AN EXPOSITION Of the GOSPEL OF Jesus Christ ACCORDING TO JOHN.

BY GEO. HUTCHESON MINISTER of the GOSPEL at EDINBURGH.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhil near the Royal
Exchange. 1657.

CHRISTIAN READER,
THe love and care of God for his Church and people, is very much seen, not
only in raising up variety of Ministers from time to time for their benefit,
but also in the variety of gifts, which he gives to those whom he raises up.
To one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom; 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
to another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another faith, by the
same Spirit; to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another
the works of Miracles; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits;
to another diverse kinds of tongues; To another Interpretation of tongues, etc.
And all these diversities of gifts are given by the Spirit to every man, 1 Cor.
12.7
(...), to profit withal. The Greek word is (as some think) a Metaphor taken
from Bees, Mr. Trapp.
who bring all the honey they can get to the common Hive. We are neither borne,
nor borne again for our selves. If we be not fit to serve the body (as the same
Author says) neither are we fit to be of the body. He is not a Saint that
seeks not communion of Saints. Pudeat illos qui ita in studiis se abdiderunt,
ut ad vitam communem nullum fructum far possint, Paulum sepultae
distatinertiae caelata, virtus. Hor.
says Cicero. They may well be ashamed that employ not their Talents for a
public good.

To our Reverend Brother (the Author of the ensuing book) God has given an
excellent and a peculiar gift, whereby he is enabled in a very short, and yet
substantial way, to give the sense and meaning of a Text, and to gather
suitable, proper, and profitable Observations out of it for the help of weak
Christians. This gift he has already manifested in his Exposition of the
Lesser Prophets, which has been received and entertained by the Church of God,
with much approbation and spiritual edification. This has encouraged him to
make a new attempt in the same kind, and to publish a brief Exposition of the
whole Gospel of Saint John. This Apostle and Evangelist was one whom Christ
loved eximie and singulariter. He was the delights of Jesus Christ, his
Benjamin, his Iedidiah; therefore he is called, The disciple whom Christ loved.
And as Christ loved him above others, so he loved Christ more then others did,
Joh. 19.26
for he stood by the Cross when all the other disciples left him, and fled
away for fear. This blessed Divine (as he is called) wrote the Gospel after the
other three Evangelists, Rev. 1. in the Inscription, (...). In Christiani
nominis solatium post se reliquit tanquam pretiosissimum thesaurum and (...)
omnibus mundi gazis non aestimandum.
and left it to the Church as a most precious treasure to be preferred (as
Luther says) above thousands of gold and silver. Upon this Gospel you have the
accurate, elaborate and profitable pains of this religious and learned Author.
The Lord bless them, and grant they may find acceptance with his people, and
may cause many thanksgivings to God for the benefit reap't by reading of them.
So prays

Thy Servant in the work of the Ministry, EDM. CALAMY.

To the Right Honorable and Noble Ladies, The Lady Margaret Lesly, late
Countess of Buccleuch, now Countess of Weems Lady Elcho, etc. AND The Lady
Mary Scot, Countess of Buccleuch, Lady Scot of Whitchester, etc. her hopeful
Daughter. Grace, mercy, and peace, through Jesus Christ, be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
IT has been of old fore-prophesied that in the perilous latter times there
should be many murmurers and complainers (Jude v. 16.) who are seldom, if at
all, satisfied with their lot, and with the dispensations of God toward them;
And that because (as is there added) they walk after their own lusts, and so
cannot but quarrel what does cross them in that woeful course, and complain of
their best and most useful enjoyments, if they find not that satisfaction
which they lust after, in them: And we, in our times, have but too many sad
experiences of distempers of this kind; evidencing the corrupt frame of our
hearts, and our great distance from God occasioning these distempers. But right
discerners will judge otherwise of the Lords dealing. They will submit unto,
and acknowledge mercy in what is profitable; though it be not pleasant, but
grievous. They will read and acknowledge mercy in what they feel and suffer,
when they consider how much more they deserve: and, They will admire the
mercies which are remembered and continued with them in the midst of wrath.
Humility as it is a safe grace; and lays a man low, beneath the violent
blasts which shake the lofty Cedars; So it is free of that unthankfulness
wherewith pride is attended and plagued, 2 Timothy 3.2. And in particular, True
grace and humility will teach men to covet earnestly after the best things, and
to prize them, and bless themselves in the enjoyment thereof, though otherwise
their condition be sad and grievous. And indeed, if men under affliction, ought
to enquire after, and esteem of God because he has endowed them with
reasonable souls, and teaches them more then the beasts of the earth, and
makes them wiser then the fowls of heaven, Job 35.9, 10, 11. How much more
ought they to prize the more special mercies of God continued with them? And
especially, that in the holy Scriptures he afords unto them the means of
knowing themselves, and an offer of Christ, with all the consolations flowing
from him, and an interest in him, and directions how to apply and improve the
same in all cases? Though this be the great and choice mercy aforded to the
world, Psalm. 147.19, 20. and to be esteemed of above thousands of gold and
silver, Psalm. 119.72. as being able to make us wise unto salvation, and
containing matter of songs in the house of our pilgrimage; Yet it is not the
simple enjoyment of this mercy, nor any pretense of an estimation thereof, that
can prove a people blessed, unless in practice they labor to improve the
mercy, and do make use thereof as a glass wherein to behold and know
themselves what they are, and be invited thereby to embrace and close with
Christ revealed therein, upon his own terms, and do study daily to testify
their subjection to God speaking in his Word, by setting it before them as the
rule of their conversation, and to rejoice in the consolations thereof over all
their sorrows, blessing the Lord daily for the continuance thereof with them,
though he strip them of other things. And here, there is but too just cause of
regrate, that though our day be short, our journey long, and our way clear; Yet
the generality of the visible Church and professors, are either idle, or out of
their way, and in their greatest throng, are but laboring in the very sire for
vanity. If we look upon the most part of those, we will find that, being
ignorant of their true good, or not giving credit to what is revealed in the
Word concerning it, they do spend their strength in seeking after any good,
yea, or any show of it, that hereby they may deceive and full themselves
asleep, and take the best course they can to skin over these wounds, grievances
and discontents, which do attend miserable and fallen man, the perfect cure
whereof is only to be found in Jesus Christ; And that, by seeking more then is
to be expected in and from the creature, they do not only miss of their aim,
but deprive themselves of that good they might find in the right use of the
good creatures of God, all the days of their life. But it may further be
regrated, that the abuse of this mercy is more universal then that only such
should be charged with it; Sad experience does testify how truly the Apostle
did give warning, that in the last days, vilest abominations should mask
themselves under a form of godliness, denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. and since the profession of Religion has been in any reputation
among us, how frequently do we find men make use of a pretense of piety to
render their vilest errors plausible; Yea, to carry on their selfish and carnal
designs? Whence it is come to pass, that innocent and lovely holiness
suffers for their sake, and the Name of God is blasphemed, and holiness so
generally stumbled at, through them. Beside, If we look upon those who fear God
indeed, How sadly may it be lamented that they are idle, and turned off from
their great work, to needless diversions and distractions? And among those who
are most busy, How few are to be found who follow a right method in their
walking? Many do covet more after what is adorning, then after what is saving;
Some do earnestly desire after satisfaction to their sense in the ways of God,
without acquainting themselves with the solid way of living by faith: Some do
habituate themselves to a trade of discouragements; under which, after they
have wrestled awhile with anxieties and bitterness; they fall faster asleep in
security, then if they had a Delilah in their bosom. And generally, That
Summary description of a Gospel way held out by the Apostle, Phil. 3.3. is but
the practice of very few. Men do not worship God in the Spirit, because they
learn not to rejoice in Christ Jesus; and this they study not because they are
not put from all confidence in the flesh, or, in any thing beside Christ. And
if they would begin at having no confidence in the flesh, and look upon their
being emptied of all things as a ^all not only to close with, but, to rejoice
in Christ and his imputed righteousness; they would find virtue flowing from
him daily, to enable them to worship God in a lively and spiritual way, and to
order their conversation as becomes the Gospel.

As these considerations serve exceedingly to commend the patience and
long-suffering of God, who has not removed his Candlestick from us,
notwithstanding our not walking in the light, and our abuse of corrections,
which have been sent to chasten us, for not entertaining the offer of
salvation, and to quicken us in our Christian course: And as they ought to
excite all, in their stations, to mourn before the Lord, and to stand in the
gap to make up the breach; and Ministers in particular, to be instant in
season, and out of season, if so be there may yet be a returning to him who
smites, and we may become an afflicted and poor people trusting in the name of
the Lord, and he may delight in us, and call us Hephzi-bah, and our Land
Beulah: So it also has prevailed with me to contribute my mite in this public
way (beside my ordinary weak travels in my charge) and to make offer of this
Exposition on that rich Treasure of the Gospel written by John. A subject
(though handled by me briefly, and in much weakness) full of the substance and
marrow of Religion, tending (as John himself gives an account of his scope in
it, Chap 20. 31,) to point out Christ the true remedy for sin, in his person,
and offices, and to direct us how to attain salvation through faith in him.
Which being to come to public view, I have made bold to present it to the
world under your Honorable Names, and to join you together in this
Dedication, whom God has conjoined in the strict bond of nature; which is
daily confirmed by that mutual respect, tenderness and affection, which You
bear one toward the other.

It is not much my way, and I know Your Honors do not expect it, that I should
stuff this Application with large commendations of You, or with
acknowledgments of your respects to my self, and Your kindnesses toward others
of my Relations. My great scope in it is; As to encourage You in the good way
wherein both Your Honors are engaged in Your several measures: So to excite
and engage You yet more to improve Your eminency (as You are or may be capable
of this service) for the advancement of Christ's interests in this backsliding
and degenerate time. Not that Christ needs any such help, who by weak things
can confound the mighty, and by things that are not, bring to naught things
that are. But that it is Your own true honor and interest, not to be among
those Nobles of Tekoa, who put not their necks to the work of the Lord; but to
subject Your selves unto him, and lay out Your selves, in Your stations, for
promoving his Kingdom, and the advancement of piety and the work of the
Gospel. As for your Honor, my Lady Weems, all the lovers of Christ in Scotland
do with thankfulness remember their obligations to Your late Father, The Right
Honorable Earl of Rothes, of precious memory, whom the Lord raised up to be a
prime Instrument in the late Reformation, and who spent himself, till his last
breath, in that public service. And those who know Your Ladyship best, will
bear witness that you have endeavored, in your Sphere, to trace his steps,
not only in Your private and secret practice, but in your open countenancing
and encouraging of godliness, and honest Ministers of the Gospel, at all
occasions: Wherein I trust You shall be helped to persevere and abound unto the
end. Your Honor has received many favors from the Lord, particularly; that
he has made you a joyful Mother of children, who are (the Lord continuing
their life, for which I pray) to succeed in several Honorable families of the
Land, beside those of them who are, or may be placed in other families, by
marriage: Which, I doubt not, You look upon as a strong obligation to lay forth
Your self that they may prove friends to truth and piety in their station and
generation. In subserviency whereunto, I have presented this piece to your
Ladyship, as containing a brief hint at many of these precious truths which are
necessary to salvation, and useful to be inculcate upon these who mind the way
to heaven. And for Your Honor, My Lady Beuccleuch, Albeit, by reason of your
young and tender years, many of these truths here presented may transcend your
capacity for present; yet as your grave, prudent, and sweet disposition and
behavior, your opposition to profanity, and respect to the Sabbath Day, and
your careful observance of such duties of Religion as your tender age is
capable of, do much refresh those who are concerned in you, and converse with
you; (as being things not usual in so tender an age; especially in one who
wants not sufficient baits of worldly advantages and contentments to divert
you) and do give good ground of hope, that if the Lord continue you, ye shall
prove an ornament to your dignity and station: So it has engaged me to prefix
your name also to this piece, as an incitement to you to proceed in that good
course; and that your Ladyship may have an help ready at hand, from whence, as
ye grow up, ye may drink in that sound doctrine which is according to
godliness.

Now that the Lord himself may bless you both, in all your relations and
concernments, may continue you long togther, may make you a blessing to each
other, and may bless this and the like means unto you, for your furtherance in
faith and godliness, till ye come to your eternal rest, is the hearty prayer of

Your Honors obliged servant in the Gospel, GEORGE HVTCHESON.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THat I do again appear in Print, flows from no other cause, but my desire to
do service to the Church of Christ in my generation, and to contribute my
endeavors for promoving that public design of making the holy Scriptures yet
more clear unto the Lords people. Some while ago I received such an intimation
of my mortality, as did excite me to improve my time the best I could. And
accordingly, I made haste to perfect this Exposition which formerly I had begun
to cast in this mould out of some Notes of Sermons I had preached on this
Gospel: And now, through the good hand of God upon me, thou have it here
presented complete unto thee. I shall not say much to what is mine in it; But
this may commend it unto thee, that the subject matter is indeed divine, and as
full of that marrow of the Christian Religion as any other parcel of Holy
writing. Here the profoundest mysteries of Religion are opened up by a beloved
Disciple. Christ is lively pointed out in his Person and Offices, and in his
heart and affection to his people; We are here directed in the way of closing
with him by faith, and the sure grounds of lost sinners confidence are clearly
demonstrate. And albeit this Exposition be swelled up to a great bulk upon my
hand, yet such is the riches of this Treasure, that whosoever would search into it,
will find that I have only gathered some gleanings, and for what I have
hinted at, I could with much less trouble have given it more at large, then
contracted it in these bounds. I need say nothing to the mould of it, being the
same with that I made use of in the pieces formerly published. Only, if any do
think that the Sum of each Chapter is given too briefly, especially toward
the beginning of the Book; They will find (for satisfaction) that to save my
self and them a labor, I have in going through the several parts of the
Chapter supplied that defect, and given a Sum of every part as I come to it.
If any shall conceive that upon several places, to which they may turn, the
Notes are not so many, nor so full, as might be expected; They may be pleased
to consider, that (beside my too true Apology of my inability to satisfy the
expectation of the judicious and learned, for whom this work is not chiefly
intended) my scope is not in this to proceed after the way of a Sermon, on a
select place; Upon which occasion many things might be brought in: But
commenting upon an entire book of Scripture, I satisfied my self with the most
obvious things upon every particular verse. And beside, some purposes
frequently occurring, I resolved to be more brief upon these afterward which I
had once; and it may be, again, spoken before. And who so will be pleased to
read the whole, or to compare the Notes on those passages which frequently
occur, in all the places where they are observed, will (I hope) find more
satisfaction, then if they look only on some one place: If the Reader find
many repetitions, not only of the same Doctrines, but it may be also, of the
same cautions or reasons couched in, and subjoyned to the Doctrines, He should
consider (beside other reasons) that in a work of such bulk wherein there are
so many doctrines, it was almost unpossible to get all in my view at once, that
so I might have corrected needless repetitions. And as the Doctrines are (I
hope) the genuine Doctrines of every place; and are, inculcate by Christ in his
frequent repetitions of them; So I conceived it not fit to omit them:
Especially, seeing I could almost as briefly, and (I suppose) to better
purpose, repeat them, then refer the Reader to the place where they had been
formerly observed. I shall add no further Apology in behalf of this
undertaking, but what ever my failings have been in it, (and I believe
judicious Readers will find more escapes then I could my self observe) yet I
hope thou will find the Exposition sound, and the observations pertinent and
Orthodox, and such as may (through the Lords blessing) contribute to thy
edification in the faith, which is in Jesus Christ. To his Grace thou art
commended by

Thy servant in the work of the Gospel, GEORGE HVTCHESON.

AN EXPOSITION Of the GOSPEL of Jesus Christ According to JOHN
The ARGUMENT.
JOHN the son of Zebedee, being called from the fisher-trade to be an Apostle,
Matthew. 4.21, 22. was in a special way favored of Christ, during the time of
his abode in the world; being admitted to be one of the witnesses of some of
his special miracles, Mark 5.37. of his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.12. and of
his agony in the garden, Matthew. 26.37. He was likewise entrusted by Christ
upon the Cross, with the care of his mother, John 19.26, 27. and (which is
above all) he was one specially beloved of Christ, and very intimate with him,
John 13.23. and 21.20, 24. After Christ's ascension, and the pouring out of the
Spirit, he is employed with the rest, in proclaiming the glad tidings of
salvation, and was joint with Peter in healing of the creple, and enduring of
the trials which followed thereupon, Acts 3. and 4. After that, we find him
sent with Peter to Samaria, Acts 8.14. etc. Afterward, as histories record, he
went to Asia the lesser, where he did propagate the Kingdom of Christ, not
only by preaching unto them, but by writing, at the direction of the Holy
Ghost, to the edification of the whole Church, as appears by his Epistles,
the Revelation, and this Gospel, whereof he declares he was the Penman. John
21.20, 24.

His scope in this Narration of the History of Christ, is to prove that
Christ-man is also the very Son of God, and to clear up the way of salvation
through faith in his Name, as he declares, Chap. 20. 31. And more
particularly, the time, and occasion of his writing of it, as is (recorded in
Ecclesiastical history) was, That, during the time of his exile in Pathmos,
(where he wrote the Revelation) the Churches in Asia were infested with many
seducers, publishing their pernicious errors, as may be gathered also from his
Epistles to the seven Churches there, Rev. 2. and 3. and namely with Ebion and
Cerinthus, who denied the divinity of Christ; Therefore, after his return, (and
so long after all the rest of the Apostles were dead) he is set on work by
Christ to write this Gospel, and add this witness to the other three, to make
up a most perfect narration for the use of the Church in all ages; Wherein he
does in a very sublime way describe and assert the person, natures, and offices
of Jesus Christ, against all the errors of that time, or which might afterward
trouble the Church; and, as the beloved Disciple that had lien in his Masters
bosom, he soareth very high in speaking of the great mystery of godliness. In
his narration he does not insist to repeat what had been sufficiently recorded
by the other Evangelists, but pitcheth chiefly upon some noted, and special
actions of Christ, adding thereto diverse of his excellent Sermons, upon the
chief points of Christian Religion, together with his solemn Prayer before his
passion; which in the Lords holy and wise providence had been reserved for such
a time and such a Penman; and wherein the deepest mysteries of says, and the
rich treasures of the godlies comfort, are clearly and satisfactorily pointed
out.

The parts of this History are, 1. A descrition of Christ to ver. 37. of Chap.
1. 2. A narration of the execution of his offices, in his doctrine, and
actions, during the time of his life and ministry, to Chap. 18. 3. The history
of his death and sufferings. Chap, 18. and 19. 4. The history of his
resurrection, with some passages confirming the same, Chap. 20. and 21.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, first, John describes Christ the subject of the Gospel,
pointing out his divinity, and his manifestation of himself to the world,
before, and by his incarnation, to v. 15. Next, he confirms this doctrine
from sundry testimonies of John the Baptist, concerning Christ, to v 37.
Lastly, He relates the calling of five disciples, to the end of the Chapter.

Verse 1. IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God.
In the first part of the Chapter John asserteth the divinity of christ, v. 1,
2. and confirms his assertion, and proves his subsistence, and manifestation
of himself to the world before his incarnation, v. 3, 4, 5. Then, to make way
for the doctrine of his manifestation in the flesh, he begins with the sending
of John the Baptist, his forerunner, v. 6.7. By occasion of whom he describes
yet more of Christ, his excellency and dignity in his manifestations, and
offices, to v. 14. And in the last place, he describes his incarnation, and
proves that he became God and man in one person. ver. 14.

In this verse the Godhead of Christ is asserted, and confirmed from his
eternity, from his coexistence and society with the Father, and by expre^s
assertion declaring him to be true God, one in essence with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, Doctr. 1. Christ is called the Word both here, and ver. 14. and 1
John 1.1. and 5.7. Rev. 19.13. and elsewhere; not only because he is the chief
subject of the written Word or Scripture; being the promise made and often
repeated in the Old Testament, He in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen,
the substance and truth of all the Law-types and shadows, the end of the Law,
and kernel of the Gospel. But further, because as a word is a mean of revealing
a man's mind to others; so Christ has revealed the Father in his own person,
being the brightnsse of his glory and the express image of his person, Heb.
1.3. so that God is to be taken up, and is savingly known only as he has
revealed himself in Christ; And in his office, as he is the wisdom of the
Father, Prove. 8.12, 22, 23. and knows all the Fathers secrets, so he is the
Word of the Father, as declaring him, his mind, and will to the Church in all
ages, Matthew. 11.27. John 1 18. 2. As Christ in his person, natures and offices,
is the great Theme of the Gospel, and ought to be the matter of our study; so
particularly it is needful that believers do know, and take him up as God; Not
only that they may avoid errors concerning his person, but, That they may see
how little need he had of the son of men, whom yet he came to seek and save for
their own good, not to receive from them, but to give unto them; That their
faith may be led through the veil of his flesh, to this rock of his God head,
where it will get sure sooting in his essence and attributes, against all
assaults; That the ignominy of his Cross may not obscure his glory, but they
may have high and honorable thoughts of their humbled Lord in his lowest
estate; That they may see the infinite worth that is in his sufferings, to
satisfy justice, and to expiate sin, considering the dignity of his person;
And, That this may teach them rightly to receive his doctrine, and not to be
ashamed of his truth, and the profession of his Name, or to suffer for him, who
is so excellent a Lord: for these (among other) reasons, does John begin this
Gospel, with so sublime a description of the Godhead of Christ. 3 The Godhead
of Christ does appear in his being eternal; and that he had his proper, and
perfect subsistence; not only before his incarnation, but before the first
point of time, wherein God began to create all things; for, In the beginning
was the Word: He does not say as Moses, Genesis 1.1. (whom he imitates in this
beginning of his Gospel) In the beginning God created the Word; but, in the
beginning, when all things created got a beginning, the Word was, and did
actually subsist. He thus describes his eternity, that he was in the beginning,
because there is nothing before the first period of times beginning, but
eternity; and because our shallow conceptions can follow eternity no farther,
but only over the border of time. 4. Christ as God, is a person distinct from
the Father, yet undivided and unseparable from the Father in his essence, with
whom he eternally coexists; and this is another evidence of his Godhead; for
the Word was with God; where the word in the Original rendered God, with the
Article, is taken personally, for the Father (as is also cleared. 1 John. 1.2.)
signifying that he is one person, and the Father another with whom he was; As
also that, notwithstanding the distinction of the Persons, yet he is
inseparably with the Father, in the same essence and nature, being in (as well
as with) the Father, and the Father in him John 14.10, 11. and eternally with
him; so that the Father is never without him, John 17 5. 5. However men may
take liberty to carp at these proofs of Christ's Godhead, alleging from his
incarnation, that he was but man, or that there being but one God, the
simplicity of the Divine essence cannot admit of plurality of persons, or that
Christ in the exercise of the Mediatory office declares that his Father is
greater then he; or whatsoever else unstable and deluded men may pretend; Yet
the Holy Ghost puts the Godhead of Christ, his equality, and unity in essence
with the Father out of all controversy, and would have it out of doubt in the
hearts of believers, and all their reasonings in this supernatural mystery
subjected to the revealed Word, which says, and the Word was God: Where the
Greek word signifying God, without the Article, is taken essentially, for the
Divine nature, signifying, that as the Son is a distinct person from the
Father, so he is one God with him, in the same indivisible nature and essence,
communicate unto him from the Father, and with him to the holy Spirit; so that
their name, nature, properties, glory, and working are one.

Ver. 2. The same was in the beginning with God.
John does here repeat and conjoyne the two first assertions concerning the
eternity and coexistence of the Son with the Father; which is no idle
repetition, but teaches, 1. How little able we are to comprehend this great
mystery, which we can but take in by little and little, and must put that
together, as children do letters, syllables, and words, till we attain a more
full understanding thereof, for our comfort and salvation; Therefore does John
repeat and conjoyne these two parts of the description. 2. The knowledge of
Christ as God, is a truth to be much and often inculcate upon believers, and
which they ought to study again and again, and dwell upon, as having more in it
then will be seen at first view; and when they have found most in it, yet
there is infinitely more to be found in that inexhaustible fountain; for, so
much also does this repetition teach. 3. It is but a robbing of Christ of his
glory, to attribute unto him the name of God under any notion, or acknowledge
any glory to belong unto him; unless his subsistence from all eternity, and
his eternal Godhead, one in essence, with, and a distinct person from the
Father, be acknowledged; for John repeats and conjoynes his eternity with the
other, The same was in the beginning with God, to show that this assertion of
his eternity is to be joined with all the rest; and that from all eternity he
was God with the Father, one in essence, and a distinct person. 4. Christ who
is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen, was in himself perfectly blessed, and
infinitely happy and glorious from all eternity with his Father, before the
world was made; Which he needed not to make, but only it pleased him so to do,
that he might let his glory shine therein, and communicate of his fullness
thereunto; and especially to the children of men; for, so much also does this
assertion, that he was in the beginning with God, before he made all things,
ver. 3. import, as is also expounded, Prove. 8. from v. 22. to 32. 5. The
eternity of the Son of God is a subject worthy of serious meditation to
believers; that so they may read all that tender-heartedness, these bowels of
compassion, that mercifulness and sympathy which is in him, to be not a man's
only, and in our kinsman; but in him who is also the eternal God, whose
thoughts and purposes are eternal and immutable like himself; so much also may
this repeated assertion teach us, The same was in the beginning, by repeating
whereof he puts us in mind to study it often, that we may reap more and more
of the comforts thereof. 6. The Sons coexistence with the Father, is also a
matter seriously to be considered by believers, wherein they may see the deep
wisdom and rich love of God, who has found a way of reconciliation of lost
man, by the same in nature and essence who is the party offended; and that the
unity of the Divine essence, and the distinction of persons should contribute
to make the redemption and reconciliation of lost man effectual by him; Wherein
also believers, who have fled to Christ for refuge, may not only find him to
be true God, able to supply all wants, and to save to the uttermost; but may
also find the Father in the Mediator, as being one in essence with him, 2
Cor. 5.19. and so, what he wills, the Father also wills; This also the
repetition of his being with God may teach us, and that we should study it,
till we draw these or the like encouragements from it. ver 3.

Ver. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made.
John having asserted the Godhead of Christ, as coeternal and coessential with
the Father, he proceeds to prove the same yet farther by effects of his Divine
attributes manifested in time, whereby he proves his subsistence before his
incarnation, from several steps of his manifestation of himself to the world
from the beginning thereof. The first step of this manifestation, and proof of
his Godhead, was in the creation of all things at the beginning, which is so
universally ascribed unto Christ, as nothing created is excepted, from being
his handiwork. Doctrine 1. The world and all things therein are not eternal,
but had a beginning, and were made by God, for this truth which is undeniable
to right reason, is here made clear by revelation, all things were made. 2.
Creation is an act of Divine power; and it is a proof of Christ's Godhead, that
he is the Creator of all things visible and invisible, and that all the
creatures owe their very being to Christ the Son of God; for, All things were
made by him, Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. They were made by him, as working from the
Father, the Father creating by him, the order of working following the order of
subsistence of the Divine persons. 3. Christ is clearly excluded from being of
the number of creatures, in that he is not an instrument, but a co-worker with
the Father and Spirit in the work of creation, and that not of some creatures
only, but of all things that have a being by creation; So much does John's
amplification inculcate, and without him was nothing made that was made: Where
without him as a Creator does not seclude the rest of the persons, who are with
him, in their order of operation, in that work, but clearly secludeth him from
being a creature, or any thing that was made. 4. It is useful and profitable
for believers to read the Godhead of Christ as shining in the creation of all
things, by his omnipotent power; Wherein they may read a ground of interest to
go to him as his own creatures, when other relations are obscured, as Psalm. 119
73. They may see omnipotent power, able to produce what they need, of very
nothing, Romans 4.17. and able to make a new work of creation in their
regeneration, 2 Cor. 4.6. Ephesians. 2.10. And, They may see all creatures at his
command who made them, and that they who are his servants, and under his
protection, need not fear any creatures, Isa. 51.12, 13. for these, among other
causes, does John point forth the Divinity of Christ, as shining in this glass
and mirror, all things were made by him, etc.

Ver. 4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
A further manifestation of Christ, and proof of his Godhead and subsistence
before his incarnation, appeared in his communicating of further excellency to
some creatures then their bare being; as life to all living creatures, which
was derived from him, and preserved by him. And unto man, with his natural
life, the light of reason and understanding also; together with holiness, and
the image of God, which was implanted in him at first. Doct. 1. It does set
forth the glory of Christ, and is a proof of his Godhead, that all creatures
that live, have and hold their life of him not as an instrument, but as the
fountain from whence their life flows, and is preserved; for, in him was
life, Not only has he life in himself essentially from the Father, John 5.26.
but the life of all living creatures, was in him, as in the fountain cause, as
the stream is in the fountain, and the rays of light in the Sun: and in him
still as the preserver when it is given, as the fountain constantly feeds the
stream, that it dry not up; for in him we live, Acts 17.28. and, he upholdeth
all things, Heb. 1.3. 2. Believers ought to study the Godhead of Christ their
head, as shining in his giving life to all living creatures, and their having
their life still in him; That when they shall observe such variety of living
things from the least to the greatest, fed by that fountain, they may come
confidently to him for life and quickening, as to him who can create life, can
restore a soul, and quicken a dead piece of clay: That they may not be
discouraged by their baseness when they come to him, who disdains not to
communicate life to the basest worm, and smallest midge, that they may hold
their spiritual life of him, and by abiding in him, in whom life still is, even
when they get it; and, that they may not fear the decay of their life, when
they dwell in him, in whom the inexhaustible fountain of life is, who
preserves and continues the life of all creatures. So much does this proof of
Christ's Godhead teach, in him was life. 3. In the creation man was exalted not
only above lifelesse creatures, by having life, but above all creatures,
except Angels, by being endowed with a reasonable soul, and a faculty of
understanding, and with the image of God, consisting in the lightsome and sweet
estate of clear knowledge in the understanding, of holiness and righteousness
in the will, and of peace, joy and comfort in the affections, for, the life was
not only the life, though man have life, but the light of men, he was endowed
with a life of light. 4. The reasonable soul of man, and the image of God,
wherein he was at first created, was Christ's gift, not as Mediator (which
office he did enter upon but after the fall) but as the Son of God, working
with, and from the Father; By which work his Godhead is proven, the rays of
his glory shining so brightly in the making of man, that little world, and
especially of his most noble part, the soul, that none can consider themselves
rightly, but they will see a finger of God in that work; for, this is another
proof of his Divinty, the life, or the Son of God, the fountain and preserver
of life in living creatures was the light of men, or their life of light was
from him as the fountain and preserver, as was before said of life. 5. Christ
the Son of God, by creating man after his own image, and enduing him with a
reasonable soul, has not only laid obligations upon him, not to employ these
noble endowments against their Maker: But he has also given an especial pledge
of his own respect to mankind, and a proof of his power, as Mediator, to
restore that image of God, which he at first implanted in him; As also of his
infinite and perfect knowledge of all things for his peoples good; and of that
life of light, and felicity, which he enjoys in himself with the Father and
holy Spirit, to the sight and fruition whereof he will at last bring believers,
in such a measure as finite man can be capable of; for, therefore is this proof
of his Divinity held forth by John, for the instruction and comfort of
believers.

Ver. 5. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not.
A further proof of Christ's Godhead, and of his subsistence and manifestation
of himself before his incarnation, is taken from his dealing with man after the
fall. He who is light in himself, and the fountain of light in man, did by
diverse means shine in man's understanding, and before man, now darkened by his
fall; but was not entertained nor taken up as becomes: This is chiefly to be
understood of the sparkles of the light of nature shining in the darkened mind
of man, Romans 2.15. And of Christ's shining in the view of all men in the works
of creation, holding forth his eternal power and Godhead with the Father, Romans
1.20. though natures light could not by these means take him up, nor
acknowledge him: Not secluding also (as is cleared from ver. 10, 11. where this
subject is enlarged) his shining in the Church in all ages, after the fall of
man to his incarnation, (as well as after it) as God and Mediator, by Divine
revelation, types and shadows, and other means: In which respect though some
did acknowledge him as God and Mediator, yet no man was able so to do (as at
no time else) by the strength or light of nature, and very few did acknowledge
him at all (considering their natural darkness) in the predictions and types
pointing him out. Doct. 1. Man is fallen from that life of light and comfort
whereinto he was created, and is become a dark mass of sin and misery,
darkened in his mind with ignorance and abominable errors and mistakes, and
in his will and affections, with vices and lusts, and liable to a dark estate
of discomfort, and sorrow; for, so is supposed here, that he is not only dark,
but darkness, being wholly deprived of that light of the image of God, and
over clouded with thick darkness. 2 The Son of God did not cease in all ages,
by sundry rays and beams, and means, and instruments, to communicate himself
to fallen man; But did manifest himself unto all mankind by the light of
nature, holding out some sparkles of light concerning a Deity, and some
principles of justice and moral virtue; and by the works of creation and
providence: And to his Church, by Divine revelation did hold forth his person
and office: All which do prove him to be God subsisting before his incarnation,
and do manifest his self-sufficiency that does communicate himself to man now
fallen from him: As also his love and pity to his own, that would thus follow
them; And do prove that he exercised his office of Mediator before his
incarnation; for it is a proof of Christ's Godhead, and manifestation to the
world in former ages, that the light, or, Christ the enlightner of mankind,
shines in darkness; And he says, shines, in the present time, because
Christ's manifestation of himself does not cease in all ages and times, though
the way of it to his Church be changed by his incarnation; And because his
manifestations under the Gospel are but the same continued thing that was
formerly, though in a different way. 3. What ever light men have by nature, or
may gather from the book of creation; Yet such is the power of darkness in
man's nature, that all who are left to these means do not receive that light, so
as to let it shine through them to direct their actions, but do captivate it in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18, Nor do they take up that light which they have and
use, to be from God, but become proud of it, as if it were their own; nor do
they take up God as manifesting himself in the works of creation, but became
vain in their imaginations, and darken their own foolish heart more and more;
far less do they discern the Son of God equal with the Father, nor can they
discern him as the true remedy of sin thereby; for, the darkness comprehended
not the light that shines in darkness. 4. No man at any time, by the light
and strength of nature, can t^ke up, or savingly embrace Christ as God, and
Mediator, whatever outward means he have: And particularly, before his
incarnation; many to whom he was revealed in promises, and types, did not look
so far as to him who was to be incarnate; but did rest upon these shadows, as
if they had been the mean appointed for remedy of their misery; which fault is
not to be attributed to his dimnesse, who was clearly revealed, though under a
veil, but to men's own darkness; for, of these also it was true, the light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. And the point is
of general verity in all ages where this light shines at any time, though the
order of the Narration (it being spoken before the sending of John the Baptist)
lead us to understand it of the Church before his Incarnation.

Ver. 6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

7. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men
through him might believe.


In the next branch of the first part of the Chapter, John having spoken of the
manifestation of Christ before his incarnation, and how it did not suffice; he
comes to his more clear manifestation under the Gospel, and begins (as the
rest of the Evangelists, and because of that Prophecy, Mal. 4.5.) at John the
Baptist, his forerunner, and by occasion of him, speaks yet more of Christ.
Concerning this forerunner we have here held out, his calling, his name, and
the ends of his calling and office, which were to point out and bear testimony
concerning Christ, that men might be drawn to says in him Doct. 1. A special
mean and way whereby Christ shines to the world, and helps the world to know
him, is the Ministry of men; whereby he condescendeth to our weakness, who
could not endure more glorious instruments; he tries our obedience, and
acknowledgment of his authority in the weak messengers; and he makes manifest
that the excellency of the power whereby they do so great things, is of him;
Therefore does he bring in John's Ministry, as a particular mean whereby he
shined. 2. Ministers of Christ must not run unsent, but ought to have a calling
from God, either extraordinary (in extraordinary times and cases) or ordinary;
as being that which will afford them matter of courage in undertaking their
work, of comfort under difficulties, and of hope of success; for, so John was
a man sent from God; to wit, in an extraordinary way, as Christ's forerunner. 3.
Albeit an unregenerate man may be a lawful Minister, yet they will in a most
lively way proclaim that geace of God bringing salvation, who have themselves
obtained grace and favor by it: And it is a sweet thing, when men prove
answerable to these names and titles which Scripture gives them, because of
their Christian profession; for, this forerunners name was John, a name given
by the Angel, without the consent of friends, Luke 1.13.59, 60. etc. which in
the Hebrew signifies, one that had obtained grace and favor, or, one to whom
the Lord had been gracious that he might actively proclaim the same to others,
and a name to which John's carriage was answerable. He was one, in giving of
whom the Lord showed himself gracious to his parents, Luke 1.13. One, to whom
the Lord was gracious, in sanctifying of him from his mothers womb, and in
making of him faithful and successeful in his Ministry, Luke 1.15, 16, 17, 77,
78. 4. The chief and special end of a Ministry, is, to point out Christ in his
excellencies and usefulness to lost men, to declare him in his person, offices
and benefits, how he should be bebeleeved in, served or suffered for; John came
to bear witness of the light, or of Christ in his glorious excellency, and as
he is the light of dark man, in his comforts and directions. 5. Faithful
Ministers are to preach Christ as his witnesses, with plainness, with fidelity
in not adding or diminishing, with boldness and constancy; and as men by whom
Christ (who nee^s not any testimony from men) does temper and fit his light to
our capacity, and who will be witnesses one day against them who do not receive
their doctrine; for, the same came for a witness to bear witness of the
light. 6. The end and scope of a Ministers witnessing and preaching is, and
should be, to bring self-condemned sinne^s to believe in Christ; his preaching
of the Law and wrath is in order to that, and to bring men to see their need of
Christ, and should be joined with the doctrine of the Gospel; His preaching of
the doctrine of sanctification and holiness should be joined with the doctrine
of faith in Christ, from whom virtue flows, for that end: And faithful
Ministers should not be content that their excellent gifts lead men to esteem
of themselves; but it should be their endeavor to lead men unto Christ; for,
albeit John did threaten sharply, and call them a generation of Vipers, and did
press repentance and renovation hard; yet the same came for a witness, that
men through him (or by his Ministry and his leading them not to rest or dote
upon himself) might believe. 7. No man is secluded from being allowed to
believe in Christ, who has the ofter, but every one of whatsoever condition or
quality, who hears the Gospel, is bound to make this use of it, following the
due order appointed for sinners to come to Christ; And particularly, under the
Gospel, Christ is to be held forth as the common refuge of all his people of
whatsoever kindred or Nation; for, John came for a witness that all men might
believe, not that all, even of Judaea, heard John, but that all who heard, were
thus obliged, and all indifferently of any nation, were now allowed to come to
Christ.

Ver. 8. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that light.

9. That was the true light, which lightneth every man that comes into the
world.


The particular testimonies of this witness are intermitted till ver. 15. etc.
And before John comes to speak of Christ's further shining and manifesting
himself, by taking on our nature; he takes occasion from what has been said of
John the Baptist, to speak some more of Christ's excellency, his manifestations
and offices; first, with relation to John the Baptist, v 8, 9. Next, in
reference to his ill entertainment in the world and visible Church, v. 10, 11.
Thirdly, in relation to those who did receive, and embrace him. v. 12, 13.

In these verses, because many doated on John the Baptist, and some were
suspicious that he might be the Messiah, Luke 3.15. Therefore John holds forth
Christ's excelleny as far above John the Baptist, in his manifestations of
himself; he being that true Original light, who enlightens all mankind with
the light of reason and understanding, and who is the author of gracious
illumination in every one who obtain that mercy; and John being but a witness,
to point out that light. Doct. 1. It is a weakness incident to men, to dote,
and to have over-weaning thoughts of excellent instruments, and to give them
more then is their due, which would be prevented and corrected; for, there is
need to clear that John was not that light, or the Messiah the fountain of
light, though he was a burning and shining light, being enlightened by him, John
5.35. 2 The highest honor of a Minister, is, to be appointed a proclaimer of
Christ's excellency, and an instrument to hold forth Christ's light, and
administer the outward Ordinance, leaving the blessing to be conferred by
Christ: And this honor is no more to be denied to them, then what is Christ's
due is to be ascribed to them; for, John was sent to bear witness of that
light. 3. Christ is light by nature and of himself, not by participation only,
as creatures are; And whatsoever is said of him as a light, is truly and really
in him, and whatsoever is borrowed from the creatures to set out his
excellency, is in him really and truly, and they are but shadows compared with
him; for, that was the true light, says he, not that John was a false light,
but he was light by nature, John a star and candle, borrowing light, and
lighted from him; What is said of the light of truth in him, against error, of
comfort against trouble, of remission, of reconciliation, etc. is really and
truly to be found in him, and in him only; and all the excellency we find in
light for the good of creatures, is far more eminently and truly to be found in
him for the good of souls. 4. The efficacy and virtue of Christ, the light of
his people, is, such, as he cannot only shine on them and make them
discernable, as the Sun does on inferior creatures, but he can shine through
them, and make them to be enlightened themselves; This Sun shining can give an
eye to what he shines on; for, the true light lights, etc. 5. All the light
that men have, is borrowed from Christ; All the light of reason and nature,
that every one has, and all the light of A^ts, Sciences, and inventions, are
from him; And any light of saving grace, ^ound knowledge, or true comfort, that
any have, it is from him only; for in all these respects he lights every man
that comes into the world; He gives to all the faculty of reason and
understanding; and though every man be not enlightened with grace, nor yet with
special gifts and sciences that others have, yet it holds still good, that no
man is so enlighned, but he who has it from him; As when it is said, Psalm.
145.14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all that be bowed
down, the meaning is not, that none who fall, and are bowed down, are let lie
so, but all raised up, but that none of these are raised up or upholden, but by
him only.

Ver. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not.

11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.


The manifestations and shining of this true light, are here spoken of to
aggravate the sin of the world and visible Church, giving him ill
entertainment, as a clearer Commentary of what was said, v. 5. As for the
world, albeit Christ had made the world, and was still present in it by his
power and providence, yet the men of the world did not know him, nor take him
up: As for the visible Church of Israel, albeit, beside his common
manifestations in the world, he came yet nearer to them; yet the body of them
did not receive nor embrace him. This challenge holds true of the world and of
the visible Church in all ages, to whom he draws near by his Word and
Ordinances, though here it be spoken especially with relation to the time
before his incarnation, if not also to his coming in person to the Church of
Israel, Luke 20.13, 14, 15. Doct. 1. Christ from the creation to his
incarnation, was ever in the world as God, (as he also still is) in his essence
filling heaven and earth and in his providence preserving and upholding all
things, and manifesting himself in variety of dispensations; so universal i^
the providence of the believers head; for, he was in the world. 2. As Christ's
creating of the world is a manifestation of his glory to be seriously studied,
(and therefore is here again repeated) so his creating of it is sufficient to
prove his constant presence in it; it being impossible for the creatures made
by him to subsist without him; Therefore it is subjoyned to the former, he was
in the world, and the world was made by him, as a proof that he behooved to be
in it, because he made it. 3. It is the sin of the world, not to know or take
notice of Christ in his manifestations; And particularly it is the sin of men
without the Church, that they do not acknowledge nor glorify God, when he
manifests his glory to them in the works of creation and providence; for, the
world knew him not. 4. God may justly make use of very common favors and
means, as sufficient to aggravate the sin of such as do not acknowledge him;
for says he, he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not, which imports that his making of the world, and his presence in
it, was such a manifestation, as might have led them to know, acknowledge, and
glorify him as God, and that they were without excuse, who having these means,
did it not, Romans 1.20. And that the common favor of men's being, and Gods
providence about them, does heighten their sin who do not acknowledge their
Maker, Isa 1 3. 5. Besides Christ's common interest in all mankind as their
Creator, and his special interest in his own elect and converted people; he
has also an interest in a visible Church, and they in him, which no other
people have, and that by virtue of a visible Covenant, and election to the
external privileges of the Church; for in this respect the body of Israel are
his own, or his peculiar people. This interest may give self-condemned sinners
a liberty to go to him, as born in his own house, when other privileges are
obscured from them. 6. Christ even before his incarnation, was present in the
Church of Israel, and beside his common and general presence, he drew nearer
unto them, in his Word and Ordinances, and types pointing him out as Mediator,
till at last he came to them in Person; for, even then, he came to his own. See
Acts 7.38. 1 Cor. 10.9 7. All the favor and kindness that is betwixt Christ
and his people, begins at him, and he is at the pains to seek and come to them
first, though he stand in no need of them; for, he came to his own. 8. Common
relations betwixt Christ and a visible Church are so far from proving a
peoples good condition, as to the particular state of their soul, that such
may, and oftentimes do refuse to make Christ and his offer welcome; for, his
own received him not 9. The nearer the relation be betwixt Christ and his
people, and the greater his offer be, the sin of not making use of it is the
greater in it self, and he will take the refusal the worse at their hand, as
being a despising of his love; for, whereas the world knew him not, v. 10.
their sin was greater, that they received him not, when they knew him, and so
sinned of contempt: And Christ takes this i^l, and accounts it a great
aggravation of this sin, that they did it, who were his own, and they to whom
he came. 10. As the great sin without the Church is ignorance, and not
acknowledging, and glorifying of God; so the great sin within the Church, is
contempt of Christ, and not embracing of him, nor his offer; for, the world
knew him not, but, his own received him not.

Ver. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name:

13. Which were borne; not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.


Christ's excellency and manifestation of himself are here spoken of with
relation to these, who, at any time, do embrace his offer made in the Church:
His excellency herein appears, 1. In prevailing with some to make him and his
offer welcome, though many reject it. 2. In advancing them to the dignity of
Adoption and sonship, who thus embrace him: And he farther clears, how it is
that men do receive Christ, to wit, by faith; and, whence it is that any come
to believe, and so attain to the dignity of sons; even from a principle of
regeneration, which is wrought by no power of the creature, but by God only.
Doct. 1. Howsoever many within the visible Church do reject Christ, yet there
will still be some to make him welcome. As he never lights a candle, but
where he has some lost groat to seek; So he has excellency, even when many
despise him, to allure hearts, and virtue, not to take a refusal, but to draw
his own till they be made willing; for, there are who receive him. 2. Such as
make the offer of grace right welcome, do first welcome and receive Christ
himself, not contenting themselves with his common gifts, nor yet seeking first
after his saving graces, but after himself, that he may work these in them;
for, they receive him. 3. Christ is received and made welcome by faith; and all
they, who, hearing of the offer made to the Church on Christ's part, do out of
the sense of their need, embrace, and consent and roll themselves upon Christ
thus offered, these have made up an union with him, and are believers, though
as yet they have not attained to particular assurance, which is the fruit of
the Spirit of Adoption, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. for, they who receive him, are even
they that believe. 4. Such as rightly believe in Christ, ought not to take him
up as in their presumption, security, fear or discouragement they may imagine,
but they ought to cleave close to the Word revealing him, and bring all their
thoughts of him to the touchstone thereof, correcting them thereby, and
submitting thereunto; for, they believe on his Name, or, as he has revealed
himself. 5. As all spiritual privileges are in Christ's hand and disposing; So,
albeit we be by nature children of wrath, yet he offers reconciliation to such,
and whosoever they be that by faith receive him, he conferreth upon them the
privilege to become heirs and coheirs with himself, and children unto God,
with allowance to call him father; And instead of a slavish and worldly spirit,
and a spirit of fear and bondage, he gives them the spirit of enlargement, and
of sons, and a disposition suitable to their dignity and high calling in every
condition; for, as many (of whatsoever rank or condition) as received him, to
them he gave power (or, right, privilege and dignity) to become the sons of
God. 6. As it is by faith that we come to the privilege of Adoption, by
closing with Christ the only begotten Son; so when we have believed, adoption
is still his gift, it being still of grace that he exalts us to that dignity;
and when we have done all, the comfort of that dignity must be his work, by
sending the spirit of sons into our hearts, to loase our bands and elevate
our hearts; for, he gave power to become the sons of God. 7. Every one who is
adopted to be a son of God, must have a new birth and spiritual being in
Christ, by a change of disposition, and qualities of the soul going along with
that privilege, to prove the truth of it; for, these sons of God are borne, to
wit, again; By this change they will be led to esteem highly of this dignity,
1 John 3.1. to study conformity with Christ their elder brother, Romans 8.29. and
to perform obedience, whatever they can attain to, with childrens
dispositions, out of fear to offend their Father, 1 Pet. 1.14. which are the
kindly evidences of adoption. 8. Faith and receiving of Christ is so much the
gift of God, as first by regeneration, Christ must make an inward offer, and
join himself to us, and give us this hand to grip, before we can by faith
actively receive him, or set about the work of sanctification by faith; for,
all who believe on his Name, were born again. 9. The change of man out of
nature into grace, is a kind of new birth of the man, in producing whereof
there will be some traveling in pain, by it there is brought forth a
proportionable new man of grace; spreading it self (though weakly as in the
natural man) through the whole man; also a new life, and likeness to the
Father, an appetite after food suitable to that life, and a being sensible of
hurt from what is contrary to this life; for, so is imported in that they are
borne. 10. Regeneration comes not by natural generation, or by the dignity of
men's race and descent from pious progenitors, for, they were borne not of
blood, or of bloods, that is, by descent from their ancestors of many
generations, of which the Jews boasted. 11. Men's freewill, or natural power,
is quite dead in the matter of regeneration, its utmost endeavors can
contribute nothing to this work; for, they were borne, not of the will, or the
strongest inclinations, of the flesh: 12. Whatever singular endowments of
learning, wisdom, or valor men have, yet none of these do prove regeneration,
nor can they contribute any thing to such a work; for, they were borne, not of
the will of man, or, of famous and virtuous men, as the word in the Original
often signifies. 13. Regeneration is Gods own work, who employeth his Word as
the seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. sends his Ministers as instruments to sow this seed,
Gal. 4.19. and who quickens this seed by the Spirit, who is the immediate
worker of regeneration in order of operation, John 3.6, 8. And so, whatever
excellency regenerate men may have they are still bound to acknowledge that
grace prevented them, and made them to differ from others; for, they were born,
not of any thing, but of God.

Ver. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us (and we beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and
truth.
John comes here to speak of Christ's humanity, his incarnation and
manifestation in the flesh, whereby he became God and man in one person; And
declares further, how he abode in our nature on e^^th, for a season; how the
glory of his divinity shined forth even in that abasement, in the view of his
disciples and followers; and what the benefits were, he was filled with for
sinners good to whom he came, and among whom he abode: even grace and truth, in
opposition chiefly to the curse and shadows of the Law, as appears from ver.
17. Doctrine 1. The sinfulness and ingratitude of the world, and visible
Church, will not make void Christ's love to his own, nor will hinder him to draw
so near unto them (and to others for their sake) as is needful for their
redemption and salvation, and may yet further convince others of their
ingratitude; for, notwithstanding that ingratitude, ver. 10, 11. he drew nearer
yet, and was made flesh. 2. So great was the difficulty of restoring the image
of God in lost man, and of restoring him to Gods favor and the dignity of
Sonship, that no less could do it, then the natural Son of God his becoming
the Son of man to suffer in our nature: And so great was Gods and Christ's love,
as to lay a foundation of reconciliation betwixt God and man in the personal
Union of the divine and humane nature in Christ; so much is imported in that
the Word was made flesh 3. The person of the Godhead that was incarnate, was
neither the Father, nor the Holy Ghost, but the Son, the second person; for,
the Word was made flesh. There being a real distinction of the persons, that
one of them is not another, and each of them having their proper manner of
subsistence; the one of them might be incarnate, and not the other, and it is
the Godhead not simply considered, but the person of the Son subsisting in that
Godhead, that was incarnate: And it was very convenient, that the second, or
middle person (in order of subsistence (of the blessed Trinity should be the
reconciler of God and man; and that he by whom all things were made, should be
the restorer and maker of the new world, and that he who was the express image
of the Father, should be the repairer of the image of God in us. 4. The Son of
God became true man, and did take on our nature with all the essential
properties thereof, and all the common infirmities thereof, yet without sin;
for, so much is imported in that he was made flesh, by which name is not
signified that he assumed only a body, his divinity supplying the place of a
soul; for, as the soul is sometime taken for the whole man, Acts 27.47. so also
is flesh, Psalm. 145.21. And the Scripture speaks expressly of Christ's soul,
Matthew. 6.38. of his will, Matthew. 26.39. And knowledge, or wisdom, as man, Luke
2.52. Nor does it signify that he took on our nature, as it is corrupted with
sin by the fall, as flesh is sometimes taken; for he was separate from sinners,
Heb. 7.26. But the designation serves to point out the reality of his humane
nature, that he was true man, having a real body with all the properties
thereof; And it points out his ab^sing of himself, that he united not only our
soul to himself; but even our flesh and body wherein we agree with beasts; And
that he took on the sinlesse infirmities and frailties of man, as flesh
oftentimes signifies, Isaih 40.6. Psalm. 78.39. that so he might simpathize
with us as a merciful and faithful High Priest. 5. Albeit Christ did assume
both a soul and a body, yet these did not make up another person in Christ,
distinct from the person of the Son of God, but the personal subsistence of his
humanity was prevented in his conception, by its being assumed into a personal
union with his Godhead, and that without any change on the Godheads part, and
without mixture or confusion of the natures, and properties flowing from the
same: for, so are we taught in that the Word was made, or, became flesh, that
is, being God from all eternity, and remaining so still, he became also man, in
respect of the unity of the person; and yet the Word and flesh remain distinct
still in their own natures and properties, though the properties of either
nature be ascribed to the whole person with relation to that nature to which
they do belong, and both concur in the operations required in execution of
the office of Mediator. And by reason of this union, he is a fit Mediator,
betwixt God and man, his sufferings are of infinite worth, being the sufferings
of one who is God. Act. 20.28. And is able not only to suffer, but to carry
through the work, to apply his own purchase, and repair all our losses. 6. As
the ingratitude of the world did not hinder the Son of God to come into the
world, and to take on our nature, so it pleased him in our nature to live in
the world for a space; That so he might prove the truth of his humanity to
these who conversed with him; That he might sanctify the earth, by his
residence upon it, as a place of his peoples pilgrimage, that he might in his
own person, who was greater then Moses, abrogate the ceremonies of Moses; and,
That he might perfect the work of man's redemption appointed to him of the
Father; Wherein his great love appeared, that no provocation, no contradiction
of sinners did prevail with him to leave the earth, till he had perfected his
work; for, the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us says John, in name of
all the Apostles. 7. The Son of God his incarnation and dwelling in our nature,
is the substance of the type of the ancient Tabernacle in the Church of Israel;
His humane nature and flesh is that true Tabernacle wherein he dwelt, Heb. 8.2.
and 9.11. The glory of his Godhead did fill this Tabernacle and shine forth in
view of his disciples (as after follows) as the glory of the Lord filled that
Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34, 35. And the Son of God thus incarnate, is the trysting
place wherein sinners may draw near unto, and meet with God, as of old they
sought him in the Tabernacle. Therefore it is said in the Original, He, or, the
Word dwelt as in a tent, or Tabernacle among us. 8. Christ our Lord during his
abode in the world was content to submit to a mean and pilgrims life, That
through his poverty many might become rich; That he might sanctify a poor
condition of life to his followers; and, That he might assure us of his being a
fellow-feeling High Priest, having been in his own person partaker of our
miseries; for, so much also is imported in that he dwelt as in a tent or
Tabernacle (which is the habitation of pilgrims) among us; And to this also
does the type of the ancient Tabernacle agree, which was ambulatory, and fitted
to their wandering condition: Though Christ also be the substance of the type of
the fixed Temple, John 2.21. 9. Christ also came into the world, and dwelt in
it, to undertake a warfare, and did undertake, Devils, men, death, and all that
had any thing to say against his people; and did overcome them, that so his
people might have to do with vanquished enemies, and might go to him in need,
as to one who had experience of hard conflicts and exercise in his own person;
for, so much further does his dwelling as in a tent (which is a military
habitation) import. 10. Christ in his abasement and sufferings, did not cease
to be the same glorious and excellent Lord still, and this his glorious
excellency and Godhead did shine through the veil of his flesh, and in his low
condition, and was seen by all them who got anointed eyes, and seriously
considered it; for, says John, in name of the Apostles and believers we saw
(or, did contemplate, and seriously view, till we discerned) his glory; His
stars appearing while he was lying in a manger, the Angels proclaiming his
birth to the shepherds, his disputing with the Doctors when he was young; the
glorious appearances at his Baptism and transfiguration; yea, the whole course
of his doctrine, miracles, and sufferings, ascension, and pouring out of the
Holy Ghost afterward, did abundantly evince this. And by this we are taught not
to judge of him nor of his members according to outward appearance. 11. Christ,
as God, comes of the Father by way of inexpressible generation proper to
himself only, as being an eternal generation, by communication of the same
essence and properties; And a generation wherein the Father is not before the
Son, but both alike eternal: And this his glory did shine forth in his lowest
condition; for, his glory was the glory as of the only begotten of the Father:
that is, such glory as was suitable and becoming Gods only begotten Son; for,
as, here, is not a note of similitude or likeness, as when we say of a beggar,
he goes as (or like) a King, but a note of sutablenesse, as when we say of a
King, he goes as (or as becomes) a King. And by this Christ is commended to
his people, as he who should be only and chief in their hearts. 12. Albeit
Christ conversed in the world in a poor and mean condition, yet his furniture
for the worlds behoof was rich, And particularly, there was in him grace; or
the free favor of God, as a remedy for that wrath which the Law reveals
because of sin, and the gifts of grace to cure, and remove sin; In him did the
fullness of the Godhead dwell bodily, and on him as man, was the spirit poured
forth above measure; and he had fullness of this grace, to supply all his
peoples wants, to make up the greatness of their misery, and to overcome even
their abuse of grace; for, he dwelt among us full of grace; as the construction
in the Original conjoyneth them. 13. Christ also came into the world fraught
with truth, and fullness of truth, being as God, truth it self, and as man,
full of truth by virtue of the personal union; having treasures of knowledge
for all our ignorance and errors, the truth of all the shadows of the Law, and
what was foretold of him by word, or signs, being found in him, and all that
is in him, and said of him, being true and solid, and such as will not
disappoint us, whereas other things without him, prove but shadows; for, he
dwelt among us full of truth.

Ver. 15. John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I
spoke, He that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.
IN the second part of the Chapter John confirms this his doctrine concerning
Christ from four testimonies of John the Baptist, given after the Baptism of
Christ, ver. 37. The first, from this ver. to ver. 14. The second, from ver.
19. to ver. 29. The third, from ver. 29. to ver. 35. The fourth, ver. 35, 36.

In the first testimony, he holds forth the excellency of Christ, first, as
being above himself in dignity, ver. 15. Next, as being above all believers in
the point of fullness, and sufficiency for the supply of lost sinners, ver. 16.
Thirdly, as being preferred to Moses the Minister of the Law, ver. 17.
Fourthly, as being preferred to all men in the point of knowing and revealing
of God. ver 18.

In the first branch of this commendation, Christ being now immediately gone
from John after his Baptism, to be tempted in the Wilderness (and therefore
he says, this was he, speaking of one who had been with him, but was now gone)
John does repeat his former testimonies, and apply them to this individual
person who had been with him; Wherein he had declared, and yet again does
declare, that howsoever Christ did come after him in time of nativity, and in
time of manifestation and execution of his office; Yea, and after him for a
time in place, as coming to be baptized by him, and as yet more obscure then
he: Yet he was truly before him in dignity of person and office, as being the
eternal God. Doctrine 1. It is a commendable and sweet thing when Ministers
prove faithful in their trust, and mind the work about which they are sent;
for, John was sent to bear witness of the light, ver. 7. and accordingly his
practice is, John bare witness of him. 2. The testimony of faithful Ministers
does not evanish with the publication thereof, nor dies with themselves, but
continues as a constant witness to all those to whom the knowledge thereof
comes: And particularly, it is so with the doctrine of extraordinary
Messengers, whose doctrine being recorded, stands as a constant witness;
for, in the Original it is, John bears witness of him, in the present time,
though John was long since dead. 3. Faithful Ministers having to do with
hearers at a great distance from God; who are deaf, and distracted with the
noise of tumultuous lusts, had need to be earnest and instant in their
doctrine, and should in plain terms, not going about the bush, with boldness
and fearlessenesse, and with fervency, and not for the fashion only, publish
what they have in commission; for, in these respects, John bare witness of
him, and cried. Beside that John, entering to his Ministry in a year of Jubilee,
as is supposed, did thus become the trumpeter to proclaim the acceptable year
of the Lord. 4. Christ needs not visible manifestations of himself, to invite
such as know him from the Word, to commend him, and esteem highly of him; for,
John, before Christ came unto him, or he saw him, had given ample testimonies
concerning him, This was be of whom I spoke, even all these testimonies before
Christ's Baptism, recorded by the other Evangelists. 5. As faithful Ministers
ought to be preparing people for Christ's manifestations of himself; So when he
does manifest himself, a Minister is yet needful to expound these
manifestations to be the thing promised, that so they may not be mistaken nor
stumbled at; Therefore, John having spoken of Christ before he manifested
himself, finds it needful to apply that doctrine to that person, that they
might not stumble at his low condition. This was he of whom I spoke. And we are
ready to fall in the like mistake of his promised comforts and outgoings, when
they come. 6. Christ's real excellency and worth is such, that commenders of him
according to his word, will never have cause to change their note, but when he
manifests himself, they will see all true that was said of him, and when again
he obscureth himself; there is no cause to change our thoughts; for, here when
Christ comes to John, he points him out, as making good all he had said, and
when now he is gone to the Wilderness to be hungry and to be tempted of the
Devil, John says the same things of him, This was be of whom I spoke, etc. 7.
A^ Christ is still above, and preferred before the choicest of Ministers,
however he abased himself in the days of his flesh, and subjected himself to
fulfill all righteousness; So it is the duty, and will be the practice of
faithful Ministers, and honest Christians, to abase themselves, that Christ may
be exalted, and to guard against any respect that may encroach upon his honor;
for, thus did John preach of him first and last, he that comes after me is
preferred before me. 8. The dignity and eternity of Christ's person as God, sets
him up above all creatures, how excellent soever; for albeit as man, he was for
a time made a little lower then the Angels, yet by virtue of the personal
union, he is, even as man, made head of Angels. And as God, there is no
comparison betwixt him and the creatures; So much does John's reason teach us,
he is preferred before me, for he was before me.

Ver. 16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
In the next branch of this commendation, John prefers Christ to all
believers, as being he in whom all fullness dwells, and from whose fullness:
all graces and gifts that ever any had, or has, do flow, in all the steps and
degrees thereof. Doctrine 1. All men, and even the choicest of Christ's
servants, are by nature, and of themselves, empty of any thing that is good;
for, so much is implied in that we must receive of his fullness. 2. All
fullness of grace and goodness for supply of believers wants, is treasured up
in Christ; He has an increated fullness as God, and as man, a created
fullness; A fullness of dignities and prerogagatives; a fullness of divine
perfections, gifts, and graces answerable to these dignities, the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in him bodily, and the Spirit without measure is poured
out upon him; for, this is also supposed that he has this fullness. 3. The
fullness that is in Christ is for the supply of all believers wants, as their
treasure and storehouse. These who come to him, he needs them not to receive
from them, but to give unto them, he needs not their fullness, but their
emptiness, that his fullness may overflow to the supply thereof; And this may
invite sinners to come to him as they need; for, of his fullness we receive, 4.
God has in great mercy so ordered the way of his peoples salvation, as not to
entrust their own stock of grace into their own hands, as he did to Adam before
the fall, but to put them and their allowance in Christ's hand, that he might
keep it for them, who can contain infinitely more then they could receive, and
they may come and draw it daily out of him as they need; for, so is it ordered
here that he has the fullness, and we receive of his fullness. 5. There is no
man of any rank, quality, or degree that has any gift or grace, but he has it
of Christ; The most eminent ought to look humbly on what he has as Christ's
gift, and the meanest ought to adore and acknowledge his wisdom and love who
lets out such a measure to every member as he pleases, for, of his fullness
have all we, Prophets, Apostles, Believers, etc. received. 6. Whatever
believers get from Christ, yet he remains still full; as the sea diminishes
not by rivers coming from it, and as the Sun does not wear nor lose light, by
giving light to all; so Christ is still the same for fullness, notwithstanding
what he communicates; for, it is of his fullness we all receive, it is still
fullness when all receive of it. 7. Whatever any receive of Christ, it comes of
grace, and not of merit; and the free favor of God, and the gracious effects
thereof, are the chief fruits flowing from Christ's fullness; for, in both these
respects it is said all we receive, and (or, even) grace. 8. Whosoever do
receive true grace from Christ, they will be receiving grace after grace; And
as they do not receive grace all at once, but by degrees and so should not sit
up on any measure received; So Christ's giving of grace unto them is an argument
why he will give them yet more grace; for, we have received grace for grace,
that is, grace upon grace, grace after grace, and more grace, because he has
already given grace. 9. Not only what the Elect do receive at their first
conversion, but even what they receive after grace given, comes not of merit,
but from the first to the last, is grace still; for, it is grace for grace, and
so still grace, and grace for graces sake, Romans 12.6. Ephesians. 3.7. 10. This
grace received by us for grace, or, answering to grace, as the Original will
bear, may relate to grace in Christ and coming by Christ; And so it may teach
further. 1. Christ is not only the storehouse, from whose fullness grace
flows to believers, but the procuring cause thereof also; grace being given
to them, because of his redemption and righteousness made theirs of free
grace; And because his gracious acceptance with the Father as Mediator, takes
in all his people in and with him; Thus do we receive grace for (or, be cause
of) grace in him, and flowing from him. See Romans 5.15, 17. Ephesians. 1.6. 2. As
every believer is a member of Jesus Christ his mystical body, so do they in
their own measure, as members, receive grace answering to the grace poured out
on him as head; being made sons and coheirs answering to his dignity in
their measure and getting proportionable holiness, that there may be a
conformity betwixt head and members; for, so we do receive grace for grace, or
answering to grace, to wit, in him.

Ver. 17. For the Law was given by Moses; but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.
In the third branch of this commendation, (which clears also the former, of
his fullness to communicate grace for grace, and therefore is joined with it by
the particle, for) John prefers Christ not only to himself, but to Moses
also, on whom the Jews doated so much: And that, both in respect of the
Doctrine and benefits brought by either of them to the world; Moses being the
Minister of the Law, which reveals wrath, and points out Christ in dark
types, and sanctification under Ceremonial washings; And Christ bringing grace
and truth with him, to releeve such as groaned under these Legal
administrations: And, in respect of their persons, and way of conveighing these
benefits; Moses being but an instrument and Messenger carrying that doctrine
which he delivered, and Christ being the Author and procurer of these benefits
which he revealed to the world. Doctrine 1. The faithful servants of Christ
will not only be afraid to meddle with his glory themselves, but will cry down
all glory that is given to any other, to Christ's prejudice; and will study to
exalt him above the most excellent of men, considered in their best things;
Therefore John prefers Christ unto Moses, as well as to himself, and that in
these things wherein Moses was most eminent; as his going up to the Mount to
God, and his receiving of the Law from him. 2. Albeit the doctrine of free
grace was revealed in Moses time; and by him, and renewing grace, and grace as
a remedy against the rigor of the Law was then known: Yet it was but very
obscurely revealed, and sparingly let forth in comparison of the times of the
Gospel; And in his Ministry, the paedagogy of the Law was much insisted on,
pressing the Moral Law of duties under the pain of the curse, and holding out
Christ under dark shadows; In this respect it is said, the Law was given by
Moses, in opposition to grace and truth brought by Jesus Christ. 3 The legal
pedagogy as it is contradistinguished from the grace offered in the Gospel, is
a very hard and unsupportable yoke; for, in that respect the Moral Law
requires complete and personal obedience under the pain of Gods curse, and yet
gives no strength to perform any thing; it bears in our duty upon us with
rigor and terror, discovers our misery without showing a remedy, brings
on a spirit of bondage without any hope of release, irritates and provokes
nature to sin yet more, etc. And the Ceremonial Law contained but a shadow of
good things to come, was a veil cast over Moses face, and was a toilsome yoke,
for these causes the Law by Moses is postponed to what Christ brings. 4. In
Christ there is an case and relief to believers against all the burdensomnesse
of the Law; And particularly, by the Gospel he has published the free grace
and favor of God, accepting the self-condemned sinner in him, and freely
justifying the ungodly through his imputed righteousness, conferring grace
freely to sanctify and cure the perverseness of men's nature, and so fitting
them for glory. He has also taken off the veil of Moses face, being himself
the substance of all the shadows. And having given the performance of all the
promises; for, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 5. Albeit Christ has
abolished the Ceremonial Law, and has abolished the Moral Law to believers, in
its condemning, cursing, and irritating power; Yet none get good of grace
through Christ, but such as are sent by the Law as self-condemned to him for a
remedy, and such as continue under the Law as a rule of life, being enabled to
the obedience thereof by Christ; for, not only does Christ bring truth of
sanctification, answering to all their legal purifications under the Law, but
grace also, which presupposes a work of the Law discovering sin and wrath, and
grace enabling such as come to him to endeavor obedience thereunto; And thus
Christ established the Law, not only by fulfilling the same in his own person,
as our surety, but by making his members also to walk in some measure according
to it, which the Law of it self could not do. 6. Christ is above Moses, not
only in respect of the benefits or doctrine he publishes, but inrespect of
his efficiency about these benefits, he is above him, and all other Messengers,
who are but instruments and messengers publishing the doctrine which they
receive, and the benefits held out therein; whereas Christ is the Author and
procurer, as well as the publisher of the spiritual benefits of the Gospel; for,
the Law was given by Moses, as a Messenger, receiving the same from God, to
deliver it to the people, but grace and truth came, (or was made, or brought to
pass) by Jesus Christ.

Ver. 18. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
In the last branch of this commendation, Christ is preferred to all men in the
point of seeing and knowing of God, and in particular, to Moses, of whom it is
said, that he saw God, and God talked face to face with him, Deuteronomy. 34.10. Numb.
12.8. It is here declared that God is invisible and incomprehensible by any,
save by his Son Jesus Christ, who being one in essence with the Father, and
upon all his councels, does perfectly know him, and does reveal unto mankind
all that they know of him. Doctrine 1. God, as being a Spirit, is invisible to
the bodily eyes of any, though some rays of his glorious Majesty have at some
times been seen; nor can any creature take up the infinitely glorious essence
of God with the eyes of their mind, but very Angels cover their faces before
him; Nor is there any knowledge of God at all attainable by men of themselves,
and what they see and know by revelation, is but as nothing in comparison of
what Christ has: All this is imported in that, No man has seen God at any
time, to wit, with bodily eyes, or fully as Christ does, or without him. 2.
Albeit God be invisible and incomprehensible by any of themselves, yet there is
a declaration and manifestation of him to sinful man, and a knowledge and sight
of him attainable in so far as is necessary to salvation; for, so are we
taught here, that God is declared. 3. As Christ perfectly sees; and knows
and comprehends the Father; so the declaration and manifestation of God to
man, and especially that which is saving and sanctifying, is by Christ, who
from the beginning of the world was the only revealer of God to the Church;
And especially at his incarnation, he has revealed the Father in himself, and
the knowledge of him and his will unto salvation, by his doctrine; for, the
Son, he has declared him. 4. Albeit God have many sons by creation, (as
Angels, Job 1.6. and Adam, Luke 3.38.) and by adoption; yet he has only one
natural Son begotten of his substance, by eternal and incomprehensible
generation, who as he perfectly comprehends the Father, so he cannot but
infallibly declare him, being the express image of his person; for, Christ is
the only begotten Son, and this is one ground of his declaring the Father.
5. Christ is one in essence with the Father, coexisting with him from eternity,
and is one with him in regard of familiarity and delight, and was and is upon
all the Fathers counsels; And this does yet further assure the Church of the
certainty of what he declares of God, and does set out their happiness who
have him for their friend and surety, who is so intimate with the Fathar; for,
this is another ground of his declaring the Father, that he is in the bosom of
the Father, which imports oneness, intimacy and delight, that he has a near
sight, and intimate acquaintance with the Father. See Prove. 8.30.

Ver. 19. And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and
Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou?

20. And he confessed and denied not: but confessed, I am not the Christ.

21. And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? and he said, I am not, Art
thou that Prophet? And he answered. No.


John's second testimony after the Baptism of Christ, was given upon occasion
of Commissioners sent unto him from the Council at Jerusalem and expressed in
way of conference betwixt them and him; Wherein, being posed concerning his
person and authority, he declares negatively that he was neither the Messiah,
nor Elijah in proper person; nor that great Prophet they expected, ver. 19, 20,
21. Next, being further posed, he declares positively that he was Christ's
forerunner, of whom Isaiah had foreprophesied, ver. 22, 23. Thirdly, being
further interrogate concerning his office and administration of Baptism, he
clears them in that, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27 Lastly, the Apostle John subjoyneth
the circumstance of place where this testimony was given. ver, 28.

From these verses wherein he declares what he was not, Learn. 1. Church
Judicatories for managing of Christ's matters, and for trial of new doctrines
and opinions, are an approven Ordinance of God: And such as are entrusted with
that power, ought to go very gravely and tenderly to work, when providence puts
them upon the trial of any such emergent; for, these in Jerusalem, from whom
these Commissioners came, were their great Council appointed of old by God for
these matters; And their carriage in not condemning John untried and unheard,
and their using of him respectively, in sending grave men for descent, office
(land of their most eminent sect also, as appears ver. 24.) to him, are rules
of prudence, in such procedure, worthy of imitation. 2. In a corrupt and
declining time of the Church, ordinarily the teachers are furthest out of
course, and are not with the first to enquire after Christ, but behind many;
for, notwithstanding all John's doctrine before Christ's Baptism, yet it is
after that ere the Council of Jerusalem enquire after him or it, and but to
little purpose then either, as the sequel shows. 3. Whatever be the purposes
of corrupt men in enquiring after, or debating about truth; yet God can make
use thereof to bring out more of his truth, and give occasion to his servants,
to publish it yet more; for, though these came rather to quarrel and jangle,
then to be edified; yet it drew out a record of John, which is of use to the
Church in all ages. 4. It is not only requisite that new doctrines be tried
and examined, but the authority of men who publish the same, not upon an
ordinary call, nor in an ordinary way, is subject to trial also, and that in
the first place; for, their first question (which John holds himself bound to
answer) is, who art thou? intimating, that if he were not an authorized person,
he was bound to cease. 5. It is the duty of truly godly men to walk
respectively toward Church Judicatories appointed of God, even when such as
bear sway in them are corrupt: nor ought they deny a testimony to the truth
when they are called to it, and so long as there is any hope or appearance of
doing good by it; for, John, though he was an extraordinary man, yet is content
to give an account to the Commissioners of that corrupt Council, seeing they
sat in Moses chair; and by this means he does confirm the truth for the good
of others. 6. Visible Churches and Councels, even such as have most peculiar
privileges, may err, and have erred; And that particularly, when they look
more to tradition, then to Scripture; for, these instructions do clear the
Council of Jerusalem to have erred, in that they suppose the Messiah could be
come (as John's answer to their first question understands them) without a
forerunner; In that they dreamed (following tradition) that Elijah was to come
in proper person (for in that sense only John denies that he was Elijah,
though otherwise he was he, as coming in the spirit and power of Elijah, Matthew.
11.14. Luke 1.17.) And, in that they dreamed from Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. of any
singular Prophet to be raised up after the succession of Prophets in the Old
Testament, in the time of the Messiah, beside the Messiah himself, to whom that
passage is applied, Acts 3.22. and so John denies that also, though otherwise
he was a Prophet of the Highest, Luke 1.76. 7. As Gods servants in all their
Testimonies ought to be plain, bold, affectionate, ingenuous and constant; so
in particular, they ought to be ingenuous and fervent in renouncing the honor
due to their Master, not sleeing from it for the fashion only, that it may
follow them the faster. Therefore he confessed, and denied not, but confessed I
am not the Christ, not standing on what they might do to him, not finding him
to be so. 8. Such as come not to the Word to be edified, but to jangle and
catch advantage, it is righteous with God to leave them lying in their errors
and mistakes, without clearings; Therefore, does John not clear their mistakes
concerning Elias, or the Prophet, nor clear in what sense he was Elias, but
nakedly answers their questions according to their apprehensions of things.

Ver. 22. Then said they unto him, Who art thou, that we may give an answer to
them that sent us? What say thou of thy self?

23. He said; I am the voice of one crying in the Wilderness: Make straight the
way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias.


John being further posed concerning his person and calling, declares that he
had authority and commission to be Christ's forerunner, and to prepare his way;
as was fore-prophesied by Isaiah. Whence learn, 1. The reason which these
Commissioners give for their so earnest questioning of him, may teach every man
to be faithful in what is committed to his trust, especially in matters of
public concernment, relating to the Church of God; for, say they, Who art
thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent us? What say thou of thy
self? 2. As faithful Ministers ought not to encroach upon their Masters honor;
so they ought not to pass from that authority that is due to them, but assert
it as need requires; for, so does John here, declare what his Commission and
place was. 3. Every one who undertakes the work of the Ministry, ought to be
clear of his calling, and have a warrant for it, either ordinary, or
extraordinary, according as the calling he claims to, is; As being that
whereon a Ministers courage, comfort and success does much depend; Therefore,
John shows his warrant for his extraordinary calling out of the Prophet. --
As said the Prophet Isaiah, to wit, chap. 40.3. For whatever use these words
had to comfort the captives in Babylon with the hope of a speedy return, and of
Heralds to publish it, and Ushers to prepare their way, and of removing of all
impediments; Yet in the substance, it pointed at the manifestation of Christ,
and his forerunner, as this text makes clear. 4. Christ's coming into the world
was stately, and Kingly, however in appearance it seemed base; And wherever he
is received, he will be received as a King. Therefore came he with an Usher and
forerunner, crying to prepare his way when he manifested himself; which is the
prerogative of Kings, whereas private persons will come in with less noise,
and at narrower passages. I am, says he, the voice of one crying, make
straight, etc. 5. Men have hears naturally unp^epared for Christ to come into,
which must be cured before he come; They are naturally averse from the purity
of true Religion; full of mountains of vanity, pride and ambition; valleys of
dejection, discouragement, unbelief, and hollow-hearted hypocrisy;
crookedness and deceitfulness in their hearts and ways, whereby men deceive
themselves and others, and hide the need of Christ from themselves; roughness
of their passions, humors and lusts, ready to reject all warnings and offers:
And all these make men's hearts an unstreight way for Christ's Chariot to march
in; Therefore, cried John, make straight the way of the Lord, under this
including the making low of mountains, the exalting of valleys, etc. of which
Luke 3.5. from Isaiah 40.4. and turning the heart of the children to the
fathers, etc. of which Luke 1.16, 17. from Mal. 4.5, 6. 6. As all men in all
places are naturally unfit for receiving of Christ, so ordinarily the offer of
him is worse entertained in places of eminency then in more obscure corners;
Therefore, is this proclamation made, not in Jerusalem, but in the Wilderness;
(or hill-countrey of Judea, where the inhabitants and Cities were fewer, Josh.
15.61.) a place where he would more readily be received then in Jerusalem. 7.
Albeit that. Christ commands us to prepare his way, that he may show us our
duty, and make use of exhortations, as a mean whereby he works upon his own;
Yet this work of preparation is not in our power, but must be his work, whole
reward is with him, and his work before him. And unto such as he convinces of
their own inability, he will first come with a work of conversion unto faith
and repentance, that this may make way for his coming with consolation and
sensible manifestation; Therefore, is this command sweetened with a promise,
Isa. 40.3, 4, etc. Luke 3.4, 5.

Ver. 24. And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.

25. And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be
not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet?

26. John answered them saying, I baptize with water, but there stands one
among you, whom ye know not,

27. He it is, who coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes
latchet I am not worthy to unloose.


These Commissioners, seeking advantage, (as being no friends to the Gospel) do
question John further concerning his office, and administration of Baptism,
seeing he was neither the Messiah, nor any of these extraordinary men: To which
he answers, that he pretended to no more then the administration of the outward
ordinance, the efficacy whereof depended on Christ; And that he did this much
because he was the forerunner of Christ, who was already come, though yet
unknown to them; And that Christ in his person and dignity was so far above
him, as he was not worthy to do him the meanest service. Doctrine 1. It is an
evidence of a sick and corrupt Church, when corrupt men are entrusted with most
grave and weighty employments in it; for, so was it with the Church of the
Jews, when they, which were sent were of the Pharisees; A precise sect,
abounding in error, superstition and hypocrisy, as the history of the Gospel
makes manifest. 2. Corrupt men are more ready to jangle and lie at wait for
advantages, then to embrace the truth of God delivered by his servants; for,
these Pharisees take no notice of what he had said from Isaiah, nor seek to be
further cleared in it, but think they have an advantage of him, that he should
presume to baptize. Why baptisest thou then, if thou be not that Christ etc? 3.
It was an uncontroverted truth, both among friends and foes, in the Jewish
Church, that at the coming of the Messiah, there should be some changes in the
way of Religion, and an institution of new Ordinances; for, the Pharisees have
nothing to say against his Baptism, if he were Christ, or Elias, or the
Prophet, their only objection is, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that
Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet? And John's answer, I baptize, but
there stands one among you, etc. imports that he being Christ's forerunner,
who was now come into the world, it was lawful for him to administer this
Sacrament. 4. Ministers ought to arrogate no more unto themselves, then to be
Ministers and dispensers of the external means of Word and Sacraments, leaving
the glory and efficacy thereof unto Christ entirely; And people ought so to be
affected in coming to these Ordinances; Therefore, says John, I baptize with
water, not denying that Christ also baptized with water, nor yet denying that
baptism administered by him was accompanied with Grace and the Spirit of God;
but he only compares his person and office with Christ's, and shows that
whatever grace came by the Sacrament administered by him, yet he was not the
giver of it, but Christ only, who had appointed him to dispense the outward
seal. 5. Christ may be among a people, and yet they who reckon themselves very
high in the Church, neither see him, nor know him; for, says John there
stands one among you, (not that he was present then at that time, for he came
but the next day to him from the Wilderness, ver. 29. but that he was come
into the world, and conversant with the Jews) whom ye know not. 6. It is the
duty of Ministers, and will be the care of such as are faithful and zealous, to
exalt and commend Christ at all occasions, that men may fall in love with him;
Therefore, does John again repeat his doctrine, he it is who coming after me,
is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. 8. The
more high employment, and the more eminent gifts men have, and the more ready
men are to esteem of them, the more will they abase themselves, if they be
truly gracious, and be affected with the excellency of Christ; for, it is John,
the greatest among them that are born of women, and so much esteemed among the
Jews, and the forerunner of Christ who thus abaseth himself, he is preferred
before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. 9. Albeit Christ,
of free grace, do honor men with eminent employments under him, and
particularly Ministers of the Gospel; Yet such as know Christ and themselves
well, will not only see that they are unworthy of the high employments they
have, but even to do the basest service to him; for, John says not, I am
unworthy to be his fore runner, though employed in that service, but, whose
shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose, which was a mean and base office.

Verse 28. These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was
baptizing.
Unto this testimony the Apostle John subjoyneth the place where it was given;
It was, as the name signifies, an ordinary place of passage over Jordan. This
is remarked not only to confirm the truth of the testimony, by recording the
circumstances; But, 1. To show that as this place where John baptized and
preached, was an ordinary entry to the Land of Canaan; so Christ whom he
preached is the Author, and the Sacrament he administered, a mean of entry into
the heavenly Canaan. 2. To show that faithful Ministers ought to omit no
opportunities, but to take advantage of all occasions for setting forth of
Christ, and gaining of souls to him: Therefore does John make use of
Bethabarah, to preach and baptize in, because of the daily concourse that was
there.

Verse 29. The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold,
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.
This is John's third testimony concerning Christ after his Baptizme, given in
Christ's own presence, when he returned to John after his tentations in the
wilderness; wherein, first, he points out Christ as the true sacrifice for
expiating of sin, ver. 29. Next, he again applies his former doctrine
concerning the Messiah, to this person, ver 30. Thirdly, he shows how he came
to know him, and thus to testify of him, which was not upon any acquaintance
by eyesight; but when he got Commission for his Ministry, it was revealed to
him that the Messiah was in the world, and to be manifested by him, ver. 31.
and that he got a sign from God whereby to discern the Messiah, which was
accomplished in this person, ver. 32, 33. upon the sight whereof he was
encouraged to proclaim Christ to be the Son of God, ver. 34.

In this verse, John who had hitherto set forth Christ in the dignity and
excellency of his office, does now declare how he was to execute his office,
and to bring about these benefits; which was by suffering; and therefore he
points out Christ as the substance of the Passover and daily Sacrifices, who
by the merit and virtue of his death takes away the sin of his own, both Jews
and Gentiles. Doctrine 1. Faithful Ministers, and such as know Christ, will
diminish nothing of his commendation, for any outward dispensations he may meet
with; for, the occasion of this testimony declares, that when John was
publishing the former testimonies, Christ was absent, and particularly, under
his tentations in the Wilderness, as the Harmony makes clear, and yet in the
mean time he had been commending him. 2. Such as faithfully point out and
commend Christ, he will give them occasion to do it yet more, by becoming more
familiar with them, that so they may make him better known; for, whereas John
had preached Christ faithfully, the next day John sees Jesus coming unto him,
and so will he do still, though he come not any more in person. 3. As faithful
Ministers get more clear and renewed sights of Christ, so they ought to improve
those dispensations by making him known yet more to others; for, when Christ
comes to John, he publishes a new testimony, and points out yet more of him.
4. It is no small part of Christ's excellency in the eyes of lost sinners, that
he was pleased to condescend to be a suffering and crucified Lord, whereby he
purchases unto them so great a good, and g^ve such a demonstration of his
love, in that he would buy their well-being at so dear a rate, and lay his own
exaltation in pledge of it; Therefore, however carnal Jews stumbled at a
crucified Messiah, yet John holds him out as excellent, in that he was the ^amb
of God, or, a sacrifice for sin. 5. The world without Christ, is lying in
wickedness under sin, and under all that follows upon it; under the guilt of
Adams sin, and the corruption of nature, under the dominion and power of actual
sin, and under the curse and wrath of God for it; and the sense of this is it
which will make thoughts of a crucified Christ sweet; for, so is supposed here,
in these words, the sin of the world. 6. Man's misery through sin, and wrath
for sin, is such, as he can only be relieved from it by Christ the true
sacrifice for sin; for, he is the Lamb of God who takes away sin; And only
he, since the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. 7. The Legal Sacrifices and
the Paschal Lamb, were but types of Christ the true Sacrifice for sin, and the
substance of all they shadowed out, is only to be found in him, who was
without spot and blemish; who is separated from sinners, as the Paschal Lamb
was set apart on the tenth day of the month; who expiates sin by his death,
which theirs did but typically; whose blood applied, does quiet the conscience,
and turn away the curse, as upon sprinkling the blood of the Passover, the
destroying Angel passed over; who was content to be killed and roasted in the
wrath of God, (as the Passover was in the fire) that we might live, and he
might be food for us; and, who was content to undergo all this meekly and
patiently for our cause, Therefore is he called the Lamb, with relation
specially to the Passover, and the Lambs employed for daily sacrifice, and
with relation to the properties of these beasts, pointing out the way of his
suffering, as Isaiah 53.7. 8. Albeit the Paschal Lamb, and Lambs for Sacrifice
were Gods creatures, and appointed and enjoined by God in the general for these
typical uses; Yet the choosing out, and setting apart of such as were most fit
according to Gods direction, was man's work, and his judgment was interposed in
it: But Christ the true Sacrifice, was singled out alanerly by God; who out of
his infinite love to lost man, did design him for that work in his eternal
counsel and the Covenant of redemption, when man had no way to help himself;
who separated him from sinners by spotless sanctification, to be a perfect
Sacrifice; and, who sent him out of his own bosom to accomplish the work of
redemption; for these causes is he called the Lamb of God, as his peculiar
privilege above these types. 9. Christ is the true Savior who takes the
burden of sin from off his people, and bears it himself, and by bearing of it,
does destroy and abolish it; This he did by his death in transferring the guilt
of their sin upon himself, and bearing the punishment and wrath due to it, by
which he has merited the taking of sin away out of Gods sight, and obtained a
dominion over it; and this is made forthcoming to his people, partly by
justification wherein the merit of Christ's death is applied for taking away the
guilt and punishment due to sin, so as it shall not be inflicted, partly, by
sanctification, wherein the power of his death is applied for subduing and
purging the filth of sin, till the believer be presented spotless; He is the
Lamb of God which takes away sin; or, takes it often them, bears it
himself, and takes it quite away; for, the word will import all these. 10. The
virtue and efficacy of Christ's death does expiate and take away the sin of the
universality of his elect throughout all the world, and is not restricted to
Jews only, as these typical sacrifices were, but extended to all his elect
among the Gentiles also; for, he takes away the sin of the world, which is
not to be understood of all and every man (for their sins are not taken away)
but of his own scattered through the world, and in all ages of it, and
particularly, as taking in Gentiles as well as Jews, as the word world is
taken, 1 John 2.2. Beside, they may also be called the world, as being many in
themselves, as being in his estimation as good as all the world, and they who
will one day be set apart from the rest of the world, and make up a peculiar
world of themselves. 11. Christ, coming into the world for the redemption of
lost man, ought to be looked on as wonderful in his incarnation, sufferings,
and in the love from whence this flows; and as rare and matchless, there
being no Immanuel but one, no love, no actions like his, and therefore much to
be admired and esteemed of; And all who would reap benefit by him, ought to
turn their eyes off all other things, expecting no such benefit from them in
whole or in part, and fix them only on him: All these are imported in this
duty to which John inviteth his hearers to behold (or, see, and fix our eyes
upon) the Lamb of God.

Ver. 30. This is he, of whom I said, After me comes a man which is preferred
before me: for he was before me.
John here applies his former Doctrine concerning the Messiah (which he had
preached both before Christ's coming to him, and since he went to the
Wilderness, ver. 15, 27.) to Jesus Christ now present. Whence learn. 1.
Ministers can never enough be careful in setting out Christ's excellency,
notwithstanding any outward condition wherein he is; nor in putting away any
honor due to Christ, when it seems to be given to them; nor in studying his
eternal Godhead, and commending his excellency above all; because of that; for,
this is the sum of that doctrine which here again he inculcates; after me
comes a man, which is preferred before me, for he was before me. 2. God does
approve in his servants, not fits and flashes, but fixednesse and constancy in
their discerning Christ and his glory, in his lowest estate; And they will
find no cause to repent, or eat in any honorable thoughts they have had of
him; Therefore, does John as no reed shaken with the wind, adhere unto, and
again publish his former doctrine. 3. The same things spoken over and over
again of Christ, will not be tastlesse to such as know his excellency; and
truths often inculcate are the truths which we come oftenest short in taking
up; and yet should study most; So much also does John's frequent repetition of
this doctrine teach. 4. The dignity and excellency of Christ as God, becomes
comfortable to the Church, being found in our nature, by his becoming man and
her kinsman, that he may do the duty of a kinsman and Redeemer to her.
Therefore, does John point him out under the name of a man; after me comes a
man, etc. 5. Faithful preaching and commending of Christ, is a mean making way
for a more full sight of him, both to the Preachers and faithful receivers of
what is taught; for, John at last, gets him now present to point out, whom he
had so often commended unseen, This is he of whom I said, etc. And all faith
full Preachers and receivers of their testimony, may expect the day when they
shall see him whom they commended and believed in, face to face.

Ver. 31. And I know him not: but that he should be made manifest unto Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water.
Lest any should question how John knew this person to be the Messiah whom he
had preached; He declares how he came to know him, and got ground for this
testimony. And first, he declares that when he entered upon his calling, he
knew not Christ by face; or at least, that he had not any converse with him to
know him to be the Messiah: Only he knew by revelation, his offices, and that
he was in the world, shortly to be manifested: And therefore he was sent by the
immediate call of God to preach his approach and being at hand, and by his
Doctrine and Baptism to hold out the benefits to be had by him, having
assurance also, that in the time of his Ministry, he should have occasion to
point out his person to Israel, as being his forerunner. Doctrine 1. It is an
unjust calumny and prejudice against the Ministers of the Gospel, that what
they say of Christ, is done but for by-respects; And particularly, there was no
cause to suspect these extraordinary messengers sent to point out Christ, now
come into the world, of any collusion with him, or double-dealing; Therefore,
God so ordered it, that, to prevent this, John, though a kinsman of Christ's
according to the flesh, should not know him, either not seeing him by face, or
having no converse with him. 2. A bodily sight of Christ, or acquaintance with
him outwardly, is not simply needful for enabling a Minister to point him out
savingly to the world: Albeit all the Apostles behoved to have been such as had
seen, and had conversed with him in the flesh, Acts 1.21, 22. And therefore
Paul was ravished to the third heaven to supply the want of seeing him in the
flesh, 2 Cor. 12.2. 1 Cor. 15.8. Yet even in the days of his flesh, called men
were able to preach him upon spiritual acquaintance by faith, though they had
not seen nor known him in the flesh; for, John was sent to manifest him to
Israel, when yet he knew him not. 3. Men called of God to the work of the
Ministry, must not stand back because of the conscience of much inability, but
ought to hazard on the call, expecting that their furniture shall grow upon
their hands as they need it; for John is sent not only to preach Christ, but
to point him out, when yet he knew him not, but had a promise that he should
know him, as afterward he did. 4. The chief end of the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, is, to point out, and to make an unknown Christ, known to the world
and the Church; for, that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore, am I
come baptizing with water. John had indeed a peculiar end in his Ministry, to
preach that the Kingdom of God was at hand, that Christ was come in the flesh,
and to point him out in person: But the general end of the Ministry, in which
he also joined, is to point him out to faith, in his merit, virtue and
efficacy. 5. Baptism with water is an Ordinance of God, wherein Chrst is also
held forth, as the pardoner and pu^ger of his people, the washer and renewer of
their person and nature; and this was the end of John's Baptism also; for,
says he, I am come to baptize with water, that he should be made manifest. 6.
The Lord who is Sovereign Lord of the world, and may reveal Christ to whom he
will, was pleased to make Israel his peculiar people, and to give unto them the
first offer of Christ, and of all the privileges of the Gospel, that he might
keep his promise made to their fathers, Romans 15.8. and that he might leave a
pledge of his fidelity, that no affection to the rest of his sheep, could make
him break what he had said; for, John was sent, that he might be made manifest
to Israel.

Ver. 32. And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
like a dove, and it abode upon him.

33. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same
said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on
him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

34. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God.


John declares further, that he got a sign from God whereby he might know the
true Messiah and the Baptizer with the Holy Ghost, which being accomplished on
Christ at his Baptism, Matthew. 3.16. did confirm John, and encourage him to
proclaim Christ to be the Son of God. Whereas John says, ver. 33. that he
knew not Christ, it is not to be understood as if he knew him not at all,
before the accomplishment of that sign, for it is clear from Matthew. 3.13, 14
he knew him when he came to be baptized. But the meaning is, that when John
entered to his Ministry, and got the promise of this sign, he knew not Christ
by face, though afterward about the time of his Baptism, he knew him first by
revelation, and was yet more confirmed by the accomplishment of the promised
sign. Doctrine 1. The glorious evidences of Christ's excellency and Godhead,
when he came into the world, are not cunningly devised fables; but most
certain and infallible truths; for, John bare record, saying, I saw, etc. He
gives a solemn testimony of it. 2. Christ in his solmne entry to his offices,
was sealed from heaven, and stated in them, that so the Church may learn to
embrace him with all respect. Therefore does the Spirit descend upon him in
this visible glorious way, and the Father bear witness to him, as it is,
Matthew. 3. all the persons of the Trinity manifesting themselves on Jordans
bank. 3. Christ is endowed with the Spirit from on high for executing of his
offices, and it is made manifest that the Spirit is to be found on him, and
sought from him; for, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven upon him, where
the Spirit, who fills heaven and earth, is said to descend in respect of that
visible manifestation and sign of his presence. 4. The Spirits descending like
a dove, a meek, harmless and affectionate creature, pointed out, what Christ
is in his own nature to them that come to him, even meek, harmless, loving,
and not dreadful; what he is in the execution of his office, even he in whom
the Father is well pleased and pacified, and he who brings the good news of
asswaging the deluge of wrath, as Noah's dove of the drying up of the flood; And
what he is in the operations of his Spirit upon his people, that they are made
meek, harmless, and lowly as doves, not like birds of prey. 5. Albeit all
Christ's members do receive of the Spirit in their measure, yet it is Christ's
prerogative to have the Spirit resting on him; Not only as God is the Spirit of
one essence with him, proceeding from the Father and him, and so is ever
present with him t^ But even as man by virtue of the personal union, the Spirit
flows and rests on Christ, and efficaciously works in him all divine
graces and virtues without measure, and immutably, so that none can come wrong
to him at any time for receiving of his Spirit: Therefore, it is said, it abode
upon him. See Isa, 11.2, 3. 6. Christ in taking on our nature, did so cover his
glory with the veil of our flesh and common infirmities, that he could not be
known by bodily sight from another man, without divine revelation, and
evidences from God; for, without this, John says, I knew him not. See Matthew
16.17. 7. The Lord is very tender and careful of his servants, to encourage and
confirm them in their calling and message; And will not fail to perform what
he has promised for that effect, when he sends them out; for, John says, he
saw this sign in a peculiar way, as being to him an accomplishment of that
promise given to him; for, God had said to him, upon whom thou shall see the
Spirit descending, etc. and now it was accomplished. 8. The Spirit rests upon
Christ, and was manifested to be on him by a visible sign, not only for
himself, and to point out his ezcellency, but for the Churches good, and to
certify them that he received the Spirit to communicate unto them, either
extraordinarily, when need required, or ordinarily, to work that inwardly by
his Spirit, which Baptism scaleth and signifies; for, this sign served to
point out that Christ is be which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Which is
spoken, partly, with relation to the extraordinary pouring out of his Spirit
after his Ascension, as appears from Acts 1.5. partly, with relation to the
external Ordinance of Baptism administered by John and others, whereof he only
can give the substance, when by his Spirit he sanctifies and cleanses the
believer. 9. Albeit that extraordinary signs and wonders be not now needful to
confirm the doctrine so often confirmed already; Yet every Minister, would be
sure grounded in what they testify to be the mind of God, and what they know
of Christ's excellency, they would not hide nor conceal it; So much may be
learned from John's way, who saw, and bare record. 10. This truth, that Jesus
the Son of Mary, is also the Son of God in the same person, was confirmed
by infallible evidences, and by eye and ear witnesses; for, I saw, and bare
record that this is the Son of God. See 2 Pet. 1.16. 1 John 1.1. 11. It is
not enough to receive Christ as excellently endowed for the discharge of his
offices; but to receive and believe in him as the Son of God by eternal
generation, as being the ground-stone of our salvation, of our comfort, peace
and strength; Therefore does John hold him out not only as the Baptizer with
the Holy Ghost, but as the Son of God. See 1 John. 5.5.

Ver. 35. Again the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples.

36. And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God.


This is John's fourth testimony, upon which followed the conversion of some
disciples, and so it leads us to the last part of the Chapter: The occasion
and sum of the testimony is, that John being the next day left alone with two
of his disciples, (or such as had embraced his doctrine, and were more then
common hearers) and Christ coming by, he again points him out as the true
sacrifice for sin. Whence learn, 1. As Christ does not fail to cast
opportunities of well-doing in his servants way, so they ought to neglect no
occasion of doing good, and of leading men to Christ, for, Christ, the next day
after the former testimony, walks by them, going now away, as appears from
ver. 38, 39. And John will preach and point him out, though but to two
disciples. 2. Christ's faithful servants will make conscience to exalt him, and
to lead people to him, and not to themselves, And that not only in public,
where many may observe, but even in their most private converse, it will be
their care that such as respect them most, may be led from them to Christ.
Therefore John, even in private with two disciples is so careful to point out
Christ. 3 A sight of Christ is not only an occasion, but a notable help to
enable Ministers to preach and point him out to others; for, as John looking
upon Jesus as he walked, is encouraged to commend him, so a sight and enjoyment
of his spiritual presence, will notably furnish men to speak of him. 4. It is
the duty of faithful Ministers, to be much in preaching of Christ crucified,
and pointing him out as the only propitiatory sacrifice for sin, as being a
chief point of Christian knowledge, and a powerful mean of conversion;
therefore does John again point him out as such, Behold the Lamb of God.

Ver. 37. And the two Disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

38. Then Jesus turned and saw them following, and says unto them, What seek
ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say being interpreted, Master)
where dwell thou?

39. He says unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and
abode with him that day; for it was about the tenth hour.


From this to the end of the Chapter we have the calling of five disciples, not
to the Apostleship, for that was afterward, nor yet simply by conversion, at
least all of them, for some of them were John's disciples, and believed in the
Messiah to come; and Nathan^el was a sincere man: But to the acknowledgment and
embracing of the person of Jesus Christ as the promised Messiah.

The first two wrought upon by John's last testimony, are Andrew, as appears
from ver. 40. and (belike) John, because he marketh the circumstances so
punctually. They hearing John's doctrine, are taken with it, and follow Christ.
And Christ enquiring their errand, they declare they sought to him as their
Teacher, and to have more acquaintance with him; Upon which they are warmly
invited, and stay with him all night, learning excellent things, as appears
from the effects. Doctrine 1. Small ordinances and few words may do much good,
when Christ is pleased to breath, and that which has no effect at one time,
may yet be blessed at another; for, John, short testimony does now work on all
that were his hearers at that time, though we read of no effect the same
doctrine more amply enlarged, had the day before. The two disciples heard him
speak, they so heard now as their hearts were touched and drawn to believe. 2.
As the doctrine of Christ, as a sacrifice for sin, is sweet to such as are
trained in the school of repentance, as John's disciples were; So this doctrine
is the chief instrument of conversion: Whatever other divine doctrine men
receive, it will but turn them Moralists, unless they also receive and
embrace the doctrine of Christ crucified, and himself so held out in it, to
make them Christians indeed; for, behold the Lamb of God, was the doctrine they
heard him speak, which wrought upon them. 3. Such as do rightly hear Christ
preached, will never get rest till they attain to some more acquaintance with
himself; The heart touched by the Word, is set on work to follow after and seek
communion with him, and for this end, will miss and follow after him, never
resting till they get him; So much are we taught by these disciples practice,
they heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. 4. Christ takes notice, and
knows wel-enough who they are that follow him, although his back seem to be
toward them; for, his turning, and seeing them follow, imports, that he knew
they were behind him. 5. Albeit Christ seem to go away from these who follow
him, and let them follow awhile that so he may stir them up, and exercise and
discover their faith the more: Yet ere all be done, he will turn and manifest
himself unto them: so much are we taught by this practice, Jesus turned and saw
them following. 6. Such as follow Christ would very seriously try and enquire
their end in so doing; Whether it be ease and outward things, o^ spiritual
ends; Whether himself, or his gifts; and, What estimation they have of him, if
they be seeking himself; And before they do this, and be single in their aim,
they will not find Christ's sweet entertainment. Therefore, Christ at first
propounds this Question, What seek ye? ^s needful to be answered, and till
then he keeps a distance. 7. One right end of seeking to Christ, is, out of the
sense of our ignorance and errors, to employ him to be our souls Master and
Teacher, who can infallibly and effectually instruct. So much may be gathered
from that title they give him; They say unto him, Rabbi, which is to say being
interpreted, Master, or, Teacher. 8. Such as have any sound knowledge of Christ
will use means to be more acquainted with him; And such as come to him for
right ends will not have soon done their errands with him, nor get enough of
him; So much is imported in their answer; Where dwell thou? as minding to
have more familiar acquaintance with him, then to get a little information by
the way only. 9. Such as seek Christ for himself, will get warm invitations
and entertainment from him at last; And as they are not willing to have soon
done with Christ, so he will find means to hold them on with him; for, be
says unto them, come and see, he does not tell them, that they might come when
they liked, but draws them along with him: And if we take it up spiritually,
it imports, That his sincere followers will be made to know by experience the
place where his honor dwells, by tasting of the blessing of public
Ordinances, till they come to dwell with him for ever. And, That they can
better take up these things by seeing and experience, then by any report. 10.
When Christ gives invitations, it is wisdom in his people to embrace the
offer, and not to sit their time, when either the Word, or the lively operation
of the Spirit with it, is calling and alluring their hearts; for, upon his
call, they came and saw where he dwelt 11. Such as follow Christ's call, may not
only get what good they expect, but his providence may cast unexpected
benefits in their way; for, they abode with him that day, for it was about the
tenth hour, or, (according to the Jews calculation, who divided every day into
twelve hours, which therefore were longer in Summer, and shorter in winter) two
hours before night. They came only to know the place of his abode, but
providence ordered, that they got a nights lodging with him, that they might
learn more of him.

Ver. 40. One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother.

41. He first finds his own brother Simon, and says unto him, We have found
the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.

42. And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art
Simon, the son of Jona, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by
interpretation a stone.


The next that is called, is Peter, whom his brother Andrew (one of the former
two) finding, he declares how he had found the Messiah, and brings him to
him: And Christ promises to make him of a mean man, a prime believer and
instrument in his work, and gives him a name answerable. Doctrine 1. Such as
have gotten any knowledge of Christ, and are brought in to him, ought to be
careful to invite others unto him: And albeit such as are unrenewed may be
instruments of conversion to others (otherwise we should hear none in faith of
a blessing to that Ordinance, since we cannot be infallibly certain of the
conversion of any) yet such as are converted, will be most zealous that way,
and ordinarily are most successeful; Therefore, does Andrew, being now called,
seek Simon, and bring him to Christ. 2. True grace sanctifies natural
affection, and makes a man express it, by seeking their spiritual good to
whom he is bound by nature; Therefore, Andrew seeks his own brother, Simon.
3. God may by a weak instrument, call a man to Christ, who will prove a more
excellent and notable instrument then himself; He may make mean ones
instruments of good to very eminent ones; for, Peter, the great Apostle, is
called by Andrew. 4. Kindness begins on Christ's side, and his grace does
prevent the sinner; for, Andrew the instrument of Peter's good, first finds
his own brother, which imports he was seeking him, and did find him before
he dreamed of so good news 5. Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah promised in the
Old Testament, whom the Prophets and the godly looked for, so does Andrew
reckon, we have the Messiat, implied also that he and his brother had been of
these who looked for him. 6. The finding of Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah,
is good news indeed, and the most excellent of purchases, as making the finder
eternally happy; for, these are the good news that went among them, we have
found the Messiah. 7. It is the will of God that his mind in Scripture be not
hid up in a dark language, but that it be made plain and intelligible to all
who seek the way of salvation therein; Therefore, is the Hebrew word Messiah,
interpreted, the Christ, in Greek, in which the New Testament was written for
the use both of Gentiles and Jews, as being then a common language, so also
ver. 38.42. 8. The titles and styles given to Christ in Scripture are not to be
lightly passed over, but pondered, what may be held out in them for our
edification and comfort; And particularly, that he has taken to himself the
title of being the anointed one by the Spirit without measure, for the
discharge of all his offices for the Churches good; therefore also is his name,
the Messiah, which signifies the Anointed, interpreted in Greek the Christ,
signifying the same. 9. Whatever is wanting in the light of Instruments
pointing out Christ, will be made up if the hearer go to Christ himself; And
faithful Preachers will not be at ease till they draw hearers to Christ, and
hearers should be tractable when means are offered, and not rest up in any man's
word, but go to Christ themselves; for, Andrew having little more to say,
draws him to Christ, and Peter goes with him, he brought him to Jesus. 10.
Christ does perfectly know all that come to him, and what concerns them, and
this he discovers, that they may be encouraged to employ him in all exigents,
and may walk before him as an heart searching God; Therefore, when Jesus beheld
him, he said, thou art Simon, etc. At first view he lets him see he knew him.
11. Christ will welcome these that come to him, whoever were the instruments of
their conversion, nor will he despite them for their outward mean condition;
for, he welcometh Peter, though called by the private instruction of Andrew, as
well as these who were called by John, and that albeit he was poor Simon the
son of fisher Jona. 12. Such as come to Christ he gives them a new nature,
and admits them into his family as children; for, his giving him a new name,
imports he was now a borne child in his family, and he his Father. 13.
Whatever dignity and excellency Christ confer upon his converts, yet he would
have them not forgetting what they are of themselves, that this may still keep
them humble, and commend Christ's grace the more; Therefore, with the promise he
puts him in mind, that he is Simon the son of Jona. 14. As constancy and
firmness in the truth and profession thereof in variety of times and trials,
is a commendable excellency; so the dispensation of the measures of faith
whereby professors are stronger or weaker, are in Christ's own hand; And it is
not only believers duty to be firm, but Christ's promise also, who undertakes
to make them such so far as he sees it meet; for, the thing signified by
this name, Sephas, or, a Stone is constancy as Peter's excellency; and Christ by
giving him this name, undertaketh to make him so. 15. The Lord does not measure
nor judge of his servants by their fits of weakness, but by the constant
tenor of their way; And in great mercy, he gives confirmations to his own,
whom he is to try, that when their weakness appears, they may not lose hope;
for, Christ calls Simon, Cephas, or a fixed believer, notwithstanding his
slips that followed, and by this name would sore-arme him against
discouragement therefrom.

Ver. 43. The day following, Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and finds
Philip, and says unto him, Follow me.

44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the City of Andrew and Peter.


The fourth disciple, whom Christ himself sought out and called, is Philip, and
to this is subjoyned the place of Philips habitation, being the same with
Andrew and Peter's also. Whence learn, 1. As Christ was constant and diligent
about his Fathers work; So he will not fail to go wherever he has an errand,
or any to bring in, and wherever he comes, he has some to find: for, The day
following, without loss of a day, Jesus would go forth, (from the place where
he stayed after he passed by John) into Galilee, because he had Philip to seek.
2. Such as Christ has a purpose of love unto, he will not only prevent them,
but will find them out and gain them; for, he finds Philip. 3. Christ has
diverse ways of calling and bringing men to him, so that none are to carve out
a way to themselves, as if there were none else; nor are any to suspect their
being accepted by Christ, when they come to him, though they have not been
dealt with in all things as others; for, here we have some called by John, some
by private instruction, and Philip called by Christ's own mouth, and yet all
alike welcome. 4. Such as would prove the truth of their Conversion, ought to
renounce all things in affection and practice, in so far as they hinder from
Christ, ought not to presume to go before Christ, in prescribing their way to
him, nor to follow their own wit, will or lusts, but to follow him as a Teacher
and Guide, and as a pattern of obedience to the moral Law, and suffering for
righteousness, and to do this constantly; so much is imported in this
invitation, Follow me, which Philip obeyed, as the sequel declares. 5. The
work of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ may begin in very obscure places, and
among mean persons, that so none may despise a day of small things; for, here
he begins the gathering of his Kingdom, which afterward overspread the world,
in obscure Galilee, and among men of an obscure town. Bethsaida. 6. The
wickedness of a place will not seclude Christ's favor from particular persons,
who are his own in it; for, Bethsaida was a wicked place, as appears from
Christ's woes denounced against it, Mat. 11.20, 21. yet from thence he calls
three eminent Instruments.

Verse 45. Philip finds Nathaneel, and says unto him, We have found him of
whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the son of
Joseph.

46. And Nathaneel said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and see.


The last who is called here to embrace Christ for the Messiah is Nathaneel,
who is wrought upon, partly by Philip, ver. 45, 46. partly, by Christ himself,
ver. 47, 48, 49. And upon his believing, he is commended, and promises of
greater things given for his encouragement, v. 50, 51.

As for Philip the instruments part, he finding Nathaneel, declares how they
had found the promised Messiah, and when he stumbled at Christ, because of the
place of his residence or bi^th, as was supposed, Philip inviteth him to come
to Christ for clearing of that doubt. Doct. 1. As Christ by one word can draw a
soul to him, so Conversion is best proved by effects, and particularly, by zeal
in seeking to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and the good of our neighbors
soul in our station; it being an inseparable companion of the new nature to
seek to multiply the kind; for, Philip was gained by one word, and proves it
by finding Nathaneel, and seeking to gain him. 2. Private conference and mutual
edification is a notable means for advancing the Kingdom of Christ in our
selves or others; for, by these means Christ gathers his disciples here. 3.
The Messiah was spoken of and foretold, both in the Law and in the Prophets,
and the godly before his coming, waited for him by studying these Scriptures;
And Jesus is the true Messiah, in whom all things that were foretold are
accomplished, the finding of whom is the best of news; for these are Philips
news to Nathaneel, We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets
did write, importing, that Moses and the Prophets did write of him, as is clear
from Genesis 3.15. and 49.10. Deuteronomy. 18.18. and frequently through the Prophets;
importing also, that Philip, Nathaneel, and other godly men were versed in the
Scriptures, point him out, and fed upon him as held forth in the Word, and that
the finding of him now in person was joyful news unto them. 4. Such as are
true Converts and love Christ, may yet be very weak in knowledge, yea, and err
also, especially when any thing of Christ is learned from tradition, or vulgar
report, and not from the Scripture; for, so does Philip mistake in calling him
Jesus of Nazareth, if it be taken for the place of his birth, and not of his
education, Matthew. 2.23. and, the son of Joseph, as the common report was. 5.
Men are naturally ready to stumble at something of Christ, yea, even good men
may have prejudices to mar their own growth and progress; for, Nathaneel
stumbleth at the place, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? not so
much because Christ must be born at Bethlehem, as because of the baseness of
the place, the inhabitants of Galilee where Nazareth was, being a blockish and
gross people; so that it was generally conceived, no Prophet could arise from
thence. John 7.52. And this good man is overtaken with that evil of the
generation; whereas there is no place so base or bad, but God when he pleases,
can raise eminent instruments out of it, or otherwise do it good. 6. No
prejudices should hinder men to come to Christ, and albeit others cannot solve
their doubts, yet a blenk of him will easily dispel them; for, Philip answers
his doubt with Come and see, intimating his own weakness to satisfy all his
doubts, that it was his duty to come to Christ notwithstanding, and that Christ
could clear him.

Verse 47. Jesus saw Nathaneel coming to him, and says of him, Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.

48. Nathaneel says unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus answered, and said
unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I
saw thee.

49. Nathaneel answered, and says unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God,
thou art the King of Israel.


Nathaneel being persuaded to come to Christ by Philip, Christ by commending
the sincerity of his heart, and (when Nathaneel wonders at Christ for knowing
that) by de^l^^ing unto him where he had been; does discover his Godhead unto
him, which to works, as to draw Nathaneel to a confession of his Godhead and
Office. Whence learn, 1. Christ will in mercy pass over the faults, prejudices
and mistakes of these who do not persist in them, but come to him; for, Christ
welcometh and receives Nathaneel, even while he is coming, and takes notice
of him when he minded it not, and speaks of him, and not to him. 2. Christ is
an exact discerner of men, both their inside and outside, and the knowledge of
this should draw men to him, for, Christ gains ground on Nathaneel, by
discovering how exactly he know him. 3. Albeit all who came of Jacob after the
flesh, were Israelites in the external Court, yet all that were so by visible
Covenant, were not such inwardly, and in the inward Court of God; And Christ is
a discerner both of the one and the other, who cannot be deceived; Therefore,
says he of Nathaneel Behold, an Israelite indeed, or truly, importing that
many were not truly such, or in the spirit. 4. The true mark of a true
Israelite in the spirit, is, not perfection or sinlesnesse, but sincerity,
whereby men having gotten grace, and closed with Christ, and applied the virtue
of his blood, are enabled to serve God from right principles, and for right
ends; and are in so far purged from hypocrisy and dissimulation, that it does
not reign in them, but they love truth, and hate guile, they labor to be in
reality and in secret, what they seem to others to be, they are jealous of the
unsoundnesse of their own hearts, and daily vexed with it; they set against all
by ends in Religion, and aim at perfection in it; Thus was Nathaneel, an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, to wit, reigning or approven. 5. Albeit
Christ be the Author of every grace men have, yet he will not spare to commend
it in them; and particularly, he is a notable commender of sincerity, where he
finds it, and that so much the more as men are sincere in a corrupt time;
for, he commends Nathaneel, a sincere man in that time. Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile. Men need not seek themselves, for such as are
sincere, Christ will commend them 6. The practical knowledge of Christ, and
particularly, that he is a searche^ of hearts, is such as will strike these who
attain unto it, with admiration and wonder; for, says Nathaneel, surprised
with this encounter; Whence know thou me? as little dreaming how Christ
could know him, and especially his heart and inside, seeing he had never seen
him before. 7. Confused and surprising thoughts concerning Christ, ought not to
be rested on, but the knowledge of him ought to be dived further into, till we
get distinct satisfaction; for, Nathaneel does not rest here, but dives into
the matter, Whence know thou me? that he might know whence this knowledge
came, and how he should be affected with it; and Christ answers him, to give
proof of his willingness to satisfy modest enquiries. 8. Christ's Omniscience
and perfect knowledge of all things, particularly, these things that concern
his people; is such, as when he has discovered so much as may make men wonder,
he has yet more to discover if he please; for, Christ tells Nathaneel how he
knew yet more of him, Before that Philip called thee, etc. A sight of this did
overcome David, Psalm. 139.1. -- 6. 9. Christ has an eye upon his people,
before that any instrument deal with them, to draw them unto him, from whence
it is that instruments fall upon them and are successeful; for, Christ
condescends particularly on this to Nathaneel before that Philip called thee, I
saw thee. 10 Christ's Omniscience as God, and his Providence about all things,
particularly, about his people, does condescend to very meanest things, even
postures of the body, circumstances of time and place, and by this he would
assure them of his taking notice of greater things that may concern them; for,
says he, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I
saw thee 11. As a sincere heart, through Gods blessing, will easily receive
satisfaction concerning Christ, and be gained to him; so the kindly fruit of
such a work, is, to beget an high estimation of Christ; for, Nathaneel is
satisfied, and his satisfaction brings out a fair confession and commendation
of Christ. 12. The more a soul know of Christ, it will not only esteem him, but
think and speak the more reverently of him and to him; therefore does Nathaneel
call him Rabbi, which he did not before. 13. Christ's All-seeing eye is an
infallible proof of his Godhead, whereby he knows all things of himself,
which every one would study who embrace and close with him; for, whereas
Philip had called him, the son of Joseph, v. 45. Nathaneel is convinced of more
from what he heard; Thou art the Son of God, and as such a one closes with
him. 14. That which makes Christ's Godhead comfortable to his people, is that
as Mediator, and by virtue of his offices they have a peculiar interest in
him; and particularly that he is a King unto them, who will employ his divine
power to subject them to his Government, and to protect and defend them,
therefore Nathaneel subjoyneth, Thou art the King of Israel. We need not
enquire whether by Israel he understand the Nation of Israel only, being yet
ignorant of the extent of Christ's Kingdom, or all the Israel of God also,
seeing the truth in that point is elsewhere sufficiently clear to us.

Verse 50. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw
thee under the fig tree, beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things then
these.

51. And he says unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall
see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
man.


In the last place, we have Christ's entertaining of this Convert, in commending
his believing on so easy terms, and promising further grounds of
confirmation; And particularly, he promises unto him and all of them, a sight
of heaven opened, and of Angels ascending and descending on him; This Promise
may indeed have an allusion to Jacobs vision of the ladder, Genesis 28. as
accomplished in Christ, who is the Opener of heaven, and the way to it; who
reaches to heaven in his divine Original, and to earth in his manhood, and
whom Angels serve. But it seems more safe to take it literally, for some
signs of his glory manifested to some, that by their Ministry, it might be
published to all; And as before this, heaven had been opened at his Baptism,
Matthew 3. And Angels ascended and descended as he had service for them, and
particularly, at the publication of his birth, and in the time of his tentation
in the wilderness, so afterward heaven was in a sorr opened at his
Transfiguration and Ascension, and Angels ministered to him in his Agony,
Resurrection and Ascension; We may also safely conceive, that this might have
been yet more literally accomplished, according to the Promise, though the
accomplishment be not recorded, as many other particulars were not, John 20.30,
31. Doct. 1. Christ is really well pleased with the faith and conversion of
any, and would have them to look on it as no common benefit; And he is the
better pleased the more easy terms we believe upon, when we believe though we
see not, or against sense; or close with him, notwithstanding manifold
difficulties; for, says Christ, admiring and commending his own grace in him,
because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, beleevest thou? 2. As
Christ has still more and more proofs of himself, to give for confirmation of
our faith, as we need; So they who are willing to believe on less apparent
grounds, shall be more and more confirmed, and see still greater cause of
believing; for, this is Christ's promise to Nathaneel; Thou shall see greater
things then these. 3. The encouragements allowed by Christ to particular
believers, are intended and recorded for the comfort of all believers in the
like need, and following the same way; for, so is this promise given, he said
unto him, I say unto you, that is, to all then present. Even particular
extraordinary promises made to particular persons, do allow general comfort to
all believers in an ordinary way, though they are not to expect what is
extraordinary: So much appears from Josh. 1.5. compared with Heb. 13.5. 4.
Christ's promises would be looked on as sure and infallible; being not only
promised by him, who cannot lie, but most gravely asserted for our
confirmation. And we ought to be humbled for our infidelity, which so readily
mistrust; him, and to admire his indulgent condescendencie to satisfy our
weakness; Therefore, Christ prefixeth to this promise, verily, verily I say
unto you, a grave and vehement asseveration putting the matter beyond all doubt
and controversy. Not that this makes the promise any surer on his part; but
that our weakness and unbelief needs it, and he condescends unto it, and
having given this assurance, expects absolute and entire credit to what he
says. 5. The sight of Christ's glory is the great encouragement and ground of
believers confirmation, as being all for them and their good, and letting them
see what excellency there is in him to be relied upon; Therefore is there a
promise of Nathaneels confirmation by seeing more of Christ's glory. 6. Christ
our Mediator is approved from heaven, and he by whom heaven, formerly shut
against sinners, is opened; for, it is a part of Christ's glory, that heaven is
open with relation to him, testifying an approbation of him, and his acceptance
for him and his. 7. It does also illustrate Christ's glory, and further confirm
believers faith, that Christ is Lord of Angels even in his state of
humiliation, and has them ready at his call, as he or his people shall need
their service; for, it is also promised they shall see the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of man; or, moving from earth to heaven,
and from heaven to earth as he required. 8. All this glory of Christ is further
comfortable, when he is found dwelling in our nature with it, yea and
delighting in this his condescendence, and to be our kinsman, for, it is
promised they should see all this upon the Son of man, showing that the Son
of God was also the Son of man, and that he delighted to be so, and therefore
does so often take this title to himself.

CHAP. II.
IN his Chapter we have First, a miracle wrought by Christ in Cana of Galilee,
in turning water into wine; the occasion, working and manifestation whereof,
with John's observation upon it, are recorded, to ver. 12. Next, Christ's removal
to Capernaum, and his short abode there, ver. 12. Thirdly, his going to
Jerusasalem, with his purging of the temple there, and his disciples
observation upon it, to ver. 18. his conference with the contentious Jews,
whereby also his disciples did profit afterward, to ver. 28. and his carriage
toward some who pretended to believe; to the end of the Chapter.

Ver. 1. And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the
mother of Jesus was there.

2. And both Jesus was called and his disciples to the marriage.


In recording this first miracle of Christ, John begins with three occasions
thereof; The first and remotest is, a marriage feast, which is described from
the place Cana, a village of Galilee lying at least within a days journey to
Capernaum, as appears, John 4.46, 50, 52. Called, of Galilee, to distinguish
it from another Cana, or, Kanab, in the tribe of Asher, Josh, 19.24, 28. which
lay farther off from Capernaum, being near Zidon: It is also described from the
time of it, which was the third day, to wit, after the former conferences
mentioned, Chap. 1. or after his coming into Galilee, of which Chap. 1. 43. The
second and nearer occasion is, that Christ's mother was there; (being, as
appears, a friend to some of the parties, in that it is not said she was
invited, and she is solicitous for the want of wine, ver. 3. and has some
power with the servants, ver. 5.) and that Christ and his disciples were
invited to it. Doctrine 1. Christ's practice, being now to enter on his public
Ministry, teaches us not to pass away time, but to be frequently about the
employments of our calling; for, he lets few days pass but he is manifesting
himself openly by word and work. 2. In Christ's account Marriage is an
honorable Ordinance, to which he will not deny his presence and countenance;
for, he is at this Marriage, and honors it with his first miracle. 3.
Feasting, and better fair then ordinary, and calling of friends together at
marriage, are lawful, providing the rules of sobriety, prescribed in the Word
to such feasts, be observed: And it is not against Christian sobriety in any
person to countenance their kindred or friends in marriage feast; for, there
was a marriage, or marriage feast, (as the word imports) wherein they had
wine, ver. 3. and the mother of Jesus was there, and both Jesus was called, and
his disciples, and they came. 4. Albeit men cannot now have alike occasion of
inviting Christ, yet this practice may mind us, 1. That married persons do
need, and should seek Christ's presence to their marriage. 2. Men in
marriage-feasting ought so to carry themselves in the use of their liberty, as
they might invite Christ to it, and not to take such profane liberty, as may
provoke him not to countenance them. 3. Such as would be kind to Christ, and
welcome him, ought to prove! it by their kindness to his disciples also. 4.
Christ's working a miracle upon this occasion; teaches, that in our most
cheerful and free times, we would be still mindful of doing all to Gods glory,
and not omit any occasion of honoring him.

Ver. 3. And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus says unto him. They
have no wine.

4. Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not
yet come.


The third and nearest occasion of this miracle, is, the want of wine,
occasioned, as would appear, rather through their poverty, and that some of
their guests, (and belike Christ and his disciples newly come to the country)
had not been expected, then through any excess. Unto this is subjoyned the
miracle it self, in recording whereof John sets down what past betwixt several
parties, in the preparations to it, and manifestation of it; and first we have,
by way of preparation, Mary's part with Christ, and his answer; She being
sensible of the want, and respecting (as should seem) her kinsfolks credit, and
having known many things of her Son, partly by the Angels intimation at his
conception, partly by what Simion, and Janna, and John the Baptist had said of
him, if not also by his own private information during his private life, that
he was shortly to manifest himself by doctrine and miracles: She, I say,
knowing this, does represent the matter unto him for remedy: But he judging of
her discourse by her secret thoughts, does sharply reprove her for thinking to
usurp power over him in the works proper to his Godhead, and belonging to his
office, and for prescribing of times to him wherein to work, though he were
otherwise willing to do the thing. Doctrine 1. Such is Christ's tenderness,
that he does not discover wants, that he may leave men in misery, but that he
may take occasion to let the riches of his power, providence, mercy and help be
seen; for, their wanting wine, whatever cause it slowed from, was the occasion
of this miracle. 2. Very lawful suits and requests to Christ may be ill
managed, and propounded; And there may be great ill in Saints ways, then they
are aware of, or do see; for it was a very lawful course to go with needs to
Christ, and yet he finds matter of reproof in her so doing: and Albeit Mary
seem to deal very submissively, in telling the need, they have no wine,
without prescribing, yet Christ, who understood the secret thoughts of her
heart, finds great presumption in it; So Peter little dreamed that Satan
should borrow his tongue in wishing well to his Master, till himself told it.
Matthew. 16.22, 23. 3. Such is Christ's vigilance, and zeal, and tenderness, that
at be discovers, so he will not bear with faults in those that are dearest
to him; for, he fails not to reprove his own mother. 4. Albeit Mary was
blessed among women in being the mother of Christ, yet was she not free of sin,
not only Original, but even of actual out-breakings; for, seeing Christ, who
could not err, reproves her, she is not faultlesse. And this is registrate in
Scripture, to prevent men's conceiting of that blessed woman above what is mere.
5. It is an affront offered to Christ's glory, to think that Mary's motherhood
gave her any power over him, to direct him in works wrought by his divine
nature, or in works of his office of Mediator, or to employ her for that end;
for, his reproof taxes this secret presumption in her self, while as he who
was subject to her, as man, during his private life, as to a mother, Luke 2.51.
does now say unto her, woman, not mother, as accounting her to have no motherly
authority in the matter of his office; and, What have I to do with thee? thou
have nothing to do to meddle by any motherly power, for as a (supplicant she
might) with what I do now in my public office, not so much as to obtain a
miracle of me. 6. Christ's saddest reproofs of his people, for their
miscarriages in coming to him, ought not to put them out of hope that he will
respect their real necessities in due time, as he sees meet; for, though
Christ thus reprove; yet the last part of it, mine hour is not yet come,
imports that it would come, yea, and that he had been waiting for it, and
thinking on the matter before she spoke. 7. Even when Christ is about to
manifest himself; yet our time wherein we would have him work, and his time
wherein he will work, are often very different; We are hasty, and would be
through straits without any humbling exercise and trial of graces; But Christ
looks on these fruit as better then simple out-gate, and our presuming to
prescribe to him, is matter of reproof; for, mine hour is not yet come, says
he, reproving Mary, who would have had an out-gate already. 8. Whatever our
desires be under wants, yet Christ will not manifest his help, when it would
please us best, but when his glory in working may be best seen, and
particularly, when our emptiness without his help is most sensibly seen; for,
when wine began to be scant, (as the words will bear) and was sparingly
distributed, was the fittest time in Mary's account, for keeping the
Bridegroomes credit, and hiding the want; but Christ's hour was not come, till
the want was better known and felt, and by his so doing, he looks more to the
setting forth of his own glory, then to saving the credit of a creature.

Ver. 5. His mother says unto the servants, Whatsoever he says unto you do
it.
Secondly; by way of preparation to the miracle; Mary's part with the servants
is recorded, She taking with the reproof, and being humbled, and yet gathering
hope from what he said; directs the servants to give simple and absolute
obedience to Christ's directions, that so they might not fall in her fault, and
he might do the work. Whence learn, 1. As we are not to think of Mary above
what is meet, so we are not to run on another extremity, in not thinking
reverently of her, and as becomes; for, John notwithstanding of Christ's sharp
word, calls her Christ's mother still. 2. It is an evidence of a truly
gracious heart, and of one that sins of ignorance or infirmity, and not of
pride or obstinacy, that it takes with a reproof from Christ, and humbly
submits to it; for, so does Mary, in not answering again, though sharply
reproved. 3. As Christ by reproving his peoples faults, takes not away ground
of hope that he will do them good; So it is the mark of one who takes kindly
with a reproof, that their humility hinders them not to take advantage, and
grip to any thing that may give hope; whereas proud discouragement is ready,
under a pretense of humility, to cast away all ground of hope when it is
reproved; for, humbled Mary her speech to the servants, imports that she
gathered from Christ's word, some ground of hope, which she laid hold on. 4.
Such do take rightly with a reproof, and do prove that they are bettered by it,
who do labor to prevent the ill they have fallen in, in others as well as in
themselves; for, so does Mary's direction to the servants teach, that she would
have them humble and submissive, and not to prescribe. 5. Christ's commands
ought to be the rule of our actions, to which we ought to give simple, implicit
and absolute obedience, without questioning or murmuring; and the best way to
come speed at Christ's hands, is to give him all his will by submission,
especially in things outward, and in the time, manner and measure of giving
spiritual things also: providing that in things outward, we do not pretend to
submission only out of design, to get our will; And in things spiritual,
that our submission flow not from careless security, and produce not
negligence in the use of means; but that it be a fruit of faith and humility,
and a guard to keep the heart from fretting, when it has done duty; This
subjection and submission is held forth in Mary's direction, Whatsoever he
says unto you, do it

Verse 6. And there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkings apiece.

7. Jesus says unto them, Fill the water-pots with water, and they filled them
up to the brim.

8. And he says unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the
feast. And they bare it.


Thirdly, John records Christ's part with the servants, which is contained in
two directions given by Christ, and their obedience. The first is, to fill up
some great vessels (used by them for holding of water for purifying themselves)
with water, which they did: And this was by way of preparation to the miracle.
The second is, to draw out and carry this wine to the governor of the feast,
whose skill was best, and his senses most entire; which they also obey; And
this direction presupposes the miracle wrought by his secret power, and their
obedience makes way to the manifesting of it. Doctrine 1. This manner of the
purifying of the Jews, for which they had the water-pots, to have water still
in readiness, whether it be understood of purifications enjoined by the Law,
or of the multiplied washings brought in among them by tradition, Mark 7.3, 4,
etc. does teach; That Apostates and such as have lost the life of Religion, may
yet be unwilling to quit all show of Religion, but may hold up external
ceremonies, yea may be ready then to multiply them most, as quieting any thing
of a natural conscience that is left, and as being very easy, and craving no
inward exercise of the heart; for, so was the manner of the Jews, in their
declining times. 2. It is not in vain to wait for any thing Christ gives hope
of by his Word, for he will make it good in due time; As here, the want of wine
is supplied by miracle, of which he gave some hope by his speech to his mother.
3. Christ does not deceive people in the good turns he does for them, but they
are all real, and every circumstance of them being marked, does confirm the
same, and set out his glory; Therefore, are the circumstances so narrowly
marked, to set out his glory, in proving that there was no deceit in the
miracle; the water-pots, and not hogsheds, where wine dregs might have given
some relish to water, do prove there was no jugglery; their matter, being of
stone, not capable of the sent of former liquor, confirms the same; their
great capacity prevented suspicion of stealing in of wine, which might have
been suspected of lesser vessels; his employing of the servants, and not his
disciples, takes off any suspicion of collusion; his sending it to the Ruler,
or orderer of the feast, without so much as tasting it himself, showed how
certain he was of the thing. 4. Where ever Christ comes, he is worthy of his
own room, and does liberally recompense any entertainment he, or his receive
from any; for, whether his presence and his disciples (being beyond the number
of guests expected) occasioned the want or not; yet he paid his dinner well
with abundance of wine in six water pots, containing two or three firkins
apiece. 5. Miracles wrought by Christ for confirming his doctrine, were such
works as were useful and profitable to men; such as this here. Whereby he would
condemn such as boast of idle and useless miracles, serving for no profit,
which favor not of Christ, not of power from him, nor of his doctrine, to be
confirmed by them; And by this also he would prove himself to be the merciful
Savior of sinners, in that he manifests himself to be God by these works and
the like, when he might have proved it by sad judgments on sinners. 6. It is no
difficulty for Christ to work the greatest work he pleases, and to make a
change from worse to better; for, this miracle is wrought immediately by his
Godhead, without so much as a word, only he bids them fill water and draw wine.
7. Christ, in his deepest humiliation and abasement, is full of Majesty, and
he knows how to get instruments to do him service when he pleases; yea, he
can bow their hearts, who in appearance know nothing of him, to be foot and
hand for his work; for, being in the form of a servant, yet these servants,
who knew him not, as would seem, obey all his directions, how useless -- like
soever they seemed to be.

Verse 9. When the Ruler of the feast, had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew) the
governor of the feast called the bridegroom,

10. And says unto him, every man at the beginning does set forth good wine,
And when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept the
good wine until now.


Fourthly, John records the Ruler of the feasts part, whereby the miracle was
manifested, he wondering at the goodness of the wine, and not knowing whence
it was, calls for the bridegroom, and ascribes this provision to his
prudence, (rather as may be conceived, then to his parsimony) which was not
ordinary at such occasions; with which we are to conceive, that the servants
who knew the matter (as is said here) did make the miracle manifest, as
appears from v. 11. What the Ruler says, of giving of wine to men who have
well drunk, is to be understood, not of excess, but of drinking to
satisfaction. However, it is but a simple narration without an approbation on
Christ, or his pen-mans part. Nor did Christ, by affording so much good wine to
them, who had already drunk so much, give any evidence of his allowance of
intemperance, for he had another end in it, v. 11. And besides, all the
creatures which men daily consume by excess, are his gift by common
Providence, to which men's excess and abuse cannot be imputed. But it is a man's
duty, to look on Christ's liberality as a trial to his sobriety. Doct. 1.
Christ's works, when they are rightly considered, will be found worthy of
commendation, and albeit the worker were not known, yet they will commend
themselves; for, the Ruler commends the wine, when he knew not whence it was.
2. In a miraculous transubstantiation, or change of one substance into another
sense will be judge and bear witness to it; for, the Ruler having tasted the
water that was made wine, finds by his taste that it is wine 3. Ignorance of
Christ's hand in a work, makes men to ascribe it to others, and so take Christ's
glory from him; for, the Ruler called the Bridegroom, and ascribed it to him.
4. In the comparison which the Governor of the feast makes betwixt other men's
way, and the Bridegrooms, which was indeed Christ's work, we have a fit
resemblance betwixt the fashion of the world and Satan, and Christ's way; They
set out their best commodities first, but worse come after, but Christ in his
dealing, may begin more harshly, but he is still the longer the better.

Verse 11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
manifested forth his glory, and his disciples believed on him.
This History is closed with John's observation upon the miracle, that for
order, it was the first, that the place was Cana of Galilee, that the fruit of
it was, the setting forth of the glory of his Godhead, and confirming his
disciples in their faith in him. Whence learn, 1. Christ did begin to work
miracles, not in his infancy, nor in the time of his private life, but when he
entered to his Ministry, and to publish his doctrine which his miracles were to
confirm; for, John says not only, this was the first miracle he did in Cana,
though that was true, but. This beginning of miracles did Jesus, as being
simply the first. 2. Christ does not choose persons or places for manifesting
himself in or to them, as men or carnal reason would judge, nor will he stand
to manifest his glory in an obscure place, and by so doing, make it famous;
therefore it is again marked, that he did this in Cana of Galilee, now made
famous, of an obscure village, by his working. 3. Christ's glory is his supreme
end in all his working, to which all other ends and effects must be
subordinate; for, he did this, and manifested forth his glory. 4. The end of
Christ's miracles was to set forth his own proper glory of his Godhead, as
principal Agent of them, though his Manhood sometime concurred as a Minister in
the work: for he manifested forth his glory, as doing this by his own power;
whereas Prophets and Apostles were but instruments in what was done by them. 5.
It is a part of Gods glory, that he only can work a true miracle, and neither
Satan not any instrument by their own power; for, in this miracle he manifested
his glory proper to him as God. 6. One work and miracle of Christ does set
forth his glory much, being well considered: for, by this one, he manifested
forth his glory; for, in it shined the glory of his Omnipotency, and of his
Liberality; by it he declared that he is a Supplier of wants whetever he
comes; that he can bring excellent things out of that which is naughty; that
he can make things more comfortable then they are in their own nature; that it
is he who turns water into wine, and sorrow into joy; that he made that change
betwixt water and wine in a moment, which nature does but in a year, by making
water to fructify the vi^e. 7 Such as have believed in Christ, will be needing
daily confirmation of faith, and will get it: And such as have got good by his
Word, and believed it, shall also find confirmation from his working; for, his
disciples, who were already called, chap. 1. get new confirmation, and believed
on him. 8. A right sight of Christ in his glory and properties, is a notable
help to faith and calls for it at our hands, whereas narrow thoughts of him
feeds unbelief; for, he manifested forth his glory, and his disciples believed.
9. Beside the common use of Christ's works and benefits, which the world gets;
it is the privilege of disciples to get spiritual advantage thereby also, for
when the banqueters got wine by this miracle, the disciples got more faith also.

Verse 12. After this he went down into Capernaum, he and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples, and they continued there not many days.
Here, in the second part of the chapter, we have Christ's departure from Cana
to Capernaum, with his company in going thither, and his short abode there,
occasioned, as appears from v. 13. by the near approach of the Passover. It
is not needful to enquire what his errand was there, and upon what occasion his
mother and brethren went with him; whether because Joseph was now dead, and so
he took care of his mother, or because they would convey him on his way, or
because his brethren were to go up to Jerusalem with him; only this voyage was
before that, Matthew. 4.13. when he came to dwell in Capernaum, for then John was
cast in prison, Matthew. 4 12. but now he was not, as appears from John 3.24.
Doct. 1. Christ was content to submit himself to the wanting of a certain abode
and settled dwelling in the world, that he might sanctify our pilgrimage, and
tossed condition to us; and to invite his followers willingly to be removed or
tossed from place to place, as he has service for them; so much are we taught
by this his removal. 2. Christ has errands in eminent places, as well as
obscure, and will not despise eminent persons or places for their eminency,
more then the base for their baseness; and he can make the work of his
Kingdom in a land advance from obscure beginnings and places, to be more
eminent and conspicuous; So much may we gather from Christ's going out of
obscure Cana to Capernaum a chief City in Galilee. 3. As it is wisdom in
Christ's own to go still in his company, so others also may be with him so long
as his way and theirs lies together, ^or when he is working gloriously, and
his Gospel has credit; for, after this miracle, we find not only his mother
and disciples, but his brethren or kinsfolk with him, who yet believed not in
him, John 7.5. 4. Christ may stay longer or shorter while, and do little or
much in a place as he pleases; And particularly, he stays or removes
according as may contribute to advance the great work of his glory, and of
sinners salvation; for, he continued there not many days, as having more to do
at this time in Jerusalem.

Verse 13. And the Jews Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

14. And found in the Temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and
the changers of money, sitting.

15. And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of
the Temple, and the sheep, and the oxen, and poured out the changers money, and
overthrew the Tables.

16. And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence, make not my
Fathers house, an house of merchandise.


Follows, Christ's going up to Jerusalem at the Passover, and (which is the
first branch of this part of the chap.) his purging of the Temple, wherein he
fulfilled that prophecy, Mal. 3.1, 2, 3. in the beginning of the solemn
execution of his office; and declared his glory as much as in the former or any
miracle, having not a lifelesse creature in its obediential subjection to work
upon, but Satan acting in malicious men to oppose him; The pretext of this
abuse, which he reformes, was taken partly from the Law, Deuteronomy. 14.23, 24, 25,
26. requiting, that those who dwelt far off, should bring money and buy their
sacrifices at Jerusalem; partly, from the condition and other ordinances of the
Jews; as of old the males, from twenty years old and upward, did pay half a
shekel to the Lord, according to the Law, Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15. So we find
that practice continued, 2 King. 12.4. 2 Chronicles 24 9. beside other voluntary
oblations of all sorts of persons, which are frequently mentioned in the Old
Testament, all which did occasion the necessity of changing greater coin into
lesser, as the word in the Original signifies. Others of them living in diverse
countries, needed to have their strange coin changed into cur^ant money to buy
sacrifices. Now the covetousness of the Rulers brought these things into the
outer Court of the Temple, under a pretext of having them near at hand to the
people, and that the cattle that were there, had been already overseen by the
Priests to be perfect: if not also, that they were more acceptable which were
bought there. These corruptions Christ reformeth, partly, by terror and force;
driving the men and their cattle out with a scourge made (belike) of the cords
wherewith they led and tied the cattle, and overthrowing the Tables with the
money; and partly, by his word, commanding some to take away their commodities,
and forbidding all to profane the Temple with their merchandise. What is here
said concerning the Temple, is not to be applied to places set apart for
public worship under the Gospel; (for, however it be a fault to apply such
places to common and profane uses, especially to the impeding of public
worship, except in the case of necessity, yet they are not typically holy as
the Temple was) but to the Church of Christ. Doct. 1 The observation of Easter
and such like days is a Jewish rite, proper to them, and not belonging to the
Christian Church; for, John, who wrote last, knew it for no other then the
Jews Passover, or, a feast of theirs. 2. Christ our Lord went up to Jerusalem
at the Passover, in obedience to the Ceremonial Law, yet in force, Exodus 34
23. and that he might take occasion in the concourse from all places in this
public time, to publish his office and doctrine. By the first, to teach us
condescendence and reverence to all the Ordinances of God, and by the second,
that we should neglect no occasion of promoving the honor of God in our
stations. 3. Great abuses may creep into the visible Church, and corruption may
get far in; for, so was it here, He found in the Temple those that sold oxen
and sheep, etc. This one was the fruit of many more. 4. The covetousness of
Churchmen is the great breeder and entertainer of abuses and corruptions in
the House of God, whatever be the pretenses they are cloaked with; for, this
was the rise of the abuses here. 5. There is no hope of reforming abuses in the
Church, till Christ come and take order with them; and when such as should see
to it, will not, Christ will find a way for it, though he will not approve of
men's following any unlawful course, or to which they have not a calling to
promove this; for, here Christ comes to purge, and when the Civil Magistrate
was Heathen, and cared not for Religion, and the ordinary Church rulers had an
hand in the transgression; yet Christ does it by his absolute Authority, as
Lord of the house. 6. When other means fail, Christ can use violent remedies,
and by plagues put sinners from their courses; Yea, when he comes to reform,
he may see it just to smite the very creatures for sinners cause. So are we
here taught, in that by force, be drove them all out of the Temple, and the
sheep, and the oxen 7. Our Lords face is very terrible when he is angry, even
in his abasement; and a weak mean of Reformation in his hand, and assisted with
his power and terror, will serve the turn; for, when he had made a scourge of
small cords (more fit in appearance for affrighting children, then for this
work) he drove them all out, and none durst resist him. 8. It is the duty of
all such as are employed in a work of Reformation, to testify their zeal and
integrity, by not minding or seeking their own things under pretext thereof; so
much does Christ: practice teach, who poured out the changers money, and
overthrew the Tables, but put none of it up. 9. There ought to be no tryfling
nor composition in the matter of corruptions in the House of God no less must
satisfy then putting them out at doors, as here Christ does. 10. Corruptions,
even after they have been cast out by Christ's own hand, may yet creep in again
into the House of God; in which case Christ will deal more severely; for,
Christ, having purged the Temple in this first year of his Ministry, has it
again to purge of the same evils, Matthew. 21.12, 13. in the last year, where,
in stead of an house of Merchandise, he charge them with making it a den of
thieves. 11. Reformation will not be through, when only force and violent
remedies are applied to purge, unless instruction be joined with it, to take
out the roots of corruptions out of men's minds, and to make them willing to
concur and reform themselves; for, Christ joyneth his Word here, bidding
some take these things hence, and warning all not to abuse his house. 12. As
Christ is Lord and heir of his Fathers house, the Church, Heb. 3.6. and
therefore cares for it; so all who have relation to God as their Father, their
heart will rise in his quarrel, when his honor, house or service are wronged,
nor can they endure the presence of what desires his house; Make not, says
he, my Fathers house an house of merchandise. 13. Albeit men would pass over
faults done to Gods house, and bear with them, yet Christ will not, but in due
time will see to the redressing of them; as here we see in this instance. 14.
Things lawful, being done in a wrong time and place, become sin, as it is also
unlawful to spend what is dedicated to God, in common or profane uses; both
which are reproved in this, Make not my fathers house, dedicated to him, an
house of Merchandise, though Merchandise be lawful in its own time and place.

Verse 17. And his disciples remembered, that it was written, The zeal of thine
house has eaten me up.
Unto this is subjoyned the observation and use the disciples got of it. The
Spirit suggested to them that passage, Psalm. 69.9. at that time, or afterward,
and let them see it was then accomplished in Christ, though it had its own
verity in David the type Whence learn, 1. It is the property of disciples to
construct well of Christ's working, and get a right sight thereof how rude and
tumultuous soever it seem to others; for, so do the disciples here. 2. Christ's
working will be well constructed, and tend to edification when his Word and
working are compared together, as the disciples are led to do. 3. Such as are
faithful disciples, and conscientious hearers, have the promise of a sanctified
memory, by the Spirits bringing Scriptures to their remembrance as they need;
for, thus it was, that his disciples remembered that it was written, etc. Yet we
ought in this to guard against neglect of searching Scripture, expecting
somewhat to be suggested; against leaning to the suggesting of it, as the
reason why we fasten faith on it, rather then if we found it by search agreeing
with our need, which were to make it no divine Scripture to us, but when it is
suggested; and against Satan's delusions who may suggest Scriptures, unto souls
taken with this way, under false glosses. 4. Much is spoken of Christ in the
Old Testament under types, and it should be our care in reading it, to
understand these types well, and see Christ the truth in them; for, so do the
disciples see a Prophecy of Christ held forth in the profession and practice
of David the type. 5. Zeal, providing it be according to knowledge, Romans 10.2.
is a commendable grace, when men are employed about right things, not
negligently and for the fashion, but affectionately. As herein Christ has
given us a pattern, who excelled in all graces, and particularly, that of
zeal. 6. As Gods house, and the matter of his Kingdom and Ordinances, are the
chief object of zeal, which should be balanced with meekness in our own
matters; so true zeal is the only right and acceptable principle of
Reformation; and men will go no further in the study of Reformation, then there
is zeal or indignation against what dishonors God, and love to that which
honors him; for, upon this principle did Christ reform; and he was affected
with the zeal of Gods house. 7. Albeit true zeal do trust God with caring for
his own affairs, and so is neither diffident nor hasty, yet the nature of it
is to be a spending grace, and it will affect the person with pain, till what
is amiss in Gods house be rectified; And it will incline a man, having Gods
call, to stoop to meanest employments, and to fear no hazards in carrying on
Gods work; for, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and Christ evidenced
how much his zeal affected both body and mind, by abasing himself to this mean
emploiment of scourging out beasts and men, and by exposing himself to their
fury, if he had not been armed with divine terror. 8. Albeit that zealous
instruments were removed, and love and zeal among men should decay, and they
neglect and become careless of the matters of God; yet Christ never wants
zeal to resent and redress the wrongs done to Gods house; for of him it is
still true, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

Verse 18. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, What sign show thou
unto us, seeing that thou do these things?

19. Jesus answered, and said unto them, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.


Follows in the second branch of this part of the chapters Christ's conference
with the contentious Jews, even these (it seems) who were driven out, who
being put to the door, and he drawing back his terror, they (in these verses)
begin to question his authority to do as he had done. For, seeing these that
were in power did tolerate these things they reckon that it was boldness in
him to undertake it, unless he had an extraordinary calling, or were the
Messiah, and if so he were, they desire a proof of his Commission by some
sign. Christ in answering, remits them (but in dark terms) to his death,
which he foresaw and would permit them to put him to, and to his Resurrection,
to prove that he was the true Messiah, and Savior of sinners. Doct. 1. A work
of Reformation of Gods house, will never want opposition from corrupt men, even
when Christ and his terror is eminently seen in it; for, Christ met with
opposition thus far, that we should not stumble when we meet with more. 2,
Obstinate wicked men, and especially polluters of the House of God, will hardly
be reformed, however they be convinced; for, these Jews answer again, or
except against what he did, now when terror had driven them out, and they had
nothing to say. 3. Whatever pretenses men may have, wherewith they think to
palliate their corruptions in Gods service, and make them plausible, yet when
Christ comes, he will make their greatest Patrons speechless in that cause;
for, they are put to the door with silence, and when they would carp most, they
dare say nothing in defense of the corruptions themselves, only they question
his authority to purge them out 4. When men's hearts are once hardened in ill
courses; even a shake with the terror of God will not gain them, but so soon
as the fit is over, they will not fear impudently to speak against Christ; for,
so do they when he draws back his terror. 5. When enemies of Reformation
cannot justify their own faults, they will rather quarrel the calling of
Reformers, then yield to the convincing truth held out by them; for, their
question imports their questioning of his calling to do this, since he had
given no sign for it. 6. Enemies of Reformation and unbelievers are not
content with warrants from the Word, nor with such confirmations as God
prescribes, unless they get signs of their own carving; for, it was not
their fault simply to s^ek a sign, seeing Christ was to confirm his authority
and doctrine by signs, but that (beside that they had no intention to believe
however) they were nothing at all wrought upon by the Word; fore ^^ing this,
no^ are they content and convinced by he sign Christ had given now wrought
upon themselves, in that one man had chased them all, being overcome wi^h the
conscience of the filthiness of their fact, and the sense of his Majesty. 7.
No man ought to undertake a work of Reformation, but he who has a calling
thereto, and can instruct it by evidences suitable to the nature of the calling
he claims to; for, this Question does import, that if Christ could not prove
his ^uthority, he had done unwarrantably, though the action were good in it
self. 8. Chtist did foreknow all his own sufferings, and would not hinder, but
willingly permitted them to come on, and underwent them; for, Destroy this
Temple, is not a command of Christ; but a Prediction foretelling their malice,
and a permission to them to do their uttermost. 9. The malice of superstitious
and greedy enemies of Truth and Reformation, will be satisfied with no less
then the lives of Reformers; and as God permitted Christ to be killed, so he
may permit the lives of notable Reformers to be taken by enemies, that so they
may be made conform to their head, and that their sufferings may be a seal
and testimony to their doctrine; for, Destroy this Temple, does import, that he
knew no signs would satisfy them, but to have him killed, hereby also
teaching all his followers, what to expect in doing the like work. 10. Christ
foreknew that he would not succumbe in his sufferings, but would overcome
death, and all the malice of his enemies, by giving them their will, and then
rising again the third day by his own power, as it accordingly came to pass:
for, says he, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. 11.
Christ's Death and Resurrection from the deal, is an infallible sign that he is
the Messiah and true Redeemer of sinners, having authority to order abuses in
his own house; for, herein he did the works of the Redeemer of sinners; and
triumphed over death, and proved himself to be God, Romans 1.4. therefore does he
remit them to this sign, to prove his authority.

Verse 20. Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this Temple in
building, and will thou rear it up in three days?

21. But he spoke of the Temple of his body.


These Jews mistaking Christ's speech, do again carp, supposing he had meant of
the material Temple. But John clears Christ's meaning, whereas they (as would
appear) were lest to their mistakes. Whence learn, It is Gods judgment on
haters of truth, that Christ speaks in parables to them; and that they are
given up to mistake and carp at him, and are left in their mistakes, for, so
fared it with these Jews, to whom Christ spoke of his body under the name of
the Temple. 2, As it is no new thing to see men wrest Christ's speeches, so a
maine cause of men's mistakes in Religion, is, when they understand figurative
speeches, as if they were proper; for, the Jews err, in taking what Christ
spoke of his body under the name of the Temple, the type thereof, as if it had
been spoken of the type it self. 3. A work of Reformation is a work of great
difficulty, and may encounter with much opposition and many delays, before it
be perfected; for, so much does the Jews exception against Christ's words,
taken in their own sense, import, Forty and six years was the Temple in
building, reckoning all the time betwixt Cyrus edict, of their laying the
foundation, and the sixth year of Darius, wherein it was finished, after many
delays, Ezr. 6.15. Or, however their supputation hold, yet it was certainly
long in building. 4. Men do mistake Christ, (take his words as they will,) when
they measure his power by their carnal reason: for, take them even in their own
sense, it was not impossible for him to rear up the Temple in three days,
since he was God, and did undertake a greater work, even to raise up his own
body from the dead. 5. Scripture does expound it self, and what is dark in one
place, is cleared in another; for, John does here clear Christ's meaning, He
spoke of the Temple of his body. 6. Christ's body is the truth of that type of
the Temple; for, as God did declare the Temple to be his dwelling place, so in
him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily: As the Temple was the trysting
place, whese sinners found God in the Mercy-seat, and where he gave out his
Oracles; so in Christ incarnate God is to be found reconciled with sinners, and
he is to be heard, revealing the Father and his mind; And, as the Temple was a
magnificent stately Palace, yet more glorious within then in outward show; so
also was Christ's body and humane nature, framed by the finger of the Holy
Ghost, without original corruption, and filled with excellent endowments, and
the inhabitation of the Godhead; therefore is his body spoken of under the name
of the type, and called, The Temple of his body.

Verse 22. When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered
that he had said this unto them: and they believed the Scripture, and the word
which Jesus had said.
John records the use the disciples got of this conference, not presently,
but after the Resurrection of Christ: Namely, that then this passage is brought
to their remembrance, and they were coofirmed in the faith of this and other
Scriptures, which spoke of his Resurrection. Whence learn, 1. Even true
disciples may be such babes in knowledge, that for a long time they will little
understand what Christ says: for, it was long before the disciples took up the
meaning of this passage. 2. It is a mark of true disciples, that however they
be ignorant, yet they will not carp at what they understand not, as enemies do,
but will in silence reverence all that Christ says; for, when the Jews
quarrelled, v 20. we find them silent. 3. Disciples may hear that at one
time, the understanding and benefit whereof may be reserved to begotten by them
at another time, and that (it may be) long thereaf^er; for, When therefore he
was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto
them, etc. 4. The doctrine of the Cross, and of victory and deliverance from
the same, even when it seems to prevail most over the sufferer, is a
doctrine which disciples are slowest to learn and believe of any, because of
their carnal conceptions of Christ and his Kingdom, and of their
discouragement when these are disappointed: for, it was when he was risen from
the dead, that the disciples remembered, and understood, and believed this
doctrine as they ought; See, Luke 24, 45, 46. And thus also is the lot of his
members oft-times judged of. 5. As Christ will accomplish in due time what he
has spoken; so the event of matters being compared with the Scripture, will
clear many mistakes, and be a notable confirmation to faith, and an exposition
of many Scriptures: for, When he was risen, they then remembered and believed
this and other Scriptures. 6. The doctrine of Christ was agreeable to the
Scriptures, and both alike sure; it being all one to have his mind in
Scripture, and to have himself speaking immediately, seeing he is the Author
of both; for, They believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said,
as being both alike sure, and to one purpose.

Verse 23. Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover in the feast day,
many believed in his Name, when they saw the miracles which he did.

24. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men,

25. And needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in
man.


Lastly, in this part of the chapter, John records some further of Christ's
proceedings at this feast; that he wrought such miracles, as drew diverse to
profess faith in him, whose profession he would not trust, as knowing well
what they were, as he does all men, even what is most inward and secret in
them, and that of himself, without any information from others. Whence learn,
1. Albeit Christ will not satisfy the curiosity or tempting humors of men;
yet he will not deny to work whatsoever may be needful for the confirmation of
the faith of his own: for, though he would grant no present sign to the
contentious Jews, v. 18. yet he did miracles in Jerusalem at the Passover, in
the feast day, though it be not recorded in particular what they were; hereby
also giving us to understand, that when Christ comes to work a work of
Reformation, (as here) he may sometime second it, (not with miracles now, but)
with notable and wonderful works of Providence, to gain credit to his work, and
faithful instruments about it, and, it may be, to quash the fury of malicious
opposites. 2. It is not unusual for some natural men to be so far affected with
Christ and his working, as to be convinced in their judgment of some
excellency in him, and be drawn to profess some sort of embracing of him; and
yet they remain still in nature, and unconverted; for, many believed in his
Name, or professed to do so, who yet were unsound, as the sequel clears. 3.
It is a clear evidence of unsoundnesse, when Christ's works are the chief thing,
drawing men to profess faith, and not his Word, revealing his nature and
properties: for, such was their faith, They believed, because they saw the
miracles which he did. Such converts are not affected with their own misery and
Christ's mercy, and so have not a right principle; and Christ's works will not be
always alike glorious, and so their affection bottomed on that, will ebb and
flow, and at last evanish. 4. As Christ no sooner begins to reform, but Satan
in enemies will be raising storms, and laying snares for him, in which unsound
converts will not prove trusty, nor back him, but be ready to turn enemies; so
it is wisdom in trying times to be wary whom we trust, even of Professors:
for, Jesus did not commit himself unto them, that is, seeing hazard appearing,
he would not familiarly converse with them, as men to be confided in: for, he
kept but one Judas of such, and he betrayed him. 5. Albeit we cannot infallibly
discern of Professors, before they discover themselves, yet Christ knows
hypocrites before they discover themselves to men; for, he knew all men, and
them among the rest, so as not to trust them. 6 Christ's discovering of one or
more hypocrites, is a document to all to take heed to themselves, as being seen
and known of him: therefore is his knowing them expressed in a general, He knew
all men, 7. Christ's knowledge of men is not conjectural, or by report, but
certain, as being by and from himself as God: for, he needed not that any
should testify of man. 8. Christ does infallibly know what is in-most, or most
secret and hidden in man, the thought whereof should excite all to self
examination, and be an encouragement to the sincere; so much is imported in
this reason, For he knew what was in man.

CHAP. III.
THis Chapter contains; First, Christ's conference with Nicodemus concerning
regeneration and faith in him, for attaining salvation, to v 22. Next, John's
last testimony concerning Christ, some occasions whereof are recorded, to v.
27. and the testimony it self, from thence to the end.

Verse 1. THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the
Jews.

2. The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
then art a Teacher come from God: f^r no man can do these miracles that thou
do, except God be with him.


The occasion of this Conference and Sermon of Christ, is, Nicodemus (a
Pharisee, and not one of the common sort, but a Ruler and Member of the
Council) his coming to Christ by night, and in his discourse giving him
reverent titles, and testifying that he and the rest of the Pharisees were
convinced by Christ's miracles, that he was a teacher sent of God, however their
malice drove them over the belly of their light. Whence learn, 1 So great is
the excellency of Christ, and the riches and efficacy of his grace, as he can
not only convince, but will even, (when he pleases) convert and draw in
greatest enemies to him: for, Nicodemus a Pharisee and ruler of the Jews came
to Christ, and albeit the beginnings were but small, yet they came to further
maturity afterward. 2. Even Persecutors and haters of Christ may be so for
convinced of his excellency in his Ministry, as in cold blood they will be
forced to see God shining in it; for, says Nicodemus in name of his
associates, the Pharisees and Rulers, Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher
come from God: and the like thoughts may men be forced to have of his working
and presence in and with good Ministers, who yet have not found enough
evidences of grace for all that. 3. There may be alike conviction and light in
men's mind, which yet does not work alike on their will and affections; but
many who know as much as others, being left to the natural corruption of their
hearts, do yet sit still, when these others by the power of grace are drawn to
Christ; for, says Nicodemus, we know, etc. and yet only he came to Jesus. 4.
Great places, and honor, and credit prove oft-times great snares to men, to
hold them from Christ, or from such an open avowing of him as becomes; for,
Nicodemus came to Jesus by night, as fearing to lose his place and reputation
with the rest, or to sustain some damage, or being unwilling to be found
ignorant, and one that needed come to be taught. So great cause have men to be
content with their mean estate which hides them from many snares, and to pity
and have charity to others who have greater tentations. 5. Men may seem to
have very high thoughts of Christ, who yet come far short of that estimation
that is due to him; for, all he says is, Rabbi, thou art a Teacher come from
God, or, an extraordinary Teacher, whereas he was God over all. 6. Christ's
miracles were known, even to enemies, to be done by no jugglery, and to be such
as could be wrought only by divine power, and to be a proof of his authority;
for, it was acknowledged, no man can do these miracles that thou do (of
which see chap. 2.23.) except God be with him.

Ver. 3. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom if God.
Follows the conference it self, and Christ's instructing of this Pharisee;
wherein, first, he presses the necessity of regeneration, ver. 3. Secondly,
meeting with an ignorant scholar, he repeats and explaines the way of this
birth, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thirdly, Nicodemus continuing yet ignorant, is
rebuked for the same, and for the unbelief common to him with the rest of the
Pharisees, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. Fourthly, he leads Nicodemus up to the knowledge
of himself, as the only revealer of spiritual mysteries, and author of
salvation through faith in him, ver. 13, 14, 15. Fifthly, this way of
salvation, and the certainty thereof, is confirmed and commended from the love
of God in sending Christ for that end, ver. 16.17. Unto which is subjoyned the
condemnation of such as shall, by unbelief and delight in their sinful ways,
reject this remedy, ver. 18, 19. Proving that it is their evil deeds which
makes them so to do. ver. 20, 21.

In this verse Christ begins with this Pharisee at the first principles of
Religion, and by a grave asseveration teaches the necessity that all men have
of a change by regeneration, if they would expect to enjoy a part either in the
Kingdom of grace or glory, for so this Kingdom of God may be extended to
signify. It is said Christ answered, and said this to him, either because
Nicodemus had moved a question concerning this matter unto him whom he had
called a Teacher, ver. 2. though it be not recorded, or because Christ saw his
need, and answered to it, by applying fit remedies, and seeking to cure all his
ills at the root. Doctrine 1. Christ is very meek to such as come to him,
though with many weaknesses, and will not sail to take pains upon them to
bring them further up; for, though Nicodemus failed in acknowledging him only
for a Teacher, and stealing to him by night; yet Christ passes over all this,
and considering his need, does teach him. 2. The great business of men,
especially professing themselves scholars at Christ's school, should be to know
the way of salvation, and how to be in a state of grace, and in the way to
glory; for, so much does Christ's grave and doubled asseveration in pressing
this point, as most necessary, and his propounding the want of a part in this
Kingdom as a certification sad enough, whatever a man have else, teach us. 3.
Every man by nature (be he in appearance better or worse) is out of the state
of grace, and unmeet for glory, till a change be wrought. So much does Christ
gravely assert, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man (be who he will,
an Epicure, or Civilian, or painted Pharisee, a gross sinner, or under the
power of original and heart corruption only) be borne again, he cannot see,
(or enjoy, or partake of, or, as it is, ver. 5. enter into) the Kingdom of
God. And by this doctrine, Christ puts this Pharisee from all conceit of
himself, by discovering his danger of perishing, that so he may become
teachable. 4. For working of this change in man, man's nature is not in such a
condition as needs some reparation only, but is wholly corrupt; Not will a
bare acknowlegment of Christ, nor a moral reformation of carriage and
principles, nor common gifts and graces serve a man's turn, unless there be a
change of the whole man from the state of corruption to the state of holiness,
and a restoration and renovation, in some measure, of that image of God
wherein he was created; for, a man must be born again, or, the second time, (as
Nicodemus expresses it, ver. 4.) before he be right. The word rendered again,
signifies also to be born all of new; as a man going to build his house
better, razeth it to the very bottom to lay a new foundation, and as a man
beginning to declare a matter from the very original and first rise of it, and
so Luke uses the word, Luke 1.3. 5. This change and renovation is called a
birth, with allusion to a man's being born of his mother, because of many
resemblances betwixt the one and the other. As, 1. As a child is not born
without some pain, so every true convert finds some pain, in less or more
degree, in working this change; and they who find least at first, may meet with
more afterward. 2. As in a birth, a new creature is brought forth; So in
regeneration there is (not a new substance of soul and body, but) a new nature
communicate, in the renovation of the faculties of the soul and of our nature,
and not a parching up of the old. 3. As in a birth, there is a perfect creature
brought forth in respect of parts; so regeneration goes through the whole man,
and works a change upon it. 4. As it is not a birth, when there is never so
much pain, and yet there is nothing brought forth; so convictions, terrors,
challenges of conscience, and a spirit of bondage, will not prove a man
regenerate, unless these beginnings contribute to, and be followed with the
bringing forth of this new creature, 5. As in a birth, the creature is brought
forth, living, endued with properties, inclinations and dispositions agreeable
to the nature that began it; so by regeneration there comes a principle of new
life, whence flow ^e^ actions, desires, comforts and contentments in some
measure of resemblance and conformity with God. 6. As a babe new born is
sensible of what is contrary to that life it has, and is desirous of the means
that may preserve that life. So every regenerate person will feel hurt from
what is contrary unto grace, and will long after the means appointed for
feeding of it. 7. As every born child has an inclination to love those who are
begotten of the same parents, and has a natural inclination to multiply its
kind; So regeneration leads men to love all those who bear the image of God,
and to desire an enlargement and increase of Christ's family. 8. As upon the
birth there arises a visible relation betwixt the child born and its parents;
So in regeneration, beside the change of disposition, wherein progress is made
by sanctification, there is a relative change of a man's state and person being
engrossed in Christ the stock, by Christ's application of himself unto him, and
his apprehending of Christ by faith; whereby he becomes a Son of God through
Christ Doct. 6. This change by regeneration as it is of the whole man, to it
cannot be rought by any power in man, but must come from above: At first man is
passive, and Christ must apply himself to him, before he can do any thing, and
what he does afterward for carrying on this work, he must do it by strength
^rawn from Christ apprehended by faith, after that faith is wrought in him;
for, so the original also b^ ^^^th, Except a man be born-from above. 7. A
regenerate man is not only enabled to see and discern the things of God, but
is translated into the state of grace, and made sure of glory, the state of
grace being the porch of heaven, and grace, glory in the bud; for, from Christ's
assertion we may clearly gather, that a man who is born again, shall see the
kingdom of God. 8. Such as are regenerate and brought into the state of grace,
come under a peculiar dominion of God, being not only under the external
Ordinances and government of his Kingdom, but having a throne erected to God
in their hearts, righteousness and grace reigning over the Law and the curse,
the love of Christ set up as a Commander in them, and they abiding under the
shadow of his wings and protection; and at the end of their course, they enter
into glory, the felicity whereof can be no better expressed to our capacity,
then under the similitude of a Kingdom, which is the greatest outward glory and
happiness imaginable here; for these causes is the felicity of a regenerate
man held forth under the name of enjoying a part in the Kingdom of God,
whereby not only the state of glory is to be understood, as Acts 14.22. and
frequently, but the external administration of the Gospel, as is frequent in
the Gospels, see Matthew. 21.43. and the state of men regenerate by the Gospel,
as Romans 14.17. and elsewhere.

Ver. 4. Nicodemus says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he
enter the second time into his mothers womb, and be born?
Nicodemus, taking up Christ carnally, as if he had been speaking of a natural
birth, objects against his doctrine, as prescribing that which was impossible.
Doctrine 1. Christ's doctrine is then rightly heard, when every hearer makes
application thereof to himself, and tries what conformity there is betwixt
their way or condition and it; for, so does Nicodemus question the possibility
of this doctrine in his person, How can a man be born when he is old? as he
was. 2. Nature is so far from grace, that not only it has it not, but is
even ignorant of it, and the way of its working; for, so was Nicodemus here. 3.
Men may know many things in Religion, and yet be ignorant of the matter of soul
changes, wherein common illumination, as well as nature, fails men; for,
Nicodemus a Doctor, is ignorant of the matter of regeneration. 4. It is a great
part of the corruption of men's judgment, and cause of their ignorance, that
they cast spiritual things in a carnal mould, and will not believe that for
which they see not probabilities in reason; so does Nicodemus take up
regeneration, and therefore judges it impossible, can he enter the second time
into his mothers womb, and be born? 5. It ought (and to a sensible soul, will)
be matter of sad affliction, when men find themselves in a condition giving
little or no hope of salvation; for, Nicodemus his question imports a great
perplexity in him, when his ignorance made him look on that as impossible which
Christ told him was the only way to heaven and happiness. 6. Whatever
perplexity or ignorance men have, it is good to bring it out to Christ, as the
only remedy and way to help it; for, Nicodemus goes not away, but lays out
his case to Christ.

Ver. 5. Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a man be borne
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
Christ, in his answer, repeateth what he had said of the necessity of
regeneration, and withal, clears the way of it for Nicodemus his information;
Showing that this birth was not natural, but spiritual, wrought by the Spirit
whose working is like unto water cleansing filth. To understand this water of
Baptism will not agree with this place; for, this water does certainly
regenerate, but every one that is baptized is not certainly regenerate, as
witness Simon Magus, Acts 8.13.23. and others. Further, this water is pressed
as absolutely necessary to salvation; whereas men may go to heaven without
baptism, if it be not contemned; as of old the elect seed of Abraham who died
in the wilderness without circumcision, were saved, so the thief on the Cross
was saved without baptism. Therefore as Matthew. 3.11. the holy Ghost and fire
signify one thing, or the Spirit working like fire in purging dross, so the
water and Spirit signifies the Spirit working like water. Hence it is that
verse 6. he repeats only the Spirit, as including all that is here signified
by the water and Spirit. And this expressing of the Spirits working, under the
name of water, is no unusual expression in the Old Testament, Isa 44.3. Ezekiel.
36.25. Doctrine 1. No apprehension of impossibility in the matter of
regeneration, does warrant men to shift the thoughts of the necessity of it, or
to think that any less then regeneration will avail them to salvation; for,
Christ notwithstanding Nicodemus his doubt; presses it as necessary, and
gravely interposeth his authority (whom Nicodemus acknowledged for a Teacher
come from God) to persuade him of it, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be borne of water, he cannot into the kingdom of God. 2. As Christ is meek
and tender unto such as bring their doubts and ignorance unto him (and
therefore informs Nicodemus) so, men's questioning of truth, and their
propounding of doubts against it, is an occasion that Christ makes use of for
clearing of truth yet more; for, he takes occasion of Nicodemus his doubt, to
clear the doctrine of regeneration. 3. Regeneration is wrought neither by the
power of nature, nor by outward Ordinances only and alone, but by the efficacy
of the holy Spirit, who does prevent the sinner, and bless outward means to
him, before he can be changed; for, a man is borne of the Spirit. 4. The Spirit
in working this change of regeneration, works like water; for, as water
cleanses what is filthy, and makes it bright, so the Spirit does apply the
blood of Christ, for cleansing polluted nature, and renewing of it in true
holiness; as water cools and refreshes the thirsty and faint-hearted, so
the benefits purchased by Christ being applied by the Spirit, do refresh the
fainting souls of sinners in the perplexities and pangs of the new birth, or
afterward, Psalm. 42.1. And, as water fructifieth the barren ground, so the
Spirit makes the regenerate man fruitful in every good word and work;
Therefore is this birth described to be a man's being born of water and of the
Spirit.

Ver. 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which borne of
the Spirit, is Spirit.
Christ subjoyneth a reason of the necessity of regeneration for attaining
salvation, and the certainty of the regenerate man's salvation; because men by
nature are corrupt and opposite unto that Kingdom, and a renewed nature is
made suitable to it. Whence learn, 1. The corruption of men's nature, being well
seen, would soon discover the necessity of a change by regeneration, and none
will slight this, but they who are ignorant of the former; Therefore does
Christ upon this ground press the necessity of a new birth. 2. Men by nature,
or by their natural birth, are altogether corrupt and fleshly creatures, in all
the powers and faculties of soul and body; for, he that is borne of the flesh,
is flesh, or, one lump of corruption, flesh being taken here for corrupt
nature, and so including not outward and fleshly sins only, but even the
corruption of the mind also, as Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. 3. The corruption of men's
nature is transmitted by generation and propagation from their parents, and, so
is the seed of actual transgressions before they break forth; and (however
children of Church Members be borne federally holy, and in visible Covenant, 1
Cor. 7.14. yet) every one who comes of Adam in the ordinary way of generation,
is infected with it; for, that which is borne of the flesh, or, of corrupt man,
is flesh. 4. Whatever dignity men may be borne to, yet all that we can claim
by our natural birth, is, that by it we are secluded from heaven; for, our
condition by nature is held forth as a reason why we must be regenerate before
we enter into the Kingdom of God. 5. The corruption by our natural birth, and
our unfitness for heaven thereby, is, to the Lords own, cured and made up by
the Spirit of regeneration; for, therefore is it subjoyned, that which is borne
of the Spirit, is Spirit. 6. A true evidence of regeneration, and of men's being
fitted for heaven by it, is when men become spiritual in disposition, senses
and discerning, motions and inclinations, and in actions, leaving a stamp of
their dispositions even upon their common actions; and when they labor not
only to have habits of grace, but to have the spirit of these graces; or, the
daily influences of the Spirit, to make them lively, fresh and active; for,
that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, not by a change of substance, but
as is before explained.

Ver. 7. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every one that is
borne of the Spirit.


Christ seeing Nicodemus at a stand, and marvelling at that which he was saying
of this new birth, as at a thing impossible, he forbids him to marvel; and by a
similitude taken from the wind, he clears the matter yet more, and shows
that it is nothing the less true that he could not comprehend the way of it;
for, as the wind blows freely, and at the command of no creature, and as the
sound and effects thereof prove that it is, and yet men's reason cannot reach to
know from whence it arises, and whether it goes, or from how far it comes,
and how far it goes, seeing at the same time there are contrary winds in
several places of the earth; so in this spiritual birth and change, wherein the
Spirit works freely and efficaciously, it may be sensibly found by effects,
although the manner and way how it is wrought, be incomprehensible. Doctrine 1.
Albeit Gods works, and particularly in regeneration, be glorious and excellent,
at which faith may far more wonder then at a man's conception in the womb, Psalm
139.14. Yet Christ condemns that wondering as sinful, which sloweth from
unbelief, and from men's counting that impossible which they cannot comprehend;
Therefore Christ forbids such wondering, marvel not that I said unto thee, etc.
when yet he holds out the thing as incomprehensible. So excellent is the nature
of faith, that it makes that to be a commendable duty, which were sinful, if
coming from unbelief. 2. Albeit all men, even the greatest Doctors, lie under a
necessity of being regenerate if they would be saved; Yet Christ is excluded
from that number, being sanctified in his conception by the holy Ghost, and
borne without sin; Therefore he secludeth himself here, and includes Nicodemus
and all others, when he says, ye must be borne again. 3. By the fall of Adam,
man's understanding falls short even in comprehending natural things, and
there are depths in nature, and even in things most obvious to sense, wherein
natural light does fail; so it is said here of the wind, thou can not tell
whence it comes, and whither it goes. And by many questions about such things
is Job put to a nonplus, Job 38. and 39. 4. Good use may be made of common and
obvious things, to further spiritual mindedness, and to help to satisfy us
and quiet our reasonings in spiritual things; for, Christ by this similitude
casts a copy to all, to be led by thoughts of the wind, to think on
regeneration, and silenceth his wondering, by making his common sense and reason
about the wind, subservient to quiet his faith about this mystery; and by the
condsietation of such things as these, God brings Job to dust and ashes
before him. 5. The Spirits working is compared to wind, not only here, and in
that extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit, Acts 2.1, 2. but Cant. 4 16. Not
only because the Spirit and wind have one name, in the original languages of
the Scriptures: But because of many things wherein the one resembles the
other; And in the text (to go no further) we have these. 1. As the wind
blows through the world freely, not staying for the command, nor caring for
the prohibition of any creature; so the Spirit in his working is a free agent,
working where, on whom, when, and in what measure he pleases, and will be
hindered by none, the wind blows where it lists. 2. As there is somewhat
in the wind which is sensible, and felt or heard, proving that it is, thou
hear the sound thereof; so is the working of the Spirit discernable in the
effects, by them that have it, Only as the wind is not always alike loud,
nor sensible, so the working of the Spirit is not always, nor in all alike
discernable; and as they who hear the wind, must have the sense of hearing
clear; so men who desire to feel the effects of the Spirit, would not
over-cloud their own discerning with jealousies and misrepresentations; and
withal, it would be considered, that the Spirit is one gift, and discerning of
him and his working is another gift, (1 Cor. 2.12.) to be sought of him, or
else we may mistake; Likewise, this discerning faculty may sometime be keept up
where the true work it, either for trial, that we may not build our selves on
what is within us, but on Christ; or for chastisement, because we have grieved
the Spirit. There may also be some babes in Christ, who cannot for a time
discern their own members, though they really have them. 3. As there is some
what in the wind incomprehensible to natural reason, thou can not tell,
whence it comes, etc. So in the Spirits working, there is somewhat not only
beyond the reach of natural reason, 1 Corinthians. 2.14 but even above sanctified
reason, as to know how he insinuates himself with the Word upon us, and frames
that hidden man of grace; There are mysteries here to be adored, and calling
for praise, that he should work so admirably in us, rather then to be pried
into: In all these respects, is this comparison of the wind applied, So is
every one that is borne of the Spirit.

Verse 9. Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?

10. Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a Master of Israel, ^and
know not these things?


Nicodemus continuing in his ignorance, notwithstanding all this pains, is
reproved for it by Christ, as being a shame for a man of his calling to be
ignorant of such truths, which were so necessary and clear. Whence learn, 1.
When divine truths are told in plainest terms, and as fitted as can be to
vulgar capacities, yet they will be still obscure to a natural mind: for,
Nicodemus is yet ignorant, when Christ has illustrated the matter, much more
may men be ignorant when others teach. 2. The great cause of men's ignorance of
divine things, is, their carnal reason, which (especially in able men) keeps
them from simple believing and resting on what is revealed, till they see a
reason for every thing: for, this is Nicodemus his constant objection, How can
these things be? 3. This carnal reason is not easily beat down, nor will any
external means or speaking (though even by Christ) do it, till some more
powerful means be added, for, after all this pains, to solve that doubt when
it was first propounded, v 4. it sticks to him yet. 4. Where Christ has taken
pains in teaching, and men do not profit, there he will sharply rebuke this,
being one mean to stir up men to make progress in his school: therefore, does
he thus reprehend Nicodemus, though more mildly then he dealt with other
Pharisees. 5. A special mean of humbling men (especially such as have parts)
and making them more capable of Christ's instruction, to convince them of their
gross ignorance, for knowledge is that whereby men differ from beasts, and
therefore to see the want of that will lay their pride, Psalm. 73 22. and
conceit of knowledge does puste up men till they be discovered what they are 1
Cor. 8.1, 2. Therefore does Christ discover to Nicodemus, whose carnal reason
and parts made him stand out, that he is an ignorant, and knows not. See Prove
30.2, 3. 6. Every man as he has a calling and station in Church or
Commonwealth, ought to be answerable unto it, and have endowments ^utable; for,
Christ from his place argues, that he ought to have been better acquainted
with these things. 7. Man may have great learning, and be Teachers of the
Church, and yet be ignorant of the found principles of Religion and
Regeneration, not only in an experimental, but even in a contemplative way,
when a Church is fallen in Apostasy, and the matter of trying such is
neglected, and especially where superstitious observances come in the room of
the sound exercises of Religion; for, in this declining Church, where
traditions and superstitious rites prevailed, a Master of Israel knows not
these things. 8. It is a great sin and shame of teachers, to be found ignorant,
(who should have knowledge to instruct others,) especially in the sound
principles of Religion; for, says he, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know
not these thing? 9. The more clearly truths be revealed, and the more weighty
they be in themselves, men's ignorance is the more blameworthy; for, says he,
Know thou not those things? the very principles and fundamentals of
Religion, and which were revealed to Israel, among whom thou art a Master. That
they were of old revealed, appears from Deuteronomy. 30.6. Psalm. 51.10. Jer. 31.33.
Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.25, 26. and elsewhere.

Verse 11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we do know, and
testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness.
In the next place, Christ reproves his unbelief accompanying his ignorance,
which was common to him with the rest of the Jews, especially the Pharisees;
this he does upon two grounds, whereof the first (in this verse) is taken from
the assurance he had of the certainty of his doctrine, it being perfectly known
as by eyesight. This way of certainty by seeing, is attributed to Christ, v.
32. as proper to him who was in the bosom of the Father; and taking it thus
strictly, while Christ says, we have seen, it may be understood of the whole
Trinity, bearing witness with him, John 8.16, 29. 1 John 5 7. But taking this
seeing more largely, the expression seems rather to take in John the Baptist,
who was the present public witness with Christ at that time, and who (as
others, Prophets and Apostles) had the certainty of what he preached in his own
measure, from Christ's illumination, and did indeed preach what was most
certain, and what Christ revealed out of the bosom of the Father; though few
did believe and embrace either Christ's testimony or his. Doct. 1. Where Christ
has men to reprove for ignorance, there will be also unbelief found that is
blameworthy; for not only cannot ignorant men believe, but in many things men
are bound to embrace truth by faith, though they cannot comprehend them by
natural reason, and so unbelief is the cause of not closing with these high
mysteries; therefore does Christ challenge Nicodemus for not receiving the
witness; or not embracing this truth by faith, resting on the Authority of God
the Revealer. 2. Ill Scholars that come to Christ may be led back to see more
of their misery, common to them with others, that so they may not rest on any
thing they think peculiar in themselves, but be stirred up effectually to
study to profit; therefore does Christ show Nicodemus, that he was lying yet
in the common sin of others; Ye receive not, etc. 3. Whatever mistakes men have
about spiritual truths, yet they are infallibly certain in themselves, and
infallibly known to Christ, who revealed them out of the bosom of the Father,
as the sure ground of our faith, and that he cannot mislead such as he
teaches; therefore does Christ so gravely assert and inculcate this principle,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testify that we
have seen. The latter word explains the former, that he is as certain of it as
of a thing seen, though not with bodily eyes. 4. Such is Christ's
condescendence, as to take in sinful men with him in the same yoke of bearing
witness to the truth, and of partaking in their measure in the same honor
with him the chief Shepherd, and of holding out the same infallible truth with
him from the Word, though their persuasion and certainty of it be from his
gift, and inferior to his; therefore, says he, we speak etc. John being a
conjunct witness, speaking the same sure truth, and knowing it certainly in
his measure, though Christ knew it in an higher way, both as God of himself,
and as man by virtue of the personal union. 5. As it is no strange thing to see
men, (however they may hear, yet) not liking, embracing nor believing most
certain and saving truths; even when spoken by Christ himself; so the certainty
of divine doctrine will agg^eage the sin of unbelief; for, says he, we speak
that we do know, etc. and ye receive not our witness, His doctrine is called a
testifying and witness, as being both certain in it self, such as solemn
depositions of faithful men are, and a standing testimony against them who
believe it not.

Verse 12. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things?
The second ground upon which Christ reproves and aggreageth his unbelief, is,
the plainness of his doctrine: Christ had spoken of heavenly things in a plain
way under a similitude taken from earthly things, as, v 8. and if he did not
comprehend and believe them so, what would he do if they had been spoken of as
heavenly things in a style suitable to their own nature? Doct. 1. It is the
will of Christ, that teachers of souls do not affect high and lofty styles, and
quaintness of expression, but that in doctrine they descend as low as may be,
and accommodate themselves to the capacity of people; for, herein Christ
commends his own love in drawing the copy; I have told you earthly things, 2.
Even spiritual things, when they are spoken of under earthly similitudes, are
but earthly things in comparison of what they would be, being spoken of in
their own language and terms; therefore he calls them, being so expressed,
earthly things, in comparison of heavenly things, expressed in a suitable
style. There is an eminency in these things above what any similitude can
express, and when we come to know as we are known, we will find it so. 3.
When all is done that can be to bring down spiritual things to a peoples
capacity, yet there is no power in men of themselves to understand or close
with them; for, Christ found it so, I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not: and Ministers need not think it strange, if their doctrine be no
better entertained then Christ's was. 4. The plainness of doctrine does
aggreage the sin of ignorance and unbelief, and make it more inexcusable: for,
it is a challenge, I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, etc. 5.
Such as are rightly convinced of their dullness in taking up spiritual things,
when plainly expressed, will much more see their inability to take up these
things in their own nature; and however, this will stand as a witness how far
men are from knowledge, or closing with spiritual things: for, so does Christ
hold out, If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things.

Verse 13. And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.
If we understand these words properly of ascending to heaven and enjoying
eternal felicity, it does indeed hold good, that only Christ enters there by
his own virtue, and all others only through and by him; and so the scope of
this verse will be the same with verse 14, 15. of which in its own place. But
the dependence on the former purpose, and the expression of this in the bypast
time, whereas Christ was not yet ascended in his humane nature, leads us rather
to understand this ascending to heaven, figuratively, of comprehending heavenly
mysteries, and entering on Gods Council concerning the way of salvation, as it
seems to be understood, Romans 10.6, 8. with Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 14. And so the
meaning is, that no man of himself can know or take up these things, that
being Christ's prerogative, who manifested himself from the bosom of the
Father, in our nature, and yet as God, is still in heaven; and thus Christ
having reproved Nicodemus for his ignorance, does yet show the remedy thereof
in himself. Whence Learn. 1. Christ's sharp Word is not his last Word to his
own, but when he has challenged most sharply for any fault, he is willing to
offer himself, the only remedy, to cure it; For, so does he deal with
Nicodemus his ignorance. 2. It is alike impossible for men, by their own parts
and natural endowments, to take up and comprehend spiritual mysteries, as to
climb up to heaven and enter upon Gods Council; Therefore is it called an
ascending up to heaven. 3. In so far as sinners come to a true and saving
knowledge of heavenly mysteries: they are in a sort transported up to heaven
from off the earth, as knowing the counsels of God, and being ravished with
what they know; therefore also is it called an ascending to heaven. If
Capernaum were exalted to heaven, Matthew. 11.23. because of the offer of these
things, what are they, who in some measure comprehend and embrace them? 4. It
is proper to Christ the Mediator only, in some sense, to ascend to heaven, and
comprehend spiritual mysteries, both for the measure and degree of knowledge in
these things, which, as God, is infinite, and as man, is large, as the humane
nature is capable of, and for the kind and manner of knowledge, which, as God,
is of himself, and, as man, by virtue of the personal union, whereas all
others have any knowledge they have it from him; for, no man has ascended up
to heaven, (or comprehended these things fully or of themselves) but he that
came down from heaven. 5. The Son of God in the bosom of the Father, was
pleased to condescend so far, as to manifest himself unto the world in our
nature, that so he might in our nature understand heavenly mysteries, and
communicate the knowledge thereof to his people; therefore it is marked as the
ground of his ascending to heaven, or comprehending of these things for his
peoples use, that he came down from heaven, the Son of man, hereby showing,
that his abasing of himself did exalt him as Mediator God-man to that dignity,
to be the storehouse of wisdom and knowledge to his people; and that his love
in stooping so low, to bring and communicate knowledge to us, is remarkable; In
all which, we are not to understand, that Christ, as God, did change place by
his Incarnation, but only did stoop and demit himself to assume the humane
nature in a personal union. 6. Christ by his Incarnation, and becoming man, did
not cease to be God, but continues still the same, filling heaven and earth;
for, he that descended down from heaven, is in heaven, and so is upon the
counsel of God still, to teach us infalliblie. 7. The Son of God has assumed
the humane nature into so strict a personal union, that what is proper to
either nature, is ascribed unto the person under whatsoever name; for, says
he, the Son of man which is in heaven, which is not to be understood, as if
either his humane nature came from heaven, (for he is speaking of what still is
there) or that his humane nature were in every place, but that the same person
who is the Son of man according to our nature, is in heaven according to his
divine nature, and yet but one person still. And hereby Christ shows his love
to our nature, that under that name he ascribes what is proper to his Godhead,
to himself.

Ver. 14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness: Even so must
the Son of man be lifted up:

15. That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.


Christ here points out himself as the Savior of sinners, having sufficient
virtue to cure the sinfulness and misery of such as flee to him by faith, and
to keep them from perishing; and save them; This he does under the type of the
brazen Serpent lifted up in the wilderness at Gods command, for curing of the
Israelites bittten with the fiery Serpents, Number. 21 6, 7, 8, 9. Christ by
subjoyning this to the doctrine of regeneration, does partly teach Nicodemus
the way of a taining regeneration, which is by the Spirits applying of the
merit and virtue of Christ's death in the first act thereof, and by the
regenerate man's applying the same by faith, for carrying on that work to cure
themselves perfectly; and partly, he teaches him that regeneate men are not to
rest on any thing in them, but must be led out of themselves to Christ for
attaining salvation. Doctrine 1: Truly regenerate men, and such as are minding
that work in earnest, will see great cause and need to make much use of Christ;
for, so much does this doctrine, and the dependence thereof teach. 2. Christ
and the use to be made of him was pointed out to believers under the Old
Testament by types and figures; which as it should sweeten unto us the reading
of these things, so it should point out our mercy, that we have not such dark
and long prospects through which only they could look to him, but we may see
him more clearly; for, Christ shows here, that he was typified by the lifted
up Serpent. 3. It is our duty to dip in the application of this and the like
types, till we find the agreement that is betwixt the truth and the type; for,
so does Christ cast us a copy in the explication of this type, wherein we may
see, first, They agree in the original occasion: As Isreal's deadly misery
occasioned the setting up of the Serpent, so the occasion of Christ's sending
into the world was man's sin and misery, man being so bitten with that old
Serpent, that the venom is gone through him all, and he become liable to
intolerable pain, if his conscience were not lulled asleep. Secondly, they
agree in the impulsive cause; That, as the Serpent was a remedy of Gods own
prescribing out of his great mercy, so is this remedy for lost sinners.
Thirdly, they agree in their present condition when they were mad use of; for,
as the Serpent was like that which bit them, so was Christ true man the second
Adam answering to him by whom sin came into the world: as this Serpent was
without venom, so was he without sin: as the Serpent was made of brass, and
not of gold; so appeared he not in glorious state, nor majesty: and, as the
Serpent was a very unlikely mean in it self, so they needed clear eyes who
would see salvation coming by a suffering Lord, by a worm and not a man.
Fourthly, they agree in the use to be made of them, and in the fruits that
follow thereupon. And so 1. As the Serpent was lifted up on a pole at Gods
command, that the offer of this remedy might be made conspicuous unto all
Israel; so Christ, in regard of Gods decree and sentence against sin, and in
regard of predictions concerning him, must be lifted up on the cross, and be
broken there, that this ointment might be let out for our cure, and he is made
conspicuous to the Church on the pole of the Gospel, that faith may get footing
on the offer made of him. 2. As the way of cure by the Serpent was a look, so
it is believing in him, and laying hold on him by faith, that only brings
cure of the guilt of sin, of the pain of conscience through sin, and of the
dominion of sin. 3. As it was ground enough for any bitten Israelite to look to
this Serpent, that he had need, and thirsted for cure by this appointed mean;
so a ^el^ sense of sin is a warrant sufficient for sinners to lay hold on
Christ the ostered remedy. 4. As a simple look, though at great distance, and
in some with weaker eyes, brought cure to them who were bitten, what ever they
were; so a weak act of true faith, and at a great distance will cure the bitten
sinner without exception; Whosoever believes, and though his faith were never
so weak, if it be faith. 5. As this look healed the bitten Israelite, and kept
him from death, so though all men are in a state of perishing, and secluded
from heaven without Christ, yet by faith in him sinners are freed from death,
and made heirs of life, they shall not perish but have eternal life, and this
includes remission, reconciliation, perseverance, and all the means leading to
these ends, and is a benefit far beyond what an Israelite got by looking to the
Serpent.

Ver. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son:
that whosever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Christ insisteth to point out himself to Nicodemus as the Author of eternal
life, and to confirm and illustrate the former doctrine, as the particle for,
imports. And here the benefit of giving him unto the world is commended from
the free love of God contriving such a way of the salvation of lost sinners,
and the certainty of sinners salvation through faith in him, is confirmed from
this, that it is Gods very end in sending him, that believers should not
perish. Whence learn, 1. The world of it self is liable to pardition, and under
sinfulness and misery, from which there is no deliverance, but by Christ the
Son of God only; for so it is here employed. 2. This way of man's deliverance
is not to be ascribed to any thing in man procuring the same, for God might
justly have damned all, but to the free love of God only; for, so are we here
taught. 3 Love to lost man is not to be looked upon as shining in Christ only,
who willingly gave himself to redeem him, but in the Father also, who loving
lost man, sent his Son to suffer and do the office of a Mediator, that
through his mediation he might (not begin to love them, but) communicate the
effects of his love in a way agreeable to his justice; for, God loved the word,
and that antecedently to his giving Christ, and as a cause of it. 4. This love,
being rightly studied, will be found matchless and inexpressible, and so will
all think of it, who are sensible of an interest in it, and of the fruits of
it, God so loved the world. See 1 John 3.1. 5. The matchlesnesse of this love
may appear if we consider, 1. The person who loves, even God who was provoked
by man, and who stands in no need of man, or of any thing to add to his
infinite happiness: God loved. 2. The object loved, which is the world,
whereby we are not to understand all and every man (for that were to make God
be disappointed of his will; and of what he intends toward man out of his love,
seeing all get not good of Christ, and to have him giving Christ for them, for
whom he will not sanctify himself, nor intercede, John 17.9.19.) but only his
own in the world among lost mankind, who are not only gathered from among
all Nations and conditions of men in the world, and not of the Jews only, (as
the world is taken, 1 John 2.2. See John 11.51, 52. Romans 3.29) and who (as
there is a community or world of the reprobates as distinguished from the
elect, John 17.9. so they) make up a world or community of themselves, 2 Cor.
5.19. John 6.33. But they are by nature the same that others of the world are,
of the same race of cursed mankind, and not only living in the world, but
after the fashions of the world: And herein shines the matchless love of God,
that he would not so far abandon lost mankind, but he would have a new and
holy community to himself from among them, and would love these who had nothing
love-worthy in themselves more then they who were left in their miserable
estate. 3. This matchless love appears in the effects, or gift bestowed by
it, even the Fathers only Son by eternal generation and communication of the
same essence, to be a ransom and Mediator for sinners; God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son. This gift and an interest in it,
speaks more love then any other benefit a man can receive, 1 John 4.9. and
assures of all other things in so far as they tend to the man's good, Romans
8.32. Doctrine 6. The way whereby benefit is reaped and gotten from this gifted
Savior, is only by faith, whereby a man, being put out of himself, and seeing
himself in the same condition with the lost world, does flee to Christ the
only remedy, and roll himself upon him as a sufficient Savior; for, it is he
that believes in him, that shall not perish; Albeit a self-condemned sinner
have not a particular assurance of an interest in Christ, yet he believes when
he casts himself upon him on all hazards: And albeit he miss many other
qualifications, yet he is not to stand back, but to come to Christ, to get what
he wants. 7. Albeit Christ be given only to the elect, yet unto the visible
Church the offer is held out generally upon condition of faith, whereby
reprobates are left inexcusable, through their voluntary rejecting this mercy,
and the elect, through Gods blessing on these offers and exhortations, are
brought in in a way agreeable to their nature, as ^a^ional creatures, Therefore
is this gift and offer spoken of indefinitely, that whosoever believes should
not perish. Otherwise to say, that this indefinite offer is the sum of Gods
purpose and will revealed in Scripture concerning sinners salvation; is not
only repugnant to Scripture speaking of particular election, and of the giving
of some to Christ, and of working faith in them; but is injurious to Gods
perfection, in ascribing such confused and indistinct thoughts to him, as a
general decree, which may consist with the saving of all, or of none. 8. Such
as come to Christ, the Lord makes no exception of what they have been, nor of
the degrees of their faith, if it be true; for, whosoever believes shall not
perish. 9. Every believer in Christ is not only delivered from perishing, by
Christ's underlying wrath for him, but is stated in a right unto eternal
felicity, which he shall certainly attain; for, he shall not perish but have
everlasting life, to wit, here in the pledge and bud, and hereafter, in full
enjoyment. 10. The felicity purchased by Christ to believers is such, as only
deserves the name of life, (all other life being but as death in comparison of
it,) and it will be eternally, and without end, such; Therefore it is called
everlasting life.

Verse 17. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world: but
that the world through him might be saved.
To confirm the certainty of believers salvation, Christ insisteth yet upon
the end of Gods sending him in the flesh, which was not to condemn the world,
but for the salvation of the world through him. If we understand this of Gods
intention in sending Christ into the world, then the world, in the two last
sentences, must be understood only of the Elect of Jew and Gentiles, as ver.
16. and 1 John 4.14. for whose salvation and deliverance from condemnation
Christ came into the world: But if we look to the nature of the work which
Christ was sent to do, it may be taken more largely for men in the world
indefinitely. For not only Christ in his first coming, came not to judge and
sentence any, but to hold out the way of life as a meek Savior and Mediator,
as Luke 9.55, 56. John 12.47. but nothing he did then was to procure
condemnation to any, but on the contrary to make offer of salvation to lost
man, though accidentally, by reason of man's corruption, and not making use of
him, his coming did heighten men's condemnation, as ver. 18, 19. Doctrine 1. It
is a lesson we are negligent in taking up, yet a lesson wherein Christ would
have us well versed and rooted, to know the sure and happy condition of these
who believe in him; that we may be stirred up to study to partake thereof;
therefore does he so much inculcate the certain advantage to be had thereby. 2.
In the matter of man's Redemption, the Son of God was pleased to demit himself
in our nature to be the Fathers Servant and Ambassador, that we may be assured
of the Fathers being well pleased with what he does; for, so much are we taught
in that God sent his Son. See, Matthew. 3.17. 3. It pleased the Son of God, at
the Fathers appointment, to cast a veil upon his glory, by appearing on earth
in our nature, and to converse among men, and endure all their contradiction
and enmity, that he might finish the work given him to do; so, he was sent into
the world, which is to be understood here of the habitable world and of men in
it, and savouring of it; and this commends his love, that at his Fathers
appointment he came willingly among such. 4. It is as certain that believers
shall be saved, as it is certain God cannot be frustrate of his end in sending
his Son into the world; therefore it is subjoyned as a reason of that, v. 16.
Believers shall not perish, etc. for God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world, etc. yea, his not sending his Son to condemn, as he might
have done, is a clear evidence of his willingness to save believers. 5. Such
as are Christ's own, of Jew and Gentile, through the habi^able world, who fly
to him by says, whatever they be, or whatever they meet with, yet may be sure
of salvation, and not to be condemned, having a Savior sent to them to free
them from wrath, and work out their salvation by his merit and efficacy: and
in this they may glory over all difficulties, and say, God sent not his Son to
condemn the world. etc. 6. Albeit Christ may be eventually for the falling of
many, and his coming will afford sad matter of dit^ay against them; yet all the
blame of this lies upon themselves, who stumble at the rock they should build
themselves upon, who reject their own mercy by offer, and by opposition
thereunto, do harden and blind themselves; so much also do these word, teach,
being understood of the nature of his work and carriage, as is above explained.

Verse 18. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not
is condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God.
Christ goes on to clear and illustrate the certainty of the salvation of
believers in him, by showing on the contrary the condemnation on unbelievers,
whom he declares to be under a double condemnation, one by the Law, and
another by the Gospel; every unbeliever is condemned already by the sentence of
the Law, which they lie still under, and have it confirmed by the Gospel, since
they do not by faith lay hold on the offered and only remedy for their
liberation. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Christ came into the world to save his own,
yet he actually saves none, but such as he gives faith unto, whereby they
renounce themselves, and close first with him, and then with all the Promises
in him; and this is the method wherein he deals with all his elect; for, it is
he that believes on him, that is not condemned. 2. However believers in Christ
deserve condemnation of themselves, as having many things condemnable in them;
and however the Law may accuse and trouble them, yet they are freed from actual
condemnation; for, ^e that believes on him is not condemned. 3. Believers are
not only freed from condemnation in the life to come, but immediately upon the
exercise of faith, a sentence absolvitory is past, which stands firm till
the last day, wherein it shall be solemnly declared, for, he that believes is
not condemned, in the present time. 4. Albeit such as flee to Christ, and
expect not to be condemned, ought to study holiness, without which no man
will see God; yet the condition required for reversing the sentence, and
absolving the self-condemned sinner, is only faith put in exercise, as laying
hold on Christ's righteousness, which alone can answer the Law, and endures
constantly; whereas our holiness is imperfect and variable like the Moon;
therefore it is he that believes on him, or, has faith in exercise, not in
the habit only, that is not condemned. 5. Every unbeliever (such as all by
nature are) has the sentence of condemnation already past against him by the
Law, under which he lies, having only the thread of his life betwixt him and
full execution of it: therefore it is said, he that believes not, is condemned
already. The sentence of the Law stands, since he has not come to Christ to
get it repealed. See, Romans 2.9. Gal. ^.10. 6. Albeit the sentence of the Law be
sufficient to condemn mankind, and will condemn all them who have not heard of
Christ; yet under the Gospel, unbelief and not receiving of Christ is the great
condemning sin; for, as no sin will condemn the man, who flees to Christ the
remedy, so when the remedy is not embraced, the sentence of the Law is ratified
in the Gospel and Court of mercy: for, he that believes not is condemned,
because he has not believed. The sentence is declared just and confirmed by a
new sentence, since he will not take help. And thus unbelief is the great,
unpardonable sin, Mark 16.16. whereas other sins, (that against the Holy Ghost
excepted, because it is joined with final impenitency) would be pardoned, if
men would believe. 7. It aggreageth the sin of unbelief, that the sinner
rejects so excellent a one as Christ, whose excellency proves him an
all-sufficient Savior, and who is so clearly manifested to be so; or if he
pretend to believe, yet he does not take up Christ as he is revealed in the
Word, nor groundeth his faith on the Word, nor follows the order prescribed
therein, but takes up a Christ according to his fancy, and takes a dream for
faith; for, he has not believed in the only begotten Son of God, nor in his
name, whereby he is clearly revealed, nor according to it.

Verse 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.
Christ insisteth on the second cause of sinners condemnation, which is there
sleighting of the offer of mercy in the Gospel. And beside what was intimate in
the former verse, of the ratifying of the laws, sentence upon their not
embracing the remedy, he adds the heavy condemnation that it brings on men,
while they not only embrace not, but do contemn the remedy of misery, and
delight rather in their own ways: And withal, he shows the reason of this,
which are men's evil deeds. Doct. 1. The world without Christ lies in
darkness, void of spiritual light, and full of errors, and of the works of
darkness: God is withdrawn from the creatures, and they wander and stumble (as
in the dark) upon Satan's snares, their case is void of true peace and comfort,
as men in a dark pit; their way tends to utter darkness; and yet, as men in
the dark, their case and misery is not discerned in its own colors; for, in
opposition to all, this, it is said, that light is come into the world, by
Christ's being manifested in the Gospel. 2. Christ offered in the Gospel, has
brought a remedy for all sin and misery; bringing light to discover men's case
in its true colors, light to dispel the darkness of errors, and the
vileness of sinful lusts, light for direction, and light of comfort to make
things pleasant and comfortable, upon solid grounds of reconciliation; for,
light is come into the world. 3. Where Christ manifests himself, men will not
so easily be drawn from their wo^ul condition, but their old darkness will be
suting their hearts to hold the grip it has, as well as the light suteth for
entrance; for, their loving the one more then the other, supposes that both
come in competion to their choice. 4. Such is the perversitie of men's nature,
as not only not to embrace. Christ offering himself, but to love their woeful
condition far beyond the offered remedy: to like to abide in darkness, rather
then to see their misery or need of him; and to like their own deluded peace,
better then to follow after his true comforts; for, men loved darkness rather
then light. 5. Where Christ, offering himself in the Gospel, is not received in
love, but contemned, it brings sadder condemnation then the breaking of the
Law, as being a sinning against the remedy, and that with an high hand; an
underval^ing of him, and doing of what they can to make void his pains; for,
this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, etc. 6. Men's
living in ill works is an evidence of their rejecting Christ, it being evil
deeds that makes light hateful to men: for, men loved darkness rather then
light, because their deeds were evil; their love to their evil ways makes
them hate this light as it is discovering, and so they go no further, nor
attain to the refreshing light of it, and makes them that they cannot quit
their lusts, and come under Christ's yoke.

Verse 20. For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, left his deeds should be reproved.

21. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.


Christ proves that it is men's ill deeds which causes them to hate the light,
from two general positions. The first whereof (being a proverbial sentence, and
holding true both in natural and spiritual light,) shows, that evil doers
hate the light, lest it should discover them; and the second, that the godly,
on the contrary, delight to have their ways tried and made manifest by this
light. Whence learn, 1. Whoever is yet in nature, and on whom Christ has not
shined with the renewing light of the Gospel, is an evil doer, not only in a
legal sense, (as all have sinned, and the godly do sin daily) but habitually,
it is his course, study and endeavor to do that which displeases God, and
this study of doing evil is the air he breathes in; such is he who does evil.
2. The Gospel has not only a refreshing light to comfort sinners in the due
order, but a reproving and discovering light, which (however men will stand as
long as they are able, in the defense of their own righteousness, yet) will
convince and discover them to themselves: for, this is the light here spoken
of, which reproves or discovers, or, (as the word is) argues and convinveth
men to be what they are. And albeit nature will discover some gross sins, yet
men's self-righteousnesse, the emptiness of moral civility, etc. must be of the
words discovering; And albeit the Law which is spiritual, discover these also,
yet it is ascribed to the Gospel in this challenge, because it aggravateth
these sins so much the more, that the Gospel discovers them with the offer of
a remedy. 3. The great plea betwixt Christ and sinners in the Gospel, is about
this reproving lights getting place, and about men's being discovered to
themselves, as being the first lesson where the most part of men stick, and so
get no more; for, they hate the light and come not to it. 4. As in the matter
of natural light, evil doers wait for the dark, Job 24.15. so it is a mark of
evil doers, that they hate the spiritual light, and shun all means of searching
and knowing themselves, as wishing such things were not sin, not desiring to
know them to be so, and wishing there were not a God to punish them; for, every
one that does evil, hates the light. 5. All these who do not (out of jealousy
over themselves) come to the Word, with a desire to be discovered to
themselves, but desire to hear what may flatter them in sin, and to whom it is
not only their tentation at some times, but their habitual frame to take ill
with reproof; All these I say, do prove themselves evil doers, and haters of
the light, whatever respect they pretend to have to it; therefore does he
explain who are haters, neither comes to the light, left his deeds should be
reproved. 6. A mark of a man who has embraced Christ in the Gospel, is, (not
sinlesnesse, but) a study and endeavor to do what is commanded in the Word of
truth, and to do it in truth and sincerity; for, he does truth. 7. As the godly
man must have been at the light before he can do the truth, so this light
makes him jealous and suspicious of himself, as knowing that Satan and a
deceitful heart may out-wit him, and therefore he loves self searching and
examination well, whereby he may know himself; for, this is his character, He
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, not so much to
others, as to himself. 8. The godly man's jealousy of himself, will not be
satisfied in comparing himself with others, or the fashions of the world, or
with the external duties required in the law, or in judging of himself, as
self-love would prescribe; but it brings him to Gods balance, and the light
of the Word, as his Judge: for, he comes to the light, etc. 9. The matter
wherein a godly man puts himself to trial, are his particular actions, and that
daily, and not now and then only; for, he comes, that his deeds may be made
manifest. 10. That which the sincere man tries in his way, and which only
quieteth his conscience about them, is, when he finds them agreeable to Gods
direction, (whatever others think of them) and tending to his glory; when he
finds they are done by him, whose person is in God by reconciliation, and who
has his strength in God, by dwelling in him by faith; for, he tries his
works, that they are wrought in God, that is, at the direction of God, and by a
person dwelling in God by reconciliation, so empty in himself, that he not only
now and then employeth God, but dwells in him for strength; To live and walk
in the Spirit, is to be understood, Gal, 5.16, 18, 25.

Verse 22. After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of
Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized.

23. And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much
water there; and they came and were baptized.

24. For John was not yet cast into prison.


Follows in the second part of the chapter, John's last testimony given to
Christ before his imprisonment, three occasions whereof we have, to v 27. The
first and more remote occasion, is, that Christ leaving the City Jerusalem,
came to the territory of Judea, and baptized there by the Ministry of his
disciples, and that John (being yet at liberty) was busy, baptizing also at
the same time, and having left Bethabara on the other side of Jordan, was come
to Aenon, (supposed to be in Manasseh or Galilee, where Herod, who beheaded
him, had power,) and baptizing there. Their baptizing both at one time
occasioned that emulation, ver. 25, 26. which drew out the testimony. Doct. 1.
Christ was pleased to submit unto a tossed life, and went from place to place
according as he had to do, or sinners to convert; for, after these things Jesus
came (from Jerusalem, where he was ordinarily ill-welcomed) into the land of
Judea. where he got work, and had occasion to do good. 2. It is the duty of
Christ's disciples to follow him, whithersoever he goes, and however Christ may
get many sleeces of followers, yet it is only disciples that follow him in well
and woe; for, therefore, (and not only because it was their particular calling)
is it marked, that Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea. 3.
Christ's own bodily presence, being filled with the Spirit without measure for
his peoples good, did not take away the use of external Ordinances of Word and
Sacraments, as being the means in and by which he conveighs himself, and his
grace and fullness to his people; for, he tarried with them and baptized, to
wit, by the Ministry of his disciples, John 4.2. he used the same means that he
appointed John to use, that he might bind all to Ordinances. 4. The Ordinances
of Christ are as truly his Ordinances in the hands of weak men, appointed
thereunto, as if he did administrate the same himself; for, so is here said of
baptism in particular, He tarried and baptized, when his disciples did
administrate it: The virtue of Ordinances does not depend on the excellency of
the instruments. 5. It is the duty of Ministers to continue their diligence,
whatever other means Christ use to further his own work; and Gods raising up of
clearer lights should not discourage faithful Ministers to go on in their duty:
for albeit Christ was now getting the name, yet John was also baptizing. 6.
Whatever circumstantial difference there was betwixt Christ's and John's
baptism, yet in substance they were the same, pointing out and sealing up the
same thing; therefore they baptize together at one time, and people go to both
of them as to the same Ordinance. 7. Under the Gospel the administration of
Ordinances are not confined to any one place; for, John baptizeth in Aenon, as
well as in Bethabara, with other water as well as Jordan, and Christ is
baptizing in another place. 8. Ministers who are free, ought to choose such
places for to exercise their calling in, where in wisdom they find mainest
circumstances concur for furtherance of the work of God; for, he baptized in
Aenon, because there was much water there, to baptize withal. This does not by
any consequence give us to infer that John did not sprinkle, or pour water
on these he baptized, but that he dipped them: for, in these hot countries,
water being so scarce, that oft-times it occasioned contention, to get it for
necessary uses, as appears, Genesis 26. Exodus 2. and elsewhere; it needs not
seem strange that John was not permitted to make use of wells, even for
sprinkling the multitudes that came to him, but behoved to go to rivers and
brooks where the water was copious and common. 9. Where God employeth his
servants, he will give them success in some measure; and albeit God raise up
more shining lights, yet the work of God in the hands of any faithful
Ministers, will not wear out of request among believers; for, when Christ is
baptizing, yet they came and were baptized by John. 10. The most faithful of
Gods servants may expect hard measure from the world for their pains, and that
they will do what they can to impede them in their work; for, it is here
supposed that John was cast in prison, though not yet. 11. The servants of God
are not, upon fear of danger, to lie by of their own accord, but while they
have liberty and opportunity of doing good, they ought to use it well, that it
may further their account in a day of trial: for it is a reason why John still
baptized: for, he was not yet cast into prison

Verse 25. Then there arose a question, between some of John's disciples and the
Jews about purifying.

26. And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee
beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and
all men come to him.


The second and nearer occasion of this testimony, is, a debate betwixt some
Jews, and some of John's disciples, whether his baptism or their washings were
best for purging of sin; and the Jews (it seems) having nothing to object
against John or his baptism, will yet depresse it what they can, by casting up
Christ and his baptism, as now out-shining John. Whereupon his disciples, out
of carnal emulation come to him with a regrate, that Christ who was brought in
credit by his testimony, did now gather disciples of himself; and c^rie all the
praise from him; and this is the third and nearest occasion of the testimony.
Whence learn, 1. Truth will always be liable to contest so long as men are
carnal, and especially times of Reformation will readily breed debates and
questions; for, there arose a question at this time. 2. None are more bold and
ready to fall on debates, then those who are weakest in Religion, having much
rash zeal, being conceited of the little light they have, and ignorant of their
own inability, and of the subtility of errors and heretics; for, it was some
of John's disciples, who were weak, very ignorant and emulous of Christ, who
enter on this question. 3. Adversaries of the truth, are so deeply rooted in
their superstitious customs, as they will be as ready and bold to dispute for
them, as others are for truth, especially when they meet with a weak party:
for, the Jews question with John's disciples about purifying. 4. It is an old
policy of adversaries of the truth, when they can do no better, to put Christ's
friends by the ears among themselves; for, so it is supposed the Jews did
here, by casting up Christ's baptism to disparage John. 5. Such disciples as
are weak, and rash, and foolishly forward in debates, get more hurt then good
by them one way or other; for, John's disciples are sent away poisoned with
carnal emulation and envy against Christ. 6. In so far as men know Christ, he
will grow in their estimation, and men will come down, and get only their own
room: for, it is supposed that Christ's train was greatest, he baptizeth, and
all men come to him. 7. Carnal emulation is an old and great sin in the Church,
and even among Professors; it being the foul fruit of a carnal temper, to look
on the success and applause of one man's gifts, as the debasing of another who
is faithful: to count the thriving of the work of God in one Ministers hand,
the disgracing of another who is not so flocked unto: to be forty that any
praise should go by our selves, or these we esteem of; or to be taken up, not
so much with what concerns the Gospel and the glory of God, as with the
reputation of men employed about it; for, in all these they failed, they think
Christ wrongeth John, that his rising disgraceth him, (and therefore they give
him honorable titles, and debase Christ as one that had been with him, and
brought in credit by him) and the thriving of the work in Christ's hand angereth
them, since it brought (as they judged) their Master out of request, Rahbi, he
that was with thee beyond Jordan, etc. See; 1 Cor. 3.4. 8. It is a great injury
done to Christ, when his voluntary humiliation abaseth him in men's hearts, when
men think he is obliged to any for giving him due respect, or that he wrongeth
any when he is in greatest repute in his Church; for, herein they wrong him, in
casting up that he was with John beyond Jordan, as one of his hearers, in
alleging ingratitude upon him, in baptizing to John's prejudice, who had born
witness to him, and brought him in credit, and in quarrelling that all men
come to him.

Verse 27. John answered, and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be
given him from heaven.
Follows the testimony it self, wherein John represseth their emulation,
partly by showing that the dispensations of God to every man, are to be
acquiesced in, v. 27. and by remitting them to his former doctrine, wherein he
had asserted the difference betwixt Christ and him, v. 28. and partly, by an
ample commendation of Christ his excellency, wherein he points out the
differences, not only betwixt Christ and himself, in his peculiar office of
being a forerunner, but betwixt Christ and all men; And namely, that Christ is
the Bridegroom, he and others but servants and friends, v. 29. That Christ's
glory was on the growing hand, and his splendor decreasing, v. 30. That Christ
is as far above men, as heaven is above earth, v. 31. That he is far above all
in his knowledge of divine things, which he reveals, v. 32. -- ( though his
doctrine be but ill entertained v. -- 32. and so men deprive themselves of the
dignity of setting their seal to the truth of God, v. 33. which yet is
undoubtedly spoken by Christ, as having the Spirit without measure for that, as
for other ends, v. 34.) That he is the beloved Son, having the charge of the
Elect, and a Sov^raignty over all things for their good, v. 35. and that
salvation is to be attained only by faith in him, without which men will
perish, v. 36.

In this verse, John in a general Assertion shows, that the difference
betwixt Christ and him (as betwixt men and men) for dignity of calling, gifts,
efficacy and success, flowed from a divine dispensation, which could not nor
should be quarrelled, unless men would bark against heaven. Whence learn, 1.
Faithful Ministers will be far from emulation themselves, and from fostering it
in others: and where grace is lively, it will resist tentations, which would
kindle the fire of emulation; for, when they blow this corruption, zeal to
Christ's honor does not only quench that fire, but sets him on work to quench
it in them. 2. Every excellency and lawful calling men have, is from God, who
dispenses variously for eminency in calling, gifts and success, as he
pleases; for, so is here imported, that God gives from heaven, what men have
in their several measures. 3. Men are to submit to dispensations of divine
providence in what they enjoy of any of these, and upon that ground ought to
cure carnal emulation; it being neither lawful, nor to any purpose, to do
otherwise, for John keeps down his own, and curbeth their emulation with
this, a man can receive (or, take to himself) nothing, except it be given him
from heaven, from which these grounds of curing this disease may be gathered.
1. Any calling or gift, and any success men have in the exercise of their
calling and gifts, is from God; which they ought rather to acknowledge, then
quarrel what they want. 2. The variety of dispensations which men are ready to
quarrel, is chiefly in gifts and excellencies given for the use of others, and
which are adorning rather then saving; for, of these the text is speaking, and
men have the less cause to quarrel for a less measure of these, if they have
the truth of saving graces, necessary unto life. 3. There can be no envying of
any who excel us in these, without reflecting on God who has so dispensed his
own gifts; for, it is from heaven that the difference is. 4. As no man can
lawfully usurp any calling which he has not from God; (as they would have had
John above Christ) so it will be to no purpose to aspire higher, in calling or
gifts, then God has set men, nor will it prosper; No man can receive, or, take
to himself, but what is given from heaven; he can neither lawfully usurp a
calling, nor think to be blessed in it, if he usurp it, nor can he prosper in
stretching himself beyond his gifts and abilities, or in hunting after
eminency and reputation by them.

Verse 28. Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ,
but that I am sent before him.
He remits them to his former doctrine, chap. 1.20. and attests their own
consciences, if he had not clearly told them that he was not the Messiah, but
his forerunner. And this is the first, and a great difference betwixt Christ
and him. Whence learn, 1. Faithful Ministers, and especially such as have
eminent gifts, ought so to carry themselves in doctrine and practice; as to
give no occasion to people to esteem more of them then is meet, or to have
emulation and envy; for, so had John put marches betwixt Christ and himself.
2. Let Ministers walk never so circumspectly and wisely, yet people are ready
to debord, and run on such extremities; for, so had John's disciples done,
though clearly warned. 3. Negligent hearing, or forgetting of doctrine
preached, is the ground of much mischief, which might be prevented; for, they
miscarried through not heeding what John had said, as judging that he had
spoken but modestly of himself, or they could not think of a greater,
considering his gifts; or they had forgotten this in their fit. 4. However
people may miscarry with fleshly emulation, yet the testimony of Ministers
sincerity, in walking circumspectly, and laboring to prevent such
exorbitancies, will give ground of peace and comfort; for says he, Ye your
selves bear me witness that I said I am not the Christ. 5. Christ is so far
above all Ministers, that it becomes them to put marches betwixt him and
themselves; And he is so great a King, and there is so much need of preparation
to receive and entertain him, that it is the highest honor of Ministers to be
Ushers to prepare his way; and it is their duty to prepare the way for him, by
stirring up people to receive him, and not to stop the way, by obscuring of
him, or keeping people hanging on them; for, this was John's office and high
honor; I am not th Christ, but am sent before him.

Verse 29. He that has the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly, because of the
bridegroomes voice: This my joy therefore is fulfilled.
John proceeds to a second difference betwixt Christ and himself: Namely,
that Christ is the Bridegroom to whom the Church is to be married, and it is a
great enough honor to him, or any Minister to be employed betwixt him and his
people, to invite them to him, and to see Christ enjoy his own peoples
affection, and them brought to enjoy fellowship with him, by their Ministry;
And this made him instead of envying, to rejoice at the success Christ the
Bridegroom had. This difference and employment, though it was peculiar to John
in some respect, yet may take in all faithful Ministers. Doctrine 1. The
relation betwixt Christ and his people is a relation of marriage, wherein the
supreme, and all-sufficient Lord condescendeth to take lost sinners to himself,
in a sure bond not to be broken for every fault; does make them one with
himself; deigneth them with communication of estates, he taking part in their
wants, and sharing with them in his fullness; and allows them dignities and
entertainment suitable to their state and relation; And on the other hand, his
people are bound to embrace this offer, to acquiesce in him, to be subject unto
him, and give him alone their heart and affections, not prostituting themselves
to any other, nor ought any other to usurp an headship over them, nor urge for
that respect and room that is due to him alone; for, the relation is expressed
under these terms, of bride, and bridegroom who has the bride, and enjoys
her. 2. The relation betwixt Christ and his people is expressed as espousals,
and under the name of Bride and Bridegroom, rather then under the notion of a
complete marriage; Not only because it is begun here; and to be consummate in
heaven; but because, however Christ's affection respects rather his peoples
profit then their humors, yet it is still fresh and tender toward them, as of
persons new married, or in terms of it. 3. Albeit Ministers do not usurp
Christ's place, yet their office, being faithful in their duty, affords them
abundant honor, under the name of the friends of the Bridegroom, an office
which was usual in those times in the solemnities of marriage. Wherein are held
forth, 1. It is their great honor to be accounted and be friends to Christ. 2.
It is also their honor to be friends especially to further the marriage, and
that Christ will be honored by their attendance, and commending and appearing
for him, and by their inviting the Bride to embrace him, and being instrumental
to bring them together, such were the friends of the Bridegroom, his most
especial and intimate friends. 3. It is also their duty to do him honor, by
waiting on him as servants, to receive his directions, and get commissions to
deliver from him, and it is their dignity to stand in so near a relation,
though of servants, for, so is imported in that he stands, as servant and
friend near the Bridegroom. Such service of him is great honor. 4. It is also
their dignity to bring the Bride to hear the Bridegroom, and it will be matter
of their great joy to see the Church brought to acquaintance with Christ by
their Ministry; for, he stands and hears him, and rejoices greatly,
because of the bridegroomes voice, as the friend of the Bridegroom standing in
the Brides chamber, and seeing the parties brought together by his means, and
himself admitted to be a witness of the fruit of his pains. This dignity
faithful Ministers may attain in their own measure, though John had it in a
peculiar way, even in that which his disciples quarrelled; to wit, his seeing
so many of his followers embrace the Messiah in person, whom he had pointed out
unto them Doctrine 4. Faithful Ministers, blessed of God, and denying
themselves, have more complete matter of joy in the Churches thriving, though
with their own abasement, then any they could have by their own advancement, or
usurping what is not due to them; Therefore says John, this my joy is
fulfilled, by seeing people flock to Christ. What is an eyesore to envy, will
be matter of joy to sincerity.

Verse 30. He must increase, but I must decrease.
A third difference betwixt Christ and John, is, that John shining as the
morning star, before him the Sun of righteousness, was to be obscured more and
more by Christ's appearing, and his extraordinary office of preparing the way to
Christ, was to give place to the full manifestation of him and the Gospel,
which was to shine more and more brightly. This is not to be understood of any
real decay in John, but of his decreasing in the estimation of men, and
appearing to be but what he was, when Christ was seen. Whence learn, 1. When
Christ is not known, he will be but little thought of, and not duly
acknowledged; and then others may be too much esteemed; for, so John
insinuates, that Christ was not fully manifested, nor esteemed of as became,
and that himself was but too much esteemed by many; yea, by some to be the
Messiah, through ignorance of Christ. 2. Where Christ manifests himself, and
is truly known, men's estimation of him will be upon the growing hand, as the
light shines more and more unto the perfect day; there being such excellency
in him as cannot at once be comprehended, and the more he is seen, the more
will he be esteemed and accounted excellent; and his kingdom and glory will
still increase; for, he must increase, not in himself, but in manifestation,
and estimation. 3. As the shining of Christ in his glory, will obscure the
excellency of other things; so particularly of Ministers, not in respect of
what they are appointed for of Christ (for so they will come more in request)
but in respect of men's over-weaning conceits. Their light and glory will be
seen to be borrowed from him, as the day star does borrow light from the
Sun; his splendour and light will obscure and swallow up their borrowed light,
as the rising Sun does the day star; their light and shining will be looked
on as subservient to lead men to Christ, and not to be doated or rested on;
for, this (beside what was singular in John's calling, which therefore was to
cease) is imported in this, he must increase, but I must decrease 4. Carnal
envy and emulation will be so far from getting satisfaction, that men who give
way to it, may expect to find more and more occasions of it, and more and more
tentations to it, in Gods holy providence; Therefore John tells his envious
disciples, that they should see him yet less esteemed, and Christ more, he
must increase, but I must decrease. 5. Faithful servants of Christ, whose scope
in their Ministry is to commend and set him out, will be content to be abased
and obscured, providing he be exalted and come in request, and to see the
Master more esteemed, then themselves the servants; therefore, John speaks of
this as a dispensation he was content with.

Verse 31. He that comes from above, is above all: he that is of the earth, is
earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven is above all.
A fourth difference wherein Christ is not only above John, but all men, is
taken from the excellency of his person; In respect of the divine original of
his person, he is above all men, and all creatures. And men whose original is
of the earth, do resemble it, and favor of it in their speech, whereas he not
only in his person, but in that also is above all, as is cleared in the next
verse. Doctrine 1. Christ did not begin to be when he manifested himself on
earth, but h^d his perfect and glorious being before; for, he comes from
above, and consequently was there before. 2. It is Christ's prerogative to be
matchless and singular above all creatures, in glory, excellency, efficacy
of operation, and every perfection. He is above Angels, above principalities
and powers, above Pastors in the visible Church, above all the members in the
mystical body, and all things in the world are under his feet; for he is above
all. 3. It is not possible for created conceptions to take up Christ's
excellency as it is in its self, but must point it out, by setting it above
all created excellency, further then which they cannot follow it; Therefore
does John say no more to it, but he is above all. 4. What ever may be the
perverse or blinded judgments of men, yet in due time, that which is most
eminent before God will carry the pre-eminence even before men, above what they
otherwise doated on; for, so much does this verse, with the former, teach, he
must increase, for he is indeed above all. 5. Christ's excellency is indeed
founded upon real worth, being above all, because his original is divine, and
from heaven; Not only is he incomparable in his descent as God, but in his
humanity, his conception and sanctification of his nature, and the union
thereof with the person of the Son of God, are from above; for, he comes
from above, or, from heaven (as it is in the end of the verse) who is above
all. 6. It pleased this excellent and matchless Lord to stoop so low, as to
commend his love to sinners, by coming unto them, to seek and purchase them and
their affection; for, be comes from above. 7. Albeit Christ, by coming on
earth, did put a veil upon his glory, yet his stooping did derogate nothing
from his sovereignty and highness; for, he that comes from above, is above
all. 8. Man's original is so low and base, and men do so much resemble it, that
it is high presumption to enter in any comparison to Christ; for, in opposition
to what was said of Christ that be comes from above, and is above al, it is
added, he that is of the earth, is earthly, or, of the earth. Not only is man
of the earth in respect of the original of his body, and the union of the soul
with it, and so infinitely inferior to him who is also God over all, and but
dust and ashes before him, Genesis 18.27. But every man is of the earth, in regard
of the corrupt qualities he has by ordinary generation, of which he favors,
save in so far as he is renewed by Christ; and yet that is but imperfect
here, and fa^re beneath the divine condition and state of Christ even as man;
And thus to be earthly, or, of the earth, or world, is to be understood of men's
corrupt estate and condition, John 8.23. James 3.15. See 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.
9. As man in his person is inferior to Christ; so also in his office and
doctrine, his way of it, and his authority in it, is far beneath Christ's;
for, he that is of the earth, speaks of the earth; Whereby we are not to
understand that their doctrine according to the Word, is earthly, or endited by
the wisdom of the flesh, (though indeed they be subject to error;) Nor yet
that their calling and authority to preach it, is from the earth, or men; for
in both these respects John's Baptism and Ministry was from heaven: But, 1. In
respect of men's natural condition, they favor and can speak only of things of
the earth, and what they can do beside that, is by gift. 2. Those who are
enabled and endowed with authority to speak the things of God; Yea, suppose
they be regenerate also; yet their renovation and gifts are so imperfect, that
their way of preaching favors of their original, and puts them far
beneath Christ; and therefore the best have need of touched lips daily, Isa.
6.5, 6, 7. 3. Their authority in preaching is from Christ, and as far
inferior to his, as the earth, or the footstool, from off which (as the word
signifies) they speak, is to heaven, or the throne from which he speaks; and
thus the comparison seems to be instituted, Heb. 12.25. Doctrine 10. It is
our part to dwell much on the thoughts of the excellency and sovereignty of
Christ, and to see it shining in every step of his dispensations toward us;
Therefore it is repeated, he that comes from heaven, is above all, partly to
inculcate this point, and partly, to point him out as excellent in doctrine
above man who speaks of the earth, which is further insisted on in the next
verse. For albeit he stooped to our weakness in speaking heavenly things under
earthly similitudes, verse 12. yet his way and authority even in that, was
altogether heavenly, John 7.46.

Verse 32. And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, and no man
receives his testimony.
A fifth difference betwixt Christ and all men, is taken from his knowledge and
the manner of it, All men of themselves do but speak and favor of the earth,
verse 31. and what they have above this, is of free gift; but Christ in this
also is above all, having the knowledge of that doctrine which he delivers,
by seeing and hearing, that is, by a clear, full, certain and immediate
comprehension of it, as being in the bosom of the Father and upon all his
counsel; whereof men's being eye and ear witnesses of what they speak, is but a
shadow. And yet for all this, John regrateth that so few embrace his doctrine,
of which see verse 11. Whence learn, 1. It is Christ's prerogative to have the
knowledge of divine truths of himself from the Father, and to have all others
who know any thing beholden to his bounty and illumination; for, his doctrine
is, what he has seen and heard, in a way peculiar to him. 2. It sets out the
bounty of Christ, that he does not keep up this knowledge, but discovers it,
that so sinners may have a sure guide and teacher, and the solemn testimony of
an eye and ear witness, on which they may lean; for, what he has seen and
heard, that he testifies. It is called a testifying both in respect of the
certainty of the matter, and in respect of Christ's earnest persuading of men to
embrace it, as testifying seems to import, Acts 18.5. 3. Christ's gracious
condescendence in revealing the counsel of God concerning man's salvation, gets
but ill entertainment in the world; the most part of men either not harkening
to him, or not embracing his offer with respect, affection or faith, for no man
(that is, very few or none in comparison of them who do otherwise, though some
there are verse 33.) receives his testimony: Let them hear it as they will,
yet they do not receive nor embrace it as becomes; and therefore also it is
called a testimony, as witnessing against them, that they receive not so
certain a truth. 4. It ought, and will be matter of regrate to all the friends
and servants of Christ, that his doctrine is so ill received in the world; for,
whereas John's disciples complained, verse 26. that all men came to Christ, he
sees rather cause to complain that no man receives his testimony.

Ver. 33. He that has received his testimony, has set to his seal, that God
is true.
The receiving of the doctrine of the Gospel being the great business, as to
promoving of the salvation of sinners; therefore John insisteth on it, and
aggreageth the sin of unbeleevers, from the great dignity which is put upon
believers; in that they are honored by their faith solemnly to ratify and
bear witness unto the truth of God. Whence learn, 1. How many soever do
reject Christ and his doctrine, yet, he will still prevail with some; for, it
is here imported that there are who receive his testimony 2. Whosoever do
receive Christ and his doctrine, will find that they have to do with a true
God, who cannot lie, nor will disappoint them; for, so is imported that God is
true, and will prove so to such. 3. Faith embracing the doctrine of Christ,
does also glorify God, by subscribing to the truth of his Word, and does, so
far as believers can, ratify the truth of the Word, that others may embrace
it: and so the believer is also honored of God in that his testimony is taken
in so great a matter; for, he that has received his testimony, has set to his
seal, that God is true: See Rom 4.20. Whereas on the contrary, unbeleevers
(beside their own prejudice thereby) do speak blasphemy against God, 1 John
5.10.

Verse 34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives
not the Spirit by measure unto him.
That receivers of Christ's doctrine do seal the veracity of God, is confirmed
from this reason, that he is the sent Angel of the Covenant, and therefore
speaks the mind and truth of God. This is again confirmed from another
ground, that Christ has the Spirit without measure, as for other ends, (of
which in the next verse) so also to reveal the Father and his mind
infallibly, and this also sets forth his excellency above all others. Whence
learn, 1. It is believers duty to study much, and be persuaded, that what is
revealed in the Word, is the mind of God, and that it is his truth which is
sealed by believing, for so much does this confirmation of the former assertion
teach, that they seal that God is true, because what Christ propounds to be
believed, is his Word. 2. As they who are sent of God ought to speak only what
they have in Commission; so sending by God, and speaking of Gods mind, for
inviting sinners to believe, must go together; for, they are conjoined even in
Christ: See Heb. 5.4, 5. 3. Christ is a messenger sent of the Father in a way
peculiar to himself, not only in his coming to the earth, but in the exercise
of a public calling thereupon; being the great Angel and Mediator of the
Covenant, and the chief Prophet of his Church; for, it is he whom God has sent
in a singular way. 4. As Christ's sending, so also his speaking of the mind of
God, is in a way peculiar so himself; Not only is the matter which he
speaks, infallibly the words of God, so that it is all one to have his mind,
and to be upon the Fathers counsel, 1 Cor. 2.16. but (though others may speak
Gods word for matter; and be infallibly guided in doctrine also, yet) he has
this privilege of himself, and his authority in speaking is singular, not
only from God, but being God who speaks, and the man Christ having a more
divine way of uttering the mind of God then any mere man; so much is imported
in that he speaks the words of God. 5. Christ as Mediator is endued with the
Spirit for discharge of his office, and particularly, for revealing the mind
of God; whereby he teaches all who are sent on such an employment, to have
much need, and make much use of such furniture; so much does this reason of
speaking the words of God, import, for God gives the Spirit unto him. 6.
Albeit Christ as man have not an infinite measure of the Spirit, (though indeed
in that person, the fullness of the Godhead dwells, as being God also;) for that
were to be no more man, but God: yet the gifts and graces of the Spirit are
poured out upon the man Christ in a measure far above all creatures, for,
though every believer be complete in him; Coloss. 2.10. yet as for what is
inherent in them. They have but diversity of gifts of the Spirit, 1 Corin.
12.4. etc. Ephesians. 4.7. but he has all sorts of gifts Isa. 11. 2. They, as
members of the body, have but gifts for some and fewer uses, Romans 12.3, 4. He
for all uses, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. They have a measure of gifts, which are capable
of increase, he above measure, so much as the humane nature is capable of,
which though it be finite in it self, yet it cannot be measured nor
comprehended by us: So much is imported in that God gives not the Spirit by
measure to him, being understood of his manhood, so Psalm 45.7. Though (as was
said) if we speak of his person, he has the Spirit infinitely and without
measure, Col. 1.19. and 2.9. This fullness became Christ as man, that he might
be a fit Temple of the Godstead, and as Mediator, that he might be the
universal head of his Church, and storehouse of his people.

Verse 35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his
hand.
A sixth difference, is, that Christ as the beloved Son is the Mediator of his
people, who has them and all things for their use and good, and a Sovereignty
over all things, concredited to him as Mediator. Whence learn, 1. The
excellency of Christ above all other Ambassadors, is, that he is the Son, and
they are but servants: so are we here taught. 2. Christ is the object of the
Fathers love in a peculiar way: as a Son, and not a servant in respect of his
person: and as Mediator, he is pointed out as the beloved Son in whom God will
be found well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. As he who is beloved, and has purchased
love to others because of his death, John 10.17. (so willing was the Father to
be reconciled) as he whose being beloved, answers our being unworthy of love,
and is a pledge of the Fathers love to us, John 17.13. so much is imported in
that the Father loves the Son. 3. In carrying on the Redemption of sinners, as
the matter is accorded betwixt the Father and the Son; so the redeemed are not
left to themselves, but are put on Christ's hand, to purchase and be
forthcoming for them; and all things are concredited to him that may tend to
their good: for, the Father loves the Son, (in the quality of Mediator) and
has given all things into his hand: under which all things we are to
comprehend the elect themselves, who are in stead of all things to him;
together with all the gifts and graces of the Spirit (of which, v. 34) needful
for their Conversion and Salvation, which are not entrusted to our selves, but
to him who can keep us and them, and let them out as we need: and a dominion
over all things that may contribute to help or hinder his peoples happiness,
that he may order them so as may be for their good. And this power he has as
God with the Father, and as Man and Mediator, by donation and gift from the
Father, Matthew. 11.27. and 28.18. and thus the believers happiness is firm,
being transacted betwixt such parties, the Father being satisfied in the
Mediator, and they entrusted to him, whose dear purchase they are, and
therefore he will not lose them, who has capacity to receive their furniture
far above what they could hold, power to maintain, wisdom to guide and
dispense their allowance, dominion to curb all enemies and opposition, and a
Commission and Charge to be answerable for them. All which may invite us to be
content that we be nothing, and that we and all our furniture be in his hand.

Verse 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on
him.
The last difference, (and the use to be made of all the excellency of Christ
formerly mentioned) is, that he is to be believed in for attaining of eternal
life, and that without this we perish. Whence learn, 1. It is the prerogative
of Christ above all others, even the choicest messengers of God, that he is the
object of saving Faith, as being the Son of God equal with the Father; for, so
are we taught here, and by this John would quench all carnal emulation in his
followers. 2. The excellency of Christ is ^ever rightly studied nor
acknowledged, till it draw men out of themselves, and discover fullness and
worth in him to be closed with by faith; Therefore does John sum up all this
doctrine concerning Christ, in this Use, That the Son should be believed on. 3.
Such as close with Christ by faith, are not only sure of eternal life at the
close of their days, but they have it here, partly, in the word of Promise,
partly, in Christ who is the fountain of it, and in whose hands it is given,
and partly, in the bud of begun cummunion with Christ, which is an heaven on
earth; for, he that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, where faith
only is held out as the hand to receive this benefit. 4. How excellent soever
Christ be, yet there are still many who will not close with him, nor see any
worth in him, wherefore they should renounce themselves, and flee to him; for,
it is imported there are who believe not the Son. 5. Unbelievers do lie under
the dreadful hazard of the loss of salvation, which only deserves the name of
a life, other living being but a death without it. While they do not believe
they have no right to it, nor b^d of it, and continuing therein, they are
eternally secluded from it, without so much as a sight thereof, save so much at
the last day, as shall add to their torment in hell; for, he that believes
not the Son shall not see life. 6. Unbelievers are not only secluded from
heaven, but are under wrath, which is sad and in^upportable, as being the wrath
of God: this wrath under which the unbeliever is by nature, by reason of the
sentence of the Law, rests upon him in the state of infidelity, till he has
filled up his measure, and be ripened for hell, and then he lies eternally
under wrath; for, he shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him;
and by all these considerations would John press his heaters, to flee from the
danger, by believing,

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter we have; First, Christ's removal from Judea into Galilee, to v.
4. Next, what occurred by the way at Sychar, to v. 43. Lastly, his
entertainment, and what he did in Galilee, to the end.

Verse 1. WHen therefore the Lord knew, how the Pharisees had heard, that Jesus
made and baptized more disciples then John.

2. (Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples.)

3. He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee.


The occasion of Christ's removal was, that the Pharisees began to take notice
of his gathering and baptizing more disciples then ever John did (though indeed
he baptized none, but by his disciples) and Christ knowing of this, and what
they were hatching upon it, did decline their fury, and went again into
Galilee, where he had been before, chap. 1, 2. Whence learn, 1. The messengers
of the Gospel, getting success, may look to meet with envy and malice from
Satan and his instruments, and especially from corrupt Churchmen; for, the
Pharisees heard how Jesus made and baptized disciples, they heard it with an
hostile mind, and with a purpose to do him hurt, which therefore made Christ
to withdraw. 2. The more that men study to bear down truth, and the work of
the Gospel, the Lord can make it to flourish the more; and though one
instrument be laid aside, yet he can raise up another, in whose hands it will
prosper yet more; for they who bear down the work in John's hand (who, as some
think, was now in prison) find it rising more in Christ's; he made and baptized
more disciples then John, which seems to relate to that, chap. 3.26. 3. As it
is an evidence of a wicked disposition to have hatred against Christ and his
Ministry, upon the very report of it; so it is a judgment on these who will
not themselves come to hear and see, that his way and his servants be so
represented to them by others, as may stir up their corruptions, and set them
on edge to persecute; for, the Pharisees but heard all this, that set them on
edge, and that (as appears) by no friends to Christ. 4. Albeit the people of
God may be in a very secure condition when persecution comes, and God may send
persecution of purpose to stir them up; yet persecution is an evidence of so
much fruit and success of a Ministry, as is Satan's eyesore; for, here
persecution is raised against Christ in Judea, because he made and baptized more
disciples then John. 5. Christ observes and knows how every one is affected;
and be men's machinations what they will, yet none will steal a dint on him, but
he will know their projects beforehand, to avoid them if he please; for, the
Lord knew how the Pharisees heard these things, as he might easily do by his
Omniscience. 6. Christ's disrespect from men, diminishes nothing of his true
excellency and worth, nor ought it to obscure it in his peoples hearts; for,
when the Jews are about this, John calls him the Lord, which is a name of
majesty and dominion. 7. The preaching of the Gospel is the great and principal
work of the Ministry, whereof administration of Sacraments is an accessory; and
Christ would not have men to judge of the efficacy of Baptism, as depending
on the Minister; and would have all to put a difference betwixt the outward
seal, which any instrument authorized thereto, may administrate, and the thing
signified, for which he alone must be depended upon; for these reasons, and to
teach this it was, that Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples; which is
added by way of correction to the report: he betook himself to preaching as
the great work, 1 Cor. 1.17. He taught his followers to look on baptism
administrated by his disciples in his Name, to be as sufficient as if he had
administrated it himself; and by baptizing none at all, he kept that distance
clear betwixt the Ministers and his part in that Ordinance. 8. It is lawful for
Ministers to withdraw themselves from the plots of persecutors, when their
calling is cleared so to do, by the general rules of the Word, relating to such
a case and practice; for, upon this ground, Christ left Judea, and departed
again into Galilee, a more obscure place, and more remote from the Pharisees
power. 9. No pretense of confidence ought to slacken men's diligence, in the use
of lawful means for their own preservation, for albeit Christ knew his hour
was not yet come, yet he used means, and withdrew. 10. Albeit Christ might
either have prevented or repressed his enemies fury by his Omnipotency; yet he
choosed rather to let it break forth, and used this mean of his own
preservation; that he might fight with the weapons of his weak followers, and,
in his own person sanctify these means, of retiring and sleeing in hard times,
unto them; therefore, he who might have stayed in Judea, and driven the
Pharisees out, chooses rather to leave Judea, and depart into Galilee.

Verse 4. And he must needs go through Samaria.

5. Then comes he to a City of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the
parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

6. Now Jacobs well was there: Jesus therefore being wearied with his journey,
sat thus on the well, and it was about the sixth hour.


In the second part of the chapter John records what was Christ's carriage and
success in his way to Galilee, in bringing in some first fruits of the
Gentiles, and of these without the Jewish Church; and first, he records his
conference with the woman of Samaria, in his disciples absence, to v. 27. Next,
their return, her going to the City to bring out the people, and his
conference with the disciples in her absence, to v. 39. Thirdly, the conversion
of some more of that city, to v. 43.

Unto this conference with the woman, some occasions are permitted. As, 1. That
his straight way from Judea to Galilee, lay through (not the City, but) the
Country of Samaria, and therefore he came there, v. 4. 2. That coming unto
Sychar, a City of the territory of Samaria, where Jacobs Well was, he was so
wearied with his journey, and the heat at noon, (which was their sixth hour)
that he rested upon or beside the Well, while his disciples provided meat, v.
5, 6. and so Providence set the tryst with her who was coming. This Sychar is
the same with that place of Jacobs abode, Genesis 33.18, 19. called there Shechem;
and this description of it here mentioned, relates to that, Genesis 48.22. the
interpretation whereof I remit to its proper place. Doct. 1. When persecutors
have done their worst, neither Christ nor his followers will want work or
success, so long as the Lord pleases; for, Christ driven from Judea, finds
both in Samaria. 2. As persecution and exile should not put Christ's servants
from minding their calling; and as they should employ the very time of their
journey in seeking to do good; so a very short time, through Gods blessing, may
produce great effects; for, so does Christ's practice and success, while he is
on his journey, teach us. 3. In every step of men's way, they should study to
have a clear calling, especially for doing those things whereat others are apt
to stumble and take offense; therefore, Christ, however his love put a
necessity upon him to visit these wandering sheep, and he did not stand to go to
an hateful place to seek them; yet being the Minister of Circumcision, Romans
15.8. and having forbidden his disciples to go to the Samaritanes, Matthew. 10.5.
he will have his journey thither freed of obloquie, by the necessity of his
going that way, from Judea to Galilee, be must needs go through Samaria, as
being his straight way, as appears, Luke 9.51, 52. and 17.11. and is clear to
them who know the situation of that country. 4. A lawful and necessary
calling, makes converse lawful with those, with whom otherwise it were not
justifiable; for, therefore he went through Samaria, and that warrantably,
since it was the straight way to Galilee. 5. Piety and faith in God have a
sweet savor and smell, above any excellency that men can hunt after beside;
therefore, is this place so eminent, even in Christ's time, by reason of Jacobs
abode, who worshipped God there, Genesis 33.9, 20. And because of his faith in
giving that land to his children when they were sojourners in Egypt. 6. Christ
took on, not only our nature, but the common infirmities thereof; and he is to
be as seriously eyed as emptied in his humanity, as in the glory of his
Godhead, for the comfort of sensible sinners who come to such an High Priest:
therefore, it is recorded that he was wearied with his journey, ere half the
day was spent: and that through weariness, he sat thus on (or, beside) the
Well, that is, even as the seat offered, or as wearied men use to sit.

Verse 7. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus says unto her,
Give me to drink.

8. For his disciples were gone away unto the City to buy meat.

9. Then says the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me which am a woman of Samaria? For the Jews have no dealing
with the Samaritanes.


The third and nearest occasion of this conference, is, that while he was
sitting there, a woman of Samaria, (originally of that country, it seems of
the town of Sychar) comes to draw water, upon which follows the conference;
wherein he leads her from one thing to another, till she come to know him to be
the Messiah.

It may be summed up in this order, 1. Christ seeking a drink in his disciples
absence, v. 7, 8. gets a tart answer, v. 9. 2. He discovering how much she
mistook him, and that he had better water to give her, then she would offer
him, v. 10 she reasons against this his offer, v. 11, 12. 3. Christ pointing
out yet further the excellency of what he offered, v. 13, 14. does beget but a
natural desire in her after it, v. 15. 4. Christ not prevailing by his offers,
does discover her misery to her, and that he knew her lewdness, v. 16, 17, 18.
5. The woman upon this, taking him to be a Prophet, v. 19. propounded the
controversy betwixt the Jews and the Samaritanes, concerning the place of
public worship, v. 20. and gets a full resolution to it, v. 21, 22, 23, 24. 6.
The woman upon this discourse, bringing to remembrance the Messiah who was to
come, is brought to know that Christ was he, v. 25, 26.

In the first discourse betwixt them (in these verses,) Christ seeking drink,
both to quench his thirst, and that thereby he might take occasion to confer
with her; she casts up the dissensions betwixt the Samaritanes and Jews,
tartly checking him, that in his need he would now make use of her; Here John
inserts, that the disciples, (who, it seems, were not so many as afterward)
were gone to buy provision, as a reason why she found Christ alone, and why he
employed her and not them to get drink. As for this great distance betwixt the
Jews and the Samaritanes, it began first at the defection of the ten tribes
from (...) Temple at Jerusalem, and from the (...) Davi^ and did increase,
partly, when (...) N^^^^s, with some few Israelites, did pos^e^^^ that land
which had been given to Israel the brethren of the Jews, and did invent a
mungrel way of Religion, 2 Kings 17. partly, by reason of many injuries done to
the Jews by these Samaritanes; who, however they boasted to be descended of
Jacoh, when the Jews were in any good condition, (as appears in part from v.
12.) yet they were their bitter enemies in their adversity, as appears from
Ezra, Nehemiah, and the histories of those times; And chiefly, this difference
was heightened, when the Samaritanes with some Apostate Jews, built a Temple
in Mount Gerizim, in opposition to that at Jerusalem, and so that country
became a shelter of all Apostate Jews. Doct. 1. Providence may be intending
much mercy to those who are unworthy of it, and are little minding it; for,
this woman of Samaria, who was a vile woman, v. 18. comes to draw water, and
minds no other thing, and yet Providence made her to tryst with the Savior
of sinners; and with him, when he was actually under the feeling of our
infirmities, being weary and thirsty, and so a meet Lord to deal with such an
insensible woman. 2. It is no strange thing to see Christ and his followers
much straitened in outward things: to see them need a drink of water, and have
scarce any willing to supply them, and to have their dinner to seek at dinner
time; for, this has our humbled Lord sanctified to his followers in his own
person; and by this his want he has recovered their right to outward benefits,
which was forfeited in Adam. 3. Albeit Christ humbled himself, and became poor,
that through his poverty we might become rich; yet has he also left an example
to his meanest followers, of studying an honest way of living, and providing
for their subsistence, and not by scandalous beggary, or being burdensome; for,
he sent his disciples to buy meat. 4. There may be somewhat betwixt Christ, and
those he will do good unto, that it were not meet that even disciples should
know of it; therefore, among other causes, the disciples were gone away unto
the City, that they might not be witnesses to Christ's ripping up of her
shameful fault in this conference; nor to her miscarriages in her discourses
with him. 5. It is a commendable practice in men to be constant in their habit
and fashions, and not affect novelty in these; for, herein Christ has cast a
copy, being known at first to be a Jew, by his habit and language. 6. It needs
not seem strange, if Christ or his people, not only want and get no supply, but
be mocked and insulted over in their necessities, by those who may help them;
for, Christ being thirsty, gets a taunt instead of a drink. See, John 19.28,
29. with Psalm. 69.21, 7. Contentions about Religion are ordinarily very hot,
and draw not only to alienation of affections, but even to the breaking the
b^^ds of civil society and converse: for, so was it here the Jews had no
dealings with the Samaritanes. 8. It is an evidence of a malicious heart to
insult over the miseries of any, and to take advantage of the misery of those
they hate, to do them all the spite they can: for, so much does her taunt
impo^t, How is it, that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am a woman
of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritanes. As if she had
said, ye regard us not at other times, but now when ye need, ye seek to us, and
therefore I will not answer you. 9. Self-love is so deeply rooted in every one,
that even the basest cannot endure to be despised: for, the ground of her
quarrel is, that they were contemned by the Jews, the Jews have no dealings
with the Samaritanes. 10. Christ is a Lord who will not stand on any
impediment, but will come over them all, to reconcile sinners to himself; for,
he keeps no such distance with Samaritanes, nor with a lewd woman among them,
and counts it his glory to take so wild a creature.

Verse 10. Jesus answered, and said unto her, If thou knew the gift of God,
and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water.
In Christ's second speech to her, he lets her see how much she mistook her own
mercy: for, if she had known him, she would not only not have refused his
request, but would have turned a Supplicant to him, and he would have given her
better and living water: whereby we are to understand the Spirit of God, and
the graces of the Spirit acted by him, as chap. 7.38, 39. Doct. 1. Christ's
meekness passes over much frowardness, which he finds in his own in the
time of their Conversion, and by his goodness he overcomes their ill; for, so
much does this reply to the woman, teach. 2. Ignorance of Christ, and what he
has, and is ready to give, is a great ground of sinners miscarriage toward
him: for, Christ finds this want here, If thou knew, etc. 3. Christ is
then known rightly and savingly, when he and all that he has are looked on as
free gifted to the world by the Father, (as well as by himself) and made
theirs by offer to be embraced in the due order; for, therefore is he named,
the gift of God, as is expounded in the following words. 4. Christ being
rightly known, it will add to his commendation in a sensible heart, that he is
at the pains to come unto them, and prevent them with offers of himself: and
especially, that he stooped so low as to take on their infirmities; therefore,
also it is added as a ravishing consideration, If thou knew who it is that
says unto thee, Give me to drink, or, that the Messiah, compassed with
infirmities, should be at her hand. 5. When Christ is rightly known, as offered
to the world for the salvation of lost man, it will beget a thirst after him,
and put souls to seek the supply thereof by prayer, and that they cannot stay
away from him: and they will see him seeking sinners, rather to give to them,
then to receive of them: for, if thou knew, thou would have asked of him,
rather then have refused him a drink of water. 6. Christ has better things to
give sinners, then any thing he can ask of them, or they can offer him: and
particularly, the well of life is in Christ's hand to dispense it as he will:
for, in stead of her water, he has living water to give her. 7. Christ, who
makes offer of grace before we seek it, will not refuse it to them who ask it;
nor will former sins hinder their acceptance who come to seek grace; for,
even to this wicked woman he says, Thou would have asked, and he would have
given thee living water. 8 The grace of Christ, communicated by the Spirit, is
compared to water, not only that he might allude to her water, but to point out
its cleansing and fructifying virtue, and that it will quench the thirst of a
burnt up soul: and it is compared to living water, etc. springing, as Genesis
26.19. because it has an enlivening, quickening virtue, and because of its
constant endurance unto eternal life, as it is, ver. 14.

Verse 11. The woman says unto him, Sir, thou have nothing to draw with, and
the well is deep: from whence then have thou that living water?

12. Art thou greater then our father Jacob which gave us the well, and drank
thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle.


The woman in her reply reasons against Christ's offer, alleging that this
water was either to be given out of that well, and that could not be, seeing
the well was deep, and he had nothing to draw with, or out of a better well,
and that was to prefer himself to Jacob, who himself and all his family was
content with the water of this well, and left it to them. Whence learn, 1. It
is the property of natural men to take up spiritual things in a carnal way, and
they are not able to discern grace till they have it; for, so does this woman
understand Christ, as if he were speaking of elementary water. Sir, (says she,
in civil courtesy) whence have thou that water? 2. We are also naturally
enemies to our own good, and prone to dispute against our own happiness, that
we may deceive our selves; so far are we from preparations in our selves to
Conversion; for, she reasons against this living water, as, in her judgment
impossible to be had or given. 3. We are also naturally so addicted to our own
carnal sense, that we will believe nothing revealed by Christ, further then we
can see a reason or outward appearance for it; for, she judged it impossible he
could have living water, seeing he could not draw it out of that well, nor
could show a better. 4. A chief deceiving principle, making men enemies unto,
and careless of truth and grace, is their pretense of antiquity and succession
unto it, and their descent from religious Progenitors; for, she boasted Jacob
was their father, who gave the well, and therefore slighted the offer of a
better, as being well enough in her own conceit. 5. None are so ready to boast
of antiquity, and of interest in pious Progenitors, as they who have least
cause so to do; for, says she, our father Jacob gave us the well, and drank
thereof himself, etc. and yet they were but heathens who had come in the room
of Jacobs children, who had forfeited their right; and however, they were far
from Jacobs spirit, who would satisfy their soul with that which only
supplied his bodily necessity, and served his cattle as well as him. 6. It is
a notable injury done unto Christ, to plead any antiquity or succession to it,
in prejudice of him or his truth, or to cry up any above him; for it was her
fault to cry up Jacob, and her interest in him, that she might fleight him and
his offer; Art thou greater then our father Jacob, etc? 7. Sobriety and a
simple way of living, albeit it may be found among Pagans, yet, it is a notable
ornament to grace in the godly: when nature, which is content with little, is
not overcharged with creatures, to the dishonor of God, abuse of the
creatures, and prejudice of men's better estate: and when men by their carriage
declare, that their bodies and flesh is not their best part, which they care
most for; so much does Jacobs practice, contenting himself to drink of this
well, with his children and cattle, teach us.

Verse 13. Jesus answered, and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this water,
shall thirst again.

14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life.


Christ, in his third speech to this woman, does not carp at her contradicting
and carnal humor, but points out the excellency of his offer, above what she
gloried in, from the effects of both; The water she spoke so much of (as all
other outward contentments) could not give any abiding satisfaction, even to
the body, but his living water should have enduring and lively effects and
satisfaction, till it were completed in glory. Whence learn, 1. A great cause
of men's despising of spiritual things, is their ignorance of them, and of their
excellency and worth; therefore Christ takes so much pains to clear this. 2.
A special mean helping to point out the worth of spiritual things, is to
compare them with earthly things, and take up the superexcellent worth that is
in the one above the other; for, thus does Christ commend this living water. 3.
Whatever pains men take to follow after, or drink up outward contentments, yet
they will find no abiding satisfaction therein, and will sooner drink them
dry, then quench their own thirst; for, what is said of this water, is true of
all things of the same kind. 4. The Lord has so ordered it, that men's outward
necessities should recurre often upon them, after the use of means, that so
they may be humbled, and made to depend constantly on Providence, and to seek
better things, yet with the thankful use of what they have. And in particular,
God has put men to much trouble to uphold a cottage of clay, and has framed
it so, as to need constant new supplies, that we may mind our mortality daily:
so much does this dispensation of Providence point out, Whosoever drinks of
this water shall thirst again. 5. The water of life, albeit Christ did purchase
it, yet, it must be his free gift to us, who cannot buy it; and his offer
includes a promise of giving it to every one who will receive it in the due
order, and that indifferently, without respect of persons: for, so much is
imported in that he calls it, the water that I shall give him: he says not,
I can give, but I shall give him, to wit, if he will receive my offer, and that
indefinitely, whosoever he be. 6. Who so partakes of the true grace of God, it
will so refresh and satisfy him, as to quench his thirst after vanity and
earthly delights, and make them tastlesse, and to give him contentment in the
want of all things; so much is imported, in part, in this promise, Whosoever
drinks of this water shall never thirst. 7. Albeit such as enjoy the grace of
God in part, will still need and desire more of it, and feed in part on hunger
and thirst, while they are within time, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. Matthew. 5.6. yet they
shall never fall again under a deadly thirst of total want of this water, a
seed still remaining in them; and their mouth being still at the well, they are
rather quenching thirst, then thirsty, and when they have gotten their full
draught at the end of their race, they are satisfied, and never thirst any
more; for, so much also is included in this promise, he shall never thirst. 8.
Whosoever receive the true grace of Christ in any measure, get also the Spirit
of Christ as the fountain, to make grace thus enduring in it self, and its
effects: for, the water shall be in him a well of water. 9. The Spirit and
grace of Christ in believers, is not a stream or a pond that may run dry, but a
well, and springing well, of inexhaustible fullness, virtue and refreshment;
nor is it such a well, which may rot and make water ill tasted, but it is a
springing well, still fresh, and where the Spirit is entertained, formality
will be a stranger; nor is it only a spring to abide within its banks, but a
well of water, springing up, or leaping up, and watering all about: The Spirit
and grace of Christ flows out in all the carriage of men who receive the
same, making them fruitful, and never to have done with duties, (but the more
they do, still the more before their hand) and active and vigorous in them, as
a well boiling up. It flows out also upon others, unto their good and
edification, according to the station and vocation wherein God has placed
them. 10. As the truly godly have no tearme-day of Religion but eternity, and
their desire is to keep fresh till the end; so where the Spirit of Christ is,
he will still be venting of his virtue and riches from day to day, and letting
out more and more to the sinner till eternity come, wherein all the banks of
incapacity, sin, distance, ignorance, mortality, etc. being broken down, and
the windows of heaven being opened, this stream and well becomes an Ocean,
and grace, smothered here under corruption and infirmity, gets leave to
expatiate it self in glory; for, It shall be a well of water springing up into
everlasting life.

Verse 15. The woman says unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst
not, nor come hither to draw.
The woman in her reply, expresses a desire to have this water for her own
ends. Whence learn, 1. The bars of ignorance and naughtiness even in the
elect, hindering them from Christ, are not easily broken; for, so much
appears in this woman's answer. Whether we understand her to speak by way of
derision, or rather, that Christ's spiritual preaching did discover some
excellency in these things to her, (as it may fall out even in natural
minds;) yet she took them up but in a natural way, and accordingly her desire
is but carnal. 2. Even nature may have a loathing at these outward infirmities
that follow sin, and yet will not be affected with spiritual wants, without
renovation; and such may have a desire to be happy and free of these troubles,
when yet they seek this happiness under the Sun, and oft-times in that which
proves their greatest misery; for, she desires to be rid of thirst, and of
pains in seeking water. 3. It is the great fault of many, that they would be
content of as much of Christ as may serve their base ends, and no more; and
particularly, it is but a natural and carnal desire after spiritual things,
when they are sought for supply of natural imperfections and wants, and for the
accomplishment of natural imagined happiness; for, such was her desire, Give
me this water that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.

Verse 16. Jesus says unto her, Go call thy husband, and come hither.

17. The woman answered, and said, I have no husband: Jesus said unto her, Thou
have well said, I have no husband.

18. For thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thy
husband, in that saidest thou truly.


At this fourth speech we may begin the second part of the conference, wherein
Christ having prevailed, so little by his offer and commendation of free grace,
does now discover her misery unto her, whereby she is at length, and by
degrees brought to know him. Therefore he bids her go call her husband, and
bring him with her, and she denying she had any, he commends her ingenuity, and
lets her see that he knew her lewdness. Whence learn, 1. As grace is little
known or esteemed of, so long as we know not our misery, so where the offer of
mercy does not persuade, Christ will discover their misery to his own, to make
them either come quickly to him, or else resolve on hell; for, therefore after
the former offers had no success, does he rip up her bosom. 2. Christ is very
meek and tender, even in discovering of misery to men, so long as they are not
incorrigible, and is willing that they should judge and accuse themselves, that
he may deal tenderly with them; therefore does he so mildly bid her, Go call
thy husband, that he might draw a confession out of her own mouth, 3. It is not
every sin whereof natural men are guilty, for which they can at first be
capable of conviction; for, every sin will not be odious to every one in every
condition, but there are some sins which only grace, and much grace, and
grace in exercise will see to be sinful: therefore, though she was guilty of
many other sins, yet Christ pitcheth only on this sin of gross filthiness, as
that which would be seen best by her. 4. It is not every ^ight of sin that will
convince the sinner, but Christ must put it home upon the conscience, and
discover sin to be marked by his all-searching eye, before it work upon him;
for, she knew her own condition, (and therefore says, I have no husband, as
shifting the matter whereof she supposed him to be ignorant,) but without any
sense, till he rip up her bosom, and let her see he knew her. 5. Christ will
commend a small good under much dross; and particularly, he accounts of a true
acknowledgement, even of an heinous crime, as a commendable duty. Therefore
does he make so much of her confession, Thou have well said, thou saidest
truly. 6 Christ has particular knowledge of what sins men are lying in, how
hid soever; and particularly, he has an eye upon secret uncleanness; and how
loath soever sinners be to be discovered by Christ, yet where he pleases, and
has a purpose of mercy, no shiftings will hide them; so much does this large
discovery after her shifting confession, teach, Thou have had five husbands,
and he whom thou have, is not thy husband, 7. Such is the pollution of our
nature, that lust will be insatiable, unless grace curb it; so much appears
in this woman, who after so many marriages does live in uncleanness.

Ver. 19. The woman says unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet.

20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is
the place where men ought to worship.


The effect of this discovery is, that the woman is brought to acknowledge him
for a Prophet, and thereupon propounds to him the great question concerning the
place of public worship, betwixt the Samaritanes and the Jews; the one
pretending that Mount Gerizim was the place, where Sanballat, by permission of
Alexander the great, had built a Temple for Manasseh his son-in-law, who for
that marriage with his daughter, was put from the Priesthood at Jerusalem; and
the other pleading for Jerusalem as the place. As all Israel were enjoined to
worship in the place which God should choose for them, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. So the
Jews had particular and clear warrant, that after the rejection of Shiloh,
Jerusalem was the place, 1 King. 8.29. and 14.21. 2 Kings 21.4. Psalm. 78.67,
68, 69. and 132.13, 14. But the Samaritanes, who rejected all Scripture, but
Moses writings, regarded not this, and alleged, that the place they worshipped
on, was the mountain of blessing, Deuteronomy. 11.29. and that their Progenitors had
worshipped there of old, Genesis 33.18, 20. for it was near to Shechem. Doct. 1.
Christ's discovering of sin, and making the sinner to be touched with it, breeds
more respect and estimation of him; for, now she thinks more of him then
formerly. 2. The work of illumination in the elect, may have weak beginnings at
the first, and very apparent high thoughts of Christ, may come far short of his
worth: for, in her to perceive him a Prophet, was very much, yet far beneath
what he was, and what she knew him after to be; for, however Christ was indeed
a Prophet in a superexcellent manner, yet she as yet saw nothing in him above
ordinary Prophets. 3. The Lord may see it fit to awaken and convert a great
sinner very gently at first; that so he may show his abundant tender mercy,
that they may not be deterred from closing with him; and particularly, that
such as live at a great distance from ordinances, and the society of Gods
people, may not be overcharged with difficulties which they cannot there alone
get through; so much appears in his dealing with this woman of Samaria, a
stranger. 4 The Lord in his holy Providence has so ordered, as there will be
controversies about the way of truth and his worship, that the godly may be
stirred up to study and embrace the truth more affectionately, and that he may
have a ready plague of strong delusions and lies, for them who receive not the
truth in love; so much may we gather from this controversy betwixt the Jews
and the Samaritanes. 5. It is a necessary and commendable duty in such as
profess the true God, not to be ignorant of the matters of Religion, nor of
the controversies that fall out about it; for, even this profane Samaritane
had knowledge of this controversy, and of the grounds they had for it, yea,
she knew the Messiah was to come, v. 25. 6. A wakened conscience will be
careful to lay the groundwork of Religion sure, and men being serious about
getting of heaven, they will be diligent to know the right way, and for this
end will omit no occasion of getting light; so much may be gathered from the
practice, that taking him for a Prophet, she propounds that grand question unto
him, to get resolution, rather then to think she started that national
difference, to shift any discourse about her own vileness. 7. A wakened
conscience is always so jealous of it self, and its way in matters of
controversy, as to omit no mean of information; and such as embrace
superstition and a false way of Religion can never be established, nor have
sound peace, as they will find when the conscience is put to it; therefore the
first scruple that presents it self, is this question concerning their way of
worship. 8. It is no new thing to see Antiquity opposed to Christ's own express
Ordinances: And Antiquity, and the practice of some, is a crooked rule to
follow, when it contradicts the current of the Scriptures; yea, and of the
practice of such as are commended therein; such was the Samaritanes pretenses;
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, etc. when yet God had appointed
another place, and the godly in their times frequented it.

Verse 21. Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.
Christ, in discussing of this question, answers in two assertions; first,
that both these ways of worship were to give place to a better: For, the time
was approaching, (at his death, and the honorable burial of the ceremonies,)
that the public and lawful worship of God should not be astricted to any
certain place, and so the Samaritane worship, because unlawful, and the Jewish
way because temporary, should be abolished, and that partition wall be broken
down. Whence learn, 1. It is great wisdom in discovering of errors and
false-wayes, so to point them out, as those who are misled, be brought from
them, not to another way not much better, but to the right way indeed;
Therefore, Christ takes pains, in the first place, not only to draw her off
Samaritanisme, but from the Jewish way also which was to be abolished, to
Christianity. 2. There was a time wherein it was lawful and ordained that the
public worship of God should be at one certain place, to wit, at Jerusalem,
and that under shadows they should find out Christ; for, while he says, the
hour comes, wherein it shall not be so, he implies that before it was so, and
that lawfully. 3. God may lawfully change the way of his worship when he
pleases, seeing any thing is therefore worship and lawful in it, only because
he appoints it; Therefore does Christ foretell the Lords changing of the Jewish
way of worship. 4. After Christ coming and death, the public worship of God is
no more ascribed to any certain place, or Nation, nor to be performed in types
and shadows, so much does this assertion teach us, the hour comes, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship, compared with verse
23. See 1 Timothy 2.8. Otherwise it was lawful to have Gospel worship at
Jerusalem, as the Apostles had, but not there more then in another place; And
many Jews were Christians, and worshippers of God, though not they and their
Proselytes only. This partition wall began to be abolished by Christ's doctrine
in his Ministry, and was quite abolished of right, by his death, though the
Jews had an indulgence for their way, till the honorable burial of the
ceremonies in the destruction of the Temple, which was the public place where
the most of these ceremonies, and the most solemn of them, were acted and gone
about; and were thereunto astricted by divine institution. 5. True worship, as
it must have Gods command, so it must be performed to him as a Father,
apprehended to be so through Christ, and must flow from a silial affection;
Therefore, it is called a worshipping the Father, importing that interest and
affection which worshippers do (at least) pretend unto. 6. Such is the power of
Christ accompanying Gospel dispensations, as will not only discover the ill of
contrary ways, but actually make them give place thereunto; for, so much are
we taught, in that Christ assures, not only that we should not, but shall not,
so worship, and thus have we seen it accomplished. 7. Men are ordinarily so
rooted in their opinions and errors which they have drunk in, that it is very
hard to drive them from them; Therefore, must Christ press this, woman believe
me. 8. As the way of salvation must be taken up by faith, and not by sense or
reason; so Christ is worthy to be believed, and his word is a warrant
sufficient for faith, how little soever he be credited; for, says he, woman
believe me. 9. Christ not only reveals ground sufficient for our faith, but
such is his tenderness and respect to our weall, that he will even entreat for
credence at our hands, and be our supplicant that we would discharge our duty,
for our own good; Therefore does he entreat, woman believe me.

Verse 22. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation
is of the Jews.
In the second assertion, Christ speaks to her question more distinctly; and
left from what he had said of the abolishing of both for the time to come, and
of their giving place to that spiritual worship, she should gather that they
were both in themselves (at least) equal; Therefore he here speaks of both
these ways, being compared each with other, and in respect of their use till
that fullness of time should come; and in this respect he condemns the
Samaritan worship, as being an ignorant way, and wanting warrant of the word,
and prefers the Jews, as having clear ground for their worship, and it
being pointed out in the Scriptures as the way to heaven and salvation; The
Savior also being to come of them, and the doctrine of salvation, which was
among them, being to go out from them into all the world; according to the
Prophecy, Isa. 2.3. Whence learn, 1. No good intentions, no zeal, or pretense
whatsoever, can justify any thing in Gods worship which has not sure warrant
of the Word, and is not gone about in the knowledge and faith thereof; So much
is included in this reproof of the Samaritans, and commendation of the Jews,
Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship. To transgress this rule,
and to take in any device of men in Gods worship, does in so far make the
true God an Idol, as to imagine him to be such a one as will accept of such
false worship. 2. Christ, as he took on the form of a servant, is content to
rank himself with the true Church as a member, to teach all to esteem highly
of such a society; We, says he, know what we worship. 3. Not only is worship
devised by men not warrantable, but it is not the way to heaven, seeing there
can be no salvation but in Gods institute way; And the case of these who follow
devised worship, is so much the more dangerous if they want also the doctrine
of salvation, in matters of faith and manners; Both these are included in this
reason, for, salvation is of the Jews, that salvation was to be found in that
Church, their way of worship being appointed and approven of God, and the
saving doctrine and oracles of God concerning faith, worship and manners being
also committed to them, and among them. 4. It was the special privilege of the
Jews, and a testimony of Gods approving of them as his Church, that the
Savior of sinners was to come of them, and the doctrine of salvation pointing
him out, to sound from among them in all the earth; so much also does this
reasoning import, as has been explained.

Verse 23. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit, and in truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him.

24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in truth.


Christ returns to enlarge and explain his first assertion, and shows what
is to come in place of the Jewish worship to be abolished; to wit, that the
time was even at hand, wherein not only there should be no distinction of
place or Nations, in the matter of worship, but in place of carnal and typical
worship, performed by the Jews in one place, all true worshippers in every
place, should worship in spirit, and truth; For which he gives two reasons,
first, that God requires such worship; secondly, that this is most agreeable
and pleasing to his spiritual nature. As for these two properties of worship,
in spirit and truth, they must be taken in opposition to the properties of the
former worship, and so they come to one in substance, that in stead of external
ceremonies, which are called carnal, Heb. 7.16. and 9.10. and shadows, Heb.
10.1. the Lord would have a spiritual worship, and the truth of what was
represented by these shadows, as Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.15, 16. And this agrees
well with the reasons subjoyned; for, however the Lord did require, and was
pleased with these external forms, in the infancy of the Church; yet he never
did accept of them, save in so far as they led to this, which is so agreeable
to his nature, and were not rested on by the worshipper, But we may further
extend these properties, not only to the matter of worship, but to the manner
of it also, that the Lord, who is a Spirit, does require that lawful worship
should be performed in spirit, as opposite to a formal way of worship, and in
truth, as opposite to hypocrisy; Not that God did approve of the want of these
before, but that by the removal of these external rites, wherewith worshippers
were much taken up, and which the best saw not clearly enough through, he was
to discover this way more fully, and make them more free to attend it; and by
pouring out of his spirit, he was to work it more generally. Doctr. 1. The
correction and reformation of the worship of God was reserved for the days of
the Gospel; and to be brought about by Christ; Therefore, says he, the hour
comes, and now is, when this change shall be; He says, Now is, either because
it was instantly approaching at his death, or because he was even now beginning
this reformation by his Ministry. 2. They who profess themselves worshippers
of the true God, ought to perform it with humble and affectionate reverence,
and with subjection and submission to him, considering his majesty and their
own vileness; for, so much does the word rendered worshippers import, being a
similitude taken from dogs fawning and casting themselves down at their Masters
feet. 3. Albeit all who profess the true God, and are not avowed Atheists,
will have some sort of worship; yet all of them will not be found true and
approven worshippers, either for matter, or manner; Therefore, are some called,
true worshippers, by way of distinction from others. 4. The true worship of God
under the Gospel does not consist in the external pomp of ceremonies and
observations, but is spiritual, simple and substantial; for, they shall worship
the Father in spirit and truth, not in carnal shadows; which if being Gods own
Ordinance, yet did take up worshippers so, (through their own weakness,) as
oft-times to keep them from minding this spiritual worship: how much more may
it be expected, that the more external pomp there be of men's devising, there
will be the less spiritual truth? 5. It is not sufficient to make an approven
worshipper, that they do not multiply rites and ceremonies, but their worship
must be chiefly inward, flowing from grace engaging the heart in Gods service,
and from the breathing and influence of the spirit; not resting on an external
form of lawful worship, or any bodily exercise about it; So much also are we
taught from this, that worship must be spirit, or spiritual for the manner of
performance, as well as for its nature in it self. 6. God requires also in a
worshipper, that, with avoiding of formality, which is but a deceitful
hypocritical show of worship, he studies sincerity and straightness of heart,
not dealing negligently, or for by-ends in Gods service; for, worship must be
in truth. 7 It is the Lords will and appointment alone that can give a being to
true worship, and to this must all our reasonings about this matter be subject;
And therefore his enjoining of spiritual, substantial and sincere worship
should commend it to his people; So much does the subjoyning of this reason,
for the Father seeks such to worship him, teach. 8. All the true worship that
God gets, is of his own seeking and procuring, and having wrought it, he takes
pleasure in it: So much also may his seeking such import, that he sent Christ
to make a conquest of spiritual worshippers, and seeks such, as being these
he delights in. 9. God in his nature is a most pure and simple substance,
free of all mixture and composition, and infinite in perfections; and he is to
be conceived of spiritually, avoiding all carnal and gross conceptions; for,
so much are we taught, God is a Spirit, infinitely above Angels or spirits of
men, who yer are the most simple, pure, and perfect of creatures. 10. The right
way of worshipping of God is, when men study to do that which is most agreeable
to his nature, which is most pleasing unto him; And men who know him, cannot
but see that it is not carnal and outward performances that please him, but
that which is performed in inward sincerity and real substance; for, so much
does this second reason, confirming the former, teach, God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

Verse 25. The woman says unto him, I know that Messiah comes, which is
called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

26. Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto thee, am he.


By this discourse concerning the change of Religion, the woman is brought to
remember of the Messiah's coming, for the full clearing of all doubts, to whom,
as appears she remits the controversy; and Christ does assure her that he is
the same person. Whence learn, 1. Some knowledge of the mysteries of Religion
may be found among those who otherwise are very far ost; whereby the Lord would
condemn all those, who being in a nearer relation, do yet remain grossly
ignorant, and all those who content themselves with notional knowledge; for,
this woman a Samaritane, not only knew the Messiah was promised, but was
expecting him as near at hand, in regard that things fore-prophecied before his
coming were accomplished, and especially that the Scepter was removed from
Judah; I know that the Messiah comes, says she. 2. It is the Will of God that
the Scriptures and truths of God, should be made plain to the capacity of all,
and that men should not please themselves with forms of words in the matter of
knowledge, but should be acquainted with the thing it self; therefore, is the
name Messiah, expounded, which is called Christ, (not by the woman, who
understood that name well enough, but by John) for the use of all Readers, that
they might know what was signified by that name. 3. Resolution in a
controversy of Religion is only to be had and sought from Christ, who is the
infallible resolver of all who come to his light; therefore, does she remit the
matter to him. 4. As the Will of God concerning Religion and the way of
salvation, was not fully revealed till Christ came from the bosom of the
Father; so Christ came to be a teacher of his Church, and has fully revealed
the counsel of God, concerning his service and man's salvation, so as there is
no place for adding or diminishing: so much is imported in her expectation,
When he is come, he will tell us all things, to wit, which relate to this
subject in hand. 5. Christ is not far off from any, who have an high estimation
of him, and a desire after him, how great soever the distance seem to be to
themselves; for, to this woman, so affected, he is at hand, I am he. 6. It does
commend Christ's great condescendence, that he not only came into the world, but
was pleased to converse with the vilest of sinners to do them good: for, says
he, I am he that speaks unto thee, a lewd woman, and a scoffer. 7. It
commends also his great compassion toward needy sinners, that his secret is
with them, and that he will reveal himself unto them, when he lets others lie
in darkness; for, though, upon wise grounds, he forbade his disciples to make
him known, and would not himself answer many captious and tempting questions of
the Jews to this purpose, yet he will not conceal himself from this
Samaritane, now convinced of her need of him. 8. None can know or take up
Christ, though present with them, and speaking to them, unless he reveal
himself: therefore does this woman need this declaration.

Verse 27. And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with
the woman: yet no man said, What seek thou? or, Why talkest thou with her?

28. The woman then left her water-pot, and went her way into the city, and
says to the men,

29. Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did: Is not this the
Christ?

30. Then they went out of the city, and came unto him.


In the next branch of this part of the chapter is recorded; First, (in these
verses,) that the conference being broken up by the disciples return, (who
wondered at their Masters carriage, and yet would not challenge it) she proves
how she was affected with it, by forgetting her own errand, and going to invite
those of the City to come to him, wherein she had success. Whence learn; 1.
Poor sinners may meet with so sweet a time in Christ's company, that the company
even of disciples would be an interruption to it; for, she had so sweet a time
with Christ, that the disciples coming puts an end to it: They had been sent to
buy meat, v. 8. and now they returning, the conference breaks up, or at least
shortly after. 2. Providence does wisely and graciously order dispensations
toward his people, so as they are not prejudged thereby, but they tend to
good; therefore does not the disciples come, till she knew him to be the
Messiah, and till the breaking up of the conference tended to a greater good in
sending her to bring in more. 3. Christ will demit himself, and stoop so low to
a poor sinner, as is mavelous to flesh and blood; and there is more
kindness, meekness and humility in him alone, then in all his followers; for,
his disciples marvelled that he talked with the woman, or, that he should take
notice of such a one, and, it seems, he was upon the close of his discourse,
and had not yet ended when they came. He is so compassionate, as he needs no
intercessors. 4. It is no strange thing to see Christ's followers soon forget
themselves, and, being advanced by grace, to become so proud as to despise
others; for, they who were even now chosen out of the dust, marvelled that he
talked with the woman. 5. Such reverence is due to Christ in his working, as
when we can see no reason for what he does, yet we are bound not to quarrel,
but to suppress our own thoughts; for, so did they, yet no man said, What
seek thou? or, Why talkest thou with her? 6. When a soul has tasted of
Christ and his excellency, other things will be little regarded, which before
were in great esteem; for, so was it with this woman, she came to draw water
for her thirst, and thought much of that water, but now she forgot her errand,
and left her water-pot, and went her way. 7. True grace is communicative of it
self, and knowledge of Christ will make a person diligent to spread his name,
and particularly, to these they have greatest interest in; for, she goes to
the City, where she dwelt, and says to the men, come, etc. 8. Such as are
kindly inviters of others to Christ, from any saving knowledge of him, they
will not be content that men rest on their report, but would have them taste
and see themselves, nor will they be content to send others, but will go to
share themselves; Come, (not go) and see a man, says she. 9. As Christ knows
all that men do, so his searching and discovering Word is a special mean of
Conversion, and a sanctified sight of one sin, discovered by Christ, will open
men's eyes to see more; therefore, albeit Christ spoke many good words to her,
yet this was the hook that catched her, he told me all things that ever I did;
she says, all things, either because that in one instance he gave proof of his
ability so to do; or, because that discovery represented other things to her as
seen by him. 10. Christ's doctrine is then effectual, and prevails, when
himself is seen in and by it; therefore, subjoyneth she, Is not this the
Christ? not as doubting of it her self, seeing he had told her, but as pointing
it home to them, that they may consider of such an opportunity. 11. Weak
instruments, and such as have but small knowledge and weak faith, yea, even
women in their stations, laboring in the Gospel, shall not want their own
success, but may have powerful effects; for, upon this weak woman's invitation,
they went out of the City, and came unto him.

Verse 31. In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat.

32. But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

33. Therefore said the disciples one to another, Has any man brought him
ought to eat?

34. Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and
to finish his work.


Secondly, we have recorded Christ's conference with the disciples in absence of
the woman, and before the Samaritanes came to him; tending to commend the work
of the Ministry in bringing in of souls. And first, in his own practice he
declares, that his delight in that work entrusted him by the Father, took his
mind off bodily refreshment, even when he had need of it, and was more
refreshful to him then meat or drink could be. Whence learn, 1. Christ is not
only meek toward lost sinners, but most indefatigable, yea, and refreshed, in
seeking their good, even to the forgetting of his own necessities; for, in this
also his disciples come short of him, who would have him now eating of what
they had bought, whereas he not only needs to be put in mind of his necessary
food, though he had been weary and faint, v. 6. but tells them, I have meat to
eat, and that delight in his calling allayed the sense of outward necessities.
2. It is also Christ's Prerogative to be the chief Improver of time, and
entertainer of spiritual purposes, whereas others that are often and much in
his company, may be, and too often are, very carnal; for, albeit it was
necessary that Christ and his disciples should have bodily refreshment, yet the
disciples in this bewray their own disposition, which was yet rude, in that
when others are not with Christ, to keep up and draw out spiritual purposes
from him, they mind only meat, In the mean while, when the woman was away,
his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat; wherein Christ reproves their
temper, by setting on foot a spiritual purpose necessary for them, and emproves
that short while of the woman's absence well. 3. When the Lord offers an
occasion of doing good to souls, (especially which will not so readily occur
at another time,) it should be followed so far as health will permit, with the
neglect of any thing of lesser consequence; for, so does Christ reckon of this
occasion of doing good to the Samaritanes, I have meat to eat, it made him
forget meat, and was as meat to him. 4. The refreshments that are found in Gods
service and doing of his work, are but known to very few, yea, even disciples
may be much ignorant thereof for a time, and do always come short of that
delight that Christ found therein; for, says he, I have meat to eat that ye
know not of. They were but yet rude, and knew not this, at least under these
terms of meat, (as Thomas knew not Christ under the name of a way, John 14.5,)
nor did they know it yet in experience, nor could they reach that height of
delight Christ found in it. 5. As a carnal disposition and temper is not soon
cured, even in disciples; so this is a great impediment to them in taking up
Christ's mind, while as they judge carnally of what he says; for, so much does
their discourse, till Christ cleared them, import, Therefore said the disciples
one to another, Has any man brought him ought to eat? 6. Christ is so careful
in helping his people, that their very necessities are an invitation to him,
though they fail in not employing him. Therefore, although they do but
discourse among themselves, and (out of modesty, or otherwise) do not enquire
at him, yet he clears them. 7. The saving of lost sinners is a special point
of Gods Will, which he will have accomplished; for, Christ calls this work he
is about, the Will of him that sent me; that men might neither look on God, as
averse from sinners salvation, nor on that work as uncertain what the issue of
it will be. 8. Christ is entrusted by the Father with the work of saving
sinners, and sent into the world with a Commission for that effect; therefore
does Christ speak of himself as sent of God, to perform this his will. 9.
Christ is entrusted not only to undertake the work of sinners salvation, but to
bring it to perfection, as accordingly he did; for, he was sent to finish his
work, or the work enjoined by the Father. And as he perfected the work of
Redemption on the Cross, John 19.30. and did faithfully preach these glad
tidings, and convert souls in his generation; so he stands still engaged to
see that whole work perfected. 10. Christ undertook this work entrusted to him,
not of necessity, but willingly, and went about it with more delight then an
hungry man has in meat; that so he might commend his love to us; that he might
teach Ministers to be delighted in this work, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. and 3.8. Acts
20.24. and that he might teach all to go about Gods service in their stations,
as their delight and recreation; for, says he, My meat is to do the Will of
him that sent me, etc.

Verse 35. Say not ye, there are yet four months, and then comes harvest?
Behold I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields: for they are
white already to harvest.
In the next place Christ stirs them up to the like affection and diligence in
their calling, which he presses on them from several reasons; The first is
taken from the ripeness of people, and their willingness to hear (whereof
there was a present instance in the Samaritanes that were coming forth,) which
therefore was to be emproved. Whence learn, 1. As people may be sometimes ripe
for a Ministry, as corn is for reaping, (as when people stock to Ordinances
when they are offered, after they have lien long in ignorance, or under a dead
Ministry,) so such an opportunity would not be neglected by Ministers, as that
which will not be easily recovered; therefore compares he the condition of
people to fields white already to harvest, which is a season cannot be
neglected without much damage, and loss of the grain. 2. Men's diligence in
their worldly affairs, foreseeing and preparing for the opportunities of them,
should be a spur to Ministers to set their heart upon their work, to mark the
case of their people, to long for a disposition in them for embracing the
Gospel, and to improve it when they find it in any measure; so much does this
comparison import, Say not ye, that there are yet four months, and then
comes harvest; Behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the
fields, etc. He says four months, either because it was so much to the
harvest, and they had been speaking of it by the way, or because generally men
mind it a long time before, and much more ought they to take notice of the
present ripeness of people for the Ministry.

Verse 36. And he that reapeth, receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that sows, and he that reapeth, may rejoice together.
A second reason pressing this duty, is taken from the profit following on this
work, which is both a free reward in their own persons, and the reward of being
instrumental to save others, as 1 Timothy 4.16. The effect of both which, is the
joint joy of the Prophets as Sowers, and of them as Reapers, as is after
explained: wherein there is an allusion to the joy of Reapers in harvest, and
their feasts after it was gathered in, Isa. 9.3. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
faithful Ministers deserve nothing at Gods hand, and albeit they lie under much
contempt in the world, yet beside what reward of honorable maintenance is due
for their encouragement, they shall not want an eternal reward from God; for,
he that reapeth, receives wages. 2. Albeit such as are brought in to Christ by
the Ministry, may seem many times to be called to encounter many storms; yet
when they are ripe for Gods barn, they shall be brought unto eternal life,
where they will be at quiet; for, the fruit is gathered unto life eternal. 3.
The service of God, and his blessing upon it, is reward enough of it self; And
particularly, faithful Ministers have a promise, that they shall be blessed
with fruit in their labors, and it is reward enough that they are honored to
be instrumental in the salvation of any; for, it is a promise and a part of the
wages, he gathers fruit unto eternal life. 4. As there is joy in heaven at
the Conversion of a sinner, and there will be unspeakable joy at the perfecting
of the Congregation of the firstborn; so faithful Ministers have allowance of
joy in the bringing in of souls, which will be completed in the day of
Christ: for, here, the end of their labor is to rejoice. 5 Gods allowance of
joy is so free, that none who labor faithfully, are secluded from it, whatever
their success be, and so, full that all may share in it, without envy at one
another happiness and success; for, both he that sows, and he that reapeth
rejoice together.

Verse 37. And herein is that saying true: One sows, and another reapeth.

38. I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor: other men labored,
and ye are entered into their labors.


A third reason, (illustrate by a similitude) is taken from the easy task
wherein the Apostles were now employed, in comparison of Moses and the Prophets
before them; They had much pains, as in plowing and sowing with little seen
fruit, but by this they had made the work more ripe for the Apostles, having by
their preaching and writing to the Church, laid a ground for the Apostles
speedy success; for, clearing this purpose, we are to consider, 1. This
comparison does not chiefly hold in respect of the Gentiles, where the Apostles
are said to plant, 1 Cor. 3.6. and to lay a foundation, Romans 15.20. See also 2
Cor. 10.15, 16. (though in this also they had the advantage of the Prophets
doctrine, delivered to the Jews, to confirm what they said by it;) But the
comparison holds in respect of the Church of Israel, where the Prophets had
labored, and to which the Apostles first Commission was, Matthew. 10.6.
Consider, 2. This Comparison is not to be taken as if the Apostles took no
pains at all; but it is to be understood comparatively, that the Prophets great
pains made them come better speed with less pains. Nor is it to be understood,
as if the Prophets reaped or converted none, but that their fruit was small,
considering their pains, in comparison of the Apostles, who under the
dispensation of the Gospel, reaped the fruit of their pains. Doct. 1. A
spiritual mind will make good use of common proverbs, even in spiritual
purposes, as Christ does here. 2. The Lord sees it sit in his deep wisdom, not
to let all his servants have alike difficulties in their calling, nor alike
success; but may let some be at great pains in preparing for Christ, and
sowing the precious seed, who yet will be out of the world, before any
remarkable fruit of it appear; and may let others see very rich fruits of their
labors in their own time; for, so were the Prophets Sowers, and the Apostles
Reapers; the one labored with little visible success, the other brought in
many, sometimes even with one Sermon. 3. Such as labor faithfully in the Lords
work, albeit they have not much visible success, yet they are neither
disapproved nor useless, but are doing useful service in their generation, and
working to the hand of others, under whom the fruit of their labors will
appear; for, so the Prophets were Sowers, and the Apostles entered into their
labors, and reaped the fruit of their sowing. 4. The more easy the Lord makes
a Ministe^s work, by sending him not to Pagans, but to a visible Church,
prepared aforehand by the faithful labors of others, the more delight should
he have in going about it; so much does the force of the reason import; I sent
you to reap that whereon you bestowed no labor, etc. therefore, ye should be
affected with your work. 5. This also lays an obligation on these who have
long enjoyed Ordinances, to give proof of their profiting under former
Ministers, by being fitted to receive the Word more fruitfully from these who
follow after; so much also does this similitude teach, that the Church of
Israel was like a ripe field to the Apostles, as having been prepared thereto,
as a manured and sown field: And such is the duty of others.

Verse 39. And many of the Samaritanes of that City believed on him for the
saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.

40. So when the Samaritanes were come unto him, they besought him that he
would tarry with them, and he abode there two days.

41. And many more believed, because of his own word.

42. And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the world.


In the last branch of this part of the chapter, John proceeds to record the
Conversion of more of the Samaritanes of Sychar; and for that end, he returns
to prosecute that Narration, v. 29, 30. setting down, First, the cause, which
drew (at least) many of them to go out; which was their giving credit to the
woman's testimony, v. 39. Next, their request to Christ when they came to him,
and his granting thereof, v. 40. Thirdly, the effect of his doctrine among
them, which is the Conversion of many more, who, belike, out of curiosity or
otherwise, had gone out with the rest, v. 41. The effect of which Conversion
is, their declaration to the woman, that their faith did not depend on her
testimony, but on the sure ground of his own instruction, v. 42. which may also
be safely understood of them, who get some measure of faith by her information,
and were confirmed by his own doctrine, but chiefly of these who were drawn
out to see him, though as yet they believed not, from v 39. Learn, 1. Very weak
instruments may be very richly blessed, when they employ themselves for Christ;
for, this woman prevails, not only to bring them out, but many of the
Samaritanes believed on him for the saying of the woman, etc. 2. When one can
say but little of Christ, yet if it be spoken from experience and feeling, it
may be more persuasive to invite men to believe, then much more which is spoken
from notional knowledge; for, such was this woman's testimony of him, which was
so successeful; He told me all that ever I did. 3. As it is a commendation to
be easily persuaded to believe; so when a people are ripe, a very weak mean,
through Gods blessing, will draw them in; for, these Samaritanes are persuaded
by less then many incorrigible Jews had daily. 4. As true faith may be
wrought by degrees, so Christ has a great estimation, even of the smallest
beginnings of it; therefore, he gives it the name of believing, from v. 40.
Learn, 1. It is a good preparation, where men are thus far prevailed with, as
to draw near where Christ is to be found, and take a trial of him; for, the
Samaritanes (belike, more then believed) came to him, and this drew on more. 2.
Christ, being rightly taken up, his company will be more desired, and
especially the weakest degree of faith will breath out desires after its own
confirmation; by enjoying more of him; therefore, they besought him that he
would tarry with them. 3. Christ is very tender and willing to grant the
desires of these who long for his company; Therefore, albeit he had forbidden
his disciples to go in the way of the Samaritans, Matthew. 10.5. and albeit the
time of spreading his glory to the world was not yet come, yet for a preludy of
the calling of the Gentiles, and our of respect to their need, he abode there.
4. As Christ measures the time of his sensible presence according to his own
purpose, and his childrens necessity; so a very short while of his company is a
great blessing; Therefore, he abode there two days, only, as being the
Minister of circumcision, and of the Jews, and yet that is marked as a mercy
to them, whereas many now think little that his Sun stands still in one
Horizon. From verse 41. Learn, 1. Such as are not wrought upon by instruments,
are not yet desperate if Christ take them in hand; for, more believed then would
give credit to the woman. 2. Christ being found speaking in and by his Word,
will have such clearness in discovering himself, and such efficacy in
persuading that it will prevail with those that otherwise stand out; for, his
own Word, spoken by him, prevailed with them. 3. A short time in Christ's
company may do much good through his blessing; for, in two days, many more
believed. From verse 42. Learn, 1. Albeit that instruments speaking, may be a
mean to draw people to hearken or give some assent to truth, yet it is Christ
himself who must work a persuasion, and faith is never established till it get
rooting on Christ's speaking and sealing the Word by the Spirit; and then any
thing men can say, comes short of what they find in him, and they will
undervalue men's authority, when it comes in competition with his; All this is
imported, in that they said unto the woman, now we believe, not because of thy
saying, for we have heard him our selves, etc. where they do not despise her as
an instrument, but declare that their faith is bottomed on a surer ground then
her word. 2. The right knowledge of Christ in his person and offices, and
particularly, that he is the Savior of sinners offered to all Nations, is a
notable mean to draw souls to rest on him, and embrace him; for, this doctrine
Christ taught to convert them, and this their faith rests upon; We know that
this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world, and not of the Jews only.

Verse 43. Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee.

44. For Jesus himself testifies, that a Prophet has no honor in his own
country.

45. Then when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having
seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem, at the feast: for they also went
unto the feast.


Follows in the third part of the Chapter Christ's coming into Galilee, with
his entertainment, and working of another miracle there: This history being
interrupted, from verse 3. by the narration of what occurred by the way, is now
prosecuted; And in these verses John relates his coming thither after his
removal from Sychar, verse 43. that, expecting (according to the common
proverb) no respect in his own City Nazareth, therefore he went not thither, or
staid not there, verse 44. (but went to Cana, as it is, verse 46) and, that as
he traveled through Galilee toward Cana, he was entertained and welcomed by
them who had been at Jerusalem at the feast, and had seen his miracles there,
verse 45. from verse 43. learn. It is the duty of the Lords servants closely to
follow their calling from him, even though it should seem they might do more
good elsewhere; Therefore, notwithstanding his success in Samaria, yet after
two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee, being a part of his charge
as Minister of the circumcision. From verse 44. Learn, 1. Christ is a Prophet
among and above others, and whatever charge he lay on others to teach his
people, yet he remains still the chief Teacher himself; for the proverb
imports that he was a Prophet. 2. The Prophets, or Messengers carrying the
Word of God, should have honor, and a due estimation of the dignity of their
calling and gifts, testified by reverence to their persons, obedience to their
doctrine, and honorable maintenance, for, so much does the proverb import,
that a Prophet should have honor, and honor includes all those; Their being
spiritual parents, Rulers, and Christ's Ambassadors calls for this. 3. It is
an usual and ordinary fault, that the servants of God are most disrespected
among their own; for, such is men's naugh^inesse by nature, that things that
come from a far like them best, and that acquaintance with men's persons,
parents, etc. breeds contempt; Therefore, Christ met with this, and testified
it, as ordinarily true, that a Prophet has no honor in his own country. See
Luke 4.22. -- 29. 4. Since Christ's doctrine cannot be in request, where the
Messengers carrying the same, are not in estimation; Therefore such as
ingrately contemn Ministers, are justly deprived of the benefit of the
Ministry; Therefore is this set down as a reason why he went not to, or staid
not in Nazareth, but went to Cana. 5. It is the duty of the servants of God to
arm and guard themselves against contempt and disrespect, that it stumble them
not, especially after they have enjoyed better times; therefore not only does
Christ resolve on it, but testified concerning it when he came to Galilee, that
his disciples who had seen him better esteemed of among the Samaritans, might
not mistake. From verse 45. Learn, 1. Distance of place, and necessity of
pains, should not hinder men from frequenting of Ordinances, and it is
commendable where it is so; for, the Galileans also went unto the feast. Their
great pains may condemn them that are lazy, and yet have fewer difficulties.
2. Albeit Christ get no respect nor welcome in one place, yet he will get it
elsewhere; and those who have observed his dealing best, will respect him most;
for, the Galileans received him, having seen all that he did at Jerusalem, etc.
3. Every work of Christ whereof we see not present success, is not therefore
lost, but may have rich fruit ready to appear in due time; for, the fruits of
Christ's miracles at Jerusalem (which chap. 2.23. are marked only in general,
to have produced some sort of faith) appear more clearly in Galilee. 4. Albeit
fairest shows of good, founded only on the sight of Christ's works, will prove
but unsound; yet in so far are Christ's miracles rightly made use of, as they
tend either to confirm doctrine, or induce men to receive and hear it, and to
welcome the Messenge^s thereof for that end; for, so was it here, they received
him (or made his person welcome, and admitted him as a Teacher among them)
having seen all the things that he did, etc.

Verse 46. So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water
wine. And there was a certain noble man whose son was sick at Capernaum.

47. When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto
him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his son, for he was at
the point of death.


Follows the miracle upon the son of a Noble man, unto which is premitted
some antecedents and occasions, as namely (in these verses) the place where it
was wrought; the person on whom, a Noble man or Courtiers son; and, that his
Father hearing of Christ's coming into Galilee, goes unto him, entreating for
his son in his extremity. Whence learn, 1. Where Christ has manifested his
glory, and done good to any, there will be need of confirmations, and Christ
will not be wanting therein, but will count it an homely place to come to
again, where he has done a good work before; Therefore it is marked that he
came again to Cana of Galilee, where he had made the water wine. 2. The grace
of God is free, and the Lord has his elect and precious ones, even of all
ranks; for, here, he gains a certain Nobleman, or Courtier, belonging, as
appears, to Herod, to whom Galilee belonged, Luke 23.7. and it may be was
that Chuza of whom Luke 8.3. 3. Men's greatness and nobility does not exempt
them or theirs from common calamities and crosses; for, his son was sick at
Capernaum; and it makes the cross heavier, the more they have to give them.
4. Many of Gods Elect never come to Christ till they be driven by a cross; and
particularly sickness of children is one special mean whereby Christ draws
his own to make acquaintance with him; for, his going to Christ upon this
occasion, imports not only that it was his duty thus to respect his child, but
that Christ took occasion of this distemper to draw him in to himself. 5. Many
who come to Christ in trouble, do not give him that glory by faith that they
ought, but are ready to limit him to a certain way of working, beyond which
their faith can see no probability of help; for, albeit he conceived Christ
could heal his son, yet he ties his virtue to his bodily presence, he
besought that he would come down and heal his son. 6. As great and pressing
need should stir us up to do our duty; so it is an argument meet to prevail
with Christ by; Therefore is it subjoyned, for he was at the point of death, as
the reason of the parents diligence, and as the Argument propounded to Christ.

Verse 48. Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe.
Christ will not at first grant this request and work the miracle, but first
studies to cure a more dangerous soul-sicknesse in this man and others, that
nothing but outward miracles did at them, or affected them; For this was all
the man's errand to Christ, and it seems to have been the common temper of
these in Galilee who received him, verse 45. and of these in Cana, verse 46.
and therefore he deals first about it; And this is another antecedent of the
miracle. Whence learn, 1. It is a dangerous and general disease of men, not to
affect Christ so much for spiritual benefits, as for his outward workings, and
not to ground their estimation of, and confidence in him, upon his word, but on
his works; for, such was the disease here, except ye see signs and wonders, ye
will not believe. 2. Albeit it be our fault to be more affected with bodily
then spiritual wants, and we do come to Christ more for the one then for the
other; Yet spiritual and soul ills are greatest, though less felt, and require
speediest help; for so much is imported in Christ's method of curing the one
before the other, whatever need of have there seemed to be that he should cure
his son first. 2. The more common an ill be, it needs the greater have in
curing of it; Therefore Christ falls on this with the Nobleman, as being the
disease not only proper to him, but common to those where he was, ye will not
believe. 4. As it is good to come to Christ, even with outward straits and
troubles; so Christ may see it fit to suspend intended help that he might do
our souls good; and wherever Christ gives an outward favor in mercy, he does
also some good to the soul with it; As here in this example is to be seen.

Verse 49. The Nobleman says unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die.

50. Jesus says unto him, Go thy way, thy son lives. And the man believed
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way.


The Nobleman is so pressed with the present trouble, as he little heeds what
Christ said, and therefore repeats and renews his suit with more haste and
diffidence then before; (and this is yet another occasion and antecedent of the
miracle) yet Christ grants his request, intimating that the miracle was
already wrought, though not in his way, yet in a better; and withal, he cures
his unbelief, making him to go his way at his command, leaning to his word.
Whence learn, 1. Such is man's weakness and frailty, that distractions with
grief or fear, will draw his mind from heeding instructions from Christ, and
outward vexations will draw the mind from the thoughts he should have about
spiritual and better things; for, he is so taken up with his childs case, that
he took little notice of what Christ said, only he is so far humbled and
pressed with need, as not to startle at a rough answer. 2. Where there is
pressing need, and any spark of faith, it makes a Supplicant importunate, and
that he will not give over, meet with what he will, therefore, does he renew
and press his suit again, Sir, come down, etc. 3. Weakness in faith
expresses it self in much haste under pressing needs; so much does his
supplication import, Sir, Come down ere my child die. 4. Unbelief or weakness
of faith has more base thoughts of Christ then are seen at first, and the more
it be exercised, it will appear the more, for, in his second request, he not
only a stricts Christ's virtue to his bodily presence, but limits his power
further, as if he could do nothing, though present, if his son were once dead.
Sir, says he, come down, and that, ere my son die, both of which were a fault,
either to limit him to a way of working, or to limit his power, as if any thing
were too hard for him. 5. Such is Christ's tenderness and mercy, that when he
has reproved our faults, and we have come ill speed in amending them, yet he
will not leave us so, but will respect great need and weak faith, more then
much unbelief and ill deserving; so much appears in his granting this man's
suit. 6. As Christ may be answering the maine of his peoples desire, when they
get not satisfaction in every particular circumstance; and as Christ will not
be prescribed unto, or limited in the way of his working; so his refusal to
satisfy his people in their way, is in mercy, and because he purposes to do
better; so appears here, the best this man could devise was, that at Christ's
coming to Capernaum, his son should recover, but Christ does better then so,
and shows it is done already, Go thy way, thy son lives, or, is well. 7.
Christ has absolute power of sickness and health, of life and death, and with
one word can chase away a deadly disease at never so great a distance, so much
does he teach this Nobleman here, that being at Cana he could chase away
sickness at Capernaum, thy son lives. 8. Christ can do a weak believer a good
turn, and with that, amend his faults also, and make his former reproves to
work; for, now this man believed the word that Jesus had spoken to him, and, at
his command, went his way, not doubting but all would be well.

Verse 51. And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him,
saying, Thy son lives.

52. Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend: and they said
unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.

53. So the father knew that it was at the same hour, in the which Jesus said
unto him, Thy son lives, and himself believed, and his whole house.


Follows the manifestation of this miracle, which is declared to be wrought
in the former verse, and the effects of it. The servants meeting this Nobleman
with the good news of his sons recovery, he finds, after a diligent enquiry,
that the time of it trysted with the time that Christ spoke to him, whereby he
is confirmed in faith, and his family drawn in to God with him. Whence learn,
1. It is the duty of servants, not only to be faithful in their Masters
affairs, but to be affected with them, and to sympathize with their condition,
whether it be sad or joyful; so much appears in the practice of these
servants, who met their Master with the good news. 2. Good news will, sooner
or later, meet the man who believes and rests on Gods Word; for, so much
does this Nobleman find in experience. 3. As a believer is bound to observe
all the circumstances of Christ's working, that may confirm ^i^h, so experience
and observation will prove the truth of what he believes, and will speak in
the same terms with the promise: for, this finds not only that true which
Christ had said, but trying it to the uttermost, he finds the miracle to have
been wrought that same time that Christ spoke. 4. Much advantage may be reaped
by men's communicating their knowledge, experience and observations one with
another, whereby they may help each other to a more full acknowledgement of
Christ; for, the servants they knew the childs recovery, and the time of it,
the Master knew the word Christ had spoken, and the time of it, and these being
put together, they mutually draw other to know Christ, and his power and
good will. 5. Temporal favors are then indeed blessed, when the experience of
Gods goodness in them advances our souls good, and is a mean, either to
beget, or advance our faith in Christ; for, so is it here, he believed, or was
confirmed in what was begun before. 6. As Christ brings salvation to the house
he comes unto, and may do good to the souls of many by one work: so where a
Master of a family is brought to Christ, it gives good ground of hope, that
others of the family will do well: and however, what experience any one of a
family, gets of Christ, all the family are bound to make use of it; all this
may be gathered from this, that himself believed and all his house.

Verse 54. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come
out of Judea into Galilee.
John concludes this History with a remark, that this miracle was the second
which he wrought in Galilee, (the first being done in the same place, chapter 2.)
and that he did it after he came from Judea thither. Whence learn, 1. Christ's
^^rks, and particularly, his more special manifestations of himself, ought to
be marked and kept in memory: as here, John's practice after so many years, and
his recommending that observation to the Church in all ages, teaches. 2.
Christ present works and manifestations ought not only to to affect us
themselves, but should bring his former works to remembrance, that they may be
considered and commended also: so does this miracle call the former to
remembrance. 3. However men may study to bear down Christ in the world, yet it
will be to no purpose, for in one place or other he will be still reaping
fruit, and manifesting his glory. Therefore it is ma^ked that he did this
miracle, (as also the former) when he was come out of Judea into Galilee, to
show, that their driving him from thence by their malicious plottings, did not
hinder him to show forth his glory elsewhere, nor hinder sinners to believe in
him.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter; First, we have another miracle of Christ's working in curing
an infirm man in Jerusalem, at the feast, and on the Sabbath Day. to v. 10.
Next, we have the Jews quarrelling with the healed man as a Sabbath-brea^er,
and their plotting of Christ's death, when they know him to be the Author of
that work, to v. 17. Thirdly, Christ's Apology for what he had done, v. 17. and
for asserting his equality with the Father, in maintaining his deed: which he
further proves by many reasons, to v. 31. And by many witnesses, which were so
clear and convincing as gave him just cause to reprove them for their wilful
unbelief, from ver. 31. to the end.

Verse 1. AFter this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
Several circumstances are premitted unto the History of this miracle, to v. 8.
whereof the first is, a general description of the time and place of it; it was
done at Jerusalem, at a feast to which Christ went up. As this History does not
follow immediately upon the former, (though in general, it be said it was after
this,) but several things intervened; which John omitteth, as being employed,
not so much to confirm the same doctrine by repeating it, as to record what
the ^est had omitted: so this is the cause why we cannot certainly determine
what this feast was, at which Christ went up, nor is it much material for our
use. Only we may gather from this, 1. The solemn feasts observed by the Jews
at Gods appointment, were peculiar and proper to themselves, and not obliging
nor belonging to the Christian Church; for, therefore is this called, a feast
of the Jews. 2. Christ was pleased to subject himself unto the Law, not only
moral, to free his people from the condemnation thereof; but to the ceremonial
Law also, that he might free his Church from the yoke thereof, therefore, Jesus
went up to Jerusalem, in obedience to the Law, requiring this appearance, Exodus
34.^3. 3. Opportunities of advancing the Kingdom of Christ, and of doing good
in our station, ought not to be omitted, but taken hold of, though it seem to
tend to our own trouble or hazard that we do so; therefore, also Christ went up
to Jerusalem at the feast, though he met with trouble there, because he had
occasion of setting out his glory by healing the man, and by preaching in that
solemn Assembly.

Verse 2. Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep- market, a poole which is
called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches.

3. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, hall, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water.

4. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the poole, and troubled the
water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was
made whole of whatsoever disease he had.


The next thing premitted, is a more particular description of the place of
this miracle it was wrought at the Sheep-gate, (as the word may be read.) of
which Nehem. 3.1. so called, because being near the Temple, the sacrifices were
brought into the city at that gate; or, at the Sheep market, (as we translate
the word) a place near that gate, where, according to the liberty granted by
the Law, Deuteronomy. 14 24, 25, 26. men might provide themselves of sacrifices;
though now the corruption of men had brought these commodities into the Temple,
John 2.14. More particularly, this miracle was wrought at a poole, which
whatever use it had of old, (it may be, among others, for washing the beasts,
before they were presented,) was now honored with the Lords presence
manifested there, in curing the diseases of all such as went into it, after an
Angels troubling the waters, and therefore was frequented with a number of sick
persons, who attended that sign, and were accommodated in five porches built
about the pool. The name of this pool Bethesda, may either signify the place
of pouring out, to wit, of water, either into the pool by conduits, (being
possibly that of Hezekiah; 2 Kings 20.20.) or out of it by pipes, for several
uses; or, it may signify, the house of mercy, because of the proofs of Gods
mercy manifested to the sick there. As for the time of the beginning or ceasing
of this miracle, it is needless to search into it, seeing Scripture elsewhere
is silent about it, only it seems to have begun but of late among them. Doct:
1. The place where these persons lay, being a place of great concourse, and
from whence they went into the Temple to worship, does teach us, that it is a
necessary meditation for men to have frequent and serious thoughts of their own
frailty, that they may be humbled, and may be stirred up to press more
earnestly after God, in whom all is made up; this did the Lord preach by
presenting these sad spectacles to men's view, in that public place, as they
went to the Temple. 2. Hospitality and compassion toward the afflicted, is a
commendable duty, and the pains that a declining people put themselves to in
that kind, may stand up as a witness against others; for, though the Jews
were now declined, yet the pool had five porches, either built for the sick, or
now converted to that use. 3. Where Christ comes to any place, he will be sure
to give a special visit to the desolate and afflicted, and to be at pains to
come to them, who are not able to come to him; for, so is it to be supposed
here, (as is afterward cleared) that Christ coming to Jerusalem, comes to the
Poole where the sick lay. 4. From this miraculous manifestation of God in the
Church of the Jews, we may learn, 1. Where God continues a Church, although
the people be wicked, yet he will not fail to give some tokens of his
presence, specially for the good and behoof of his elect among them. Therefore
when the Jews had now long wanted public Prophets, and were under deep
distress, the Lord gives this miraculous proof of his presence; to confirm
them, and especially the elect, that he did not forget them; to establish them
in the love of their own Religion, when idolaters did prevail over them, and
to stir them up to expect the Messiah. 2. Incurable diseases and infirmites are
not therefore desperate and hopeless; for, God from heaven can help that,
which no means on earth can do good to; and it is his ordinary way to interpose
and appear, when matters are incurable and remediless otherwise, so much are
we taught here, in that the blind, halt, withered, and the disease whatsoever
it was, was cured, and by these cures on the body, the Lord gives proof what
he can do to souls and inward conditions, or other outward lots. 3. Means of
Gods appointment, how improbable like soever, should not be contemned; every
thing being therefore useful because God appoints and blesses it; therefore
made he use of the water of this common poole, and that when it was troubled,
(which it seems, should make it more hurtful) to be stepped into; though, it
seems, there was no virtue put into the water, but only the troubling of it was
a sign of Gods presence there. 4. Whatever good the Lord do by any mean, yet
we are to see that all the virtue and blessing comes down from heaven; for, an
Angel went down and troubled the water, before that men got any good by
stepping into it. 5. It is the duty of all such as are sensible of wants or
infirmities, to slock to appointed means, and take up their abode there, as
being the Lords trysting place; for, so does the practice of these sick
persons, teach; who abode and lay in the porches of the pool. 6. Much sense of
need will make men assiduous and constant in their waiting on, in the use of
lawful means, not giving over for delays and disappointments; for, albeit the
Angel went down but at a certain season; and albeit he only who stepped first
in, was healed at that time, and many being there, would he disappointed and
prevented by others, yet they lay still waiting.

Verse 5. And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight
years.

6. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that
case, he says unto him, Will thou be made whole?

7. The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man when the water is
troubled to put me into the pool: but while I (...) coming, another steppeth
down before me.


The third thing premitted, is, a description of the man on whom the miracle
was wrought. It is not declared who he was (for these whom Christ cures, are
best known by their misery, and his mercy) nor yet what his particular disease
was, though it seems it has been sore, and kept him lying, v. 6. only it is
declared he had been long under it. Unto this is further added a previous
conference betwixt Christ and him; wherein Christ, being sensible of his case,
stirs up his desire of cure, by propounding a question about it, v. 6. In
answer to which, the man proves his desire, by his waiting on the means,
notwithstanding he was helpless and often disappointed. Doct. 1. Not only are
men subject to bodily infirmities, but it may please the Lord for wise ends, to
let some spend a lifetime, or a large part of it in sickness and weakness, as
if they had been born for no other end, but to bear such a cross; for, this
man had an infirmity eight and thirty years. See, Psalm. 89.47. 2. As it is the
duty of the afflicted to wait on means, so long as God appoints any for their
help; so when Christ comes they will be first regarded, who have been longest
and forest troubled; for, as this man was there, so Jesus saw him lie, and took
notice of him before all the rest. 3. Such as have been kept long, and longer
then others under trouble, may be but reserved for Christ's own hand, and for
his manifesting his glory in doing of them good; for, so much did this man
find in experience. 4. Christ needs no information to acquaint him with the
afflicteds case; he takes notice of the measure of their trouble, and knows
its continuance; for, he saw him lie, through sickness and heartlesnesse,
having been so often disappointed, and knew that he had been now a long time in
that case. 5. When Christ is willing to manifest himself for the afflicted, yet
he would have our desires after his help stirred up, and not blunted by any
delay; Therefore, says he unto the man, will thou be made whole? not as
doubting of it, (for his desire had drawn him thither, and kept him there) but
to quicken it up, as a preparative to the receiving of the mercy, and to give
pledge to all, that continued desires, notwithstanding all delays, will be
satisfied, ere Christ give over the afflicted. 6. It is a real proof of our
desire of help under distresses, when we are sensible of our misery thereby,
when we give not over to wait on in the use of means, and when we are afflicted
with disappointments in using them; for, thus does the man prove his desire, in
answer to Christ's question, 7. One may be in a very abject like condition, and
seem to be neglected both of God and men, whom yet the Lord purposes to do
much good unto; And one may meet with many disappointments in the use of
means, who yet will get deliverance in a better and more comfortable way; for,
so was it with this man, and so did he find. 8. It may be the lot of the
afflicted, not only to be sick and unable to help themselves, but to be left
destitute without any to help them; which shows what mercy they enjoy, who
have if it were but one to attend them in sickness; for this man had no man to
put him into the pool. 9. It (...) a token that sickness, he plesnesse and
disappointments are blessed, when these make us more meek and humble; for, his
moan is such, meekly does he speak of the inhumanity of these about him, and of
others (who possibly came there after him) their getting in, while he is
disappointed. 10. It is the duty and commendation of those in distress, never
to quit hope, nor weary to wait on, so long as there is any possibility of any
deliverance by any lawful means, albeit they were ever so long delayed or
disappointed; for, so did this man, notwitstanding all he met with. 11. It is
one great weakness, that our hope and expectation of help and relief goes no
further then we see outward means, nor can we conceive what Christ, power and
goodness is ready to do for us, till he reveal it himself; for, this man has
only his eye upon that known help, and by his regrate to Christ, insinuates a
desire that he would show that kindness to him which others had neglected; but
little does he dream of that which was in Christ's heart.

Ver 8. Jesus says unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.

9. And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed and walked: and
on the same day was the Sabbath.


Follows the miracle it self, wrought by Christ's power, and at his command,
making the sick man arise, and carry his own bed, and walk. To this is added a
more particular description of the time of this miracle, that it was on the
Sabbath; which occasioned the following controversy and debate. Doctrine 1.
Such is Christ's goodness and pity toward his afflicted people, as to prevent
their hopes and prayers, with doing great things for them in their need; for,
Christ cures the man who neither asked it from Christ, nor dreamed he would do
it. See. Ephesians. 3.20. 2. All Christ's dealing with his own in distress, ends in
healing of them at last, how little soever it seem to promise; for, so does
his conference with this man. 3. Christ is not tied to means, ordinary, or
extraordinary, but can work without both when he pleases; and by his word of
command can do greatest things, and cure most desperate diseases; and not only
command, but work that which he commands, and by his word conveigh virtue and
efficacy, and give strength to obey; for, he does not take the man to the
pool, but by his word cures him. 4. Albeit in trouble, all means and
probability should sail us, yet their case is never desperate, who have
Christ to go unto; So much also does this instance teach us: Yea, singular
afflictions, and disappointments under them, may end in a more eminent and
singular way of deliverance, as this man found: And, long delay in waiting on
in the use of means, may be made up with a speedy completing of the delivery
when Christ begins; for in an instant the man is made whole. 5. Christ's
miracles and wonderful works upon, and for the afflicted, are so real and
through, as will make them speak for themselves, and they should be observed by
all; for, this command, rise, take up thy bed, and walk, which he obeyed,
imports that this cure was a through cure, and that he would have the man
satisfied about it, and all to remark it. 6. As Christ does his great works,
that his glory may be manifested, and not buried; so a work appointed by him
for setting forth of his glory, may, and should be set about, and that without
any violation of the Sabbath; Therefore, he not only commands him, take up thy
bed and walk, that the miracle might be published, but allows it to be done
on the Sabbath, not only because he was Lord of the Sabbath, and so might
dispense with the observation of it, but because this was no servile work
enjoined for a worldly end and commodity, but a mean appointed by himself for
setting out his glory, and so was subservient to the great end of the Sabbath.
7. Such things, within the compass of our calling, as tend to the setting
forth of Christ's glory, are to be set about, with a single eye and heart,
albeit we knew others should stumble and carp; for, so did Christ in his
station, he stood not on the Jews stumbling in commending this to be done on
the Sabbath, as minding hereby to hold out his own glory in the miracle, and in
the following dispute.

Verse 10. The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the Sabbath,
It is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.

11. He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up
thy bed and walk.

12. Th^n asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy
bed and walk.

13. And he that was healed, wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed
himself away, a multitude being in that place.


Follows the second part of the Chapter wherein is recorded, the Jews
opposition to the man, before they knew the Author of the miracle, verse 10,
11, 12, 13. and their malice against Christ, when he is known to be the Author
of it, verse 14, 15, 16.

In these verses, they challenging the man for breach of Sabbath, verse 10. he
defends himself by the warrant he had gotten from Christ, verse 11. And when
they desire to know the Author of that warrant, verse 12. he is not able to
resolve them, for Christ had withdrawn himself in the preasse, immediately
after the miracle was wrought, verse 13. Whence learn, 1. When Christ is doing
greatest works, there will still be some who get no good of them, but will
rather suck poison and gall out of them; for, this glorious work meets with
opposition and persecution. 2. It is the duty of all the members of the visible
Church in their stations, and especially of Magistrates and Ministers, to see
to the observation of the Sabbath day, even by others as well as by themselves;
for, these Jews (who seem to have been of the Pharisees and Rulers) their
quarrelling a breach of Sabbath, was a commendable duty in it self, if the
charge had been true. See Exodus 20.10. Nehem. 13.15. 3. Hypocritical and
superstitious persons may pretend to much zeal for Gods glory, when they are
but naught; for, say they, it is the Sabbath Day, it is not lawful for thee to
carry thy bed, as pretending to be zealous for the Law, Jer. 17.21, 22. when
yet they were but a naughty crew. Yea, albeit it may be alleged, that at
first they knew not what was wrought on the man, and so might the excused in
part, yet it is not to be justified, that they condemn so rashly, before they
examine the matter: As it is usual, that hypocritical zeal is still rash and
censorious. 4. Divine warrant is sufficient to guard the conscience against any
challenges of sin, and may justify that which otherwise were condemnable; for,
such is the man's Apolgy, he that made me whole, the same said to me, take up
thy bed and walk. And albeit he knew not Christ particularly, verse 13. yet he
saw so much of his glory in that miracle, such power in his word, and such
virtue flowing from him, as warranted him to look on Christ as having
sufficient authority to command him, and warrant his obedience; seeing Joshua
only an extraordinary man, was warranted to command all Israel to march about
Jericho, if not also to take it, on the Sabbath day. 5. Where Christ bestows
a favor, or sends relief to the troubled, in mercy, it will leave a stamp
of subjection to his command behind it, and incline the receiver to obedience;
for; so is imported in this man's Apology, he that made me whole, said to me,
take up thy bed, and how can I decline a command, coming from such a one? 6.
Albeit occasion be offered to obdured men, to see Christ's glory in his working,
yet they care not for the knowledge of it, but will rather slight it, and
study to bear him and it both down; So much does their second question, verse
12. teach; Albeit the man had told them of the cure, yet they heed not that,
but only his saying, take up thy bed and walk, that they might traduce him as
a Sabbath-breaker; And albeit it be probable they knew who was the Author of
such a work, yet they will not let it appear, but with contempt, enquire, What
man is that which said unto thee, take up thy bed, etc? that they might brand
him as a presumptuous man, who durst as they judged) oppose his commands to
Gods Law: Whereas a due estimation of the miracle, might have led them to judge
otherwise of his person and commands. 7. Christ's works and under-takings will
then only be rightly constructed and judged of, when he is taken up in his
person as God, and not man only; for, this will discover him to be above the
Law, and that he can effectuate that which no man could; So much may we gather
from their ground of calumny, in that they take him up only as a man, what
man is that, etc? 8. Christ may be doing some good to them who have no distinct
and clear knowledge of him, it being one thing to do the work, and another, to
manifest himself to be the worker of it; for, the man wist not who it was,
albeit he was healed by him, and have some respect to him. 9. Christ's
withdrawing of himself, (which he might easily do in the throng, and) which is
subjoyned as a reason of the man's ignorance, serves not only to clear the
man, that his ignorance was not through his neglect, but further may teach, 1.
No prejudice at Christ, or his outward condition, should obscure the glory of
his working; Therefore he withdrew, that the outward baseness of his person
might not cause them to undervalue his working. 2. By this he teaches, how
hateful the seeking after vainglory is in his eyes, for, by withdrawing, he
shuned the present applause of the multitude. 3. By this practice, he has
sanctified such a lot to his people, as when they are doing good, to be
necessitated to withdraw themselves because of it: And he teaches all, as not
to flee trials when called to them; so not to thrust themselves rashly on them,
but to wait for Gods calling; Therefore, he withdrew to decline for a time,
these his enemies, who might be enraged, and to shun their fury, till
afterward that he is called out to defend his own work.

Verse 14. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto him,
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

15. The man departed, and told the Jews, that it was Jesus which had made him
whole.

16. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him,
because he had done these things on the Sabbath day.


Here we have the Jews prosecuting of Christ, when it was made known he was the
Author of the miracle. The way of the revealing of it was, that Christ finding
the man, does give him wholesome directions how to make use of his deliverance,
verse 14. and he does thankfully publish Christ to be the Author of his cure,
ver. 15. upon which the Jews do persecute him, by traducing him as a prophaner
of the Sabbath, and by plotting how to take away his life, ver. 16. from, ver.
14. learn. 1. It is a sweet fruit of trouble, when we study thankfulness to
God for deliverance from it, by frequenting his house and public worship,
without neglect of private; for, therefore was he in the Temple, giving thanks
to God, as acknowledging, that though he knew not who Christ was, yet he had
been Gods instrument to him; yea, Christ's own practice, in being there, is a
pattern for our reverencing of ordinances. 2. It is not only our duty, but our
great happiness also, to be frequenting public ordinances, as being the
trysting place of Christ's presence; for, here, Jesus found him in the Temple,
which was a benefit he little expected. 3. Where Christ gives outward favors
and deliverances in special love, he will give also spiritual mercies and
benefits with them; And such as are thankful for what they have received,
Christ will come and give them more; for, this man with the cure, gets
direction for his souls estate, and that in the Temple, where he came to bless
God. 4. Such as have gotten great mercy and deliverance from Christ, have need
of direction how to guide it, that they do not miscarry under it; and even when
they have some good beginnings, they need yet further upstirring; Therefore
does Christ, by his exhortation, prescribe a diet for this cured man; and
albeit he was at pains to come to the Temple to offer thanks, yet Christ
finds it needful to give him this warning. 5. When men have gotten
deliverance from outward trouble, they ought to take heed of resting on it,
neglecting God, their duty, and souls good; So much does this exhortation
import, that being made whole, he should not think he had no more to do with
God, nor needed any 'other thing, but should mind his duty, otherwise God'
could reach him. 6. Bodily health, and the curing of infirmities which deprive
us of it, is a mercy to be seriously considered, and which lays on a special
obligation to duty, especially if we have been long under the infirmity, if it
has been sad and heavy, and if our deliverance from it has been remarkable:
Therefore, does Christ begin his direction with this; Behold, thou art made
whole, that finding now by experience, the reality and benefit of his health,
so miraculously wrought after his long and sad disease, he should be so
affected with it, as to take with the following direction. 7, It is a special
help for getting a right use of our condition, to see trouble and sickness
flowing from sin, as the sluice to let it in; to see that Christ knows men
well enough, and what they are, though they take but little notice of him; and
this is to be remembered, when the trouble procured by sin, is over; for,
while Christ directs him to sin no more, it imports, that sin had drawn
on his former sickness, that Christ would not have him forgetting this when
the smart of the rod was gone, and that albeit he knew not Christ, yet Christ
knew him, and what he had been. Whether this man had drawn on this sickness by
some gross provocation, I will not determine, but it is certain, that
sickness and trouble entered in by sin, and that every one has so much
sin, as to deserve sharpest plagues here, and hereafter. 8. It is not
sufficient that men being delivered, do profess their thankfulness, or see
their former guilt, unless the sense thereof, and of its bitter fruits, and of
their deliverance restrain their after sinning, and stir them up to prevent it
for the future, and so be reformed by Gods dealing; At least, (since they
cannot be sinlesse) they would watch diligently over it, and not let it reign
in them; So much is imported in this direction, sin no more. 9. Sin is not
easily avoided or shaken off, but when men have smarted for sin, and have
been graciously delivered, and tasted of Gods mercy, they may yet be tempted,
and are ready to sin yet more, and need caution to prevent it. So much also
does this direction and warning, given to the man, teach us, sin no more. 10.
The best preservative against affliction and trouble, is, not to run every
course which flesh and blood may suggest for avoiding it, but to beware of
sin, which if it hold not off trouble, yet may assure us that God does
correct us in love, and not in anger; so much does the reason of this
direction, import, Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. 11. As
all trouble is in it self an evil, what ever good God may bring out of it, and
by it; So whatever any have lien under, God can easily send worse; for, while
he threatens him with a worse thing, it imports that other trouble is evil,
though not all in alike degree, and that God could send a worse condition then
thirty eight years sickness. He can add to outward trouble, Lev. 26.18, 21,
24, 28. and to spiritual plagues, Matthew. 12.45. 2 Pet. 2.20. He can send them
both together in their extremity, Lam. 2.22. and can send eternal punishments
in stead of temporal. 12. Such as continue in a course of sinning, after they
have been afflicted, and have been delivered, and tasted of Gods favor, to
soul or body; do hereby take a way to kindle divine displeasures, and increase
trouble; for, so much is held forth here, sin no more least a worse thing
come unto thee. Which calls for much jealousy over what good things we seem
to have under affliction, for much wariness, that we rest not upon outward
deliverance, and for much abiding in Christ, and keeping of grace in exercise.

From verse 15, 16. learn. 1. It is the duty, and commendable practice in those
who have gotten experience of Christ's power and pity, to proclaim it, for
setting forth of his glory, and invitation of others to come and partake;
Therefore, the man departed, and told the Jews, that it was Jesus which had
made him whole. And this he did out of gratitude toward Christ (whom he knew
either from himself, or others about him) and to invite the Jews to make use
of Christ, if they had any such employment for him. 2. Sound doctrine meets often
times with corrupt hearers, who are more enraged thereby; and honest minded men
following their duty in singleness, may occasion persecution, and yet be
blameless, as having done but their duty, and given no just occasion, and so
are free of what follows; for, upon this man's publishing Christ to be the
Author of his cure, the persecution arises, but without any fault in him. 3.
The rising and spreading of Christ's glory, is an eye sore to corrupt teachers
and people, who are thereby discovered to be what indeed they are, and their
seeming glory obscured; And persecution is the ordinary entertainment that
Christ, manifesting his glory, may look for at the hands of such; for,
therefore, upon the report, did the Jews persecute Jesus, by their reproachful
tongues, and devising how to take his life, either in a tumult, or judicially.
4. Such is the cruelty of persecutors, that, if they had their will, nothing
but the death of those they oppose, would satisfy them: and such as are
persecutors with the tongue, and spare not men's names, will also be ready to
take their lives, if opportunity offer, and they can get a pretext for it; for,
they sought to slay him, upon pretense of the law of Sabbath-breaking, Numb.
15.32, 33, etc. And this is marked as their disposition, who had spoken
contemptibly of him, ver. 12. and continued to do so still, since they could go
no further. 5. Great cruelty against Christ, may be masked with fairest
pretexts, even of zeal for God and his commands; And sufferers are not to
expect, but that they shall be laden with calumnies under their sufferings;
for, they sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath
day. As persecutors will think shame to publish their malice and the causes of
it: so this way of procedure, makes persecution most sharp, Joh. 16.1, 2, 3.
6. What ever be the malice, desire, or endeavors of wicked men; yet the life
of Christ and his followers is not in their hand; but the Lord may make their
malice their own plagues, and preserve his people while he has any service for
them; for, though they sought to slay him, yet all their endeavors, at that
time, tended only to their own trouble.

Verse 17. But Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto, and I work.
In the third part of the Chapter we have Christ's Apology for his working this
cure on the Sabbath, in answer either to their thoughts, or to somewhat they
expressed to him, ver. 17. and his prosecution thereof, upon the increase of
their rage, verse 18, 19, etc.

At other times, upon the like occasion we find him making Apology for himself
or his followers, by way of retortion, as Matthew. 15.1, 2, 3. Which though it
could not justify an unlawful act; Yet it might stop their mouths, who
maliciously quarrelled with others, and yet were more guilty themselves.
Sometime, by pleading necessity, as Luke 6.2, 3. and 14.3, 4, 5. In which case,
the Sabbath is made for man, Mark. 2.27. and Christ commends his love, that
when he gets a distressed sinner, even on the Sabbath day, he will not delay
their help till morrow. Sometime, by pleading that works of piety and charity
do not violate the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.5, 7. Luke 6.9. But here Christ
justifies himself from a more sublime reason, that he may take occasion to
set out the glory of his Godhead. And whereas the weight of their challenge was
grounded on the fourth command, wherein God had not only commanded us to rest
on the Sabbath, but had by his own example, in resting from all his works on
that day, pressed it; Therefore, Christ removes the mistake, showing that the
Father, ever since the creation, has continued working without any
intermission, and this without any violation of the Sabbath; and that himself
as he is one in essence with the Father, so he is undivided in working from
him, the Fathers work and his being one; And therefore his working on the
Sabbath could not be challenged, and he being God, might command the man to
carry his bed, when he pleased, and when it contributed to set forth his glory:
Whence learn, Albeit the Lord, after the creation of all things in six days,
did cease from the creating of new kinds of creatures, Genesis 2.2. Yet he is
still without intermission (even on the Sabbath) working, by preserving and
upholding all the creatures he has made, without which they could not subsist
a moment; and by governing and overruling of all things, how small contingent,
or casual soever they be; for, my Father works hitherto, which speech does
not exclude the time following, but shows that there is no intermission in
that work, see Act. 17.28. Matthew. 6.26, 30. and 10.29, 30. Exodus 21.13. 2.
Christ the Son of God is joined with, and undivided from the Father, in
working, and that not in one work alone, or at some time only, but in all
works, and without intermission: As the Father created all things by him, so,
with, and from the Father, he preserves and governs all things; for, my
Father works hitherto, and I work, even the same works which he works, see
Heb. 1.2, 3. 3. God, and Christ is God, is above all law which he has
prescribed to the creature; He works on the Sabbath, and does not violate it;
he may do what he pleases, without quarrelling; and may command what he
pleases, and make it service; for, so does the scope of the Apology teach,
that Christ, being undivided from the Father in working, was God, and so not
subject to the Law of the Sabbath, and might command the man to carry his bed,
and warrant him in so doing.

Verse 18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he
had broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God.
The fruit of this Apology, among the Jews, is, that their rage of persecution
is increased the more by it, and they thirst the more for his life: And that
because he not only had broken the Sabbath, as they alleged; but had asserted
that God was his Father in so peculiar a way, as made him equal with God.
Whence learn. 1. Clear declaration of truth will not satisfy wicked and
malicious men, but the more Christ and the light is held out to such, it is
hated the more; for, after his Apology, therefore the Jews sought the more to
kill him. 2. No vindication, nor defense of lawful practices, will wipe off
the misconstructions of prejudged men, but they will stick by their prejudices,
and maliciously fasten them upon the innocent; for, let him say what he will,
yet he had broken the Sabbath, not indeed, but as they alleged. 3. Albeit God
have many Sons by creation and adoption, yet Christ is his Son in a
peculiar and proper way, by eternal generation, and communication of the same
essence; for, so does the Jews understand him, he said, God was his Father, or
his Father in a proper and peculiar way, otherwise they could not have
quarrelled with him; and Christ does not refute this. 4. Christ's conjunction
with his Father in working, does prove his equality with the Father, and that
he is of the same essence, and does partake of the same omnipotency; for, so
much do they soundly gather from his Apology, ver. 17. that he made himself
equal with God, neither does Christ call them calumniators, nor clear any
mistake in it, as in other cases he does, Joh. 21.23. but cleares and confirms
what they challenged, (though they gathered a vicious consequence, that he
should be killed as a blasphemer;) and what they collect, is asserted by the
Apostle, Phil. 2.6. 5. Such may be the corruption of a visible Church, as very
truth may be accounted blasphemy, and a ground of putting men to death; for,
albeit it be horrid blasphemy for any creature to equal it self with God, yet
they were far wrong, when they would slay Christ for asserting the comfortable
and supernatural truth of his Godhead.

Verse 19. Then answered Jesus, and said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto
you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do: For
what things soever he does, these also does the Son likewise.
Christ insisteth in his Apology, to the end of the Chapter, and clears and
confirms that which offended them in his discourse, of his equality and
conjunction with the Father, which does infer the justifying of his work on
the Sabbath. For this end, he produces many instances and arguments of his
equality, to ver. 31. and then produces many witnesses testifying concerning
him, whereof he makes use, in the rest of the Chapter. What Christ here speaks
of himself, is to be understood of his Godhead, for divine nature, though he
mention his commission to come into the world, ver. 23. and bis becoming man.
ver. 27. to show that as he is man and Mediator, that the Majesty of his
Godhead might not deter sinners from coming to him; so his condescendence did
take away none of his glory, nor his equality with the Father, as God.

In proving this equality. 1. He insists in general to prove his conjunction in
operation with the Father, which he had asserted, ver. 17. promising further
and greater manifestations of it, ver. 19, 20. 2. He produces particular
instances of this conjunction and equality, to ver. 31. And namely. That he is
equal with the Father in quickening the dead. ver. 21. in the matter of
judgment and authority, ver. 22. in being the object of divine honor, ver.
23. in giving eternal life to believers on his word, ver. 24. in quickening
dead souls by his word, ver. 25. in having a fountain of life, ver. 26. (
which may be cleared by his authority as Mediator also, ver. 27.) and in his
power to be showed in the resurrection and general judgment, ver. 28, 29. all
which is summed up by way of conclusion, ver. 30.

In this verse after a grave asseveration, we have two assertions; in the first
(which is negative) is declared, that what the Son does, he does it from the
Father, and does nothing separate or divided from him, and so shows that he
does only what the Father does, though there be a distinction and order of his
working from the Father. In the second, (which is positive, and a confirmation
of the former) is declared, that the Son does all that the Father does, and
the Father does nothing without him; and withal, that there is an unity and
equality of the working of the Father and Son, both in matter and manner.
Whence learn. 1. As truth is not to be quit and forsaken because of opposition,
so truth will lose nothing by opposition; but Christ will take occasion thereby
to clear it more, and make it shine the brighter; for, notwithstanding their
rage, he insists to inculcate and clear this truth the more. 2. The mysteries
of Religion, especially concerning God, and Christ as God, and plurality of
persons in the unity of essence, ought to be spoken of, heard, and thought
upon, with much gravity, reverence and sobriety; Therefore, does he begin this
doctrine with a grave esseveration, verily, verily. 3. Christ's equality and
unity with the Father, is a truth hardly received or believed by the hearts of
men, as being a mystery above the reach of natural reason, and yet it is worthy
to be received, for setting forth of his greatness, and the dignity of his
person; for grounding our faith in him; and, for assuring us of the certain
success of his undertakings; Therefore, also it is inculcate with a verelie,
verelie. 4. In taking up divine and supernatural mysteries, we are to submit
unto, and acquiesce in divine revelation, what ever carnal reason suggest to
the contrary; so much also does his confirming this truth, and obviating all
objections, with his asseveration, teach us. 5. As the Father and Son are one
in nature and essence, so are they undivided and inseparable in operation and
working, and the Son works only what the Father works; for, the Son can
do nothing of himself, (or separate from the Father) but what the Father does;
and that he cannot work otherwise, but in conjunction with the Father, does not
argue any impotency in him, but his strait union with the Father. 6. Albeit the
Father and Son be one in essence and operation, yet are they distinct
persons, and there is an order of subsistence and operation to be observed
betwixt the Father and the Son; So much are we taught, in that the one is the
Son, the other; the Father, and so distinct each from other, and in that the
Son does nothing of himself, which does not seclude Christ's own proper power
as God, but holds out (beside his conjunction with the Father) that in order of
working, he works from the Father; And it is yet further confirmed, in that
he does what he sees the Father do; Which seeing, (as that showing also ver.
20.) though it be an expression fitted to our capacity, and borrowed from among
men, who show their children their skill by acting and practicing thereof
before them, that they may imitate it; Yet it is not to be understood, as if
Christ's work were posterior to the Fathers work, and done in imitation of his,
as is after cleared: But it points out that unspeakable communication, whereby
the Father communicates unto the Son his nature, will, wisdom and power, and
so the Son in order of subsistence is from the Father; and points out also,
that the Son knows the Fathers working, because he works the same work with
him, and from him. 7. The Son is not only joint with his Father in working,
or execution of his purposes, but is upon all his counsels also, and perfectly
understands all his purposes; So much also may be gathered from his seeing
what the Father does, and the Fathers showing, ver. 20. importing that he is
conscious to all his Fathers counsel and working, as having the same wisdom
communicate from the Father to him. 8. Christ's works are not only like unto
the Fathers, but the same in substance, as flowing from one and the same
essence and power; for, what he does, these things also does the Son. 9.
Christ, in working with the Father, acts not as an instrument subordinate, but
as there is an unity in the work, so also in the manner of it, by the same
power, wisdom, liberty, authority, etc. the order of operation being observed;
for, these things also does the Son likewise, or, in like manner. 10. Christ is
joint with the Father, not in one or some only of his works, but in all that
he does, for, whatsoever things he does, these does the Son likewise. 11. It
is comfortable to the Church to be much in studying Christ's excellency, to look
on his working as the work of God, who can effectuate what he will, and that
the works which he works, they are the works of the Father also, and to see him
on all the Fathers counsels and undertakings; whereby believers may see nothing
contrived from all eternity, or acted within time, but what he, who is their
Head and Mediator also, has an hand in; So much may be gathered from this
doctrine, whereby he sets out his own glory for our use.

Verse 20. For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that
himself does: and he will show him greater works then these, that ye may
marvel.
This unity, and equality in operation, betwixt the Father and the Son, is
again repeated, confirmed and amplified, from several considerations. 1. That
this unity flows from, and is conjoined with the Fathers special love to the
Son. 2. That this communication, of counsel, and power in operation, is
universal, as he communicates his whole essence, and 3. He promises more ample
proofs of this equality, then they had seen in the late cure, though they
should make but little good use of it. This promise, of more ample proofs of
his equality with the Father, though it be verified in all the following
instances, to which this is a transition; Yet as to them, it is to be
understood specially of his great miracles wrought afterward, of, opening the
eyes of the blind, raising the dead, etc. Whence learn. 1. There is true love
betwixt the Father and the Son, accompanying their communion in essence and
operation; And Christ is beloved of the Father, in a special manner, not only
as Mediator and man, by virtue of the personal union, but as God, he is the
object of his eternal love, as being the substantial image of himself, and the
splendour and brightness of his glory; for, the Father loves the Son, and
shows him, etc. See Prove. 8.30. And it teaches us to tryst with the Fathers
love, by coming to the Son, to be assured of it in him; and as Christ is
beloved, and therefore gets the Fathers counsels, so by studying to be beloved
of God, we are sure to get his mind and secrets, in so far as is for our good,
Joh. 15.15. 2. As the Father and the Son are alsufficiently blessed in
themselves with the holy Spirit, loving and delighting in one another, without
needing of the creature: So it commends Gods love to sinners, that he would
send the beloved Son of his bosom to them, and Christ's love, who would come
out of the Fathers bosom, who would have his delights among the sons of men
also, and would purchase to himself love, and an object of love from among
them; And it should teach all to love him who is the Fathers beloved, and in
whom others are beloved: So much further may be gathered from this, the Father
loves the Son. 3. Gods love is communicative, and will manifest it self in
effects, according to the capacity of the party beloved; so much appears in
that unspeakable love of the Father to the Son, the Father loves the Son,
and shows him all things, etc. or, communicates his nature, wisdom, and
power for operation with him; which is expressed in terms taken from among
men, because of our weakness, and ought to be spiritually taken up, and not
carnally conceived of; And therefore also these terms of the Fathers showing,
and the Sons seeing, are made use of, to prevent all carnal and gross
conceptions of this inexpressible communication from the Father, and
participation by the Son. 4. Christ, as he is, and knows, and works from
the Father, so he is not posterior, but coeternal with him in his nature and
attributes, and works in the same time with him; for, he shows him, not
what he has done, but what he does, as being joint with him in counsel and
working, and at all times, and consequently, in his being also. 5. It is a
point to be much and often studied, that the glory not only of the Father, but
of Christ, as God, shines in all the Fathers works, that so we may adore the
infinite glory of our Head, and may see him in all that is done in the world;
Therefore, is it again inculcate, that the Father shows him all things that
himself does. 6 Christ's omnipotency, working from the Father, is infinite, and
when great things are done by him, it comes far short of what omnipotency
can do, and will do as need requires; for, he will show him, (or communicate
with him in, and he, from the Father, will work before your eyes) greater
things then these. 7. Albeit Christ's works do speak his praise, and his own
will get good of them, and glorify him for them; Yet most part of men (and
especially hardened enemies) will reap no saving benefit by them; Christ may
convince them of his glory in his works, may dash their unbelief, and make them
wonder; but they go no further then stupid astonishment; for; he will show him
greater works, that ye may marvel. He speaks of their wondering, as the Fathers
end, and his, in these works, as to them, because it is indeed his glory to
convince them so far, and put them to silence; and withal, it is his
righteous judgment, to give them up, to reap no more fruit by his working.

Verse 21. For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them: even so
the Son quickens whom he will.
Christ produces several instances and proofs of his conjunction and equality
with the Father, which are greater then that of the cure wrought on the man.
Whereof the first is the quickening of the dead, and raising them up, wherein
he works as the Father works; Not that he quickens some and the Father
others, but that he is joint with the Father in these works, and equal with him
in doing them, working even so, as the Father works them; not as an
instrument, but whom he will, that is, as a principal agent, by the same
authority, and absolute freedom of will, with the Father. This quickening and
raising may very safely be understood both of quickening these who are dead in
sin, and of raising up of all at the last day, of both which he speaks more
distinctly, verse 25, 28. not excluding also his miraculous quickening and
raising up of particular persons, (such as Lazarus, etc.) as a proof of what he
had foretold to the Jews, verse 20. Nor is this conjunction of the Father and
Son in this work to be understood, as excluding the Holy Ghost, who works
from the Father and the Son, in this operation, Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 12.10, 11.
But Christ here speaks to the present point in controversy, which the Jews
denied, Doctrine 1. Quickening and raising of the dead, whether bodily or
spiritually, is an act of omnipotency, and proper to God only; Therefore does
Christ set it out as his Fathers prerogative, and his, as equal with him, to
raise up the dead and quicken them. See Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6. Psalm. 68.20.
2. As Christ's power to quicken the dead, is a proof of his equality with the
Father, and shows the infiniteness of the power communicated from the Father
to him: So this proof of his Godhead, and of the Fathers also, does give to
them who come to God through him, sufficient ground of confidence in lesser
difficulties; may establish their hearts, when nothing but omnipotency can
effectuate what they need, and is promised to them; and, may give these who
have found his quickening virtue, confidence in coming to him, to recover their
decayed spiritual condition: so much may faith gather from this, as the Father
raises up the dead, and quickens them, so the Son quickens. See Romans
4.17 3. Christ in his working, is absolute, sovereigne and independent, as the
Father is, for, he quickens whom he will, and has the dispensation of his
power absolutely in his own hand: Which as it is verified in spiritual
renovation, and in miraculous raising up of some, so in all his actions, to
deny him absolute sovereignty to work as he pleases, is to deny him to be God,
Psalm. 115.3. Though his people have this comfort, that what is his will, is
their will.

Verse 22. For the Father judges no man: but has committed all judgment unto
the Son.
A second instance of this equality, (which is also a proof of the Sons
absolute power and Sovereignty, in quickening the dead, whom he will, verse 21.)
is, the judging of all things, communicate to him from the Father, who judges
none without him, but by him. By judgment, we are to understand, an absolute
dominion and soverignty over men, and all the creatures. In the first part of
the verse indeed, it is restricted to men, and holds out Gods dominion and
divine authority in absolving or condemning them, in adjudging them to live or
die, as a confirmation of what was said, verse 21. But in the second part of
the verse it is to be taken more largely, for the government and administration
of all things in heaven and earth; and so it is a confirmation of the former
part, importing, that the Father does not any particular act of government
without the Son, because he has committed the administration of all acts of
government to the Son, by whom, as God, he executes them; beside that he
has given to him dominion over all things as Mediator, for the Churches
behoof, of which elsewhere, Matthew. 11.27 and 28.18. And while he says, the
Father judges no man, it is spoken according to the Jews conception, who did
separate him from the Father, and the meaning is not, that the Father has so
given up the government of all to the Son, as to divest himself of it, for
that is contrary to verse 17, 19, 20, 21. and multitudes of Scriptures: But
that he does not judge any alone, or separate from the Son, but in and by
him; and so the Son also does not judge his alone, verse 30. for the Father
does so communicate all to the Son, as yet he has all. Doctrine 1. There is a
dominion and sovereignty exercised in the world, and over men and all creatures
therein, whereby they are not left to their own arbitriments, or to uncertain
contingencie, but are under the government of a supreme providence; for, so is
imported, that there is a judging of men, and all judgment. 2. It is the
prerogative of God only to be sovereigne Judge and Governor of the world, who
having created men and all things, may dispose of them at his pleasure; who is
every where present in heaven and earth to govern all things; whose
omniscience takes up all things, even the secrets of hearts; whose providence
extends to all; and, whose power is infinite, to execute the pleasure of his
will; for, so is here held out, as a proof of Christ's equality with the Father,
that he has all judgment from the Father. 3. Christ, as God, has the
government of the world communicated to him from the Father; he has power of
life and death, of absolution and condemnation, and the administration of all
things in his hand: So that we are to look on nothing in the world, as done by
the Father alone, or separate from the Son; but that all is done by him, who
is also the Churches Head, for, so much are we taught, in that the Father
judges no man, but has committed, (or, given) all judgment to the Son, as
is before explained. Which giving, on the Fathers part, and receiving by
Christ, is not out of his indigencie, or to supply his defects (which is an
imperfection, Acts 20, 35.) but it is given and received by communication and
participation of the same essence.

Verse 23. That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, which has
sent him.
The end of this communication with the Son, (and a third proof of his
equality with the Father) is, Ch^ists participation in divine honor with the
Father, which whosoever deny to him, they deny it also to the Father. Whence
learn, 1. There is an honor due to God only, and not to be given to any
other; consisting in the admiring and publishing of his infinite excellency
and perfection; in subjecting our selves to him, with absolute submission; and,
in offering up religious worship and homage to him; Therefore does Christ prove
his equality with the Father, by partaking of the same honor with him. 2. Gods
glory and the manifesting thereof, is his supreme end in all his works in the
world; which we should set before us in all our ways, and submit in every
dispensation whereby he is glorified; for he judges, and commits judgment
to the Son, That all men should honor the Son, etc. See Prove. 16.4. John
12.28. 3. The glory of the excellency of wisdom, sovereignty, alsufficiencie,
power, and every other attribute, is due to God from men, in his administration
of the world: And men ought rather to study matter of his praise, then of
complaining and quarrelling, therein; for, it is the very end of his
administration of all, by his Son, that all men should honor the Son, etc.
4. Christ is equal with the Father in participating of divine honor; As he
has the same throne, and power of administration with him; so no less glory
is due to him, then is due to the Father; for, all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father. See John 17.5. He is to have the same glory of
believing in him, John 14.1. of love, fear, invocation, bowing of the knee,
etc. with the Father. 5. As no man has, or enjoys, or acknowledges the
Father, but he who acknowledges the Son, and the Father in and through him,
1 John 2.23. So, however men do pretend to acknowledge one true God; yet, they
cannot withdraw honor from the Son, but they deny it to the Father, who will
not be honored, but in and through the honoring of the Son; for, he that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father. 6. Christ, as he is true
God, equal with the Father, so he sustaines the relation also of being the
Fathers Ambassador, sent into the world, for the redemption of lost man, by
the exercise of his Mediatory office; for, so is imported here, that the Father
has sent him. And this he takes delight to speak of in the midst of his divine
glory, that the Jews might not stumble at that condescendence, wherein he
delighted so much. 7. Christ's condescendence to come into the world as Mediator
of sinners, diminesheth nothing of his divine glory, but in the same person he
remains true God, to be equally honored with the Father; for, though he be
sent, yet he is to be honored, even as the Father. He is an Ambassador whose
honor cease by the presence of the King, but remains equal with the
Father, though in respect of that voluntary dispensation, as God-man, he is
inferior. 8. As the Father is honored in and through the honor given to the
Son, as God equal with him; So also is he honored in his authority, by men's
acknowledging of Christ, as sent of him into the world; And whoever despise
Christ, they offer injury unto God, in both these respects; so much also may we
gather in that, he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which
has sent him.

Verse 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.
The fourth instance of Christ's Godhead and equality with the Father, is held
out in several particulars, relating to man's salvation: Namely, that the
Doctrine of the Gospel is his Word; that it requires absolute faith and
closing with God through him; and that he gives perseverance and eternal life
to such as believe in the Father through him, according to the Word. Whence
learn, 1. It is the great and undeniable evidence of men's giving due honor
unto Jesus Christ the Son of God, when his Word is acknowledged and received
as becomes; and when by making use thereof, we do promove our own eternal
happiness; So much may be gathered from the dependence from this verse on the
former, he is then honored, when his Word is heard. For, in this work the
glory of his Godhead shines brightly, and his love to his people is such, as
to account himself especially honored in that which promoveth their
happiness. 2. Christ would have men very serious in the matter of esteeming
his Word, and of their own salvation, and would have them taking him up as very
serious about it, and very real in what he says concerning their well-being;
Therefore does he begin with an asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
to show that the way of sinners salvation was no small matter in his mind, and
that he was worthy to be credited concerning it, and to invite them to
seriousness. 3. The Doctrine of the Scripture is Christ's voice, who as God
equal with the Father, is the prescriber of men's duty, and of the way of their
salvation; an authorizer of a rule of faith and manners to bind the
conscience, and who is Mediator, is the purchaser of the good news of the
Gospel for lost sinners; for, says he, it is my word, not as a Messenger
carrying it only, as Paul says of himself, that the Gospel was his, Romans
2.16. Nor yet only as the Purchaser of good tidings, (though both these be
true,) but as principal Author, with the Father of that Doctrine, and
particularly of the Gospel, whether published by himself, or by his
Ambassadors, Luke 10.16. 4. Christ's Doctrine is to be reverently attended and
hearkened unto, and absolute obedience is due to what he says, without
exception; And for this end, he is to be heard in every message, who is God
over all, and who speaks from heaven, and who in his voice of the Gospel,
has not that dreadful sound, which accompanied the Law, Heb. 12.19, etc.
attending it; for, it is their duty, that they hear my word, says he, hearing
importing obedience thereunto, and attention as previous to that, and all this,
because it is his word. See Deuteronomy. 18.15. 5. The Doctrine of Christ, and
especially of the Gospel, is then rightly heard, when we bring faith, and not
our reason and corrupt sense, to judge of it, and when it puts a sinner out of
himself, to flee by faith to a refuge; for, so is added, he that hears my
word, and believes. Christ's doctrine may be a stumbling block, and
foolishness, if we bring not faith, 1 Cor. 1.18, 23. and whatever change the
Gospel work on men, yet it works not savingly, till it drive men out of
themselves, to live by faith. 6. Faith, whereby the Doctrine of Christ is
embraced to salvation, is not our own, but Gods gift, and wrought by means of
hearing the Word: for, so much is imported in the order; he that hears and
believes, see Romans 10.17. 7. Saving faith, begotten by the Word, does lay hold
on God through Christ the Mediator, and rests on God as the proper object;
for, he believes on him that sent me, where Christ does not seclude himself
from being the object of faith, as God, (which elsewhere he so clearly
asserteth, John 1.12. and 3.16. and 14.1.) more then he denies the Father to
be the Author of his Doctrine, when he calls it, my word. But he speaks thus,
partly, with reference to the Jews conception, who thought that he and his
Doctrine had nothing to do with God; therefore he shows that as he was one
with the Father, so his Doctrine tended to, and was a means of begetting faith
in him; and partly, to show the order of saving faith, that as it dare not fix
on God immediately, but in, and by the Mediator, so it cannot rest till
ultimately it rest on God in Christ his Son, equal, and the same essentially
with him. See Acts 20.21. 2 Cor. 3.4. 1 Pet. 1.21. 8. Albeit all men by nature
be lying dead in sins and trespasses, and be liable to bodily death and
mortality, even albeit they come to Christ; Yet such as by hearing the Word,
are drawn to believe on God through him, get spiritual life, and not only
shall they have, but they already have eternal life, by Covenant-right, in the
bud and earnest of it, Ephesians. 1, 13, 14. 1 John 5.11. and in their Head Christ,
Ephesians. 2.5.6. for, of such Christ says, he has everlasting life, as John
3.16. and he is passed from death unto life, or, translated from under the
state and sentence of death, by a sentence of life passed in his favors in
justification, and put in a living condition, by sanctification: And this is
the reason why the believer has everlasting life. See the like form of
speech, 1 John 3.14. 9. The believer in Christ has eternal life on so sure
terms, that he is out of peril of perishing, and is gifted with perseverance,
till full fruition come; for, he has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. 10, The sentence passed in
the believers conscience, according to the Word, shall stand firm, and be
ratified by God, in his judging of men; for, he that has everlasting life, by
believing, shall not come into condemnation, etc. imports this also. See 1
John 3.21. 11. Albeit Christ, being God over all blessed for ever, does not
stand in need of man, nor any of his creatures; Yet such is his alsufficiencie
and bounty, as he delights to give proofs of his Godhead in saving his people,
and making them happy; Therefore does he bring this proof to confirm his
assertion, from his being able and willing to save them who believe in God
through him.

Verse 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the ^onne of God, and they that hear, shall
live.
The fifth instance of his Godhead and equality with the Father, does amplify
the former in ver. 24. for, whereas there he proved his Godhead by being the
Author of eternal life to believers; here he promises to give faith to his
own, by causing them to hear his voice who are of themselves dead, and making
them, by hearing and believing, to live a life of grace here, till it be
perfected in glory. Doctrine 1. However Christ may propound the Doctrine of
eternal life conditionally, to the visible Church, yet the promises are
absolute in his intention toward the Elect, and he is the undertaker for
performing all the conditions, which he requires of them, when they are humble
and flee to him; So much is held out, in that Christ undertakes to give faith,
and cause the dead to hear, which was required as a condition in the former
verse. 2. We have much need to be often stirred up to be grave and serious in
studying Christ's glory, and about the matters of our salvation, and to be
stirred up to give credit to what he says and undertaketh for lost sinners;
Therefore does Christ again inculcate this Doctrine with Verily, verily, I say
unto you. 3. The great manifestation of the power of Christ's Word and Spirit,
was reserved for the days of the Gospel; for Christ says, the hour (or
acceptable season, to be well improven, and therefore measured by an hour) is
coming, after my resurrection, and pouring out of the Spirit, and now is, in
some measure by my Ministry and John's, when the dead shall hear, etc. Not that
he gave not proof of this before his incarnation, but it was now to be in
greater measure, and with greater efficacy. 4. Whatever remainders of the image
of God, and what ever excellency natural men may have; yet they are
spiritually dead till Christ come unto them, being destitute of spiritual life,
and of the favor and peace of God, being dead by a sentence of the Law past
against them, and being under this, insensible, and unable to help themselves;
for, here they are called the dead. 5. Such is the power of the Gospel, as
being the voice of the Son of God, that not only will it speak to them who
have ears, but it will raise dead souls to life by conversion, and give them
an ear to hear, and make them to believe; for, the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God. 6. Such as are regenerate and raised from the dead, by the
Word of the Gospel, and who do close with it, and Christ in it, by faith; their
begotten life shall be cherished and entertained and carried on, by enjoyment
of begun conformity and communion with Christ, till it be perfected with glory;
for, they that hear (or being regenerate, are made so to hear, as to believe)
shall live.

Verse 26. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son
to have life in himself.
What Christ has said in the two former verses, is here confirmed; that he can
give everlasting life to believers, and quicken those who are spiritually dead,
because Christ, as God, has a fountain of life, equal with the Father,
communicate to him from the Father by eternal generation. And this is a sixth
instance and proof of his equality with the Father. Whence learn. 1. The power
and efficacy of the Gospel for quickening and keeping in the life of believers,
will never be rightly seen nor believed, till we see that inexhaustible
fullness that is in Christ for that effect, who has all fullness of life in
himself, as God, to be forthcoming to his own, as a cause of life in them; and
when that is seen, difficulties will easily be removed; Therefore, does he
prove the truth of the former doctrine, by this reason, they shall live,
because he has life in himself equally with the Father. 2. No less is able
to beget, and keep in and cherish life in the elect, and to revive it when it
is decaying and ready to dye, then that infinite and independent fountain of
life, which is Gods own prerogative; So much also does this dependence teach;
No less can assure that the dead shall hear, and that the quickened shall
persevere in life, then such a fountain employed for that end. So many
invincible impediments are there in the way of our quickening, and so many
blasting storms does our life meet with, 3. It is the property of God to be a
living God; that independent inexpressible life is his own essence and nature,
and he is the fountain of all life in the creatures; for, it is Gods
prerogative, and a proof of Christ's equality with him, that he has life in
himself. 4. This property of life is common to each person of the blessed
Trinity, to the Father and to the Son; Yet the Father is first in order in
having of it, and does communicate it to the Son; for of both it is said, he
has life in himself, and that the Father has given it to the Son, which is
to be understood of his communicating it, in communicating his nature with him,
by eternal generation; And as for the humane nature, this is only gifted to it
in this respect, that by the grace of the personal union, the humane nature is
assumed into the unity of person with him, who has this life by eternal
generation. 5. The Fathers communicating of life to the Son, argues no
inequality nor inferiority in the Son, but he has the same life, infinitely,
independently and equally with the Father; for as the Father has it, so has
the Son; and he has it in himself, as the Father has. Such a fountain and
storehouse have believers to trust to.

Verse 27. And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he
is the Son of man.
To confirm the former reasons, and because they might be ready to stumble at
what Christ said of himself, when they looked on him in his humane nature;
Therefore he declares that not only as God, he has a fountain of life,
equally with the Father, but that he has authority given him from the Father,
to execute, or do judgment, even because he is the Son of man. By executing
or doing of judgment, of which, ver 22. we are to understand a dominion and
government over all things, and particularly, the power of life and death, to
condemn or absolve, which will be especially verified in the judgment of the
last day, of which he speaks, ver. 28, 29. And Christ says authority is
given him to do this because he is the Son of man, or, as he is the Son of
man. Whereby we are not to understand his humane nature simple considered, but
his office, and his humane nature as united in one person with the Godhead;
That because he is God-man, the Mediator of sinners, and took on our nature
for that end, therefore he has all power committed to him as Mediator, for
the good of the Church; the exercise whereof he fully entered upon, after his
resurrection, Matthew. 28.18. Romans 14.9. Rev. 1.18. Philip. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. And,
that in his humane nature, though he be not advanced to the participation of
divine properties, yet he is advanced to that Lordship over all the creatures
that he is capable of, Romans 14.9. Phil 2.9, 10 and gifted with that dignity and
authority to be in the unity of person, one with him, who is sovereigne Lord
over all; And he is the visible actor and Judge in these administrations, which
could be done by none but him who is God also, and particularly, in the last
day, wherein he shall be Judge in visible shape, Act. 10.42. and 17.31.
according to the prophecy of him under the same name, Dan. 7.13. Doctrine, 1.
The eternal Son of God, equal with the Father, did in the fullness of time,
become true man in one person with his Godhead; for, the Son of God, ver.
25. is also the Son of man. 2. Man's nature is highly exalted in our head
Christ; his humane nature being not only advanced to that dignity above all
creatures, that it can be capable of, in it self; but being in the unity of
person, the same with him who is Lord over all, and the visible actor of the
works of the Godhead, for, the Son of man has authority given him, etc. 3.
As Christ has from the Father a native dominion, as God, by eternal
generation; so he has also a donative Kingdom, as Mediator, God-man, for the
good of his Church; whereby he not only rules over his Church, but has all
power in heaven and earth, and all things in his hand, which may either hinder
or promote her happiness; for, the Father has given him authority to execute
judgment, because he is the Son of man. And this is to be looked on as
better and surer in Christ's hand, who is our head, then in our own. 4. The
redemption of lost sinners is so acceptable to the Father, that he will not
only accept a ransom, but will honor the Redeemer, and confer dignity upon
him, for effectuating that work; for, because he is the Son of man, and
Mediator, the Father has given him authority to execute judgment. See
Philip. 2.8, 9, 10. Joh. 10.17. 5. Christ has undertaken to work the work of
redemption of sinners, and so has engaged himself to carry it through; and
the Father, according to his Covenant with him, has invested him with what was
requisite (...) perfecting that work; for, he is the Son of man (...) that
end, and therefore the Father has given him authority, etc. 6. Christ in the
work of redemption, and administration of all things, for the elects behoof,
is the Fathers Commissioner, and clothed with a Delegate authority for which
he is accountable to the Father, for all those whom he has given him, and all
their allowances and lots, and for the administration of all things in order to
them: Not a lot they meet with, but he will give an account of it, as beseeming
his dominion and trust, and tending to their welfare; for, as the Son of
man and Mediator, this authority is given him, as to a Delegate. 7. The
dignity of Christ's humane nature being united with the Godhead, and his
dignity as Mediator, as it shines in many particular acts and administrations,
so particularly, in that he will be the visible Judge of quick and dead, in his
humane nature, at the last day; wherein Christ, despised in the world, because
of his outward baseness, will be glorious; and contemners of his offer of
mercy, will find his Lambs face terrible; And wherein believers will find
their Advocate, their Judge; for, his executing of judgment, because he is the
Son of man, does point at this ultimately.

Verse 28. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves, shall hear his voice.

29. And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.


Hitherto Christ has given diverse proofs of his Godhead and equality with the
Father, and amongst the rest, one from his quickening of those who are
spiritually dead; and has declared his supreme authority to absolve and
condemn, and to govern and judge all, as God incarnate. Now finding the Jews
but amazed and astonished at this doctrine, he labors to put them from that,
by producing a new proof of his power and Godhead to be showed in the
resurrection, by quickening the dead, raising them up, bringing them to
judgment, and sentencing them according to their works. And by this instance,
he confirms what he said of his power to quicken dead souls, by a proof
which they would think more mavelous; and holds out a particular evidence of
that authority, ver. 27. wherein in his humane nature he should so be visible
Judge, as yet his procedure should prove him to be true God also. Doctrine 1.
Christ's glory has but little room and place in our narrow hearts, when it is
set before us; and in his humanity and state of humiliation, hardly will men
give unto him the glory of his Godhead; for they but marvelled at these
things, as that which their hearts could not receive. 2. As it is commendable
for men, when Christ manifests himself and his glory in the Word, to close
with it by faith, and believing, to admire, and wonder at that infinite depth
of excellency in him, which cannot be comprehended; So to misbeleeve and
wonder, and be astonished at what Christ says, because we cannot comprehend it
by sense or reason, is the great and ordinary sin of too many hearers; for,
such was the fruit of the Jews hearing, reproved by Christ, marvel not at
this. 3. Christ's power for quickening and converting sinners, and his having
authority to execute judgment, should not be thought strange of, considering
what he is, and that wonders are ordinary with him; Marvel not at this, says
he. Christ has still more and more proofs of his Godhead to let forth, if
need be, and the proof of his Godhead and power in the general resurrection,
may stay our hearts from distrustful wondering at what he declares of
himself; for, Christ refutes their wondering at what he had said, by this new
proof. Not that the resurrection of the body is a greater proof of power in
it self, then the quickening of a dead soul, wherein all the powers and
faculties of man, are prone to resist Gods operation, whereas men's dead bodies
have an obediential subjection to his power; But this proof of his power is
more visible and obvious to men's senses then the other, and more difficulty
appears in the work, to carnal reason, which takes not up the power of
spiritual death, and thinks it easy to work on a man having a reasonable soul
and bodily ear, then on dead bodies having no sense nor understanding to hear
his voice; And therefore Christ proves the one by the other. 5. How impossible
soever it seem to carnal reason, yet it is clear from the word, that there will
be a resurrection of the dead, that both godly and wicked may receive a full
recompense according to their ways; and that for this end, there shall be a
reuniting of the soul to the body in the grave, to make them living persons
again; for, they that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, which
presupposes that their souls shall be united to their bodies in their graves.
6. Albeit the time of the resurrection, and general judgment, be unknown to
any, save to God only, Matthew. 24.36. Yet it is certainly coming, and all are
bound to mind that it is so; for, the hour is coming, in the which they shall
hear his voice, etc. See Jam. 5.9. 7. This resurrection will be universal, of
all, whether dead sooner or latter, none of the godly will be l^st, but will
meet in that general assembly, nor shall any of the wicked shift this day of
compe^rance; for, all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, etc. Whereby
we are not to seclude those who shall be changed, 1 Cor. 15.51. as if no notice
should be taken of them in that day, though they need not a resurrection; Nor
yet are we to seclude others, who never got a grave, but were torn, drowned,
burnt, or devoured by wild beasts and monsters; for, all will be delivered up,
Rev. 20.13. Only under this, as the most usual course taken with dead bodies,
all the dead are comprehended, and by this evidience of power on them who are
rotten and resolved to dust in their graves, proof is given how easy it is for
him to raise up all. 8. This universal resurrection will be of the same bodies
that lived on earth, and were laid in grave, which as his omnipotency can
effectuate, so his justice, purchase and promise requires, that the same body
should receive the reward of its ways, and that he should not lose his
purchase; for, they that are in the graves or, the same body that lived, and
was laid there, being dead, shall hear his voice, see Job 19.25, 26, 27. 9. The
mean employed in the resurrection, is the voice of Jesus Christ, who shall
descend with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and with the sound of a Trumpet, sounded
by Angels, and backed with his authority, Matthew. 24.31. which not only those
who remain and are alive, but those who are dead shall hear all the world
over, (their souls having now re-entred into their b^dies) and shall call them
out, to the terror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly; for, all that are
in the graves, shall hear his voice. 10. The souls of men being united to their
bodies, and their bodies endowed with qualities suitable to the estate for which
they are appointed, shall at the call of Christ rise out of their graves, and
be brought before the judgment seat of Christ, the godly rejoicing to go meet
their bridegroom, and the wicked forced to appear, who could wish that hills
and mountains would cover them; for, they shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth. 11. In the day of the resurrection, and general judgment: there will be
only two sorts of persons, good, or evil, and all the godly will be reckoned
to have done good, how small soever the degree of their goodness has been,
and how many faults soever they have had, if their course and way has aimed at
good; yea, the evil deeds of such as sincerely close with Christ, if it were
but at their death, shall be forgotten: And on the other hand, all the wicked
shall be accounted evildoers, how many soever moral virtues they have had, or
albeit they have been painted hypocrite; and that because they have not made
their peace through Jesus Christ: for, there shall be only then, they that
have done good, and they that have done evil. 12. Albeit there may be many
mistakes in this world, and the godly may be misconstructed and slandered, and
the wicked and hypocrites may be cried up, and seem to be very good; yet in
the day of judgment, men's ways will appear in their true colors, and their
actions and ways shall be clearly known to the Judge, who will distinguish and
rank them accordingly on his right and left hand, for then it will be clear,
who have done good, and who have done evil 13. According as men live in this
world, and die and go out of it, accordingly will they be found in the
resurrection and judgment, without any change; for, in that day, men are
reckoned according as they have done good or evil, to wit, in this life. 14.
Albeit Christ will not reward men for their good works, as he punishes them
for their wickedness, in the general judgment; Yet he will proceed in that
day according as their works shall evidence their state, that they have been
believers in Christ, or living in the bond of iniquity, to punish them for the
one, and to reward them of free grace, according to the other; Therefore, will
it be taken notice of in that day, who have done good, and who have done evil,
See Matthew 25.34, -- 45. 15. Albeit the Lord see it fit, for wise reasons, to
let common lots befall the wicked and the godly, within time, and albeit the
wicked may prosper in the world, when the godly, holding fast their integrity,
are in deep distress; Yet in the resurrection and general judgment, God will
give a full and final recompense to men according to their ways; for, the
Godly shall be raised up, and brought to judgment, that they may be entered
into the possession of a blessed and eternal life, wherein they shall enjoy God
and Christ, and the company of Saints and Angels, and sing Hallelujahs for
ever: And the wicked, to get the sentence of condemnation passed by the Law and
Gospel, execute upon them; and to be in the pit, tormented with the Devil and
his Angels for ever; And they shall be raised by virtue of that sentence, and
by the power of the Judge, to have it executed, and not by virtue of Christ's
life and resurrection, and their head, 1 Cor. 15.23. for, they shall come
forth, they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

Verse 30. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my
judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father
which has sent me.
This verse is a conclusion of this part of Christ's Apology, for his curing of
the man, and commanding him to carry his bed on the Sabbath day, and for his
asserting his unity and equality with the Father: Wherein, from the former
purpose, he sums up these conclusions. 1. That he is inseparable from the
Father in operation, as verse 19. having no private power of his own, (as they
conceived of him as a mere man;) but the same in essence, power, and operation
with him. 2. That he is on all the Fathers counsels, and has the power of
administration of all things, communicate to him from the Father; which is
pointed out under the name of hearing, as it is verse 19. by seeing, to hold
forth the spirituality of the way of communicating, and his infinite
comprehension of all that is communicate, as hearing and seeing all. 3. That
his government and administration is most just, as seeking no satisfaction to
any will of his own, contrary to, or diverse from the Fathers, as he is God;
And that he does this not only as God simply, but as God now incarnate also,
being the same still with the Father, and acting in all things according to the
will of God. And though as man he have a will distinct from his will as God,
and so diverse from the Fathers will, yet that did act in subordination to the
will of God, Matthew. 26.39. Whence learn, 1. The divinity of Christ is a truth,
that may no ways be quarrelled, and does call for our second and serious
thoughts; Therefore does he recapitulate his Apology, that this truth may be
inculcate. 2. Such is the strict conjunction, and perfect unity of the Father
and the Son, that the Son neither does, nor can do any thing, without the
fellowship of the Father; So that in all his working, the Father is to be seen
and taken up; for I can of mine own self do nothing, says he. 3. Christ, in
the administration of all things, and executing of his purposes in this life,
and at the day of judgment, is upon the Fathers counsel, acting from him; and
all Christ's administrations are upon counsel and conclusion taken betwixt the
Father and the Son; for, says he, as I hear, I judge. 4. Christ's
administrations and sentences are all just and right, doing injury and violence
to no man, nor ought they to be stumbled at by any; for, my judgment is just,
says he. 5. The reason of the justice of Christ's judgment, is, because it is
agreeable to the will of the Father, with whom he is one, and whose will is the
rule of justice, as being supreme and absolute Lord; Which will Christ, being
incarnate and God-man, did conform himself unto, in all things; for, my
judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, (nor have any will contrary
to, or diverse from his, as has been explained) but the will of the Father,
which has sent me.

Verse 31. If bear witness of my self, my witness is not true.
Follows to the end of the chapter the second part of Christ's Apology;
wherein, having by many instances proven his unity and equality with the
Father, he proceeds to produce witnesses testifying concerning him, which
were so clear, as gave him just cause to season them with chalenges for their
wilful unbelief and rejecting of him, and to threaten them with being judged
and condemned before God. And, 1. Waving an ordinary exception which might be
moved against his testimony of himself, verse 31. be clears that the Father
had by many witnesses testified concerning him, verse 32. Namely: By the
testimony of John the Baptist, verse 33. ( a witness, whom though he produced,
not because he needed it, but for their good, verse 34. yet one who was truly
eminent, and whose eminency might condemn their inconstancy, verse 35.) By
the works he did, verse 36. By his immediate testimony from heaven, of whom
they were ignorant, and looked nothing like his manifestations to them, verse
37, 38. By the testimony of the Scriptures, verse 39. 2. Unto these he
subjoynes chalenges for several faults; Namely, for their wilful unbelief in
not coming to him, verse 40, ( though he sought them not for any need he had of
them, verse 41.) for want of the love of God, verse 42. for not embracing him,
whereas they would receive a seducer, verse 43. and, for their pride and
vainglory, which causes their unbelief, verse 44. 3. Because of these evils;
he warns them of being accused and judged before the tribunal of God;
assuring them that even Moses would be against them, verse 45. Seeing they
could not believe Moses who wrote of him, since they believed not him, verse
46. and it was no wonder they slighted him, since they believed not Moses,
verse 47.

In this verse we have a transition, wherein Christ obviates an ordinary
objection against the former part of this Apology; to wit, that his testimony
of himself could not be authentic, of which also, John 8.13. Christ, by this
sentence, does not grant this as true, for the contra^y is asserted, John 8.14.
but only by way of preterition, passes it, to make way for the following
testimonies confirming his testimony of himself, that he might let them see he
had witnesses beside to convince them, though he were silent. Whence learn, 1.
In reading of holy Scripture great care is to be had for finding out the true
sense thereof, and that we be not drawn away by what it seems to say at first
view, to take up a sense contrary to truth, and other clear Scriptures: And
particularly, words spoken by way of objection, or, preterition and giving and
not granting, are to be distinguished from affirmations; for, so is this to be
understood, if I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true; to expound
it otherwise, were to contradict truth. 2. Albeit that men may lawfully speak
that which is true of themselves, when they have Gods call unto it; Yet
ordinarily such is the frailty of any who is a mere man, that he is but a bad
witness in his own cause, being but a liar, and so subject to err, being
readily poisoned with self-love, in what concerns himself; and, being ready,
in what is true, to seek himself; for, upon this truth is this objection
grounded, which had some color if Christ had been only a man. 3. Albeit Christ
be of himself the Amen, the faithful and true witness, Rev. 3.14. to all that
know him; yet for further confirmation of his people, and for conviction of
wilful opposers, he is content to deny himself, and produce witnesses to
testify for him; So much does this preterition, and proceeding to the
testimonies, teach us.

Verse 32. There is another that bears witness of me, and I know that the
witness which he witnesses of me is true.
Albeit this verse may be understood of John, (of whom, verse 33.) who as he
testified of Christ, so Christ commends and allows of his testimony; Yet it
seems rather to be understood of the Father, who is the other witness with
himself, John 8.18. And it does point, not so much at any particular testimony,
of which verse 37. As in general, shows that all these ensuing testimonies
had authority from him, Concerning this testimony, Christ declares his
persuasion of the truth, and certainty thereof. Whence learn, 1. Albeit that
Christ, the true and faithful witness, be oft-times accounted so infamous in
the world, as not to be believed; yet, as he is above all proof to his own, so
he wants not witnesses to testify for him; So much does his producing them in
this Apology, teach. 2. As Christ came into the world in obedience to the
Father, and to bear witness of him, so was he assured to be avowed and owned
of him, and accordingly found so; and as he honored the Father, so did the
Father honor and bear witness of him; for, there is another that bears
witness of me. 3. Christ, as he is one in nature and essence with the Father,
so is he a distinct person from him; for, he is another that bears witness.
4. Gods testimony concerning Christ is undoubtedly true, and to be rested on,
and all other testimonies are therefore true, because Gods authority is
interposed in them; for, the witness which he witnesses of me, is true, and
the rest of the testimonies have weight, because they are his testimonies. 5.
It is not enough for our comfort, that we have Gods testimony approving us, but
we should know that it is so, and ought to study the certainty and sure ground
that is in such a testimony, that it may bear us up against all opposition, and
enable us to avow it, and having believed, to speak, as we stand in need;
Therefore Christ having asserted, that the Father bears witness of him, does
subjoyne, and I know that the witness which he witnesses of me, is true, as
resting upon the truth and reality that is in such a testimony.

Verse 33. Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth.
The first particular witness produced here, whereby the Father testifies
concerning him, is John the Baptist, who without any partial respect to Christ,
did simply bear witness to the truth concerning him; And this testimony he
presses from their own practice, who seemed so much to respect him, as to send
honorable Commissioners to him, chap. 1.19. And to be willing to stand to his
testimony concerning the Messiah, yea, and to offer that honor to him, if he
would have accepted it; And therefore they were bound to esteem of his
testimony, especially, when they sound him so self-denied, as not to seek his
own honor. Whence learn, 1. It is the duty and commendation of Christ's
Messengers, to be witnesse-bearers for him, and with zeal and fidelity to
publish his excellency upon any hazard; And they ought to assume no more to
themselves, but to be Heralds of his praise, that sinners may be drawn to him;
for, John bare witness unto the truth, concerning Christ. See chap. 1.7. 2.
Faithfulness is the great ornament and duty of Christ's witnesses, that,
without any by respect, they publish only what is truth, and that nothing
which is truth, (be it of less or more importance) want a testimony from them,
as they are called to it; for, he bare witness unto the truth, was his
commendation in this testimony, and it is a pattern to all others; And Christ
thus describes his testimony concerning himself, that none might except that
there is such a difference betwixt the matter of John's testimony, and what may
be their trial, as to make them shrink, if there be a divine truth in it. 3.
The doctrine and faithful testimonies of Christ's servants, will live to their
commendation, and be of use, when themselves are gone; for, Christ repeats
John's testimony; to his commendation, and for the use of the Jews, when now,
John was in appearance, dead; for he speaks of him, as one that was, verse 35.
4. The respect that men have seemed (at least) to carry to faithful Ministers,
and the excellent graces of God that they might have observed in them, will be
a witness against them, if they do not respect and credit their doctrine; for,
so does Christ urge from their practice, and John's fidelity and self-denial; ye
sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth, and renounced that honor
which they would have conferred on him.

Verse 34. But I receive not testimony from man: but these things I say that ye
might be saved.
Unto this testimony of John, Christ subjoines two things. 1. By way of
correction, that he needed not man's testimony, nor did produce it for any
thing it could add to him, but only for their good and salvation, if so be
that testimony of John, whom they seemed to respect, might draw them to come to
him, and be saved. Whence learn. 1. Christ does so condescend and stoop for the
good of his people, as yet he will not have his greatness, and Majesty
forgotten or slighted; Therefore does he add this correction, lest they
should mistake his condescendence. 2. Christ does then get his own room in
men's estimation, when he is seen to be such a one, as needs nothing without
himself, and needs nothing to commend him, but himself; And when they are
brought to see and acknowledge; That he is nothing the greater, or better, when
all are for him, nor the worse, though all were against him; That his truth and
doctrine needs no man's testimony for confirmation of it, being sufficiently
confirmed by his own authority; And, That men's commending of him, adds nothing
to him, though it be their own and others advantage, that they do so,
Therefore, says he, I receive not testimony from man. 3. Albeit Christ need
nothing of himself, but is alsufficient and infinitely glorious; yet he
condescends much to man's weakness, and for his good; for, albeit, he receive
not testimony from man, yet says he, these things I say, I borrow a testimony
from John, for your cause, that ye might be saved. 4. The nature of Christ's
Ministry tends to the salvation of sinners, how crosse-like soever it seem to
work, to such an end; And in his Ministry, he intends the salvation of his own,
whom his love does follow when they are among the crowd of enemies; for, these
things I say, not only in producing this testimony, but even in the harshest
of this Apology, that ye might be saved, not that he intended the salvation of
all these, but that the nature of his work tended to that end, and he intended
the salvation of his own among them, 5. Albeit the salvation of men be their
great and eternal happiness, yet they are ready to lay many obstructions in
the way thereof, which it is Christ's great love and condescendence to pass
over; for, so much also is imported, in his saying these things, that they
might be saved; They obstructed the way of their own salvation, and Christ
condescended to take the stumbling blocks out of the way.

Verse 35. He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light.
The second thing subjoined to this Testimony, is a qualification added to his
depressing of John's Testimony. Lest any should think, that by what he had said,
he had vilified John, and his Testimony; therefore he guardes it with a
commendation of him, as being an eminent man, for clearness of Doctrine, and
vigor of zeal, and effectual in his doctrine, even among these corrupt Jews,
both Pharisees and others, who went out to him, Matthew. 3.5, 7. Wherein also he
checks them for their inconstancy, who so soon wearied of what they seemed to
be so much affected with. Doctrine 1. Albeit Ministers be nothing in comparison
of Christ, nor are they to think that they can add any thing to him; Yet they
will not want their own due commendation; for, so does Christ's commending of
John, after what he had said, ver. 34. teach us. 2. Without the knowledge of
God, and a lively Ministry holding out the same from the Word, the world lies
in the darkness of ignorance and error, wandering in the unfruitful works of
darkness; and under the disconsolate estate of misery, without any comfortable
sight of Gods favor; for, Ministers being a light, (which serves to enlighten
what is dark) imports so much. 3. Faithful Ministers are appointed of Christ,
for remedying this darkness; And it is their duty, and commendation, not only
to shine in their conversation (as all Christians are bound to do, Phil. 2.15,
16.) but by purity and clearness of doctrine, to point out the way of
salvation, and remedy of all grievances, to sinners; for, he was a shining
light; The Word is, a lamp, or, lantern, not only pointing at this, that such
a light should not be put under a bushel, Matthew. 5.15. but that his light was
not native and from himself, but lighted from that bright Sun; and that the
light of the Ministry serves for our use in this dark night of time (and
therefore they are also called Stars) but will cease in the other life; as John
his shining candle was put out, when Christ the Son of righteousness was
manifested. 4. It is also the duty of a faithful Minister, not only by
clearness of doctrine to shine round about him, but also to have his light
seasoned with much zeal and love; that so it may affect his own heart, and
burn up his own corruptions; may warm and stir up others; may make him move
upward (as fire does) in his motions; and may make him active and vigorous in
his calling, though with the wasting of himself; for, he was a burning and
shining light. 5. Qualifications and gifts are not bestowed upon all Ministers
in a like measure and degree; but Christ dispenses them variously; that he may
show forth his absolute freedom in bestowing; and that the glory of success
may not be ascribed to men's gifts, when he shall effectuate great things by
weakest instruments; And he does bestow gifts on men according to their
employments, in several times or places; for, this commendation of John
imports, that he was gifted above others, even honest instruments, being more
then a Prophet, Matthew. 11.9, 10, 11. See 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17. 6. The brightest
and most zealous lights of the Church, have but their time of it in the world,
and men will have the offer and benefit of them but for a season. They are
subject, as well as others, to the common condition of mortality, and often times
they spend themselves speedily with burning and shining to others; yea, and are
hastened out of the world by persecution: Beside, the Lord by removing of them,
does put an end to their toil, and call them to enjoy the fruit of their
labors; does chastise the ingratitude of the world, and exercise his own in
it; and, does make way for setting forth the riches of his glory, in raising
up, and creating new stars in their place; for, here it is said of John, he was
a burning and shining light, but now is put out, and gone. 7. When Christ's
faithful servants are dead and gone, yet their commendation lives in his
estimation; Therefore does he commend John, when now he is gone by death, or at
least, is in prison. 8. A sound and powerful, a clear and lively Ministry, may
have strange effects, even among unrenewed people; The excellency of their
doctrine, when it shines among a people who have long lien under the darkness
of ignorance, and superstitious traditions; the countenance of Ministers from
great men, (as John had from Herod;) the excellency of their gifts, together
with a common work of the spirit upon hearers, may produce strange effects in
them who have no true grace nor faith, for, says he, ye were willing to
rejoice in his light; there was none but John in their account, and they were
much taken up with him. 9. Men's affections may be much aloft, and they may have
great fits of joy and delight, through the novelty and excellency of doctrine,
and through some apprehension of that at a distance, which the Word speaks of,
who yet have no sound grace, as never having been humbled for sin, nor laid
hold on Christ, on whom alone, sound joy is founded, Phil. 3.3. for, these
temporaries were willing to rejoice, or, delighted to rejoice. See Matthew.
13.20, 21. Mark. 6.20. Heb 6.4, 5. 10. It is also an evidence of men's
unsoundnesse, when they are more taken with men, and with their gifts, as their
own, then they are affected with God as the Author of these gifts, or do find
his power accompanying the exercise of them, in effects upon their hearts; for,
they rejoiced in his light, or, in that light as his, not seeing, nor feeling
God in it. 11. Temporary motions, wrought in men by a lively Ministry, are not
to be leaned to by themselves, nor are Ministers to look much to the respect
that comes from such, for it will be but momentany. Their unsoundnesse will not
bear out, and when Ministers meet with discountenance from great men, and with
the cross, and do touch their darling sins, they will give over; for, they
were willing to rejoice, but, for a season, or, an hour, and particularly, they
rejected him, when Herod turned his enemy, and when he did testify concerning
Christ, whom they liked not. 12. Men's temporary sits will be a witness against
them, after they have made apostasy; and their respect to a Minister, will
witness against their not receiving his message; for, their former carriage is
now a check to them for their Apostasy; and they are declared to be perverse,
who, when they could upon no pretense reprove John, but must admire him, yet
they would not credit his Testimony of Christ.

Verse 36. But I have greater witness then that of John; for the works which
the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of
me, that the Father has sent me.
The second particular testimony, produced by Christ, whereby also the Father
witnesses concerning him, is, that of his works, in doing miracles, and the
work of redemption, which he declares to be a greater witness then that of
John, and that they prove abundantly that he is sent of the Father, as the
Messiah and Savior of the world. Whence learn, 1. Albeit our hearts be
naturally jealous and suspicious of divine truth, and of what Christ says of
himself; yet he has abundance of witnesses, for curing of this disease, and
putting us beyond all cause of suspicion; for beside John, he has more and
greater witnesses, that in their mouths every word may be established, 2 Corinthians. 13.1. 2. Christ is willing and ready to give proof of his excellency,
not only by his own or others words, but by his working really to prove it to
their sense and satisfaction; for he has a witness of his works. 3. Christ's
workings are not dumb works, but are speaking testimonies of his glory; and we
never take them up rightly, till we see that in them; for, his works do bear
witness that the Father has sent him, as his own Son, to be the savior of
the world, and that he is not contrary to the Father in his working, as they
alleged, 4. Albeit the testimony of the meanest instrument, concerning
Christ, being according to the Word, is as true as any other witness; yet if
we respect degrees of convincing evidence, the testimony of Christ's own works,
is a clearer confirmation of his Godhead, office, and doctrine, then the best
of men's testimonies, For, not only is this testimony more intrinsccall, then
the commendation of another, but his doing these things that were
fore-prophesied of the Messiah, is an undeniable proof, and therefore he
remits John to it, Matthew. 11.3, 4, 5. and his doing of them in his own name,
proves that he did them of himself from the Father; Therefore says he, that
his works are a greater witness then that of John, proving that the Father
has sent him; For he could not have done what he did, not only by way of
confirmation of the doctrine of the Scriptures, (which seducers by their
miracles do not, Deuteronomy. 13.5.) but so agreeable to predictions of Scripture
concerning the Messiah, if he had not been God, and sent of the Father, and if
he had called himself what he was not. And albeit Prophets and Apostles wrought
great miracles, who were not the Messiah; Yet this infringeth not the
clearness of this Testimony; for, these miracles did only confirm their
calling, authority and doctrine, and that they were what they called
themselves, (which was not that they were the Messiah) and so do Christ's
miracles confirm his doctrine, and what he said of himself: Next, they were
but instruments, and that not of the miracle, but of the Word and sign by
which it was done, and they expressly declared that it was not in their own
name or power any such thing was done, Act. 3.12, 16, But Christ was principal
agent, and wrought them in his own name, and in this respect, he did the works,
which none other man did, Joh. 15.24 5. All the works that Christ did, were
entrusted him from the Father, not only to undertake, but to finish and perfect
them: As God, the Father did communicate his nature and operation with him, and
as Mediator, he had a commission by the common counsel of the blessed
Trinity; for, they were the works, which the Father gave him to finish. 6.
Christ is faithful in his trust, and what is committed to him he does; for,
says he, the works which the Father has given me to finish, are the same
works that I do. 7. As Christ's works do prove his excellency in himself, so
also do they commend him to his people, as being sent out of the Fathers love
for their good, an alsufficient and omnipotent Mediator, able to effectuate
all his purposes, and worthy to be rested on by them; for, says he, they bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me.

Verse 37. And the Father himself which has sent me, has borne witness of
me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

38. And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him ye
believe not.


The third particular testimony, is that of the Father, which is neither to be
understood of that in the Scriptures, of which verse 39. nor yet of any
internal revelation of Christ, as Matthew. 16.17. But of his immediate testimony
to Christ; that as he had described him of old to be such a one as he was
found, Isa. 42.1, 2, etc. and chap. 53. Zech. 9.9, etc. and elsewhere; so he
had given him an immediate testimony at his Baptism, Matthew. 3.17. as afterward
in his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.5. of which 2 Pet. 1.17. That which is
subjoyned in the end of verse 37. may be looked on, as pointing at the
unusualnesse of such a manifestation of God, they never having heard a voice
from heaven in their time, nor seen any visible sign, (not to represent Gods
essence, but to assure them of his presence,) but when God owned Christ by a
voice from heaven, and when the likeness of a D^ve, was the sign of the
spirits coming on him; and therefore this testimony was the more to be
regarded. But the following verse, and Christ's way of subjoyning reproofs to
his testimonies, leads us rather to understand it, as a reproof of their
ignorance of the Father, of whom they glorified so much; For, whereas they were
much puffed up, and might readily oppose this unto that immediate testimony
given unto Christ, that they were the people, whose fathers had heard the voice
of God, Exodus 20.18, 19, 22. Deuteronomy. 4.12. and with whose Prophet Moses, God had
spoken familiarly, and given him a very near manifestation of himself, Number.
12.8. (not in a bodily way, Deuteronomy. 4.12. but spiritual and intellectual of his
back-parts, Exodus 34.6.) Christ shows them, that all this was nothing to
them, they neither had, nor looked like any such manifestations, but were deaf
and blind to them, verse 37. And whereas they might object, that though such
manifestations were gone, yet they had the Word, which was delivered by the
Ministry of Moses, to their fathers, and in them, to their successors and
children: Christ answers, that it had not its due place with them, since they
believed not in him, verse 38. Doctrine 1. God is so faithful to them whom he
employes in his work, that they shall not want his testimony and approbation;
to bear them out against all opposition and contradiction of men; Of this, his
carriage toward his Son, is a special instance, and a pledge to his own, of
what they may expect in their own measure: the Father which has sent me, has
borne witness of me. 2. The Fathers immediate testimony of Christ, is
especially to be taken notice of, as being a witness above all doubt, 1 John
5.9, 10. and showing that Christ is famous and excellent in heaven, whatever
esteem men have of him on earth; Therefore, that the Father himself, has
borne witness of him, is superadded as greater then the testimony of his
works, which yet was a greater witness then that of John, verse 36. And
indeed, the presence of the glorious Trinity made that witness most solemn,
and the opening of heaven, showed that, through him, heaven was propitious to
sinners on earth. 3. Men may be ready to delude themselves, because of great
things of God manifested to the Church and Nation whereof they are, and to
their progenitors, who yet themselves come far short, and are nothing like
these things; for, so did the Jews upon what Moses and their fathers had
found, when yet says he, ye have neither heard his voice at any time, not seen
his shape, that is, not only had they none of these extraordinary
manifestations, which are not usual in declining times, but they had not
knowledge of God like to that, which may be attained; which is a clear, solid
and satisfactory knowledge of God, as of one whom we know by seeing and
hearing. This they wanted, and so proved that they were not Moses disciples,
nor looked like that people whose progenitors had seen so much of God 4. The
Word of God is sufficiently able to compense and make up the want of any
extraordinary manifestation; for, so is employed here in that which Christ meets
with, that they had the Word from their progenitors, to make up the want of
those manifestations; Which Christ does not refute, seeing the Word is the
ordinary and sure way for attaining the knowledge of God, See 2 Pet. 1.17, 18,
19. 5. It is not enough to prove men to be in a good estate, that they have the
Word, unless by faith it get access into the heart, and it be fastened and
kept there, as a treasure, and as seed to bring forth fruit; And this may be
wanting in them who pretend to much estimation of the Word; for, so says
Christ unto the Jews, ye have not his Word abiding in you, it must be an
engraffed Word, where it does any good, James 1.21. 6. Where Christ is not
believed in, and received as sent of the Father, there the Word is not rooted,
nor is there any saving knowledge of it: And particularly, the Jews who did
not, or yet do not receive Christ now exhibited under the New Testament, nor
are led by the Old Testament to him, they have not one word savingly of it;
for, this is the reason of the former challenge, for whom he has sent, him ye
believe not.

Verse 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.
The fourth particular witness is that of the Scriptures, which (by occasion
of the former challenge) he exhorts them to search into, as being high in their
estimation, and that deservedly, and as bearing witness unto him. Whence
learn, 1. The Lord, in deep wisdom and love, has prevented all occasion of
delusion, and has made his peoples way clear and sure, by setting down his
mind in holy Writ, which is his infallible Word, and the rule for finding out
truth, and deciding all controversies in Religion; Therefore, does Christ remit
them to the Scriptures, or written word, as to Gods rule in this controversy.
2. The way of salvation, and all things needful for attaining there; of, are
fully revealed in Scripture, and was held forth even in the Old Testament, much
more now both in Old and New; for, says he, in them ye think ye have eternal
life, which was a true thought; as to the Scriptures pointing out of the way,
though they might be deluded in their application as to themselves, or thinking
to be saved by the having or reading of it. See 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 3. Albeit the
Scriptures be plain and clear in all things necessary to salvation, and the
entrance thereof give light, Psalm. 119.130. Yet they are a depth not soon
comprehended, or by superficial search, but are a treasure in a Mine, to be
found out, by digging and painful pondering of every word and sentence, (none
whereof are expressed in vain, or at random, but all divine) by considering
of the scope and dependence, and comparing Scripture with Scripture, and humble
and single dependence upon God; for, he recommends the Scriptures to be
searched. 4. This treasure will be found out by the painful searcher, and it is
the common duty of all the visible Church to read and search into the
Scriptures, that they may find it; Therefore does he enjoyne this search, as a
thing possible, and enjoyneth it to the Jews in common, who were his hearers
at this time, see Acts 17.11. 5. As men, yea, and a visible Church may be very
corrupt, and yet pretend to estimation of the Scriptures, and allow people the
use thereof, And may be opposing Christ, and yet dream of salvation by the
Scriptures: (for, both these are true of the Jews here) So men who profess
hope of salvation that way, ought to prove the reality of it, by their being
much in the study of the Scripture^, that they be not deluded in their hope,
and may feed on it, and find the comfort of what they solidly gather from it;
for, Christ makes use of their granted principle to press this search: Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life. 6. The scope of the
Scriptures, and particularly, of the old Testament, is, to point out and bear
witness of Jesus Christ, of his person, natures, and offices, of his birth,
life, death, sufferings, and the glory that should follow, and of the benefits
that come through him: And it should be our aim in searching of the
Scriptures, to find out Christ in them, and what they witness of him; without
which our study is to little purpose; Search the Scriptures, says he, and they
are they which testify of me. See Acts 3.22, 23, 24.

Verse 40. And ye will not come to me, that ye may have life.
Unto these testimonies Christ subjoyneth very sad chalenges and reproofs of
this people: And first, he challenges them for their wilful unbelief; And that
albeit John, his works, the Father and the Scriptures which they pretended to
esteem of, did prove what he was, and point him out as the Author of that
life, which they professed to seek, verse 39. Yet such was their obstinacy, as
they would not come to him, nor believe in him. Whence learn, 1. That which God
offers in Christ to lost sinners, is that which only deserves the name of
life, in grace here, and glory hereafter, as being the true remedy of our
spiritual death, and without which our life on earth is scarce worthy the name;
Therefore it is called life. 2. Men may be so far deluded, as to conceit they
will get life, when yet they neglect the means of life; for, these Jews
thought to have eternal life, verse 39. and yet they take not the right way to
it. 3. The life of lost sinners is only to be found in Christ, who is the
purchaser, storehouse, keeper and dispenser thereof, the Mediator of the
Covenant, and the mid-man betwixt God and sinners; for, so is here held out,
they must come to me, says he, eat they live. 4. The way how sinners come to
partake of this life, is, by their coming to Christ by faith: And whoever they
are that have a pressing need of Christ, and whatever discouragements they
find, cannot bide away from him, and who, whatever distance they are at, yet
are moving toward him, though with a slow progress, and are still seeking more
enjoyment, whatever they have; These are true believers, and will not miss of
life, but their soul shall be kept in life, till they come to live with him for
ever; for the condition required, is, to come to Christ, which is in effect to
believe, as is expounded, chap. 6.33 and upon this it is imported that they
shall have life. 5. Albeit life be to be found only in Christ, yet few make
use of him for that end, but most part being ignorant of themselves, and of
him, conceiting of their own welbeing, or to get life some other way; being
taken up with earthly things; given up to judicial obduration: or not pleasing
the terms of getting life by renouncing their own righteousness and
pleasures; Most part, I say, being thus prejudged, do neglect this offered
salvation: for, so is challenged, ye will not come to me. 6. The great
obstruction of faith, and aggravation of unbelief, is men's wilfulness in not
coming to Christ; Some will not come and believe in him, out of their malice
and obstinacy, as many of these Jews would not come to him, though he proved
never so clearly what he was. Others are plagued with brutish sensuality; And
they who think they would come, but apprehend reasons why they dare not, will
find that, will not, is the great impediment, and that they do not believe,
because they are not willing to be stripped of themselves, as faith in Christ
requires they should be, Romans 10.3. Otherwise there is no impediment lies in
the comers way, but love removes it; he will welcome them who have refused
many invitations, have wandered far, fallen into gross sins, played the
harlot with many lovers, etc. provided they will come to him, to seek grace to
repent for, and amend them; Yea, the dead may come to him to get life, if they
resolve not that they will not; and they who have some weak desire, may come
to him to get willingness; Therefore, the challenge is, ye will not come, which
in many of them was obstinacy upon grounds of malice, and brutish stupidity,
and most part of unbeleevers are guilty of it in some degree, upon other
grounds. See Psalm 81.11. Revel. 22.17. 7. Christ will challenge men's not
embracing his offer and invitation, to come and get life, especially when there
is much of will in it. The contempt of his offer is a great indignity, and will
condemn men; his peoples unbelief is a sin, to be avoided at his command,
under pain of his displeasure; his love will make a quarrel of it, that we
should be straightened in our own bowels, when there are bowels of affection in
him to be let forth; and, he is really offended at that pride (though masked
with a show of humility) which makes that the self-condemned sinner will not
embrace him upon Gospel terms; for, it is a challenge here, ye will not come,
etc. So that it is our great advantage to be mourning for the unbelief we find
in us, and when our unbelief is our burden.

Verse 41. I receive not honor from men.
Lest they should think that in commending himself, and chalenging them, he was
hunting after vainglory, as false-teachers do, Christ obviates that mistake,
and shows that he was seeking no such thing, nor was capable of any addition
of honor from the creature. Whence learn, 1. Christ is so omniscient, that he
knows and marketh the thoughts of every one that he deals with; So much
does his obviating their thoughts teach. 2. It is the usual fault of men, that
they have but low and base thoughts of Christ, and that they measure and judge
of him and his followers, by themselves; for, this suspicion of Christ,
imported that they looked on him as a mere man, and, as they were themselves
ambitious, verse 44. so did they judge of him, and so are his servants judged
of. 3. Christ was no hunter after vainglory, nor is he capable of any addition
of honor by men's acknowledging of him; nor ought men to think that he seeks
them because he has any need of them, or that they add any thing to him, when
he makes them somewhat; For albeit men are bound to manifest and declare his
super excellent glory; and men by sin do what they can to dishonor him, as
who would cast dirt or spit against the Sun? yet his infintie glory is neither
capable of addition nor diminution from the creature; for, I receive not honor
from men.

Verse 42. But I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.
A second fault (and a cause of the former, ver. 40.) for which he chalengeth
them, is, their want of the love of God, and so he shows that he challenged
them, not because they respected not him, but that he might convince them of
this want, and take from them that great pretense, of love to God, and zeal to
the Sabbath commanded by God, upon which they pretended they opposed him, and
his working of that miracle. Whence learn, 1. It is the woeful case of men, to
be void of the love of God. Love being the fountain of desiring, and fruit of
enjoying communion (in part) with him; being the true root of all sound
obedience, and the sum of the Commandments, and that which is the evidence of
being beloved of him, and will make obedience to be active, constant and
pleasant; Therefore, Christ summeth up their woeful case in this, ye have not the
love of God in you. 2. True love to God does not consist in outward pretenses
and shows, but must have a sure root of affection within, breaking forth in
deed and in truth; And men may pretend zeal to Gods glory, and for his
Ordinances, who yet have no true love to God; for, they pretended that all
their opposition to Christ flowed from zeal for the Sabbath and Gods glory,
and yet, says he, ye have not the love of God in you; Christ does perfectly
and exactly know men, and what is in them, let them mask themselves as they
will; and he will in due time decipher and detect the unsound; Therefore, says
he, I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.

Verse 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.
The third fault challenged, is their not embracing him; who is come in his
Fathers name, whereas they would receive a seducer coming in his own name:
wherein their great pervisitie and injustice toward him, and Gods judgment on
them, appeared. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Christ be God over all, equal with the
Father, and Lord over his own house, and so acts in his own name; Yet it
pleased him to condescend as Mediatour^ not only to purchase life to them that
come to him, but to be at pains, and come into the world clothed with a
commission and authority from the Father, to make offer of this purchased life;
that by his condescendence, he might commend his love to his people, and teach
them humility, and not to run on a calling unsent; and, that we might look on
him as approven of the Father, and that such as come to him, the Father will
accept them; for, says he, I am come in my Fathers name, See Phil 2.5, 6, 7.
etc. Matthew. 3.17. Heb. 5.4, 5. 2. Christ thus coming, is to be received; his
doctrine to be heard; himself to ^e acknowledged for such in his person,
offices, commission, and benefits, as he declares himself to be; to be rested
on and embraced, to be employed and submitted to as such; for, so is imported
in that they should receive him. 3. Albeit Christ be the great Ambassador of
the Father, not a servant, but the Son, Matthew. 21.37. And albeit he was
singular in his administration of his office, and all tending to the good of
sinners: Yet such is the perverseness of the world, as not to make him
welcome; for, it is the peculiar privilege of the elect, to be drawn to him,
and others, they neither see his excellency, nor feel their need of him;
Therefore, says he, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not. 4.
Such as reject Christ and receive him not, are destitute of the love of God,
nor have they any evidence of respect to him, since Christ is the clearest
image of the Father, and comes in his name, and the Father will not be
acknowledged but in and through him; Therefore, by this does he prove that
challenge, ver. 42. 5. When Christ manifests himself to the world, it is usual
with Satan to hound out seducers and false teachers, to study to bear him
down, to seduce souls, and by their courses, to make the way of truth odious;
for, so is imported that another shall come, pretending either to be the
Christ, or to hold him out to others, See Matthew. 24.5, 24. Act. 5.36, 37. 6.
Albeit false-teachers pretend to come in God and Christ's name, Matthew. 24.5. Yet
they do but come in their own name, as having no commission when they run, as
making themselves, their reputation and advantage, their chief aim in their
undertaking, and as speaking the imaginations of their own heart and brain,
without any warrant from God; for, another shall come in his own name. 7. Such
as love not God, nor embrace Christ or his sent servants, may take worse in
their room, and will easily receive and embrace false-teachers and seducers.
Men's nature is propense to evil courses, and is readiest to be affected with
what is wrong; And seducers are more ready to serve men's humors, then faithful
Ministers may be; and withal; it is Gods just judgment on the world, to give
them up to such, since they will not receive the love of the truth, 2 These.
2.10, 11, 12. Therefore, says he, if another come in his own name, him ye will
receive. This is the heinous sin of men, to affront Christ, to respect Satan
in his messengers, before God in his Son, as to prefer lies to truth: And
it is their dreadful punishment, to be given up to such delusions, because they
will not see the light, or do receive it only as it may serve their turn, or
weary of the light, and walk not answerable to it. And men should be ashamed of
their errors, as being their plague, and a proclamation that they have not
received the love of the truth.

Verse 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another; and seek
not the honor that comes from God only?
The fourth challenge, (and the chief cause of their unbelief, and not
embracing Christ) is for their pride and vain glory, which they hunted after
among men, not contenting themselves to be approven and respected of God, by
embracing his Son by faith. See chap. 12.43. Doctrine 1. True believers, and
receivers of Christ are all one: They do indeed believe in Christ; who, out of
affection and sense of need, do close with, and embrace Christ offering
himself in the Gospel, albeit they have not attained to lively assurance; and
without this, historical assent will not prove saving faith; Therefore,
receiving, ver. 43. and believing in this verse do mutually explain one
another. So also Joh. 1.12. 2. Albeit faith be the gift of God, and it be
impossible for any natural man to believe of himself; Yet men by continuance
in sinful ways, and entertaining particular reigning sins, may add to this
impotency, may lay more impediments in the way of Gods working faith, and may
be convinced that their case is inconsistent with true faith; for, how can ye
believe? says he, intimating, that they had superadded impediments of
believing to their condition by nature, as a crooked twig by growing, becomes
more difficult to be made straight, and that themselves might see that their
temper was inconsistent with faith. 3. As faith, which supposes a man
regenerate and subdued to Christ and his yoke, and which purifieth the heart,
is inconsistent with the dominion of any one lust or corrupt affection; So in
particular, it cannot consist with the dominion of ambition, and affectation of
vainglory; for, albeit we be bound to honor all men, and Magistrates in
particular, 1 Pet. 2.17. and are bound in honor to prefer one another, Romans
12.10. and albeit believers ought so to carry themselves, as the way of God may
be honored in, and because of them, Romans 2.24. Yea, albeit they cannot hinder,
nor is it their sin, if undue honor be offered unto them, provided they
mourn for it, and receive it not: Yet when men hunt after respect from men, and
do receive it with lustful delight, and rest on it as the chief scope of their
actions, it is an evidence of no faith, or that what they pretend to, is
unsound: Therefore, albeit some such be said to believe, where it prevailed but
in part, Joh. 12.42. yet where it bears full sway, and it only is sought
after, he says, how can ye believe, which receive honor one of another? And
indeed, such do evidence, that they have not closed with Christ on his own
terms, of self denial and being convinced of their worthlesnesse; that they
will take most pains on their outside to be seen of men, and so cannot but
neglect sincerity; and, that their ambition and love of respect from men, will
draw them to apostasy and prove their unsoundnesse, when they are called to
undergo an ignominious cross. 4. God allows and conferreth much honor upon
true believers; They have an honor of state and privileges, in being sons
and friends to God; They have the honor of his approbation in their
conscience, yea and sometimes his respects to them are made conspicuous to the
world; And, they are allowed to wait for the honor of eternal exaltation; for,
there is the honor that comes from God, to such. 5. As this true honor comes
from God alone, whose approbation only may be rested on, and who can advance
those whom he approves, and make them honorable. So sincere believers must
seek after this which is so necessary; by studying humble sincerity in his
sight, following those duties that are in least respect in the world, and not
resting on so much only, as may gain them honor from men; And as they must
seek after it, not contenting themselves with less, so they must be content
with this, and be loosed from the love of honor from men, not regarding how
they be looked on by the world because they embrace Christ; Therefore, it is
imported, they should seek the honor that comes from God only, See Romans 2.29.
2 Cor. 10.18. 6. Whatever may be men's duty, in seeking to approve themselves
even to the consciences of men, and not to neglect just disrespect in the
world, under pretext of approving themselves to God; Yet such as ambitiously
hunt after vainglory, and respect from men, do prove themselves to be
careless of Gods approbation, since hunting after the one, and seeking the
other, cannot consist together; for, here they are opposed, ye receive honor
one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only.

Verse 45. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that
accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.
To make the former chalenges have place, Christ warnes them of being judged
and accused before the tribunal of God; And that he might prevent the thoughts
of their hearts (who leaned to Moses as their great teacher, Joh. 9.28, 29. and
believed to be absolved and saved by following the Law given by him, and so
regarded not Christ's chalenges) He declares that not only he, but Moses his
Law would accuse and condemn them; And so leads a special Scripture witness
for himself, even Moses Law. While Christ says, he will not accuse them, it
is not a simple denial, for his doctrine and offer of salvation will be the sad
condemnation of sinners: But it is spoken according to their opinion, who
regarded little his opposition, and therefore he declares that even Moses,
their great friend, would be their party, not in respect of his person, but
his writeings. Doctrine 1. Sinners, continuing obstinate after abundance of
conviction, may look for appearing before Gods tribunal, to have the matter
discussed; and Ministers oughe to set this before them; Therefore does a Christ
here put them in mind of being accused to the Father. 2. Sin unrepented of,
and the sinners not fleeing to Christ for pardon and purging of it, will draw
on sharp and sad accusations before the tribunal of God; both law and Gospel,
Gods justice, men's own consciences, the spirit resisted by them in his moral
swasions, Act. 7.51. yea, all the pains taken on them, will contribute to this
work; for, it is supposed, they will be accused to the Father. 3. Such as
reject Christ, and do neglect chalenges for this, it is because they have some
false confidence beside, which bolsters them up in their opposition; for, so
had the Jews, Moses, in whom ye trust, says he; they gloried of being his
disciples who spoke with God, and thought to be safe by looking to his Law. 4.
What ever be the confidence, which seems to uphold men in their mis-regarding
of Christ, it will not only fail them, but turn an accuser to make up their
ditty; for, even Moses, in whom ye trust, will accuse you to the Father. 5.
What ever men may think of Christ's being an adversary; Yet not only is it sad
when the Savior of sinners turns the sinners accuser; But he will find many
witnesses to prosecute his sentence and challenge against the despisers; Godly
men, whom such glory of, in opposition to him, will be ready to be their
greatest enemies, and the Word of God in the Ministry of his servants,
extraordinary or ordinary, will bear witness against them, whatever respect
they seem to carry thereunto; for, says he, think not that I will accuse you
to the Father, (or, albeit ye think light of that, though too sad for you to
bear, yet) there is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust, not
only, because the sentence of the Law stood against them, but all his writing
and doctrine should accuse them, as is after cleared.

Verse 46. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote
of me.
Christ confirms this assertion by this reason; Moses could not but be a
witness against them who believed not his doctrine; Now, none could believe
his doctrine who believed not in Christ, since he wrote so clearly of him.
Whence learn. 1. Eminent instruments in Gods house, are never rightly
entertained, but when their doctrine is received and entertained by faith; for,
whatever they boasted of Moses, yet Christ imports that they believed not his
doctrine, had ye believed Moses. 2. Men may pretend to trust Gods servants, and
their message, who yet have no true faith; and namely, when their trust goes
contrary to the meaning and scope of the word; Such was their trust in Moses,
rejecting Christ, ver. 45. which yet was no believing 3. There can be no true
believing of the doctrine of the Word, but where it leads men to the
acknowledgement and embracing of Christ; for, had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me. 4. Such as did indeed believe Scripture prophecies concerning
the Messiah, did also acknowledge the accomplishment in Christ's person, when he
came; and he who acknowledges not the one, did not truly believe the other;
for, had ye believed Moses, who wrote of me, ye would have believed me, when ye
see the accomplishment. 5. Moses in his doctrine did write and testify of
Christ; Not only did he hold him out in express prophecies, Genesis 3.15. and
22.18. and 49.10. Deuteronomy. 18.18. and elsewhere, and did point him out under the
shadows and types of the Ceremonial Law, and of the brazen Serpent, the Manna,
the Rock that followed them, etc. But the scope and drift of all his writing
tended to him, Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.24. and the way and conveyance of the legal
administrations pointed at somewhat beyond them. For, in the very entry, it was
showed him that these were but shadows of better things in heaven, Exodus 25.40.
with Heb. 5.5. his unvailing of his face, when he went to God, Exodus 34.34.
showed that such as were familiar with God, saw some other thing then they
could see through the veil: The consciences of such as were apprehensive of
sin and wrath, would easily discover that these could not quiet them; Their
frequent repetition pointed out their insufficiency, Heb. 10.11. Yea, God
himself declares how far they mistook themselves, or the Law, who looked on
it as a Covenant of works, to get life by it; Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28, 29. Upon all
these grounds it is said, he wrote of me.

Verse 47. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?
Christ closes this challenge, with an amplification taken from that which is
more in their esteem, to that which they accounted less of; Showing that if
they did not believe Moses writings, who himself was so high in their esteem,
and whose writings they acknowledged to be divine Scripture, it was no wonder
they gave him no credit, of whom they had no such account, though indeed he was
infinitely above him. Whence learn. 1. Christ our Lord was content to undergo
contempt and disrespect, and to be looked on as inferior to his very servants;
That so he might make his people truly honorable, and might sanctify
contempt to them; and particularly, that his servants might not be discouraged
when they are slighted, considering that none contemn them, but they contemn
these whom they profess to esteem more of: Therefore Christ speaks of himself
here as inferior to Moses in their eyes, and acquiesceth in this, that they
contemned Moses whom they boasted of, as well as him. 2. The writings of Moses
(as of other penmen of Scripture are worthy to be believed) even all and every
part of them; for, it is a challenge, ye believe not his writings. 3. Such as
will not believe the Scriptures, would not believe Christ, nor esteem of him,
if he were in the world speaking to them; for, if ye believe not his w^itings,
how shall ye believe my words? See Luke 16.29, 30, 31.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter we have recorded, First, A miracle of Christ's feeding a great
multitude with a few loaves and fishes; to ver. 16. Next, His miraculous
walking on the Sea, to come to his disciples in their need; to ver. 22.
Thirdly, Christ's Sermon, or conference, with those who followed him, concerning
the bread of life, with the effects and consequents of the conference, to the
end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. AFter these things Jesus went over the Sea of Galilee, which is the
Sea of Tiberias:
This history of the miracle of the loaves is the same with that which is
recorded, Matthew. 14.13, etc. Mark. 6.32. Luke 9.10, etc. And here are mentioned
some antecedents, occasions, and circumstances of the miracle, to ver. 5. some
preparations to it, to ver. 1^. the form of the miracle, ver. 11. and some
consequents following upon it, to ver. 16.

In this first ver. we have a general connection, and transition from what had
been formerly said, to what now follows, with a general designation of the
time and place of this miracle. As for the time of it, it is said to be after
these things, which is not to be understood as if this followed immediately
upon what is spoken of, chap 5. for then Christ was in Jerusalem, now he is in
Galilee: But John does pass over many things that are marked by the other
Evangelists, and does only pitch upon the history of these miracles, though
marked by others, because they gave occasion to the following Sermon which the
rest had omitted. And in particular, the other Evangelists do clear that this
followed upon the beheading of John the Baptist, Matthew. 1^.10, 11, 12, 13, etc.
which trysted also with his disciples return, after he had sent them out to
preach, Mark. 6.29, 30, 31, 32, etc. and with Herod's hearing of his fame, and
desiring to see him, Luke 9.7. -- 10, etc. As for the place it is said he went
over the Sea of Galilee, etc. This lake in Galilee, through which Jordan runs,
gets several names in Scripture from several places upon the banks of it, as
here it is called the Sea of Tiberias, from a Town built there by Herod the
Tetrarch, and named from Tiberius the Roman Emperor. We need not conceive that
Christ went over the lake to the opposite shore, for Tiberias and Bethsaida
(to the bounds whereof he went, Luke 9.10) were both on one side of that lake,
and the people followed him on foot, ver. 2. with Mark. 6.33. But he passed
over some creek or bay of that lake, that so he might more speedily retire
himself into a desert place, as the rest call it, and might ease his wearied
disciples, who had been toiled with travel, and be rid of the press of the
multitude, at least for a time. From these words, as they are cleared, we may
learn. 1. Christ's practice and lot teaches, that his servants ought to be very
bussie in their stations, and may expect, and should submit unto a tossed
unsettled life; for, he is whiles in Judea, and whiles in Galilee, about his
calling, and is here driven to new wandering. 2. Christ's and his servants
entertainment in the world, is ordinarily such, as most desert and barren
places will be more sweet and comfortable, then any other; Therefore, Christ
leaves the Cities, and retires to a desert, shunning Herod's fury. See Heb.
11.37, 38. 3. As it is no right way to keep Christ among a people, to wrong his
servants; (for, he removes when John is slain) So it is lawful for Ministers to
withdraw themselves from the dangers wherewith they are threatened, providing
the trial be personal, and they may do it without wronging their cause and
calling; for, so has Christ taught us, who went over the Sea of Galilee, etc.
to shun the rage of Herod, who being engaged in persecution would be at more of
it. 4. As Christ's servants may have much toil, and should spend themselves
willingly in his work; So he will be tollicitous for them who serve him, and
careful to give them needful refreshments and breathings; for, such is his care
of his disciples here, who return wearied unto him.

Verse 2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.
This verse contains a remote occasion of the miracle and a consequent of
Christ's removal; which is, that many did follow him, considering the miracles
he had done; And their following him till they were hungry, occasioned the
miracle in feeding of them. Doctrine 1. Persecution and trouble will not make
Christ have a thin back, when he sees it meet to honor himself by having many
followers; for, here a great multitude followed him, though Herod be seeking
him, and he go but to a desert place, where they could be but ill accommodate.
And this speaks sadly against the laziness of many in times of greater quiet.
2. Such as have an errand to Christ, or any estimation of him, will be at pains
to follow him, for, so did they here, yea and outwent them, Mark. 6.33. though
they were not, at least all of them, well principled. 3. It is not enough that
multitudes pretend great respect to Christ, and follow him for outward
considerations and advantages, unless their principals and their motives be
yet more spiritual; for, herein they fell short, in that they followed him,
because they saw his miracles, not taking up the true excellency of his person
thereby, nor being affected with his doctrine, or seeking their own spiritual
good; But the great wheel in all this, was their being affected with his works
as a novelty, and the outward benefit they had thereby. And therefore however
now they follow him on all hazards, yet afterward when he lets them see their
error, and presses spiritual things upon them, they voluntarily forsake him,
ver. 66. It is better to feel one miracle wrought upon the heart in changing of
it, then to be affected with many outward miracles. 4. Christ does perfectly
know and take notice who they are that do follow him, and what their principles
and motives are; for, here an account of it is given and regestrate; and
afterward he lets them know it more clearly. 5. Christ makes himself known by
these miracles on the diseased, not only to fulfill the prophesies that went
before of him, Matthew. 11.5. with Isa. 35.6. But to show that he came by his
miracles to do good, Acts 10.38. and not to satisfy curiosity; And to teach,
that his company and dispensations are very alluring, to invite men to come to
him: for, they will find many diseases and wants among his followers, and him
taking notice of them all, and curing them, even miraculously.

Verse 3. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples.
Follows another antecedent of the miracle, showing that however the people
do follow and interrupt him, yet he went up for a while into a retired mountain
with his disciples, to refresh them with his company. This mountain was not the
place where the miracle was wrought, but after he had rested a while here, he
came down to the plain to the multitude, as may be gathered from verse 15.
Whence learn, 1. Refreshment after labor and travel in Gods service, is so
necessary and so lawful, that Christ will have a care to afford it to his
servants, even in greatest throng of business; Therefore, albeit the people do
follow and interrupt him, yet he went up into a mountain, for this end. 2. It
is the sweet refreshment of Christ's followers, when they have not only
vacation, for a time, from their laborious toil, but when they enjoy some
familiar hours of fellowship with himself, being free from the noise of
distractions in the world; for, thus were they refreshed, there he sat with
his disciples, where no doubt he refreshed their bodies with rest and food, as
may be gathered from Mark 6.31. but chiefly their souls with divine
conferences. 3. Christ is the wise dispenser of his servants refreshments and
breathing times, who does let out their allowances as they may be most useful,
and not prejudicial unto them; for he does not bring them after their toil, to
a place of delights, but to a desert and a mountain to rest them in, and
allows it but for a while, or, a little, as it is, Mark 6.31. and presently
they are at work again: If Christ did not deal thus, they would find rest and
excess of delights waste them more, then toil it self.

Verse 4. And the Passover, a feast of the Jews was nigh.
In this verse the circumstance of the time of this miracle, which was but
generally spoken of, verse 1. is now more expressly declared, that it was
about the time of the Passover. And so if that Feast, Chap. 5. 1. were the
Passover, this should be the third since his Baptism, for the first is spoken
of chap. 2.13. This circumstance is marked, not only to confirm the truth of
the History; or, to put us in mind that these anniversary feasts were peculiar
to the Jews; or, to show how seasonably Christ did preach of eating the
spiritual food of their souls, about that time the Passover was to be eaten.
But further, it would appear that Christ went not up to this Feast, for it is
here marked, that a little before that time, he is in the desert places of
Galilee, and nothing is marked of his going up afterward to it, by the rest of
the Evangelists. And John 7.1. seems to point out his continued resolution,
after this Sermon, to stay in Galilee; and John 7.3, 4. his brethren do
challenge him for lurking, and John 7.21. he seems to point at that work at the
poole of Bethesda, of which chap. 5. as the work which he had last done among
them, and which stuck much in their minds at Jerusalem. As for the multitude
that followed him, it is not needful to enquire whether they went up after this
to the Feast, or not; But for his part, it teaches, 1. Corrupt Church men are
as dangerous, and as much to be avoided, as any persecutors: for, as he
withdrew for a time from Herod, though he went afterward to Capernaum, verse
59. belike, because Herod was gone to the Feast, as he used sometime to do,
Luke 23.7. or, because he would not always lurk) so he kept himself without the
reach of the Scribes and Pharisees. 2. It is no strange thing to see Christ and
his servants secluded from the public and solemn meetings of the Church,
because of dangers and snares laid for them: And in such a case, it is their
affliction, not their sin, to stay away; for so much does Christ's practice
and lot teach. Though it be remarkable how prudently he carries it, that he
will not give offense, by staying in the Cities at such a time, but retireth
himself till the importunity of the people bring him back again. 3. Christ
would have his people expecting preservation, in the use of all ordinary lawful
means; and for this end, he who could by his omnipotency restrain the fury of
men, does sanctify that way in his own practice, which his people are to walk
in; for, he does stay away, though he could have gone there, and have preserved
himself even when he was among their hands.

Verse 5 When Jesus then lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto
him, he says unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat?

6. (And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do.)

7. Philip answered him, Two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for
them, that every one of them may take a little.


Follows the introduction and preparations to the miracle, wherein is
recorded what past betwixt Christ and some, or all of his disciples, and
betwixt them and the people, before the miracle was wrought. In these verses is
recorded, that Christ taking notice of the multitude, does pose Philip, how
they might be provided, verse 5. which he does, not out of ignorance or
irresolution, but to try him, verse 6. Philip gives such an answer as bewrayes
his weakness in the matter, by showing that much money (and possibly more then
they could command) would not by a mouthful, far less full refreshment, to
every one of such a multitude, verse 7. We are to consider, that this was not
the first thing Christ did with them; But after he had pitied the multitude,
and preached unto them, and healed their sick, and after he had refused to send
them away in the evening, fasting, at the disciples desire (all which are
recorded by the other Evangelists:) he at last falls upon this, and other
questions recorded by the rest, for the further trial and discovery of the
disciples.

From verse 5. Learn, 1. There is no trouble nor distraction, nor desire of
ease, will hinder Christ from taking notice of them who come to him, even
albeit they have many defects in their coming; Therefore, albeit Christ had
withdrawn to refresh himself and his disciples, and it was much indiscretion in
them to interrupt him, yet he takes notice of them, and pitying them, does
preach unto them, and cure their sick, as is recorded by the rest. And this may
teach Christ's servants not to take it in evil part, though they be kept so
busy in their calling, as to want sometime that kindly rest that is allowed
upon them. See 2 Cor. 11.27, 28, 2. As an ardent affection after Christ's
company, will make men oft-times forget their own outward necessities, so they
may enjoy him, (as here, we find the multitude follow him to a desert place,
without any provision;) So Christ will not fail to take notice of all the
necessities, even bodily, of those that follow him; for, here he is careful of
what they had neglected. 3. Christ will put his followers, who have been long
in his company, and have seen much of him, to give a proof of their
proficiencie thereby, before he let them see new proofs of his power; for such
was his scope in this question, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
He would first try what was in the thoughts of his disciples, who heretofore
had seen many of his miracles. And the question seems to be put to Philip,
not so much because he had been the mouth of the disciples, in desiring Christ
to send the multitude away: as because now he was an old scholar, and among the
first of his followers, John 1.43. (as Andrew also was, John 1.40.) and yet
long after this, he is but rude and ignorant, John 14.8, 9.

From verse 6. Learn, 1. Christ's words (as also his dispensations) will very
readily be mistaken and misconstructed, unless himself explain what is his
scope in them; Therefore it is necessary that he clear it here. 2. Christ's
scope in his words, (as also in his dealing,) is oft-times only to try them
with whom he has to do: and when he has so done, he can let them find that
his trying word or dispensation is not all; but he has more to say and do;
for, this he said, to prove him, and yet after that, he did the work. See Deuteronomy.
8.15.16. 3. Christ will even have the weakness of his own followers tried;
partly, that what is known to him, and yet lurking, may be discovered to them,
and so they may not conceit of more then they have, and the evil which before
lurked and was unseen, may be cured when it is discovered; And partly, that he
may be exalted, who is alsufficient to do what he pleases, when their
weakness lays them by: for these causes did he prove Philip, and belike the
rest also, as appears afterward in Andrew. 4. Christ needs not consult with
any, nor the help of any man's wit in greatest extremities; nor is he ignorant,
or uncertain and irresolute what to do, whatever his way of carrying on his
work seem to say; Therefore it is added for confirmation, for he himself knew
what he would do.

From verse 7. Learn, 1. When Christ puts even his most eminent followers to
trial, they will prove weak, if they be left to themselves; for, so appears
here in one and more of them, though they had seen many proofs of him 2. When
men judge by sense or reason, and do look to likelihoods and probabilities, and
not to Christ's power, they will soon be at their wits end in extremities, and
unable to answer doubtful cases; for, so much does his answer teach, Two
hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for them that every one of them
may take a little. It is not needful to determine how much this sum was
according to our coin, but it is sufficient to know that it was a great sum
to them, and would have bought more then he made use of to feed the people
with. 3. It is Christ's way, oft-times, to do that for his people, whereof there
is no probability or likelihood, that so his glory may shine the more brightly
in it; for, so it appears in his working this miracle, and feeding the
multitude, when there was no appearance how it should be done. And this should
warn men, as not to tempt God in an ordinary calling, by neglecting ordinary
means; so also, not to be discouraged with improbabilities, when they are in
need, and have to do with Christ.

Verse 8. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says unto him.

9. There is a lad here which has five barley loaves, and two small fishes:
but what are they among so many?


Follows a further preparation to the miracle, in Andrews giving an account
of their provision, though with as little faith and expectation of what Christ
was to do, as Philip had showed. It seems that after Christ had bid them try
what they had, Mark. 6.38, Andrew gave him an account that a little boy had so
many loaves and fishes, (which belike were carried about for the disciples use,
Matthew. 14.17. Mark 6.38. Luke 9 13.) but all that was nothing for feeding so
many. Doctrine 1. Weakness and short-sightednesse is not the temper of one
only, but of all Christ's followers, if they be put to it; and every disciple
will be ready to discover his own weakness, faster then another, in a day of
trial; for, Andrew acquits himself no better then Philip here, though he was
one of the first disciples. 2. As Christ did not neglect to provide such
outward things, as were necessary for himself and his followers; So his
provision is such as may teach sobriety, and contentment with a mean condition,
unto all, for, he has only five barley loaves, and two small fishes. 3. Such
as would imitate Christ, ought to be tender, and ready to communicate to the
necessities of others, were their own portion never so small; for, not only
Christ, but his disciples are willing to bestow their small provision upon the
multitude, though they judge it could serve them in no stead. 4. It is worthy
of serious and frequent observation, to consider how weak sense and reason will
prove in Gods matters; how much Christ will lay by the hope and expectation of
creatures, before he appear in his glorious working; and, how he will work that
for a needy people, that is little expected by any; Therefore also is Andrew's
weakness marked, (What are they among so many?) as well as Philips, that it
might contribute to set out Christ's glory in this miracle.

Verse 10. And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in
the place. So the men sat down in number about five thousand.
Follows a nearer preparation to the miracle, wherein, Christ having laid by
the expectation of his disciples, commands that they bid the people sit down
upon the grass, which was rank in that Country and climate at that season;
whereunto the people (who were a great many) give obedience, and so Christ
proceeds to feed them. Doctrine 1. Christ takes no advantage of his peoples
weakness and dullness, to hinder him to do good when it is needed; for,
notwithstanding their slownesse of heart to give him glory, yet he goes to the
miracle, for their good, and the peoples. 2. It is Christ's way, oft-times, to
refute the doubts of his people, by his working, and by real proofs of his
power and love; for, he stays not to debate with his disciples about their
doubts, but refutes them by the following work. 3. Christ may see it fit to
engage his own in strange-like service, and to impose commands upon them that
seem absurd to sense and reason, and yet give a good account of all, in his
time: for, such was this command, to make the men sit down upon the grass, to
a bare table, and yet he fed them all. 4. It is the commendation of Christ's
followers, when, how weak s^ever their faith be, yet they subject themselves to
his commands, and yield obedience, without any reasoning; for, such was both
the disciples, and the peoples practice, here; they being commanded by Christ,
do make the men sit down, and the men sat down, though none of them saw well
what Christ was about to do. 5. Every circumstance of Christ's work, which sets
out his glory ought to be marked, and he will order his working so, as these
may be seen; Therefore it is marked, as setting out Christ's glory, that they
were in number about five thousand, whom he fed, which is to be understood of
the men only, besides women and children, Matthew. 14.21. And this is marked in
this place, because Christ commanded that they should be so set down in ranks
and companies, ( Mark 6.39, 40. Luke 9.14.) as the disciples might easily mark
the number of them.

Verse 11. And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down, and
likewise of the fishes as much as they would.
In this verse we have the miracle it self, and the manner of it; that Christ
having given thanks, did distribute to the disciples, and they to the people,
and that it grew among all their hands, so that every one got as much as they
would. Whence learn, 1. Christ's undertaking to do great things for his people,
will not prove evanishing flourishes, but real works; for; he who bid them do
several things in order to this work, does now work it gloriously. 2. This
thanksgiving and blessing, premitted to the miracle, teaches 1. That all our
refreshments should be sanctified and gone about with prayer and praise, Deuteronomy.
8.10. Considering, that they are great mercies, though ordinary; that it is his
word and blessing which makes them feed us; that this is a mean to draw down a
blessing upon them, as Christ here does on the loaves and fishes; that hereby
they are sanctified to us, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. and, that it is a mean to sweeten
common mercies to us, when we acknowledge them to come down from heaven, as
proofs of love, and do so take them out of his hand. 2. That cheerfulness and
thankfulness to God is to be made conscience of by them who have sober and
course fare, as well as if they had choicest dainties; for, so does Christ's
practice teach, when he had but barley loaves and fishes. 3. That God alone
must have the glory of all the wonderful works he does for his people.
Therefore does Christ give thanks and bless, as Mediator, to testify that it
was by the power of God that he (being one with the Father) did the work.
Doctrine 3. This miracle it self, and the distribution by the disciples to the
people, and the increase of the loaves, teaches. 1. As by curing the sick and
diseased, Christ proved himself to be a Physician for all their plagues and
sores: so by this he proves himself to be the true spiritual food of souls, as
he clears in the following Sermon. 2. It is not abundance, that is necessary
for the maintenance of the life of man, but Gods blessing upon what a man
enjoyes, be it less or more; for, so does this miracle teach. 3. It is Christ
that sends every man his portion and allowance, through whose hand soever it
comes, for though the disciples give immediately to the people, yet it is
Christ who, by them, does distribute. 4. Christ allows much benefit upon his
servants and minds it, in his employing them betwixt him and his people; for,
he employeth them to distribute unto the people, not so much that they might
get wherewith to refresh themselves, and satisfy their hunger, but especially,
that their faith might be confirmed, by being so near witnesses of the glory of
this miracle. 5. Obedience to a command, and making use of what we have, is a
mean to make it increase and grow as there is need; for, in distributing that
small portion at Christ's command, it grows. 6. Christ's servants may expect to
have their endeavors blessed, when they get their furniture out of his hand,
and employ themselves as his instruments, in dispensing thereof: for, the
disciples getting their provision out of Christ's hand, and so distributing it,
to feed his people, it grows among their hands. 7. Christ's allowance is very
large; he can make course fare of barley-bread and fish satisfy men with his
blessing; he can make little of it suffice never so many, and let every one
have no scant: for, they got all as much as they would.

Verse 12. When they were filled he said unto his Disciples, gather up the
fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

13. Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above, unto them
that had eaten.


Follows some effects and consequents of this miracle; And first, the people
being satisfied, Christ commands the fragments to be gathered up, whereby the
truth of the miracle is confirmed, not only that the people are filled, but
there is more left then they laid down at first. Whence learn. 1. Christ's
miracles are such as sense will bear witness unto, and he will make his
peoples sensible satisfaction, bear witness for him, how really good he is
unto them; for, so is this miracle confirmed from the effect, they were filled.
2. As the Lords people should not be doubtful or anxious in wants; So when he
gives greatest plenty, they should be frugal and thrifty, and should beware of
abusing greatest abundance; for, though he had now fed them miraculously, yet
says he, gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. 3. Such
as, at Christ's command, lay out what he has given them, for supplying the
necessities of others, may expect to be no losers, but rather gainers; for, the
disciples who gave out their provision, find it returned with advantage, and
instead of five loaves and two fishes, they filled twelve baskets with the
fragments, etc.

Verse 14. Then those men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said,
This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world.
A second effect and consequent of this miracle, is, that hereby they are led
to acknowledge him to be that great Prophet, whom the Jews expected according
to the prediction, Deuteronomy. 18. which was indeed true of him, however they did not
take him up as became in his person, offices and benefits, beside that they
went far wrong in the following purpose. Whence learn. 1. This knowledge of the
Scriptures, and of the Messiah, which continued among these Jews in these
corrupt and declining times, may witness sadly against the ignorance of men in
the days of the Gospel, when yet light is far clearer. 2. Christ's working
should discover unto people somewhat concerning himself; And the use of his
miracles is, to discover unto us what his offices are, and to confirm us in
the faith thereof; for, These men, when they had seen the miracles that Jesus
did, said, This is that Prophet. Though it be remarkable that this affects them
more then many miracles as contributing to feed their belly, and being
generally benificial to all, whereas healing of diseases was but only for the
good of a few; And beside, they took occasion to dream of an easy life under
this Messiah. 3. Christ should be taken up and expected in the word of promise,
that so his manifestations of himself may be more sweet when they come; for,
this heightens their estimation of him, that he is the Prophet that should come
into the world, who had been promi^ed unto them, and whom they had so long
expected. See Isa. 25.9. 4. Points of truth, especially concerning Christ,
would not be superficially and slightly closed with, but men should be
persuaded of the truth of them, that so they may boldly confess and profess
them, as they are called to it; for, say they, This is of a truth that Prophet.
5. Among other offices of the Messiah, he is also the Prophet of his people,
and the great Teacher of the Church, from whom all other Teachers have their
commission; who teaches his people infallibly an effectually, and who was to
exercise this office at his incarnation and coming into the world; for, so much
does their designation of him, according to Scripture prophecy, teach, This is
that Prophet. For, that prediction of Moses, Deuteronomy 18.18. did ultimately and
chiefly point at him, Act. 3.22.

Verse 15. When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by
force, to make him a King, he departed again into a mountain himself alone.
A third effect and consequent of the miracle, is, that the people, out of
blind and furious zeal, would have set him up to be their King, if he
foreseeing it, had not departed again into the mountain (where he and the
disciples had been, ver. 3.) and that alone, having commanded his disciples to
go to Sea, as the other Evangelists do record: And so this is a transition to
the following miracle. Doctrine. 1. There is no point of divine truth received
by natural men, but their hearts are ready to detain the same in
unrighteousness, and to leaven it with their own corrupt principles; for, they
who acknowledge him to be the Prophet, according to the Scripture, and who had
warrant also to receive the Messiah as a King, do yet pervert all this, with
their corrupt conceptions of his Kingdom. 2. Christ is ordinarily much
mistaken, even by those who acknowledge him: And particularly, his Kingdom is
oft-times conceived of amiss; for, so do they here; Though they knew him to be
the promised Messiah, yet they leave that, and take themselves only to his
Kingly office, not to submit themselves to his Spiritual yoke and government,
but expecting carnal liberty, and a prosperous condition, under their promised
King. And for begetting of these conceptions; there concurred. 1. Their mistake
and carnal conceptions of Scriptures pointing at Christ's Kingdom, wherein they
were fostered by the corrupt glosses of their Teachers, who pointed out the
Messiah as a worldly Monarch, coming to subdue all nations under his and their
feet. 2. Their own carnal disposition, which minded no other want, but that of
their belly, and therefore could conceive of no other remedy and advantage by
him, but that they should live at ease, and with much liberty, under him, and
he give them their meat without toil, as he had done in the late miracle. 3.
They were more sensible of the yoke of oppression, wreathed about their necks
by the Romans, and of their slavery that way, then they were of sin and soul
slavery, and therefore they could not take up Christ rightly, nor make right
use of him, but dreamed only of deliverance from their outward slavery by him.
All these evils would be guarded against by them who would conceive a right of
Christ; and in a word, men would beware dreaming of great things under the Sun,
in Christ's company, and when they engage themselves in the ways of godliness.
Doctrine. 3. Men may have fits of zeal, pretending more to honor Christ, and
be more furious and violent in the expressions thereof, then those who have
spiritual and pure zeal; and yet all of it be but fleshly and sinful; for,
such is their blind zeal here, all they pretend to in it, is to honor Christ,
and exalt him as a King, and they will do it violently, and by force, never
minding the danger wherein they involved themselves thereby, and yet there was
nothing but flesh in it. Carnal zeal, what ever it pretend, yet it sails both
with wind and tide, and therefore such impetuous furious motions are to be
suspected. 4. Rash and carnal blind zeal for Christ and his Kingdom, is one
of Satan's great engines, whereby he labors to bring real prejudice to Christ
and his Kingdom; for, by this attempt of theirs, not only were all thoughts of
his spiritual Kingdom banished, and swallowed up in the thoughts of a carnal
Monarchy, but this was the ready way to raise a scandal on him, as guilty of
treason, and to draw the Romans on him, and them, and all his followers, to cut
them off. 5. Christ is omniscient, and knows what is rolling in every man's
mind; and he will not be surprised nor overreached by any design of men; for,
Jesus therefore perceived that they would come, and take him by force, etc. 6
Christ will not approve of any honor offered to him, which he has not
prescribed and enjoined, were it cloaked with never so much of apparent zeal;
for, he refuses and declineth all this honor, as not required by himself. 7.
Albeit Christ be a true King over his Church, and do exercise a spiritual
Kingdom in it, and have also a spiritual government established, for keeping
his subjects in order; Yet he came not into the world to be a worldly King, nor
to administrate a Kingdom which is of this world: Nor is his Kingdom
prejudicial to the thrones and civil government of men, but the best pillar
they have, if they will suffer him to rule among them; Therefore does Christ
refuse all this offer, as not competent to him. And this teaches his
followers, to beware of usurping Lordly dominion under pretext of administering
the things of his Kingdom. 8. As Christ's followers should shun popular
applause and worldly pomp, (as their Masters example here does teach;) So true
zeal against these should be very fervent and real, and not for the fashion
only; Therefore Christ not only prevents their motion before it break forth,
but withdraws himself alone, having sent his disciples away, that they may not
find him. And this he did; not only to avoid all occasion of suspicion, or
prudently to break their fit of zeal, which could not have been diverted by his
staying and reasoning with them: But also to testify how really he abhorred
their course, and so gave a pattern to all his followers, not to put away
applause so, as they would have it follow them, but really to detest it. 9.
Such as do not make right use of Christ and his company, but do only expect
carnal things of him, are justly punished with the want of his company; As here
he deals with this people. 10 That Christ when he withdrew, went to prayer, (as
is remarked, Matthew. 14.22, 23. Mark 6.46.) it may teach. 1. Christ has
sanctified to his people the exercise of prayer in all their needs, and he is
the great Intercessour for them, under all their miseries and distresses; So
much does his practice teach. For, albeit he was true God, and so needed not
pray, yet as he was a man under the Law, he would pay this homage and fulfill
all righteousness, and by making use thereof in his need, Heb. 5.7, Matthew.
26.39. he has sanctified this exercise to all his needy people. And by this
practice he teaches, that as Mediator, his intercession is always ready in a
strait, and he delights in that exercise; as here he had this peoples folly to
pray about, and his disciples following trial to hold up to the Father. 2.
Prayer is a special mean of entertaining communion with God, and a mean of
converse with him, wherein they who are most holy, will be most frequent, as
Christ's practice does teach, who at all occasions did converse with his Father
in the practice of this duty. 3. Private prayer does require as much privacy
and retiredness as may conveniently be had, that men's spirits may settle and
be composed for the duty; So much also does this practice of Christ teach (in
going alone to the mountain to pray) as it is a pattern to us, though he
himself was not pestered with any sinful distractions 4. When men get much
applause in the world, it is their duty not only to shun it, but then to be
much in converse with God; partly, to guard their hearts from being blown over
at unawares; and partly, to make sure that all is right betwixt God and them;
So much also may Christ's practice of prayer at this time, as it is a pattern
to us, teach.

Verse 16. And when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the Sea.

17. And entered into a ship, and went over the Sea, toward Capernaum: and it
was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them.

18. And the Sea arose, by reason of a great wind that blew.


Follows, to ver. 22. the second part of the chapter, containing a second
miracle, of Christ's walking on the Sea, to come to the disciples in their need,
with the antecedents and consequents thereof The antecedents thereof are
recorded, ver 16, 17, 18. the miracle it self, ver. 19. -- and the consequents
of it, ver. -- 19, 20, 21.

In these verses we have the antecedents of this miracle, that the disciples,
at his command, go to Sea without him, and being at Sea in the night time, they
are tossed with a violent tempest and contrary wind, as is observed, Matthew.
14.24. It is here said they went toward Capernaum, where the succeeding Sermon
was preached, ver. 59. yet Matthew 14.34. they came into the land of Genesareth;
and Mark. 6.45. they are commanded to go unto Bethsaida. But this is easily
reconciled; for their way was toward, and by Bethsaida, and Genesaret was the
name of the Country where Capernaum stood, and though he landed not at the
City, yet he stayed not till he came to it. Doctrine. 1. It is not unusual,
that upon the back of sweetest refreshments and manifestations of Christ, the
people of God meet with a stormy and sharp exercise; Such was the lot of the
disciples after this miracle; for. 1. A constant gale of sweetness is not
easily born while we are within time, but we must be exercised with changes. 2.
It is meet that he take proof of our preficiency by former manifestations, as
being given not only for present delight, but for a future use; as here he
tries how the disciples faith was strengthened by the former miracle, and so is
marked, Mark 6.51, 52. 3. It is by these changes that men get new proofs of
their own weakness, and new proofs of his goodness, for the confirmation of
their faith. All which they would want, if they had not renewed exercise.
Doctrine. 2. As men should be clear of a calling from God to any thing they
undertake, that this may support them in what they may meet with, (as the
disciples were constrained to this journey by Christ; Matthew. 14.22.) So they
ought not to judge of the rightnesse of a way, by what they meet with in it;
Seeing sharpest trials may meet men in Gods own way, and in the way of their
duty; for, when they are going over the Sea toward Capernaum, at Christ's
command, the storm arises. 3. The Lords people may expect, that their trials
will be measured out according to their grouth, and according to the time which
they have had, wherein to make proficiency; for, whereas before this, the
desciples had a tempest, Matthew. 8.23, 24, etc. yet this is now a sharper trial;
Then, Christ was with them, though a sleep, now he is away; Here it is dark
night, which we read not of there; Here they have not only a storm of wind,
as there, Mark. 4.37. but a contrary wind, Mark. 6.48. They are also not near
the shore, but in the midst of the Sea, ver 19. Matthew 14.24. And it is long ere
Christ come to them, Matthew. 14.25. with which they are not tried in the other
storm. 4. In the trials of the Lords people, they may expect that all
circumstances will concur, that may sharpen the trial, and make the exercise
deep: And trials may be completely dreadful, wherein yet the Lord will give a
good issue; for, so was this trial ordered in every afflicting circumstance
before marked. See Lam 2.22. 5. It is a sad addition to the trials of the Lords
people, that ordinarily they are attended with much confusion, darkness, and
perplexing irresolution, so that they cannot see through their troubles, nor
what to do under them; So much may be gathered, by analogy, from this
circumstance, that it was now dark, when the storm arose, so that they could
not know where they were. And frequently trouble gets the name of darkness, as
the saddest ingredient in it. 6. It is Gods way so to order his dealing with
his people, as easy and successeful-like beginings may have a very hard
procedure, before the way and work be ended; for, here they entered at even, and
it is still fair till dark night, and that they are far in. By this, Christ on
the one hand, does train on and engage his people in his way, and on the other
hand, he tries them being engaged, and warnes them to be humble and sober, when
all things inwardly or outwardly succeed well with them. 7. It is also a great
addition to trouble, when Christ is absent, or hides or withdraws himself; The
want of him may raise a storm in the greatest calm, and his presence can make
a calm in a storm, and therefore it must be sad when both they are in trouble
and miss him; So much may be gathered from this circumstance, and Jesus was
not come unto them. It is true the text speaks of his bodily presence, which
did not always hold off a storm, Matthew. 3.23, 24. But if the want of that was
sad to them, how much more must it be sad, when his spiritual presence by faith
is wanting in trouble? Yet as he is not always absent, when he is not seen, so
it is needful sometime to be exercised with that in trouble, because otherwise
trials would not be trials. 8. They who, through abundance of enjoyments, are
but little sensible of their own mercy, or tender of the need of others, are
justly put to essay the case of such in their own experience, that they may
know the hearts of strangers; for, the disciples, who through constant enjoying
of Christ's company, were oft-times little sensible of the case of poor ones,
who got but now and then an opportunity to meet with him, and who even at the
last miracle would have had the people sent away, Mark. 6.35, 36. are now put
to know what it was to want his company in a time of need, that they might love
it the better, and pity others the more. 9. When a people are in a very
desolate and low condition in their own eyes, it may be, they are yet so far
from issue, that harder and sadder trials are yet to come; for, when they are
disconsolate by reason of the dark night and Christ's absence; and that before
the storm came (as appears from the order of the narration;) Christ, instead
of coming, sends a sad storm, to add to their bitter condition by the
trysting of all these together, and the Sea arose, etc. See Jer. 14.19. 10. The
Lords people may expect in troubles, that though they will not be drowned nor
swallowed, yet they will have sad and fearful tossings, before they see an
outgate; for, the Sea arose, whence the ship was tossed with waves, Matthew.
14.24. And this is a fit Emblem of the condition of the Church, and the Lords
people in it. For. 1. As Mariners are often tempest-beaten, by reason of the
unsettlednesse of the Element wherein they travel; so this world is so
uncertain and unsettled, and there are so many raging lusts of wicked men in
it, that it is a wonder if the Church get but one hour for breathing in it. 2.
Tempests do so toss Mariners, that they stagger, and are put to their wits
end, Psalm 107.27, and so are the Church and godly, in their afflictions,
oft-times staggering and like to fall, tossed, and put from all their
resolutions, Psalm. 109.23. Isa. 54.11. 2 Cor 7.5. 3. Tempests are dreadful in
this, that present death is before men, and but very little betwixt them and
it, even a poor thin vessel, and it much beaten: And so also may afflictions
pursue the Lords people, as there will be little betwixt them and death in
their own account, and they may have deliverance to seek betwixt the jaw bones
of death, Psalm. 9.13. Yet in all this, it is sweet that it is the Lord who
raises the storm, and has the winds in his fists. Doctrine. 2. It is yet a
sad addition unto trouble, when the Lords people are not only afflicted under
their present lot, but there is a strong course and stream of providence
meeting them in the teeth, and crushing, and making ineffectual, all their
endeavors to help themselves; for, so much may be gathered from this, that
there was a great wind that blew, which not only caused the sea to arise, but
was contrary to them in their course, Matthew. 14.24. as if heaven were opposing
any course they should essay in this extremity, See Psalm. 80.4.

Verse 19. So when they had rowed about five and twenty, or thirty furlongs,
they see Jesus walking on the Sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship, and they
were afraid.

20. But he says unto them, it is I, be not afraid.


Follows the miracle itself, or Christ's coming unto them in a miraculous
way, for their comfort in this distress; which they mistaking, are more
affrighted, ver. 19. till he by his speaking unto them, do comfort and assure
them, ver. 20. And these are some of the consequents of his miraculous
appearance. From ver. 19. learn. 1. As it is a mercy in a strait, to have any
known duty, wherein to employ our selves; so no difficulty should deter nor
discourage us from duty, but the faster difficulties do grow, we should be the
more busy, even albeit it should be to small purpose so to do; for, so is
imported here that they rowed forward, and they were toiling with it, Mark.
6.48. Albeit they could promove little thereby, by reason of the storm and
contrary wind; yet, since Christ had commanded they should make forward, they
hold at the duty. 2. What ever be the pressing need of Christ's followers in
troubles, and their constant cleaving to duty for all that; And whatever be
Christ's purpose of love toward them; Yet he sees it fit oft-times, not to come
to them at first, but will let the trial go on, till it come to an height, and
be a trial indeed, and put them seriously to it; for, before he came, he lets
them row about five and twenty, or thirty furlongs (the last of which make
near four miles, eight furlongs going to a mile) and Mark. 6.48. he came not
till the fourth watch of the night, which is the morning watch. We are indeed
very sparing of our selves in trouble, and do soon begin to think that we are
low and tried enough, and therefore would be delivered: But our wise Lord sees
that we need more. 3. What ever be Christ's delaying to help his people in
trouble, and whatever may be their fears and apprehensions, upon the extremity
of their troubles; Yet deliverance, in his due time, will certainly come unto
them, and when their difficulties are at the height, his help will be nearest,
for, here after all their toil, he comes. 4. Christ needs not our diligence,
to move him to help us in trouble, but his own knowledge and observation of our
case will plead for pity and help, when the trial is perfected; for, he comes
unto them, when there is no mention of their crying to him, because (as it is,
Mark. 6.48.) he saw them toiling in rowing. Albeit it be our duty to call on
him in trouble, yet his affection and sympathy will read supplications from our
necessity. 5. Christ is not only a careful observer, and tender sympathizer in
his peoples trouble; but he is ready to come over all impediments, and to make
up the distance betwixt them and him, that he may help them; for, when it was
impossible for them to come to him, he is at the pains, and walks on the Sea
and draws nigh. 6. Christ is omnipotent to bring deliverance unto his people,
and to remove impediments out of the way, of their help; And nothing will
impede him to come to them in their need, but he who is Lord of all, will make
a way through greatest difficulties: for, he walks on the Sea, and draws nigh;
whereby he proves himself greater then Moses, who went only through a divided
Sea, whereas he walks on the Sea it self; and proves that a deep Sea, and a
great storm lying betwixt him and his people, will not withhold his company.
We are not here to conceive any change wrought in Christ's body, as if it were
denied of its natural properties that so he might thus walk; for, we find
Peter walking also on the Sea, Matthew. 14.29. But herein appeared the power of
his Godhead, carrying his manhead upon the Sea, and any change that was, was
wrought on the Sea, which his omnipotency did turn into a pavement to walk on.
7. It is a sweet sight of our difficulties, to consider that what does most
affright and trouble us, yet Christ is secure of it, and has it under his
feet; for, this was the first dawning of their deliverance, that Christ treads
upon that Sea, and makes a walk and way of that which threatened to devour
them, and so he proved himself Lord of it, though they were not yet delivered
from it. 8. As Christ's followers do meet with more trials then others, so shall
they be made witnesses of more proofs of his power and love then others; for,
beside the former miracle, whereof they and the multitude were witnesses, this
new trial brings them the sight of a new miracle. 9. Christ, even when he comes
to deliver his people in a remarkable way, may be mistaken, and even mercies
may be matter of fear and terror to them; for, when he thus comes, they were
afraid, supposing it to be a spirit, and not dreaming of him, as is marked by
the rest. This needs not seem strange if we consider. 1. That natural
infirmity, in sinful man, is apt to be affrighted with strange apparitions, as
they conceived this to be. 2. It is natural to men to misconstruct of the Lords
de^ling, and to misapprehend his best dispensations, and to create groundless
fears unto themselves; and when it is otherwise, it is his special gift and
mercy to them. 3. Crushing of spirit with many troubles, will make any thing
take a deep, and readily a wrong, impression on men; As they, being now much
broken with their former tossing and cross dispensations, look upon this
through the same perspective. Minds broken and crushed with many troubles, are
but ill judges of Gods dealing. 4. The conscience of guilt, when it is awaked
in a storm, will readily judge of dispensations, rather according to men's
deservings, then according to what Christ may intend in them. 5. Christ's method
and way, in bringing about deliverance, is oft-times so strange, and the means
and ways of it, so unlikely, and contrary, in appearance, and so like
himself, and his power and wisdom; that it is no wonder our shallow
conceptions do not take him up at first; for, such was his way here. 6. Men's
want of faith in trouble, and their limiting of Christ to their way and means,
not leaving him a latitude, may occasion many mistakes when he appears; for,
it appears they were not believing that help would come from him, far less,
that he would walk upon the Sea, and therefore they mistake. All these being
considered, may afford us many necessary cautions, and may teach us, that it is
our own apprehensions and mistakes that puts an edge on many of our trials, and
not his dealing, if it were rightly understood. See Isa. 40.27, 28. Doctrine
10. When Christ has appeared to deliver his people, he may see it fit, to put
them yet to deeper exercise and fear, before they come to the comfortable
issue; He may let trouble be augmented, when he comes to remove it, and may let
out the sharpest pang and darkest hour, when delivery and daylight are
nearest; for, whatever was their weakness in this mistake and fear, yet Christ
not only drew nigh, but in his providence ordered that it should be so, and for
this end, he would have passed by them, Mark. 6.48. that so he might make his
appearance conspicuous, and might try them, as Luke 24.28. This way of dealing
contributes to humble his people yet more, to fit them for deliverance, and to
make it sweet, when it comes.

From ver. 20. learn. 1. Albeit Christ may, sometime, delay to appear for his
people, and to manifest himself unto them in trouble; Yet when the trial is
come to an extremity and height, he will not fail speedily to appear and
speak warmly to them; for, now when they are not only afflicted, but in
extremity of fear, he will not have them tortured with it, but says unto
them, it is I. 2. Christ must not only appear, but must discover himself,
before we can discern him, or be free of mistakes concerning him; for, though
he was in their view, yet that did not avail till he said, it is I. 3. Christ's
speaking and word is the infallible and sure mean, whereby he discovers
himself unto his people, without which, his dealing will be readily mistaken;
And it is from his word that they must got the first comfortable sight of their
condition, and their begun deliverance must be laid hold on there; for, it was
his silence made his dealing to be mistaken, and therefore he begins their
deliverance and comfort by his word, which will loose many doubts, but he says
unto them, it is I. 4. Faithless discouraging fear is that which the Lords
people most readily are inclined to under trouble, as being but the expression
of the dross of their hearts, and that which is more easily a tained, then
humility or any other good use; Such was their condition here, they were
afraid. 5. It is acceptable service to God, to oppose faithless fears in
trial, and to be wrestling against them, when they most violently assault us;
for, there is a command of Christ for so doing, be not afraid. 6. It is the
great victory of the Lords people, and a sufficient deliverance unto them, if
when they are in greatest extremities, they be delivered from slavish fear;
for, such is Christ's antidote and issue allowed on his disciples, when they are
in great danger and perplexity, be not afraid. 7. The sovereign remedy
against fear in troubles, and the only right sight of troubles, is, to see
Christ in them, whose presence, and manifesting of himself, takes away all
cause of slavish fear, and who being seen to have the chief hand in his
peoples trials, it does warrant them to expect no hurt by them; for, this is
the sovereign remedy of fear, It is I, be not afraid. 8. When Christ has
propounded most ample ground of encouragement, yet our endeavors thereupon
will not remove our fears, nor rectify our dispositions, till he interpose
also, and apply the encouragement, by his word of command; for, Christ counts
it not sufficient to propound that comfortable doctrine, It is I, leaving the
use thereof to be gathered by themselves, but he enforces the inference with
his command, It is, be not afraid.

Verse 21. Then they willingly received him into the ship, and immediately the
ship was at the land whither they went.
In this verse we have the warm entertainment given by the disciples unto
Christ, after they knew him, and so were delivered from their late fear;
together with the issue of their whole trial, in that they get to land, and
that immediately. And these are the rest of the consequents of this his
miraculous coming unto them. Whence learn, 1. As Christ's company should always
be sweet, and welcome to his own; so trials ought to make their estimation
thereof to grow, and a known Christ will be found sweet company in trouble;
for, then they willingly received him into the ship. 2. Love to Christ, even
among disciples, may grow so cold and remiss, that there will be need of
trials and separation for a time, to quicken it again; for, this was one chief
cause of all this distance and trial, that they who were (so to say) cloyed
with his company, and therefore thought but little of their condition who came
to him upon occasion; might after this separation and storm, make him more
welcome, and willingly receive him. Thus does the Lord cure drowsinesse and
security, by withdrawing, and making even desertions bring about much good. See
Cant. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. 3. Whatever be the tossings and perils wherewith
Christ's followers may be exercised; Yet they will not perish, but will
certainly come safe to land, one way or other, either sooner or later, here or
hereafter; for, so much may be gathered from this instance, that the tossed
ship and disciples came to land. ^. Christ's presence being manifested to his
afflicted people, will produce sweet changes, and heaps of mercies and wonders,
to them, and for them; for, beside his coming to them in a miraculous way, now
there are two wonders more, one, that the storm is calmed, as it is, Matthew.
14.32, and another, that they were immediately at land. 5. Whatever be the
tossings of the Lords people, yet none of his purposes toward them shall be
made void, and their following of commanded duty shall have a good and desired
issue; for, it is not their mercy only, that they get to land any where,
(which yet is a mercy to tempest beaten men, who may be driven far from
their course) nor does the contrary wind drive them back to the land from
whence they came; But the ship was at the land whither they went, and so their
voyage held good. 6. Christ will let his people lose none of their toil,
wherein they spend themselves (as would appear) to little purpose; But he will
make it all up with his presence; and when he comes, he will further them as
much as trouble has hindered them; for, they who were toiled in rowing against
a contrary wind, are, upon his coming, immediately at the land, etc.

Verse. 22. The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of
the sea, saw that there was none other beat there, save that one whereinto his
disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the
boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone.

23. Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks.

24. When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his
disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.

25. And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto
him, Rabbi, when came thou hither?


Follows unto the end of the Chapter Christ's excellent Sermon or conference
with his followers, some occasions whereof are recorded, verse 22, 23, 24, 25.
and the Sermon it self, with the effects and consequents that followed
thereupon, in the rest of the Chapter.

In these verses, we have the occasions of this Sermon; (which also are a
further effect of the miracle of the loaves;) The first whereof is more remote,
that the multitude who had been miraculously sed, knowing that Christ had not
gone with his disciples, and that there was no other boat there, did, the next
day, expect that possibly they would find him there still, on the mountain to
which he went: But finding him gone, as well as the disciples, they (being
provided of other boats, as is marked, verse 23.) do follow and seek him. The
other occasion of the conference, ( verse 25.) is more near, that having found
him, they enter into familiar discourse with him, and enquire concerning his
getting to that place. It is not needful to determine, whether they suspected
any thing of his miraculous passage; Though it be not improbable that they were
taught, as well as the disciples, thereby: And one work of Christ in feeding
men miraculously, may discover more of him, and that he can pass over a sea
without a boat; And they who were on land, free of a storm, may have a better
fight of Christ's power, then disciples in their perplexity, whose judgments
and discerning were confounded with tentation and trouble: Yea their narrow
marking of circumstances, that there was no other boat there, may import they
suspected it, by their following him when they found him not there: And indeed,
narrow consideration will discover more of him, then slight observers do
ordinarily remark. But that which is certainly clear, is, that they, not
finding him there, do seek him where his disciples were, and providence
furnishes them with boats for their passage. From verse 22, 23, 24. Learn, 1.
The hot moods and fits of temporaries will not always cool at the first, but
they may continue very earnest for a while; for so did it prove in this people,
who, it seems, stayed all night in the desert place watching for him, and are
eagerly seeking him the day following. They are said to stand on the other side
of the sea, though the desert near to Bethsaida, was on the same side with
Capernaum, where Christ now was; because the nearest way to it was by sea, and
the disciples had gone that way. 2. Such as follow Christ but for a wrong end,
he will soon be weary of their company, and they will lose it; for, so did it
fare with these, Jesus was not there, but had slipped from among them ere they
were aware. 3. When Christ is away, it is the duty of such as respect him, to
resolve to follow him on any terms; And even temporaries will not be put away
with every repulse, but may seem, for a time, to follow the faster; for, such
is their practice here, they will go after and seek him, though they should
leave their families and interests. 4. It is great folly and blindness in men,
to do at upon places wherein Christ has gloriously manifested himself, when he
is removed thence in the ordinary signs of his presence; for, so much does
their practice teach, they would not stay in that place, (though famous for a
miracle and Christ's presence,) when he is away, but do follow him. 5. When
Christ is withdrawn, men will be at a loss where to find him, and to know
whither he is gone, if they consult with reason; for, so much do they find, he
is not there, and yet they cannot (when they have considered all circumstances)
discern how, or whither he is gone. See Cant. 5.6. 6. Albeit Christ be not
always visibly seen in the company of his disciples, yet it is safest seeking
him where they are, for, so do they, with good success. They saw him not go
with his disciples, yet they came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus, not only
because that was the place of his education, but because the disciples went
thitherward, as it is like they knew when they went away. See Cant. 1.7, 8. 7.
Such as have their heart and eye on Christ, resolving to follow him, his
providence will serve them with means that they may follow him; for, they who
resolve to follow, and had no boats, are within a while provided, as verse 23.
And if he do so to hollow-hearted men, how much more to others? 8. In
mentioning the place of the miracle, John takes notice that they did eat bread,
after that the Lord had given thanks, to show 1. That spiritual minds are much
taken up with observation of spiritual things, even when greatest outward
wonders are a working; for, he passes the miracle in a word, but speaks more
fully of that refreshing and edifying thanksgiving. 2. Christ's way of speaking
to his Father, in prayer and praise, was very ravishing, and did take deep
impression upon spiritual observers, who were witnesses of it; Therefore, is it
now so warmely remembered by John. 3. It is one great lesson in Christ's school,
to learn that the blessing of all enjoyments are in Gods hand, and to fall in
love with prayer and praise, as the mean of drawing out that blessing, as it is
needed; Therefore, also John remembers the thanksgiving or blessing, especially
as the mean of drawing down the blessing on these few loaves. 4. Such as are
due observers of Christ's wonderful works, will have high and reverend thoughts
of him; Therefore, John does on this occasion name him the Lord. Doctrine 9.
Such as are but temporaries, and hollow-hearted, may get through without
difficulties, where Christ's peculiar followers will meet with storms; he
having more proofs of love to let out on them, and to them; for, they get
through the sea easily, where the disciples were tempest beaten.

From verse 25. Learn, 1. Christ may condescend to be found even of hollow
hearted men who follow him: That so he may witness that their perdition is of
themselves, and that he is willing to to reclaim them: And that he may give a
public testimony, how willing he is to receive sincere seekers, when he is so
condescending to such as these; for, they found him on the other side of the
sea, to wit, at Capernaum, as appears verse 24. with 59. For albeit Christ
landed in the Country beside, where he wrought some cures, as is recorded in
the parallel places, Matthew. 14.34. etc. Mark 6.53. etc. yet he was entered the
City before these men met with him. 2. Temporaries may have as much show and
outside, as these who are sincere; so that none are to be tried thereby, but
men must distinguish betwixt true piety and familiarity with Christ, and a show
or estimation of it; for, they make a great noise and fair show, when they came
to Christ. 3. Temporaries may give Christ very fair language and titles, it
that will suffice him, and will not fail so to do it, so long as he does not
cross their idols and designs; for, their compellation is Rabbi. 4.
Temporaries also may pretend to very great familiarity with Christ, and may
think themselves very great in his Court, and homely with him; So much does
this familiar question about his coming there, import. They judged that the
great work he had done for them, had made them of worth before him, and great
men in his account. 5. Whatever be the flourishe and pretenses of
hollow-hearts, or their pains in following Christ; yet this does witness
their unsoundnesse, that they make no right use of him, when they have the
opportunity, but do curiously and idely pass away their time; for, all they
have to say, is, Rabbi, when came thou hither? which seems to relate not
only to the time, but to the manner also of his coming. And albeit it give
some hint, that they suspected he came in a miraculous way, yet they were but
curious and idle in propounding the questions, as the sequel more fully
clears.

Verse 26. Jesus answered them, and said; Verily, verily I say unto you, Ye
seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves
and were filled.
Follows the sermon it self, preached in the Synagogue of Capernaum, verse
59. wherein, Christ points out the true bread of life unto them, and the
excellency, and way of partaking thereof, with several other passages; upon
which, several effects and consequents do follow. This Doctrine is held out by
way of conference, because he is often interrupted by their questions to him, or
their grudgings and debates among themselves, upon which more of the Doctrine
is brought forth.

I shall take up the parts thereof in this order, 1. Christ discovers and
reproves their corrupt ends, in the pains they took, verse 26. and directs them
to labor and take pains for better and more spiritual food, verse 27. 2.
They seek direct on how to labor, and he points out faith in himself, as the
way for attaining this spiritual food, verse 28, 29. 3. They require a sign,
before they will believe in him as a new teacher, seeing Moses (whose scholars
they profess to be) had given them Manna in a miraculous way; verse 30, 31.
and Christ, upon occasion of this, sets out the excellency of the bread offered
by him, above Manna, verse 32, 33. 4. They professing a great desire after this
bread so commended, verse 34. He describes it more plainly to them, verse 35.
Discovers their hypocrisy in their desires, verse 36. And shows that his
Elect would not deal so with him, and should, accordingly, be well entertained
and cared for, verse 37. -- 40. 5. They carp at his doctrine, and that he
should so commend himself; whose base original they suppose they knew, verse
41, 42. And he clears whence their not believing in him did flow, verse 43.
-- 46. and commends himself to be the object of saving faith, and the bread of
life, verse 47.48. far more excellent then Manna, verse 49, 50, 51, --
showing also in what respect he is this bread, even in his flesh, or by reason
of his incarnation and suffering, verse -- 51. 6. They understanding the last
part of his doctrine carnally, verse 52. He does more seriously inculcate the
necessity, and advantage of eating his flesh, or closing with him as God
incarnate and crucified, commending yet again this food above Manna, ver. 53,
-- 58. Unto which is subjoyned, a designation of the place where he preached
these things unto them, verse 59. 7. Some events and consequents are recorded,
which followed on this doctrine and conference; Namely, That many of his
disciples do yet carp at this doctrine, verse 60. and he reprehends their
stumbling, verse 61. clears and vindicates his doctrine, verse 62, 63. and
points out the true cause of their mistakes, verse 64, 65. And, that many of
them made apostasy and defection from him, ver. 66. Upon occasion whereof, he
confirms his twelve Apostles, verse 67, 68, 69. and warns them of the
unsoundnesse of one among themselves, verse 70, 71.

In the first place, Christ (in this verse) discovers them unto themselves,
showing that notwithstanding all their pains and insinuations with him, yet
they were not straight in their ends; nor were they so much as affected with
his glory shining in that miracle they had seen; but it was only the filling
of their own bellies that made them so earnest. Whence learn, 1. Christ is
neither taken, not will be deceived with fairest shows of pains, and much
respect to him; but will see and discover unsoundnesse, when yet there is much
outward appearance to the contrary: Therefore, notwithstanding their pains in
following him, and their insinuations, verse 24. he knows, and, without being
affected with what they did, declares what they were. And his verdict is to be
submitted unto. 2. Christ is so tender, even of hypocrites, that he will not
abruptly put them away, but will deal with them: And as their case must be told
them before they can know it, so he will discover them unto themselves, and
take pains upon them, so long as they will stay with him, and heat; Therefore
he does not abandon them, though carnal, but answered them: and in great
compassion discovers their case, that they may not deceive themselves. 3.
Albeit it be a most needful thing, that men of double hearts be discovered to
themselves, that so way may be made for a cure: Yet it is a very hard task to
convince hypocrites, and make them sensible of their condition; Considering
that men are naturally blind; that their outward pains may make them appear
somewhat in their own eyes; and, that most of such go on, till they be
judicially blinded and given up to conceit: Therefore, is this doctrine begun
with a double asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you, as pointing out the
necessity of this doctrine, and withal, how difficult it is for such doctrine
to have place. 4. Albeit painfulnesse be commendable, yet the true difference
betwixt time-servers and sincere professors is not always to be taken from
their outward diligence. But they may be exceeding diligent, who yet are not
welcome to Christ, but have a false heart lurking under it: And there may be
much unsoundnesse under seeming forwardness, as casts it all down: for, here
it is granted to them, ye seek me, and that with as much forwardness once and
again, as could be, and yet they are but naught. See Psalm 78, 34, 35, 36, 37.
Isa. 58, 1, 2. 5. Albeit Christ be displeased with the faults of hypocrites
seeking of him; Yet he is so tender, that he will approve even of their pains
and endeavors, in so far as they are materially good in themselves, though
they go about them sinfully: Therefore, he acknowledges, ye seek me, and does
not condemn, but yields to that, as good in it self, if they had done it
rightly. 6. Christ, in trying of men, looks not only to their diligence, that
for matter it be aggreeable to his will; but chiefly to the ends and principles
of men, and their manner of doing that which is right; for, he tries them thus
here, by pointing out wherefore, and for what cause they seek him. 7. As it is
a rare thing to see men, who a^e naturally filled with self-love, free of by
ends in seeking Christ; So to seek him because of outward advantages, which
sometimes accompany him and his way, is the basest and lowest of by ends, and a
practice which he exceedingly abhorres; for, this is their byasse here, ye seek
me, not because ye saw the miracles, (of which; ver. 2. and 14) but because ye
did eat of the loaves and were filled. To follow him only because of miracles,
neglecting his doctrine, were bad enough; but this is yet worse, when only
their own belly drew them, and they did not take up his scope in this miracle,
which was, to hold forth that he was the true food of souls. 8. Men's hearts are
so decei^ful, that when they seem to be most taken up with Christ's glory in his
working, yet they may in reality be only affected with attaining or expecting
their own ends; for, though they seemed to be much taken up with the miracle,
v. 14, 15. yet Christ declares, that they sought him, not because they saw the
miracles, but because they did eat of the loaves. Albeit Christ condescended to
confer bodily benefits upon them by his miracles; yet it was their fault not
to see the glory of his Godhead shining in them, nor to look on them as signs
confirming his doctrine, that they might believe it, but that in the height of
their applause, they should only mind their own belly.

Verse 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for
him has God the Father sealed.
In the next place; Christ, having thus reproved them, does also direct them
how to amend their fault, by employing their pains and care, chiefly about the
spiritual good of their souls, and not about these perishing things. And this
he presses upon them, partly, from the consideration of the one and the other
food; and partly, from his promise to give that spiritual food unto them, if
they seek it sincerely; which he confirms, further, from his being
authorized, furnished and manifested to be the Messiah, the Savior and helper
of lost sinners. Whence learn. 1. Christ does not reprove the faults of men out
of malicious spleen; but he is so ready to cherish desires of seeking himself,
that even when men are unsound in seeking him, he reproves them, not to put
them away, but to cure them, and make them sound; Therefore, does he subjoyne
this direction, and warm encouragement, to the former reproof. 2. As
unsoundnesse in seeking Christ is a disease that must be cured, otherwise it
will draw on perdition; So even that is a disease which Christ is ready to
cure, and has medecin for; So much appears in this pains taken on these
seekers. 3. Men will never employ themselves rightly in seeking Christ, till
first their hearts be weaned from earthly things, and fall most in love with
what concerns their souls eternal welfare; and till the things of the world
cease to be their principal labor and end, and they cease to follow Christ and
religion, for worldly ends and advantages; for, so much is imported in this
direction, Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat, etc.
Which prohibition is not to be understood absolutely, as if it were simply
unlawful to labor, or take pains about the things of the world, for that is
contrary to Scripture rules, Genesis 3.19. 2 These. 3.10. 1 Timothy 5.8. And if the
World were kept in it is own room, it would prove no enemy to grace: But it is
to be taken comparatively (as in the like phrase, Matthew. 9.13.) that they
should not only, or chiefly be taken up with the world, neglecting what is
better, as all mankind is since Adam fell from God to the creature; and, that
they should not make the world their aim in seeking him, as they did. 4.
Albeit men can merit no more by their works, then the beggars craving merits
the alms; Yet men are not to expect, that they will come to the enjoyment of
spiritual things, with idleness, or wishes only; But they must be at pains for
them, and such pains, as flesh and blood will find it hard labor; for, says
he, labor not -- but for that meat, etc. where he diverts their affections and
eagerness from off these earthly things, and sets them upon the right object.
5. It may help to wean our hearts from the world, when we consider that,
however natural hearts feed upon the things of the world, and their souls
imagine satisfaction in them; Yet, if they had the world at their will, they
will get no more of it, but their bit meat, which the poorest may attain unto:
Therefore, does he comprehend all earthly things under the name of meat, not
only, because it was their meat they were now most taken up with; but to point
out what was the most they might expect of the things of time, let them have
what dreams they please; and, to suggest an argument why they should not toil
so much for that which could afford them so little. See, Eccles. 5.11. 6. It
may also cool our affections to the world, when we consider, that, however men
want not enough of toil, when they embrace the world for a portion, (for, they
labor for this meat:) Yet, all they labor for, is but of a perishing nature,
and perishes in the useing, Matthew. 15.17. It serves but to uphold a perishing
life; and cannot prevent it is perishing at last, 1 Cor. 6.13. And, where souls
get no better, and men do only and mainly labor for it, it will cause them
perish eternally; for, this is another ground of disswasion, it is the meat
which perishes. 7. Christ does here commend himself and his spiritual graces,
to be labored for, under the name of meat. 1. Because now they were earnestly
seeking for meat, therefore he points out himself as excellent and better
meat; Thus to the woman of Samaria, coming for water, he points out himself as
living water, chap. 4.10. And so it teaches, That whatsoever men seek in the
creature, they will find it more eminently and excellently in Christ, if they
will come to him. 2. To show the necessity sinners have of Christ, and his
usefulness to them; for, as meat is the mean of preserving life, so not only
unrenewed sinners continue dead without him, but the souls of these who have
any life, will be in peril of starving without him: and if they feed upon him,
their souls shall live, and be refreshed by him. 3. To show his love, who, as
meat is prepared for eating, by fire; so he was content to be roasted in the
fire of Gods displeasure, that he might be fit food for starving and pining
souls. 4. To show the near conjunction that must be betwixt Christ and them
who reap spiritual benefit by him; for, as food must be eaten, and digested,
and turned into our substance, before it can nourish, so must we apply Christ,
and have him dwelling in us, before we draw forth of his refreshing virtue.
Doctrine 8. It does commend Christ, and may quicken our appetite and desire
after him, that he is food which neither perishes in using, nor diminishes,
how manysoever partake of it, and makes them who partake thereof, to endure
and be happy for ever: and therefore ought to be esteemed of above other food,
as much as our souls are better then our bodies, and our eternal welfare to be
preferred to our temporal life: for, it is another argument pressing this
labor, he is that meat which endures unto everlasting life, both in himself,
and in his effects in believers. 9. Albeit, oft-times, such as labor most for
earthly things, may starve and want, for all their pains; Yet it may encourage
men to seek Christ, that none shall do it in vain, but however he may see it
fit to sharpen their appetite with delay, yet he will at last satisfy them;
Therefore does he quicken them yet more with a promise, that what they labor
for, shall be given. 10. Christ is so liberal and faithful in rewarding them
who seek him, that even carnal hypocrites will not be refused, if they quit
their unsoundnesse, and put him in the room of the Idol they are seeking; for,
on these terms, the promise is made, even to these whom he had reproved, to
you. 11. Whatever pains men are bound to take, or do take in seeking Christ,
yet all the reward they receive, is of free gift, and sinners seekers will see
it to be so; for, he shall give it unto you, says he. 12. As Christ is the
true food of souls, so is he the giver thereof, and all of it must come through
his hand; for, the Son of man shall give it, not only by giving himself to
death, that he might purchase life, and become fit food, but by the actual
application of himself, and his purchased benefits, to every hungry sinner.
13. Christ's assinitie to us, and his being our kinsman, and of the same nature
with us, is a pledge to them that seek him, that he will tenderly and
faithfully supply their necessities; Therefore does he take the name of the
Son of man in this promise, to show that he whose delight was among the sons
of men, Prove. 8.31. and delighted to design himself often by this name, and
he who took on our nature, and stouped to subject himself to our sinless
infirmities, will be tender of them who come to him, and need him. 14. Christ
is to be acknowledged to be he whom the Father has authorized, and furnished
to be the Savior and Redeeme^ of lost sinners, and the storehouse from whence
they are to expect their spiritual good: And the Father has made it undeniably
manifest that he is the true Messiah, who was to be expected; for, so is
imported in this, him has God the Father sealed. Whereby we are to understand,
partly, that as King, give sealed warrants and commissions to their Ministers
of state, who are sent out or employed in great affairs. 1 King 21.8. Est.
3.12. and 8.8. So Christ is the Fathers great Ambassador, authorized and sent
out by him to this work; partly, that as a seal represents on wax that which
is engraven on it; So the Father has communicate to him his divine essence and
properties, and stamped and filled him with all divine perfections, for
carrying on that work; having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him; all
knowledge, to reveal his Fathers will, and direct his people; affection, to
come down from heaven for sinners good, and to love them who abhorred him; the
spirit without measure, to refresh, power, to sustain them, etc. And partly,
that as a seal annexed to a commission is a public evidence of the persons
authority; So Christ's endowments are visible mark ^s whereby to know him, and
the miracles wrought by him, and that voice from heaven, Matthew. 3.17. and 17.5.
with the accomplishment of all the prophecies in him, were clear evidences
that he was the true Messiah, and of the Fathers installing him in that office.
15. Christ's being thus sealed by the Father, is a sure pledge that seekers of
him will obtain spiritual food from him; Therefore it is subjoyned as a reason
of his giving this meat, for him has the Father sealed, for we may assuredly
gather, that the Father would not seal a commission, but to one who could be
answerable; H^s fullness, being God, and sealed by God, does assure us of great
abundance and liberality in him; And, he who is the Son, will be faithful in
his trust, since Moses the servant was so, Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Verse 28. Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the
works of God?

29. Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent.


This exhortation of Christ draws out a new question from the hearers; In
answer to which, Christ points out the right way of attaining this spiritual
food which he has held out unto them. We are not necessarily to conceive that
they propound this question in a taunting manner, as if they would declare to
Christ, that Moses had commanded them to do works which are acceptable to God,
and they did them; and therefore would know what new law he would prescribe
unto them; (though this be not unsuteable to their disposition which they bring
forth, ver. 30, 31, and afterward, and it is very true, that none are worse to
deal with, then they who are sitten down upon outward performances; every
thing they do, putting them so far out of Ch^ists reverence in their own
account) but we are rather to conceive, that not being as yet hopeless but
Christ will satisfy their carnal desires, therefore they keep fair with him,
and hearing him speak of labor, which he understood chiefly of faith, and of
other works, as fruits of faith; they understand it only of works according to
the doctrine of their Teachers, and therefore desire to be directed what to
work which might be acceptable to God. Christ answers their question, and leads
them to that one work of believing on him, who is sent of the Father. Whence
learn. 1. Men may endure many rubs from Christ, and seem to come a great
length in terms of aggreement with him, who yet are unsound, and will never
close with him; for, here these carnal hearers do quietly digest that reproof,
ver. 26. and seem to be so taken with his offer, as they want only information
what to set about. 2. Such as resolve to seek Christ and things spiritual, will
need much of Christ's own direction, how to labor and employ themselves, for
attaining thereof; for, so much does their question import. 3. Men by nature
cannot take up the right way of justification and salvation, as being a
mystery; And particularly, Men by nature do retain such a deep impression of
the first Covenant of works, and are so ignorant of the perfection of the law,
and of their own impotency, that they know no way of acceptance before God, but
the way of works, and doubt no more of themselves, but if Christ tell them
their duty, they will do it; for, such is their principle and bold undertaking
here, What shall we do, that we might work? that is, tell us, and we shall do
it. See, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Mic 6.6, 7. Romans 9 31, 32. and 10.3. 4. Men in following
the way of happiness, must not make it their only aim to please themselves in
what they do, but must submit to follow that which pleases God, and which he
shall enjoyne; for, so much do they insinuate, while they are desiring to work
the works of God; Whereby we are not to understand the good works which are,
not only commanded, but, wrought by God in his people; for they dream of no
need of his working any thing in them; but it is an Hebrew phrase, which
signifie^h, works commanded, and acceptable, and pleasing to God. 5. What ever
be men's conceit of their own works; Yet it is only by faith that sinners come
to reconciliation with God, and to enjoy Christ to be souls food unto them;
for, in opposition to all their works, he leads them to this one work, that
they believe. And his calling it a work, does not import that faith as a work
does justify, for it is only the hand to receive Christ who is our
righteousness. But he gives it this name, speaking in their own terms who
doated on works, and so the doctrine of faith is called a law, Romans 3.27.
because the Jews boasted so much of the law. And though other duties be
required also of his people; yet he names this only, because it only embraces
Christ for righteousness and life; it is the only remedy for a soul lying
under the conscience of guilt or any difficulties; and, it is through faith
that we can do any good work, and that they are accepted, and the imperfections
thereof covered. 6. No faith will serve men's turn for justification and life,
but that which closes with, and embraces Christ the Mediator, as sent of the
Father, by his incarnation and manifestation in the flesh, and by his
authorizing of him to exerce that office; for, so is here required, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent. Whereby he warnes men not to rest on general
assents to every divine truth, as a faith sufficient for salvation, unless
they close with Christ; And teaches, That it is no saving faith, to
acknowledge and believe in God, where Christ is not acknowledged; That it is
not enough to profess faith in a Messiah (as the Jews did) unless Christ be
taken up and acknowledged to be that Messiah already manifested; So 1 John 4.2,
3. And, That faith must first close with Christ the Mediator, by whom it
finds access to God, and comfortable resting on him. See 1 Pet. 1.21. 7. Such
as do upon right terms, close with Christ as sent of the Father, and do not
only in the general assent that he is the true Messiah, come in the flesh, but
do heartily close with him as such, and give him the glory of his person and
offices, and do employ him accordingly; they are about a work acceptable and
welpleasing to God; Therefore it is called the work of God, not so much because
he works it in his people, (though that be true, Ephesians. 2 8. and it is not by our
works, but his work about us and in us, that we are saved) as in their own
terms, ver. 28. that it is acceptable to him, being commanded by himself, 1 John 3.23. and therefore lost sinners need not to be affrayed to make use of it.

Verse 30. They said therefore unto him, What sign show thou then, that we
may see, and believe thee? What do thou work?

31. Our Fathers did eat Manna in the desert, as it is written, He gave them
bread from heaven to eat.


This answer produces a new question from them; wherein they bewray more of
their carnal minding of their own belly. For whereas Christ has taken them off
their error of leaning to the works of the law and Moses, and has directed
them to faith in himself; for attaining life and salvation; They (finding that
he was not like to satisfy their carnal expectations) do object, that they
cannot take his word to renounce Moses and the works of the law given by him,
in the point of justification and acceptance with God, and to believe in him as
a new doctor till he show greater signs, for confirmation of that doctrine,
then hitherto he had done, seeing Moses had done the like, or greater works,
then yet he had showed them. He had indeed fed many of them miraculously, but
it was only with course barley loaves, and for one time: But Moses had fed all
their fathers, and that for the space of forty years, and with excellent
Manna from heaven, for which they cite Scripture. And thus they resolve, that
either he shall satisfy their desires, in feeding them and filling their
bellies, or they shall have some plausible pretext for forsaking him, as not
being such a one as Moses was in their fathers days. From ver. 30. learn. 1.
Albeit it behooved Christ to confirm his doctrine, at the first promulgation
thereof, by miracles and signs; Yet men did sin many ways in seeking of
them; as these do here. And namely. 1. When men only tempt him in seeking them;
not purposing to believe, how gloriously so ever he work, as the Pharisees did,
Matthew. 16.1. and here, they are rather seeking a quarrel, then edification. 2.
When men do not first believe the Word, and then seek these as helps to
confirm their faith, but they require signs to induce them to believe, and
would have sense satisfied, before they will act faith; for, they will have a
sign, that they may see, and believe. 3. When men ungrately forget and sle^ght
Christ's former working, unless he work more as they desire; for, they
undervalue all he has done, unless he do more. 4. When men limit Christ, and
are not content with any works, but what they prescribe and carve out to him to
do; for, though they saw many miracles, ver. 2. yet their instanding in what
Moses had done, in the next ver. shows that they would be pleased with
nothing, but with filling their bellies in a miraculous way, without their
pains. Now albeit signs are not now to be expected, Christ's doctrine being
already sufficiently confirmed; Yet this is a clear Emblem of the carriage of
misbeleevers, who do not magnify the Word, nor are willing to close with
Christ, but take pleasure in quarrelling his dealing, and do prescribe to him
and limit him in his dealings, and seek to have their sense first satisfied,
otherwise they will not believe Doctrine 2. Faith in Christ is not only a way
whereof we are ignorant by nature, but a course we are very averse from when we
know it, and a course that naturally we incline not to follow, unless we see
signs and wonders; for, when he has directed them in this way of believing,
ver. 29. now they show their disaffection to it, and that nothing but signs
will persuade them to it, what sign show thou then, that we may see, and
believe thee, etc. 3. Let unsound men flatter Christ never so much for a time;
yet their unsoundnesse will end in cavillations and quarrellings at last; for,
albeit they were much affected with Christ's work, v^r. 19. and seem even now
to give up themselves to be his scholars, yet now the m^at being out of their
belly, and finding that they are not like to come speed in what they accounted
their main errand, they fall a quarrelling. 4. Such as cannot endure the sharp
edge of the Word, nor are profited by it, will soon undervalue Christ's working,
and forget any impression it made upon them; for, they who cannot endure this
his doctrine, do now make light account of the miracle they lately so much
esteemed of. 5. Such as are taken up with earthly things and their own belly,
will not only lightly esteem of Christ's works, if they contribute not to their
ends, but things spiritual and eternal will have little bulk in their eyes in
comparison of these; for, notwithstanding all they had seen, and that Christ
even now had promised to do a greater work, in giving them the bread of life,
yet say they what do thou work? as thinking little of all that, since they
get not their bellies filled.

From ver. 31. learn. 1. God has extraordinary and miraculous ways of
supplying the wants of his own, when ordinary means fail; And the distress of
his people tends but to render his providence and care about them, the more
remarkable; for, so much is pointed out in the history of the Manna, and in
that testimony, (which they summarily cite from Psalm. 78.23, 24, 25.) wherein
it is recorded. 2. However hypocrites may mask themselves, and carry themselves
plausibly for a time; yet they will not always lu^k, but at last will bewray
themselves, and their carnal dispositions and desires; for, while they insist
only on this miracle in Moses time, neglecting other great works done by his
Ministry, they declare that that challenge, ver. 36. was true, and that it was
only me^t and the loaves they were seeking, however they even now pretended to
more. 3. As men may have much knowledge of the Scripture, who are never a whit
the nearer to close with Christ; so they who make not a right use of knowledge,
are justly given up to abuse it, to their own destruction; for, here they have
such knowledge, not only of the history, but of other Scriptures, spe^king of
the Manna, as is a clear proof^ of their parents instructing them, according to
the law. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. and may shame the ignorance of men in times of greatest
light; And yet they will not discern nor embrace the spiritual things of
Christ; yea, they employ their knowledge as a weapon to fight against him. 4.
Christ, in the offer of his Gospel, has not only to do with men who are so
gross and absurd, that on no terms they will close with him, but with the
strong holds and reasonings of witty men, who will dare to rub affronts on him,
and pretend much reason, yea and Scripture, for not embracing him; for, such
are these here; they will not refuse to believe on him, but upon some show of
reason and Scripture, and if they leave him, they will so carry it, as if he
should bear the blame, and not they, as being (in their account) inferior to
Moses. 5. It is a great sin of men, and a great injury d^ne to any of the
faithful servants of God, when they are cried up, to obscure and bear down
Christ and his truth: And this is all the end for which wicked men do, at any
time, commend any of them; for, such was their scope here, in commending Moses
and what was done in his time, though unjustly, seeing it was not needful to
feed them miraculously now when they were in a fruitful land, and not in a
barren wilderness. So also, Joh. 4.12, 6. It is one fruit of the perverse and
lustful dispositions of men, that they are never satisfied with things that are
present, and will be ready to cry up a formerly despised mercy, that they may
undervalue a present offer; for, this Manna was much loathed by their fathers
when they had it, though now their children esteem of it when it is gone, that
so they may undervalue Christ's present offer:

Verse 32. Then said Jesus unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses
gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread
from heaven.
Christ in answering to this question, does not meddle with their asking of a
sign, but as before he cleared the way of attaining this spiritual food, so
here he takes occasion to set forth the excellency thereof, by comparing it
with, and preferring it unto the Manna, whereof they boasted so much. The
comparison is propounded in this ver. which may be diversely understood, As, 1.
That it was not Moses (of whom they gloried in opposition to him) who gave
them, even that Manna; for it was the Father that gave it, upon Moses petition,
who also does now offer this true bread, and that of free grace, without any
previous desire of theirs. This is a truth in it self, and shows, how Christ
will debase them whom men do injustly cry up, to the prejudice of truth; But it
does not reach Christ's full scope here. 2. That the Manna was not given from
heaven, that is, from the celestial heaven, but only from the air and clouds,
which frequently in the Old Testament is called heaven. But Christ, this
spiritual food, is given from the heaven of glory. Yet neither does this
exhaust the scope. Therefore. 3 I take the comparison to be institute betwixt
the nature and effects of Manna, which was given by the ministry of Moses, and
this food, given by the Father; That, however Manna was a Sacrament and type of
Christ, and in that respect is called spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. Yet it was
not bread from heaven, or true spiritual food, in effect and of it self; but
only bodily food. But this is true bread from heaven, that is, real spiritual
food, and the substance and truth of all these types pointing it out. Doctrine
1. It is not to any purpose to follow a contentious and quarreling people, in
their endless debates with Christ, and about his doctrine; But the best way of
dealing with them, is, constantly to hold out unto them their need of Christ,
and that singular excellency that is in him; Therefore, Christ stands not to
debate with them about signs, but goes on to point the excellency of this
food, and how needful it was for them, if they looked for life. 2. Unbelief is
a disease ill to be cured, and it is no easy matter to draw men from doting
on the external privileges they have enjoyed, that they may learn to prize and
esteem of what is spiritual and more excellent; Therefore Christ, in pressing
this doctrine, must use doubled asseverations, verily, verily, because they
would account but little of his bare word in this matter. 3. There is no
outward privilege enjoyed of old, and which the Church wants under the Gospel,
but it is all made up in Christ with advantage; for, here, better bread is
daily offered then that of Manna was. 4. Christ is the truth and substance of
all the types in the Old Testament. And particularly, the type of Manna is
fulfilled in him, in his Incarnation and coming in the world. In his Original,
he comes from a better heaven then that whence Manna came; He is but little,
small and despised in the eyes of men, and yet is white and spotless, as Manna
was, and of a sweeter taste to right discerners; and feeds and entertains a
better life, then Manna did: He is alsufficient to feed all his people, (as
Manna furnished all Israel) and is laid freely forth, to be gathered and
received by all of them; as Manna fell daily round about the camp; And, the
weakest believer shall not come behind with the strongest, in sharing in him,
according as the Manna was equally divided. Therefore is he called the true
bread from heaven, with relation to Manna as the type, 5. The holiest of
Ministers do not confer the thing signified in a Sacrament, nor is the
outward element of the Sacrament, the thing signified by it, which feeds the
soul; But God has the giving of that in his own hand, and if he be not
employed, men will get but the earthly part of the Sacrament: Therefore albeit
Moses was a Minister in giving them Manna, which was the type and outward
element, yet, says he, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, or the thing
signified, but my Father gives, etc. And thus he not only debaseth Manna in
comparison of himself, but speaks the more meanly of it, in respect they
looked not so much to the spiritual signification thereof, but only propounded
it as an instance, to invite Christ to give the like carnal satisfaction to
their bellies. 6. Such as stand in need of true spiritual food, have both the
Father and the Son ready and engaged to give it unto them; for, whereas he
had said, the Son of man shall give it unto you, ver. 27. now says he, my
Father gives the true bread; Wherein he does not only, as Mediator, give the
glory of all to his Father; but shows that the Father concurreth with him in
this, and gives it by his hand. 7. Even such as are, for present, but carnal
and unsound, are not secluded from the offer of Christ, but, upon right
terms, may expect that he will be gifted to them; Therefore, says he, even
to these hearers, but my Father gives you, etc. that is, by me makes offer of
it, to be embraced upon right terms, and in the due order.

Ver. 33. For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives
life unto the world.
In this ver. the assertion concerning this true bread given by the Father, is
repeated, and cleared and enlarged in a description thereof, which aggreeth not
to Manna. Wherein, 1. It is declared, that this is the true bread of God, which
comes down from heaven, to give life to lost and dead men, which Manna could
not do. 2. This benefit is enlarged, that whereas any benefit Manna brought,
was peculiar to Israel only, this is appointed to give life to all sorts of
persons, as well as the Jews. Whence learn, 1. Albeit not only Manna, but even
our ordinary refreshments, are of God, and from him; Yet Christ is the bread of
God by way of excellency, as being indeed divine food; and food for our better
part, and food wherein God manifests his riches and fullness as God, and
wherein he ought to be clearly seen: Therefore says he, the bread of God is
he, etc. or, he is divine bread, and bread which comes from God in a singular
way. And he speaks of this bread as a person having action, he comes down,
etc. because it is Christ's person and benefits accompanying him, which, being
applied, do give life. 2. Benefits of God ought to be in esteem with us,
according as they have much of God shining clearly in them, and in giving of
them; which will commend spiritual benefits before temporal, and lesser
benefits, coming more immediately and sensibly from his hand, before greater
favors, wherein that is not so visible; for, this is an argument to commend
him as the true bread; for he is the bread of God. 3. All mankind by nature is
in a lost condition, lying spiritually dead, and being obnoxious to eternal
death, without Christ; for this is the case of the world, that they need life.
4. Man's lost and dead condition is irremediable by himself, or any other mean
under heaven; for, this life must come down from heaven. 5. Christ is the true
bread and food, that not only preserves life, and keeps from eternal death, but
does put life and quickening even in the dead; And such as do partake of
Christ, will live, and become lively in their motions and actions; for, this
bread of God gives life. 6. Christ (that he might become fit food to quicken
dead souls, and might stoop to them who could not ascend to him) has been
pleased to come down from heaven to earth, unto sinners, Not in regard of his
Godheads changing of place, seeing he fills heaven and earth, but in regard of
state, in that he stooped to be incarnate, and did assume our nature on earth,
by a personal union to himself; Nor yet that his humane nature was from
heaven, but that the sanctification, manner of conception, and personal union
thereof unto the Godhead, was divine and from heaven, and wrought by the virtue
and power of the holy Ghost: In these respects is this bread of God commended,
that he comes down from heaven, and gives life 7. The spiritual benefits and
refreshments of Christ are not proper to Israel only, but common to all
Nations; And as the offer is made indifferently to all sorts of persons, where
the Gospel comes; So he is applied to his own elect, of all Nations and ranks
of persons; for, he gives life unto the world, not to Israel only, but to his
own of all sorts and conditions throughout the world, who in themselves dister
nothing from the rest of the world till grace prevent them, and therefore they
get the common name of the world.

Verse 34. Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread.
Christ's commending of this bread, produces a vehement desire, and earnest
petition for it; Albeit they had wickedness enough to propound this desire by
way of taunt, desiring him who made such fair offers, to give some real
proofs of it; Yet it seems rather to slow from their ignorant and carnal
disposition, who hearing of such bread, and conceiving of it but carnally, they
desire to partake of it constantly, as Israel did of the Manna. Whence learn.
1. The commendation of spiritual things may produce strange motions, and
desires and affections in men, who yet are but carnal; while as they have but
carnal conceptions of things spiritual, and their desires are neither serious,
nor constant, nor laborious; for, here, the former commendation produces very
vehement desires, and strong insinuations with Christ, calling him, Lord, that
they may have their will, and yet the issue proves them to be but naught in all
this. 2. As all men by nature are carnal, so their conceptions of things
spiritual are but carnal, and their desires are agreeable to there dispositions;
for, such was their conception and desire here; they are far from Christ's
purpose, and dream of nothing but bodily refreshment in all this. 3. As men's
lustful hearts are vehement and ardent upon their desired objects; So sudden
changes, and when people on a sudden become vehement in desi^ing spiritual
things, it gives just ground of suspicion, that (at best) there is much of
flesh in these desires; Seeing (what ever grace can do yet) such desires are
not attained without much wrestling, and much sense of former negligence, and
are, for most part, carried on against strong tides of opposition; for, their
very instancy on a sudden, is a strong evidence that they conceived but
carnally of the matter.

Verse 35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes to
me shall never hunger: and he that believes on me shall never thirst.
Christ returns an answer to this desire to ver. 41. Wherein. 1. He describes
more plainly, what, and who this bread is, ver. 35. 2. He discovers their
hypocrisy, and checks them that for not being that in reality, which here they
pretend to in their desires, ver. 36. 3. He shows that his own Elect would
not deal so with him, and should be well dealt with, according as was given
him in Commission, ver. 37, 38, 39, 40.

In this ver. 1. Christ, upon occasion of their desire, does declare what and
who this bread of life is. He had told before the excellency thereof, and that
he and his Father would give it to them who seek it sincerely; Now he brings
out more of his mind, declaring that he is the bread of life. 2. He does again
repeat and inculcate the way of partaking of this bread, which is by believing
and coming to him, of which, See chap. 5.40. 3. He confirms that he is the
bread of life, and points out the excellency thereof, from an effect, which is,
that the partakers of him, shall find complete refreshment in him, for the
preserving and perpetuating of their spiritual life. Whence learn. 1. Christ is
so tender of any desires after himself, that he will labor and take pains to
make the best that can be, even of natural and carnal desires, and not cast
them away at first, but labor to make them better, and set them right;
Therefore does he answer this carnal crew, and propound an object, to elevate
their desires. 2. A right sight of Christ, and his commending of himself to
sinners, is a special mean to make desires spiritual, and elevate them toward
him; for, he points out and commends himself here, for that end. 3. Christ is
not only the giver of that food which begets and entertains spiritual life, and
which is most necessary, and should be most sweet to sinners: But he himself
is the food of our souls also, who gave himself to death, that he might be
prepared meat for us, who by his merit does purchase life, and by his efficacy,
being applied, does dispense and entertain that life; for, says he, I am the
bread of life, that is, who has life in himself, and who merits, begets,
maintains, and perfects life, in them who embrace and apply him. And he speaks
of himself under the notion of bread, because it was bread which that carnal
people was seeking. 4. The right way of feeding on Christ for the entertainment
of spiritual life, and of finding him the bread of life, is, by faith to
embrace and close with him, his person, offices, and offers, and exercise our
faith on him daily; for, he is the bread of life to him that believes. 5. To
come to Christ, and to believe in him, are all one; And he that is made
sensible of his distance from Christ, and of the excellency and fullness that
is in him, and does turn his course and eye toward him, and is still moving on
toward him, is a believer whatever he enjoy: for, he that comes unto me, is
explained by this, he that believes on me. 6. Christ's offers unto all and
every one that comes unto him, are not fair complements, but produce real
satisfaction; As this promise subjoyned does teach. 7. As all they who come not
to Christ, will eternally pine away, under the want of all satisfaction; So
they who embrace him, shall find alsufficiency in him for all wants, and that
eternally; for, this bread satisfies both hunger and thirst, as in Scripture
phrase bread is put for all bodily refreshment: And it is promised, he shall
never hunger, and never thirst. Whereby we are to understand. 1. That they who
embrace him, though they will long after more of him, yet they shall never
again hunger after the husks of sin, nor after satisfaction thereby to the
lusts of the flesh. 2. Albeit there will be lustings and longings after these,
even in them who have embraced Christ; Yet in so far as they have come to
Christ, and are renewed, they will be rid of them. 3. They shall not any more
pine under the destroying hunger of total want, though they will still have an
hunger of wholesome appetite to prepare them for feeding, and have food at hand
to supply and satisfy it. 4. This promise, of being delivered from hunger and
thirst, is but begun to be accomplished here, and daily going on, and shall be
perfected hereafter, when believers shall enjoy complete and total satisfaction
throughout all eternity.

Verse 36. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not.
In this ver. Christ does sadly regrate, and discover their hypocrisy, and
that, notwithstanding all their fair pretenses, ver. 34. yet, they were but
wilful despisers of him; in that, however they had not only seen him, but were
convinced what he was, ver. 14. yet, they would not believe. And this he
declares to be the more odious, that he had told them of it before, and yet
they had not amended it. Whence learn. 1. When Christ is manifesting himself,
by his Word or working, unto a people, then his eye is upon them, marking how
they profit; So much does he intimate unto them here. See, Ezekiel. 33.31. 2.
Christ will not be deceived with fair shows in a people, but can discover a
rotten and perverse heart, under plausible pretenses and professions; for,
whereas they seemed to be so earnest, ver. 34. that there needed no more but to
discover and offer that bread unto them, and they would embrace it; he shows
that it was far otherwise, and that it was not ignorance, or want of
opportunity, but perverseness, that kept them back. 3. It is no wonder that
Christ be much greeved with, and have many sad complaints of unfruitful and
hypocritical hearers; considering their deceitful hypocrisy, the great injury
they do to him, by sleighting of him, and, that they deprive themselves of so
sweet advantages by him; Therefore does he, who knew them well enough, and what
a sweet offer of life they slighted, break out in this sad rebuke, the manner
whereof shows that it came from a grieved spirit. 4. As men may come a great
length in conviction and knowledge, who yet do not believe; So whatever they
attain by hearing, Christ will account it all nothing, if they come not to
close with him by faith; without which, neither is he honored, nor do they
reap profit; for, Christ grants they had seen him, and yet that avails not,
since they believe not. 5. The more conviction and light men have in the
matters of Christ and the Gospel, their unbelief is the more odious; for, thus
does he aggreage their sin, ye also have seen me, and believe not. See Joh.
12.37. and 15, 22, 24. 6. It does also aggravate the sin of unbelief, and
prove the unsoundnesse of men, that they have been often told of their fault,
and yet do not amend it; for, this adds unto the challenge, that he had told
them of it before, But I said unto you, etc. And albeit we find it not
directly mentioned before, yet we are not to doubt of it, since he asserts that
he had said it, and we find it insinuate, ver. 26. where he tells them they
followed him for carnal ends, even after conviction, ver. 14. 7. So long as
sinners are not ashamed to continue in their courses of unbelief, and
sleighting of Christ, Ministers should not weary to tell them of it, over and
over again; for, so much does Christ's example teach, who having reproved this
fault, does not fail to inculcate it again.

Verse 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes
to me, I will in no wise cast out.
Christ, having thus pointed out their obstinacy in unbelief, does (to verse
41.) comfort himself, and strengthen the weak, who might stumble at the
unbelief of so many, by ascending up to the fountain of faith and conversion;
assuring himself that the Elect would come unto him, and promising all tender
usage and welcome to them; which he confirms by reading over his Commission
unto them. And by this means also, he lays before them their sad case, and
that their practice said much to it, that they did not belong unto him; Yet so
as he does not terrify, but warmly invite any who had a mind to come to him.
In this verse, 1. He comforts himself, that, misbeleeve who would, yet,
undoubtedly all these that were given unto him, would come unto him. 2. He
assures all these who come, of tender and warm acceptance. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit many who slight Christ's call, may yet be elect, and at last embrace
him; And albeit we cannot certainly conclude the Reprobation of any in this
life, by any mark in them, if it be not found that they have sinned unto death;
Yet to reject Christ after conviction, is an evidence of a reprobate condition,
and such as continue in it, have sad cause of fear, lest they be indeed
Reprobates: And whatever be Christ's purpose toward any, yet it is a special
mean to terrify sinners from their refusing of Christ, to afright them with
Reprobation: for, so does Christ here deal with these unbeleevers, pointing
out unto them what their way might portend of them. 2. However Christ and his
servants have oft-times cause to complain of the small fruit of their labors;
yet this is matter of comfort, that all the Elect will, in due time, be brought
in; for, so does Christ comfort himself here. See Romans 11.7. 3. Albeit the
offer of the Gospel be made generally to all, to all who hear it: Yet the
special purpose of God for good is toward some only, and not others; for,
there are who are given by the Father, and not others. 4. It is the great
dignity and happiness of the Elect, that they are from eternity given to
Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, as the reward of his sufferings, to come
to him in due time: And that they are given to him in trust, to be accountable
and forthcoming for them; for, so is here declared, that there are whom the
Father gives him. Wherein is imported, that they were the Fathers first, not
only by virtue of his general right in all creatures, Psalm. 24.1. but by
particular Election; and that being the Fathers, they are given to Christ, both
from eternity, to be redeemed by him, and as the reward of his sufferings; And
in time, to be drawn to him, and therefore both the Father gives them, in the
present time, and, has given, them of before, verse 39. See John 17.6. Isa.
53.10. Psalm. 22.30. 5. As these who are thus given unto Christ, are many, how
many soever reject him; So they are high in his esteem, and as much as if all
were given unto him: Therefore are they called All that the Father gives, not
only to show their number, but the word in the Original is more emphatick, and
imports as much as, all things, to show, that, indeed they are his all, and
that he accounts of them as much as, and above all things beside And thus the
expression is more clearly, Ephesians. 1.10. 6. The Elect, and such as are given to
Christ, may, for a time, be, and really by nature are, as far away and
estranged from him, as any other; for, they are given, and yet are to come to
him. This may make them thankful, humble, and charitable, when they are
converted. 7. Such as are elected and given to Christ, will certainly, in due
time, come to him; Their being given from eternity produces their being given
and coming in time, for God is faithful, who will not frustrate Christ of what
he has purchased, and the power that draws them, is invincible and
irresistible: Therefore says he, all that the Father gives me, shall come to
me. 8. Conversion, and coming unto Christ, is not a cause, nor is the foresight
thereof antecedent to Election, but it is only a fruit following thereupon;
for, such is the order here, they are given by the Father, and upon that, their
coming necessarily follows. See Acts 13 48. 9. It is not men's moral changes,
nor their following external ordinances, that proves them given to Christ, but
their coming to him, and closing with, and embracing of himself, as Mediator;
for, so are we taught here, They who are given, come to me says he. 10. Such
as really come to Christ, and embrace him, have not only the present comfort
of communion with him; but are warranted from this to gather their eternal
election, and that they have been given over to Christ, and committed to his
charge and care; Therefore is their coming put as an effect and evidence of
their being given. 11. Such as are come to Christ, have warrant to expect
welcome and warm entertainment, whatever they have been before; for, so much
does the promise subjoyned, teach, which is made to all without exception. See
Jer. 3.1. And particular notice and care is taken of every one, as if there
were no more; And therefore, albeit the former speech was general, all that the
Father gives, yet the promise is more particular, him that comes, etc. 12.
Such as come to Christ, are put into a state of much familiarity, and comfort,
and may expect more from him then can be well conceived or expressed; for,
albeit this promise be expressed only in a negative, I will not cast him out,
yet it imports much more of his warm entertainment; and namely, that they are
taken into his family; are brought near him by reconciliation and friendship;
have all their conditions respected by him; enjoy much of his presence, have
him to be accountable for them, and to make all their lots, by his gracious
providence, tend to their good. All things shall be theirs (and not they slaves
to their idols) and Christ to the advantage; Nothing shall discommend their
person to him; Their condition shall plead rather for pity, then wrath; Wants
shall not render them unacceptable, but rather a conceit of fullness; Under
afflictions, and in performing duties, he shall be undertaker, to work all
their works in them and for them; And all of them shall find the door kept
open, till they be entered in glory, without the reach of all their enemies,
where they shall feed on the light of his countenance, shall follow and enjoy
him, and be made like unto him. All this and much more is imported in this
promise. 13. It is the great comfort of such as come unto Christ, that as their
allowances are rich, so their state is safe and secure; And whatever their
fears, mistaks, or quarrellings, may be; yet they shall never be again deprived
of that happy condition; for, so much is expressed in this promise, I will not
cast him out, that is, they are taken into that sweet estate, not to be cast
out or rejected again. Saints do indeed ofttimes complain of casting off, but
they are the words of sense, and not of faith; They may seem to be cast off,
when really it is not so; They may lose degrees of fellowship for a time, but
cannot be deprived of it totally, and for ever; They cannot be secluded from
his favor and love, and an interest in him, though sometime they may be
deprived of some effects and manifestations, and fruits thereof; They may be
deprived for a time of what contributes to their welbeing, but not of what is
necessary for their being in grace; Yea, he will not permit them to cast out
themselves, Jer. 32, 40.14. Christ's promises to these who come to him, are very
sure, and such as (whatever doubts or jelousies they may have, yet) he would
have them on no terms to question, especially in what concerns his purpose
not to reject them finally or totally; Therefore does he so vehemently assert
this, I will in no wise cast him out, where the doubled negatives, in the
Original, serve to make the assertion strong, and to carry their faith over all
their doubts and fears.

Verse 38. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will
of him that sent me.

39. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son; and believes on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up
at the last day.


Christ confirms this promise, of entertaining them who come to him, by
showing the end of his Incarnation and coming into the world, and by rehearsing
a part of his Commission unto them. He declares in general, verse 38. that his
errand into the world, is, to do his Fathers will who sent him, and not his
own. Which is not to be understood that, as God, he has a different and
contrary will to the Fathers, (though as man, he has a distinct and
subordinate will to his) but the meaning is, he came not to do his own will
only (as the Jews alleged of him) but the Fathers also, and that in this
work, he was the Fathers Commissioner, sent to do what he had entrusted to him,
and not, as the Jews gave out, one who did that for which he had no warrant.
Next, he declares more particularly ( verse 39.) for confirmation of the
promise, what this will of the Fathers is which he came to do; to wit, That
these, that are given him, should be preserved from perishing, and be raised up
at the last day. This is again repeated, verse 40. not only for further
certainty and comfort, but in the repetition, it is explained who they are that
are given to him, even such as see and believe in him; and what is the benefit
they shall reap at the resurrection, even everlasting life.

From verse 38. Learn, 1. Christ, in entertaining them that come to him, is not
only led thereunto by his own mercy and bounty, and love toward them as the
reward of all his sufferings; but does also stand obliged thereunto, by virtue
of a Commission and trust laid upon him by the Father, and accepted and
undertaken by him; Therefore does he mention the will of him that sent me, as a
reason of his fidelity in this matter. 2. Christ has given an ample proof of
his love, and pledge of his fidelity in his trust, in his stooping to take on
our nature, and assuming it in a personal union to himself, on earth; for,
says he, I came down from heaven, of which, see verse 33. And this he mentions
here, not only to show how much it cost him to exalt us; But to be a
confirmation, and pledge of his tenderness, and fidelity, in welcoming sinners
who come to him. For who can suspect him who made himself like his brethren,
(yet without sin) that he might be a fit High Priest? and to assure us that
as he stooped to our low condition, and to be humbled with us, so he would have
us exalted with him. What assurance may it afford us, that he would come down
from heaven, to dwell with us? that the beloved Son would make himself the
But of all the wrath due to our sins? that the sovereign Lord of the
creatures would endure their opposition and enmity, that they might be friends
to us? and, that he took on the form and condition of a servant, and continued
so, till he had perfected what concerned us? 3. Such as are employed in any
station by God, ought to have a constant look to the will of God, and the end
set before them in that station, that so they may aim at it; for, so does
Christ's example teach, who looked to the will of him that sent him, that he
might do it. It is as sure that Christ will warmly cherish them that come to
him, as it is certain he is faithful in his trust; for, such is the force of
the confirmation, I will in no wise cast him out, for I came, not to do my own
will, but the will of him that sent me. If he do his Fathers will, as he still
does, then such shall not be cast out. 5. The Fathers will and good pleasure is
the last and ultimate ground, that faith can seek to settle it self upon; And
particularly, it is sufficient to answer all our reasonings against Christ's
rich offers, that it is the Fathers will such mercies should be conferred; for,
so is also imported here, that they have not only Christ's fidelity engaged to
make them welcome, but it is the Fathers will they should be accepted so, and
that may silence all doubtings.

From verse 39. Learn, 1. It does commend the Gospel to us, that it contains an
Extract of the deep counsels of God, and of the eternal transactions betwixt
the Father and the Son, concerning, 1. Lost man, in so far as is for our
good; for, he brings out and reads, in the Gospel, his very Commission, and
some Articles of the Covenant past betwixt the Father and him. 2. The first
fountain and rise of the salvation of any of lost mankind; is in the absolute
and sovereign will and pleasure of God; for, here he mentions the will of him
that sent him, as the first Original of all, from whence their giving to
Christ, their coming, and safety do flow. 3. These whose salvation the Father
wills, are given over to Christ in his eternal purpose, to be brought to him
in due time; for, so is here held out. 4 Such as are given to Christ by the
Father, and do in time come to him, are put in his keeping, and he has a
charge of them, not to lose any the least of them; for, this is the will of him
that sent me, that of all he has given me, I should lose nothing. Wherein the
Father does so commit the trust unto him, as he still keeps them in his own
hand also, John 10.28, 29. 5. Christ's charge and care of these that are given
to them, extends even to the very day of their resurrection, that there he may
make a good account of them, when all perils and hazards are now over, and that
he may not so much as lose their dust, but gather it together again, and raise
it up in glory, to be a proof of his fidelity: for, says he, I should lose
nothing but should raise it up again at the last day, and so death and
dissolution proves no loss.

From ver. 40. Learn 1. It is a truth that needs much and often to be inculcate
upon us, that all spiritual advantages and benefits come to us, and are to be
had, only in Christ, and that in him they are all very sure; Therefore does he
again repeat this doctrine, concerning what is to be had in him; and that they
will surely get it, who come to him; About this truth we have naturally many
doubts, and are averse from submitting to it; And when we close with it, it
begets love, it moderates all our cares and fears, and strengthens us to
endure all hardships. 2. However such as flee to Christ in the sense of their
misery, are prone to doubt of Gods will to accept them, rather then of anything
else; yet it is out of all controversy, that his will is to do good to such;
Therefore it is again repeated, this is the will of him that sent me, etc. to
remove all doubts and fears. 3. Such as are given to Christ, to be under his
charge, and participate of his benefits, are drawn to believe on him; And it is
the Fathers will, and a part of the transaction betwixt him and the Son, that
faith be the way to partake of these benefits, and not the fulfilling of the
impossible condition of the works of the Law: for, they who are given to
Christ, are expounded to be they who believe on him, and it is the Fathers
will, that such partake of these benefits here mentioned, as of the rest of his
purchase. Albeit mortification, holiness, etc. do prepare for the possession
of these benefits, and do evidence a right thereunto, and the begun possession
thereof; Yet it is only faith in Christ that gives the right and title, that
so it may be of grace. 4. A special mean of begetting faith in Christ in men,
is, to see and know him spiritually; to have him revealed unto them, and to get
open eyes that they may see and contemplate him, till they see beauty in him,
which may allure them to renounce themselves and flee to him, and till they see
fullness and alsufficiency, to answer all their doubts: for, they see (or,
contemplate) the Son, who believe on him. 5. It is covenanted betwixt the
Father and the Son, that believers shall (beside his tender dealing and care
within time) be made partakers of everlasting life; for, it is explained that
not to lose them, verse 39. is, that they may have everlasting life. 6. For the
further assuring of believers of their eternal happiness, it is also
covenanted, that they shall have this life in present possession, in the
earnest and first fruits thereof; for, they have everlasting life, even here,
and before their raising up. 7. Christ, having given an earnest-penny of
salvation, will not suffer it to be lost by any difficulty or impediment in the
way; but will carry believers through all difficulties, till he destroy death
and the grave, and raise up their very dust, that in body and soul they may
partake of that bliss, and that he may make it manifest that death and rotting
in the grave does not make void his interest, nor cause his affection to cease:
Therefore it is added, and I will raise him up at the last day. 8. Albeit
believers are not all of one growth or size, but some are weak, and some
strong; some little children, some young men, and some fathers; Yet all of
them, without exception, have right to the benefits conferred by Christ, and
the weak, as well as the strong, are under his care and charge; Yea, and may
expect the more tender usage from him who carries the lambs in his bosom,
etc. Isa. 40.11. Therefore is the charg^ and promise universal, that every one
which believes on him may have everlasting life.

Verse 41. The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven.

42. And they said, is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and
mother we know? How is it then that he says, I came down from heaven?


Follows their bad use of this sweet doctrine. The clearer Christ speaks,
they discover the more of their disposition, and testify their discontent of
spirit, by murmuring. They pass over all that Christ had said beside, and do
carp only at what he had said in direct answer to their desire, ver. 34.
wherein he asserts himself to be that bread of life, ver. 35. which he had
said did come down from heaven, ver. 33. This they carp at, that he, whom they
supposed they knew to be but the Son of Joseph and Mary, should speak so
great things of himself. Wherein they not only bewray their ignorance of his
divine nature, and miraculous conception, but their gross error, in
alleging that he was the Son of Joseph. From ver. 41. learn. 1. Men may
pretend to much affection and estimation of Christ, who yet will prove but
inconstant, seeing they proceed not on solid grounds; for, they who cried him
up, ver. 14, 15. do now vilipend him, and carp that he should commend himself.
2. Such as do not get good of Christ and the Gospel, nor do embrace him when he
is offered, will certainly grow worse; The powerful Gospel will bring out their
heart, and their unsoundnesse will draw on more unstreightnesse; for, so fared
it with them who sought and heard Christ for a wrong end, the longer and the
more they hear, they grow the worse. 3. It is no strange thing to see corrupt
men, not only not embrace saving doctrine, but that they murmr and fret
against it, and spit out their gall against the messengers thereof, either
secretly or openly; for, such is the entertainment Christ and his doctrine
gets, The Jews (as they were who followed and heard him) murmured at him, or,
secretly muttered against what he said. 4. Such as turn carpers and secret
grudgers at the doctrine of Christ, do not only prove their present
unsoundnesse, but are on the way to further and more horrid apostasy; for, so
does the sequel prove in these, this was the beginning of a breach betwixt him
and them, which came at length to a greater height. The highest degrees of
apostasy would not be digested at first by many, but murmurings, grudgings, and
mistakes, do by little and little habituate them unto it. 5. Such as carp at
Christ's doctrine, and deny unto him the glory of his excellency, in his person
and offices, do not only wrong him, but ingrately despise their own great
mercy; for, this point which they murmured at; that he is the bread which came
down from heaven, does not only set forth his glory, but was most sweet and
comfortable to lost sinners, as holding out his rich offer, and his gracious
condescendence and love, that he would stoop and come down, to give life and
refreshment to them. 6. Though Christ had spoken much more then this, and that
which concerned them very nearly, yet they take notice of no more but this one
word. We may conceive the reasons to be. 1. This having displeased them, it
casts down all the test; as often times one word, crossing carnal hearts, will
irritate their corruptions, to reject all they hear, were it never so useful
and inoffensive, Jer. 26.3, 6. with 9. 2. It may be conceived, that, however
they understood, and did resent the hard news that were insinuate against
them, ver. 37. yet, they will not quarrel upon that, but upon a more plausible
ground: To show, how subtle unfriends to Christ are, that can mask their
discontent with fairest colors, and not discover the bottom of their hearts.
Or. 3. It may be conceived, that not only passion because of what Christ said,
but their own conceit of themselves, hindered them from taking up that sentence
indirectly hinted at, and therefore Christ does inculcate it again, ver. 44,
45. And so it teaches, That, men who are puffed up with a conceit of
themselves, will not readily take with a reproof or discovery of their
condition, especially if it be done but indirectly, and not held forth in
express terms. Doctrine. 7. When enquiry is made, it will be found, that it
is not Christ's doctrine, but men's own corruptions and mistakes, that cause them
to stumble; for, if they understood his meaning to be, that his very body
descended from heaven (as their following reasoning does import they did) this
was but their own fancy; for, he speaks of his Godhead and of the manner of his
conception. And to deny his divinity and miraculous conception, was but their
own ignorance of the Scriptures, Isa. 7.14. and 9.6.

From ver. 42. learn. 1. Sins of progeniters may bring posterity very low,
and put even the posterity of Kings into a mean condition; for, Joseph, the
supposed father of Christ, and his mother, were both of the blood royal of the
Kings of Judah, and yet they lived in a poor condition, which occasioneth this
mentioning of them with contempt. 2. It pleased our Lord not only to stoop and
become man, but to be born of base and mean parentage; That so he might
accomplish prophecies, Isa. 11.1. and 53.1. That he might show, that his
Kingdom is not of this world; might sanctify a mean condition to his own, and
by his poverty make many rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. And, that, in Gods righteous
judgment, reprobates might stumble at him; for, so was it with him here, his
supposed father, and his mother, were in no great account at this time. 3. It
is the disposition and plague of hypocrites and belly-gods, that they stumble
at Christ's outward base estate, and do not see his true and spiritual glory
shining through that veil; for, such were they who see not the mystery of his
Incarnation, nor the glory of his Godhead, but do stumble on this, Is not this
Jesus the Son of Joseph whose father and mother we know. 4. It is a great
engine of Satan, to oppose Christ and his truth, by raising and spreading
untruths, to bear him and it down; for, this was a grand cause of their
stumbling, that they falsely supposed him to be the Son of Joseph, which did
obscure the glory of his miraculous conception and birth. Thus also did Satan
labor to bear him down by a general reproach cast upon his country, Joh.
1.46. and 7.52. Thus did he endeavor to obscure his resurrection, Matthew.
28.13, 14, 15. And it is no wonder to see Christ and his truth suffer
prejudice, by hereditary misreports and calumnies in all ages. 5. Much outward
familiarity with Christ and his servants, will readily breed contempt of him in
carnal hearts; for, their knowing of him, his mother, and supposed father,
makes them slight him, notwithstanding his miracles, is not this Jesus, whose
father and mother we know? 6. Corrupt and blinded reason in men, is a great
enemy to God, and their own souls, while it musters up things, partly false,
and partly true in their own kind, to oppose against supernatural truth, and
to drive men from embracing of Christ; for, they please themselves in their
reasonings against Christ's assertions, partly, alleging false principles, that
he was the Son of Joseph, and nothing but a mere man, and partly, measuring
his miraculous conception by their principles of reason, whence they reason it
to be absurd that he should say, I came down from heaven. Men had need to
subject their reasonings to divine revelation in the things of God, lest they
wrong him and themselves both.

Verse 43 Jesus therefore answered, and said unto them, murmr not among your
selves.

44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and
I will raise him up at the last day.


Christ, in his reply, does not (as was also marked on ver. 32.) enter to
debate with them, or refute their ignorant Sophistry; But 1. He shows, that
the root and true cause of their unbelief was not in his doctrine, nor from
any just ground of exception they had against it, but from somewhat in
themselves, to ver. 47. 2. He repeats and inculcates the former doctrine that
life is to be had only through faith in him, and that he is the true bread of
life, and clears yet more distinctly, in what respect he is the true bread
and spiritual food, to ver. 52.

In these verses. 1. Christ shows that he took notice of their murmuring, and
does dissuade them from it, as having given no just cause thereof by his
doctrine, ver. 43. 2. He confirms this, by pointing at the root of their
unbelief and murmuring, even their natural impotency and averseness from him,
which also is the condition of all men, till such time as divine power be
interposed to draw them, and then all who are drawn, come, and Christ
undertakes to be accountable for such. And by this way of preaching, Christ
would draw them from their idle debates, and would terrify them, by letting
them see that their unbelief proved they were lying, still in nature, and that
God had yet wrought no change upon them, but had lest them to themselves; And
withal he would let them see their loss, who by not embracing him, were
secluded from his care.

From ver. 43. learn. 1 Christ knows and takes notice of most secret
murmurings, and mutterings and repineings against God, his Word, or Servants,
were they never so closly or handsomely conveyed; for, albeit, it seems,
they spoke not out these things, but whispered them among themselves, as the
text has it, and the word in the Original imports; yet Christ knows it, and
tells them of it. 2. Murmurings, and repining against God, and divine truth,
upon whatsoever pretense, are displeasing to Christ, as being a causlesse
distemper, reflecting injuriously upon God; Therefore does he prohibit it as a
thing displeasing to him, Murmr not among your selves.

From ver. 44. learn. 1. What ever be the pretenses of murmures against Christ
and his truth; yet the true cause thereof is in themselves, and not in him nor
in it; Therefore does he lead them from that carping at his doctrine, to see
their own natural disposition, which bred such a distemper. 2. Men, by
rejecting Christ, and murmuring at his offers, do bewray so much of their own
corrupt dispositions, and that they are so far left to themselves by God, as
might be matter of horror unto them, if their eyes were open; for, this is the
scope of this doctrine here, to let them see, not only that they are corrupt,
but that God has not wrought on them as he does on these who are his elect, as
ver. 37. that so he may let them see, what sad things their condition spoke to
them. And Christ does often recurre to this with these contentious Jews, not
to make them sit down upon this as an excuse (which is not); But partly, to
show, that, however the Lords purposes concerning men be hid and secret; yet,
by their own carriage they may bring out strange evidences of it, and (however
the reprobation of any particular person, cannot be certainly known by any mere
man, so long as the person is within time, yet) men's perverse carriage does
prove a reprobate disposition for present, and being preserved in, is a black
mark of their deplorable state. And partly, to show that Christ will not take
an affront at the hand of any, but as they who love him, shall find that they
were first beloved of him; so they who reject him, and persevere in it, will
find (to their eternal confusion) that he did give them up to their own
hearts, to walk in these ways, in punishing whereof he will manifest the glory
of his justice. 3. Albeit it be the duty of all who hear the Gospel, to embrace
Christ; and albeit it be justly commanded, to discover our inability, and as a
mean which God makes use of to work thereby upon his own: Yet no man has
naturally any liberty or power to receive Christ, or come in faith to him; But
every man by nature, (whatever his inclination, education, or moral virtues,
be) has lost all power to do any spiritual good by Adams fall, and remains
dead in sin; for, no man can come to me, says he, to wit, of himself, as is
after cleared. 4. This natural impotency in man cannot be cured by mere moral
swasion, or holding out of the offer of Christ in the Gospel; But with this,
there must be a powerful and effectual work of God, in changing and renewing of
men's nature, infusing of the habits of grace and faith, quickening them from
their deadness, and exciting of these graces which he infuseth, and
effectually inclining their heart and mind to embrace Christ, and close with
him, and adhere to him; for, this is the only remedy of man's impotency, that
the Father draw him. To ascribe unto God no more but moral swasion in this
work, is to allow him no more hand in good, then Satan has in evil; and
consequently, to ascribe unto man as much praise of doing good, as he is
reproveable for evil. And it ascribes unto man the glory of making himself to
differ from another, who had the same offer with him, but would not be
persuaded. See 1 Cor. 4.7. 5. Divine power, in curing and recovering of lost
men, has not only to do with impotency, but with averseness, with a corrupt
will, strongly inclined to evil, and with corruptions, which will resist and
oppose him in his working; for, so much does this drawing import 6. The
powerful grace of God is invincible, and will effectuate his purpose over all
impediments. He will not only bear down the resistance and opposition that
corruptions make, but he, who is Lord of the will, will sweetly incline, and
powerfully allure it, and make the man most willing to come to Christ; for, if
none can come, except the Father draw him, then certainly they whom he draws,
do come, and so Christ's promise subjoyned, and the following verse do clear. 7.
This drawing is ascribed to the Father which has sent Christ, not secluding
the rest of the persons, seeing every work of God which relates to the
creatures, is common to the whole blessed Trinity, and Christ has an hand in
this same work, ver. 46. with Matthew. 11.27. See Joh 12.32. Nor yet is this
expression only used to show, that the Father is first in order of working this
work, as he is first in order of subsistence. But it points out further. 1.
That the father, who entered in a Covenant with the Son, and sent him into the
world to obey his will; and perform these duties he had voluntarily
undertaken, is in a special manner obliged, by virtue of that paction, to bring
unto his Son the promised seed and reward of his sufferings. 2. It serves to
show, that, however he be a righteous God, and will have justice satisfied, for
the sins committed even by his elect; Yet, as the Son did voluntarily
submit to that dispensation, to pay the price, though he was also the party
offended: So the Father does also so love them, as he draws them to Christ,
that his justice may be satisfied in him, and that his love toward them may let
forth it self in comfortable and sensible effects. And this will teach us, so
to magnify the tenderness of the Mediator, as not to entertain wrong
thoughts of the Father. Doctrine. 8. The great misery of these who are not
wrought upon to come to Christ, is clearly to be seen and read in the warm
useage they meet with, who embrace him; Therefore does Christ hold out his
undertaking for them who are brought to him, that he may let these murmurers
see their great loss. 9. Time will certainly come to an end, and all
perfection and contentment which men imagine in the things of it, will have a
period; for, days do, at last, come to the last day. 10. Whatever believers
find in Christ within time, yet their eyes are chiefly fixed upon eternity,
and upon the expectation of settled happiness there; Therefore do they need to
have a promise concerning the last day so often repeated unto them. 11. Such as
are brought to Christ by the Father, he will never abandon them till he have
raised them up at the last day, and presented them blameless and complete
before the Father, that they may forever be with him; for, says he, and I will
raise him up at the last day.

Verse 45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God.
Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes
unto me.
Christ does confirm his assertion, concerning the Fathers drawing, from the
prophecies of the Old Testament which speak of the days of the Gospel; Wherein
it is foretold, that all the Elect, and confederates in the Spirit, shall be
taught of God to embrace Christ offered in the Gospel, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33,
34. Whence he infers, that every one who is thus taught, does come and
embrace him. This teaching is not to be understood as secluding a teaching
Ministry under the Gospel; for, the very text includes hearing and learning;
and this interpretation should not only rub an imputation upon Christ and his
Apostles practice, who in these very times of the Gospel, did preach, and
appoint a Ministry, and ordained Ministers; and who did continue teaching and
exhorting, when yet they acknowledge this promise to be accomplished, 1 John
2.20, 21, 27, 28. 1 These. 4.9, 10. but it should strike also against all
private mutual edification, as well as public teaching: which yet the decriers
of a Ministry will not allow; Yea, they intrude themselves as Preachers, that
they may cry down Preaching and a Ministry. But the meaning is, that God, in,
and by the mean^, should teach them, that however means be necessary, yet it is
not they, but the Spirits teaching, that prevails with them; and, that under
the Gospel, this teaching should be more general and conspicuous. Doctrine 1.
It is by the Scriptures, that all controversies and debates, in matters of
Religion, must be decided; Therefore, does he remit the proof of his assertion
to what, is written in the Prophets. 2. Not only Christ's outward condition and
practice, but his doctrine, are in all things aggreeable to the doctrine and
predictions of the Old Testament, concerning the Messiah, and what should be
fulfilled in his ways; Therefore does he cite the Prophets, as foretelling the
same things of the days of the Messiah, which he now asserts. And he who was
truth it self, does condescend to confirm his doctrine thus. 3. Gods way of
drawing in sinners to Christ, as it consists not in bare moral swasion, so
neither is it a working upon men as insensible stocks or irrational creatures,
but he deals with them in a rational way, and by his efficacious teaching,
does cure the blindness of their mind, and open and incline their hearts;
for, his drawing, ver. 44. is by this teaching, they shall be taught of God, to
wit; in the use of means, yet so, as they find God in them, as is before
explained. 4. It is the privilege of all the Elect, that, in their own
measure, they are taught by God; and how small soever their knowledge be, yet
they are taught what is necessary for bringing them to Christ, and made wise
unto salvation, for, the promise is universal, as to them, they shall be all
taught of God. See 1 John 2.13. And Christ does cite it with the copulative,
and, whereby it is joined in the Prophets with the other promised mercies, to
lead us to the study of the rich and many mercies that do accompany it, and are
given with it. 5. Such as are taught by God in the use of means, will not only
get an ear to hear, but will not rest on that, till they get an heart to
understand and learn by their hearing; for, they who are taught of God, are
every man that has heard, and has learned of the Father. 6. Gods teaching of
his people does not only illuminate the mind, or give the power of believing,
but does also give the act and exercise of faith, and certainly bring them to
Christ; for, every man that has heard and learned, comes unto me. 7. No
light, nor illumination of the mind, nor any other change, will prove a man
taught of God, unless he be convinced of his own misery, and of Christ's mercy,
and brought to close with him, and daily to come unto him, and practice this
lesson of coming; for, this is the evidence of a man that has heard and
learned, he comes unto me.

Ver. 46. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he
has seen the Father.
In this ver. Christ clears the former testimony, and inference from it, by
showing that Gods teaching does not import that men must first see God, and be
taught of the Father apart, and without him; For not only is the Father
invisible to the eye of our body (which is also true of the Son and Spirit,
save in so far as the Son of God was incarnate, and made manifest in the
flesh) but there is also no immediate sight of the mind, or knowledge of the
Father, in his essence, will, or ways about saving of sinners, but what Christ
the Son has; And therefore all others must be taught, not immediately by the
Father, but mediately in and by him. And Christ's scope in this, is, not only to
clear the mistake that might arise, but to make way for returning to his
former doctrine; by leading them to himself, in whom, and by whom alone, they
could expect any thing the Father promises. Doctrine 1. Men in hearing and
studying sublime and divine truths, have need of much caution and wariness,
that their carnal and shallow conceptions and imaginations do not beget
mistakes and errors about them, and withdraw them from the simplicity of what
is revealed; Therefore does Christ find it needful to prevent mistakes about
this mystery. 2. Gods condescending to stoop to sinners should be entertained
with due reverence, and should not hide from us that distance that is betwixt
his Majesty and our baseness, nor hinder us to keep at due distance with him;
Therefore, having spoken of his condescending to teach us, he guards that, by
exalting the Father, and showing that there is no immediate seeing or knowing
of him. Hence it is that even that sweet name, the Lord they God, is declared
to be a glorious and fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. 3. Not only is the Father
invisible, but he does not reveal himself, or his will concerning the
salvation of sinners, immediately unto men; or, as Christ sees and knows him
and it; but is an incomprehensible God, a light which no man can approach unto,
1 Timothy 6 16. for, says he, not that any man has seen the Father, to wit,
immediately, or without Christ, and as Christ sees him, as is after cleared.
For albeit he did familiarly converse with, and reveal himself more
immediately to some in respect of others, and particularly to Moses, Exodus
33.11. Numb. 12.8. Yet any bodily sight he got, was but of his back parts,
Exodus 33.23. and but the similitude of the Lord, Numb. 12.8. or some external
sign of his glorious presence with him, and not a sight of his essence, which
only Christ does immediately see and comprehend. And what he got revealed of
God, by his speaking with him mouth to mouth, and face to face, it was only
through and by Christ, (who is the revealer of the Father,) and far short of
that knowledge and sight, and of the way of it, which Christ has. See on Joh.
1.18. 4. Christ is of the Father another way then either Angels, or men, or
Saints; to wit, neither by creation, nor regeneration or adoption, but by
unspeakable generation proper to himself; Therefore it is ascribed to him in a
singular way, that he is of God. 5. This way of being of the Father, makes it
Christ's privilege to be singularly and immediately acquainted with him, and to
be the teacher and revealer of the Father, to all that know him; for, he which
is of God, he has seen the Father, and this cleares that it is by him men are
taught of God, ver. 45. See Matthew. 11.27.

Verse 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me, has
everlasting life.
Christ having digressed this far (being interrupted with their murmuring) to
show the cause of their distemper; He returns now to inculcate and press the
former doctrine, taking occasion from the former ver. wherein he has spoken of
his immediate knowledge and seeing of the Father. And first, he gravely asserts
and seals the truth of that doctrine which points out salvation to believers in
him. Whence learn. 1. Christ's immediate acquaintance with the Father, is
forthcoming for believers good; Therefore, unto that doctrine, ver. 46. is
this subjoyned, for their comfort. 2. Such as do know and take up Christ
rightly, will see great cause of trusting him, and closing with him; So much
also does the dependence of this on the former ver. import, that they who take
him up to be one who immediately sees the Father, will find ground to credit
this doctrine, whatever they thought of it before. 3. This repetition, and
pressing this doctrine does hold out how necessary these truths are. 1. That
men be taken up with their own salvation, and the way of attaining it, as being
the mean to drive away many idle and needless janglings; Therefore does he
wave the answer to their sophistry, and direct them how they may attain
everlasting life. 2. It is necessary that men study much that eternal life is
to be had only in and by Christ, and will certainly be attained so: This he
again repeats here. 3. It is necessary, that all false ways to heaven be cried
down, and that men look on faith as the only and sure way of taking hold of
Christ, and of getting life in him; for, to such is the promise again
repeated. 4. Men should also study that this offer of life, is indefinite, and
it will be undoubtedly granted to all who shall or will believe: for, it is
indefinite, he that believes, be what he will, or be they never so many. 5. It
is also to be seriously studied, that believers have eternal life in some
respects, even here, to wit, in Christ, and by faith, in the earnest penny and
first fruits; for, he that believes, has everlasting life. Doctrine 4. The
confirmation of this doctrine, by a double asseveration, teaches. 1. Men are
by nature so addicted to the covenant of works, and so loath to be stripped of
their own worth and righteousness, that they are hardly persuaded that faith
in Christ is the way to life, and very unwilling to embrace and rest in it;
for, this asseveration imports, that there is a controversy in this matter, 2.
Corrupt reason will never end this controversy, but we must take us to Christ's
word alone, to satisfy us; Therefore he uses no dispute, but asserteth it on
his truth and word. 3. This truth (however controverted) is most certain, and
without all controversy; for, it is verily, verily, true. 4. It is most
needful, and profitable, that sinners believe and close with this truth, and
make use of it; Therefore does he inculcate and assert it. 5. Christ allows
such as believe in him, to be very confident and persuaded of his accepting of
them, and of their eternal happiness; Therefore does he strongly assert that
verily, verily, they have everlasting life.

Verse 48. I am the bread of life.
Next, Christ repeats his former doctrine, and confirms the former assertion,
by showing that he is the bread of life. See ver. 35. Doctrine. 1. Men by
nature are soul-starved, pineing away under the want of souls food, and not
only so, but they are so dead, that they know or feel it not; for, that he is
the bread of life; imports not only this their pineing condition, but their
being dead under it. Otherwise, if they truly felt it, it were a sign of a
good condition, to be sensible of their worst estate. 2. Christ is unto the
needy soul all that it can need. He is, by way of excellency, the food of
souls, which quickens them when they are dead, and refreshes them, and
preserves the life which he gives; for, says he I am that bread of life. 3.
This excellent virtue in Christ, to give and preserve life, is ground of
confidence to a believer, that by closing with him, he shall have everlasting
life; Therefore is this subjoyned as a confirmation of the former assertion, in
ver. 47.

Verse 49. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

50. This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a man may eat
thereof, and not die.


Thirdly, Christ illustrates this quickening virtue of this bread, by comparing
it again with Manna, which was but weak, and could not preserve their fathers
from death, ver. 49. whereas this bread, which came down from heaven, does
deliver and preserve them from death who eat of it, ver. 50. This that is said
of Manna, that the fathers, who eat thereof, are dead, may be understood two
ways, and in both respects, the opposition will stand firm betwixt it and
this bread. 1. That though Manna was excellent and pure food, yet it could not
so much as save their fathers from bodily death, but this saves the soul from
spiritual death, is a remedy against bodily death, and a preservative both of
soul and body against everlasting death. 2. That though their fathers did eat
Manna, as it was spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. and a Sacrament pointing out
Christ, yet many of them perished eternally; but the partaker of this bread, is
sure of everlasting life. Doctrine 1. A special way to find out the excellency
of Christ, is, to compare him with what seems to have any excellency in it, and
then (...) how far he out-shines (...); for, to this end is he again compared
with Manna. See Phil. 3.7. 2. Whatever it be that would came in compe^^^^ with
Christ, in the matter of worth, is not only infinitely inferior to him, but
should be ^losed as a thing of naught; Therefore, albeit Manna in it self was
an excellent gift of God, yet when they do^^ed so much upon it, Christ finds
it necessary to vilify i^ thus. 3. It may lessen our estimation of any outward
thing, when we consider that it cannot so much as perpetuate it self with us,
or us with it, and far more, that it cannot prove a remedy against perdition;
for, thus does he abase Manna, your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness,
and are dead. 4. Unbeleevers do partake only of the outward part of the
Sacraments, and that is so far from saving them, that their abuse thereof,
tends to their perdition; for, thus also did they eat Manna, as it was a
Sacrament, and are dead. 5. It does set forth the excellency of our true
spiritual food, that it comes down from heaven, far above the clouds whence
Manna came; and so is divine food, proclaiming Gods love and condescendence to
lost man; for, This is the bread which comes down from heaven. 6. Christ's
coming down from heaven, and offering himself in the Gospel, is a sufficient
invitation, and ground for hungry sinners, to come and feed upon him; for, it
comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof. 7. Christ is such
spiritual food, as will prove a remedy and preservative against death, both
spiritual and eternal, and so swalloweth up any bitterness that is in bodily
death, for, this bread comes from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not
die.

Verse 51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven, If any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world.
In this verse, 1. Christ goes on to show the excellency of this bread which
he had commended above Manna. And speaking of himself in the first person,
(whereas verse 50. he had spoken of himself under the name of bread, in the
third person) he declares that he is that living bread, the partaker whereof
shall live eternally in bliss with him. 2. He brings out yet more of his mind
concerning this true food, by showing in what respect he is this food; to wit,
by reason of his incarnation, and taking on our flesh or nature, and by his
giving of this a ransom for sin, whence flows the purchase and application of
life to his own of all Nations. So that the sense of this is not, that his
flesh, eaten in a carnal way, by the mouth of the body, is this living bread,
nor yet that his humanity separate from his Godhead gives life; for both these
conceits are afterward refuted. But the meaning is, that Christ's Incarnation,
and taking on our nature as our kinsman, is a channel and conduit, through
which the quickening virtue that is in his Godhead, is commuicate unto us; and
his offering up himself in that nature, by his eternal spirit, does purchase
and merit that this quickening virtue be actually applied and communicate, and
his suffering is (as it were) the preparing of him to be fit meat to us.

From the first part of the verse, Learn 1. It is a point to be much and often
studied, that only Christ is the fountain and seeder of our spiritual life,
lest our hearts turn aside to other confidences; Therefore, having spoken of
this bread in the third person, he finds it necessary again to assert, I am the
living bread, which came down from heaven. 2. It may confirm our faith, that
Christ can give and preserve spiritual life, when we consider that he is not a
dead creature, as Manna was, but himself a living Christ, and fountain of life;
for, says he, I am the living bread, etc. 3. Christ is not only a remedy
against death which came by sin, but he gives to his own a life of
happiness, which lasts eternally; for, so is here declared, he that eats,
shall live for ever, to wit, in glory; for, otherwise reprobates shall live for
ever in hell. 4. Christ must be applied by faith, of all these who would find
his virtue; for, this bread must be eaten, and then the eater shall live. 5. As
Christ is that (and much better) to the soul, that food is to the body, so
faith in applying him, has some affinity with eating, as here it is expressed;
for it is as needful to the soul, as eating is to the body; it must be the work
of empty and longing souls, as eating is the work of hungry men; Christ must be
received and united to us by faith, as meat is let down, to be turned into our
substance, by eating; being thus received, he will refresh and strengthen the
soul, as meat does an hungry man; And, faith must be daily exercised, out of
new sense of want, as eating is daily renewed by reason of new appetite.

From the latter part of the verse, Learn, 1. The whole world, without Christ,
is dead in their dispositions, and lying under the sentence of death pronounced
in the Law; for, so is here imported, in that he must come and give life. 2.
The only remedy of this evil, and ransom of lost sinners, is, the Incarnation
of Christ, and the giving of his humane nature to suffer death; for, the bread
is my flesh, given for the life of the world, or, to purchase life to sinners
dead in sin. In all ages of the world, even before his Incarnation, he obtained
life to sinners, because of the Covenant, wherein he had bound himself to take
on our nature, and, in it, to satisfy justice, which now he has performed,
And albeit Christ in his whole person be Mediator, and the party engaged to
satisfy justice; yet it was in his humane nature that he underwent the
punishment, and his humane nature was supported therein, and his sufferings had
worth and merit, because of the union of the humane nature with the Godhead in
one person. 3. Christ is not only the ransom of lost sinners, but the giver
thereof also: He not only willingly offered himself to suffer, but was Priest
as well as sacrifice; yea, and Altar also; for, says he, I will give my flesh.
4. Christ came in the world to give, and now has given, his life for the
world; that is, for his own in it, in all ages and Nations, who are in
themselves as bad as any in the world, and many of them, of all ranks; In these
respects it is said, I give my flesh for the life of the world. 5. That same
flesh and humane nature of Christ, that is offered up a ransom to justice, is
also the bread of life, for souls to feed upon; for, the bread is my flesh
which I will give for the life of the world. It is Christ's suffering and death,
from whence our life flows, and Christ crucified is the carcass on which
souls feed. And it is ascribed to his flesh; or, humane nature, (as his paying
the ransom is also ascribed to it) because, however the quickening virtue and
efficacy flow from the Godhead, to which his flesh is united; yet, it is by his
Incarnation and suffering, that this becomes food to us. 6. As Christ must not
only be given a ransom for our sins, but also given and applied to us, to
quicken and feed our souls; So Christ is the giver of himself both ways; He
gave gimself to the Father, to purchase life to his own, when many of them were
not in being, far less believers; and he does apply himself unto them for
life, when they believe; for, both these are expressed here, The bread which I
will give (to wit, by way of application) is my flesh, which I will give (by
way of ransom) for the life of the world.

Verse 52. The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?
This new point of light, which Christ brings forth to clear the way of this
spiritual feeding, occasions a further discovery of his hearers; who
understanding his words carnally, did stumble at them, and strive among
themselves about them, that is, they did in a fighting tumultuous way express
their stumbling one to another, or, it seems that some understood him aright,
or gave him charity, others took him up carnally, and stumbled, and so they
fell to strive. Whence learn, 1. Carnal men and misbeleevers will grow still
the longer the worse, when pains are taken upon them, and they do not profit;
for after misbeleeving and murmuring, they fall a brawling and contending, they
strove, or fought. All, or most part, of them were in a rage at what he had
said. 2. Division, and strife and tumult, may follow upon the doctrine of the
best Preachers, and yet the doctrine is not to blame, but only men's
corruptions; for, upon Christ's preaching, The Jews strove amongst themselves.
3. Carnal misbeleevers do put a carnal sense upon Christ's spiritual words, and
so do occasion their own stumbling; for, this they stumble at, how can this man
give us his flesh to eat? They understand it of bodily eating, and this they
cannot endure, because it is inhumane to eat man's flesh, and his own body
could not be food, that way, to all the world, far less could it give life.
But Christ meant no such thing, they stumble on their own mistakes; And they
who assert such a bodily eating of Christ's flesh, and yet do not stumble at it,
are more brutish then these Capernaites. 4. The right way to be satisfied about
any point of truth, or doctrine, is, to come to Christ himself in his own
appointed means; And they who neglect this, are justly left to stumble in
darkness: for, herein they failed, They strove among themselves about it, but
come not to him for resolution.

Verse 53. Then said Jesus unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Follows Christ's answer to this; Wherein he does not alter his words, but
presses more and more the necessity of believing on him, and closing with him
as crucified, under the terms of eating his flesh and drinking his blood. And
1. He presses it from their danger if they do it not, ver. 53. 2. He
encourages to it, by showing the advantage thereof, verse 54. 3. He proves the
real advantage of feeding on him, verse 55, 56, 57. 4. He concludes this Sermon
with a recapitulation of somewhat said before concerning the excellency and
usefulness of this bread, verse 58. Unto which the Evangelist subjoynes a
designation of the place where Christ preached these things, verse 59.

In this verse he presses the necessity of feeding on him, from the
consideration of their danger who neglect it; which is, that wanting this souls
food, they can have no spiritual life in them, but are dead in their sins.
Whence learn, 1. Ministers must not change nor alter their doctrine because of
men's humors; But let people quarrel as they will, they must press it the more
that it is opposed; for, Christ repeats the same doctrine in the same terms,
notwithstanding their discontent. 2. Christ is not ashamed of his stooping to
take on our infirmities for our good; Therefore does he design himself the
Son of man, not only to clear that his Incarnation was the way to make
himself ours, and that we may expect good from him who is of our own nature,
but to show that he thought no shame of it, however they in disdain called him
this man, or, this one, verse 5^. 3. There is a daily spiritual feeding upon
Christ by faith, necessary to salvation, as men must eat daily for preservation
of life; for, this is it which Christ presses here in this Chapter and not (as
some dream) a Sacramental eating of his body, far less, an eating of his
flesh in a corporal manner in the Sacrament; for, 1. The Sacramental eating was
not yet instituted and appointed, and therefore could not be here inculcate. 2.
This eating is so necessary to salvation and life, as none can have life
without it, and all live who get it, verse 54. But neither of these can be said
of Sacramental eating; For, before it was institute, they who were saved went
to heaven without it; Yea, and after it was institute, many (and particularly
children) have gone, and go to heaven, without it; and all are not saved who
partake of it. Doctrine 4. Men will never feed on Christ for salvation in
earnest, unless they look upon it as a matter of life and death; Therefore
does Christ so press it upon them, and that with a Verily, verily. 5. It is
the application of whole Christ, as incarnate, and in his sufferings, that
brings life. And Christ, being applied, will prove complete nourishment:
Therefore, having spoken before only of his flesh, now he adds his blood,
they must eat his flesh and drink his blood: to show, that they must apply him
wholly, and that he will be complete nourishment. 6. Such as do not make
spiritual application of, nor feed upon Christ crucified, have no spiritual
life or communion with God, but continue dead in their sins, and shall not
partake of eternal life; for, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you, they are already dead irrecoverably,
unless they make use of this remedy.

Verse 54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and
I will raise him up at the last day.
Christ having thus terrified them, does now allure them to feed on him, by
showing the advantage of doing it, to wit, that they shall have eternal life in
the bud, and shall be raised up at the last day, fully to enjoy it. Whence
learn, 1. When Christ shows himself terrible, and threatens us with danger,
it is, but to fit us for the promise, and stir us up to make his offers
welcome; Therefore does he subjoyne this sweet encouragement to the former sad
certification. 2. The sincere application of Christ brings life; And though
such as apply him, do yet find a body of death in themselves, yet they are
passed from death to life, and do enjoy a begun sight of God, and heaven in
part: for, whose eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life,
even here. 3. Such as do partake of this begun life, will not be satisfied with
any thing they find within time, till they come to full fruition; And Christ
will raise them up, to enjoy the perfection of it, at the last day: Therefore
it is added, and I will raise him up at the last day. 4. Such as close with
Christ, he will not only perform the promises which they are actually
believing and expecting; but will do great things for them, when they are not
sensible, nor able to cooperate: So much is imported in that he will raise him
up, when his dust is little sensible; nor can be active in that matter.

Verse 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
To confirm the certainty of this encouragement, he subjoynes several
arguments, which both prove the assertion, and are so many Motives to excite
them to feed upon him. And 4. He brings a proof that feeders on him have life
from the excellency of this food, that it is not counterfeit but real food,
able to confer and maintain life. Whence Learn, 1. Albeit men do need bodily
refreshments, and (when they do not feed on Christ) will not want their own
contentment; Yet all these, in comparison of Christ, are but vain and empty;
They are but deceitful meat, meat that perishes, the best of them are but
husks, and afford but shadows of that sweetness, refreshment, strength, and
life, which he gives: So much does this expression, meat indeed, etc. Import,
that albeit, besides bodily refreshments, and the lawful contentment men may
have in their outward enjoyments, they will also be putting other things in
Christ's room; yet all these are not indeed what they seem to be; when
compared with him. 2. Whatever shadow of excellency or contentment men find
in the creatures, the reality thereof is to be found in Christ, and him only;
For, whatever they thought of meat and drink, all that, and much better, is to
be found here, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. 3. This
sweetness and excellency in Christ, should allure needy souls to feed upon
him; And Christ's commending himself for that end, shows how well they are
allowed so to do; Therefore does he bring in this commendation, as a reason and
encouragement to them to come, and an assurance that they shall find life; for
my flesh is meat indeed, etc.

Verse 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and
I in him.
A second motive to feed on him, and reason to prove that feeders have life, is
taken from the uninion that is betwixt Christ and feeders on him; That as meat
is turned into the eaters substance, so they and Christ become one, and upon
feeding, there follows a mutual inhabitation. Whence learn, 1. Union with
Christ does produce in souls a life, begun in grace here, and to be perfected
in glory; for, Christ brings this indwelling, as an argument to prove that
feeders have life. 2. Albeit such as do but taste of Christ and his goodness,
may spit out again what they have tasted; yet true feeders will abide in him,
by constant dependence, and uniting themselves to him, that they may have life,
and feeding will make up this union; for, he that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, dwells in me, feeding draws him to abide more and more in Christ,
and it makes up this union on the feeders part. 3. As the true feeder is united
to Christ, and abides in him, so Christ also does abide in him, by constant
influence and quickening virtue, to make him live, and so the inhabitation is
mutual; for, he dwells in me, and I in him.

Verse 57. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so, he
that eats me, even he shall live by me.
A third reason proving that feeders have life, and that life flows from union
with Christ, is taken from Christ's union with his Father, and his being sent by
him to do the office of a Mediator. Wherein he declares, that as the Father
has sent him to be a Mediator and soul-feeder to believers, and as the Father
who sent him, lives of himself, and he (the second person) lives by the
Father, so they who feed on him, shall live by him. Of this doctrine see, in
part, on chap. 5.26. Doctrine 1. It is a truth to be much pressed, and wherein
we have need to be well rooted, that life and spiritual well-being is to be had
only in Christ embraced by faith, both as purchaser and appliar; Therefore is
this again inculcate, he that eats me, shall live by me. 2. Christ is such a
fountain of virtue and life, that even the dead may expect life by closing with
him; for, life, or, to live by him, is promised to feeders. 3. Such is a
believers interest in Christ, that whatever Christ has, shall be forthcoming
for him, as he needs it; for, so does the argument run, that as he lives, so
they shall live. See John 14.19. 4. The Fathers sending of Christ into the
world, to be the Redeemer and Savior of his people, is a sure pledge that
feeders on him shall live; seeing he will not frustrate the Fathers end, but
will do the work he is sent about; Therefore is this used as an argument, the
Father has sent me, etc. 5. As the Father has a fountain of life in himself,
and the Son has the same life communicate to him, with his essence, from the
Father, and this dwells in the man Christ, by the personal union; so this
life of the Father and Christ is a pledge that believers shall live; for, as
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so, he that eats
me, even he shall live by me. Believers life must be sure, for which there is
such a pledge, and that fullness of the Godhead, and life, that dwells in the
man Christ, cannot but put life, and preserve life, in all that close with him.
Yea, Christ's living by the Father is not only a pledge of our life, but our
life holds also some proportion or similitude to his: For as he has life
communicate by eternal generation, so by regeneration we are made partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. to wit, in respect of qualities; as he subsists
in his life, as man, by virtue of the personal union with the Godhead; so, do
we live by virtue of the mystical inhabitation, or union with God, by his
Spirit: And, as he as man had a created life here, and now lives gloriously at
the Fathers right hand; so by the gracious operation of Gods Spirit, we shall
be made conform to Christ, and partake of the same life for kind. 6. Albeit
in our application of Christ, we must begin at his cross and death; yet his
whole person is forthcoming to make believers live; Therefore, in place of his
flesh and blood, he speaks generally, he shall live by me, pointing at his
whole person.

Verse 58. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers
did eat Manna and are dead: he that eats of this bread shall live for ever.

59. These things said he in the Synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.


In the conclusion of this discourse, 1. Christ repeateth his former doctrine,
pointing out his excellency as bread of life, from his divine original; his
excellency above Manna; and the effects of feeding on him. 2. John designs the
place where Christ preached his Sermon, which was their Synagogue at Capernaum,
or the place where they of that City did assemble (as the word signifies) for
reading the Law, and ordinary moral worship. This erecting of Synagogues in the
several places of the Land, has been of old appointed by God for the peoples
edification, albeit they behoved to perform ceremonial worship in the Temple
at Jerusalem. See Act. 15.21. with Psalm. 74.8. And the designation of the place
is recorded here, to show that at this Christ closed his sermon, and that what
is after recorded, was only occasional, and upon their removal, or after
they were gone thence.

From verse 58. Learn, 1. The blind and corrupt hearts of men are not easily
brought to close with saving truths, but either they do reject them, or do
soon forget and let them slip; So much does this inculcating of the
commendation of this heavenly bread, import. 2. It is absolutely necessary,
that men do not halt nor hesitate in the matter of closing with Christ, and
feeding upon him; but that over all impediments, they take up their need of
him, and make use of him accordingly; Therefore it is so much born upon them,
again and again. 3. Ministers must not be weary to press ill learned truths,
but their inculcating them is one mean to make them be received: for, therefore
does Christ tell the same things over again. 4. One main impediment unto the
success of truth, is men's natural inclination to their old errors and
principles, and their unwillingnesse to quit them; for, so is here imported,
that Moses and the Manna which came from heaven, did so stick with them, that
they could dream of nothing so excellent; and therefore he takes pains to
refute this. 5. Christ being known in his true excellency and worth, both in
respect of his Original, and the benefits which are conferred by him, will be
found far above any thing men dote on, and richly able to make them happy;
Therefore is he held out here as come down from heaven, and making men to live
for ever, neither of which could be said of Manna, as has already been cleared.

From verse 59. Learn, 1. When the Lord brings a Nation into visible Covenant
with himself, it is his will, that care be had to keep up his worship, and to
spread the knowledge of his name in all the corners of the Land; for, to this
end did their many Synagogues tend. 2. It is the duty of Christ's servants, to
take hold of all occasions within the compass of their calling, to publish
truth, and work upon souls: for, therefore did Christ teach in the Synagogue of
Capernaum, that he might take occasion to speak to many when they conveened
there. 3. However men disrelish Christ's doctrine, yet it is truth, and so
innocent and harmless, that it needs not seek a corner, but may be avowed;
Therefore he went publicly to the Synagogue with it. See Matthew. 26.55. John
18.20. 4. Christ takes notice of places where he has preached, and what means
he sends to such and such places; that as hereby he testifies his respects, so
their conviction may be greater, if they bring not forth answerable fruits;
therefore is it recorded that this was done in Capernaum, where he often
taught, but with small fruit, Matthew. 11.23.

Ver. 60. Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This
is an hard saying, who can hear it?
Unto the end of the chap. we have the events and consequents that followed on
this Sermon. And the first is, that they carp at his doctrine and cannot digest
it, ver. 60. and he does vindicate and clear what he had said, ver. 61, 62, 63,
64, 65.

In this ver. their hard censure of this doctrine of Christ is recorded; They
declare it to be intolerable, blasphemous, and so absurd, that none could hear
it. And this is recorded to be the practice, even of many of his disciples,
whereby we are not to understand the twelve Apostles, who yet stay with him,
ver. 67. nor yet is it to be understood of these seventy disciples, who were
all Teachers, Luke 10.1. But it was such as had given up their names to him, to
follow him and learn of him. And so this Sermon stumbled not only the common
multitude at Capernaum, or these who followed him over the sea, for loaves: but
even many of his ordinary followers mistook it. Doctrine 1. When Christ has
taken most pains to inculcate and clear saving and necessary truths, yet
ordinarily the most part will never make them welcome; f^r, they were many, who
stumbled, to wit, in compassion of th^se to whom his doctrine was savoury. 2.
Professions of visible interest in Christ will not (...) ^^ove found to the
end, but the most part of such professors will sooner or later, when their
trial and tentation comes, stumble at him, his way and truth, for, many of his
disciples did here miscarry. 3. Carnal hearts, as they do not understand, so
they cannot digest the spiritual truths of Christ; And their corrupt
disposition disrelishing the Word, is a main stumbling block unto them; for,
this was the cause of their miscarriage here. They said, this is a hard saying,
or, intolerable. It was not so indeed, but as they understood and took it
carnally, and the blame was not in the doctrine, but in their corrupt taste,
which made what was sweet, bitter to them. 4. Carnal men, and such as get no
good of hearing, are in peril to grow still the longer the worse, and at last
impatient of hearing at all; for, they who murmured and strave before, come now
to this, who can hear it? 5. Corrupt men do measure all others by themselves,
and their pride and self-love makes them imagine, that Christ and his truth
can relish no better with any, then it does with them; Therefore say they, who
can hear it? thinking none could like it, more then they, wherein they were far
mistaken, ver. 68.

Verse 61. When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he
said unto them, Does this offend you?
Follows Christ's answer to their murmuring, which seems to have been spoken
after they were now come out of the Synagogue. In it, he reprehends their
stumbling, ver. 61. cleares his doctrine, ver. 62, 63. and points out the true
cause of all their mistakes, ver. 64, 65. In this ver. it is recorded that
Christ perfectly knew and took notice of their murmuring, and does challenge
and reprove their unjust and causeless stumbling. Whence learn, 1. It is
Christ's prerogative to know most secret things in himself; neither needing
sight nor information, nor yet any divine revelation extrinsecal to his person,
such as the Prophets had, but by virtue of the union of his humane nature to
the Godhead, his humane nature by revelation from the Godhead, is made to know
what is needful, though it be not made omniscient of it self; for, Jesus knew
in himself, when they had gone aside, and discoursed upon this matter apart
from him. 2. Christ makes use of this his knowledge, to take notice what his
followers are doing, and what fruits follow upon his doctrine and preaching to
them, as here we see. 3. Christ does take notice of, and is offended with the
corrupt affections of men, and the secret out-breakings thereof, how secretly
however they be conveyed; Therefore does he^^e prove that which he know in
himself they were gui^ty of. 4. Stumbling, and being offended at C^^^sts
doctrine and dispensations, whether by the w^^k^^^ malicious, is a great
impediment to the success of the Gospel, and a great fault in men; Therefore
does he reprove that they were offended, or scandalized, and stumbled. 5.
Murmuring, and repining, or quareling, at that which Christ says or does, is a
sad evidence of stumbling, and of hazard of falling; Therefore from their
murmuring, he gathers their being offended. 6. When Christ's followers and
disciples do stumble and take offense, the fault is the greater; Therefore
says he to his disciples, does this offend you? God has taken most pains on
them, they have professed the contrary, and their stumbling give^h more
offense, and therefore is the more odious. 7. Albeit many stumble at the
doctrine of Christ, some at the doctrine of the cross, others at the depth of
his decrees, some at the strict doctrine of holiness and renouncing our own
righteousness, and some at the simplicity of the doctrine of the Gospel; yet
there is no just ground of offense in any of these: And in particular, it is a
causeless and sinful stumbling, when men offend at the sweet doctrine of
closing with, and feeding upon Christ: Therefore says he, with indignation,
does this offend you? to wit, my doctrine, and in particular, this sweet and
easy doctrine, formerly taught.

Verse 62. What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before.
In this and the following ver. Christ does clear his doctrine, at which they
stumbled so much. And first, whereas they stumbled that he, who appeared so
much in outward baseness, should say he came down from heaven, ver. 41, 42. He
declares, that his ascension into heaven should prove the truth of that, to
their conviction and shame. And this also helps to clear their mistake about
eating of his flesh. It does not necessarily infer that they should be
witnesses of his ascension, but that he should indeed ascend, and that the
truth and certainty of this should shame them for their base thoughts of him
likewise, while it is said, he shall ascend up where he was before, it is not
to be understood, as it his Godhead did change place, and leave heaven at his
incarnation; for, however he stooped, in respect of state, to appear on earth
in our nature, ye^ he is still in heaven, Joh. 3.13. Nor is it the meaning,
that his humane nature did descend from heaven, seeing in respect of that he
ascended. But the meaning is, that the ascension of his humane nature, by local
change of place, should clearly prove that he came from heaven in respect of
his divine natures stooping to be clothed with our flesh; And both these two
are spoken of the whole person, in respect of the personal union, though they
be verified but in the one or other nature. Further, it is to be marked, that
Christ's ascension does prove his Godhead, and that he came down from heaven; to
wit, not simply, for Enoch and Elijah did ascend to heaven, who yet were not
there before; but in regard that he did arise and ascend by his own power, Job.
2.19. and 10.18. Psalm. 68 18. Joh. 20.17. Doctrine 1. Albeit men will not for
present believe the excellency and glory of Christ; yet it will be discovered,
and they may see it to their conviction and shame, either in mercy or in
judgment; for, so does he intimate, that they should see their folly, when
they see the Son of man ascend up. See Joh. 8.28. Luke 12.22, 67, 69. 2.
Christ's ascending into heaven is a clear proof of his Godhead, and that he
descended from heaven in his incarnation; Therefore, does he confirm the one
by the other. See Romans 1.4. Ephesians. 4.8, 9. 3. Christ's ascension into heaven, in
his humane nature, is a sufficient refutation of all carnal conceptions of
partaking of Christ, or of eating his flesh: Therefore also does he bring in
this when they stumbled at eating of his flesh, to show that his ascension into
heaven might refute all such conceits.

Verse 63. It is the Spirit that quickens: the flesh profits nothing: the
words that I spoke unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life.
In the next place, Christ cleares that which chiefly offended them, concerning
his flesh and the quickening power, and the eating thereof. This he cleares in
two assertions. 1. It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing. This may be understood as a clearing of what he said concerning the
eating of his flesh, that it was not a carnal fleshly eating of him that could
profit anything, but it is a spiritual eating of him by faith, that brings
that quickening and life of which he has spoken. But it seems rather to
clear what he had said concerning the quickening power of his flesh and humane
nature, and by Spirit, and flesh we are to understand here his divine and
humane nature, as Romans 1.3, 4. 1 Pet. 3.18. And so the meaning is, that however
much had been spoken of life to be given by partaking of his flesh, yet this is
not to be understood of his flesh considered by it self and without his
Godhead, as they conceived him to be a mere man: but all the quickening virtue
that is ascribed to his flesh, or humane nature, does flow from his Godhead to
which it is united, And this also does condemn their conceit of bodily eating
his flesh, seeing a Spirit, without which the flesh profits nothing, cannot
be eaten. 2. The second assertion is, the words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life. Wherein Christ directly refutes their stumbling at
what he spoke of eating his flesh, which they understood in a carnal sense; of
eating with the mouth of the body. He declares that these words are not to be
taken in a carnal gross sense, but in a spiritual way, and being so taken, and
Christ spiritually laid hold upon, the doctrine will not be found hard, but
very refreshful, and to contain that which brings life to the weary soul. And
so the Spirit, is taken for what is spiritual, Job. 3.16. Doctrine 1. Albeit
Christ's flesh and humane nature was quickened in it self, and have quickening
virtue to merit, communicate, and preserve life in believers; Yet the Godhead
is the fountain from which all this flows, and that which gives merit and
efficacy to all his sufferings and obedience; for, it is the Spirit that
quickens. 2. Such as do not look on Christ's flesh, as the flesh and blood of
the Son of God, nor do lay hold on him by faith as God incarnate, that they
may attain life: But do look on him as mere man, or as one whose flesh is to be
eaten in a bodily manner; They will never find that quickening virtue in and
from him, which he declares to be in himself; for, the flesh profits
nothing, to wit, in this respect. It is true, as God incarnate, his flesh is
the very price of life, the first receptacle of our spiritual life, and (being
laid hold on by faith) the conduit to conveigh life to us. But being considered
as a mere man, and his flesh to be eaten bodily (as the Capernaits did) in that
respect it profits nothing; for, no mere man can give life, nor merit it to
lost sinners, and outward bodily feeding cannot be refreshment nor food to
souls. 3. Scripture is the best Commentary to it self, in regard what is
spoken more darkly in one place, is cleared in another; for, so does Christ
expound the words he spoke. 4. What Christ has formerly spoken of eating his
flesh, is to be understood spiritually, of eating by faith, and not of bodily
eating; for, so does Christ declare; The words that I speak unto you, they are
Spirit. 5. None but they who understand Christ's words spiritually, will find
them lively in operation; for, being Spirit, or taken spiritually, then they
are life, and then only. 6. The doctrine of the Gospel, pointing out salvation
by faith in Christ crucified for sinners, is b^th Spirit and life. It is a
doctrine of a spiritual nature, the instrument and mean whereby the Spirit
works and communicates himself, Gal. 3.2. and tends to make us spiritual.
And by it is life revealed, offered, conferred, and carried on to perfection,
by the Spirit; for, thus it is commended, his words, they are Spirit, and they
are life. See, Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 3.6.

Verse 64. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should betray him.

65. And he said, Therefore said I unto you, th^^ no man can come unto me,
except it were given unto him of my Father.


Christ, having cleared his doctrine, does point out the true cause of their
ignorance and mistakes, and of their stumblings at his doctrine; to wit, their
unbelief; (which because it was a peremptory censure, therefore John brings
the ground of it from the depth of Christ's divine fore knowledge,) ver. 64. and
withal, he brings to their remembrance what he had said, ver. 44. intimating
he had spoken it with an eye to their corrupt dispositions, and to let them see
that it was nothing in him, but want of grace in them, that made this distance
and stumbling.

From ver. 64. learn, 1. Who ever they be that stumble at Christ's word as
unsavory, the true cause thereof is in themselves, wha^ever they pretend;
Therefore does Christ retort that imputation cast upon his Word, ver. 60. as
flowing from the distemper of their own heart. 2. Such as do not understand
Christ's doctrine spiritually, nor do find it spirit and life in operation,
they have their own unbelief to blame for it; Therefore does he assign that
as the cause of all their distemper, there are of you that believe not. This
darkens the understanding, and deads the heart also. See Heb. 4.2, 3. 3. Christ
would have his servants very tender and careful, that in discovering of faults
among hearers, they do not discourage any who are innocent, nor any who have a
desire to be healed: So much does his own practice teach, in that though they
were many who were wrong here, yet he propounds the reproof very gently, there
are some of you, etc. not only to intimate that some were free, but to guard
against the deterring of all, by a general rebuke. 4. Christ's reproves, and
admonitions from his Word, should be looked upon as flowing from good grounds
and certain knowledge, beyond any that the creature has, or can attain unto;
Therefore does John vindicate this seeming hard censure of Christ's, from the
imputation of rashness; by showing, that Jesus knew from the beginning, etc.
5. As all unbeleevers are in a dangerous condition; So traitors, and enemies
to Christ and his doctrine under pretense of friendship, are among the first
and worst of unbeleevers; Therefore albeit Judas was an unbeleever also, yet he
is set his alone here Jesus knew who they were who believed not, and who should
betra^ him 6. As there are many of these who do hear the Gospel, who neither
do nor will believe on Christ, and some who will turn treacherous enemies; So
Christ is not surprised thereby, but does perfectly foreknow what men will
prove; for, he knew from the beginning all this as being God, to whom all
things are known from everlasting. 7. As there may be, and of-times are, very
corrupt men in Christ's company, and among the visible societies of his people;
So it is his will that men be admitted to continue therein, so long as they
profess external subjection, without making enquiry into their spiritual
estate: Therefore Christ, when he judges th^se men, gives a reason of it from
his divine knowledge, to warn all mere creatures, that they presume not to pry
into these secrets: And albeit he knew them well enough, yet he never rejected
them, till first they bewrayed themselves.

From ver. 63. learn, 1. Christ has very grave and important reasons for what
he says, though we oft-times do not see them; So much does he make known
concerning his former doctrine, though they had little considered it, He said,
Therefore said I unto you, etc. 2 Albeit hearers be oft-times so stupid and
blinded with self-love, that they never lay doctrine to heart, unless it be
said, Thou art the man, (as we see even in David.) Yet it is the duty of all so
to hear, as they make particular application of what is heard, for, so much
does Christ point at, while he tells that what he spoke in general, was with an
eye to them. 3. It is a truth to be much and frequently studied, that men are
naturally impotent of themselves to come to Christ, and that they have rather
cause to mourn under the sense of this, when they close not with Christ's
doctrine, then to quarrel him: Therefore does Christ repeat this doctrine over
again. 4. Such as do not fl^e to Christ, and embrace him in the sense of their
misery, are a ready prey for all evil courses; Therefore does Christ lead them
up to this, as the cause of all their distempers. 5. Such as get power and
strength to come to Christ, do not receive it according to any merit in them,
but by free gift; Therefore is that drawing, ver. 44. explained from the cause
thereof, except it were given him of my Father; Wherein is held out, that both
power to come, and their very actual coming, is Gods free gift. See Ephesians. 2.8.
Phil. 1.29. and 2.13. Romans 7.18, 19.

Verse 66. From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more
with him.
Follows another, and worse event, that followed upon this Sermon, even the
open apostasy of many of his followers, ver. 66. with Christ's confirmation of
his Apostles, and warning them of the unsoundnesse of some of themselves, to
the end of the chap. In this ver. it is declared that even these disciples (of
whom ver. 60.) are so far from being taken with Christ's doctrine, or from
listening to his vindication thereof, when they murmured at it, that they are
the more irritate, and do make open apostasy. Whence learn. 1. As there are
times of visible flocking unto Christ, so there are times of trial, wherein
there will be as great scattering and Apostasy from professions; for, so are we
here taught, that many went back, and (as it should seem, comparing, ver. 67)
all that were present but the twelve. 2. Christ's doctrine is a touchstone of
true profession, and such as do not profit by his preaching, nor grow better by
his reproves or discoveries of their evils, and the remedies thereof, will
still grow worse, till they make open apostasy; for, it was from that time they
went back, that is, after he had preached himself unto them, and had
discovered that the true cause of their murmuring was only in themselves, and
that this could be remedied only by God. 3. Albeit such as have in sincerity
given up their names to Christ, will neither totally nor finally fall away; Yet
not only may they make a foul defection for a time, and in part, but visible
professors may totally fall away; for, Many of his disciples went back. etc.
That is many unsound professors did altogether renounce him, and albeit, it
may be, some did again recover their feet, yet no mention is made of it here.
4. Men's former professions and engagements to Christ and his truth, will
aggravate their Apostasy, and add to the sin thereof; Therefore also it is
marked that they were disciples who went back. See Gal. 3.3. and 4.15. 5.
Albeit unsound professors seem to cast the world, and their old fashions,
behind their back, for a while; yet their heart is not really weaned from
them, nor are they really cast out; And when tentation comes, and they find
not that in Christ which they expected, they will turn back to their old vomit
again; Therefore it is said, they went back, or, to the things behind them. So
dangerous is it for professors, to have Satan gone out, and not cast out. Luk
11.24. to have any thing wherein to delight beside Christ, when they close with
him; or, to have these things which they seemed formerly to sl^ight, bearing
bulk again in their eyes, however they may seem to palliate it with becoming
more wise and prudent then at first they were. 6. As it is the duty of all
professors, to hold communion with Christ; and converse with him, and
publicly to own him in the midst of a perverse generation (without which
greatest pretenses of secret friendship is of no avail, Joh. 12.42, 43.) So,
when men do quit this practice, and do not wait upon the ordinances as they
were wont, it is an undeniable sign of woeful Apostasy, whatever they pretend
to; for, it is the proof of their Apostasy, they walked no more with him, nor
did publicly own him, nor wait upon his Ministry.

Ver. 67. Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away?
Upon this sad event and defection of many, Christ confirms his twelve
Apostles, and yet warnes them, that all who were unsound, had not gone away at
this defection. The way of confirming them, is by a question, posing them
concerning their resolution, which draws out an ample confession and Testimony
of Peter, in name of the rest. From Christ's question in this, ver. learn, 1.
Christ is not much troubled, though never so many of the rotten crowd do desert
him; Therefore he never speaks a word to them, but only to the twelve. 2. When
many are making defection, it may so shake even the soundest, that they will
need warning and confirmation: Therefore does he put them to it, if they also
would go away. Even the godly have feeds of the same evils which draw others
away; evil example is very forcible, especially when it is general; and sin
is very infectious, especially when it is carried on with plausible pretexts.
And therefore it is no wonder if men be in hazard in such a case: And,
backsliders are (beside their own defection) guilty of weakening the hands of
others. 3. Albeit Christ stand not in need of any followers, nor needs he be
anxious, though all should forsake him; yet he will take pains to confirm and
keep such as are his own; Therefore does he deal with the twelve. 4. The
nearer Christ's relations be to any, and the more proofs of love they have
received, he will take it the worse, to be forsaken by them: And this should be
a mean to keep such from defection; Therefore says he, will ye also go away?
intimating that their departure would touch him more then what all the rest had
done, and therefore they should guard against it. 5. Whatever respect Christ
have to any of his people, yet he will detain none against their will, but will
have them a willing people who follow him; for this cause it is, that he puts
it to themselves, will ye go away? to intimate, that he will not accept of them
(though no more were left) except they be willing. Which yet is not to be
understood, as if he left it simply arbitrary to them, to do as they listed in
it. But his speech insinuates a reproof of them that went away, and therefore
warns them to take heed they do not follow them. It is also a mean which he
sanctifies unto them, and ties them faster, while he seems to cast the rains
loose. And withal, he who requires willing service, does give to his own, to be
willing.

Ver. 68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life.

69. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God.


Follows the Apostles answer to this question, given by Peter in name of the
rest. Wherein, 1. By a contrary question, he professes their constancy, and
that they knew none beside, to whom they could or would go, and therefore would
adhere to him. 2. He gives reasons for this his assertion, taken from Christ's
sweet and precious doctrine, ver. 68. and from their faith and assurance
concerning his offices and person, that he is the true Messiah, the Son of
God, ver. 69.

From ver. 68. Learn, 1. Were they never so many who make defection from
Christ, and think little of his company, yet there will still some be found of
another stamp; as here we see in Peter. 2. Men may be of a more forward and
ready spirit, in some outward actings for Christ, then others, who yet are as
honest as they; Therefore Peter appears with the first, not because he was the
eldest professor, for Andrew was called before him, nor yet because he had
more faith and love to Christ then the rest, for we may conceive that (at
least) the beloved disciple came not behind with him; But it flowed from his
forward spirit and temper, which as sometime it made him foremost in good, so
at other times it drove him as far wrong, that he might be humbled. 3. As
hypocrites may lurk for a time undiscerned by others, even in shaking times; So
true grace makes men charitable of others, so long as they bewray not their
unsoundnesse by visible effects: And it is a sweet companion of gracious
forwardness and zeal, to be charitable, and not when men are rigide censurers
of others; Therefore forward Peter answers in name of all, (we,) not secluding
Judas. And however his charity was mistaken, yet he could judge no otherwise of
him, seeing he stayed still when the rest went away. See 1 Cor. 13.7. 4. Man
since the fall is so empty and poor a creature, that he must have somewhat
without him, to delight and rest in for happiness; and if he do not choose
Christ, he will put some other thing in his place: for, Peter's question
imports, that if they went away from Christ, they behooved to go to some other,
to whom shall we go? 5. Such as have a mind to quit Christ, had need to
consider first where they will get a better Master, and that change when they
will, they will surely change for the worse; for, to whom shall we go? says
he, as never looking for such entertainment any where, as they had with him. 6.
True disciples, and such as know Christ's singular excellency, will not endure
to hear of any separation from him; for, this question imports his abhorrence
of going away from such a Lord to any other. And all they who would close and
walk with him sincerely, should study and learn to know him to be the chief
and most excellent of choices. 7 Such as would stand fast in times of
defection, should have frequent thoughts of eternity, and of the life that is
laid up there for such as are sincere; Therefore Peter fixes his eye on eternal
life, and where that may be found which leads to it, when he is about the
choice of a Master. 8. The doctrine of Christ and of the Gospel is the only
doctrine of eternal life; It not only manifests and brings to light, that there
is an eternal life, and makes offer of it, but it points out the only right
purchase of it, and way to it; It is the mean of regeneration and begetting of
faith, and being embraced, does give a right unto eternal life, and the first
fruits of it, till they come to full possession; Therefore is his doctrine
called the words of eternal life. And in all these respects, it is preferred
above the doctrine of all the Philosophers, and in most of them, not only above
the corrupt doctrine of these times wherein Christ lived, but even above the
Law of Moses, as it is considered in opposition to him, or without him. 9.
Whatever be the verdict that corrupt men give of Christ's doctrine; yet sincere
disciples will judge of it according as it is, and as he accounts of it; for,
what others accounted an hard saying, ver 60 Peter reckons to be words of
eternal life, according to Christ's own verdict, ver. 63. 10. Such as are
seriously minding eternal life, will cleave to the true doctrine that leads to
it, and will not abandon it nor the messengers thereof, no not in times of
greatest defection; for, it is one reason why they will not leave him, not only
because he is the Messiah, but he has the words of eternal life. 11. It is
Christ's special prerogative, and the reason of sincere professors their
cleaving to him, that he has the words of eternal life in a peculiar manner;
Being not only the dispenser and Minister thereof in the days of his flesh,
and that in a way of authority, sweetness, and efficacy, proper to himself;
But being also the purchaser of these glad tidings; and being he who gives
commission to all that preach them, and he who gives efficacy thereunto, to
make them the power of God to salvation; for, Peter, in all their names,
professes that they do cleave to him, as he who, in all these respects, has
the words of eternal life.

From ver. 69. Learn, 1. It is the duty of sincere professors, as to cleave to
all truth, so in particular, to avow all the truths contraverted in the time,
of what importance soever they be; Therefore does Peter, beside the excellency
of Christ's doctrine, confess him also in his person and office, which were the
truths then opposed, and though they be fundamental truths, yet were accounted
but little by the opposers thereof. 2. The more men know of Christ, they will
find the more bands to tie them to him, and the more preservatives against
defection from him; And particularly, the true knowledge of his office and
person may invite men to cleave to him, forsake him who will. Therefore Peter
subjoynes this as a new argument. 3. It is not bare and naked knowledge of what
Christ is, that will tie men's hearts to him, unless they embrace what they
know, by faith; Therefore Peter gives it as a reason of his constancy, we
believe that thou art that Christ. And albeit this seem to be nothing but an
historical assent to what the devils do confess; Yet as it is joined with
Peter's resolution, to whom shall we go? as the ground of it, it is an act of
saving faith, for a firm faith of the person and office of Christ, with
adherence unto him and recombency on him, is the exercise of saving faith. 4.
It is not reason that can take up the mysteries concerning Christ's person,
incarnation, and offices, but faith must close with them upon divine
revelation; Therefore, says he, we believe this. 5. As true faith and saving
knowledge go together; So the knowledge which is gathered by experience and
observation of events according to the Word, is a great help to faith; for,
says he, we believe and have known, as it is in the Original. As there is a
seeing, or knowledge, that goes before and with faith, ver. 40. (for albeit
many things revealed be in themselves mysteries, and above the reach of our
capacity, as to the nature, reason, and manner of them, yet faith knows that
these things are, and so closes with them:) So this is an experimental
knowledge following on faith; wherein, by considering the accomplishment of
prophecies concerning the Messiah, in his person, they were experimentally
confirmed in what they believed. 6. It ought, and will endeare Christ to all
true disciples, and make them cleave to him, that he is the only true Messiah
promised to the fathers, who is appointed by the Father to exercise the office
of a King, Priest, and Prophet, to his Church, and who is anointed with the
Spirit above measure for that end, from whom his people may expect the fruits
of all these offices, the participation of his fullness, and Communion with him
in his dignity: for, this is a reason of Peter's resolution, thou art that
Christ, that promised Messiah, and Anointed one. 7. It does further heighten
the estimation of Christ in the hearts of believers, and is a strong bar
against defection from him, that he is the Son of the living God, by eternal
generation, and communication of the same essence; And so he is the only
excellent choice, is able for all his offices, and to give worth unto his
sufferings; And as he has a fountain of life communicate from the Father, so
he is able to beget and preserve life in his people. All this is imported in
that other reason, thou art the Son of the living God.

Verse 70. Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is
a devil?

71. He spoke of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should
betray him, being one of the twelve.


Christ, having drawn out this confession, does correct Peter's charity, and
warn them of a yet sadder defection, of one of them twelve whom he had chosen
to be Apostles. Unto which John subjoins a declaration, showing who it was that
Christ spoke of. Whence learn, 1. In times wherein men appear very forward and
resolute, when others are turning away, Christ allows them not to be secure,
but would have them warned and sensible of the hazard of more and worse
defection; Therefore, when a few of many have now stood, Christ sees it fit to
tell them they were not all sound. 2. Albeit Christ do approve of men's
charitable judgment of others; yet that judgment is not still according to
verity, nor to be built upon by hypocrites; Therefore, albeit Christ do not
reprove Peter's charity, yet he shows that it is mistaken of one in the
number. 3. Very general Apostacies, reducing sincere professors to a small
number, will not always separate all the chafe from the wheat; But when
multitudes make defection, and only a very few do stand, there may be yet
hypocrites and traitors, even among these; for, Judas went not yet away with
the stream of this defection, because he kept the bag yet, and his tentation
was not yet come. 4. As there is no society in the earth so holy, but it is
possible some of them may be wicked; Yea, and they may have an eminent
spiritual calling and office in the Church, who yet are but wicked hypocrites,
and will totally and finally fall away and betray Christ; So the eminency of
men's office and employment renders their defection the more odious: And
particularly, Apostasy is very odious in Ministers; Therefore, says he, have
not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? Whereby, partly, he
insinuates that their election to an office, was no ground to build upon, that
they were all sound; And partly, he aggravates his defection from this, and
therefore puts it to be considered by them, by this question. It is not needful
to enquire why Christ made choice only of twelve, and would have that number
filled up, when Judas went to his place, Act. 1.21, 22, etc. It suffices us,
that as Israel according to the flesh sprang from twelve Patriarchs, so he
would have his Israel in the spirit, collected and brought to him, by twelve
Apostles. 5. Such as, being entrusted by Christ, do not only make Apostasy, but
turn persecutors and traitors to him, are not only adversaries to him, as Satan
is, but do resemble the devil, (who is a liar and murderer,) in cruelty under
pretext of friendship; are acted and possessed by him; and, are odious unto
God, as he is; Therefore the traitor gets this name, one of you is a devil,
because he should betray him. Which is far different from what he said to
Peter, when he called him Satan, Matthew. 16.23. for it was only a fit of
tentation in him, wherein Satan abused his corruption and tongue for the time,
but Satan had a dwelling and dominion in Judas. 6. How closly soever hypocrites
and traitors carry themselves among Gods people, yet they will not deceive
Christ; but he knows them well enough, though all should give them charity;
for, so much does he declare here. 7. Albeit Christ, when he warnes the
societies of his people, would have all to try and watch over themselves; Yet
such as are sincere, should have no thoughts that he is suspicious of them, or
does not approve of them: for, both these appear here; he warnes them in
general of the unsoundnesse of one, not naming him; not only because he would
let him discover himself, and would not hinder that work wherein he was to be
an instrument; but that they might all search themselves; And yet John names
him particularly, and for what cause Christ spoke so of him; and this he did,
not only to free another Apostle called Judas also, Luke 6.16. (and therefore
he describes the traitor from his parentage, and from his country, Iscariot,
or, a man of that city Reioth, Josh. 15.25. or, as some take it to be a Syriake
word, and render it a purse bearer, and so it is a designation of him from his
particular employment in Christ's company, Joh. 12.6. and 13.29.) but also to
show that this general doctrine did reflect upon none of the rest of the
Apostles integrity.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chap. John continues his Narration of Christ's life and doctrine;
Recording, first, That to avoid the fury of these in Judea, be continued still
in Galilee after the former Sermon, till the feast of Tabernacles, ver. 1.
Secondly, That he refused to go up with his friends to that feast, ver. 2. --
9. Thirdly, That at last he went up, ver. 10. with what he did, and what
occurred concerning him at that feast. And namely, 1. The peoples carriage and
speeches about him, before he showed himself, ver. 11, 12, 13. 2. His
preaching in the mid days of the feast, and his conferences and debates with
the people, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, and his hazard from the Pharisees
thereupon, ver. 14. ^ 36. 3. His sweet Sermon on the last day of the feast,
with the effects thereof, and the confusion that arose in the council of the
Rulers about him, from, ver. 37. to the end.

Ver. 1. AFter these things, Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in
Jury, because the Jews sought to kill him.
In this ver. it is showed that after these things which are mentioned in the
former Chap. Christ abode still in Galilee, avoiding the fury of these in
Judea, who sought to slay him, because of that work he had long since done, in
curing the impotent man on the Sabbath day, Chap. 5. as appears from ver. 19.
and 23. of this Chap. So the ver. shows the connection of the History, that
Christ stayed away from that passover mentioned, Chap. 6. 4. and continued in
Galilee till the feast of Tabernacles, of which ver. 2. And it contains also a
brief transition of what occurred betwixt the former Sermon and that feast,
wherein John briefly passes over many things, which are recorded at length by
other Evangelists, that he may dwell on these things which they had omitted.
Doctrine. 1. Christ is not bound to any place, were it never so eminent, but he
may abandon it, and betake himself to another, according as he sees cause;
for, he forsakes eminent Jury, and betakes himself to base Galilee; And the
reason why he stayed there when he left Jury, was, because he was the Minister
of the Circumcision, and therefore behooved to be still in some of the places
where Israel dwelt, such as Galilee was. 2. Whatever may be the suspicions of
men concerning Christ's proceedings; yet he has wise reasons, which may and
will justify them all; for, whereas it should seem that he should rather have
conversed where the learned Rabbi's were, then among the simple Galileans, and
his remaining in corners might give men occasion to suspect the candor of his
proceedings; yet the reason he gives being considered, does sufficiently
evince that he had just cause for what he did. 3. A violent death is the least
that Christ and his faithful servants may expect, for their good offices to a
wicked world, if it were not prevented; for, the Jews (or, men of Judea, and
especially their Rulers) sought to kill him. 4. The rancour and malice of
wicked men against Christ, is so inveterate, that no length of time will
mitigate or allay their fury; for, although that work was long since done, yet
they still sought to kill him. 5. Albeit Christ will not take away his presence
and ordinances from a people, because of every sin, but does rather offer
himself to sinners, as a Physician to the diseased; Yet cruelty and
persecution is a just cause, and forerunner of his departure: And faithful
Ministers may for a time, withdraw themselves, being threatened with personal
hazard, if they may conveniently get it done. Both these are imported in this
resolution, he would not walk in Jury, because the Jews sought to kill him. 6.
Albeit Christ's servants may warrantably, in some cases, withdraw from personal
danger; yet they would beware of dishonouring God, by doing it out of slavish
fear, or in a timorous way, but would use that mean of self preservation, as
a duty commanded; for, so much does his own practice teach, of whom it is not
said, he durst not, but he would not walk in Jury, because he was cammanded to
preserve himself till his hour came. 7. Albeit Christ knew that his hour was
not come, and so needed not fear them, though he were in the midst of them;
yea, being God, he could restrain them, or rid himself out of all their hands,
as oft-times he did: Yet it pleased him to use this mean, of retirement and
withdrawing of himself, for his own preservation; Not only, that, as sometime
he proved himself God, by miraculous preserving of himself; so, he might also
temper these manifestations, that they might not be kept back from doing that
which he came into the world to suffer; But further also; that he might give
proof of his deep humiliation and abasement, for our sake; that he might, in
his own person, sanctify such a lot to his people; and, that he might teach
them to expect Gods providence about them, for their preservation, in the use
of lawful means. 8. As Christ and his servants will not want employment in some
places of the world, however they be entreated in others; So albeit they may be
secluded from many places and parts of their calling, yet they have no warrant
to be idle, but ought still to be doing good, as they may; Therefore, albeit he
stayed in Galilee, yet he did not lurk there, but walked in Galilee, or, went
about from place to place, preaching and working miracles, as was his way, Act.
10.38. 9. Christ is not only tender to such as come to him, but will also be at
pains to seek them who have need of him, to do them good; for, he walked in
Galilee, he stayed not in one place, that any who had need, might come to him,
but he walked about, to seek them.

Verse 2. Now the Jews feast of Tabernacles was at hand.

3. His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that
thy disciples also may see the works that thou do.

4. For there is no man that does any thing in secret, and he himself seeks
to be known openly: if thou do these things, show thy self to the world.


Follows the second part of the Chapter, wherein Christ refuses to go up in
his brethrens company to the feast of Tabernacles. Their desire is contained in
these verses, to which Christ returns his answer in the following purpose. In
these verses consider, 1. The occasion which induced them to make this
proposition, (which also points at the time of his continuance in Galilee)
verse 2. Namely, that the feast of Tabernacles was now approaching; which was
one of their three yearly solemnities, Levit. 23.34. wherein (beside other
performances, common to it with other feasts) they went out of their houses and
dwelt in booths made of boughs of trees: Not only to be a type of Christ's
Incarnation and dwelling in our flesh, but to keep them in remembrance of their
preservation in tents in the wilderness, before they came to the promised
land. 2. Their desire, that he would depart hence, and go up to Judea, and show
himself to the world: The meaning whereof is not, that they would be rid of
him, or cast him in his enemies hands, but they could not endure that their
kinsman should lurk in so base a place, and not go to Judea, where he might get
more credit, and wherein they thought to share. And therefore they desire that
he would go up with them to this solemn feast, and so Christ himself expounds
their desire, verse 8. and so was the custom, that kinsmen went up together to
these feasts, Luke 2.44. 3. The motives they use to induce him to hearken to
their desire, are two; In one of them, verse 3. they pretend respect to the
disciples which he had gathered in Judea (chap. 3 22, 26. and 4.1.) who, as
they insinuate and pretend, were slighted and exposed to tentations, through
his long absence, and these miracles he wrought in corners might contribute
much to strengthen them. In the other, verse 4. they discover more of their
ambitious intentions; They think it unhandsome for a man of so eminent gifts to
lurk in corners, nor can they understand what could be his aim, if it were not
to rise and become eminent by his gifts; and therefore would have him casting
himself where he might get best opportunity of being taken notice of. 4. John
records the true ground of this carnal motion in them, ver. 5. They were but
yet in nature, and did conceive carnally of him, and sought only to make
advantage by their relation to him, and to advance their own carnal ends and
designs. And this makes it clear, that (as his brethren were not any other
children born by Mary, but his kinsmen, called brethren, after the manner of
the Hebrews; so) they who made this motion were not any of his kinsmen whom he
called to be Apostles; for, they were already converted and chosen, chap. 6.70.
but some others.

From verse 2. Learn, 1. The hard and incertaine lots of Gods people will, in
due time, have a good issue, and matter of praise; for, so is held out in their
keeping the feast of Tabernacles, in remembrance of the issue of their
wandering. And it is a lively emblem of the sweet issue that shall be of the
godlies wandering, when they shall enter out of the wilderness of this world
into their heavenly Canaan. 2. Albeit we are ready to forget our troubles, and
the mercies wherewith they have been sweetened, when they are past and over;
Yet it is Gods will they should be remembered, with thankfulness, and sobriety,
and with readiness to follow God, when ever he calls to new troubles: So much
also is imported in their yearly observation of this feast, wherein they were
not only thankfully to remember the mercy, but by their going out of their
houses, and dwelling in booths, and that at the time of gathering in their
fruits, and when their barnes were full (for that was the time of this feast,
Exodus 23.16. Deuteronomy. 16.13.) they were to testify that present mercies had not
made them forget former trials; that they would use them soberly, and were
ready yet to leave all at his call, who had guided them so well in former
trials. 3. Albeit praises be due to God, in all ages, in thankful remembrance
of his mercies; yet the way of testifying thereof by solemn feasts, is Jewish,
and not to be continued under the Gospel; Therefore, is it called (as formerly)
the Jews feast.

From ver. 3, 4. Learn, 1. Carnal men, when they have the occasion of spiritual
public solemnities and ordinances, do not mind the tight end, or Gods honor
in going about them, Nor do they make conscience of spiritual preparation, that
they may profit by them, but all their care is how to attain their own carnal
ends, particularly, of vainglory, in and by them; for, when this feast was at
hand, verse 2. all the preparation of these men for it, was to get Christ with
them, that they might come to credit by him at it. 2. Christ's carnal friends
and followers do follow him only for their own ends, and in expectation of
carnal respect and glory by him; for, such was their scope in this desire. 3.
It is high presumption in creatures, to presume to prescribe to Christ what to
do, or when to do it; And particularly, to employ him so to order his matters
as may most advance their carnal ends, and bring them in esteem; for, it was
not simply a fault to wish him in Judea, for he went afterward, verse 10. nor
yet to desire he should be known to the world, seeing it was his end in coming,
to shine as the light of the world; But it was their fault to carve out and
prescribe to him when to depart, and to be so impudent, as to desire that his
manifestations might be made subservient to their vainglorious and carnal
designs. 4. Men, when they are prosecuting their carnal and ambitious ends,
will not want spiritual and plausible pretexts, wherewith to mask them; for, so
much appears in their first reason, go into Judea, that thy disciples also may
see the works that thou do; wherein they seem to be so taken up with
thoughts of the public good of his followers, as they dare indirectly challenge
him for sleighting them so long. It is indeed a truth, that Christ will have a
care of such as give up their names to him, where ever they are, that they
faint not for want of necessary encouragement. But they failed in propounding
this, in That they made it but a mask to their carnal ends, (as indeed God
looks not only to desires, but to the end and scope of the desirerers;) That
they could think to learn him how to respect his people, or guide them better
then he did; That they tied his encouraging of his followers to his bodily
presence and miracles, whereas he was God, to support them in his bodily
absence; and, That they think it a fault he should withdraw his visible
presence, even from his disciples, when he is called of God to shun imminent
dangers. 5. Carnal and unrenewed men do make it their only aim, to become
great by any gifts and endowments they have received; And they are so ignorant
of another way, that they measure, even the most godly, by their own
dispositions, and do count them but silly, who do not thirst after glory and
respect; Therefore say they, for, no man does any thing in secret, and he
himself seeks to be known openly; Whereby they do not mean so much, that he
rubbed upon himself, by lurking in corners as a deceiver, and not coming to
view, as an honest man should do; But their carnal disposition thought it
impossible, that a man could be gifted as he was, and not thirst after
reputation in the world, and therefore, supposing that this was Christ's aim
also, they wonder he was so silly, and did not prosecute his ends more
vigorously. 6. Men of eminent gifts are exposed to very great danger, if they
want sincerity; having (beside their own hearts, that can tell them too well
what they are) many carnal friends, who may be Satan's instruments, to suggest
unto them tentations, to be puffed up with conceit, and to carnal courses and
aims; for, here Christ was tried with it, though the Prince of the world found
nothing in him. 7. Such as are carnal and ambitious hunters after vainglory,
do care nothing what they are or do in secret, but all their thought is about
what is open and public, and how to frequent public conventions, and make
shows, that they may be taken notice of; for, so much appears in their counsel,
If thou do (or since thou do) these things, show thy self to the world.

From verse 5. Learn, 1. The grace of God does not go by blood or natural
acquaintance, but by free gift; for, they are his brethren, and yet that proves
not their grace, neither did his brethren believe in him, more then the
Capernaites; and therefore they are in as little account with him. And herein
Christ's example is ground of comfort to them who have, and are oft-times put to
trials by graceless friends; Though afterward we find a change, Acts 1.14. 2.
The truth of the grace of God in men, will appear, especially, in their taking
up Christ by faith, as he has revealed himself, and in their closing with, and
embracing of him, out of the sense of their great need; for, this is the
evidence of their want of grace, they did not believe in him; that is, they did
not take up what he was, nor close with him. 3. When men are ambitious, and
hunt after vainglory, and when they dare presume to teach Christ his duty, it
is an evidence of a graceless condition, at least in so far; Therefore, it is
given as a reason of their former presumption and ambition; for neither did his
brethren believe in him.

Verse 6. Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come, but your time is
always ready.

7. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that
the works thereof are evil.

8. Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast: for my time is
not yet full come.

9. When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee.


In these verses, we have Christ's answer and refusal returned to their desire,
both by word and practice; Wherein, 1. Christ shows that there was a great
difference betwixt him and them, verse 6. His time was not yet come, whereas
theirs was always ready. Which however it be true in general, that natural men,
though, by right, they have not allowance to do what they list, at any time;
yet in effect and practice, they walk as they list, and take any time they
please; Whereas he behoved to choose times, and walk according to his Fathers
direction: yet it seems here rather to show what difference there was betwixt
him and them, in this going up. He who was maligned and hated, behoved to wait
for a sit time and season, lest he should cast himself on a snare, and tempt
God, but they could come no time wrong, being in no such peril. This difference
(2.) he confirms from a reason, verse 7. They might go up at any time, seeing
the world could not hate them, who were but yet children of this world; but he
behoved to choose his sit time, being hated of the world, because of his plain
and free doctrine. 3. From this he infers, verse 8. that they might go when
they list, but he would not go till his full time came, 4. His practice is
recorded, verse 9. as agreeing with his resolution: from verse 6. Learn, 1.
Meekness does beseem Christ and his followers; and that they meet the
impertinencies of carnal men, without heat or passion: Therefore does Christ so
meekly answer their carnal desire. 2. The Lord has appointed times and seasons
for every course and lawful action, which prudent and godly men are bound to
observe; for, so does Christ observe, that his time is not yet come, to go to
that feast. 3. Times of trouble and danger to the godly, should make them very
tender, to wait on Gods direction for every step of their walking, that they
neither cast themselves needlessely on trouble, nor yet do sinfully labor to
avoid it; for, so much does Christ's practice teach, who being in danger, found
that his time is not yet come to go up, albeit the feast was near, because he
was to go up privately. And as he knew his time by the Spirit of the Lord
resting on him; So he used this caution, that he might profess his voluntary
humiliation, even to sinlesse fear, for his peoples good, and that he might
leave a pattern to them. 4. Such is the ordinary temper of this world, that
Christ and his followers must oft-times lurk, when carnal men may appear in it
without hazard; Therefore, says he, but your time is always ready.

From verse 7. Learn, 1. Unrenewed men, what ever their privileges be, yet,
are but of the same stamp, and in the same condition with the rest of the
world; they do savor of it, and continuing in that condition, will get their
portion in it; Therefore are the Jews and the Rulers, from whom Christ's hazard
was at this time, called the world, albeit they judged far otherwise of
themselves, considering their privileges. 2. Albeit the Lord, in his righteous
judgment, do sometime make the men of the world plagues and scourges one to
another; Yet as there can be no communion kept with the world, unless men will
share in their wickedness: So it is most usual that worldlings agree well
enough together. Therefore says he, The world cannot hate you, being such as
themselves are. 3. Such as the men of the world are, such are their actions and
fruits; for, the works of the world are evil. Not only have they gross
vicious actions, but even such actions as are in themselves good or
indifferent, are in them, evil. 4. Unrenewed men will not readily be troubled
or vexed about their actions, but would sleep securely, if others did not vex
them with telling them of their way; for, this is the worlds trouble here, that
he testified that their works are evil. 5. Whatever be the hazard, yet Christ's
servants are bound, in their stations, to bear witness against the evil
courses of the world; for, so does Christ's practice teach. 6. Such as would be
faithful in their generation, in witnessing against the courses of the world,
must lay their account to be hated for their pains; for, such was Christ's lot,
but me it hates, because I testify of it, etc. And this he did encounter
with, not only to expiate our love to the world, and our sinful communion with
it, but to cast us a copy of what we are to expect. 7. Such is the perversity
of the corrupt world, that no evidence of affection, in dealing with them for
their good, will gain them, but rather insence them; for, albeit he but
testified of their works, by his innocent life and doctrine, to reclaim them
from them, yet the world hated him. 8. Whatever pretenses of zeal persecutors
of Christ and his followers may have; Yet the true cause of their spleen, is
the opposition that is made to their wickedness and hypocrisy; for albeit
they pretended to hate him, because he had profaned the Sabbath, as they
alleged; yet Christ shows the true cause of this hatred, because I testify
of it, that the works thereof are evil

From verse 8. Learn, 1. Christ approves that Ordinances be reverenced; And
albeit men be corrupt who administer them, and they but carnal who go unto
them; yet he allows not that they neglect, or give over the use of the lawful
Ordinances, as his appointed means; Therefore, says he, Go ye up unto this
feast, which however, in some respects, it imports only a permission, and
giving up of them to themselves, who were so carnal, (as is to be after
cleared;) yet, simply considered, it imports an approbation of that Ordinance,
and that it was their duty to frequent it. 2. Such as seek Christ's company
only for carnal and ambitious ends, may expect to want it, even in going about
sacred Ordinances; for, in so far did Christ give them up, as to want his
company in this journey, where they expected only carnal advantages by him. Go
ye up, I go not up yet to this feast. 3. Tender walkers, especially in times of
trouble and hazard, will be very acurate in the least circumstances; So much
appears in Christ, who goes not up yet, because albeit the time in general
was come, yet it was not yet full come, and therefore he would not yet stir.

From verse 9. Learn 1. It is not enough, especially in times of trial, that
men have clear light and good principles, unless they have also honesty and
resolution, to follow their light; for, herein Christ has given us example,
who, upon these grounds, abode still in Galilee. 2. Christ is not changable,
and one thing in his expressions, and another in his doings and actions, but is
uniforme and still the same, in his doings and sayings; as here we see. 3. When
the Lord gives clear light to any to know their duty, they must not be shaken
from it upon any terms, whatever pretenses might militate to the contrary, to
brangle their resolution; Therefore, albeit Christ knew that men would take
advantage, to carp at him, because of his lurking in Galilee, and this refusal
might savor of contempt of his kinsmen; yet knowing that his time was not yet
full come, he abode still in Galilee.

Verse 10. But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.
Follows the third part of the Chap. wherein is recorded Christ's going up to
the feast, with what followed thereupon. In this ver. it is showed, that at his
own appointed time he went up, yet in a private way, not in the company of his
kinsmen and friends, but with his disciples and some few followers, possibly
(among other reasons) that they might not intercept him by the way, and that he
might try their thoughts of him, before he appeared, as afterward it fell
forth. And here John passes over some things that occurred in his journey,
which are recorded by some of the rest, that so he may hasten to the following
history. Doctrine, 1. Such as have not embraced nor closed with Christ, but
remain still in their natural condition, may yet be very careful to observe
outward ordinances; for, his brethren were gone up. 2. Albeit the Lords
servants may for a time, in some cases, withdraw themselves from danger; Yet
when God calls them to appear, they should do it without shrinking, though the
danger continue; for, when his time was full come, he also went up unto the
feast, though the malice of the Jews was not yet abated. 3. The cruelty and
ingratitude of a people will not hold Christ away, where he has any good to
do, for, he went up again to Jerusalem, however they stood affected to him. 4.
Courage in following of a calling, should not be looked on as inconsistent with
prudence; and with the carriage of our selves in a secret or open way, as may
most contribute for the great work of our calling; Therefore Christ went up,
not openly, but as it were in secret, whereby he not only shows that he
subjected himself to this wary way, that he might purchase unto us boldness
before God; But as in the former purpose, we are taught how he sanctified
slight and retirement in his own person, and as afterward he leaves us a
pattern of undoubted boldness: So here, by carrying himself privately till he
come up, and till the people be conveened, and his enemies somewhat settled,
after they miss him at the beginning of the feast, he would teach them that as
faint-heartednesse is none of his lessons, so neither is temerity and rashness
approven by him; And that great circumspection should be used in our engageing
in trial, and then it should be resolutely managed.

Ver. 11. Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he?

12. And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him, for some
said, He is a good man: others said, Nay but he deceives the people.

13. Howbeit, no man spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews.


In these verses, we have the first thing that occurred at the feast concerning
him; to wit, the carriage and speeches of the Jews and people, either before
he came, or before he showed himself. And, 1. It is said ver. 11. That they
made inquisition for him; which may be taken as the multitudes fact who had
heard of him, or had heard him preach and seen his miracles, who now miss him
at the feast. As in deed, when Christ's doctrine and works are notable and
famous, many may talk of him and desire to see him, who yet make but little use
of him or them either. But it seems rather to be meant of the wicked Jews, and
their Rulers, who sought to stay him. And this appears not only from their
contemptible designation of him, where is he? but from their names the Jews
(the men of Judea, and chiefly the Rulers, called often by that name, not only
because they were of Judea, but because the guilt of their cruelty lay upon
many of the Nation, who joined too much with them in it, as well as themselves)
who are said to seek his life, ver. 1. and who are distinguished here from the
people, or multitude, ver. 12. And are cause of terror to the people, ver. 13.
2. The people express their different thoughts of him, some allowing him the
charity of being a good man, and others traducing him as a seducer, ver. 12. 3.
The manner of the conference is secret, by way of muttering, and that for fear
of the Jews, ver. 13. which is to be understood chiefly of the better sort,
that they durst not speak openly of him; yet it may be conceived also, that
they would have all to let it alone, that so the matter might be buried.

From ver. 11. Learn 1. It is one part of Christ's and his followers trial and
hard lot, that their persecuters do labor to bear them down, by putting
contempts and affronts upon them before the world; for, so do they speak of
him, where is he? with contempt and disdain. 2. Albeit enemies seem to think
very contemptibly of Christ and his followers, and of what they can do against
them; yet for all that they will not get the terror of him put out of their
hearts: for, albeit they seem to despise him, yet they sought him, to take him
out of the way. 3. Albeit Christ and his followers should carry themselves
never so modestly, yet persecuters will not let them alone; and while they
cease to be, they will still be an eye sore to the world; for, albeit he had
now stayed long away, and had not troubled them, and there was no appearance of
his coming, or being come as yet, more then at the last passover; Yet they are
not at ease, but sought him. 4. Even public solemnities of sacred worship will
not mollify, nor direct persecuters from their bloody designs; for, then the
Jews sought him at the feast.

From ver. 12. Learn, 1. Men, by their violence and cruelty, thinking to
suppress Christ and his truth, may readily thereby awaken people, to think and
say more of him; for, upon the back of their search, it is subjoyned, and there
was much murmuring (or secret whisperings, the cause whereof is showed, ver.
13.) among the people concerning him, pointing out (as would appear) that their
narrow search for him, put him in the peoples minds and mouths. And so not
only Christ is spoken of when they were dumb, and would have others silent, but
beyond their intentions, they occasion this themselves. 2. This peoples making
Christ the subject of their conference, even behind his back, when yet all of
them had little or no knowledge of him, and many of them no love at all to him;
may shame them who should know more, and who profess more love unto him, and
yet entertain but few thoughts of him, and little conference concerning him. 3.
Christ and his truth are oft-times the subject of great contradiction in the
world, and do encounter with variety of tempers among men; for, so was it here,
some are bitter, and others are more charitable. 4. Not only open enemies do
great wrong to Christ, but even some seeming welwishers, by their indifferent
way of pleading for him, and their shallow conceptions of him, do prove
themselves to be but small friends unto him; for, such were these here, who
pleaded only, He is a good man. 5. As it is a very great iniquity in men, when
they not only err themselves from the truth, but turn Seducers of others,
(for, here, they object it as a justly odious crime, he deceives the people;)
So it is no strange thing to see men brand Christ and his friends with this
infamous title, of being deceivers, and under this pretext, to cry down all
that can be alleged in their defense; for, others said, nay, (he is no good
man) but he deceives the people. See 2 Cor. 6.8.

From ver 13. Learn, 1. It is the sad case, and too often the condition of the
visible Church, to be so corrupt, as truth dare not be avowed in it; and the
Teachers thereof become a terror to all who would maintain sound doctrine;
for, so was it here, Howbeit, (whatever they whispered, yet) no man spoke
openly of him, for fear of the Jews. 2. Faithless and slavish fear in men
will easily bear down their affection to Christ, if it be but coldriffe and ill
principled; for, so did it with these here, who had but little to plead for
him. 3. When Satan cannot prevail by violence, he may sometime essay to weary
Christ and his followers out, by burying all debates and contraversies, that in
process of time, truth may wear out and be buried; for, (as was hinted in the
Exposition) so may it be taken here also; They would have none to speak at all
concerning him on any side, that so thoughts of him may wear out in time, he
having been so long absent. However it be, yet this is a course that oft-times
prevails much, (though men never gain their point by it) and it should warn
us to look on being let alone many time, as a trial.

Verse 14. Now about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the Temple, and
taught.
Follows the second thing which occurred at this feast, containing Christ's
preaching in the mid-dayes of the feast, with the consequents that followed
thereupon, to ver. 37. In this ver. is recorded that Christ went publicly into
the Temple and taught, whereby he supplied the defect of the dumb and corrupt
Priests, who at such solemnities were bound to teach the people out of the law.
Whence learn, 1. Christ's not appearing till the midst of the feast, shows,
that albeit he subjected himself to fulfill all righteousness, yet his great
errand was not the feast, but the gaining of souls at it. And it teaches, that
the gaining of souls to Christ is the great work and end, to which the use of
all Ordinances should be directed. 2. While they are about sacrifices in the
Temple; Christ goes up and teaches there; no doubt, (as appears from the
following Sermon, ver. 37.) inviting them to himself, as the substance of all
these shadows; And it teaches, that when people are taken up with the practice
of external Ordinances, they have much need of Christ's teaching, that they rest
not on these, but press after the marrow and substance of them. This was the
great sin of that time, that they rested on these rites, and had few or none
to bid them go forward. And albeit the true Religion be a living way, wherein
men may still continue fresh and lively, even to old age, Psalm. 92.13, 14. Yet
formality is a very frequent disease, and they who labor hard till they attain
to somewhat, may be ready to sit down, when they have attained it. 3. In that
Christ, who before lurked and kept himself secret, does now appear openly in
the Temple; It teaches, that whatever caution Christ's servants should use, yet
when their calling presses them, they should without fear, cast themselves, if
it were in the midst of bodily dangers; as their Master did before them. 4.
Albeit John record many Sermons, which the rest omit; yet he does not express
what Christ preached at this time; only it appears from the following ver.
that his doctrine was admirable. This the Lord has, in deep wisdom, ordered,
to teach, That as we are bound to know what Christ reveals, so we should be
sober, and set bounds to our curiosity, when he is pleased to keep up any
thing: And as Christ has revealed all that is necessary for salvation; so by
his wrapping up some things in silence, he would sharpen our appetite, and
increase our desire after that day, wherein we shall know as we are known.

Verse 15. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knows this man letters,
having never learned?
Follows, to ver. 37. the effects of this public appearing of Christ, which
may be taken up in this order. 1. There is a conference with the Jews who
marvelled at his doctrine, ver. 15. Wherein, he vindicates his doctrine, ver.
16, 17, 18. and the miracle he had wrought before; in which debates, the
multitude have some hand, ver. 19. -- 24. 2. They of Jerusalem barking against
him, ver. 25, 26, 27. he returns them an answer, ver. 28, 29. which has some
effects, ver. 30, 31. 3. The Rulers sending to take him, ver. 32. he preaches
yet more, ver. 33, 34. and is carped at by the hearers, ver. 35, 36.

In this ver. it is recorded, that they hearing Christ preach so well, and
learnedly, though he was never brought up at their public schools, do marvel
at it, in stead of seeing God in it. This is ascribed to the Jews, which may
be either understood generally, of the multitude there conveened, who were of
that Nation; or, it may be, his malicious enemies did begin this debate and
conference, though afterward the multitude, who knew not their plots, ver 20.
do interpose in it; And it is not unlike, that by this wondering, they would
bring Christ in suspicion, as not having his skill by good means, seeing he was
no scholar. Doctrine, 1. Christ's knowledge and insight in the things of God, is
admirable, even his enemies being Judges; for, the Jews marvelled, etc. they
admired both the measure of his knowledge, and the way of attaining it, without
means. Though this being extraordinary in him, is not to be drawn into
ordinary imitation. 2. Whatever be the seeming great effects of Christ's
doctrine among a people, yet so long as they want faith, it will be all to no
purpose; for, albeit it was much that they should marvel, yet since they
believed not, it was, in the best of them, nothing else but stupidity. The
least degree of saving faith is beyond all admiration, without it. 3. The
corrupt heart of man is ready to retort, even the most undeniable and
convincing arguments pleading for Christ, and to make use of them to their own
hardening; for, albeit Christ's knowing of letters, having never learned, was an
undeniable evidence that he was taught of God, and filled with the Spirit;
according to the prophecy, Is. 11.2, 3. yet they use it as a ground of
exception. 4. Such is the perversitie of corrupt men by nature, in opposing of
Christ, that nothing can be done or said, but they will bend their wits to
cavil at it; for, if Christ had preached but in an ordinary way, they would
have thought nothing of him: And if he preach to admiration, then they will
strive to render that suspicious.

Verse 16. Jesus answered them, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.
Follows Christ's reply, wherein he vindicates his doctrine, and then
justifies his old practice; And first, he declares that he had not his
doctrine from Satan, nor by any humane art or industry, but from his father
whose Ambassador he was, and that he spoke not his own mind only, but the
Fathers. While he says, it is not his, but the Fathers; the meaning is not to
seclude him simply, but to show that he devised it not of himself as man, (as
they conceived only of him) and without the Father; But as he was God equal
with the Father, and so naturally knew all his mysteries, and as man, had
knowledge thereof, by communication from his Godhead; So all this was
communicate to him from the Father, who sent him to the world to reveal his
counsel; And this might appear in his divine furniture without all humane
industry. Whence learn, 1. As Christ fully knows the Fathers mind and
counsel, so he is the faithful revealer thereof; for, his doctrine is the
Fathers who sent him; It is from the Father, and he publishes it. 2. It may
commend the doctrine of the Gospel, that not only it is of God, but that he
sent his Son into the world, to publish it; for, so does Christ commend his
doctrine here. 3. It is the duty of faithful Ministers, not only to wait for a
calling from God, but to see that they bring nothing forth, but what they have
from God; for, herein Christ is a pattern, who was sent, and whose doctrine
was not his own, but his that sent him. 4. No doctrine or Preacher, how
admirable and ravishing soever, are to be heard in the Church, but they who are
sent and bring their message from God; Therefore, albeit they marvelled at him,
ver. 15. yet he thinks not that enough, unless they be persuaded that he and
his doctrine are of God. 5. It is the duty of faithful Ministers, to lead
people from themselves to God, and to ascribe what is excellent in them, to him
that he alone may have the glory; Therefore, Christ when he is marvelled at,
draws their eyes to God who sent and furnished him.

Verse 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

18. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks
his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.


Next, because they would not readily credit him, in asserting his doctrine to
be of God; Therefore he subjoines two Rules and helps whereby they might be
enabled to try doctrine and Teachers. The first whereof is required in the
person who would try doctrine, ver. 17. To wit, that he be a pious man, and
one who according to light received, walks in Gods ways. Such a one has the
promise that he shall be made able to discern whether his doctrine be divine,
or devised by himself. The second Rule and help in trial, ver. 18. relates to
the person and doctrine to be tried; wherein he asserts, that a man who runs
unsent, and preaches his own inventions, does in his carriage, and by his
doctrine, but seek to exalt himself; whereas he, who being sent of God, makes
it his scope in his carriage to exalt God only, and the nature of his doctrine
tends to that, does prove that he is a preacher of truth, and that there is no
unrighteousness nor fraud in his doctrine. For unde^standing of this, we are
to consider, That Christ in giving these rules of trial, does not seclude other
rules and proofs of the truth of his doctrine already given, Chap. 5. and
particularly, that of Scripture; For Christ in Scripture makes it elsewhere
clear, that good men, in some cases, may be misled with error, and unrenewed
men may know and embrace truth, though not savingly; And on the other hand,
erroneous Teachers and doctrines may pretend to be much for God, and may cry
out on truth, as denying to God his glory; But Christ's meaning is, to show,
That his doctrine being undeniably true, and according to Scripture, it was
odious in them to contradict it by wicked rebellion, and to evidence by their
opposition, that they were not tender walkers. And that this is so much the
more heinous, that they saw his whole carriage, and the nature and scope of his
doctrine, tend on^y to glorify his Father, and not to advance his own private
glory. Doctrine, 1. It is the duty of the Lords people, not to receive Doctrine
or Teachers upon trust, but to try and discern, who are sent of God, and who
not, and who speaks true or false doctrine; for, it is here imported, that they
should know who are sent, and whether their doctrine be of God, or of
themselves. 2. Every man is not a fit discerner of Christ's doctrine, but many
through their own default, are left destitute of such a mercy; for, so does the
requiring of qualifications, in these who try, impo^t. 3. Such as truly fear
God, and make conscience of known truth in their conversation, have his promise
for ability and discerning, to try doctrine; for, so does the promise
expressly hold out, if any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, etc. Which we may branch out in these. 1. Such
have indeed the promise of discerning, whereas ungodliness and loose practices
provokes God to withold discerning light. 2. Albeit the Godly may, and many
times do err, and are misled; yet ordinarily, that is but the fruit of some
former defection in practice. 3. M^ns fleshly humors and passions, in debating
and s^eking out of truth, while yet their practice is not subjected to the
rule, is not the right way to come speed. 4. Such as have no use for truth nor
end in searching it out, but only to inform their judgment, or satisfy their
curiosity, may readily get leave to go wrong. 5. Such as make conscience of
known light in their practice are in Gods way for attaining further light in
dubious contraversies. 6. Such as come to hear, with a purpose to examine
doctrine by carnal reason, and to like or dislike of it, according as it shall
relish or be displeasing to their lusts, will readily reject sound doctrine;
But he that comes with a subjected mind, and fixed resolution to receive and
obey, what shall be found to be the will of God, shall get a discerning Spirit,
unless God have him to humble for some former guilt, of which he has not yet
repented. Doctrine, 4. The great scope of Preachers, and of their doctrine,
should be, to deny and abase themselves, and to exalt and seek Gods honor;
for, so does Christ teach, ver. 18. that a teacher should seek his glory that
sent him: and so himself did in carriage and doctrine. 5. Such as do run
unsent, and do broach their own inventions and errors, they certainly affect
the praise of men, and hunt after vainglory, let them pretend to what modesty
and humility they will; for, he that speaks of himself, seeks his own
glory, the scope of his carriage tends to that. And albeit selfe-seekers may
be for the truth, and may make use of it, for their own ends; yet they are
fitted to go wrong, if they have a tentation, and they will go wrong, before
they be not respected; Yea, and God is provoked to give them up to go wrong. 6.
As true doctrine does tend to set forth Gods glory, and to exalt him; So
corrupt doctrine, devised by men, does not aim at Gods glory indeed, whatever
it seem to do: for, in this respect also, he that spaketh of himself, seeks
his own glory; the nature of his doctrine rises no higher then his own or
another creatures glory; whereas he that is true, or sound in doctrine, seeks
his glory that sent him. That this may appear, consider. 1. Many corrupt and
erroneous doctrines do eminently exalt the creature, in its merit, free will,
liberty to dispose of its actions, etc. to the manifest depriving of God of the
glory of grace, dominion, and sovereignty, to the abasing of Christ, and his
sufferings, the denial of providence, etc. 2. Many opinions and practices in
Religion, though they pretend to, and seem to speak much self denial, in these
who profess and practice them; yet they never ascend to give glory to God, but
to exalt another creature in his room; Such as that voluntary humility, in
worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. 3. Though some erroneous opinions get place
in the world, and are cried up as exalting God and Christ; Yet he will have no
such honor, and it is but a real dishonouring of him, to think that he needs a
lie to set out his glory, and to maintain error under a pretext that otherwise
he will want his glory; See Joh. 13.7, 8, 9. 4. As no erroneous opinion does
tend to Gods glory, so no erroneous person does really mind it in maintaining
that error, but would exalt himself under a pretext of humility, and seeks to
be accounted and reputed of as somewhat, because of his new opinions. Doctrine,
7. To preach sound doctrine, is great faithfulness to God, and to the souls of
people, who are taught; whereas the unsound Teacher commits the greatest, and
most cruel, of frauds, as being false to God, and to the souls of people,
Therefore it is said of the Teacher of sound doctrine, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him; Not that they are perfect, (though Christ was so,
being truth and righteousness it self) but that being true, he deals
righteously, in not having any fraud in his doctrine.

Verse 19. Did not Moses give you the Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law?
Why go ye about to kill me?
Christ having vindicate his doctrine, proceeds now to vindicate his practice,
in healing the impotent man, Chap. 5. which had so long stuck in their minds
as an odious practice. This he does upon two grounds, whereof the first (in
this ver.) is by way of retortion upon themselves, that they should seek to
slay him for a supposed breach of the Law, when yet none of themselves, to whom
the Law was given by Moses did keep it. For clearing this reason, 1. We must
remember, that Christ has already justified this deed ( Chap. 5.) upon
convincing grounds, and therefore now he uses only such defenses as might
pinch them a little nearer. 2. As this comparison of his deed with their
transgressions, does no ways argue that he was guilty, as they were; So
neither is it Christ's scope to teach men, to think their own faults the less,
that others are guilty also. 3. Nor is it Christ's scope, that men should repine
because they are reproved by others that are guilty; nor yet that men's own
guilt should altogether close their mouths from reproving of others; for
neither was he guilty, nor is he teaching men how to defend themselves in ill
courses. But Christ is reasoning here, not so much to the matter, as to the
persons of these that persecuted him; and shows, that they were not meet
challengers of him, who were so gross violators of the Law in their own
practice; and that, however they pretended great zeal to the Sabbath in
persecuting him; yet, their own carriage testified how little they respected
the Law, being guilty of horrid transgressions, and many of them making the Law
void by their traditions. Doctrine. 1. Faithful Ministers ought not only to be
able to hold forth sound doctrine, and to give a reason of it, but also to stop
their mouths who, by unjust aspertions cast upon their persons, labor to
frustrate and make void their ministry; Therefore Christ having defended his
doctrine, does now vindicate his practice. 2. As Christ knows the secret
intentions of his enemies; so he is always ready to remove all scruples
against him, and to clear that he is unjustly hated and persecuted; for, he
knew their present intentions (of which verse 25.) though the people were
ignorant of it, verse 20. and puts them to it, why go ye about to kill me. 3.
As the Law of God does oblige men to obedience, by reason of his authority who
enjoyneth it; So it adds to the obligation, when a people consider how
eminently God has been seen in enjoining of it, and what privileges they
enjoy by having of it; Therefore, when he is about to urge their obligation to
obedience from the Law, he presses them to consider, Did not Moses (whom not
only ye honor, but who was trench-man, and conversed familiarly with God,
when he appeared in glory upon the mount) give you the Law? and not to other
Nations, Psalm. 147.19. He speaks to them who were successors to these who
received it, as if they had been then present. 4. Albeit the Law hold forth,
and oblige men to duty, yet not only are there some who grossly transgress
against it, but there are none who can make it appear that they keep it
perfectly; for, says he, yet none of you keeps the Law, and not some only.
And albeit there were many better then they, who sincerely endeavored to
observe it, yet even these did not attain to perfection. 5. Albeit men may, and
should, in their stations, reprove and censure others who are guilty, even
though themselves be compassed with infitmities and failings, yet not only it
is sad when gross transgressors of the Law have power in their hands, which
they employ against the innocent, as if they were guilty, (as here they did
with Christ.) But it concerns every one who has a calling to reprove and
censure. 1. To labor, so far as may be, to be blameless themselves,
otherwise they do undergo much shame, and do frustrate the end of their dealing
with others, Matthew. 23.4. 2. To be more taken up with their own failings, then
with the failings of others, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5. And, upon this, 3. To deal
compassionately with others in their failings, as being conscious to themselves
of their own infirmities. All this is imported in Christ's challenge of them (as
it is before explained (that they should deal so violently with him for a
supposed breach of the Law, when yet they were little affected with their own
real miscarriages, Doctrine 6. The Lord reckons it to be but hypocrisy and
fury, when men pretend zeal for God against others, and in some matters and
failings; and yet do allow themselves in as bad or worse courses, for, so much
also does Christ's reasoning import, that however they pretended it was zeal for
the Law and Sabbath made them so hot in pursuing him; yet if it had been so,
they would have made more conscience of it in their own practice, And indeed,
many may pretend the honor of God in somewhat they do, who, when their other
works are seen, do give their profession the lie.

Verse 20. The people answered and said, Thou have a devil, who goes about to
kill thee?
Christ is interrupted in his Apology by the multitude, who being ignorant of
the Rulers plots (which others knew better, verse 25.) and seeing him get
liberty to preach, and none molesting him, they cry out that he was mad and
possessed, that should apprehend any such thing. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
persecutors have many on their side, to be enemies to Christ; yet they are but
few of them who are made privy to their plots and cruel projects; As here we
see the people, or multitude, ignorant of all this, who goes about to kill
thee? Many who are on persecutors side, are to be pitied, and not to be
suspected as accessory to all the machinations of their leaders. 2. It is great
want of charity, when men do not only tax a particular fact, which they
suppose to be wrong; but do also reflect upon the person who does it, and pass
hard censures upon the principles from which it flows, for, albeit his
apprehension had been false (as it was not, and men are bound to trust Christ's
verdict rather then their own sense and reason) yet it was hard measure because
of this to assert, thou have a devil. This was a very frequent designation
among them of one that was distracted, and er^ed dangerously; for, whereas they
could acknowledge Gods fatherly hand in moderate chastisements, they looked
upon gro^er distempers, as an evidence that a man was delivered over to the
Executioners hand. Which however it be not still true, and is very sad when it
is true; Yet a Saint may be exercised with a messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7.
and yet be in his Fathers hand still. Only it is to be marked, that they are
affected with what they think to be a visible possession, who yet were little
troubled with a spiritual possession, under which many of them were kept in
bondage. 3. It is the lot of Chist and his followers, to lie buried under the
most horrid of calumnies, even to be looked on as acted, guided and directed by
an evil spirit; And Christ himself submitted to this, that he might sanctify
such a lot to his followers; as here we see, and frequently elsewhere in the
Evangelists

Verse 21. Jesus answered, and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all
marvel.

22. Moses therefore gave unto you Circumcision, (not because it is of Moses,
but of the Fathers) and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man.

23. If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the Law of Moses
should not be broken, are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit
whole on the Sabbath day?


Christ passes over this calumny without a reply, and goes on with his
discourse; Wherein he clears the multitude, what the quarrel was the Jews
had against him, and subjoyneth a second reason for vindication thereof, taken
from a parallel act approven by themselves, The sum is, That however they
marvelled at his deed, yet they had like practices among themselves justified
by the Law. For Moses did give them a Law, received from the fathers, that
Circumcision should be administered on the eighth day, and they did circumcise
on the Sabbath day, if it fell to be the eighth, without any scruple or
violation of the Law; yea, in obedience to the Law. And therefore they had no
cause to be angry at him because he had healed a man both in soul and body on
the Sabbath, The parallel here is not so much betwixt the person of Christ and
Moses, as betwixt the Ordinance enjoined by Moses, and practiced by them, and
Christ's deed. For clearing whereof, Consider, 1. The equality, or parallel,
consists in this, that, as Circumcision was a work of piety, as being a
Sacrament and Seal of the Covenant; So also it was a work of necessity, in
respect of the precept, that the Law of Moses might not be broken. And on the
same grounds was Christ's work to be justified, being a work of piety, to heal a
man's soul, and a work of charity and necessity, to help a man who had been so
long in distress. We need not to insist to enquire, why the Lord would have
Circumcision precisely on the eighth day; whether, because he would have the
seventh day (which Physicians account a critical day) over, before this painful
Sacrament were administered, but would have it delayed no longer; or, upon some
other typical reason. It suffices us, that Gods will is a sufficient reason
for his command. 2. There may also some disparity be found betwixt these two,
which pleads yet more strongly for Christ's practice, As, 1. In administering of
Circumcision, there was more pains and labor on the Sabbath, then in what he
did, having with a word made the man whole. 2. Circumcision, though an
Ordinance of God, yet was painful, and for awhile hurtful to the body; He, on
the contrary, healed him who had been long pained. 3. Albeit Circumcision was a
work of piety, because it was a Seal of the righteousness which is by says;
yet many who received it, did not get their hearts circumcised; And therefore
his deed was much more a work of piety, having not only healed the man's body,
but his soul also; for, so the parallel runs, and so these words are to be
understood. I have made a man every whit whole, or, the whole man whole, and so
appears in part from his adhering to Christ's directions, when they are
quarreled, chap. 5.10, 11. Doctrine 1. Christ's followers ought to be deaf men
to reproaches, and to carry themselves modestly, when they meet with personal
injuries and affronts; As here Christ by his practice does teach, who never so
much as owned their bitter reflection, verse 20. 2. Men who are most wicked and
lewd, may yet so far delude themselves, or seek to deceive others, as they
cannot look upon some supposed ills but with wonder and astonishment; for,
these vile men did all marvel at this work of Christ, pretending to detest it
as an horrid profanation, When yet they were nothing affected with their own
gross abuses and violation of the Law. 3. It is great injustice, and want of
charity, to stumble at one failing of a man (suppose it be real) who makes not
an habit of it, but otherwise is blameless; Therefore, says he, I have done
one work, and ye all marvel, wherein he not only opposes his own work to
their frequent circumcising on the Sabbath, but shows that it was a great
testimony of his innocence, that they could object but that one work to him,
and that it was great injustice to tax him so hardly (though it had not been
right,) seeing he had no custom of such transgressions. 4. The Lord, in his
deep wisdom, has so contrived his Law, that albeit diverse precepts concurring
at one time, may seem to cross one another; yet no man that is not under the
power of an erring conscience, (who, whatever way he turn him, does either
sin materially against the Law, or interpretatively against God, in going
over the light of his conscience:) will ever want a lawful out-gate, but may
follow one command without violation of another: for, so does Christ's arguing
teach; His instance of Circumcision without profanation of the Sabbath, and
his arguing from thence to justify his own practice, shows, that these
particular instances are grounded on a general rule, That in the concurrence of
many seeming contrary precepts, it is the will of God, that one of them should
give place to the other for that time, and that without sin in him who does
so, Which may be branched out thus, 1. A general command gives way to a special
precept, when both cannot be observed at one time; As here, the general command
of sanctifying the Sabbath, gives place to the command of Circumcision on the
eighth day, when that day fell to be the Sabbath. 2. The moral duties of the
first Table take place of duties of the second Table, when they come in
competition; Though a man be bound to provide for his family, to love his
friends, wife, and children; yet all these must give place to his love to God
and his truth, and he must forsake all these, yea, and (in some respect) hate
them, when they would hinder him in his duty to God. 3. Ceremonial duties and
external performances of the first Table, do give place to moral duties of the
second Table; And therefore Christ frequently justifies his own and his
disciples practices on the Sabbath, by showing that God required mercy, and not
sacrifice. Doctrino 5. Albeit it be the will of God, that his people do
sanctify the Sabbath, by ceasing from their ordinary employments, yet several
works may be done thereupon, without violation thereof; for, Christ's instancing
of Circumcision on the Sabbath, without breaking of the Law of Moses, and of
his own fact, shows, that these instances are grounded on this general rule,
That the doing of every work upon the Sabbath, is not a violation thereof. And
particularly, 1. Works of piety are the very sanctifying of the Sabbath; as
here, to administrate a Sacrament, and do good to a man's soul, and the Priests
were blameless in killing and washing sacrifices on that day, Matthew. 12.5. And
we under the Gospel, should go about our work with more delight on that day, in
regard it is more spiritual and easy, then formerly. 2. Some works, albeit
they be not works of piety, yet are lawful, in so far us they are necessary
means of, and have a tendency unto works of piety: So were they allowed a
Sabbath days journey to go to their solemn meetings and worship, and the
pains that men take in needful apparelling and refreshing of their bodies, and
going to the public places of worship are no violation of the Sabbath, if they
be done with a Sabbath days heart. 3. Works of mercy and charity are also
lawful on the Sabbath; as here, it was lawful to relieve a miserable man, so
also Luke 14.5. providing they be such works indeed, not only in the intention
of the worker, but such as in their own nature are necessarily required for
performance of mercy and charity. 4. Works of necessity may lawfully be done
on the Sabbath, though they were servile employments; as here Circumcision was,
in respect of the command, and his healing of the man. See Luke 13.15. Yet that
we abuse not this, and violate the Sabbath under a pretext of necessity, We
ought, 1. To distinguish betwixt a necessity that is inevitable, into which
providence casts us, and a necessity that is only contracted through our own
former negligence; The first does warrant us to work what we are necessitate to
do, but the other does involve us in guilt, whatever may be done upon it. 2. We
are to distinguish betwixt a necessity that is only imminent, or possible, and
feared that it may come, and a necessity that is incumbent and present. The
former cannot warrant a man to work on the Sabbath, but the latter does. A man
must not gather in his corns upon the Sabbath, because he fears it may rain
the next day, or a stood may come and carry it away, but a man may recover and
preserve his corns on the Sabbath from being carried away with a present
inundation. 3. We are to distinguish betwixt the ceasing of gain, by the
intermission of a lawful calling on the Sabbath, and an emergent damage, by
reason of some providential dispensations. The former does not warrant working
on the Sabbath day, but the latter does. Albeit it be necessary that a man
improve his means in a lawful calling, for the maintenance of his family; Yet
it is not lawful for him to continue his trade and calling on the Sabbath, upon
pretense that he will be a loser by the intermission thereof. But a man may
lawfully recover his means from fire, water, or other accidents, on that day.
Doctrine 6. Men who are possessed with self-love, and with prejudice against
others, will readily count that a fault in their neighbors, which yet is no
fault, and will allow that in themselves, which they condemn in others; for,
so does Christ's reasoning, from their practice to his deed, import, that they
did these things as approven service, as they were, and yet when he did the
like, they were angry at him. And so does he elsewhere plead from the example
of David, and of their Priests, Matthew. 12.3, 4, 5. 7. Whatever persecutors of
Christ and his people do pretend, yet the rising glory of Christ, and of his
truth, is the true cause of their spleen; Therefore, albeit they made a noise
about the man's carrying of his bed on the Sabbath, Chaper 5. 10. yet he tells
them the true cause is, I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day,
and ^o am glorified. 8. Christ's pleading for this, as a work of piety, as the
parallel bears, and has been showed in the Exposition, does import that
Christ did heal this man's soul as well as his body. And so it teaches, 1. As
men have soul diseases, as well as bodily, whereof they should be chiefly
sensible, and which, till they be cured, men are never completely whole: So it
may be an encouragement to go to Christ with outward troubles, that in seeking
help to these, men may get that, and spiritual mercies also; for, so dealt he
with this poor man, whose great care was only to be healed of his long
infirmity. 2. It is a very dangerous condition, to be sent to Christ with
outward trouble, and yet not get some spiritual and saving benefit from him,
with their deliverance, before they come away; for, it was Christ's way when
persons were brought to him with outward troubles, to cure their souls before
they came away. It says much to the incurablenesse of men's spiritual
condition, when they are afflicted, and make some fashion of coming to Christ
with it; yea, and are delivered, and yet continue unrenewed. Doctrine 9. His
pleading this as a work of charity and necessity, teaches, That mercy and
compassion in Christ will omit no occasion of showing it self comfortable to
the miserable, and them that are in necessity; for, he will not intermit to
help them when he sees them, even albeit it be the Sabbath. And this will yet
further appear, if we consider that one might object, that there was no such
necessity, but the man who had endured that infirmity thirty eight years, might
endure it yet one day; whereas Circumcision in respect of the command, could
not be omitted. But the answer is easy, that not only the duty of charity
requires that the miserable be presently helped; but, however the man might
have endured it, yet Christ's love and pity laid on the necessity, and could not
forbear. And albeit the man might be hardened in his trouble, by reason of long
continuance; yet Christ's pity is as tender toward him as if it had been the
first day; yea, so much the more, as he had endured it so long, albeit in deep
wisdom he reserved the cure for his own hand. This may help to correct the
jealous thoughts of Gods people, who complain that they are forgotten under
their long continued trials. 10. In declaring that Moses gave them
Circumcision, Christ adds a correction, not because it is of Moses, but of the
Fathers, (as indeed it was given to Abraham long before, Genesis 17.10.) Whereby,
1. He would put them in mind that there was a covenant and promise made, and
seals annexed to it, long before the giving of the law by Moses, that so they
might gather, that the law, which came after, could not make the promise void,
as it is argued, Gal. 3.17. 2. Because they doated so much upon Moses, ye^, and
eyed him more then God, in the ordinances they receiveed by his Ministry;
Therefore Christ puts him in his own room, and shows, that precious
Ordinances were given to others as well as to him. It teaches, That when
eminent instruments are too much doated on, and idolized by men, it provokes
the Lord to debase them, and to let it be seen that they are but his
instruments; As here he does with Moses.

Verse 24. Judge not according to the appearance; but judge righteous
judgment.
Unto this argument Christ subjoines an inference or conclusion, that it was
their duty to judge righteously of his work, and not to be led by appearances,
such as, looking on the one part, to Moses his authority, and on the other, to
his baseness, and so to condemn him; but should compare the one fact with the
other, and see how they aggreed, and rather see a divine power shining in his
works, setting forth his glory, and justifying them, then stumble at his works,
by judging him, according to outward appearance, to be a mere man. Doctrine 1.
Christ and the friends of truth desire nothing but righteous judgment, and
will not be afraid to go to the bar with their enemies, if they can get
justice and equity; for, he desires that they judge righteous judgment. He had
already examined his own way, and found it to be right, and therefore feared no
trial, and so should his people sit upon their own assize. 2. Men are oft-times
so blinded with visible appearances and maskes, with passions, interests, and
prejudices; that they see not through causes as they are in truth, but do judge
of them according as they are represented in a false mirror, either judging of
a cause as it is masked with pretenses, or laden with prejudices, or according
as they esteem of the person that owns it; Therefore it is requisite they be
warned, that they judge not according to the appearance, or, according to
external appearance or the outward view they take of persons. 3. Whosoever do
condemn what is right, because of their prejudice against persons, or out of
respect to persons, do justify what is wrong; and who so do rashly judge of
things, without considering all circumstances, do deal unrighteously before
God; for, so much is here condemned by Christ, judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. See Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.

Verse 25. Then said some of them of Jerusalem, is not this he whom they seek
to kill?

26. But lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the Rulers
know indeed, that this is the very Christ?

27. Howbeit we know this man whence he is, but when Christ comes, no man
knows whence he is.


Christ having thus debated with the Jews and multitude, about his doctrine
and practice, he (in the second place) is assaulted by the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who knew the Rulers plots better then others. And, 1. They cry out
upon their Rulers, wondering what is become of their zeal and forwardness, who
were seeking him to kill him, and yet now when he preaches so boldly, they
meddle not with him. 2. They allege, in derision, that the Rulers were so
moderate, possibly, because they believed him to be the Messiah; But as for
them, they think they have strong reasons wherefore they could not join with
them in that opinion. For they know whence this man is, whereas no man will
know whence the Messiah is when he comes. As for the first part of their
reason it comes more fitly to be considered in Christ's answer: But in the
second part, they assert a manifest untruth; for, albeit Christ, in respect of
his Godhead, was prefigured by Melchizedek, who in that state is brought in
Scripture, without father and mother, without descent, having neither beginning
of days, nor end of life. Heb. 7.3. and it is said of Christ, in that respect,
who shall declare his generation? Isa. 53.8. Yet it is as clear that in respect
of his humanity, the Scripture clearly points out, what tribe he should come
of, his descent, family and lineage, and the place of his birth. Doctrine, 1.
When wicked men are put to silence in debates, yet will they not be gained, but
this will irritate their corruptions to start new questions about truth, and
new prejudices against the maintainers thereof; for, their not replying to his
reasonings, makes it clear they were convinced; and yet this avails not, but
they are irritate and imbittered that the Pharisees are not more violent, and
they run to new debates. 2. Ordinarily they who enjoy most advantages in a
visible Church, do in a declining time prove worst of any; for, they of
Jerusalem, the chief City, and the place of solemn public worship for all
the Nation, are more upon the persecutors plots, and more enraged, then any. 3.
God can preserve his own, in the faithful discharge of their duty, in ill
times, in an admirable way, so that even their enemies themselves may wonder at
it; for, say they, Is not this he whom they seek to kill? and yet he speaks
boldly and they say nothing to him; They wonder that, considering his boldness
and the Rulers resolutions, he was not dispatched, seeing they might easily do
it when he cast himself among their hands. But hereby they do also hold out,
(though they considered it not) that there was an admirable providence of God
about him, restraining them till his hour came. And indeed, it is no less then
a wonder, to see Gods people carried through, amidst the many secret and cruel
plots of men, Psalm. 124.1. And it would be admired yet more by Saints, if they
were privy to all the sore hearts enemies have for their miscarried designs.
4. It will never be men's honesty and courage in an evil time, that will hasten
trouble upon them, before God see it meet to try them; But their fainting does
rather provoke God to send upon them what they fear, and would decline; for, of
this Christ's experience is an ample proof; He was in the midst of enraged
persecutors, he spoke boldly, and yet say they, lo, they say nothing to him,
they give him not so much as an ill word for his pains. 5. Wicked Rulers and
persecutors, when they are worst, will never want instigatours to encourage
them in it, yea, and to carp at them that they are not violent enough; for,
such did these of Jerusalem prove to the Pharisees. 6. Free preaching is that
which the world cannot endure, nor hear, without being enraged; for, that he
speaks boldly, is their eyesore. 7. A visible Church may grow so corrupt,
that it will be accounted the greatest crime and reproach that may be, to
receive or profess the most necessary and fundamental truths; for, they
account it a great indignity in Jerusalem, to know indeed that this is the very
Christ. They have reason to acknowledge Gods mercy who live in times wherein
it is their glory, and not their reproach, to avow this. And the godly, even in
a visible Church, should be looking that their trial may come to that height in
declining times. 8. Such as are in power, and do not rule for God, are justly
contemptible, and slaves, in a sort, to them who follow them in wickedness;
for, the Rulers must take a taunt, from their persecuting associates and
followers. 9. It is undeniably gross and abominable wickedness for men to
profess they know and acknowledge Christ, and yet to persecute him and his
truth; for, so much do these men grant, that if the Rulers knew he were the
Christ, it was sufficient to turn them from their resolutions of killing him.
10. It is commendable that men, in matters of Religion, do not pin their faith
upon the sleeve of any, how eminent soever they be, and though they were never
so much esteemed by themselves; But that they have a reason of their hope in
themselves; for, albeit these men erred dangerously in the particular, yet
their principle is good in the general, that though the Rulers should believe
him to be the Christ; yet they could not go along with them, so long as they
thought they had reason to the contrary. 11. Error is very dangerous and
ensnaring; And albeit many may seem to be led away by others into error, yet
experience will readily prove, that error does so bewitch them, as the
tentation that drew them on, will not bring them off again; for, albeit they
were drawn on, chiefly, by their leaders example, to oppose Christ, yet they
profess that though their Rulers would come off yet they will not 12.
Erroneous persons, and despisers of Christ, are much fostered in their way, by
their conceit of their own knowledge, and even by a pretense that they know and
respect Christ, more then any beside. Therefore, they make great boast of their
knowledge, and particularly, of the Messiah whom they expected, and yet they
are opposing him when he appears. 13. The not comparing of Scripture with
Scripture, but taking any single sentence that seems to plead for what, we
would be at, is a very great nursery and cause of error; for, such is their
reasoning here, they catch at one thing speaking of the Messiahs Divinity, and
take no notice of other places with which that should have been compared. 14.
The right way to read the Scriptures concerning Christ, is, to take up both
these Scriptures which speak of his humanity and voluntary humiliation, and
these which point out his Divinity and glory, and see them all accomplished in
him; Yet distinctly, so as we are not to expect that to be verified of his
manhood which is proper to his Godhead: Nor yet that his Godhead in it self
suffered any change by the personal union; for, herein also they failed in
their reasoning, urging that what was said of the Messiahs Godhead should be
verified of him according to his humane nature. 15. It any think it strange how
these understanding men should so far mistake, seeing nothing was more clear
and frequent in Scripture, then whence the Messiah is, as man, and that in
respect of all circumstances, his mother, place and time of his birth,
parentage, etc. They would consider, that (beside what may be spoken to
afterward, of their sinning against light,) this people were so taken up with,
and fostered by their traditions, in a dream of Christ's outward glory and
pomp, that they could not heed nor understand any thing concerning his
humiliation, how clearly so ever it was revealed. And of this we have a clear
instance in the disciples themselves, who being taken up with the same dream,
could not understand Christ, when he spoke most clearly of his sufferings, Mark
9.31, 32. Luke 9.44, 45. and 18.31, 32, 33, 34. And it teaches, how dangerous
a frenzy vain imaginations and delusions are, which will so possess men's
minds, that clearest sun beams of truth will not be discerned by them, unless
God in mercy recover them out of the snare of the Devil.

Verse 28. Then cried Jesus in the Temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know
me, and ye know whence I am, and I am not come of my self; but he that sent me
is true, whom ye know not.

29. But I know him, for I am from him, and he has sent me.


Christ being grieved at this impudent cavil, does reply unto it with much
boldness and zeal. And, 1. He declares that however they knew him, and whence
he came, yet their carriage proved that they knew not the Father that sent him.
2. He subjoins that he was comforted in this, that what ever they thought of
him; yet he knew that he was sent from the Father, who is true; And, however
they knew not the Father, yet he knew him, as being from him, and sent by him
into the world. For clearing this a little, consider, 1. The great difficulty
here is, how to understand these words, ye both know me, and whence I am, being
compared with what follows, that they knew not the Father; for, they are taken
up diversely, As, 1. By way of Irony and holy derision, as if Christ had said;
Ye think ye know me well enough, but ye know me not at all as ye should, since
ye know not the Father who sent me, and that I am come from him. And this
indeed holds true in general, That conceit is a great prop unto mistakes and
errors, and an hinderance unto closing with Christ; That men's not closing with
Christ by faith, does flow from ignorance of the Father; And, That conceit of
knowledge is very hateful to Christ, seeing he does, in an holy manner, mock
it. 2. The words may be taken as declaring them to know Christ, and yet to be
ignorant of him, but in diverse respects; They knew him, and whence he was, as
man, (though even in that they erred, if they supposed him to be the Carpenters
Son;) Yet they knew not the Father, nor him, as God, proceeding from the
Father, and sent by him. And indeed, They have need to be quick sighted, who
know Christ as he is in truth, and they who do know much, will perceive, when
they get opened eyes, that they are ignorant of far more of him. These
interpretations have indeed these truths in them, and do aggree well with the
temper of the body of the Jews, who were very ignorant. But Christ, zeal and
indignation in this discourse, (testified by crying) with the consideration of
these he speaks unto, may lead us to look yet more narrowly into the words,
Therefore (3) when we consider, that Christ is not now dealing with the
multitude, but with the companions of the Rulers, who knew all their plots,
ver. 25. with these who even now had been convinced in the matter of Christ's
healing the man on the Sabbath, and had therefore in great rage, started this
new quarrel; and with these who would have taken him, though they had no
warrant from the Rulers, ver. 30. When, I say, we consider these things, the
words may run very well thus; That Christ charge upon them that they knew him
well enough, and yet against their light, would not acknowledge him, but
delighted to c^vil. And this is not strange, for it was the great sin of the
Rulers, that they sinned against their light in opposing of Christ, and so
might also their associats. See Joh. 3.2. Matthew. 22.16. The only difficulty
against this interpretation, is, that it seems not to agree with what is
afterward said, that they knew not him that sent him. But so is also said of
the Rulers who sinned against their light, that they knew not the Father nor
Christ, Joh. 18.2, 3. because, however they knew as much as to make them
guilty of sinning against light, yet they knew him not savingly, and their
carnal conceptions concerning the Messiah, made them maliciously reject all the
convincing arguments that this was he, since they saw no satisfaction to their
desires in him. Consider. 2. As for these proofs of Christ's knowing the
Father, ver. 29. the last of them is clear of it self, that Christ being sent
Ambassador from the Father, behooved to know him who sent him, and to have
ample instructions, and knowledge of his mind. As for the other proof, I am
from him, however it may be taken generally, that he came from the Father, and
not only so (for, one may come from another, and yet know little of him or his
mind either) but came clothed with a commission and furnished with
instructions, as his sending imports; or, it may point out, that he did
voluntarily come, as well as the Father sent him: Yet it seems clearer, to
understand it of his eternal generation, and being from the Father as God, and
so it points out an higher proof of his knowing the Father, beside his being
an Ambassador. Doctrine, 1. Such is the perversitie of men, in opposing Christ
and the Gospel, that it is hard for them who have any zeal of God to get it
endured; So much did Christ testify by his vehemence in speaking to these, he
cried in the Temple as he taught. 2. The violent, malicious, and effronted
opposition of men should not blunt nor dash zeal, but rather set an edge upon
it, in all these who would approve themselves to have antipathy against sin;
Therefore, Christ cries as he taught. To be calm so long as our particular is
not touched, however God be dishonored, is stupidity and not meekness, and an
evidence of the want of the zeal of God. 3. Among other trials and exercises
that Christ and his followers do meet within the world, from the ignorance of
men and their infirmities, this is one of the chief, that they will have to do
with men, who directly against their light do oppose him and his truth; for,
such did Christ meet with here. And it may warn men, to take heed how they
slight and go over their light in ordinary walking, lest, in process of time,
they maliciously contradict their light. And to beware of engaging against
truth, lest they be lest to themselves, to run to hell before they stop. 4.
Men's opposing of truth, and Christ, against their light, is not only a sad
trial to the zealous, but an horrid iniquity in it self, and will be a
witness for the friends of truth in the bosom of opposers; Therefore Christ
not only cries against this, but bears their knowledge upon them, as a
witness for him, and an aggravation of their sin; ye both know me, and ye
know whence I am. 5. Whatever light malicious opposers of Christ have, which
will aggreage their own guilt; yet their opposition proves that they have no
saving knowledge of God nor of him; Therefore says Christ to them, him that
sent me ye know not. Whatever light and knowledge of God men have, yet they
know nothing indeed and savingly, but what their heart submits unto and
embraces, and what the Son reveals of him. Matthew. 11.27. and what tends to
eternal life, Job. 17.3. 6. Such as are approven of God, ought not to be shaken
by the misconstructions, and malicious oppositions and cavillations of men,
Therefore does Christ set forth his own grounds of comfort and assurance, to
testify that he would not be moved by all their opposition, nor needed a
testimony from them. 7. Albeit the gaining and conversion of one soul be of
more worth then a whole world; Yet it is one good end of a Ministry, to
convince malicious men, and not leave them without a witness; Therefore also
does Christ assert his calling and commission before these malicious men, that
they might know there was not only a Prophet, but the Messiah among them. See
Ezekiel. 2.5. 8. It is a sweet encouragement under trial, when men know they have
a calling from God to what they are opposed in, and that they do not undertake
it of themselves; for, when Christ says, I am not come of my self etc. It not
only imports, that he was indeed sent by the Father, but holds out his ground
of encouragement from his calling. And if men knew what it were to bear the
burden and consequents of any course they undertake, it would make them
affrayd to run without a call. 9. Such as would ^eap comfort by any call from
God, should study much his fidelity and truth, and that whoever despise them,
yet he will not misregard them, who employeth them; Therefore does Christ
subjoine, he that sent me is true, to wit, in his promises and covenant made
with him the Mediator when he sent him into the world, and therefore will
accordingly own him in his going through his state of humiliation. And this
also is of general use and comfort to all who are called of God, 1 These. 5.24.
And as men would not quit the comfort and clearness of their calling, so they
would take heed that Atheism do not brangle the truth of these promises made
to them, in following that calling. 10. Such as would savingly know Christ,
especially in his state of humiliation, and would not maliciously oppose and
contradict any light they have, they should labor to know the Father that sent
him, that so they may see better what Christ is, and what the hazard is of
rejecting him; for, so much also is insinuate in this challenge, he that sent
me is true, whom ye know not. Had they seen the Father more in Christ, they had
not maliciously stumbled at his baseness, nor durst they have hazarded to
oppose him 11. Men who would cleave to and be encouraged in God, in times of
opposition, should not take up truths concerning him by guess, but should be
certain of them by says; Therefore, does Christ assert, I know him. 12.
Whoever be ignorant of God, yet Christ knows him and his will perfectly, and
is sufficiently able to reveal him to others, who desire to learn at him; for,
says he; But I know him. 13. Christ's perfect knowledge of the Father appears
from his eternal Godhead, that he is from the Father, and the same in essence
with him, and so communicates with him in his eternal knowledge of himself,
and in his counsels; and, from his commission from the Father, which imports
that he came with full instructions from him; for, these are he^e given as
reasons of his knowledge, for I am from him, and he has sent me. And this not
only serves to put us out of all doubt, that Christ does reveal the Father
infallibly; But being held out as the ground of that challenge, and as that
which supported him under their malicious opposition, It teaches men, that
however they cannot attain to this measure of clear and near knowledge; yet if
they would be born out in times of opposition, they must study to know God and
his truth, by that measure of communion with him, which he allow's upon sinful
men.

Verse 30. Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because
his hour was not yet come.
Before John proceed to the third effect that followed on this first appearing
of Christ, in the middayes of the feast; he inserts two consequents that
followed on the former debate. The first is, that these enraged men, being
galled with Christ's former discourse, would have taken him by violence, but
providence did restrain them, because his time to suffer was not yet come,
Whence learn, 1. The more that malicious men are dealt with and convinced, the
further will they be from any good, and the more exasperat. As here we see in
these men, who raged before and now are quite mad in their fury. 2. Violence
and persecution against the persons of faithful teachers, is an evidence of men
that maliciously oppose truth, and the lot which is to be expected from such;
for, they (whom Christ asserts to have sinned against their light, verse ^8,
29) sought to take him, that they might kill him, or deliver him up to their
Rulers. 3. It is the prerogative of God, that to him belong the issues from
death, and that he can preserve his servants in the midst of their enemies,
even when they are in the height of their rage; for, but no man laid bands on
him. 4. God needs no means to preserve his servants, but can secure them as
well by an invisible hand of providence, as if they had all vi^^ble helps in
the world; for, so did he give proof to his Son here. 5. Many a good turn
are men made to do, and to omit many evil, for which they will never be
rewarded as service; As being not done or omitted from any principle of grace,
but from an hand of providence restraining them; Therefore, it is marked that
no man laid hands on him, not from any remorse or honesty in them, but from
Gods providence about Christ, because his hour was not yet come. 6. Albeit
Christ's followers may expect, that at last the Lord, for wise reasons, will not
let the malice of men cease, till they be brought to suffering; Yet the time
thereof is in Gods hand, and not in the power of bloody men; And they may
boldly go on in their lawful calling, believing that enemies will not anticipat
his time; (...) this reason of not taking him, because his hour was not yet
come, imports; that he was indeed to suffer; that God had the timeing of that
in his own hand; and that till his time came, all their malice could not avail.

Ver. 31. And many of the people believed on him and said, When Christ comes,
will he do more miracles then these which this man has done?
The second consequent of the former debate, (which also is a transition and
introduction to the third general effect of his public preaching) is, that
however the great ones were ang^ed, yet many of the common people did believe
on him, as concluding that whoever expected another Messiah, yet they were sure
there would none come who could work greater miracle, then he had done; And so
it was folly to expect another. John does not declare what these miracles in
particular were, that affected them, only it seems they were not present
miracles, but these he had done in former times: Therefore they say he has
done them. And as for this ground of their faith, that he wrought singular
miracles albeit the scope and end of his miracles was to confirm his doctrine,
and that he was the Messiah, and if thereby they were led not only to
acknowledge him, but to reap benefit by his word and offices, they were
certainly in the right way. But if they were only led and affected with his
miracles, and rested there; it was very defective; and though the power and
glory of Christ, shining in his works, did effect them, yet wanting a root, it
could not but soon fade; As many may think they have attained to some
perfection, when yet they are indeed but to begin. They who are pricked in
their hearts, are yet commanded to begin repentance, Acts 2.37, 38. Yet it is
to be observed, that this and the like changes are called believing on him;
partly, because they were good in themselves, and a beginning of good, and to
show, that Christ would not have good beginnings despised by the godly, when
they find them in themselves; even albeit hypocrites may have them, who yet
fall back again; for their fault was not that they had these, but that they had
not more, and made not progress: And partly, to show, that Christ himself is a
very large commender and esteemer of grace, who will give such fair titles to
small beginnings. But leaving to determine what the change wrought on them was,
we may from the verse, Learn, 1. Christ, when he pleases, can make his work to
prosper, even in the midst of his enemies; and when they are maliciously
opposing, and using their utmost endeavor against him, he can pluck some, yea
many, out of their hand; for, even at this time, many believed on him. 2.
Albeit grace be ensured to no sort of people more then another; yet it is
ordinarily the meaner sort with whom it prevails most; for, they are of the
people, or, multitude, who believed, when the Rulers and their followers in
Jerusalem are persecuting. Men who live at ease and in pleasure, ordinarily see
little need of any thing beside; they see no need of prayer or dependence on
God, having all things at hand; yea, it is a wonder if they be not persecutors.
3. Let men expect what they will, beside Christ, for happiness; yet he is
singular, and none can expect a better then he: So much do they acknowledge,
that let men dream what they will of another Messiah, yet when Christ comes,
will he do more miracles then these which this man has done? He will indeed be
found the chief of ten thousand. 4. Albeit Christ's servants may take much
pains, whereof they see no present effects; yet God may bless these same
labors with success afterward; for, the miracles which Christ has done
before, do now take effect with some.

Verse 32. The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning
him: And the Pharisees and the chief Priests sent officers to take him.
Follows the third thing that followed on his public appearing in the
mid-dayes of the feast, wherein is recorded the violence of the Pharisees and
Rulers, ver. 32. and Christ's Sermon upon occasion of that, ver. 33, 34. with
the Jews ca^ping at his expressions, ver 35, 36. In this ver. is related, that
the mutterings of the people, in favor of Christ, coming to the Pharisees
ears, they, with the chief Priests send some officers to apprehend him.
Albeit there was by right but one high Priest at once, yet here are mentioned
more chief Priests, belike they were the heads of these twenty four courses,
or orders of Priests, of which we read, 1 Chronicles. 24. or the high Priest and his
deputy, who acted many things under him, and did officiate for him, when he was
legally unclean. Doctrine, 1. Some may attain to a measure of respect to
Christ, who yet have not attained to a competency of courage, to avow it
publicly in times of hazard; for, the people did but murmr such things
concerning him. 2. Even in societies where many countenance the Gospel, and
where they carry themselves most cautiously, there may still some be found who
are but spies and observers in behalf of persecutors; for, here where many
believed, and did but murmr these things, the matter is brought to the
Pharisees ears, who were the most strict sect, and most rigide against Christ.
3. Christ's rising glory, and his success in the Gospel, will enrage enemies,
and draw on trouble; for, they who were taxed of slacknesse before, ver. 25,
26. when they hear of his success, and that men begin to commend him, they
could bear it no longer; though indeed they came too late to quench that fire,
seeing trouble will never separate Christ and them that truly believe. It is
true, indeed, that God will sometime give a flourishing Church, some breathings
of tranquillity, Act. 9.31, and will send persecution to rowze up his people
from security; But ordinarily, it is little apparent success of the Gospel,
and little prejudice done to Satan's kingdom, that makes him and his
instruments quiet. 4. Bloody and violent persecution is the last refuge of
hypocrites, and that which may be expected from them, when they are vexed; for,
they use no other arguments, but sent officers to take him, that they might
bring him before their Judicatory, whereof yet they retained some name and
shadow. When Satan and his instruments come to this, it is an evidence that
they are indeed vexed, and at their last gasp. 5. Christ is the great Butt of
persecutors malice; who as he let his followers get few or no blasts while he
was in the world; So he stands still on the head of them who sight under his
banner, and will reckon with persecutors, as they who would pour out all the
hatred they let out on his people, on him only, if he were within their reach;
for, here we see their disposition, who sent to take him only, not troubling
the Professors;

Verse 33. Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while I am with you, and
then I go unto him that sent me.

34. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye
cannot come.


Follows Christ's Sermon on this occasion, spoken in audience of all the
people, as appears, ver. 35. and of the officers also, as may be gathered
from, ver. 46. The sum of it is; That however they thought him a thorn in
their side, and that they would never be well till he were gone; Yet he would
continue the time appointed him, and then he would return to the Father. But
they needed not be so earnest, for they would want him but too soon, and
should not find him, though they would gladly have him. So that this doctrine
contains not only a consolation which Christ takes unto himself, that he would
be preserved from their fury till his hour was come, and then would return
unto his Father, where he would be without their reach: But a threatening also
against the persecutors. For albeit the same be also said to his disciples,
Chap. 13. 33. yet in different senses; for though the outward separation was
the same, yet his heart was diversely affected toward them; The separation of
the one was but for a time, and in part only; but the others, perpetual, and
total, as is to be cleared in its own place. Here the meaning is, that they
would want him but too soon, and he being gone, in their ensueing calamities,
they should miss their promised Messiah, but find none, since they sought
another then him. And though they would be glad of him, yet they should not be
able to find or come to him in heaven, seeing they understood not spiritual
seeking, and wanted faith, whereby to obtain access. Doctrine 1. It beseems
Christ's followers, not to be moved with dangers, but rather to be affected with
pity toward persecutors, and to warn them of their danger; for, so does Christ
here; He is not daunted with the coming of these officers, but preaches out his
own encouragements, and their hazard to them. See Acts 20.23, 24. Jer. 26.14,
15. 2. It is but folly for persecutors to think to gain their point by
violence, or to put away Christ and his truth, for they will not be rid of him
till he have done his work, but so long as he pleases, he will stay, and vex
them more who are already angry enough; Therefore, says he, notwithstanding
their great have, yet awhile am I with you. See Luke 13.31, 32, 33. 3. Men have
little cause to be weary of Christ, nor need they seek to put him away by
violence and persecution, for their contempt and malice against him, and their
not making use of him, will cause him to go away but too soon; Therefore,
says he to them, it is but yet a little while I am with you, being now near
the end of his Ministry, and so he tells them they would have him but too short
while. 4, When persecutors are doing their utmost, yet it is but a little while
that Christ and his followers will be troubled with them, for death will put an
end to the worst of it; So much also is imported in this, yet a little while I
am with you, and then I go, etc. 5. While Christ expresses his violent death
and sufferings in these terms, I go, etc. he not only imports that he
voluntarily underwent that death, otherwise none of them had power over his
life, John 10.18. But also teaches his followers not to be strangers unto
death, nor to look even upon a violent death for truth, in these colors
wherein sense would present it, but to be so familiar with death, and dwelling
on thoughts of mortality that they may willingly close with it, when they get a
call, and say, I go. 6. It may sweeten the godlies thoughts of death, even a
violent one, to consider, that h^re they are strangers, then they go home; here
they are unknown and persecuted, there they will be owned and respected by God;
for, so does our forerunner cast us the copy, I go unto him that sent me, where
I will be at home with my Father. See 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.3, 4 6. Phil. 1.23. 7.
Albeit it be sufficient matter of comfort to the godly, that God can, and when
he pleases, will preserve them in the midst of dangers; yet it adds to their
comfort, that the day comes, wherein they will be visibly above the reach of
all their enemies, and be made to triumph over them; for, so much also is held
out here in Christ's encouragement, that when he is gone, he would be above
their fury, and they should not reach him, though they would. See 1 Cor. 15.54,
55. 8. Greatest despisers of Christ may be made to miss and desire him, when
he is gone; for, says he, ye shall seek me. Not only shall many of them
desire to have him to persecute, but to no purpose (as is said before;) but in
the ensuing calamities, they would earnestly long for, and desire their
Messiah, to be a comfort unto them. 9. There are many who may earnestly seek
after Christ, who yet, in Gods judgment, shall never find him; for, ye shall
seek me, and shall not find me. See Amos 5.11, 12. For not only was their
desire too late, now when he is gone, (and seldom is such a desire sincere)
But. 1. They failed in seeking their Messiah in general, continuing to despise
him, and persecute him in his members; and so many pretend to love piety, when
it is spoken of in a general notion, and yet do persecute it, when they see
particular effects of it in any. 2. They failed in desiring a Messiah bodily
present with them, when now he is gone to heaven. And herein they reap the just
fruit of their despising him, when they had him among them, and of their carnal
dispositions, that could not ascend by faith to him, if they had acknowledged
him to be the Messiah. 3. They failed in their end in desiring the Messiah, not
that he might expiate their sin and being in everlasting righteousness, but
only that he might deliver them from trouble, and make them prosper under him
in the world. And therefore it is just, that such seekers come no speed, how
earnest however they seem to be. Doctrine 10. Such as desire not Christ's
company, where they are, in this life, are justly secluded from coming to be
where he is; for, therefore says he to these who would persecute him from
among them; where I am, thither ye cannot come. Not only shall they be denied
access in their seeking, but shall be secluded for ever from his, and his
peoples blessed society.

Ver. 35. Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and
teach the Gentiles?

36. What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall
not find me, and where I am, tither ye cannot come?


This sad and grave doctrine gets but bad entertainment among these wicked
hearers; who in stead of making use of this sad message and admonition, do carp
at his expressions, wondering what he meant by them, or if his meaning was to
leave them and go to the Jews dispersed among the Gentiles; For otherwise they
could make no sense of them. It seems they carp thus, not out of ignorance,
for they might easily have understood what he spoke so plainly, verse 33. of
going to him that sent him: But they evidence their perversity and malice, in
that they never trouble themselves to keep him, nor propound any thing to him
for information, but do only agitate the matter captiously among themselves.
Doctrine 1. Such is the perversity of malicious men, that they will not only
not regard admonitions and threatenings, but will openly scorn them and
wilfully mistake, and force obscurity upon the doctrine of faithful Teachers,
that they may deride them; for, so did they here with Christ and his doctrine.
2. Men do bewray their own corrupt dispositions, pretend what they will, when
they dare carp and cavil at doctrine, as dark and unclear, and yet never come
to Christ, or the means he has appointed, for resolution; for, albeit they
once, and again, repeat his words, and descant upon them, and carp at them, yet
they said it but among themselves, and so prove that they desired no:
satisfaction, but were glad of somewhat to quarrel. 3. It is also a black mark
upon men, (be their pretenses what they will,) when they are little careful to
keep Christ with them, or to make use of him while they have him; for, what
ever they pretend of obscurity in his doctrine, yet they avow it clearly
enough, that they understood he was to leave them, and yet are not affected
with it. 4. It is the ordinary sin of a privileged people, that they will not
be sensible of any hazard of Christ's forsaking and leaving them; for, while
they enquire whither will he go? they insinuate that if he were the true
Messiah, he could get no such people as them to go to, and if he went to the
dispersed among the Gentiles, (or Greeks, as the Gentiles are oft-times called
in the New Testament, because the Greeks, under Alexander and his successors,
had been lately of greatest note among the Nations) and teach the Gentiles, it
would rub more on him, as not being the true Messiah who left them, then upon
them. And yet not only did what they apprehended come upon them (for he left
them, and sent his disciples to the Gentiles, and these scattered Jews, to
whom Peter and James wrote their Epistles) but even what they say, was a
refutation of their presumption. For the condition of their dispersed brethren
was a witness and evidence of what they all deserved, and how much pains God
had taken to drive them from that carnal conceit of their singular privileges
and prerogatives.

Verse 37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
From this unto the end of the chapter, John records Christ's sweet Sermon
upon the last day of the feast, verse 37, 38, 39, with some effects of it among
the people, verse 40, -- 44. and the confusions that arise in the Council of
the Pharisees about him, verse 45, -- 53.

In this verse it is recorded, that this being the last and great day of the
feast, wherein the people were again solemnly conveened to public worship,
being to depart on the morrow; Christ takes hold of this opportunity, with
fervency and boldness, to make offer of his refreshing grace to all these,
who, being thirsty, do come to him. It is not needful to determine that on this
day they had a custom of drawing water out of the pool of Siloam, with an eye
to that Scripture, Isa. 12.3. But it is certain, that in this, Christ does
repeat that proclamation of the free mercate of his grace, which we have, Isa.
55.1. And albeit by thirsting, we are chiefly to understand a spiritual langour
and desire after spiritual things; Yet it does not seclude, but such as thirst,
even after other things, should come to him, who alone is able to answer their
expectation, as Isa. 55.2, Doctrine 1. While as Christ returns no answer to
their malicious carping, verse 35, 36. but makes this large offer, to all of
them, or, at least, to such as would be convinced and come; It teaches,
partly, that meek Christ will follow, even despisers, with his gracious offers,
and will digest all their effronted debordings, if at last they will embrace
him. And partly, That he is so earnest, and so busy, when there is an
opportunity to offer and do good to any, that he will not care to give his
enemies the last word of him, and will say to them as Jacob said in another
case to the man, 2 Samuel 18.14. I may not tarry thus with thee? 2. Opportunity
may seem strangely to slip away and be lost, as to getting any good done, even
when not only faithful men, but Christ himself is about the managing of the
work of the Gospel; for, now it is come to the last day, the great day of the
feast, (as both the first and last were holy convocations, Levit. 23.34, 35,
36) and the people, after eight days attendance, are ready to go away, before
they close with his offer. 3. Opportunities should be the more carefully
managed, that they are shortly like to pass over; Therefore does Christ bestir
himself on this last day. 4. When people are ready to retire themselves from
solemn exercises and Assemblies, to their ordinary employments and vocations,
they have need to have their hearts seasoned and guarded with useful
instructions; Therefore does Christ publish this needful doctrine on that day,
that it might beat them company home. 5. Albeit Christ be always rich and good
unto his people; yet it is his ordinary way, to bless eminent and solemn
times of his peoples worship, with much of him; Therefore also does he make
that great day of the feast, yet greater, by his sweet Sermon and offer of
himself upon it. 6. The truth of God, and riches of Christ ought to be
proclaimed with such courage, fervency, and zeal, as becomes such a message,
and as may invite hearers to take notice of it; Therefore Jesus flood (whereas
the use then was to sit and teach) and cried, not only that he might be seen
and heard in that great crowd, but to testify his courage when they sent to
kill him, and his fervent zeal to have this doctrine believed and embraced. 7.
Man is a barren and all-needy creature, burnt up with wants and necessities,
and not able to supply them of himself; for, so much does their thirsting
import, that they are burnt up, and must have somewhat without them, to cool
and refresh them. 8. There is no satisfaction for empty man in any course he
takes, till he come to Christ, and embrace and close with him. Neither will the
world and things therein satisfy their expectation, who lust after these
things; Nor will external performances satisfy them who have any true thirst:
for, this is the only remedy, Let him come unto me. See Matthew. 11.28. Isa.
55.2. 9. As men are bound to have spiritual thirst after Christ, that they may
be satisfied; and as Christ will satisfy and refresh such: So he does allow
and invite all these who have essayed many courses, but in vain, to come to
him, and find what they want; for, both are comprehended here, if any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink. For clearing and enlarging whereof,
Consider, 1. Christ is so condescending, that he will not refuse, even these
who have wandered far, seeking contentment, before they would come to him; but
will take up a man, after he has been refused at all other doors, and him who
has spent his strength for that which is no bread, and drunk many a puddle
dry, and yet is not satisfied. Hos. 2.6, 7. 2. It is no matter what a man has
been before, so now he be driven to Christ, having essayed the vanity of all
things beside; If any man thirst, let him come; And albeit the thirst of many
after other things has been sinful and dishonorable to Christ, yet he will
accept of them, if they come: Yea, albeit they want many things that are
required in such as come; yet he will make them welcome, if they come to get
these things. 3. Albeit spiritual thirst and indigencie, when it is discovered,
be a very humbling condition; Yet it should be looked on as Christ's forerunner,
and as an invitation, call, and warrant, put in the thirsties hand, that he may
come; for, if any man thirst, it says from Christ, let him come to me. 4.
Albeit thirst be nothing else but a discovery, and a making of us sensible of
our necessity; Yet it is Christ's way, to take no other advantage of his peoples
necessity, then to let out of his fullness to them, and let them see that it is
indeed their fullness, and (in some respect) matter of their encouragement, to
dwell in the sense of emptiness; for, he gives thirst, that he may give
drink; And therefore his keeping of his people at under ought not to be
stumbled at. 5. The propounding of this condition, if any man thirst, is not to
be understood, as if we must first beget sense of need in our selves, and then
come to Christ; Nor does it warrant any souls who would be at Christ, to
seclude themselves, because they think they are not thirsty: for, albeit it do
point out what is our duty; Yet it is his work to beget it, who sends his work
before him, that he may bring his reward with him, Isa. 40.10. and who by
offering of grace, as a mean, does oft-times beget it. But the scope is rather
to invite men to come, upon this ground, that if they come indeed, they do, by
their coming, prove they have thirst, whatever they think of themselves; and
that any who are come this length, that they would come if they had thirst,
they may come with what they have, and get more thirst by coming to him.
Therefore are all these conditional offers summed up in this, whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. 6. It is Christ's will,
that thirsty souls should not only come to him by humble dependence, but that
they should enlarge themselves and partake of their privileges and his
refreshments; that so they may be satisfied and acquiesce in him; may confirm
themselves in their choice of him, and forsaking other delights; and, may
refute their own tentations and unbelief, by tasting how good he is; for, it is
his will they come to him and drink, or partake largely of his refreshments,
See Cant. 5.1. Psalm. 81.10.

Ver. 38. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water.
Christ insists upon this promise and enlarges it. And 1. he shows that the
way of thirsty souls coming to him, is by believing. 2. He explains this
drinking, that it shall not be a petty refreshment for a season, but the
believer shall get Christ himself, and the graces of his Spirit, to dwell in
him as a full fountain, and to flow forth for refreshing of himself and others.
3. This is further confirmed from the promises in Scripture ratifying this
offer of Christ's. He points at no particular place of Scriptu^e, but
comprehends all which speak of the graces of the Spirit under the name of
waters, refreshing and watering barren ground, of which see Isa. 44.3. and 58
11. and elsewhere. Doctrine 1. The right way of a thirsty souls coming to
Christ for ref^eshment, is by believing; for, so is it explained, He that
believes on me. And albeit many other exercises and duties be required, yet
this is only named, 1. Because it must be the root from which the rest must
spring. 2. Because nothing we have can be right, or acceptable, without faith
laying hold on Christ and his righteousness. Humility without it, will prove
but discouragement, a study of holiness and conformity to the Law, but a
stumbling at his righteousness, Rom 9.31, 32. and diligence will but tend to
security. 3. Because albeit a needy soul should be stripped of all things
beside, yet that will be no warrant to cast away confidence, but they must
cherish it so much the more. Doctrine 2. As we are to rest upon no consolation,
as sure, but what is recorded and grounded in Scripture; So it may encourage
men to believe in Christ, that in him, and by him, we are sure to find the
accomplishment of all that the Scripture promises; for; he makes here a
promise that it shall be with believers, as the Scripture has said. 3. He does
not name the particular Scripture, not only because there are many of them,
(as has been said) and he would have his people study and search them all out,
that they may see the fullness of the promise; But further, by this he would
teach, that he would have his people well acquainted with Scripture, that they
may know where the promises are to be found; Therefore does he only name the
Scripture in general, here and elsewhere, only Acts 13.33. we find the Psalm
quoted. 4. It may encourage us to study much acquaintance with Scripture, that
the substance of the Gospel, and of Christ's riches, are treasured up and held
forth, even in the writings of the Old Testament; Therefore also when Christ
makes his richest offers, he needs say no more, but that he will do as the
Scripture bath said. The sum of all Religion is comprehended in the writings
of Moses, and therefore Christ does prove, even the resurrection, out of them.
Matthew. 22, 31, 32, The Prophets are Gods own Commentary upon these, and the
application of the doctrine thereof unto several conditions of men in several
times: and the New Testament is a clear unveiling of Moses face, and holds out
the accomplishment of what he foreshadowed. 5. Such as out of sense of need,
come to Christ, will not only find some particular refreshment or for awhile
only, but they will get a fountain to be in them; for, it is not a drink only
to cool them in this or that particular thirst, but a river put in them to flow
out. They get a seed of God to abide in them. 6. Christ's Spirit, and the
refreshments thereof, are so communicate unto believers as they take deep root
in them; for they are in their belly, or their heart, or very inward parts,
where meat is swallowed down to be digested into our substance. And this does
difference it not only from prophetic illumination, which came upon men from
without; and which a Balaam may have; But from the motions that came upon
rotten-hearted sinners, who for all they get, yet continue dark in themselves
like the Moon. 7. The Lords allowance to his people is very liberal and
bountiful, and abundantly sufficient to satisfy them; for, albeit the great
Ocean of refreshment abide still in himself, yet he lets out unto them no less
then a river, yea and rivers, every grace flowing out like a river, as is said
of peace. Isa. 48.18. See Psalm. 36.8. 8. The Spirit of Christ does remain and
abide perpetually in believers, to whom he is given; for these are rivers of
living water, not only because they are still fresh and make lively, but
because they are a spring, which does perpetually flow out, and run, and
therefore is called living. Genesis 26.19 in the Original. See Zech. 14.8. And
this does difference it from the wickeds puddle, which does run dry, and from
what the temporary receives. And albeit the regenerate man find many
intermissions of the refreshments of this spring, through his own pride,
unbelief, and idleness; yet the fountain remains still, 1 John 3.9. 9. Where
the Spirit and the graces thereof are received by a believer, and entertained
by faith, the sweet influences thereof will slow forth for the refreshing of
themselves and others in their stations, and that with much refreshment and
life; for, the rivers of living waters shall flow, and that out of his belly,
which is the seat of delight, Job 20.15. As a spring sends forth streams to
water the ground about it, and as the heart of man sends forth life and
refreshment to every faculty and member, and as a General in an army sends out
reserves to reinforce his parties; So graces of the the Spirit in believers
will flow forth into their behavior and carriage, to make their heart be
strong, to make their tongue to drop what is savoury, to make their feet like
hindes feet, etc. and to refresh and gain ground upon others.

Verse 39. (But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him,
should receive, For the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.)
Here we have John's commentary upon this last promise; who, belike, not
understanding this himself; (as they were ignorant of many things) till Christ
was risen from the dead, does now take pains to clear others who might be in
the like condition. He declares that by this living water is meant the Spirit
and graces thereof, which believers were afterward to receive, the giving
whereof was suspended till the glorification of Christ the head of believers.
This began in that solemn day, Act. 1. and does continue still throughout all
ages of the Church. Doctrine, 1. As the doctrine of Christ in Scripture does
often times need to be interpreted, because of our shallow capacity; So the best
Commentary upon Scripture, is it self, and the comparing of one Scripture with
another; for, John by this exposition, does not only express his simpathy with
these who might, possibly, be in the same condition that sometime he was; but
does point out the safe way of expounding Scripture, and shows that it does
explain it self. 2. Whatsoever virtue is in water, for cleansing of filth, for
cooling and refreshing the thirsty, and fructifying of barren ground; And
whatever is promised in Scriptures, under the Metaphor of waters, is all to be
found in a spiritual way, in receiving of the Spirit and graces thereof by
faith; for, so is here explained, But this he spoke of the Spirit, etc.
compare, Chap. 4. 10, 13, 14. Zech. 14.8. 3. While he says, believers should
receive the Spirit, and the Spirit was not yet given, or, was not yet, (not in
respect of his personal subsistence, but in respect of the measure of his gifts
and graces to be poured out upon believers) it does relate, partly, to the
times of the law, and teaches, That albeit believers under the law did partake
of the Spirit in some measure, yet all that is nothing in comparison of that
measure which is poured out under the Gospel; In that respect the holy Ghost
was not yet given, which may shame them who make not use of their ample
allowance, but do, under the Gospel, come far short of many who lived under the
Pedagogie of the law. Partly, it relates to the present condition of the
disciples, and his followers, who were not yet endued with power from on high,
and therefore were but weak and ignorant in many things. And it teaches, That
were men even in Christ's company, yet they will not profit much without the
Spirit. 4. It pleased our blessed and glorious Lord to abase himself, by
undergoing a state of humiliation, till he perfected the work of man's
redemption; for, so is here imported, and in this respect the Lord of glory was
not yet glorified, but continued under the vail of his state of humiliation. 5.
The pouring out of the Spirit in ample measure, as, in the wisdom of God,
reserved till the glorification of Christ as Mediator, that so the proportion
might be kept betwixt the head and the members; for, the holy Ghost was not yet
given to believers, because, that Christ was not yet glorified. And as our
blessed Lord did once abase himself so far, as believers must be kept back
from their allowance, till he, who was a worm and not a man, be glorified; So
we may expect that he will not rest, till we come up to share with him, now
that he is exalted: And we should be content to stoop and share with him in the
sad sufferings of his cause and interests, expecting that when he exalts
himself in it, he will respect the desolate, Psalm. 102.16, 17. And we having
now to do with an exalted Lord, should expect much from him, Psalm. 68.18. Act.
2.23. and 5.31. 6. While as under this promise is comprehended, all that
pouring out of the Spirit which followed upon the glorification of Christ, and
these gifts in the primitive times, among the rest, as a peculiar instance, The
meaning is not to put the saving graces of the Spirit, conferred upon
believers, in the same rank with these extraordinary gifts that were conferred
upon some temporary believers then; Nor yet is it the meaning, that believers
now should expect the same fruits of the Spirit for kind, that were conferred
on some believers then; But it tends to show: That the saving graces of the
Spirit are as excellent (and more) then many gifts that had a greater luster,
and the promise is richly fulfilled when men get these, albeit they want the
other; That albeit all believers do not work the like visible wonders with the
Apostles, yet by the receiving of the Spirit, as great wonders are wrought upon
themselves in a spiritual way; for, thereby the dead are quickened, the deaf
made to hear, the blind to see, the lame to leap, the withered made fresh,
and they get new tongues to speak the language of Canaan, which they understood
not before; And, That their way of carriage and deportment, who received the
holy Ghost in these primitive times, should be a pattern to all these who would
prove that they do now partake of the Spirit.

Ver. 40. Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a
truth this is the Prophet.

41. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of
Galilee?

42. Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the seed of David, and
out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?

43. So there was a division among the people because of him.

44 And some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him.


In these verses, we have the effects of this Sermon among the hearers, some
are so affected with it, that they acknowledge him to be that great Prophet
promised to Israel, Deuteronomy. 18.18. whom they understood to be another then the
Messiah; Others do confess him to be the Christ; but others oppose against
that, that he (as they supposed came out of Galilee, whereas according to the
Scriptures, the Messiah was to come out of Bethlehem; And upon this diversity
of opinions, there arises a schism and division among them: But there are
some so violent, that they will dispute none but with their hands, and yet are
impeded. Doctrine, 1. Christ's doctrine will not want effects among hearers, but
will either gain ground upon them, or put them to disquiet, debate, and
vexation. As here we see. 2. Schism and division is an ordinary consequent
that follows upon the preaching of the Gospel; Not through the Gospels fault,
but by reason of the diverse tempers of men, unto whom it is preached; for,
there was a division among the people because of him. 3. Diversity of opinions
in matters of Religion, is a mean and occasion of divisions and rentings among
a people; for, it was upon their different apprehensions concerning him, that
this division arose among the people. 4. Men's ignorance, or not right
understanding or taking up of the truth, and one of another, may breed
division, whereas otherwise there would be an agreement; for, they who said, of
a truth this is the Prophet, and they who said, this is the Christ, did in
effect agree; for he is a Prophet, and that is one of his offices as Messiah,
to be that great Prophet of whom Moses spoke, Deuteronomy. 18. And yet their own
mistakes, in conceiving that these two were different, bred a division betwixt
them. 5. Men may be much affected with Christ and his excellency, who yet come
far short of the truth of what is in him, and who do not come to him as a
Savior; for, when they are affected with him as a Prophet, yet they come far
short, and do not see him to be the Christ. 6. As for these who acknowledged
him to be the Christ, we may either conceive that they did but see him to be
so, but yet made no use of him; As indeed, the conviction of many does produce
but small, or no effects: Or, that they were indeed sincere, and yet no more
mention is made of them; For the Lord sees it sitting, oft-times, to bury the
memory of many of his dear children in silence, who yet are no less honest
then these who are more famous. Thus albeit the Lord did choose Matthias, Act.
1.23, 26. and that rather then Joseph, whom it seems the Apostles preferred to
him, and therefore mention him first; Yet it pleased him never to registrate a
word more of him. And by this he would teach, That to be famous, and in an
account in the world, or noted among professors, is not the great business in
Religion, nor that which the truly sincere will make much account of. 7.
Mistakes and ignorance are a great impediment, to the success of the Gospel;
This appears not only in them who mistook the prediction concerning the
Prophet, as if he were to be another then the Messiah; But in these also
(either the same or other persons) who being indeed acquainted with the
Scriptures which make mention of Christ's lineage, and the place of his birth,
are yet ignorant of the truth about Christ's nativity, supposing that he was of
Galilee, because he was educate and resided most there: Shall Christ come out
of Galilee? Has not the Scripture said that Christ comes of the seed of
David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was, which indeed was true
in it self, and true of Christ, Matthew. 2.1. though they were ignorant and
mistook him. 8. Men are oft-times exceeding guilty in the matter of their own
ignorance, because they do so affect it, and do not search for knowledge, but
rather delight to have somewhat to cavil at; for, such was their way here; as
they knew from Scripture where Christ should be borne, so they might easily
have been cleared of their doubt, if they had enquired at himself, his mother,
or disciples, but they desire to cavil and show their wit against him, 9. There
are some men so brutish in their violence against Christ, that his fairest
offers, and his respect among others, do but set them on edge against him; for,
after this sweet preaching, and after that some were affected, some of them
would have taken him. 10. The Lord, in his wise providence, does so order, that
many who are very eager to wrong Christ and his followers, shall yet want power
to do it; for, but no man laid hands on him, which followed not from any
natural conscience or reverence in them toward him, but from the overruling and
restraining power of God.

Verse 45. Then came the officers to the chief Priests and Pharisees, and they
said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?

46. The officers answered, Never man spoke like this man.


Follows the confusions that arose in the Council of the Rulers about Christ,
occasioned, partly, by the return of the officers without him, to ver. 50. and
partly, by some divisions among themselves, verse 50, 51, 52, 53. Albeit this
was a solemn day, yet it seems they stay not at the public service, but are
conveened in Council against him, being earnest to have him taken before the
feast were ended, that so they might prevent his withdrawing of himself among
the multitude. And albeit they had sent out the officers before, ver. 32. (and
belike they did so from day to day) that they might watch all occasions for
apprehending of him; Yet it seems they had received strict enjunctions to
bring him this day, lest the occasion should be lost. And in these verses, we
have their return without their errand, and when they are posed why they did
so, they give a better account of the preaching then of their commission,
declaring that he preached so singularly, that they could not meddle with him.
Whence learn. 1. Albeit it be both lawful and necessary, that seducers be
restrained by civil power; Yet it is a mark of a decayed and persecuting
Church, when Ecclesiastic Rulers lay aside all use of their spiritual weapons,
and do only arm themselves with force and power; for, so was it here, their
instruments to do their affairs for them, were officers, and therefore no
wonder they employ them against Christ, to bring him before them by force. 2.
The Lords providence is alsufficient, when he pleases, to disappoint his
fiercest enemies, and to make them mass their errands and purposes; for, the
Messengers return without success. 3. As it is a great evidence of men's pride,
when they think nothing should stand in their way, and they do rage, when they
are disappointed. So the Lord sees it meet to vex persecutors, and to make
their own confident creatures grieve them; for, by reason of their
disappointment, they are in a rage, and do power it out upon their own
servants, who did not serve their ends well enough, Why have ye not brought
him? 4. It is righteous with God, that they whose great work is to oppose
Christ's doctrine, and who shut all doors, that themselves be not troubled with
it, should be forced to hear their own creatures preach his praise, little to
their contentment; for, the^e Rulers would not hear Christ, and their case was
to hinder any from hearing him, and now they are made to hear their own
officers preach of him in their own defense. 5. As Christ's doctrine is
singular, far above the law; So also was he singular in his way of it, for
authority, humility, grace, power, and evidence; for, so do the officers
confess of him, Never man spoke like this man, they never heard a Scribe
preach in that manner, See Psalm. 45.2. Luke 4.22. Matthew. 7.28, 29. 6. Such is
the power of Christ's doctrine, that even such as come unto it with a prejudice,
and with a purpose to persecute the Messengers thereof, may be taken by it
themselves, and if not converted, yet bridled and restrained; for, this is the
reason why they brought him not, Never man spoke like this man, and therefore
they were bound up and had no power to meddle with him. And albeit there be no
great evidence of their conversion, (for many may like preaching, and it have
strange effects on them, who yet are for from God; and belike, if they had been
indeed converted, they would hardly have return with any account;) Yet Christ
can, and has converted, even such: And it does speak his praise, that by the
means of spiritual preaching, he can restrain men's fury, when yet they are not
really converted, nor their heart changed.

Verse 47. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?

48. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?

49. But this people who knows not the Law, are cursed.


The Pharisees, who were ill pleased with their returning without their earand,
are more nettled with their reason, and do upbraid them that they should suffer
themselves to be deceived, who were their own attenders, when yet none of the
Grandees or learned Rabbi's had closed with Christ, only an accursed crew (as
they esteem them) of ignorant people doated on him. Whence learn, 1. It is an
old, but injust, imputation, to account such as embrace Christ and his truth,
deluded; for, so do they reckon here, are ye deceived? 2. Christ when he
pleases, can add to the vexation of persecutors, by bringing the knowledge of
the truth which they persecute in others, in among their own confident
creatures, and making them respect it whom they would least suspect of any;
for, they are now put to it, to apprehend that Christ is coming in among their
own followers, and that they are also deceived. 3. When corrupt men are never
so much convinced, yet all that will but contribute to increase their rage, and
their opposition to truth; for, albeit it might have pleaded much for Christ
among them, that their very creatures are affected with his doctrine; Yet all
that follows thereupon, is their greater eagerness to bear him down. 4. Such
as express any respect to Christ and his truth in evil times, may expect much
allurement and insinuation from Satan, to draw them back, and that enraged
persecutors will cover their fury with enchantments, to see if they can
prevail; for, these words, are ye also deceived, although spoken in anger, yet
do not tend expressly to cry them down who had said somewhat on Christ's behalf^,
but to insinuate with them, that they should quit that course, alleging not
only that they were deceived, but that, however the multitude went wrong, yet
they expected better things of them who were their ordinary followers. 5. Such
as will not stoop to Christ nor respect the honor of being his servants, are
justly left to stoop to their own servants, to entreat for their countenance in
their wrong course; Therefore these eminent Rulers must thus insinuate and
flatter their base officers, that they may not want a back in their course. 6.
It is nothing strange to see eminent men, for authority and parts, so puffed
up with their own grandour, and with a conceit of their own learning and
knowledge, that they will not stoop to Christ, nor embrace him; for, they
confess that not any of the Rulers (or Governors of the Jews) or of the
Pharisees (their eminent sect, though not all of them Rulers) have believed on
him. 7. It is an old engine of Satan, to keep men from Christ, by reason of the
opposition made unto him by eminent and able Churchmen; for, this is the reason
whereby they think to dissuade them, Have any of the Rulers, or of the
Pharisees believed on him? But this will prove a weak argument to them who have
learned to call no man Rabbi. 8. To live ignorant of God, especially in a
visible Church, is in effect a cursed condition; for, this general is of truth,
the people who knows not the Law, are cursed, though it be ill applied here.
9. It is an ordinary device of Satan, to deter men from embracing the truth,
by branding them with odious and injust imputations who do follow it; for, this
they urge as another strong argument, But this people who know not the Law, are
cursed, speaking contemptibly of them as a base, ignorant and cursed crew.
Whereas not only is it high presumption in Church Rulers, thus to undervalue
Gods heritage in respect of themselves; but if all this had been true, yet it
was unjust for them to lay all the blame upon the people, when themselves were
they who kept the people in ignorance. But it was most injust, thus to traduce
the followers of Christ, who by seeking to the fountain of blessedness, and
embracing the promised Messiah, did prove their knowledge and blessedness;
whereas they themselves were in effect blind (many of them, by malicious
shutting of their eyes) and cursed.

Ver. 50. Nicodemus says unto them, (He that came to Jesus by night, being one
of them.)

51. Does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does?


While they are thinking to reclaim their Officers, a new confusion arises
among them, and they are refuted in their proud brag concerning the unanimitie
of their Rulers, by Gods stirring up of Nicodemus, who though he do not yet
openly avow Christ, yet he pleads that he might have fair justice, and that
they who tax the people of ignorance of the Law, would not manifest their own
ignorance, in condemning him unheard, and before they examined narrowly what he
had done. Whence learn, 1. Christ, when he pleases, can give persecutors more
work then they can overtake, and raise up so many witnesses for himself, that
they will hardly know how to refute them all; for, before they have done with
the officers, Nicodemus gives a new testimony. 2. God can turn persecutors
loose, even where they think they are surest, and raise difference of
judgment, even where they bless themselves in their unity; for, they use it
as a strong argument to their followers, ver. 48. that the Rulers are all
against Christ, and now they are refuted by Nicodemus a Ruler. 3. Such as are
but infirm and weak, may yet get courage in a time of need, to speak for
Christ; And albeit true faith may lie long lurking, when it is beset with the
centation of a great place; Yet Christ can draw it out when he needs it; for,
Nicodemus, who came to Jesus by night, (Chap. 3. 1, 2.) dare now say somewhat
in Council for him; and albeit yet he do not openly avow him, but only pleads
for that which is due to the greatest malefactor; yet it is taken by them as a
testimony to Christ, and afterward we will find him appear better. Christ will
not want witnesses, so long as there is a timorous Nicodemus, a politic
Gamaliel, yea, or an Ethnic Pilate, to employ. 4. Albeit the hazard of ill
company be but too discernably, in many who converse with them; and albeit
where the Lord gives a calling, the overcoming of that one difficulty of
departing from respect and accommodations, would prevent many tentations that
follow on staying; Yet it is not the will of God, that men abandon a lawful
station, because of the corruptnesse of these who are employed with them in it;
Nor yet that they should quit their station in a Church judica^^ry, so long as
that Church has not received a bill of divorce, and the judicatory is in it
self Gods ordinance, and the members, such officers as are warranted by the
word to be there, and not of men's devising, however they be corrupt; Therefore,
it is marked of Nicodemus, without any blemish, that he was one of them, and
now in Council with them. For this Council was Gods ancient Ordinance, and the
Church of the Jews was yet a true Church, and the Rulers, how corrupt soever,
were men in lawful Ecclesiastical office. And elsewhere, it is not believing
Rulers fault, that they were Rulers, but that they wronged Christ by their
silence in their station. See Joh. 12.42. 5. It is the lot of Christ and his
followers, to meet with much partiality and foul play in the world, so that
they will not be allowed the fair justice that is not denied even to
malefactors; for, so does Nicodemus his Apology import, that they would judge
him before they hear him, and know what he does, which is not only contrary to
the Word, but to all equity in any procedure, which requires that Judges
should hear parties, and be clearly satisfied in matter of fact, before they
proceed to sentence. See Exodus 23.1. Lev. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 17.4. 6. Men may very
readily fall in that fault which they will soon discern in others; And they
who tax others of ignorance, may give proof of much ignorance themselves;
especially when they are blinded with passion; for, whereas they condemned the
people as ignorant, ver. 49. Nicodemus finds their practice less aggreeable
to the law, does our law (given to us the Jews, and of the knowledge whereof
we the Rulers do glory) judge a man before it hear him, etc?

Verse 52. They answered, and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search
and look: for out of Galilee arises no Prophet.

53. And every man went unto his own house.


Follows their reply to Nicodemus, with the conclusion of their whole
consultation. Albeit Nicodemus spoke but very little, and that which might have
been said for any delinquent, yet he meets with as hard a rub as if he had
said more. They do upbraid him with Galilee, and do assert that they are so
sure that Christ, who came (as they supposed) out of Galilee, is not so much as
a Prophet, that if he were also of Galilee, they would respect him the less.
And therefore they bid search and look, not so much if Nicodemus were a
Galilean, as if he could produce any record, testifying that ever a Prophet had
risen out of Galilee. Yet it is remarkable, that however they were thus more
and more enraged, yet they scatter without any conclusion against Christ.
Whence learn. 1. Persecutors are so furious, that if a man speak but mildly and
equitably in Christ's cause, and do not oppose him as furiously as themselves,
they will be sure to account him an enemy; for, so do they deal with Nicodemus,
who spoke nothing but what justice requires, even though the party pleaded for
deserved to be condemned. 2. It is a token of fury in men, and of their rage
against Christ, that when any plead for him, they are not answered in reason,
but their persons are reflected on; for, so do they answer Nicodemus his
rational exception, Art thou also of Galilee? 3. It is also the way of
persecutors, to bear down truth, by making false and untrue grounds pass for
current; for, such are their reasonings here, Search and look, for out of
Galilee arises no Prophet. Where they lay down two false principles; one was,
that Christ came out of Galilee, whereas indeed he was born in Bethlehem; and
the other was, that suppose it had been true that no Prophet had hitherto
arisen out of Galilee; yet it would not follow that none should ever arise out
of it. 4. It is very great injustice, to rub reproaches upon whole provinces of
people within the visible Church, and particularly, to account of them as
secluded from the participation of the gifts of Gods grace, which are freely
bestowed according to his pleasure; for, herein they sail, not only that they
reproach the whole province of Galilee, (a practice like to which did once
breed great trouble, Judge. 12.4.) but that they would seclude all of them from
being ever capable of that gift of prophecy. 5. There is no council nor
understanding against Christ, but when he pleases, he can dissipate all of it;
for, here, every man went to his own house, without doing any thing. And albeit
he take not always this mean of making their councils dissolve without
conclusion; yet we may be certain that if they get permission to conclude, yet
they shall never get their conclusions, put in execution; or if they do execute
them, yet they shall be far from the end which they propose to themselves to
attain thereby, which is, the subversion of Christ, his Kingdom, and truth. 6.
When God has the conspiracies of men against Christ to dissipate, he needs not
many probable means to effectuate it, but can cause the speaking of one word
serve the turn, to break the snare; for, upon Nicodemus word, this follows,
every man went to his own house.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this Chapter John continues the Narration of Christ's proceedings and
doctrine at Jerusalem, after the feast of Tabernacles. And in it we have, 1.
The history concerning the woman taken in adultery; and Christ's proceeding with
those that brought her to him, and with her self; to ver. 12. 2 Christ's
preaching and offer to the Jews, ver. 12. with his justifying of his own
testimony against them who contradicted it, ver. 13. -- 20. His threatening of
them with his departure, and that they shall be forced to see his glory, ver.
21. -- 29. His preaching to them who believed on him, ver. 30, 31, 32. His
refuting of the Jews, who boasted of their freedom and parentage, ver. 33. --
47. and railed at his person, opposing what he said of himself, ver. 48. --
58. And, his escaping of their fury, ver. 59.

Ver. 1. JEsus went unto the mount of Olives:

2. And early in the morning he came again into the Temple, and all the people
came unto him, and he sat down and taught them.


Unto this history of the adulterous woman, somewhat is premitted (in these
verses) by way of introduction, which also points out the connection of this
purpose with the former. And, 1. Whereas his persecutors, had houses of their
own to go to, Chap. 7. 53. he, after his preaching and debates retires to the
Mount of Olives without the City, that night, ver. 1. We find elsewhere that
he went out and lodged by night in Bethany, (which was upon the side of that
Mount,) belike with Lazarus and his Sisters, that so he might prevent any
design they might have against him, to be acted in night uproares. See, Matthew.
21.17. But his early return, ver. 2. makes it probable that he rather went out
to the Mount it self, that he might pray in secret; and so it seems to be
understood, Luke 21.37. with Chap. 22. 39, 40. And this seems to have been his
constant custom after this time, to leave the City by night. 2. Having spent
the night there, he returns to the Temple, and finding the people stock about
him, he teaches them, Who these hearers were, whether the people that were now
ready to depart on this day after the feast, (for whose cause Christ returns so
early) or, the multitude of the in habitants of Jerusalem, is not much
material. Only it seems that they were of the common sort, and few or none of
the Rulers. And as for his gesture in teaching, that he sat down, it was their
custom in these times, and a testimony of the respect that is due to them that
carry the mind of God; and we find Christ sometime preach sitting, Luke 4.20,
21. sometime standing, Joh. 7.37 and at this time his weariness with night
watching might call for it. Nor is it much to be stood upon, which of these
gestures men use in preaching; But Preachers ought in these things accommodate
themselves to seek the benefit of hearers, and that they be heard and seen by
them. Doctrine, 1. It is no strange thing to see Christ and his followers, for
all their faithful services in an ingrate world, yet wanting any comfortable
accommodations in it: for, after Christ has spent the day time in teaching, he
wants a safe and convenient place to retire unto, within the City, and must go
out to the Mount of Olive. See Luke 9.58. 2. It is the duty of Christ's Servants
and people, not to rest satisfied with any public and open performances in
Gods service; But they should also join therewith a conscientious observance
of the duty of secret prayer: which is not only needful in Ministers, that they
may draw down blessings upon their endeavors, but in all the godly also; that
it may be a witness of their sincerity, and a mean of keeping up communion
with Christ, and of preventing much anxietie: Therefore Christ, after his
preaching all day, goes to prayer in the Mount of Olives. 3. As the sins of
the Elect deprived Christ of many a nights sleep, that so he might sanctify
rest and sleep to his beloved, (whereof this passage is one instance) So they
who are servent in following after communion with God, will rather take their
sleeping time, then they should want an opportunity of secret prayer; As here
Christ's practice does teach. 4. As the general calling of Christianity is a
very throng task, wherein a man needs never want an opportunity of doing
service to God, Yet without prejudice to his outward calling and occupation; So
in particular, a Ministers task is very great, and preaching and prayer, and
the duties of his calling following thereupon, may take up his whole time, if
he be faithful: As here Christ's practice does teach, who having spent the night
in prayer, early in the morning came again into the Temple and taught. See
Act. 6.4. 5. As Christ can get hearers to himself, when he pleases, and
purposes to do good, even in despite of all his enemies; So affection to
Christ, and his doctrine, will stand upon no impediment that would stop the
way: Therefore, albeit it was yet early, and the Rulers were raging against
Christ; yet all the people came unto him. 6. Where affection is kindled, and
draws men to frequent Christ's company, they will be sure of a meeting, and to
be taught by him: Therefore, albeit he might justly have a great quarrel
against that City; Yet since affection drew the people, he could not refuse
them, but sat down, and taught them.

Verse 3. And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery, and when they had set her in the mids.

4. They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very
act.

5. Now Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what
say thou?

6. This they said tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. --


Follows the history it self: wherein, first, (in these verses) we have the
case propounded to Christ by the Scribes and Pharisees, who while he is
preaching, do present a woman taken in the act of adultery unto him, and
pointing out what was determined in Moses law, they do in an insinuating way
ask his judgment, only that they might take some advantage of him by his
answer. For, if he should, according to his wonted offers of clemency assoile
her, they would condemn him as contrary to Moses; and if he condemned her to
die, then they thought to make him odious to the people, as contradicting his
own practice, in eating with Publicans and sinners, and his Doctrine, in
offering mercy and grace so freely. We need not be inquisitive why they present
only the woman, though it be probable, that however they were taken in the very
act, yet the man had escaped from among their hands. Doctrine. 1. Christ's
servants ought not to think it strange, when they get not through spiritual
duties with ease, but do meet with many temptations and interruptions in them;
for, Christ himself was interrupted by these wicked men; They brought in a
woman taken in adultery, etc. 2. It gives just ground of suspicion, when men,
who were violent enemies, do on a sudden become flattering and insinuating
friends; for, it was for little good that they who, even now, were seeking to
kill him, do in a flattering way call him Master, and do set this woman in the
mids, or, in open judgment, before him, and do seek resolution concerning her
from him. 3. Such is the perversity of fallen man, that whatever God do
testify of his displeasure, by word or judgments, against grossest sins;
Yet they are continued in and followed, yea, and committed in times when God
calls them to solemne-exercises of his worship: for, albeit adultery be
expressly prohibited, as a gross iniquity, and albeit that and the like
uncleanness had oftentimes drawn down very remarkable judgments, as on Sodom
and the tribe of Benjamin; Yet there is a woman taken in adultery, and that in
the time of their solemn feast. 4. Albeit men think to carry their sins very
closly; and albeit uncleanness in particular, be a work of darkness; Yet the
Lord, when he pleases can easily bring it out to light; for, she is taken in
the very act. And albeit many may escape this, yet the Lord can make their
sin find them out, and make their own consciences bring it out many years
after it is committed. 5. Albeit the Lord may justly bring out hidden sin,
that the sinner may be made a spectacle of his vengeance; Yet oft-times it
proves a great mercy to the sinner, when he gets not liberty to lurk in a
sinful course, but is brought out to light with it: As here it proved in the
issue, this woman being discovered, is brought to Christ even by his very
enemies, and (in appearance) gets good of him, which she had missed, if she had
not been found out. 6. The Lord does so far detest the sin of adultery,
violating the Covenant of marriage, and especially in women, who do corrupt a
family, by bringing in an illegitimate issue into it; That it is his will, that
such, a transgression be punished with death: for, so do they repeat his Law
given by Moses, that such should be stoned; and being a punishment of a moral
transgression, it should stand in force so long as the transgression is still
the same: The law concerning the putting of adulterers to death, is clear from
Levit. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22. But for the particular way of it, by stoning, it
seems to be gathered from that particular Law, concerning the betrothed Virgin,
and him that lay with her, Deuteronomy. 22.23, 24. 7. It is the disposition of wicked
men, to make it their study to lay snares, whereby they think to entrap Gods
people, and to seek advantages against them; partly, by fair language, and
partly, by cunning tentations, that so they may make them and their way odious:
for, so do they deal with Christ, they flatter him, and ask but what say
thou? but they did it tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. And
albeit they gained nothing at Christ's hand in this; Yet his followers have need
to be cautious, and to beware of subtle insinuaters: Not that it is best to
countermine subtilty with subtilty, but they should look on honesty as great
safety, and divine policy, in such cases. 8. Christ does easily discern the
drift of his enemies, and does know which are tempting curious questions, and
which are propounded out of necessity: Therefore does John, being taught of
him, record what was their drift, This they said tempting him, that they might
have to accuse him. And indeed, when any come to Christ with cases, he first
looks into the questioners heart, that he may know how it is affected with what
he propounds, before he answer it.

Ver. 6. -- But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as
though he heard them not.

7. So when they continued asking him, he lift up himself and said unto them,
He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.

8. And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.

9. And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out
one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left
alone, and the woman standing in the midst.


In the second place, we have Christ's dealing with them who brought the woman,
and propounded the case. And, 1. He writes upon the ground as if he heard them
not, in testimony of his sleighting them, ver. 6. 2. When his silence seemed to
them to flow from some advantage they had of him in this matter, and therefore
they importune him the more: He leaves the question, and turns to the
questioners, bidding them search their own bosoms, and since they needed not
witnesses, who were to cast the first stone, Deuteronomy. 17.7. He bids those among
them, who were without sin, supply that office; and again writes upon the
ground, in testimony of his dislike of them, ver. 7, 8. Upon this, 3. Follows
the effect of Christ's answer, which is the conviction of these wicked men, who
being conscious to themselves what they were, and not willing to confess it,
nor to debate with him who could bring them out to light before the people,
they take advantage of his stooping down, to slip quietly away, leaving the
woman and Christ alone (not simply alone, for the multitude stayed and the
woman in the midst, but all the accusers left them) And this they did,
beginning at the eldest, who were most guilty, and most prudent to discern
what was in this answer, ver. 9. For clearing this answer a little, Consider,
1. As for that phrase, he that is without sin, which imports a complete
purity, we need not here curiously distinguish it, from that blamelesnesse and
being irreprehensible, which is elsewhere urged, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.6. seeing
the Law of God requires both, and it was their great presumption to insult so
over the woman, and over Christ as an enemy to the Law, when yet they were not
only not sinlesse, but not free of the like gross crimes, if not the same,
wherein the woman was taken. 2. Christ's requiring they should be without sin
who execute this sentence, does not condemn Magistrates, who execute justice,
though themselves be sinners; Yea, though they be vicious themselves. For he
does not speak, as a Magistrate, prescribing that none should be punished but
by innocent and blameless men; nor does he condemn the doing of justice and
punishing of sin in it self: But as a teacher, he shows what God will
find culpable in Magistrates; to wit, if they make little conscience of their
own sins, when yet they punish sin in others 3. Albeit Christ's discourse
does not answer directly to their question, yet it fully breaks their snare
laid for him, and brings a snare upon themselves. For it does not strike
against Moses Law, seeing he acknowledges the equi^y of the sentence of
stoning, though he was not a Judge to pronounce it, and as a Minister would
have them look to their own consciences. Nor does this rough dealing contradict
his doctrine of free grace, seeing he is speaking to unhumbled Pharisees, that
he may fit them for his mercy, and he deals sweetly with the woman afterward.
But as for them, his discourse does indeed pinch them, while as they who
boasted so much of respect to the Law, are found to regard it so little in
their own practice, that their consciences sends them away confounded.
Doctrine, 1. As Christ knows who propound questions, only to tempt him, and
who desire to be taught; So he who warmely entertains the one, does justly
slight the other, as unworthy of an answer: for, But Jesus stooped down, and
with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not. It is but
curiosity to enquire what he wrote; but his end in it, was, not only to show,
that it is fitter Ministers do any thing, then employ themselves in civil
affairs; but chiefly to show, that their question was idle, and deserved no
answer. 2. Christ's enemies may get leave to think that they have some notable
advantage of him and his followers, only that their own disappointment may be
the more shameful and sad: for, before they are convinced, they think Christ is
silent because he knew not what to say, and therefore they continued asking
him, as insulting over him in their own minds, if not also in their
expressions. 3. Albeit Christ be tender and gracious toward humbled sinners;
Yet he will strictly press the Law upon all such as conceit of their
righteousness, and will not come to him; Therefore does he deal so roughly
with those men, and points out what the Law required of them. 4. The perfect
and spiritual Law of God does require of men, not only that they be without
public and visible blemish: but that they be without sin or spot: for so
much does Christ require of these unhumbled men, that they be without sin, 5.
It is the will of God, that these who punish sin in others, should be
sensible of their own failings and that the sense of their own sins make them
tender toward others: And it is a token of unsanctified Spirits, when men who
censure or punish others, do not look upon their own ways, nor do abstain from
all lewd practices themselves, nor look upon the worst of sinners as their own
picture, if they were left to themselves: for, this is the scope of Christ's
answer, as is before explained. 6. In our necessary meddling with wicked men, it
is our duty to take heed we do nothing that may seem to approve them in their
wicked ways: Therefore, again he stooped down and wrote on the ground, to
testify that as at first he liked not their discourse; So yet he approved it
not (however he had answered it) nor would keep up conference with them. 7. As
without Christ's power, the most spiritual doctrine will do no good to the best
of men; so when he pleases, he can put an edge upon a very short sentence, to
make it waken the most benumbed conscience, and cause it imprint inward
challenges upon the heart, and outward shame upon the foreheads of men: for, so
does it here appear, they are convicted by their own conscience, and glad of an
opportunity to steal away. 8. A wakened conscience will get other things to
think upon, then to be taken up with idle cavils about Religion, or descanting
upon the faults of others only, for, they quit both their tempting of Christ,
and accusing of the woman, and steal away. 9. A wakened conscience will tell a
man, that the longer he lives, his guilt is still increasing, and he has
daily the more cause to be ashamed of himself for it, for, so much is imported
that they went out, beginning at the eldest, even to the last. 10. Every
conviction of conscience is not saving, nor is every one in a state of grace,
whose conscience finds the edge of the word, to make him ashamed of sin; for,
these men are convicted; and went out, as being ashamed, who yet are but in the
gall of bitterness. 11. It is a sure evidence of an unsound wakening of
conscience, when men's convictions make them flee from Christ, and shun either
his further convictions or comforts; Whereas it is good not to go away from
him, when sin is discovered, and the truly humbled sinner is kept with him till
he find favor: for, so appears in them, being convicted, they went out from
Christ, and that one by one, without noise, when he was now stooping down, that
so he might not have occasion to say any more to them: whereas the poor woman,
though let go, stands still in the midst, in the place where she was sifted as
a guilty person, till she hear what Christ will say to her. 12. All the plots
of wicked men against Christ, will at last tend to their own visible and open
shame: for, this was the issue of their enterprise. They came in with a
resolution to have entrapped Christ, and they are sent out with much shame and
confusion on their own faces.

Verse 10. When Jesus had lift up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said
unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? has no man condemned thee?

11. She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn
thee: go, and sin no more.


In the third place, We have Christ's dealing with the woman herself; who being
left by her accusers, and not condemned by them, he does also dismiss her with
a gentle warning, to watch over her ways in time to come. In doing whereof, he
does not make void the Law of Moses, nor say that none ought to condemn her to
death, but he declines to act the part of a civil Magistrate in passing
sentence upon her, and does act the part of a Minister of the Gospel, in
absolving an humbled sinner. Doctrine 1. As they who run away from Christ, when
they are convinced, do but go on in their sin, and carry their shame with
them; So they who attend upon Christ, and betake themselves to the posture of
condemned sinners, will at last get a gracious answer; as this woman's
experience does teach, who (when her accusers went out) did stay still, to her
own great advantage. 2. It is necessary, that such as are waiting on Christ for
grace, be serious observers of his dealing, that from thence they may learn to
know what a one he is: for, his questions, when he lift up himself, Where are
those thine accusers? has no man condemned thee? did not slow from any
ignorance in him, but serve to excite her to consider the power of his word,
and what effects it had produced, and to show that his doings are not easily
marked, even when they are acted before our eyes. 3. Such as are truly humbled
with the sense of their sins, will get little pleasure to meddle, save with
these things which nearly concern themselves: for, albeit Christ propounded two
questions, yet she answers only to what concerns herself, and that no man had
condemned her, not meddling with what concerned them. 4. Such as Christ has a
mind to do good unto, are not to expect that so much will be intimate unto
them at first, but they must be content to be exercised with attendance, and
speaking to Christ, till the complete deliverance come; for, so much appears in
his dealing with this woman, He speaks so in her cause to the Pharisees, as
encourages her to stay still, till she see what further he will say: Then, he
leads her up to speak to him, and gives her a ground of an argument, that since
no man had condemned her, therefore he, the Savior of sinners, would deal
gently with her: and at last, he brings out his sweet sentence, 5. The charge
and office of the Ministry is inconsistent, in Gods appointment, with the
exercise of the office of Magistracy, in one and the same person; and it is so
weighty a calling, that it is enough to take up the whole man: Therefore, does
Christ, the great Messenger of the Covenant and Preacher of the Gospel, refuse
to take on that calling, Neither do I condemn thee. So also Luke 12.13, 14. 6.
It is the allowance of Christ, that humble and cast down sinners be gently
dealt with by his Ministers; and his rich grace will absolve such as do
condemn themselves before him: for, by this sentence, he not only declines to
exercise the office of Magistracy, but does absolve her, whom he knew to be
humbled, in the Court of conscience. 7. It ought to be no impediment to humble
sinners to expect absolution from Christ, that their sins are such as by the
Law of God and man deserves bodily death, or that they are to die a violent
death for them: for, though this sin deserved stoning by the Law of God; yet
that does not hinder Christ to give her a pardon. 8. Grace is so absolute and
free, that it can make a very sudden change in sinners; it can take them, as it
were, in the very height of their impiety, and convert and make pardoned Saints
of them; for, so it appears in this woman, who being taken in the very act of
adultery, goes not away from Christ till she be absolved. 9. Such as have
tasted of Christ's grace in pardoning their sin, will retain so much sense of
their own corrupt inclinations, and of their obligation to Christ for his
mercy, that it will put them to a wary and circumspect walking for time to
come: for, so much is imported in the direction subjoyned to her absolution,
Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more. See chap. 5.14. 10. Albeit
humble and pardoned sinners should have an eye especially, upon the sins they
have been formerly addicted unto, and upon gross and scandalous evils, that
they break not out into them; Yet they should also be sensible of their
pronenesse to all sin, as having the seed of all sin within them, and should
have an universal hatred against all sin, and be watchful over themselves, that
they fall not into any sin: Therefore is the direction general, Sin no more,
that she should not only be jealous of her own inclination to her former
debordings, or oppose and strive against some sins, while she delighted in
other sins, but that she should watch against all kind of sin.

Verse 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life.
In the rest of the Chapter, we have Christ's preaching, conference and debates
with several sorts of hearers, which we will consider in order as they lie. As
for the time wherein this was done, we need not determine that it was on
another day then that wherein he absolved the adulteress, which some gather
from this that the Pharisees were then gone out, verse 9. and are now come in
again, verse 13. for it may be conceived, that these who now debate with him,
were some others then they who had brought in the woman, who remained among the
multitude, to watch for all advantages; or, it needs not be thought strange,
that even they should have so much impudence, as shortly to return back, to
oppose his Ministry so much as they could.

In the first place, in this verse we have Christ returning to his office of
preaching, after that interruption made by the Scribes and Pharisees, and
making a rich offer of himself, which occasions all the subsequent debates and
discourses. And in it, taking occasion (as would appear) of the Suns rising
and bright shining in the morning, he holds out himself as the true Sun of
righteousness and light of the world; offering to all these who follow him,
that they shall not only have present light to order and sweeten their
walking, but that this light shall bring life with it, and lead to eternal
life. Whence learn, 1. Whatever interruptions wicked men lay in Christ's way,
yet he will not be hindered from doing and offering good to sinners: for,
notwithstanding they hindered him in preaching, verse 2, 3. Yet now he returns
to it again, Then spoke Jesus again unto them. 2. There is no better way to
conciliate love to Christ, then to study to know him well, in his natures,
excellencies, riches, and free offers to sinners: Therefore does he commend
himself here that they may follow him, I am the light of the world, etc See
Psalm. 9.10. Rev. 15.3, 4. 3. The whole world lies in darkness of it self,
being ignorant of misery, and of the remedy thereof, following the works of
darkness, and liable to affliction, wrath, and want of comfort, and to be cast
into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth: for, so is
imported in this Doctrine, that without Christ, mankind are as the world is
without the Sun, and the use of these lights which are enlightened thereby.
4. The remedy of this sad condition is only to be had in Christ, and he is
able to cure all this darkness, by enlightening the mind, and causing men to
know themselves, by discovering and dispelling the works of darkness, removing
of wrath and misery, giving clear and wholesome directions in duty, and chearing
up and warming the hearts of his own with his comforts: for, says he, I am the
light of the world. See Chapter 1.4, 5, 9. The Father is indeed a light to which no
man can approach, and before whom Angels do cover their faces; but this light
being revealed in the Son, is brought near, and made comfortable unto men.
And his Instruments and Messengers are called lights, because they
instrumentally conveigh this light which comes originally from him. 5.
Christ's grace and light is not confined to one place or sort of persons, but
is patent to the world, and to men of all ranks and conditions in it; Therefore
is he called the light of the world. 6. They who would participate of the
riches that are in Christ, ought to take him for their guide, and follow him,
neither presuming to go before and prescribe unto him, nor yet loitering and
lying by when he, in his example and directions, is going before; for, the
advantage of this offer is, to him that follows me, says he. 7. As it is the
duty of men who would partake of Christ's riches, to follow him; So they who
follow him indeed, will employ all the comfort they find in him, to enable and
encourage them to duty, and will account it sufficient, if they be enabled to
walk after him, whatever their lot be otherwise. Therefore is the promise held
out containing what they may expect in walking. 8. They who follow Christ, may
expect that in his light they shall see light; They will not be left in
darkness of ignorance, nor under the power of the ways of darkness, or under
the danger of outer darkness: And albeit sometime they may be left under a
dark condition, wanting comfort, and feeling wrath, Isa. 50.10. Yet neither is
that their allowance, nor shall they constantly walk so, or be left altogether
under such a condition, but, in due time, shall have light arising in
darkness: for, so is the promise, he shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have light. 9. The light that comes from Christ will have quickening life
accompanying it, and does in the issue tend to eternal life, whereas the false
light of the wicked, ends in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Therefore is it said, he shall
have the light of life, or, that light which is accompanied with the present
life of holiness, which in due time will end in eternal life.

Verse 13. The Pharisees therefore said unto him, thou bear record of thy
self, thy record is not true.

14 Jesus answered, and said unto them, Though I bear record of my self, yet my
record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go: but ye cannot tell
whence I come, and whither I go.


In the next place, we have Christ's first conference and debate with the
Pharisees, who contradict his testimony, as worthy to be suspected, verse 13.
To which Christ replies, asserting the truth and certainty of his own
testimony, verse 14. chalenging them for rash judgment of him, when yet he was
not judging them, verse 15. though if he did it his testimony were to be
regarded, having not only himself but his Father to bear witness to him,
which were a sufficient number of witnesses by the Law, verse 16, 17, 18. but
they were ignorant of the Father, as they were of him, verse 19. To which is
subjoyned, that however he spoke thus freely, and they had a great mind to
take him, and had him among their hands, yet they were restrained, verse 20.

In these verses, We have their exception against his testimony, as obnoxious
to be suspected, seeing he speaks so much in his own cause, verse 13. And
Christ, albeit, chap. 5.31. he did, by way of preterition, pass this, that he
might bring in the many witnesses that pleaded for him; Yet here he does assert
that his testimony concerning himself is true: Which he confirms from this
reason; That he came from God, and was to return to him again: and being
certain of this, he might assert it, whereas they being ignorant hereof, did
carp at him. The force of this reason consists in these; partly, That he being
God, who came from the Father in respect of his manifestation in the flesh, and
was to return to him in regard of the manifestation of his glory in the humane
nature exalted, he was a witness above all exception: partly, That being the
great Angel of the Covenant, and Ambassador from the Father, to whom he was to
return an account, he might lawfully publish his own Instructions and
Commission which were revealed only to himself, and ought to be credited: And
partly, That he perfectly knowing this, might boldly testify and stand to it.
Doctrine 1. Christ's enemies are endless and restless in their oppositions
unto the success of the Gospel: for, after their former interruption, verse 3.
He no sooner begins to preach again, but they do again cavil. 2. Christ's rich
offers will not prevail with malicious enemies, to make them quit their
opposition and submit: for, when he is not threatening, but graciously inviting
sinners to partake of his fullness, they yet cavil. 3. Whatever just cause
there be to suspect their testimony, who are but sinful and mere men, when
they commend themselves; Yet this derogates nothing from the glory of Christ's
being true in his testimonies concerning himself: for, albeit they think they
have great advantage of Christ from this common principle, Thou bear record
of thy self, thy record is not true, yet it has no weight at all here. It is
true indeed that the corrupt nature of man, (which is prone too seek it self,
and hunt after vainglory, which yet is as easily lost as obtained, and cannot
bear our weight in a day of distress) may render such a testimony uncertain,
but not necessarily prove it untrue, even in men; For honest men may lawfully
commend themselves in some cases, and yet not bear false-witnesse, nor yet be
guilty of self-seeking. But it does not at all hold true in Christ who is
separate from sinners, and not to be bound by the rules prescribed to men in
such cases. 4. Enemies their opposing and interterrupting of Christ, will not
make void his purposes; but he can make their opposition occasion much benefit
to his people: for, albeit they thought by cavils to hinder his preaching, yet
his very defenses and replies did bring forth most precious truths of the
Gospel, for the edification of his hearers then, and of his people to the end
of the world. 5 Whatever be Christ's gracious condescendence, for the conviction
of sinners, and confirmation of his own; Yet he will not allow that any should
deny him the glory of any of his prerogatives, and particularly of his truth:
Therefore albeit he formerly condescended, Chap 5. 31. to wave his testimony of
himself, that so friends and foes might see how many witnesses he had for him;
Yet here when they contradict it, he will not pass from it, Though I bear
record of my self, yet my record is true. 6. Christ being true God that cannot
lie, and who only can reveal himself and his will; and coming out of the
bosom of the Father as Ambassador into the world; he is an authentic
witness, above all exception, in what he reveals; and his naked testimony and
assertion ought to be credited, without seeking further proof or arguments:
Therefore does he confirm the truth of his record from the consideration of
whence he came. 7. As Christ and his followers came into the world for awhile,
to do the service for which they are appointed, and then to go to God; so the
exaltation of Christ does put his divine original and authority; and
consequently, the truth of his testimony, out of all question; Therefore does
he subjoyne whither he goes, not only as the comfortable issue of his toil,
which he looked to, but as a clear proof that he came from God, and
consequently, that his record is true. 8. Such as are employed in Commission
from God to carry his mind, and do vouch on that they have an account to make
to God who sent them, will find a necessity to cleave to their Commission, and
to publish nothing but truth: So much also may be learned from Christ's
argument, who considering whence he came, and whither he goes, does therefore
bear a true record. 9. Christ's knowledge of his own excellency and authority,
is sufficient to warrant the truth of his doctrine, whoever else be ignorant of
it; for, he proves it true on this, I know whence I came, etc. albeit, says
he, ye cannot tell, etc. 10. They who would cleave to controverted and opposed
truth, should not have it by guess only, but should certainly know and be
persuaded of it, and then speak for it: So much also may be learned from
Christ's confirming the truth of his record thus, that not only he was indeed
from God, and his doctrine the truth, but I know whence I came, etc. 11. It is
men's ignorance (either simple or affected) of Christ's person and Commission,
that makes them so little regard, or lay so little weight on his doctrine and
testimony; Therefore, in opposition to his knowledge, he subjoynes, but ye
cannot tell whence I come, or whither I go, and therefore do carp at my
testimony and doctrine concerning my self.

Verse 15. Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man.
Before Christ produce any farther proof of the truth of his record, he does
here challenge them for their censure of him. And as in the former verse he
points out a difference betwixt himself and them in the point of knowing whence
he came and whither he goes; So here he points out another difference, and a
defect in them flowing from this mistake: To wit, that as they were ignorant of
him, so they judged carnally of him, and according to outward appearance, being
led by their carnal principles. Whereas he, on the contrary, judged no man;
Which is not to be understood in opposition to their manner of judging, that he
judged no man after the flesh; for (though that be true, yet) then what is
subjoyned, verse 16. would import that he might judge after the flesh. Nor is
it to be understood, that he judged no man in a political way, but only, in an
ecclesiastical way, was pointing out their faults; for neither in that respect
will the opposition betwixt him and them stand, seeing they were not now
judging him in any political way, but only censuring his doctrine and person:
Nor yet is it Christ's meaning in this place, to show that he devests himself of
that sovereigne dominion and government that he has over men, and all
creatures, jointly with the Father, of which Chap. 5. 22. for that he never
quits; but his scope, is, to show that he forbear the exercise of it, in some
respects, for a time. And particularly, 1. That his chief errand in this his
first coming, was not to judge men, but to purchase and offer salvation to lost
sinners, Chap. 3. 17. and if any were condemned, it was but an accidental event
flowing from men's own corruptions. 2. More especially, now when they were
judging him, he was not judging, but teaching and making rich offers; and
therefore their carriage was more blameworthy. Doctr. 1. Albeit malicious
carpers, or other enemies, can do nothing to Christ's prejudice, yet will he not
pass the wrong intended by them in their endeavors, without a rebuke:
Therefore, albeit he has showed that their cavils could not make void his
testimony, yet he will challenge them for their attempt. 2. Rash judging and
censuring of Christ, his doctrine and way, is the ordinary fault of his
enemies, and an injury which he will not endure at their hands; for, this is
their particular attempt which he reproves, that they fell a judging. 3. Men by
nature are so blind and fleshly, that their judgment of Christ and his
matters is to be suspected, and such as justly deserves a reproof from him;
for, this was, in part, their fault, ye judge after the flesh, or according to
the dictates of your corrupt reason and hearts, which cannot perceive the
things that are of God. 4. To judge of Christ according to visible and outward
appearances of his person or Kingdom, or according to our own prejudicate
thoughts; is but a corrupt judgment, and such as does provoke him to anger;
for this farther, and in particular, was their fault, in judging after the
flesh, when their prejudices and blinded judgments let them see no more of
Christ then his outside. 5. It is the will of God, that his servants be found
in meekness about their duty, when they are encountered with hard measure and
unjust usage from their enemies; for, so does Christ's example teach, who when
they judged him, was judging no man, neither in the general exercise of his
calling, nor at this Sermon in particular. 6. It speaks Christ's gracious
condescendence unto lost man, that he first assayes him with the sweet offer of
salvation in the Gospel, to see how that will work, before he proceed to a
sentence of condemnation; for, says he, I judge no man, in this my state of
humiliation, and at this time in particular. And albeit he spoke sometimes
sharply unto them, yet it tended but to drive them to his mercy. 7. Christ's
mild manner of dealing, even to his enemies, does add to their dittey, and
aggravate their condemnation, who do not only slight, but oppose him;
Therefore does Christ mention this, to show how great their guilt was, in
malicious carping at him; ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man.

Ver. 16, And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I
and the Father that sent me.

Verse 17. It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is
true.

18. I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me,
bears witness of me.


Lest they should except, that therefore he judged them not, because he could
not truly challenge any thing; Therefore he declares, that he might judge them
if he would, and if he did, his judgment were true. And thus he returns to
assert the truth of his own record, and, 1. He enlarges the assertion,
showing, that if he not only bear record of himself, but against them also,
yet his record is true, 2. He adds a second reason confirming this assertion,
which is propounded, ver. 16. that he is not alone in what he does, but the
Father is with him, and it is confirmed, ver. 17, 18. that if the testimony of
two men be sufficient in any matter according to Moses Law, to prove i^, true,
Deuteronomy. 17.6, how much more is his record true, being witnessed unto by himself
who is God, and by the Father also, who by a voice from heaven, and by mighty
signs and wonders did declare and confirm who he was, and command he should
be hearkened unto?

From verse 16. Learn, 1. Albeit Christ do condescend to offer salvation unto
lost sinners, yet if he pleased, he might in place thereof, judge and condemn
them, and yet do no wrong; for, he speaks here of his judging, as a thing he
might well do, if he pleased. 2. Christ cannot err in judging of men; but as
all his testimonies are true, so also he is true in judging, how cross soever
it seem to us; for, yet if I judge, my judgment is true. 3. As all these who
are employed by God in his service are never left alone by him in their
difficulties; So in particular, Christ and the Father are undivided in the work
of judging of men, as in all other works; and the Father is still with him as
being of the same essence, and as with his Ambassador and servant, acting
according to his instructions; Therefore, says he, I am not alone, but I and
the Father that sent me, where he proves the Fathers conjunction with him, from
his being his Father, by eternal generation, and from his sending of him. 4
Christ's union with the Father, in judging, is an infallible proof that he
cannot err in that work. It being impossible that he who is God, one with the
Father, and who in all things walks according to his Fathers instructions,
should err in any of his testimonies or records: Therefore is it given as a
reason why his judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that
sent me.

From verse 17, 18. Learn, 1. The Laws given by God do not serve for rules to
direct or bind him, who is supreme and above all Law; but to be a rule and
direction to these to whom they are given; Therefore it is called your law, not
that they were the penmen or prescribers of it, nor yet only because they
gloried of it, albeit they did little regard it in practice, but because it was
given for their use and direction. 2. It is the will of God, that, as men
should not be rash in private judging, so, in public contraversies, they
should not proceed to judgment upon every report or single testimony, but, at
least, the matter must be proven by two witnesses; for, says he, It is written
in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true. Not that necessarily every
thing that is deponed by two witnesses is true, for false witnesses may
conspire to assert an untruth, 1 Kings 21.13. Matthew. 26.60. Acts 6.11, 13. But
the meaning of the Law is, that at least, there shall be no fewer testimonies
to prove any thing. And as great care should be had in examining witnesses, to
find out if there be any falsehood, (wherein, even in persecuting of Christ,
the Pharisees were exact, Mark 14.55, 56.) and for more security, the Jews
put the witnesses to confirm their testimony, by being first in executing the
sentence, Deuteronomy. 17.6, 7. So where two witnesses concur in one testimony, the
matter is to be accounted legally true and proven, albeit the witnesses should
lie. 3. Albeit Christ, as God, be above Law, yet his ways are so just, that
the Law can have no just exception against him; Therefore does he confirm his
assertion from their own Law. For, if the testimony of two men (who are
fallible and may deceive) does suffice to prove a matter to be true; how much
more is he to be credited, who is witnessed unto by the Father, and by himself
as God witnessing of himself, as man and Mediator; seeing these witnesses are
truth it self, who cannot lie, nor be biased? 4. The truth of Christ's offers
unto lost sinners is so abundantly confirmed by unquestionable witnesses, that
none can call them in question, without egregious wrong done to God; So much
also may be gathered from this double witness, of himself, and the Father
that sent him. 5. The Father and the Son, albeit one and undivided in essence
and operation; yet are distinct persons, and did distinctly bear witness in
this testimony concerning the man Christ, and his offers as Mediator; for,
says he, I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me,
bears witness of me.

Verse. 19. Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye
neither know me nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my
Father also.
As before they carped at his testimony concerning himself, so now little
regarding what he said, they carp at his other witness, desiring to know who
his Father was. For they alleging he had none but Joseph, would look upon him
to be as unfit a witness as they conceived himself to be; or if he should
call God his Father, that would waken the old quarrel, Chap. 5. 18 But Christ
does not stand to answer their question, but declares they were both ignorant
of the Father and him, and ignorant of the Father, because they knew not him.
Whence learn, 1. Let truth be never so clearly held forth, yet (without the
power of grace) enemies will not be gained thereby, but they will still jangle,
and set their wit and parts on work to find out new cavils; for so do they
here, all the fruit of Christ's doctrine on them, is a new taunting question,
where is thy Father? 2. Where there is greatest conceit of parts and abilities,
there is ordinarily greatest real ignorance, especially of saving truths in a
saving manner; for, these great Rabbi's, who think themselves able enough, to
hold up the debate with Christ, yet this sentence from him, ye neither know me,
nor my Father. 3. Albeit the Father and the Son be two distinct persons; Yet
they are undivided in essence, so that the one cannot be known without the
other; And particularly, albeit devils may believe there is a deity and
tremble, Jam. 2.19. and albeit Jews and others may have some notions of him as
Creator of the world; Yet there is no saving knowledge of God but in Christ,
Joh. 17.3. Therefore, says he, ye neither know me, nor my Father, and
particularly, he asserts their ignorance of the Father, because they knew not
him. 4. The divine nature did so evidently shine in the Son, that whosoever
knew what a deity was, might have seen it in him; and whosoever took up his
deity, were thereby forthwith led to know the deity of the Father; for, says
he, if ye had known me, ye should have known the Father also. And herein Gods
gracious condescendence is to be seen, who since his divine nature could not be
comprehended nor taken up by us, was pleased to reveal and manifest himself in
his own Son (the express image of his person) clothed with our; flesh, and
to hold out this mirror unto us in that word which is near unto us, and which
does prevent our anxious thoughts about ascending up to heaven, or descending
down unto the deep, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

Ver. 20. These words spoke Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the Temple,
and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.
In this verse we have a conclusion subjoyned to this first conference; wherein
it is declared, that however he spoke thus boldly, and that in a place of the
Temple where they had him as in a net; and how ever their rage was great
against him: Yet none of them meddled with him, God so ordering the matter,
because his time of suffering was not yet come. As for this place, the
Treasury, the Jews had a chest in Joash his time, wherein they received the
peoples collections as they entered into the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 24.8, etc. and it
seems they continued this practice afterward, Mark. 12.41. Luke 21.1. But this
was a room or chamber belonging to the Temple, wherein these treasures and
other things belonging to the service of the Temple, were kept; of which see, 1
King. 6.5, etc. 2 Chronicles. 5.1. and 31.11, 12. Neb. 13.5. -- 9. and 10.37, 38.
Ez. 8.29. And as this was their custom then, so the Lord does yet require that
somewhat be laid up for Religious uses, providing it be lawfully acquired, and
rightly employed. Doctrine, 1. The many hazards wherein Christ and his servants
may be, and the many advantages that enemies seem to have over them, should not
cool their courage in doing duty; for, these words, which were so sharp, spoke
Jesus even in the treasury, as he taught in the Temple. 2. As enemies are
endless in their rage and attempts, against Christ and his people; So the
providence of God is as vigilant to preserve them, so long as he sees fit;
for, as before, so over again, no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not
yet come. The providence of God was as effectual for his preservation at one
time, as at another. 3. This frequent repetition of his preservation, because
his hour was not yet come, serves not only as an encouragement to his people,
in being faithful in their duty and trust, seeing they are guarded by him who
can preserve so often. But further serves to teach 1. Many deliverances should
never make us put thoughts of suffering, in Gods time, out of our mind; for
Christ's preservation so frequently is still seasoned with this, his hour was
coming, though not yet. 2. Former preservation speaks so much of Gods power and
favor, as may make his people resolute to endure suffering, when his will is
to expose them to it; for, such use does Christ make of this his frequent
preservation, when they take him, which is the meaning in part of Luke 22.53.
3. Christ also makes use of it in that place, Luke 22. and Matthew. 26.55. to
testify, that as his bold and open carriage, and his preservation in it, did
bear witness of his integrity, and of Gods favor toward him; so their
clandestine course did testify what confusion of conscience they had in it.
And indeed however enemies may carry themselves high, when they are
persecuting; Yet their consciences within are a sufficient witness and torture
to them, if they would suffer them to speak.

Ver. 21. Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me,
and shall die in your sins. Whither I go ye cannot come.
From this to the end of ver. 29. we have a new Sermon and debate; wherein
Christ threatening them with his removal, and the sad separation that should be
betwixt him and them, ver. 21. They, according to their custom, do tauntingly
cavil at it, ver. 22. But Christ shows what their disposition was, contrary
to his, ver. 23. and therefore they could not but perish, especially since they
made no use of him, ver. 24. he having so often informed them what he was, so
that they could not sin ignorantly, ver. 25. And further, Christ shows that
though he had much to lay to their charge, yet he would forbear now, and
content himself with this, that his Father, whom he obeyed, was true, and
would call them to an account, ver. 26. and that (however they understood not
this at present, ver. 27. yet) after his suffering, they should be convinced
that he is the Messiah, obedient unto, and approven of his Father, verse 28, 29.

In this verse we have the sum of this Sermon; wherein, considering that they
despised his rich offer, ver. 12. and not only so, but they intended violence
against him: Therefore, he threatens them with the removal of himself, and
that however they seek him, yet they shall perish in their sins, and have no
access to him. Of this see Chap. 7. 34. Doctrine, 1. The greatest of
opposition will not drive Christ away, where he has a mind to stay, or till
he please; for, he would not be put away by their violence, but I go, says he.
2. The wicked may at last get their will of Christ, so far as to be rid of him,
but for a plague to them; for to them who would have taken him, ver. 20. he
says, I go my way. 3. Where Christ's gracious offers are rejected, and himself
persecuted, it is a presage that he will remove; for, to such he says, again,
as his next message, after the former, verse 12. I go my way. 4. As Christ's
removal is the saddest of judgments; so it is a judgment, the evil whereof is
not easily laid to heart; Therefore must it be so often inculcate upon them, as
their saddest stroke. 5. Christ's removal from a people draws on such miseries,
as may make great despisers miss and need him, and make them glad to seek him,
if so be they could find him; for, I go my way and ye shall seek me. 6. Since
reprobate men do sometime seek Christ whom they despised, not because they love
him any better, nor because they purpose to give him any employment about their
sin; but only to be rid of trouble by him; Therefore such seekers do die
impenitents for all their pains, and go to their graves before they be rid of
their sins, and with their bones full of them; for, to such he says, ye
shall seek me, and shall die in your sin, that is, die impenitent, and pine
away under the punishment of iniquity, till they die, and that because they
would not die to sin. 7. Such as do reject Christ here, and die impenitent
and unreconciled with him, shall find his removal from them will end in
eternal separation; Therefore it is subjoyned, whither I go ye cannot come.

Ver. 22. Then said the Jews; will he kill himself? because he says, Whither
I go ye cannot come.
In this verse we have their taunting reply to this sad threatening. They think
there is no good place (nay nor heaven) to which he can go, but they may well
follow, if not go before him; and therefore they allege that he will take
some black course of cutting himself off, and they will let him go to that
without their company. Whence learn, 1. None are more ready to despise
threatenings, then they who most deserve them, and lie nearest the danger of
them; for, so appears in the answer given by these hearers, 2. Such as do once
breed themselves to a despising of threatenings, will grow still the longer the
more hardened and insolent, till the execution of vengeance discover their
folly; for, now they are grown worse then in their former reply, Chap. 7. 35.
It is but cold matter of comfort, that the more a man habituate himself in
sin, he grows the more bold and impudent, for that is a spiritual plague upon
him. 3. Obdurate sinners may come to that height, that instead of trembling at
threatenings, they may mock at them, and bitterly taunt the carriers of these
sad tidings; for, to such an height do these come, will he kill himself?
because he says, whether I go ye cannot come. 4. Lofty pride, in mocking at
the Word, and taunting the messengers thereof, will not go away without
exemplare punishment, and such scoffers may meet with that plague in reality,
which they in reproach cast upon the servants of God; for, so befell these
scoffers; They tauntingly suppose Christ will kill himself, but within few
years, in the siege of Jerusalem, many of them were redacted to such despair
in their extremities, that they did indeed cut off themselves. 5. It is a great
delusion among men, hindering the success of threatenings, and making them
insolent and bitter when they are threatened, that they entertain a great
conceit of their own worth, and will not be persuaded but it will be as well
with them as any; for, this was the cause of all this peoples miscarriage; They
conceived Christ could go to no good place from whence they would be secluded,
and therefore they do so taunt him.

Verse 23. And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are
of this world: I am not of this world.

24. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins. For if ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.


Christ in his answer does not meddle with their perverse humors, but goes on
to confirm what he had said. And, 1. He points out the reason and ground of
his sad sentence, to wit, their original disposition, which is corrupt and
earthly, and contrary to his, ver. 23. and this also is a cause of their
ignorant mistake of their own danger. 2. From this he infers, that he had
justly said they should die in their sins, seeing they would not by faith
embrace him, who only could apply a remedy to their evils, ver. 24. Whence
learn, 1. It is not enough that wicked men be convinced of their evil deeds,
unless they also study their original condition, and know that their evil
practices do not flow only from a present tentation, or from evil breeding and
education, but are the fruits of their natural corruption; Therefore does
Christ point out this to these Jews. 2. Albeit man before the fall, was raised
up to enjoy a spiritual life and communion with God, yet by the fall, he is
cast down, and has his original from beneath and favors only of the world and
of things therein: for, so much does he intimate to these Jews, Ye are from
beneath, ye are of this world, 3. Albeit Christ did take on our nature, yet he
is altogether free of the sin and corruption thereof, being divine in his
original and way of conception, and in his condition, holy and separate from
sinners; Therefore says he, I am from above, I am not of this world. Where he
does not deny the truth of his humane nature, but disclaims all communion with
sin and the corruption of flesh and blood. And albeit it be said of his
Saints also that they are not of this world, Joh. 15.19. and 17.16. Yet it is
true of Christ in a singular manner, for he is absolutely unspotted by nature,
they are so only by regeneration, and in part, and comparatively in respect of
others. 4. As the study of Christ's divine original and condition, is a glass
wherein men may study the vileness of their own condition; so it is a sad
evidence of separation from Christ's company, so long as m^n retain a total
disconformity to him: for these ends does he point out these two in their
contrariety, ye are from beneath, I from above. See Romans 8.29. 5. Men
continuing in their corrupt original, without renovation from heaven, cannot
expect life eternal, but will perish in their sins; for, he draws this from
the former discourse, by way of conclusion, I said therefore unto you, that ye
shall die in your sins. 6. Albeit death be the desert of all sin, and God
do daily threaten sinners with it; Yet all this admits of the exception of
faith in Christ: And as this only (and nothing else) can come betwixt the
sinner and deserved wrath; so even the grossest of sinners shall not perish, if
they turn and fly to Christ: And when sinners do not this, their unbelief
renders their case desperate and incurable. Therefore is this threatening
propounded with this exception, even to these malicious Jews, If ye believe
not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. 7. It is not sufficient for
preventing the due desert of sin, that men do pretend to faith in the
Messiah, unless they do acknowledge and embrace him as he reveals and offers
himself; for, this Christ requires, as absolutely necessary, that ye believe
that I am he, where he mee^s with their fair pretenses of believing in the
true Messiah, and shows, that unless they embraced him for the Messiah, how
contemptible soever he seemed to be, all these pretenses would not avail them.

Verse 25. Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus said unto them,
Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.
The Jews do captiously reply to his discourse, enquiring who he was that had
laid so absolute a necessity upon them to believe on him. He answers, that he
was even the same he had declared to them since the beginning that he began to
preach; to wit, the Son of God and Savior of the world, And by this he
declares that their unbelief would be so much the more heinous, as it could
not slow from ignorance, they being so often informed of the truth. Doctrine,
1. As it is the lot of Christ and his servants, to have their doctrine, and
threatenings in the name of the Lord, entertained with reproach; so also will
their persons be mistaken and set at naught; for, such was Christ's lot, they
scofte at his doctrine, ver. 22. and now they do in contempt enquire, who art
thou? their blind eyes not discerning his glory through the vail of his
humiliation. And herein his people must resolve to share with him, 1 John 3 1 2.
As the truth of God is, in all ages and tunes, unchangably the same; So it is
the duty of the messengers thereof, to be constant in preaching of it, and not
to change their note, whatever contradiction and opposition they meet with;
Therefore does he, notwithstanding all their malice, give this answer, even the
same that I said unto you from the beginning, as not minding to change his
note. 3. Albeit men may hear much which they slight and forget; Yet the Lord
will not forget to reckon with them according to what they have heard, whatever
use they have made of it; Therefore he does not expressly answer to their
question, but remits them to what he had said, to let them see that all of it
would be laid on their account, to aggravate their obstinate unbelief.

Verse 26. I have many things to say, and to judge of you: but he that sent me
is true: And I spoke unto the world those things which I have heard of him.
Christ, meeting with so much obstinacy in th^se Jews, does, in the rest of
this discourse, give up with them; And declares, that however he could not
only discover, but convince them of much sin and maliciousness, yet since
they were so corrupt, he would rest satisfied in his Fathers approbation, and
would leave them upon God who is true in his Word, and particularly, in his
promises made to him, and who would certainly reckon with them for their
despising of his doctrine, when he taught nothing but what he received from
him. Whence learn, 1. As Christ has still much more to say to the wicked, then
he will say to them in this world; So it is his sad judgment, in particular,
on some, that when he has saddest quarrels against them, yet he gives over
dealing with them; Therefore says he, I have many things to say and judge of
you, when yet he gives them over, though they dr^w him to debate again. See
Ezekiel 3.26. 2. When men do reject Christ and his doctrine, albeit they may be
letten alone for long enough; Yet they have Gods Tribunal before which to
answer, for their contempt; Therefore does Christ leave them on God who is
true, and will avenge their contempt of him. 3. Though all the world should
oppose Christ's doctrine, yet God will own and make it good, and will prove
himself, true in performing all the promises made to Christ and his servants,
for taking order with such as oppose them and their message; Therefore does he
acqui^sce in this, He that sent me is true, to wit, generally in the doctrine
which he delivered in his name, and particularly, in the promises made to his
Son, that he would own and support him in the work of Redemption, and in the
promises also made to his servants. 4. They. who would be born out against all
the opposition of men, with the comfort of Gods approbation, should make sure
that they have his calling to what they undertake; and that they cleave
faithfully to their commission; for, hereby is Christ supported, He sent me,
and I speak those things which I have heard of him. 5. Such as are sure of Gods
calling and commission, and of the truth of what they receive, will be
encouraged to preach it boldly, though all the world should not believe, but
oppose them; for, says Christ, I speak, and that even to the world, or openly,
those things which I have heard of him. He was upon the Fathers counsel, and
knew the certainty of this doctrine, and therefore stands to it, and so others
also, 2 Cor. 4.13. 6. Christ's doctrine may safely be leaned to, as containing
nothing else but what he has heard and received from the Father; for, so does
Christ call it, those things which I have heard of him.

Ver. 27. They understood not that he spoke to them of the Father.

28. Then said Jesus unto them. When ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall
ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self, but as my Father has
taught me, I speak these things.

29. And he that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I
do always those things that please him.


This sad doctrine taking no effect, by reason of their ignorance, who
understood not that he spoke of the Father when he mentioned him that sent him;
Christ does further certify them, that though now they were ignorant, yet
after they had with wicked hands crucified him, then they should be made to
know that he is the Messiah, that he does all things according to the Fathers
will, and that the Father is always with him, as being his obedient Son.
Whence learn, 1. Were doctrine never so clear, yet Satan will keep men from
understanding it, either by their ignorance or malice; for, though he had
ofttimes before spoken of him that sent him, yet they understood not that he
spoke to them of the Father. Wherein there was not so much simple ignorance, as
malice and prejudice which transported them. 2. The ignorance of wicked and
malicious men will be removed in due time, little to their advantage;
Therefore, Christ threatens that they who understood not, shall know. 3, Such
as do wickedly oppose Christ and his truth, will readily run the length of
bloody persecution, before they cease; for, so does Christ forewarne them, that
they will lift up the Son of man, by putting him to suffer on the cross. He
calls himself here the Son of man, to show that he suffered only in that
nature, and to point out his condescendence, that he became man, that he might
suffer. 4. Christ did so love his people, that he willingly gave himself to
redeem them, and would do nothing that might hinder his being put to that
cursed death, which might redeem them from the curse; Therefore, albeit he
warn them of it, yet he will not hinder it to take effect, nor so much as
speak a word to stop it. 5. Wicked men are never further from their purpose,
then when they think they are nearest to it, and as this is true in their own
prosperity, Psalm. 92.6, 7. So also in their violent persecution of Christ and
his followers; Therefore does Christ signify, that by getting this advantage
of him, to put him to death, they should gain nothing, but lose much. See Mich.
4, 11, 12, 13. 6. The suffering of Christ and his followers, whatever enemies
may account of it, or whatever it seem to be to flesh and blood; Yet it is
their real honor and exaltation; Therefore does he call their crucifying of
him, a lifting up of the Son of man, not only because he was indeed lifted up
upon the cross, but because it was an exaltation of him. See Chap. 12. 32. It
is an honor in Saints, to be employed to suffer, Act. 5.41. it is accompanied
with much of the Spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4.14. and is a step, and the way to
glory, Luke 24.26. and therefore gets this name. 7. It is one peculiar
advantage of suffering, that Christ and his followers true dignity, and
acceptance with God, is never more clearly and convincingly seen, then in the
time of it, and after it; Therefore it is subjoyned, as a particular proof
that it should be an exalting of him, that, then shall ye know that I am he,
or, the true Messiah, obedient unto, and approven of God, as after follows.
And so we find accomplished, in that in his sufferings, Pilate and his wife
give him a testimony; the Centurion sees his glory, Matthew, 27.54. The darkning
of the Sun, the renting of the rocks and the vail of the Temple, the opening
of graves, etc. did bear witness who he was. And afterward, the sad plagues
that came on them, for rejecting of him, declared that he was the Son of God.
8. It is a sad judgment upon malicious wicked men, that they are permitted to
run the utmost length of their violence, and then (and not till then) their
consciences and Gods judgments are let loose upon them, to let them see and
feel what a woeful course they have been upon; for, so much also is imported
here, that when ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am
he, etc. 9. Christ in his works and doctrine, as he was taught them from the
Father, as man, so they are altogether agreeable to the Fathers will; for, this
is a truth whereof he will have very enemies convinced, I do nothing of my
self, but as the Father has taught me, I speak these things: So that sinners
are to come to, and seek the Father in him, and ought to look on all he does
and says, as agreeable to the Fathers will. 10. As the Father is unseparable
from his Son Christ, in respect of the unity of the divine essence; so he is
always with him as Mediator, being in him, as his Ambassador, reconciling
the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. and with him, to support and uphold him, as
his servant doing his work, according to the Covenant of redemption, Isa. 42.1.
Therefore, says he, He that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me
alone, though all the world should forsake me. Wherein we may see how
well-pleased the Father is with the redemption of lost sinners, that he was
still upholding the Son in it, and how richly they are made up who have him
with them, be against them who will, as Christ here reckons. 11. Whosoever
would have the comfort of Gods presence and company in all conditions, they
ought to set themselves to please God, and observe his will in all things; for,
so did Christ find it, for I do always those things that please him. 12. As
Christ the Son did learn obedience, and submit himself to the will of the
Father; So his obedience was full and complete, and in all things he did, the
Father was well pleased; for, says he, I do always those things that please
him.

Ver. 30. As he spoke those words, many believed on him.

31. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my
word, then are ye my disciples indeed.

32. And ye shall know the Truth, and the truth shall make you free.


In these verses, John records that this his doctrine had success among many;
And albeit it was but weak beginnings they had, (as appears by Christ's doctrine
to them) yet he exhorts them to perseverance, and encourages them in that
study, by promising. 1. That so they shall prove themselves to be among the
number of his real disciples. 2. That they shall increase in knowledge of the
truth, and in feeling the power and efficacy thereof, 3. That they shall be
made partakers of true Christian liberty. Whence learn, 1. Opposition made to
Christ will not hinder the success of his Gospel, but even the contentions and
debates occasioned by malicious men, may do much good to many; for, as he spoke
these words, many believed on him. Even from amongst the crew of opposers, he
gathers followers. 2. As it is preaching which God has appointed to be the
mean of conversion; so in particular, when men consider, either the danger of
Christ's forsaking and giving up with them, or his own true excellency, as they
are revealed in the word; it may be a mean to excite them to lay hold on him;
for, this success followed upon his speaking these things, which may relate
either generally to the whole preceding doctrine, wherein he leaves them to
give an account to God of their despising of him; or particularly, to the last
words, wherein he points out his conjunction with, and his being approven of
the Father. 3. Christ is a tender cherisher of weak beginners, and will rather
take pai^s to encourage them, then weaken their hands; for, albeit they were
weak, yet he calls it believing, and encourages them to hold on. 4. Such as
embrace Christ, do stand in great need of confirmation, and should be seriously
affected with that great undertaking wherein they engage, Therefore does Christ
so much excite them, and labor to set their joints aright: Albeit conversion
be a very great work, yet confirmation of the converted is no small work, and a
notable fruit of the Ministry: Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 12, 13. 5. It is not enough that
men do embrace Christ for a sit only, but if they would reap the benefit of
piety, they ought to persevere; And albeit such as do persevere, may be kept a
while without sensible feeling of the advantage of their course, yet, in due
time, they shall find it: Therefore does he propound this condition to them,
if ye continue, and upon performance of that, makes the promise 6. They who
would persevere indeed, ought to cleave closly to the doctrine of Christ, not
only renouncing false doctrine, and giving obedience to his truth, but as faith
is begotten by the Word, so it must be cherished and fed by it, and they must
embrace and cle^ve to Christ as he reveals himself in the Word, though
otherwise they do not sensibly find his presence; yea, and their sense and
fear and guilt may represent him otherwise then the Word says of him;
Therefore says he unto them, Continue in my word. 7. It is the great
privilege of lost sinners, to be made disciples to Christ, taught of him, and
admitted to follow him and be in his company, as a pledge of their being with
him for ever; Therefore it is held out as their encouragement and reward, ye
are my disciples. 8. As Christ has some disciples who are so in reality, and
others who are such but in show only; So whatever external privileges may
follow on men's outward profession and show; Yet there is no true ground of
solid comfort, but in being real disciples; Therefore does he encourage them
with this, which only could yield true comfort, ye are my disciples indeed, or,
truly, and, in truth. 9. Albeit real converts be disciples unto Christ from the
first moment of their conversion; Yet that is often times hid from them, till
they give proof of their sincerity, by perseverance, and then their fair
advantages are intima^e unto them; Therefore says he, If ye continue in my
word, thou are ye my disciples indeed. He says not then ye shall be my
disciples, as if the reality of their state depended upon their perseverance,
but, then are ye my disciples, that is, ye prove and make the truth of it
manifest by your perseverance, and ye shall since the comfort of it your
selves. 10. As all natural men, and counterfeit disciples, are but ignorant of
the truth of God, especially of the power and life that is in it, and
accompanies it; So even sound beginners may be for a time weak in these
things; for, so is here supposed, that however they had some beginnings, yet
they were yet to know the truth. 11. It is a very great advantage to get found
and saving knowledge of the truths of the Gospel, that so faith may close with
them, and men may be established in them, and kept on truths side against all
delusions, and be made partakers of the sweet refreshments that flow therefrom;
Therefore it is held out as a rich encouragement, ye shall know the truth. 12.
Proficiency in knowledge and the effects thereof, is not only believers duty,
which they should labor for, but it is Gods promi^e to work it, who should be
depended on for that effect; for, it is his promise to true disciples, ye shall
know the truth. 13. Whatever be the weakness, ignorance, and wants, of weak
beginners, and how little soever refreshment they find in the truths of the
Gospel; Yet by perseverance and continuance, all this will be helped, and they
will still know more and more of the truth, and the consolations thereof; for,
If ye continue, ye shall know the truth, 14. Since the ^all of Adam, there is
no man but ^e is b^^n a spiritual slave without freedom, under the dominion
and power of sin and Satan, and under the curse of the Law; for, so is here
imported, in that they need to be made free. 15. Such as do embrace Christ, and
persevere in obedience to his Word; albeit they be not loosed from that due
subjection which, in their several stations, they owe to Superiors, 1 Cor
7.20, 21, 22. yet they are made partakers of true Christian liberty, and are
delivered not only from the bondage wherein they were held by nature, when
they were slaves to sin and Satan, and under the condemning and cursing power
of the Law; and from the external bondage of an yoke of Ceremonies, imposed
upon the Jews, and of humane precepts in things indifferent in Gods worship:
But also from that spirit of bondage which he lets out at first upon his own,
in order to their future freedom. Rom 8.15. Therefore says Christ, the truth
shall make you free. And albeit believers, and they who continue in Christ's
Word, do not always enjoy the possession and use of this liberty, but may be
under bondage, terror, and fear; Yet that is not their allowance, but flows
from their own we knesse, which apprehends all their bonds to be being on, when
really they are freed from them: And therefore they should complain of
themselves to God, and strive for the use of what is their right, by walking
familiarly with God, and cheerfully and comfortably in his se^vice, and by
making their liberty a Law, to bind themselves more strictly to his obedience.
16. This making them free is here attribute to the truth, whereas Christ only
is the cause of our liberty, verse 36. But these are not inconsistent; for, it
is Christ indeed who purchases and applies this liberty; Christ and this his
purchase and offer, are h^ld out in the Word, to be laid h^ld on there by
faith, and so the believer comes to get the right, and application of it, and
he living by faith, the Spirit of Adoption comes and seals up this liberty,
Ephesians 1.13. Gal 4.6. So is this to be understood, the truth shall make you free.

Verse 33. They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to
any man, how say thou, Ye shall be made free?
The contentious Jews do here again interpose, And, 1. They debate about their
freedom and parentage, and Christ refutes their conceits, to verse 48. 2. They
fall a railing at his person, and contradict what he asserts of himself, and he
does vindicate himself and his doctrine, verse 48, -- 58. 3. They join
violence with their railing, which he avoids, verse 59 I shall take up the
method and parts of the first branch of this debate in this order. 1. They
excepting against the immediately preceding doctrine, and boasting of their
own freedom, as being Abraham's children, verse 33. Christ clears what is the
great bondage of men, and how to be free from it, verse 34, 35, 36. And
shows, that their being Abraham's seed after the flesh, could not avail, since
their malicious carriage and contempt of his divine Word, did evidence they had
another original and Father, verse 37, 38. 2. They again laying claim to their
descent from Abraham; he shows that in their carriage they were not like him,
and so behooved to father themselves upon another in that respect, verse 39,
40, 41, -- And, 3. When they (perceiving that he spoke not of their carnal
descent, but of their spiriual original) do assert that God is their Father,
verse -- 41. Christ evinceth the contrary from their want of love to him, verse
42. and from their not understanding his preaching, verse 43. And asserteth
that they are of Satan, whom they imitate in lying and murdering, verse 44.^
45. For he being sinlesse and a true teacher, ver. 26. their not harkening nor
believing in him, did evince that they were not of God, verse 47.

In this verse some Jews (not they who believed, but others) do except against
his former doctrine alleging that they being Abraham's children, and having
never been in bondage to any man, it was needless to feed them with hopes of
being made free. As for the grounds of their objection, it is nothing strange
to see them deluded with a conceit of being Abraham's children, but it may seem
strange they should say, they were never in bondage, when yet they were
bondmen in Egypt and in Babylon, and frequently, and at this time they were
under the power of the Romans. But we are to conceive that either they stood
not upon an an impudent lie, to make good their point; or, their meaning is,
that however they were actually in bondage, yet by right, and according to the
promise, they were free, and expected to be vindicate into outward liberty by
the M^ssiah, and therefore they would not willingly take with being in a
condition of bondage. Doctrine 1. Such as would embrace Christ and a course of
godliness, may expect that, beside tentations and discouragements from within,
they will meet with oppositions and shakings without, from these who cannot
endure that any should be better then themselves; for, here these Jews fall a
carping at Christ's offers, that they may discourage these beginners. See Matthew.
23.13. 2. M^n, in opposing of Christ's offers, are very subtle, and will be
prompted by Satan to manage it so, so as may render them most invidious; for,
so it appears in these men, who do not at all meddle with what he spoke of the
truth, but only with the point of liberty, as knowing it was most invidious to
insinuate to this people, who gloried so much in their liberty, that they were
in bondage. 3. The most part of men are so carnal and blind, that they see no
farther then their outside, and their outward condition, and so neglect their
inward spiritual estate; for this was the occasion of all their ca^ping, that
they understand Christ to speak only of bodily freedom and bondage, as
knowing no other, as appears from the rest of their discourse. 4. Albeit
spiritual bondage be in it self so sad and heavy, that to be free of it, might
make all other bondage imaginable, look like freedom; Yet such is the
blindness of men, that it is but little or not at all known or discerned, and
they live in their bonds with as much delight as fishes have in their own
element; for, this, in particular, was the point they were ignorant of, as
knowing and feeling no such bondage, and therefore carped at his doctrine. 5.
Men's carnal apprehensions of their own condition, or of Christ's offer, or both,
is a great cause wherefore they undervalue him and his offers, as a thing they
stand in no deed of; for, so do these men carp at his offer to stumble these
weak beginners, alleging that his offer of freedom was no great
encouragement, since they needed it not. 6. Albeit Christ's offers be never so
undeniably rich, yet the way of offering and confering of his favors is ready
to be a stumbling block, while men cannot endure to have them by free gift, or
as bestowed on them who are miserable without them; for, so much also may be
observed here, they do not carp simply at his offer of freedom in it self,
liberty being so desirable, but that they should be made free. They do not
indeed desire to be servants or slaves, but free men, only they desire to have
their freedom natural, and not adventitious, they would be freeborn, and not
made free. And this holds generally true in all his offers; men can have
nothing to except against the riches of Gods favor, grace, and righteousness,
only their natural pride cannot endure to have these things by free gift, to
have them in, and by another, and not of themselves, etc. And thus is it
(however they palliate it) that makes self-condemned sinners stand out so long,
before they close with Christ's offers, and submit to the righteousness of God.
7. Men's external privileges, in being born of religious parents and members of
the Church, do oft-times prove a great stumbling block to themselves, hindering
them from seeing their need of Christ's offers, and from closing with them; for,
they lay this as a ground to all their exceptions and their despising of his
offer, We be Abraham's seed. 8. Such as do oppose Christ and his truth, are
ordinarily so void of conscience and awe of God, that they will make no scruple
of impudent lies, so they may thereby gain their point; And maintainets of truth
should lay their account for such encounters and opposition; for, so much does
their second exception, (and were never in bondage to any man) according to the
first interpretation, teach. 9. While men are puffed up with carnal dreams of
their own privileges and worth, and with carnal expectations of great things
to be done for them; they will not attain to the right use of any condition
they are put under by God; for, so much farther do these words, as they are
explained, teach. They were so much taken up wi^h the imagination that they had
right to be free men, and would be asserted into liberty, that albeit the Lord
had sent all their captivities, to teach them to understand these privileges
spiritually; Yet they would never be driven from their own conceits, nor would
so much as hear of their own bondage. And therefore they made no right use of
their afflictions; but all their care was how to get out of them, till the Lord
made their attempting thereof prove their ruin at last.

Verse 34. Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin.

35. And the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides
ever,

36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.


Follows Christ's answer to this exception consisting of two branches. In the
first whereof (in these verses) he clears what is the great bondage of men,
from which freedom is to be desired, and is promised to the true children of
Abraham. And albeit he might have reprehended them for their impudent lie, yet
he chooses rather to inform them meekly. And, 1. That the sad bondage whereof
he spoke, was spiritual, wherein all they are held who give up themselves to a
trade of sin, verse 34. 2. That albeit such as were slaves, in this respect,
might enjoy the external privileges of the Church, for a season, (as a servant
abides in his masters house for a time) yet they would be cast out at length,
and separated from him who is the natural Son, and from all the adopted
children, for ever. And therefore they ought to think seriously of the danger
that they may be excited to seek after freedom, verse 35. 3. That the only
way to attain to true freedom, is by coming to him, verse 36. From verse 34.
Learn, 1. Whatever advantage wicked men think to reap by opposing of the truth,
yet Christ will disappoint them, and will take occasion thereby to make truth
shine more clearly; for, whereas before he had spoken of their freedom but in
a word, now, by reason of these debates, he explains that point of bondage and
freedom more fully. 2. The matter of our spiritual bondage and freedom is a
point of very great importance, and necessary that we should seriously study
and be acquainted with it; And a point wherein we must submit to Christ's
verdict, how contrary soever it be to our sense and apprehension of our own
condition: Therefore does he prefix his ordinary asseveration, Verily, verily,
to this doctrine. 3. Whatever be men's imaginations concerning their own
condition; yet there is a more heavy bondage lying upon them, then any outward
slavery that can befall them, even to be under the slavery and bondage of sin;
for, so does Christ assert, that there are servants of sin, of whom he meant
when he promised freedom. 4. Albeit all men by nature be borne slaves to sin;
yet considering that there is freedom offered by Christ, and that they who
embrace this remedy, are not in this life fully freed from sin; Therefore
Christ will not reckon men slaves by their having of sin in them, nor yet by
their daily failings and infirmities, or by their falling now and then in soul
faults, through the violence of tentation; unless they make a constant trade
of sin, and be under the dominion thereof, without controlement; for, of
these Christ speaks, when he says, whosoever commiteth sin, is the servant
of sin. See Romans 6.16. 2. Pet. 2.19. And this is the condition of natural
men, who being free from the yoke of righteousness, Rom 6.20. do voluntarily,
and without any opposition, (unless it be some checks of a natural conscience,
startling at some sin, or some thoughts of fear and shame) live in a trade of
all sin, and under the slavish tyranny thereof, though this dominion appear
more evidently in some sins then others. And some of these who are unrenewed,
are judicia^ly given up, to be more visible under the dominion of sin, then
others, not only as the just fruit of their voluntary living under that yoke,
but that they may be be^co^s to the rest of their woeful slavery. As for renewed
men, albeit they not only have sin in them, and do sin daily, but even have
some particular evils that may be called predominants, in comparison of others,
(which may easily be discerned, by the great power and sway that they bear,
even in commanding other evils to be committed or forborne, according as may
contribute to advance them; by violent and frequent relapses of Saints into
them; by their unwillingnesse to admit of admonition and reproof for them;
and, by their falling in them out of an inward propensitie, when outward
tentations are weak, or none at all, or very few:) Yet since, as to the state
of their person; they are set at freedom; and since the dominion is not
universal, as to all sins, nor is it perpetual or complete, even as to these
prevailing evils; Therefore they cannot be called servants of sin as
unrenewed men are: Yea, albeit in respect of degrees of mortification in
Saints, some sins are more predominant then others; some also are more strong
in them, because they are the general evils of the time wherein they live, or
because by natural inclination and constitution, or by education, (all which
may be a bridle to some evils;) they are left more obnoxious and open to them;
and some are left to be an exercise and daily matter of humiliation to them:
Yet I would not deny, but all the sins of renewed men are their infirmities,
not only in respect of Gods pity, who will so account of them; but in respect
of grace and the renewed parts suffering by them, which is greater under
grosser evils against light, then under sins of ignorance and mere infirmity.
However, this is to be so understood, that godly men are to watch especially
over these predominants, yet so as they take heed, lest in watching over one of
those, many other evils that make less noise, get liberty to grow up.

From ver. 35. Learn. 1. Such as will not be moved to consider the sinfulness
of their spiritual bondage, that they may be rid of it, ought, at least, to
consider of the danger that follows upon it, to see how that will affect
them. Therefore does Christ subjoyne that consideration here, to excite them to
employ him for their liberty. 2. The true difference betwixt spiritual slaves,
and these who are made free, cannot be drawn from the enjoyment of external
privileges of the Church, which the one may partake of as well as the other;
for, it is imported that servants, as well as sons may be in the house. As an
householder has in his family, not only children, but servants for several
uses, so has the Lord also in the Church (which is his house, where he dwells
and affords, his special presence, and lays up his special furniture) vessels
of dishonor, as well as vessels of honor, 2 Timothy 2.20. 3. Whatever external
privileges the slaves of sin enjoy, yet at last they will be cast out of
all, and a separation will be made betwixt them and the children who are made
free; for, the servant abides not in the house for ever, as the Son does. He
insists in the metaphor of a family, wherein servants have tearme-dayes, and
may be thrust away for faults, and are laid aside when the heritage comes to
be divided, as Ishmael the son of the bondwoman was, after a long stay in
Abraham's house, Gal. 4.30. 4, It is the great advantage of these who flee to
Christ, to be freed from the slavery of sin, that not only do they get their
liberty, but are made sons and children also; Therefore is he who is not the
servant, called the Son; whereby we are not only, or so much, to understand
Christ, (though he be indeed the natural and only begotten Son, through whom
all the rest are made sons) as the adopted children. 5. Such as are partakers
of spiritual liberty, and of adoption, have not only the rich privilege of
special and intimate fellowship with God, and of being under his special
protection and care, and provided for by him, as children in their fathers
house; But this happy estate is ensured to them; so that though they offend,
and may be corrected, yet they will not be turned out of doors, as servants
are; the doors are patent to let them in, when, like the prodigal, they have
run away: And when they have been bred a while in the Church, which is the
lower rooms of this house, and have fed upon the hope and first fruits of
their inheritance, they will be carried up to the upper rooms of the Church
triumphant, there to get full possession, and to enjoy God and his presence
immediately and for ever; for, the Son abides in the house for ever.

From ver. 36. Learn, 1. Albeit spiritual bondage be such as we cannot shake it
off, though we would; Yet lost man has this encouragement, that his freedom
is not impossible; for, here it is held out as a thing possible, upon some
conditions, ye shall be free. 2. Spiritual bondage is so great a misery, and
deliverance from it so rich a mercy, that men would not dedelude themselves,
either with a conceit of any thing that may compense the want of it, or with an
imagination that they are free, when they are not; Therefore does Christ excite
them to use means that they may be free indeed, or, really, not contenting
themselves with outward freedom, as if that were enough, nor with an
imagination of spiritual freedom, while as they remain real slaves. 3. Christ
is the heir of the family, having power to make free what servants he pleases,
and none can ever partake of spiritual liberty, but they who flee to him, and
receive it from him; for, if the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed, otherwise not. Albeit all the freed men be made sons, yet Christ here
gets the name by way of excellency, as being the only Son by eternal
generation, and he by whom all the rest are made sons.

Ver. 37. I know that ye are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me, because my
word has no place in you.

38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye
have seen with your father.


In these verses, we have the second branch of Christ's answer; Wherein he
answers to the chief ground of their exception, taken from their descent from
Abraham; from whence they concluded that (at least by right) they were freemen.
In answering to this, Christ makes use of the distinction betwixt Abraham's
seed after the flesh, and after the spirit, (of which Romans 2.28, 29. and 9.6,
7.) and declares, That he would not deny, but that they were Abraham's carnal
seed; yet that could avail nothing, since they did not follow his footsteps,
but sought to kill him, as an evidence that his doctrine had no place, nor
respect in their hearts, which was not Abraham's way, ver. 37. And to inculcate
this yet more. 1. He shows, that the Word, which they despised, was the
doctrine committed to him from the Father, which Abraham would never have
entertained as they did. 2. That their carriage proves that they have another
Original and father, whom they follow, then Abraham, and that this their father
is contrary to him and his Father, whom Abraham worshipped and obeyed, ver. 38.
And by this he indirectly points out that they were acted by Satan, whom he
expressly names afterward, seeing they would not understand him when he spoke
thus.

From ver. 37. Learn, 1. Christ, even in his dealing with wicked men, is most
tender and meek, and rather willing to gain then deter them, so long as there
is any hope; So much appears in his way of reasoning here, for whereas in
their other ground of exception (wherein they allege they were never in
bondage, ver. 33.) he had them at a seen advantage of an impudent lie, at least
of a vain imagination; yet after he has cleared their mistake about spiritual
bondage, he does not meddle at all with that exception, but only cleares that
wherein they seemed to have some advantage of truth on their side. And by this
also, he would teach all the maintainers of truth, to make it their great
study, to clear and justify it in their debates, rather then to insult over
adversaries, to imbitter and estrange them yet more from the love of the truth.
2. Christ's knowledge of truth is infinite, and he does propound it so
infallibly and irrefragably, that he knows before hand all that can be said
against it; for, whereas they thought to surprise him with his objection, he
tells them, I know that ye are Abraham's seed. A finite weak man might see his
own shallowness, by meeting with an objection he dreamt not of, but Christ's
doctrine cannot be shaken by such means. 3. Albeit external privileges may be
a snare to delude hypocrites, and make them conceit of freedom; And albeit
Christ may make use of men's conceit of these privileges, to convince them, and
agreeage their miscarriage: Yet no privilege that men can boast of, will make
void Christ's truth, concerning the spiritual bondage of men by nature, nor
bring them into real liberty: for, says he, I know that ye are Abraham's seed,
that ye conceit of it, and expect much by it; but yet my doctrine stands true,
and ye have the sadder account to make, who enjoying that privilege, do not
improve it better, 4. A little of men's practice is a surer rule to try them by,
then all their fair language or boasted of privileges; Therefore, says he, I
know that ye are Abraham's seed, but that will not avail to prove your point,
since ye seek to kill me. See Matthew. 7.16. 5. Men's cruel malice against Christ
and his children, proves them to be yet in nature, and under the bondage of
sin, whatever else they have to boast of; for, by this he proves them
servants of sin, though they were Abraham's seed, ye seek to kill me. 6.
Whatever natural men and hypocrites pretend to, or seem to have, of estimation
and respect to the doctrine of the Gospel; Yet really it has no place with
them. Either they have no room for Christ, or his directions or comforts, (as
the word here imports) as being sufficiently provided, as they think, without
him; or, they think his doctrine but cold comfort, to wait upon and follow in a
time of strait; or, they cannot digest his spiritual instructions, as being so
contrary to the dictates of flesh and blood, and laying a necessity on them to
have so mean a conceit of themselves; or, they affect it, not, because of his
authority who speaks it, but because of novelty, finenesse of expression, or
the like external motives; or, the affections they have, do not make it sink
down in their hearts, to take root there, and bring forth fruit, but it only
fleets for a while in their imagination; or, if they be never so clearly
convinced, yet out of pure malice, they will reject and oppose it: Therefore
says he, my word has no place in you. See Jer. 22.21. Exodus 6.9. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Acts 17.19, 20, 21. Matthew. 13.15, 20, 21. 7. Where the Word is barred out, and
gets not room in men's hearts, there men are full of mischief, and prone to all
evil; and particularly, where the Word preached is not received, men will
readily turn persecutors: Therefore says he, ye seek to kill me, because my
word has not place in you. For not only is this a just judgment of God upon
such despisers; but the frequent inculcating of the Word will irritate their
corruption, and it will grow worse and worse. There is no member of the Church,
how civil or discreet soever, but if he receive not Christ's Word into his
heart, he is ready to turn a persecutor.

From ver. 38. Learn, 1. Christ as he is inseparable from the Father, so is he
upon all his counsels, and knows his secrets; for says he, I speak what I
have seen with my Father, to wit, his eternal counsels concerning lost sinners,
whereof I am made participant 2. Christ also is the faithful interpreter and
revealer of his Fathers counsel, for his peoples good; and his doctrine is in
all things agreeable to the counsel and will of God; for, I speak that which I
have seen with my Father. And this, as it shows the great privilege of the
Church, to whom these secrets are concredited, Romans 3.1, 2. so it does highly
aggravate their contempt who reject this messenger and his message, Heb. 2.2,
3. and 12.25. 3. It is not enough that wicked men be showed their evil way in
it self, but they should be led up to see from what principle it flows, and
what the dangerous consequents of it are: Therefore does Christ lead them up
here, to see what their malicious opposition unto him was, and whence it
flowed. 4. It is one sad mark upon wicked men and adversaries to Christ, that
as they are opposite unto him, so their opposition proves that he and they are
not children of one Father; Therefore does he point out himself and them as
having different and contrary Fathers, I speak what I have seen with my Father,
and ye do that which ye have seen with your Father. Whereas with his own
children it is otherwise, Job. 20.17. 5. Let wicked men boast never so much of
their parentage and privileges; Yet their works and carriage do prove that
Satan is their Father, by whom they are acted and guided, and whose ways they
do imitate; for, says he, ye do that which ye have seen with your Father;
where Satan is called their Father, not in respect of the substance of their
nature, which is neither created nor begotten by him, but in respect of the
corruption of their nature and manners, into which he was a chief instrument
to draw man in Paradise, and does yet foster, and hold it on foot in his
posterity. Likewise, while he says, ye do what ye have seen with him, it is
not be understood of any visible communion and intercourse betwixt Satan and
every unrenewed man; but that they do according as he prompts and acts them. 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians 2.2. and so do commit these evils, wherein he fell before them,
as is instanced, ver, 44. 6. It is a sad and humbling sight of natural men's
condition, to see them acted and led by Satan, as effectually and really, as
ever their bodies were, who were corporally possessed by him: Therefore does
Christ by this point out the odiousness of their case unto them. And if this
were well considered, it might not only discover, how little wonder it is there
be a great opposition be twixt them, and the children of Christ, who are led by
his Spirit. But it might humble them to think that they are under the conduct
of such a guide, when they think they are only following some pleasant or
profitable course: And it might let them, who dream of a change of their
manners when they please, see that it is not so easy a matter, but as hard as
it was to dispossess the man that had the Legion of devils in him.

Verse 39. They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus says
unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham.

40. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I
have heard of God: this did not Abraham.

41. Ye do the deeds of your father. --


The Jews do except nothing against the first branch of Christ's doctrine,
concerning spiritual bondage; but finding that in his answer to their
objection, he had insinuate that they had some father of whom he had little
good to say: and being either really ignorant, or wilfully seeming not to know
that Christ spoke of their spiritual parentage and pedigree; they again lay
claim to Abraham as their father, of whom Christ durst say no ill, and so would
render him odious as calumniating holy Abraham Christ, in his reply, does more
clearly hold out that he is not speaking of their carnal descent according to
the flesh, but of their original and parentage according to the Spirit. And, 1.
He shows in general, that if they were Abraham's children according to the
Spirit, they would imitate him in his works. 2. He shows, in particular,
wherein their way was contrary to Abraham's, in that they persecuted him for
telling the truth of God. And therefore, 3. They behoved to father themselves
on another in that respect, then Abraham. Doctrine. 1. Conceit of privileges
is a disease not easily cured, nor will men be easily taught or convinced of
the evil of it; for, after Christ has sufficiently refuted this exception
before, yet they will not be put from it, but repeat it again, Abraham is our
Father. 2. It is an old trick of degenerate Churches and Churchmen, to cry up
the names of pious Ancestors, to oppose them against the light of truth; for,
so do they hold up Abraham as their Father, that any thing Christ would say of
their parentage, might be repelled by that: and so do many, like them, cry up
these from whom they have far degenerate. But if these Saints departed knew
how they were abused by these their degenerate sins, they would cry, let them
perish from under these heavens. 3. Whatever external privileges men may
enjoy, by being born of religious Parents, and members of the Church; Yet true
grace is not an hereditary gift, nor does carnal and outward succession make
men partakers of spiritual privileges: Therefore, albeit he had granted they
were Abraham's seed, ver. 37. by carnal generation and succession, yet he makes
a doubt of their being his spiritual seed, till they prove it better, If ye
were Abraham's children, etc. 4. There is no just ground for any to boast of
their religious progenitors, unless they follow their footsteps: for, says
he, If ye were the children of Abraham, and would have that a privilege unto
you indeed, ye would do the works of Abraham. Such as do boast of religiou^
Parents, and yet will not imitate them, are but in effect reading a Narrative
to a sad sentence against themselves. 5. Albeit Abraham's carnal seed did enjoy
many temporal, yea, and external Church Priviledges, by virtue of the Covenant
made with him; Yet none are his successors, as to participation of peculiar
spiritual blessings and privileges, but only these who are followers of his
faith and fruitfulness in piety: And they who do so, may lay hold on all the
spiritual promises made to him and his seed. Therefore does Christ require of
these men, who were his carnal seed, that if they would partake of the promises
made to him concerning spiritual freedom, they should prove their interest in
him by another title, doing the works of Abraham, and then their claim would be
good. And this is a fair advan^age and encouragement to Gentiles. See Romans
4.11, 12 6. As walking in any wicked course, so in particular, the persecution
of Christ and his followers, is unbeseeming Saints, and proves that the
persecutors have no claim to the privileges of Saints; Therefore does he
instance this in particular, ye seek to kill me who have told you the truth, to
show how unlike they were to Abraham, who did not this, and therefore could not
claim to the privileges of his spiritual seed. 7. Albeit the Lord, in great
mercy, will pass over the many violent fits of corruption in his people,
which, through grace, and by fleeing to Christ, they get smothered before they
break forth; Yet the Lord will judge of wicked men by their wicked endeavors
and attempts, though they succeed not, seeing they are only withheld by some
obstacle from without; Therefore does he charge it on them, as sufficient to
prove what they were, ye seek to kill me, though it had not taken affect. See
Psalm. 21.11. and 28.4. 8. Christ is a Teacher who will not dissemble, nor
deceive or sl^t^er his heare^s, but will faithfully deliver the truth which he
receives; for, says he, I have told you the truth which I have heard of God.
9. As a faithful declaration of the truth of God is the best service can be
done to men, so it is horrid wickedness and ingratitude in men, when they will
not only persecute the innocent, but even these who are beneficial unto them,
and do them best offices; for, so does Christ aggravate their cruelty; ye seek
to kill me, a man that has told you the truth. See Psalm. 109.4. 2 Cor. 12.15.
10. Such is the perversity of the world, and their hatred to the truth of God
pointing them out in their right colors, that the servants of Christ need
expect no case, so long as they are faithful in their trust; for, such was
Christ's lot before them, ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the
truth. 11. Wicked men can never attempt any violence against the servants of
God, because of their fidelity, but God will look upon the injury as reflecting
on himself who entrusts them; for this cause does Christ show that the truth,
for which they did persecute him, he heard it of God, and so their quarrel was
in effect against God, the Author of that truth. And as this may deter men
from such violent courses, so it may sweeten the bitter cup, when it is held to
the head of any of Gods servants. 12. Let wicked men cavil never so much
against Christ, or strive to clear themselves, yet he will not alter his
verdict of them till they change their manners; Therefore, over again does he
conclude, ye do the deeds of your father, that is, deeds like unto his, and
deeds whereunto he drives you. 13. Christ is so mild, even to his violent
enemies, that when he reproves them, he rather desires that they should
severely judge themselves, then that he should deal too harshly with them; And
when he reproves any, it is their duty to set conscience on work, to apply and
enlarge the challenge against themselves: for these causes it is, that he, now
the second time, says only, ye do the deeds of your father, not naming who
that father is, but leaving that to their own consciences to gather, when they
should think seriously on the challenge.

Verse 41. -- Then said they to him, we be not born of fornication, we have one
Father, even God.
The Jews are not yet silenced, but do bring forth a new objection, in this
verse about their parentage and original. Where, by fornication, I do not
understand bodily filthiness, but idolatry, which is frequently in the
Prophets called fornication or adultery. And the scope of the verse is this;
They perceiving now that Christ is not speaking of their carnal descent and
pedigree, but of their spiritual original and descent, do assert that in this
also they had enough to say for themselves; and that as Abraham was their
father, in respect of carnal generation; so being considered in their spiritual
state and being, they were the children of that one only true God. And this
(without regarding his former reasons to the contrary) they labor to p^ove by
this Argument, That they were not borne in an idolatrous state, but in the true
Church, nor were idolaters themselves, but worshipped God according to his
Word, and therefore were his children And though it may be objected, that their
progenitou^s were idolaters, as may be ^^en in Abraham, Josh. 24.2. and
frequently in their progeniton^s, throughout the history of the Bible; Yet that
does not render their ground untrue, (though it do not prove the conclusion as
will be seen afterward) for even a Church infected with idolatry may bring
forth children to God, in respect of outward Church State, so long as she has
not got a bill of divorce, Ezekiel. 16.20. Doctrine, 1. Idolatry is indeed
spiritual fornication, and a breach of that marriage Covenant that is betwixt
God and his Church; and (whatever be Gods indulgence for a time, yet) it does
deserve that the Church should be rejected as not his wife, and that her
children should be no more accounted his, then bastards are allowed to succeed
to an inheritance; for, so much do they acknowledge that it is fornication, and
that to be born of fornication, and to have one Father, even God, are not
consistent. See Hos. 1.9. and 2.2. 2. Desperate and malicious hypocrites may
not only presume to glory that they are the successors of religious Saints,
but may be so impudent also, as to boast of their adoption and communion with
G^d; for, so do they; after their glorying of Abraham, they add, we have one
Father, even God. See Matthew. 7.22. Hos. 8.2. 3. Albeit it be a great mercy to
be borne members of a true Church, and to worship God according to his own
ordinances; yet that is not enough to prove any to be a true child of God; for,
albeit their argument be true, we be not borne of fornication, yet it does not
hence follow that God is their Father, as Christ's reply does teach us.

Verse 42. Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me; for
I proceeded forth, and came from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent
me.
Unto the end of verse 47. we have Christ's reply to this exception, containing
several particulars. And first, He evinceth that they are not Gods children;
which he proves from this reason, that if they were so, certainly they would
love him, seeing he is from the Father by eternal generation, and comes into
the world by his Incarnation, not of his own head, but being sent of the
Father. Whence learn, 1. Christ is a lovely object, and ought to be beloved of
his Church; for, so is here required that they should l^ve him. And who so do
not love the Lord Jesus Christ, they are excommunicate in the highest degree, 1
Cor. 16.22. 2. None can justly pretend any interest in God as his children, but
they that love Christ, who in his divine nature is the express image of his
Father, and in his office, is employed by him; for, so much does Christ's
assertion and argument hold forth, If God were your Father, ye would love me,
for I proceeded forth (or came out, pointing at his eternal generation) and
come (in the present time, as it is in the Original, to perform this office of
Mediator) from God. 3. It is a point beyond all contraversie that Christ was
sent of the Father, to be the Mediator and Messenger of the Covenant to his
Church, and consequently, that all his doctrine and works were according to his
Commission from the Father; Therefore is it added for confirmation, neither
came I of my self, but he sent me. 4. These reasons, given by Christ, wherefore
Gods children should love him, taken from his eternal generation by the Father,
and his being sent by him in Commission, may further teach us in general. 1.
True lovers of God will give a room in their affections to others, according
to the measure of their communion with, and interest in God; for, if the
Fathers children do love Christ, who is begotten of God, and is the express
image of his person, then they will also love others who are begotten of him,
and bear his image in part, 1 John 5.1. 2. True lovers of God will love to have
intercourse with him, and will love every Messenger sent by him, and the
Messenger for the message sake; for, that other ground, I come from God, and he
sent me, holds out this general, That they could not be Gods children, unless
they liked to hear from him, and liked these who bring the tidings. See Gal.
4.14, 15.

Verse 43. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my
word.
This challenge may be understood generally, and so it contains a second proof
that God was not their Father, taken from their not understanding of what he
preaches, which evidenceth that they were not only under a natural impotencie
to hear, but were so transported with malice, that they could not hear with
patience, and so were none of Gods children. It may be also understood
particularly, as a challenge that they were so blinded with malice, that they
could not understand what he had spoken in general terms of their father,
verse 38.41. and so it is a transition to the following verse, wherein he
explains his mind. We need not stand on this difference, seeing this
particular may come in well enough under the general challenge. And it teaches,
1. It is a duty incumbent to all, to understand what Christ speaks unto them;
and where it is not so, Christ will make a quarrel of it; for, he puts it home
with a sharp question and challenge, Why do ye not understand my speech? not
only to put them to consider from whence it flowed, (of which afterward,) but
to testify his indignation against them for it. 2. Christ's wicked enemies are
not only naturally impotent to hear the Word of God aright, but are so blinded
with malice, that they cannot so much as with patience hear what he says; for,
this does Christ chiefly understand, when he says, ye cannot hear my Word. 3.
Men's own malice adds to their natural ignorance, and does so blind them, that
they cannot understand never so plain truth; for, ye understand not my speech,
because ye cannot hear my Word. See Matthew. 13.9. 4. Albeit Gods Children may
have much ignorance, and may for a time be tain^ed with some error; Yet as
that is not good, so they who maliciously slight the means of knowledge, and
do shut their own eyes, that they cannot and will not see, have nothing to
evidence that they are the children of God; Therefore does Christ, by this
question, put them to consider what their practice and condition flowed from,
Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my Word For
if men of one Province, and children of one Family do understand the language
and dialect (as some translate the word speech) of the Country, and Family,
and are discerned from others by their speaking of it, as Judge. 12.6. Matthew
26.73. Then certainly they cannot be children of Gods house, who do not
understand the language of it. And much more do they prove that they are not
begotten by the seed of the Word, who cannot so much as endure to hear it.

Verse 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own: for he is a lier, and the father of it.
Secondly, in this reply Christ does clearly and positively show unto them who
is their spiritual father of whom they are, even which is the Devil, of which
see what is said on verse 38. This he proves, in general, from their earnest
following and endeavoring to execute these wicked lusts which reign in him,
and their writing after his copy, and imitating of him, being acted by him.
Then he instanceth this general in two particulars, of murder, and opposition
to, and defection from the truth; Which as it appeared in Satan from the
beginning of the creation, in deceiving our first parents, and opposing the
truth God had delivered to them, and in drawing them under the stroke of
temporal and eternal death; So it was to be seen in them also, in seeking to
kill him, verse 40. and opposing his truth; which he had hinted at, verse 43.
and does more clearly prosecute in the following verses. Lastly, he clears God
of all these lusts of Satan, showing that they slowed from his own defection,
and that all his lies are his own invention, and so they who followed these
practices, could not father themselves on God. Doctrine 1. It should be counted
no absurdity, but the sound doctrine of Christ, to assert that not only they
who boast much of pripiledges, but these who indeed are members of a true
Church are nothing in reality and in Gods account, but limbs and children of
Satan; so long as they are unconverted, and live in a wicked course; for, says
Christ of these Jews, ye are of your father the devil. 2. Such as will not
take with a reproof when it is mildly given by Christ, do provoke him to tell
it out in sharper terms; for, they would take no notice of what Christ
formerly spoke in general, of their spiritual parentage, and now he speaks it
out, ye are of your father the devil. 3. Men's practices will prove that they
are Satan's children, let them say what they will; And these do prove themselves
to be eminently his children, in whom he works the greatest conformity to
himself; for, Christ proves his own assertion, and refutes all they had to say
against it, with this, the lusts of your father ye will do; and according as
they were eminent imitators of him, accordingly did they prove how eminent they
were among his children. 4. Satan is full of raging wicked lusts, wherein his
children, being acted by him, do imitate him; for, there are the lusts of your
father, wherein they do resemble him. 5. Albeit Satan and his children do very
often get many of their lusts fulfilled in the world; yet through the
restraining power of God, and Christ's watchful providence over his own, many of
their hot attempts are frustrated; for, sometime they prove but lusts, vexing
chiefly themselves who have them, and ye will, or, desire to do them, but can
get no further. 6. God will not judge of Satan's children by their actings and
success only, but by their desires and endeavors; And albeit they be
ofttimes stopped in their course, yet he will account them Satan's children,
because of their obstinate and wilful endeavors; for Christ proves the point
by this, as sufficient, ye will do, or, desire to do the lusts of your father;
for as yet they had gone no further then desires and endeavors in persecuting
him. 7. As all unrenewed men are Satan's children; So, in particular, all liers,
deceivers, double minded and bloody men, and especially, despisers and opposers
of Christ's truth, and bloody persecutors, are Satan's chief children; for, these
are the particular lusts, whereby he proves them eminent children, even murder
and lying, of both which they were guilty. 8. This doctrine delivered by
Christ, concerning Satan's fall and practices, does hold forth several useful
Instructions, which I shall point out in this order. 1. The most excellent and
perfect of creatures, being left to themselves, and the guidance of their best
perfections, will not be able to stand, or keep their integrity; for, so much
appears in this example of Satan, who being one of the most excellent
creatures, yet being left to himself, he abode not in the truth, or, in his
original station and holiness, and in his cleaving to God, but turned aside to
a vain lying course, and to be a deceiver of others, as is afterward cleared.
And he was in this defection, from the beginning, to wit, of man's fall; So that
however he was created perfect in one of the six days, yet before the fall of
man he had left his first habitation. 2. The cause of Satan's fall was in
himself, who of his own accord left his original holiness and station; for, be
abode not in the truth, but forsook it. 3. As since Satan's fall, there is no
spark of goodness, holiness, or truth in him, (for, there is no truth in
him;) So this depravation proves, that he is fallen from that condition wherein
he was created; therefore does this come in by way of reason, that since God
made all his creatures good and perfect in their kind, therefore it must
necessarily follow, that he abode not in the truth, because now there is no
truth in him. And so the Lord is cleared of his fall. 4. Satan since his fall
is a great enemy to man, and full of malice that man should fill that room
from whence he fell; So much appears in his being a murderer and liar, and that
from the beginning. He did begin soon, and continues long; so that Gods people
are to remember that they dwell in a world where Satan is going about, full of
rage. 5. Whatever mask Satan put on, in dealing with men; Yet he is but seeking
their destruction, both of soul and body; for, he is a murderer. 6. Satan's
attempt and success upon our first parents, is a clear evidence of his
designs against the children of men, and a sad document, showing how far he
may prevail with the best, if they be left to their own free will; Therefore
is it peculiarly marked, that he was a murderer from the beginning, as a clear
warning to all, from what he did to Adam and Eve, hazarding the destruction of
their, and all their posterities, souls, and bringing them all under the
sentence of bodily death. 7. Satan's great engine, for bringing about his bloody
designs, is, lying and deceits; Therefore is it subjoyned, he is a liar; And
by this he prevailed with our first parents, subtly calling the truth of God
in question. So that to give heed to his lies against the truth, is, in effect,
to give up our throat to the murderer. 8. As Satan is a very subtle and crafty
adversary, full of cunning and slight to entrap the simple; (see 2 Cor. 2.10,
11. Ephesians. 6 11) So he is, in all he says, a liar and not to be trusted; for, so
says Christ, there is no truth in him, he is a liar. Therefore, though he
transform himself in an Angel of light, and busk up his projects; Yet men are
not to be taken therewith; And though he sometime speak truth (as sometime he
did commend Christ, Mark. 1.24. Luke 4.34. and his servants, Act. 16.17. and
may bear in true challenges upon believers;) Yet he is still to be rejected, as
intending thereby to deceive. For by his commendation of Christ and his
followers, he intended either to make them be suspected, or to draw persecution
on themselves by casting him out, as befell Paul. And when he pleads Gods cause
against his people, it is but to drive them from God; and when he charge upon
them what they deserve, his scope is to deprive them of all hope of remedy, and
persuade them that they shall be dealt with only according to deserving. 9.
Satan's sin is of himself, and all the evil that is in the world, God is free
of it, and only Satan, as the enticer, and we, as the consenters, are to blame
for it; for, when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: he is the father
of it, or, the inventer and beginner of it, in himself and his followers.

Ver. 45. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.
Here Christ does confirm his assertion, concerning their being of Satan; And,
as before he had proven they were of him, and imitaters of him, in murder; so,
here he proves the same in the matter of lying, showing that they were like
Satan in that also, because they will not believe him and his doctrine, even
because it is truth. And upon this follows the other, of their seeking to
kill him because he told the truth, verse 40. Doctrine, 1. Rejecting of truth,
and wilful and malicious contradiction thereunto, is the great trade of Satan
the liar, and their practice who are his children, and acted by him; for, in
this does he instance Satan's lying, and their sinning like him. 2. As Satan
since his fall has cast off all aw of God, and neither fears his justice, nor
hopes for mercy, and does maliciously, oppose truth, because it is truth and
crosses him in his designs: So Christ's enemies, being acted by Satan, will
oppose truth for no other reason, but because it is truth. They will believe
any thing but truth, and the more true the doctrine be, the more will they
oppose it; for, because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. 3. Let wicked
men oppose Christ's doctrine as they will, yet it is truth, and any doctrine
they embrace beside, is but a lie, which will disappoint them in end; for,
however they believe not, yet says he, I tell you the truth.

Ver. 46. Which of you convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye
not believe me?
In the third place, Christ in this reply, does vindicate himself, and so
prevents an objection, and aggravates their infidelity; For whereas they might
object against the former challenge, in ver. 45. wherefore should we believe
thee, and leave our own Religion for thy saying whom we know not? Christ
answers, that since none of them could convince him of any sin, and his
doctrine was the very truth, therefore they could not but sin hainously, in
not giving him credit, whoever he were. Whence learn, 1. As Christ's public
Messengers are obliged to be irreprehensible, and true in their doctrine; so
this was eminently and singularly true of Christ, who was the spotless Lamb of
God and infallibly true in all his doctrine; for he was without sin, and said
the truth. 2. It is not sufficient to condemn any, that malicious men do
calumniate and traduce them, unless they can also argue and make it out; for
Christ requires of his accusers, that they convince him of sin, or, by
arguing make it clear, that what they assert is true. 3. Christ was so
perfectly spotless and innocent, that albeit he lay buried under calumnies,
yet none of his most malicious adversaries could ever make it good that he was
guilty of one sin; for, says he, which of you convinces me of sin? 4.
Albeit the blameless carriage of men does serve much to make away for their
doctrine, and does aggravate their sin who despise it; Yet should not be a
snare to draw others to receive any thing they say, unless it be made clear
that it is truth; Therefore, in grounding this challenge, Christ adds this to
that of his sinlesnesse, I say the truth. 5. As the doctrine of innocent and
infallible Christ ought, without contraversie, to be credited; so their
consciences may look for a sad account and challenge, who will not do so: for,
says he, If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? And it holds out also
this general, that no prejudice should hinder men from embracing that which is
held out to be truth.

Ver. 47. He that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.
In the last place, Christ concludes the discourse with a sad note upon them;
And does himself answer that question he had propounded, verse 46. showing,
that the true cause why they did not believe, nor hear his word, was, because
they were not of God, which he illustrates from the contrary, and so leaves
them again to consider of whom they were. This assertion, as it must
necessarily be understood of grown up persons; (for infants are still to be
excepted in these ordinary rules) So albeit to be of God, be frequently
understood of men's being elected from eternity; Yet here it is chiefly to be
understood of regeneration, because even the elect of God, so long as they are
unregenerate, may be guilty of the same sins with the reprobate, and
particularly, in sleighting the Word. Only, if we conjoyne these two, to resist
known truth, and to do so maliciously, (which was the sin of many of these
Jews) it cannot befall any elect: For though Peter sinned wittingly, yet not
maliciously, and though Paul sinned maliciously, yet he did it ignorantly, and
in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. Doctrine 1. Men's respect to the Word of God is a
true touchstone, whereby they may try their own condition and state; for, so
does Christ here teach us. 2. Men have nothing in them by nature, that can
entertain or receive the Word of God with any due respect, but what they attain
to of that kind, is of God, and not of themselves; for he must be of God, by
election and regeneration who will hear Gods words. 3. An elect child of God
being renewed, as he is begotten by the seed of Gods Word, so in his progress
he will not resist the known light thereof, but will receive and feed upon it;
And whatever may be his fits of tentation, yet he will never reject it
maliciously: for, he that is of God, hears Gods words: He hears it with
faith, submission, and fruitfulness; for, so it is opposed to not believing,
ver 46. See 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.1, 2, 3. 4. Whoever they be that do not regard
the Word of the Lord, but do maliciously reject it after conviction, they prove
themselves to be unregenerate, if not also reprobates; for, ye hear them not,
because ye are not of God. 5. Consequences soundly and solidly deduced from
Scripture, are Scripture, and as valid a ground of faith, as the ground from
whence they are deduced; for, so does Christ here teach us by his own practice,
deducing from that ground, He that is of God, hears Gods words, this
necessary and infallible consequence, ye therefore here them not, because ye
are not of God. And this penman is full of such deductions, warranting this
way of arguing. 6. Whatever affront men think to put upon Christ, by rejecting
his doctrine: Yet the real ignominy redounds to themselves; Therefore, however
they laid all the indignity of this opposition on Christ himself, and on his
doctrine; Yet he tells them it flowed really from this, ye are not of God, but
lying in a reprobate unregenerate condition.

Verse 48. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that
thou art a Samaritane, and have a devil?
From this to the end of the Chapter, these adversaries do change their way of
proceeding with Christ. So long as they had any seeming ground, or show of
reason, they debate the matter; but now being put from all that, they fall a
railing at his person; and Christ defends and replies, till they come to
violence. It may be taken up in this order. 1. They rail at him, ver. 48. and
he vindicates himself as an honourer of his Father, and therefore they were in
the wrong who reproached him ver. 49. and behoved to make account to God for
it, ver. 50. And he shows their loss who despise his Word, which preserves
men from death, ver. 51. 2. They take occasion from what he says of his Word,
to carp^^^in: objecting that Abr^ham and the Prophets were dead, ver. 52. And
that he should make himself greater then they, ver. 53. And he clears himself
of ambition in this matter, charging it on them, ver. 54, 55. and sh^weth that
Abraham's joy depended on him, ver. 56. before whom he had a subsistence as God,
though as man he was not old, ver. 57, 58. Upon which assertion, they betake
themselves to violence, and he avoideth it, ver. 59.

In this verse we have their first attempt; wherein, taking advantage of his
sharp censure of them, they charge him with being a Samaritan and possessed
with an evil Spirit. They do particularly charge him to be a Samaritan, not
only, because they accounted the Samaritans the most impious of men, because of
their Apostasy from the Church of Judah, and the true Religion there, (whereof
they account him also guilty by his doctrine) but specially, because as the
Samaritans were most bitter enemies unto, and traducers of the Jews (as may be
seen in part, Joh. 4.9.) so did they account of him, who durst be so bold as to
deny them to be children of God, and to say they were of the devil. As for the
other charge, thou have a devil, it is true that elsewhere they do maliciously
assert against their light, that he was guided and assisted by Satan in his
doctrine and miracles, Matthew. 12.24. But here, it seems, they only intend to
retort his challenge, and do say, he had a devil, which prompted him to say
they were of the devil. And so the challenge is all one with the former of a
Samaritan, whom they looked on (as on all wicked men) as guided by an evil
spirit, and accordingly, Christ answers both, in answering one of them.
Doctrine 1. Albeit wicked enemies to truth may, for a time, enter the lists of
dispute, as if they minded to seek out, and follow truth; Yet conviction in
debate will not gain ground upon them; As appears in these Jews, who when
they are put to the worse in dispute, yet they come nothing the nearer to
truth. 2. Unbelief and contempt of the truth will end in blasphemy; And
impious men, being convinced, will turn ratlers, and betake themselves to
personal reflections against the persons of men who maintain the truth, when
they can do no better: for, so do they deal with Christ. 3. Wicked men can vent
no reproaches, calumny;, or blasphemies, against Christ's servants and people,
which Christ has not sanctified in his own person, being called to his face
the worst of men, a reproacher and enemy to the people of God, and one
possessed with an evil spirit; As here we see. 4. There are none more ready to
reproach Christ and his followers, as if they were possessed with an evil
spirit, then these who are his real slaves themselves; for, they who are of the
devil, ver. 44. say of Christ, thou have a devil. 5. Such is the power of
ignorance, prejudice, or malice, when men are possessed therewith, that they
will draw bad conclusions, and put hard constructions upon best actions; for,
upon Christ's useful and true doctrine, they think they do well to draw these
bad conclusions, Say we not well (intimating they had a custom of it before)
that thou art a Samaritan, etc. since thou speak so.

Ver. 49. Jesus answered, I have not a devil: but I honor my Father, and ye do
dishonor me.

50. And I seek not mine own glory; there is one that seeks and judges.

51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never
see death.


In these verses, we have Christ's answer to this blasphemous calumny. And, 1.
He declares, that he had no devil, but was honoring his Father in what he did
and said, and therefore it was their great sin thus to reproach him, ver. 49.
2 Lost they should think he took to is ill, as an indignity done to him; he
declares, that he was no selfe-seeker, nor hunter after vainglory, nor needed
he avenge himself on them, since the Father will honor him, and take course
with them who rub upon his glory, ver 50. 3. To show what his true glory is,
and what their loss is who despise his Word, he shows what blessed effects
shall follow upon observing of his doctrine, ver. 51.

From ver. 49 Learn, Bitterest calumnies should be answered meekly by Christ's
servants; And however men f^ile in duty to them, yet they should still cleave
to duty; Therefore does Christ meekly deny the calumny, I have not a devil, and
refutes it with reason. 2. As it is the duty of all Gods people to seek the
honor of God, as their chief end; so Christ did eminently honor his Father,
both in his doctrine and obedience; for, so says he, I honor my Father. See
Joh. 17.4. 3. They who sincerely seek Gods honor, do prove that they are not
guided and acted by Satan, whatever the world think or say of them; for, so
does Christ prove his point, I have not a devil, but I honor my Father. 4.
Men's innocent lives and carriage is the best mean to refute unjust calumnies
and reproaches; for, so does Christ refute their blasphemy, by his honoring of
God in his carriage. 5. It is a commendable zeal for God, honor, when his
faithful servants will not suffer wicked men, who carry the devils stamp and
image to father themselves on God, as his beloved and dear people; for, in
this, particularly, did he honor his Father here, in telling them plainly what
they were. 6. As men's honoring of God will not stop the mouths of malicious
slanderers; So their sin is very great who reproach them who do honor God;
And particularly, this holds true of Christ, who cannot be dishonored, but it
rubs upon the Father also; Therefore, says he by way of sad challenge, I honor
my Father, and ye do dishonor me. See Joh. 5.22, 23.

From ver. 50. Learn, 1. Such as unfeignedly seek Gods honor, will not hunt
after vainglory, nor seek their own glory, save in so far as Gods honor is
stricken at by the reproaches cast on them; Therefore does Christ subjoyn, I
seek not mine own glory. 2. Such as unfeignedly seek Gods glory, need not be
anxious about the reproaches they meet with, seeing God undertakes to see to
that: Therefore also, lest they should think the want of honor from them
grieved him, he says, I seek not mine own honor, there is one that seeks
and judges. 3. As Christ did honor the Father in going about the works of his
calling; so the Father did undertake, and has now honored him, and will
avenge all the blasphemies, and reproaches that wicked men belch out against
him; for, says he, there is one that seeks and judges.

From ver. 51. Learn, 1. Christ is never so angry with his foes, as to forget
his friends; Yea, he delights to conveigh his threatenings against enemies, in
promises to his children, if so be they will consider their loss, and yet take
hold of his offer; Therefore, instead of threatening, he makes a gracious
promise, and that not only for the confirmation of any weak ones who were then
hearing, but to try what such an offer might yet work upon these wicked men. 2.
Albeit most part of men make but little account of the matter of their
salvation, and these who have any thoughts about it, are very averse from
crediting Christ's naked Word, about the way to it: Yet Christ would have it
looked upon as a weighty business, and would have it out of all contraversie
that he will make good the Word which he speaks concerning it; Therefore does
he premit his ordinary asseveration to this doctrine, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, that he may teach them, that it is no light or trivial matter he is
speaking of, and that he may remove all hesitation concerning the truth of his
Word. 3. Such as would receive any benefit by Christ's doctrine, should not only
hear it, but lay it up in their heart, and keep it in some measure of sincerity
in their life; for, it is required, that they keep my saying. 4. Albeit such as
cleave to Christ, and make conscience of obedience to his Word, may meet with
very many troubles, and may oft-times have very great fears about death, and
their eternal happiness; Yet they shall be secured from eternal death, and all
their other troubles, and bodily death it self, shall be swallowed up into
victory; for, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death, to wit,
eternal death, and consequently, shall get a good account of all the steps
betwixt him and eternal happiness.

Ver. 52. Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou have a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets: and thou say, If a man keep my saying, he
shall never taste of death.

53. Art thou greater then our Father Abraham which is dead? and the Prophets
are dead: whom make thou thy self?


In these verses, they repeat their blasphemy, and think themselves confirmed
in it, and that they have him at a seen advantage in what he last spoke; For
whereas he had said, they should never see death who keep his sayings, they
think that many ways absurd, and reflecting upon himself. For, 1. Then
certainly Abraham and the Prophets were n^ne of his disciples, for they are all
dead. Nay, 2. ^e behoved to be very arrogant, who made himself greater then
Abraham and the Prophets, in that he ascribes a quickening virtue to his Word,
not only in respect of himself, but his hearers also. Whereas they not only
kept not others alive, but are dead themselves. Doctrine 1. Wicked men will be
as little taken with Christ's promises, as they are terrified with his
threatenings; And they desire rather to have some what to carp at in them, then
to be drawn by the sweetness thereof to embrace them; for, they rage as much
here at his sweet promise, as they did formerly at his sharp chalenges. 2. As
wicken men do reproach Christ out of malice, and all the arguments they
pretend, are but invented to cover their malice; So they will sometime be
forced to bewray themselves that it is so: for, say they, now we know that thou
have a devil, and if but now they know it, why said they it before* Certainly,
all the arguments they bring so^th, were but invented to color that
resolution, which they had laid down to reproach Christ. 3. Mistakes of Christ,
and understanding of his doctrine in a carnal sense, gives occasion to
persecutors of many cavils; for, upon these grounds does their exception run,
wherein they glory so much. They think it absurd enough, if they can infer from
his discourse, that he makes himself greater then Abraham and the Prophets,
which yet is the very truth; and they mistake him as if he were speaking of the
first death, when he is speaking of the second death 4. Christ's enemies do
falsely pretend to be honourers of the Saints, that they may bear him down;
for, so do they here cry up Abraham and the Prophets, to make him odious. 5.
Albeit Saints be truly excellent, yet they have no privilege against bodily
death, but must pay that debt; partly, to be a testimony that they are by
nature heirs to the first Adam, and do carry a body of corruption about with
them while they are in the world; and partly, that they may be translated to a
better life; for, even Abraham and the Prophets, whom they cry up as singular,
are dead. 6. Such as do in a carnal way overvalue the Saints, they prejudge
Christ of his glory and due estimation; for, so did they by their excessive
commendation of them, Art thou greater then our father Abraham, etc. And this
disease is more frequent, not only in them who set them up in Christ's room,
to be sharers with him, in leaving merits to be made use of by the Church, and
in being Mediators of intercession; but in them also who dote so much on
Saints, as they forget to give Christ the glory of any excellency that is in
them, and who implicitly follow them, not considering whether they be following
Christ in that wherein they follow them, or not. 7. Christ is truly singular
and matchless, and if all the Saints were put together, they are all nothing
to him, and he can do that which they cannot all do; for, this (together with
the clearing of their mistake of what he spoke concerning death) is the clear
answer to all their cavil, that indeed he is greater then all of them put
together.

Verse 54. Jesus answered, If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: It is my
Father that honors me, of whom ye say that he is your God.

55. Yet ye have not known him, but I know him: and if I should say, I know him
not, I shall be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep his saying.


Follows Christ's answer to this exception, And, 1. In general (in these
verses) he (...) himself of any ambition in this matter, and p^^ves them guilty
of it. Whereas, in their exception, they thought it great ambition in him, to
preferr^ himself to Abraham and all the Prophets; ^^e answers (by way of
concession) that it he himself, and of himself, did take this honor on him, it
were of no worth; but he has it of the Father, who does allow and confer it
on him. And whereas they might except, that if this Father of whom he boasted
so much, be the true God, they had greater cause to lay claim to him then he
had; He answers, that this proves them really guilty of that ambition wherewith
they charge him; For they boast of him while as they have no saving knowledge
of him; But he knows him, and would be a liar, like unto them, if he should say
that he knew him not, seeing he gives real proof of knowing him; by keeping his
word. Doctrine 1. Such as hunt after vainglory, and seek after respect and
estimation otherwise then God allows and approves of, they do hunt a shadow,
and that which really is of no worth; for, this is of general verity, If I
honor my self my honor is nothing. See 2 Cor. 10.18. 2. Christ seeks no
glory but what the Father allows on him; And as he is God over all, blessed
and honored for ever, and as his humane nature is honored, by being exalted
to a personal union with the Godhead; So whoever dishonor Christ, yet the
Father allows and has conferred honor on him as Mediator, to be a
testimony how well he is pleased with the redemption of lost man, performed by
him; and to be matter of comfort to all them who seek to this exalted Prince,
and matter of terror to all his and their enemies: For, says he, if I honor
my self, my honor is nothing, it is the Father that honors me. 3. What men
have received from God with his approbation, and have his testimony for it,
they may avow and maintain it against all opposition; Therefore does Christ not
deny that honor they alleged he took to himself, but he avows it on this
ground, It is my Father that honors me. 4. Albeit Christ be in himself God
alsufficient, and so is not capable of any access of glory: Yet it pleased him
to condescend so far, as to obscure his own glory under the vail of his flesh
and state of humiliation, till he had perfected the work of Redemption; and to
account of his office of Mediator, and the dignity accompanying it, as great
honor conferred upon him by the Father; Therefore, says he, my Father
honors me, above Abraham and the Prophets, that I can give life to them that
keep my sayings. 5. Christ's greatest enemies may yet be so presumptuous and
deluded, as to sooth up themselves, with a conceit of a special interest in
God; for, the Father, is he, of whom ye say that he is your God. 6.
Persecutors, pretending to interest in God, do but proclaim their own carnal
ambition and selfe-seeking, and that they do but lie and deceive themselves;
for, he brings this as a proof of their ambition, and asserts that they were
liars in so saying, I shall be a liar like unto you. 7. As none are more ready
to boast of an interest in God, then they who know least of him; so none can
prove an interest in him, but they who know and acknowledge him as he is
revealed in Christ by the Gospel; for, says he, ye say that he is your God but
(to refute that) ye know him not, to wit, savingly, in so far as they knew not
him as Father to his Son whom he had sent, and acknowledged not the Gospel to
be his revealed will. 8. It is not sufficient for proving an interest in God,
that men do acknowledge God as he reveals himself, unless also obedience to
his will be joined therewith; so much does Christ teach by his own evidences
that he is of God, contrary to theirs, I know him, and keep his saying. 9. Such
as are of God, and know him, should confidently avow their right and interest,
and it is as great a wrong in a child of God, to deny his right, as it is in a
profane man, to claim an interest; Therefore, says Christ, in opposition to
them, But I know him, and if I should say I know him not, I shall be a liar
like unto you, who boast of an interest without ground. 10. Christ does
perfectly know the Father and his will, so that none can be deluded in
resisting on what he reveals of him; And he was perfectly obedient to the will
of the Father in all things, so that nothing can be objected against them, who
flee to lay hold on his righteousness; for, I know him, and keep his saying.

Verse 56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was
glad.
Secondly, Christ answers in particular to the ground of their exception; and,
comparing himself with Abraham (who was greatest, in their account, of any of
the Prophets, they mentioned with him, and indeed was the father of the
faithful) he proves that he was greater then he. For Abraham knowing of him,
the true Messiah, to come of his seed, did earnestly desire to see that day,
and did get a sight thereof by faith to his joy and contentment. And by this he
proves that Abraham's joy and comfort depended on him, and that he lived by
faith in his words and the promises concerning him, according to that, ver. 51.
And on the other hand, he proves by this, that they were not Abraham's true
children, who rejoiced not in him, and in the day of the Gospel. Doctrine 1.
Christ will make use of wicked men's boasted of privileges, to aggreage their
faults, therefore does he design him, your Father Abraham, to wit, according
to the flesh, that they might see how far they were degenerate from him in
manners. 2. The time of the Gospel is not only a day, in respect of the dark
ignorance in which the world lies without it; But it is Christ's day by way of
excellency. For albeit the Gospel and Christ were known and embraced before,
yet that treasure was but couched, for most part, under dark types, and seen at
a great distance, and sin and the law and the curse did bear much sway: But
now free grace does eminently reign and shine, and Christ in his own person
did appear on earth in our nature, to publish these gladtydings more clearly;
Therefore does he call it my day. 3. Men were not saved before Christ's
incarnation, by any thing beside Christ; but as Christ and the Covenant of
grace were known then, so men were made participant of him and his benefits by
faith; for, so is clear in the matter of Abraham, to whom it is supposed Christ
was known, not only as God, but as Mediator to be incarnate, otherwise he
could not have desired a sight of him, and it is expressly asserted, that he
saw his day, and was glad. 4. Such as indeed have heard tell of Christ, their
knowledge will produce earnest desires after him; and such as prize Christ and
salvation by him, will look upon the time of the Gospel, and his incarnation,
as a very sweet sight; for, Abraham hearing tell of it, he rejoiced to see my
day, to wit, of my coming in the flesh, as Luke 10.24. and this rejoicing
presupposes and includes an earnest desire. 5. Even the best of men stand in
need of Christ, and according as they grow in real goodness, their desires
after him will grow; for, so even Abraham, that eminent Saint, rejoiced to see
my day. 6. The spiritual desires of Gods people may be, and (when they are well
managed) are full of joy; begotten partly, by the estimation of what they
desire, seasoned with hope that they shall come speed in some measure; and
partly, by what they do really enjoy who are sincerely desiring and pursuing,
their very hunger proves a blessedness, and that they do possess in part.
Therefore it is said that Abraham rejoiced, or, skipped for joy, to see my day.
His heart was warmed with the thoughts of it even in desiring it. 7. The
sincere desires of Gods people will not be frustrate, nor will a sincere and
cheerful pu^s^er be disappointed, in Gods way and measure; for, he rejoiced to
see, and he saw, not with bodily eyes, Luke 10.24. but by faith, Heb. 11.13. 8.
The Lord, for wise reasons, may suspend the satisfying the desires of his
people all their days in their way; and yet in effect be granting them in a
way that is as good for them; for, albeit Abraham saw not this day with bodily
eyes, in its full accomplishment, yet for all that he saw it: The Lord indeed
suspended the exhibition of Christ in the flesh, till long after Abraham;
because it would have crossed his purpose of reserving that to the fullness of
time, to have done otherwise; (and Saints must stoop to quit their will, when
it does not consist with Gods great purposes concerning his Chruch:) Yet
Abraham got that which was far better then a simple bodily sight. For albeit
believers and the Disciples in that time had a double advantage, of getting
both a bodily and spiritual sight; yet a spiritual sight of him, either in the
word of promise, before he came, or in the word of performance, since his
exhibition, is far beyond a bodily sight of him, which avails, not without
this, as was seen in the most part of them who saw and heard him. 9. The
desires of the godly, which slow from faith, are well satisfied, when they get
more ground and encouragement yet to believe, and depend and wait on; for,
Abraham behoved to believe before he could desire, and now his desires are
satisfied with seeing more by faith. 10. Faith will see far off, and through
many impediments, and will draw comfort from what is not only invisible at
present, but not to come for a long time; for, at that great distance, and
through all these types, he saw my day and was glad. 11. A sight of Christ by
faith, though at never so great a distance, and under many vails, will bring
true peace and joy, and will satisfy a believer, however he desire often much
more; for, he saw it and was glad. He was content of that, though his desire
was after more, and it did indeed bring true joy unto him, and made him (with
the rest of the Patriarchs) confess they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth, Heb. 11.13. I need not here curiously enquire, why it is said that in
desi^ing he rejoiced, or, skipped for joy, and in getting that sight, he was
only glad. It may be conceived thus, that joy might be more solid, and make
less noise, when men have greatest cause of joy, and particularly in
enjoyment; or his rejoicing points at that more satisfactory measure of joy
that he apprehended would be in seeing Christ incarnate, and with bodily eyes,
as well as by faith, and his being glad, points at the measure of joy he
attained to in the sight he got, the other being reserved till he came to his
rest.

Ver. 57. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and
have thou seen Abraham?

58. Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was,
I am.


This last part of Christ's answer occasions a new exception against him, that
he, who was so young a man, should presume to say he had seen Abraham, ver. 57.
In answer to which, Christ asserts that however they take it, yet he is before
Abraham; to wit, in respect of his Godhead, though upon that also follows
that even then he exercised the office of Mediator according to the Covenant
of Redemption, in that nature, and so was the matter of the godlies desire and
joy, even from the beginning, as was said before of Abraham, ver. 56. While
they say, thou art not yet fifty years old, though Christ was far younger, it
may be conceived that Christ's condition and exercise, being a man of sorrows
and acquainted with griefs, had altered him much, and made him seem older then
he was, as indeed, exercise of mind will waste men's bodies soon. Or it may be
conceived to be spoken with a latitude, that it was very absurd that he, who
had not lived so much as the ha^^e of an age, (reckoning an hundred years to an
age) should say he had seen Abraham who was dead so many ages before. Likewise,
they bewray their malice in their speech, obscuring what he had spoken of
Abraham's seeing of his day, and putting in these words, have thou seen Abraham?
as thinking it a disparagement, that Abraham should take notice of him though
he had lived since that time. Doctrine, 1. The truth of God must not be the
worse loved, that it be sublime and above the reach of humane reason, or that
malicious men cannot, or will not see and acknowledge it, but do account it
absurd; for, here a precious truth is rejected by them as absurd. 2. Such as
look on Christ's outside only, and his state of humiliation, will never see his
true excellency; And so many things are true of Christ as God, that flesh and
blood, and they who look on him as mere man, will think them most absurd: for,
herein was their mistake, they look on him as man only, and therefore object,
Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? 3. Let men oppose
as they will, yet it is a truth beyond all contraversie, that Christ had a
subsistence before his incarnation and becoming man, and consequently is true
God; for, says he, Verily, verily, I say unto you before Abraham was, I am. He
follows forth his subsistence no further then before Abraham, (though he be
eternal) because this was the matter now in contraversie. And they who forge
glosses to obscure this text, as speaking of no subsistence of Christ before
his incarnation, do not only wrong Christ, as not answering distinctly to the
Jews Question, ver. 57. but are in that respect more blind then the very
Jews, who understood it so, and could not endure to hear it, ver. 59. 4.
Christ's subsistence before his incarnation, is immutable and unchangeable, not
subject to the vicissitudes of time; Therefore says he, before Abraham was I
am, not, I was, to show that this has subsistence is unchangeable, still
present, and consequently eternal. This, I am, is also a name of God, Exodus
3.14. pointing out that he is, and has an unchangeable being of himself and
that albeit there be that which may be known of God, Romans 1.19. yet his nature
is incomprehensible and unsearchable, and is most fitly expressed by this, I am
that I am, Exodus 3.14. See Judge 13.18.

Ver. 59. Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and
went out of the Temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.
Follows now the issue of this long dispute, and particularly of this last
contest. They look upon him as so absurd in what he had last spoken, that they
will reason no more, but seek to cut him off as a blasphemer; And he takes no
more pains to convince them, but delivers himself miraculously from their
fury. Whence learn, 1. Malicious persecutors will not hearken to truth, though
never so clearly told them; but when all arguments fail them, they will betake
themselves to violence; for, then they take up stones to cast at him, wherein
they were injurious, in returning him the reward of a blasphemer, who had told
them the truth, and unjust, in their tumultuous procedure, and not taking a
legal way. And this is it which may be expected of all contradictors of Christ's
doctrine, if they get power, and be not b^idled. 2. It is lawful for Gods
servants to withdraw from the fury of bloody persecutors, when the persecution
is personal, as Christ's example does teach. 3. Our blessed Lord did condescend
to sanctify all the weak means prescribed to his people in hard times, in his
own person; for, he who could have destroyed them, hid himself, and made use
of fleeing, he went out, etc. 4. Christ can disappoint persecutors, and deliver
his people, even in greatest extreamnity; for, when they have him among their
hands in the Temple, he first hid himself, and then went out of the Temple,
going through the midst of them, etc. Either he dazzled their eyes, and made
himself invisible, both when he hid himself, and went away; or having done so
for a while, while he hid himself, he did bind up their hands that they could
not touch him when he went openly through them out of the Temple. And so he
evidenced his great power even in his infirmity, and so also does he make his
people prove strong while they are weak, and perfects his strength in their
weakness.

CHAP. IX.
IN this Chapter we have the history of Christ's curing of a blind man with some
consequents that followed thereupon. It has an immediate connection with the
doctrine contained in the former Chapter; and it seems that Christ coming out
of the Temple to avoid the Jews fury, Chap. 8. 58. did meet with the blind man
beging on the Sabbath in the way that led to the Temple, ver. 8. 14. and
therefore in the original, ver. 1 the same word, of passing by, is repeated
from Chap. 8. 59 and Jesus is not named, but only it is said, as he passed by,
as being a continued discourse with that Chap 8. 59. where he is named The
Chapter may be taken up in these parts. 1. Christ's miraculous healing of a
blind man, to ver. 8. 2. The conference of the neighbors about this matter,
partly, among themselves, and partly, with the man himself, from ver. 8. to
13. 3. The proceeding of the Pharisees upon it, among themselves, with the man,
his Parents, and again with the man himself, till they excommunicate him, from
ver. 13. to 35. 4. Christ's comforting of the excommunicate man, by leading him
up to the knowledge and faith of himself, ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. and by showing
that he has the administration of judgment in his hand, for the comfort of
humble sinners, and terror of proud Pharisees, ver. 39. which he maintains
against the exceptions of some of them, ver. 40, 41.

Ver. 1. ANd as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.
The history of this miracle may be taken up in this order. 1. Christ the
Physician and the distressed man meet together, ver. 1. 2. Christ conferres
with his disciples about the Lords end in afflicting him, ver. 2, 3. and about
the necessity of his curing him, and that presently, ver. 4, 5. 3. He works the
miraculous cure, ver. 6, 7.

In this verse, it is recorded that Christ coming from the Temple, does on the
way perceive and take notice of this man, whose disease was naturally
incureable. Whence learn, 1. Since the fall of Adam, mankind is subject unto
many miseries, and beside the Spiritual plagues, and common miseries following
thereupon, it pleases the Lord to leave some exemplary effects thereof, to be
documents unto all; As here there is a man blind from his birth, which flowed
from sin as the fountain cause and inlet, though Christ afterward denies,
that Gods end in this affliction is to punish sin. 2. Difficulties and
diseases that are insuperable and incurable by the ordinary course of nature,
are yet not impossible for Christ to help, but a meet object for him to
magnify his power on; Therefore it is marked, that he was blind from his
birth, that so he may set out Christ's power, who cured that blindness that by
natural means was incurable. 3. When Christ and his followers are driven by
persecution from their station and employment, they are but driven to their
Christ; and the Lord, ordinarily, does let persecutors drive them away, because
he has other employment for them, wherein they may do more good; Therefore
when Christ is driven out from preaching in the Temple to malicious and violent
enemies, an occasion of work and doing good is presently offered him, and he is
thrust out, in Gods providence, that he may come and heal this man, who also
does afterward make better use of his doctrine then they did. 4. No heat of
persecution, or personal danger, and no throng whatsoever, will hinder Christ
to give an affectionate look to one of his own in misery; for, as he passed by,
fleeing the fury of the Pharisees, he saw the man, and looked so earnestly and
tenderly on him, that it occasioned the disciples question, ver. 2. Yea, it
seems this man's misery (who afterward was converted to him) did so draw his eye
to him, that he saw him, and took notice of none else that were on the way. 5.
Albeit Christ's people in their distress may be blind, and cannot see him, yet
he sees them, and his seeing of them will move him to pity, so much the more
as they see not: Therefore is it marked that he saw and took special notice of
a man which was blind.

Verse 2. And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man
or his Parents, that he was borne blind?

3. Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his Parents, but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him.


Follows a conference of Christ and his disciples before the working of the
cure, consisting of two parts. In the first whereof, answering a question of
the disciples, he shows what was the Lords end in afflicting this man. Christ's
taking so special notice of him, and (as would appear) his standing still
beside him, leads the disciples also to take notice of him, and to move a
question, whether it was his own or his parents sins that had drawn on this
stroke, ver. 2. And Christ declares, that in this stroke God did not intend so
much the punishment of the sin of either of them, as the manifestation of his
own glorious work, especially in curing of him, ver. 3. For clearing this
question and answer. Consider, 1. The disciples question is not concerning the
principle efficient cause of this affliction, (for that was God;) but
concerning the procuring and final cause of it, that is, whether he or his
parents by some gross sin had procured this stroke, and God had sent it on
as a punishment for that sin. Consider, 2. However there might be clear cause
of conceiving him to be born blind for his parents sins, (as it is to be
cleared afterward) yet it is more difficult to clear, how that should be the
punishment of his own sin, seeing he could not sin before he was born: But
we need not, for clearing their meaning, recurre to that conceit of
transmigration of souls from one body into another, and consequently, that he
should be punished for the sins of his soul committed while it was in another
body: For albeit this was an opinion among Pagan Philosophers, and somewhat of
it crept in among the Pharisees, as may be gathered, in part, from Matthew. 14.2.
and 16 14. yet it is conceived that they only held the transmigration of
righteous men's souls into other bodies, and no^ of the wickeds, such as the
disciples supposed this man to be. Nor yet need we understand them as
conceiving that God foreseeing what a sinner he would be, did thus punish him;
For whatever reference a stroke may have to a future sin, either to prevent
it, or to cut short their power, who would in process of time abuse it; Yet
affliction as a punishment is inflicted after the sin committed. Nor yet need
we assert, that they looked on Original sin as the Pharisees do, ver. 34. (of
which in its own place) never considering, nor laying it to heart, but where it
is evidenced by such a stroke. But we are to conceive that they acknowledged
original sin, and that this did deserve the greatest of afflictions and
plagues, not only Spiritual, but bodily also, as is seen on some Infants.
Consider, 3. Christ's answer is not to be understood. 1. As if he denied them to
have sin, whereof all are guilty since the fall, 1 Kings 8.46. Romans 5.12.
Nor, 2. As if he denied that affliction entered into the world by reason of
sin, Romans 5.12. Since if man had not sinned, he had lived in a blessed
estate, according to the Covenant of works. Nor, 3. As if he or his parents had
not sin enough to have deserved this punishment, if God had pursued it; for
the wages of the least sin is death, Romans 6.23. Nor yet, 4. As if God did
never send affliction as a punishment for sin, however he dealt in this
particular: But the meaning is, that in afflicting this man, the Lord did not
so much purpose to punish their sins, as to manifest his own glory. And so he
would draw them from their curious questions, to prepare themselves to be
edified by his cure. Doctrine 1. Such as God has a special purpose of love
unto, may yet be mistaken by his dear children, and get harder measure from
them, then Christ will give them; As here the disciples do to this man, upon
whom Christ had mercy. 2. It is a great fault in Christ's disciples, being
tenderly dealt with themselves, when they give out hard sentences against
others, because of their afflictions, and do judge of their guilt according to
the greatness of their afflictions; Not considering that it is not
dispensations, but the Word, whereby men's estate and condition must be tried;
for, herein the disciples sailed, who being as yet the children of the
bride-chamber, little acquaint with sorrows and griefs, and being little
affected with the poor man's case, only desiring to hold up discourse, when they
see Christ so diligently observe him, they would dive into his guilt and
provocation, whereas no such thing was intended in the stroke. Thus also did
Jobs friends deal with him. 3. Whatever be the Lords forbearance toward
sinners; yet all the posterity of Adam do bring as much guilt and sin into
the world with them, as deserves the saddest of afflictions; for, their
question imports this truth, that this man's sin did deserve that he should be
born blind. Original sin brings death, even on Infants, Romans 5.12, 14. does
deserve eternal damnation; and consequently, it needs not be thought strange,
if the Lord pursue it with temporal afflictions. 4. Albeit the Lord do not
punish and condemn any eternally for the sin of any of their progenitors
(except Adam in whom all sinned) unless they do actually imitate them; Yet he
may justly afflict children in their bodies and estates, which they have from
their parents, for the sins of their parents, and so punish their parents in
them; for, this truth is also imported in their question, that for his parents
sin, he might be born blind. 5. The sense of Christ's words is not always to
be taken from what his speech at first view would seem to offer; but a special
respect is to be had to all the occasions and circumstances thereof, for
finding out the truth; for, so must we do here in finding out Christ's meaning
in this speech, neither has this man sinned nor his parents; which being
nakedly looked on in it self, would seem to contain an untruth, contrary to
the tenor of the Scriptures, but being compared with the disciples question,
and what himself subjoins, the meaning is found to be, that God by this
affliction is not punishing their sin. 6. Albeit all men be sinners, and
albeit every sin deserve both temporal and eternal judgments; Yet the Lord
does not always intend the punishing and avenging of sin, even when he is
correcting such as are sinners, but may be intending an higher end; for, this
is the true doctrine and sense of these words, Neither has this man sinned,
nor yet his parents, but that the works of God, etc. Beside the punishing of
sin, and the end after mentioned, we find in Scripture that God does
afflict, that he may exercise his Sovereignty and dominion over men, and that
he may try the says of his own, as was seen in Jobs case. And albeit in many
cases it will be a great difficulty to attain to this comfort, that Christ is
not eyeing or pursuing our guilt, when we are under sad afflictions; Yet we may
safely follow this order. 1. In all afflictions we should remember that sin is
the coal from whence these sparks do fly, and so (whatever be the Lords end,
yet) we are still to be humbled under the sense of sin, as our duty, when we
are afflicted. 2. Albeit the Lord do not pursue any of his own with
afflictions, as enemies; Yet there may be many failings and infirmities, which
the Lord requires they should be sensible of, especially when the rod is on,
whatever be Gods end in it: And in observing this Job came short, as Elihu
teaches, though he was a reconciled man wronged by his friends, Job 36.8, 9,
10. 3. The Lord may be pointing at sin by afflictions, when yet they are
pardoned, and may send out rods, on penitent and pardoned Saints, to vindicate
his own glory, and make them more cautious in time coming. So did he deal with
David, 2 Samuel 12.13. with verse 10, 11, 14. 4. Albeit the Lord send some
afflictions as punishments and corrections for sin, and some for trial of
faith and other graces; Yet it is not the Lords mind that his children, being
corrected for sin, should cast away their faith, but when they take with their
guilt, they ought to look on their affliction as a double trial of faith,
having not only the affliction; but guilt also, to wrestle with; and therefore
they ought to take especial heed to faith. 5. Whatever a child of God be
commanded to look unto under affliction, either of guilt or trial; yet they
ought still to lift up their eyes above that, and to expect that somewhat of
God is, and will be manifested in their afflictions, and that this is his chief
end in afflicting; for, so much does the Text expressly hold out, it is that
the works of God should be made manifest; And the expectation of this should be
the chief exercise of Saints. Doctrine 7. Albeit the Lord has created the
world, yet his alsufficiencie is such, as he can receive nothing from it, nor
be bettered by it; only it is a Stage whereon he does experimentally manifest
and make known what he is: for, this is his great end in all his works, and
particularly in this, that the works of God should be made manifest in him. 8,
In Gods dispensations toward men, there are to be observed, not one, but many
purposes and proofs of his attributes and workings; for, the works (not the
work) of God are to be made manifest in him. His Sovereignty appeared in
afflicting, and his mercy and power in curing him. Yea, by this so much
appeared, as proved him to be the Messiah according to the Scriptures, Isa.
35.5. 9. Albeit the Lord do gloriously manifest himself daily, in the ordinary
works of his Sovereignty, power and mercy; Yet such is the stupidity of men,
that this is but little observed, unless he manifest himself in some
extraordinary works also; Therefore must such an extraordinary disease and cure
be, that the works of God may be made manifest. 10. The Lord will not take
advantage of the distresses of his people, but only that he may give them a
proof of his love; And he does involve them in infirmities and distresses, of
purpose that he may let out his glory in doing them good; for, this man was
born blind, that the works of God should be made manifest in him; And as thus
he needs our infirmities for him to work upon, so we may glory in them, 2
Cor. 12.9, 10. 11. As the Lord has diverse ends in afflicting his people; So
his ultimate and last scope will not be soon seen, but the afflicted may be
kept long under a dark condition, supported by secret strength, and an unseen
blessing, and little know the Lords mind till he himself manifest it; for,
albeit Sovereignty might still have been seen in this affliction, yet God had
many other works to manifest, which were little dreamt of by this man from his
birth to that day, till now Christ bring them out by his Word and work. Which
may warn all to beware of rash judgment, and may encourage them, who, lying
long under affliction, do keep their eyes fixed upon Christ.

Verse 4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day: the night
comes when no man can work.

5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.


In the second part of the conference, Christ having answered their question,
does now prevent an objection by showing reasons why he should cure him, and
that presently, notwithstanding any hazard might redound to him for so doing.
As for the objection which the disciples might have urged against his working
this miracle, we have one propounded to the same purpose, Chap. 11. 8. Where
Christ repeats this answer in part, verse 9, 10. And here they might be ready
to object, that being but even now in peril of stoning by the Jews, Chap. 8.
59. Why would he irritate them again by this miracle, and not rather lurk?
Especially, Why would he do it on the Sabbath, as it is verse 14. Seeing the
like practice had bred him so much trouble before, as is marked, Chap. 5. and
7.23, 25? Christ prevents all, by showing that he must manifest these works of
God (of which verse 3.) by curing this man, and that presently; For which he
gives three reasons, 1. That he is sent with a Commission to do these works,
verse 4. -- and therefore must be diligently obedient. 2. That his affection to
the service did bind the tie, laid upon him the straiter, verse -- 4. For when
he considered that there was a time profixed to him, wherein to do these works
in his own person, (to wit, the time of his life and Ministry) which being
ended (as it was now shortly to expire) he could not have the like opportunity,
therefore he would now be busy upon all hazards. 3. That he is the light of
the world, verse 5. and therefore behoved to cure him. This imports, partly,
that being the storehouse of lost man, in whom the remedy of all their
miseries is hid up, he could not withold from them what they needed; and
partly, being to manifest himself the light of the world, to cure their
spiritual blindness, he would not omit to confirm it by this visible sign of
curing a blind man. This reason is amplified from the consideration of the
time wherein he exercised this office, as long as I am in the world; which is
but an enlargement of the second reason. And for clearing thereof, and of the
whole second and third reasons, it is not needful to resume the doctrines,
concerning man's misery and lying in blindness and darkness, or, that Christ
is the only and true remedy of this evil; for these truths in their full
latitude have occurred, Chap. 1. 9. and 8. 12. and ought here to be considered
only with reference to the present scope, But whereas Christ speaks of his
day, and of a night coming, and that he is the light of the world, as long as
he is in the world, the meaning is not that ever he wants light, or an
opportunity of doing good unto his people; or that he was not the light of the
world, both before his Incarnation, and after his Ascension. But Christ by this
points out, that during the time of his abode on earth, he was this light in an
eminent way. Not only spiritually enlightening his people, and doing great
things for them; but personally and immediately, by his visible presence and
external operation, doing them by his own hand; whereas this light shined
formerly, and wrought in and by the Ministry of the Prophets, and after his
Ascension, by the Apostles. And so the force of the reason is, that Christ
considering that he was the light of the world, immediately and in his own
person, only so long as he is in the world; and that he had a prefixed time
for his going about and doing good in his own person, which was now near
expired; therefore out of his great affection to his people, and to any service
that might do them good, he would be busy and omit no time. Doctrine 1. Men
are not to expect that they will get through with good and acceptable works,
without many discouragements, which may weaken the hands of flesh and blood;
for, so is here imported, in that Christ obviates them. 2. Christ is so easy
to be entreated and employed by his people, that he will neither be discouraged
nor forbidden to do them any good that they need; Therefore will he not be
hindered, but reasons against all delays. 3. Christ's works are all of them the
works of God, being all approven of him, and God employing him to do good, that
so he might manifest his love to miserable man through him, in a way most
agreeable to his justice; Therefore does he call these things that he did in
the days of his flesh, not only his own works, but the works of him that sent
me. See 2 Cor. 5.19. 4. Christ stood obliged to perform all these duties,
which he did in the days of his flesh, and being bound thereunto by a
Commission accepted from his Father, for which he was to give an account;
Therefore says he, I must work the works of him that sent me. 5. As Christ
stands bound by obligation, to perform all the duties required of a Mediator;
So also he did affectionately undertake them, and employ himself therein; for,
so much does that addition teach, I must work while it is day. Opportunities of
well doing in our station, are not to be slighted, but taken hold of; for, we
should work while it is day. 7. It may excite us to improve opportunities of
well-doing, when we consider, that opportunity being lost, it is not easily, if
at all, recovered, even albeit we should be willing to work; for, when the day
is past: the night comes when no man can work. 8. Christ our Lord was so
willing to be employed for the good of his people, that he studiously improved
all opportunities, and did seriously lay to heart the short time he had to
remain on earth, that so he might employ it thriftily, and go about doing
good; for, he applies to himself in this present case, that general
consideration, I must work while it is to day, the night comes, when no man
can work. 9 The fullness of Christ as Mediator, being given for the good of
miserable sinners, is an argument with him, pleading that he should lay out
himself for their help who are in need; for, so is the force of ^his argument,
I am the light of the world; and therefore I must let out of that furniture,
laid up in me, for the help of this man. 10. Christ, by the miraculous cures
wrought upon the bodies of the diseased, in the time of his being on earth,
gave a visible document of what he was, and would prove to needy souls who
employ him; So much also is imported here, that he being the light of the world
would give a proof of it, and invite sinners to employ him as such, by curing
this blind man. 11. The Son of God his manifesting himself in our nature,
and conversing with sinners on earth, preaching and working miracles among
them, was a sweet and refreshful light of consolation to the world; for, albeit
he be the light of the world both before and after, yet this is true in a
particular and eminent way, as long as I am in the world, I am the light of the
world. And this was that day of light so much desired and longed for, Luke
10.23, 24. For this was the glorious manifestation of the love of God, when he
became Immanuel, God with us, and when God not only dwelt with men, but in
man's nature, and by his own preaching and miracles gave proof of that fullness
of grace and truth that is in him. 12. Our Lord Jesus is so respective of lost
sinners, that he accounted it no small favor to get his bride in his own
immediate guiding, and did so acquit himself in these days of his Ministry, as
might witness what an one he was; for, so much does Christ's argument, drawn
from this, import, As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world,
which imports, by way of Argument, these two. 1. That in his esteem it was a
great favor to be thus in his own person the light of the world, and not to
leave the ministration of his comforts to his servants, to be ministers
thereof; and therefore he would be busy in this his time of it. And indeed, it
appears how much he delighted to be the immediate Messenger and publisher of
his love, in that before his Incarnation he appeared in humane shape, and spoke
himself with the Patriarchs, and when his Messengers do in his name speak a
word in season to the weary, his love is such, that if it were fit, he would
come and be the Messenger himself. 2. That his bride being now, during this
time of his Ministry, left on his immediate hand (the Prophets being ceased,
John after awhile laid by, and his disciples doing but little) it was requisite
he should be busy, and guide her so, as she should miss no other, and he
might let her find what a difference there is betwixt the Bridegroom and his
friends. And indeed he is matchless, singular, and like himself, in his
guiding and dealing with his own.

Verse 6. When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spettle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,

7. And said unto him, Go wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by
interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing.


Christ, having given these reasons why he behoved to cure this man, does now
fall about it, and having made clay with his spettle on the dust, and anointed
the man's eyes therewith, he sends him to the pool of Siloam to wash; which he
obeying, does recover his sight. As for this pool, of which also, Nehem. 3.15.
it was a fountain springing out from mount Zion, from whence flowed out the
brook of Siloah, which watered a part of the City, of which, Isa. ^.6. And as
diverse allegories are invented by the wit of men on this miracle, (as if his
making use of clay in this miracle did point out, that he could cure the man,
who had made man at first of clay; and, that his spettle making the clay, did
point out the efficacy and virtue that sloweth from Christ's humanity, being
now personally united to the Godhead) so, in particular, the signification of
the name of this pool, which is, sent, makes men conceive the name was given to
it, with an eye to the Messiah, who is Shiloh, Gen 49.10. But as John's drift in
interpreting the name, is only (according to his custom) to make his meaning
plain; so the name seems to have been given of old, only in testimony that
they accounted it a special gift sent of God, to have a fountain or brook among
these hills, so commodious for their City: or, because it did slow out not
constantly, but now and then, according as God was pleased to send it. Doctrine
1. Christ's affection to needy sinners, manifested in his Word, is such as he
will give real proof of it, according as it is needed; Therefore he contents
not himself to have said so much of it, ver. 4, 5. but when he had thus
spoken, he works the miracle, and will give a present proof of what he had
said. 2. Albeit it be our duty to pray when we are in distress, yet such is
Christ's compassion, as to give us what we need, when we have little mind of
it, and so cannot pray for it; for, when the man is not minding at all the cure
of his disease, but is only sitting there to beg, then Christ conferreth this
unexpected benefit upon him. And by this way of dealing, Christ gives ample
encouragement to his own to pray in their distress, being confident that he
who prevents prayer, will undoubtedly hear them. 3. When Christ employeth any
means for the help of the miserable, yet the power that does them good is not
in these means, but in and from Christ; for, neither could clay heal, nor the
pool wash away blindness, but that flowed from his omnipotency only. And
therefore as we should rest on no means, so neither should we be discouraged in
using means appointed by Christ, so long as we have his promise. 4. Christ can
bring about wounderful deliverances and mercies to his people, even by means,
which seem improbable and contrary to nature; for, clay of it self is rather
fit to put out seeing eyes, then to open blind eyes. 5. Such as Christ takes in
hand, as his patients, he may make them sicker before he cure them, and put
them in a worse condition to sense, then they were before; for, so much also
does the application of clay teach, It adds an external impediment to his
natural blindness, and yet is all done in order to his cure. And thus it is
also in spiritual conditions; the strong man may make greatest trouble when he
is to be put out, Luke 11.21, 22. 6. Where Christ does good to any, he will
first try their faith, by their subjection and obedience to his commanded
means, before they find the comfortable issue; for, such is his method here;
He first puts him to subject himself to have his eyes anointed with clay, and
th^n to go wash in the pool of Siloam, before the cure be wrought. Whatever
Christ may do in his sovereignty in grace, yet it is our duty to believe, as we
would have his power and grace manifested on our behalf, Mark 9.22, 23. And
saiths first work must be subjection and obedience to commanded duties, 2 Kings
5.10. -- 14. 7. Faith in Christ yields prompt obedience, and will repine at no
command prescribing the means of help; for, he went his way therefore and
washed. And this (no doubt) flowed from faith given him by Christ (who, it may
be, has said more to him then is here recorded) which made him quit the
opportunity of getting alms on the Sabbath day, and essay so improbable like a
mean. 8. As there is no difficulty too hard for Christ; So there are none who,
trusting in him, shall obey and follow his prescribed means, but they shall
obtain a good, and the promised issue, were it never so improbable; for, he
went and washed, and came seeing. 9. If we compare Christ's method in this cure
with that which he follows in curing another blind man, Mark. 8.22, 23, 24,
25. wherein he opens a man's eyes by degrees, and here it is done at the first
act; If, I say, we compare these, we will not only find this difference; that
whereas Christ abode with the one, therefore he did it by degrees; but sending
this man away, and leaving him, upon the first act of his faith and obedience,
he is cured; As indeed, Christ orders his dispensations according to the need
of them he deals with: Such as he is to stay with in some visible and sensible
way, he may give them more work about the curing of their diseases, that so
they may employ him more: Whereas such as he is to withdraw from, may get their
business more easily done. But further, It will be found that this is common
to both, that being to meet with so great a mercy, as to be cured of
blindness; it is not wrought at first on either; but the one, with whom he
stays, is cured upon Christ's putting his hands twice upon his eyes, and this
man has a time of it, in going from before the Temple to the pool, before he
be cured: Not only that many going with him, and observing him, they might be
witnesses of the miracle, but also that himself might have time to be prepared
for such a wounderful and unexpected change. And so it teaches, That great and
unexpected mercies need much preparation to sit us for them, as well as
crosses; that so we may be armed with strength to bear them, and with grace to
improve them well.

Verse 8. The neighbors therefore, and they which before had seen him that he
was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged?

9. Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he.

10. Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened.

11. He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus, made clay, and anointed
mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the poole of Siloam, and wash: and I went
and washed, and I received sight.

12. Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.


In the rest of the parts of the Chapter we have the several effects and
consequents that followed on this miracle. The first whereof (in this second
part of the Chapter) is among his neighbors and acquaintance, to whom, it
seems, he returned with much joy, when he found not Christ in the place where
he left him; whereupon follows their conference upon this matter, partly,
among themselves, and partly, with the man himself. The conference contains
the resolution of three questions. 1. Whether such a cure had been wrought, and
whether this man who now saw, was the blind man, who sat and begged? This the
neighbors cannot clearly resolve, but some assert it, others allege that he
is only like him, till he himself put it out of contraversie, verse 8, 9. 2.
The second question is, concerning the way of his cure, which they propound for
further satisfaction in the matter, verse 10. and he answers verse 11.
wherein he is able to give an account of Christ's name, which he had learned
either from Christ himself, or from some who had been witnesses of what Christ
did, and had led him to the pool. 3. The third question is, concerning Christ
the Author of this cure; They desire to know where he is, and he cannot
resolve them. v. 12.

From verse 8, 9. Learn, 1. The glory of Christ's working for his people will
not be gotten obscured, and it should be taken notice of by all, as they have
occasion to see it; for, this miracle shines forth among the neighbors, who
seeing the man, draw forth the knowledge of it by conferences and questions:
and by their means, it becomes more public. 2. The Lord may so order his
dispensations, even toward them to whom he has a purpose of good, as one
cross may draw on another, and many miseries may ^^yst together; That so they
may have much exercise, he may make their deliverance the more conspicuous, and
may make many mercies concur in it; for, this man had not only been blind,
but his blindness had driven him to sit and beg, that law concerning the poor,
Deuteronomy. 15.4. not being carefully observed in these times of confusion and
bondage, as appears also from Acts 3.2. and elsewhere. 3. Even the many
disadvantages and miseries that trouble brings upon us, may contribute in due
time, to make Christ's glory more conspicuous in our help; for, that his
blindness made him sit and beg. it contributed to make him more known, then if
he had been the son of a great man kept in a corner; and this made the glory
of the miracle to spread the faster. 4. When Christ lets forth proofs of his
power and love upon any in their miseries, it will make so great and wonderful
a change, that they who knew them before, may readily mistake, and hardly know
them, their condition being so different from what it was; for, so appears in
these neighbors, who differ in their judgments whether this was he that sat
and begged, or, if he is like him only. 5. Such as have gotten proofs of
Christ's favor in mercy, will not be ashamed of their former miserable
condition before they were helped; for, they will seek Christ's glory, and not
their own in their deliverance: Therefore, albeit this man having now occasion
to change his beggarly condition, seeing he could labor for his livelihood,
might have let them continue in their uncertainties; yet he thinks no shame to
profess, I am he, and so puts them out of doubt, that it is he who sat and
begged.

From verse 10, 11. Learn, 1. It is not enough to take notice of any great work
that is wrought, unless we also take notice of Christ the author, and the way
and manner of working it; Therefore when they are assured, that a great change
is wrought on him, they enquire further, how were thine eyes opened, or, how
was thy sight given to thee? 2. These difficulties and impossibilities which
men apprehend in deliverance from trouble, and which Satan makes use of to
ma^re confidence, will but contribute to make Christ's power and glory the more
conspicuous; for, while they enquire, How were thine eyes opened? they do grant
it was not an ordinary work, but worthy to be taken notice of, as being
naturally impossible, that so Christ's doing of it, might make their own eyes to
be witnesses of his omnipotency, 3. Christ is the Author of any good that is
done to miserable sinners; and it needs never be enquired who makes the blind
to see, the sick to be whole, etc. for, it is Jesus who works all this: So
much does he clear, in answering their question, Jesus made does and anointed
mine eyes, etc. And albeit it be but a particular instance, yet it is a point
of general verity. 4. Such as have but small acquaintance with Christ, should
yet speak to his commendation, upon the fruits they have found of it, that so
it may prove an earnest and pledge of more: Therefore, albeit Christ had made
this miracle the first step of his acquaintance with the man, (as is not
unusual with Christ to prevent his people, and begin acquaintance with especial
favors) and so he can speak of him, but as a stranger little acquaint with
him, but that he heard his name, a man that is called Jesus; Yet he speaks what
he knows to his advantage, and so is afterward brought to know him bettter. 5.
It is not enough, to set out the greatness of Christ's work, unless also
special notice be taken of all the weak and improbable means he employeth to
bring it about; Therefore does he so punctually relate all the circumstances of
the miracle, he made clay, and anointed mine eyes, etc. to set out his glory in
it the more.

From verse 12. Learn, 1. A sight of Christ's glorious working should learn men
to enquire after himself; for, so do they on this information; where is he,
though in the issue they proved not so sincere. But when men get notice of
Christ's glory and working, they will either be allured to enquire for him, that
they may seek him to enjoy him, as Cant. 5.9 -- 16. with 6.1 or their malice
will be irritate to seek him, to do him an ill office. 2. Ignorance of Christ,
and concerning him, and where he is to be found, is no ^a^ety even among them
who have got much good of him; for, the man who was healed, as he took him but
for a man, ver. 11. so he knows not where he is. 3. Such as are truly
humble, will not be ashamed to confess their ignorance; for, so does he, They
said unto him where is he? he said I know not. 4. Christ by his withdrawing and
not staying for the man's return, would teach, 1. That true humility is an
enemy to ostentation, and to hunting after vain glory; for, to avoid this did
he withdraw. 2. That Christ is not so much taken with the muddy affections, and
ravishing admirations, which a recent mercy may produce, as he desires to have
the sense of mercies solidly digested, to bring out solid and constant fruits;
Therefore does he avoid all the expressions of the man's affections, which
readily he would have poured out, when he came from the pool, and does not
manifest himself to him till afterward, that he have more solidly digested it,
and till he have yet more need of him.

Ver. 13. They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.

14. And it was the Sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.

15. Then again the Pharisees also asked him, how he had received his sight. He
said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.


In the third part of the Chapter, to ver. 35, We have the second effect or
consequent that followed on this miracle; and it contains the proceedings of
the Pharisees upon it, when it is made known to them. And it has these
particulars in it. 1. Their debates and divisions among themselves upon it.
ver. 16. 2. Their conference with the man about Christ, ver. 17. 3. Their
conference with his parents, ver. 18. -- 23. 4. Their conference yet again with
the man, which at last ends in his excommunication, ver. 24. -- 34.

In these verses, somewhat is premitted by way of introduction to all these
proceedings. As, first, that the neighbors brought the man to the Pharisees,
ver. 13. Not so much out of their respect to Christ or the man, as to please
the Pharisees and Council, who they knew were vexed with the rising glory of
Christ, and who had made such a business of the miracle formerly wrought by
him on the Sabbath. 2. The time when this miracle was wrought, which had been
omitted in the history it self, is here recorded, ver. 14. as being the ground
why the neighbors brought the man, and upon which the Pharisees took occasion
to inveigh against Christ, 3. They examine the man concerning the circumstances
of the fact, that so they may know what to do; And the neighbors (as would
appear) having given a short account that he had been born blind, and that
Jesus had cured him on the Sabbath day; The man in his answer only adds to what
they had said, and relates the manner how the miracle was wrought, ver. 15.

From ver. 13. Learn, 1. When ever Christ begins to do a good turn to any,
albeit they have but little acquaintance of him, yet they may expect that their
friends and neighbors, who before pitied or respected them, will be ready to
persecute them, and deliver them up into the hands of the most cruel
adversaties, of Christ and his followers; for, so befell this man, they brought
him to the Pharisees. 2. Ill instruments will never be wanting, to keep up
contests betwixt Christ and his enemies; for, there are who brought him to the
Pharisees, to set them on edge against Christ. 3. Were Churchmen never so vile
and corrupt, yet their titles and eminent places will still draw carnal men
father to respect them, then Christ in his state of humiliation; for, this was
it that made these neighbors, bring him to the Pharisees who aforetime was
blind, they are taken up with their eminent places and titles, and therefore do
take their part. 4. When men are once engaged in a course of persecution, and
take delight in it; it is righteous with God, to give them up to many
opportunities of persecution, till their cup be full; for, it was in Gods
judgment that they brought him to the Pharisees. For, they had been Christ's
avowed enemies, and had persecute him formerly, and now this poor man must not
be persecuted but by their hand, that so they may be made drunk with blood and
persecution, since they delighted so much in it. See Matthew. 23, 31, 32.

From verse 14. Learn. 1. Works of necessity and charity to these in distress,
are very consistent with the due sanctification of the Sabbath, Therefore does
Christ so often work these works upon the Sabbath, to confirm this truth. 2.
As no offense taken by men at the doing of necessary and moral duties, whereby
Christ is honored, should be regarded so as to drive us from duty: So, in
particular, the offense of wicked persecutors is not to be regarded, in doing
of these things that may set out the glory of God: Therefore, albeit it was the
old contest that he had cured a man upon the Sabbath, yet he will do it over
again, seeing the work is necessary, and the doing of it then was an occasion
to manifest the glory of his work, by their opposition, whereof they had no
occasion, if he had done it another time. It is true, we should give offense to
none, either Jew or Gentile, 1 Cor. 10.32. but in doing necessary duties no
offense is given, it is taken only; And albeit it should be matter of sorrow,
when men do take offense injustly, especially if they be godly: Yet, Christ
will have no respect to the unjust stambling of malicious persecutors, Matthew
15.12, 13, 14. 3. Christ allows no composition with avo^ed and malicious
enemies, in matters of truth or duty; The (...) also Christ w^ll work these
miracles on the Sabbath day, that he might not seem to comply in the least with
their superstitious opinions concerning the Sabbath. See Gal. 2.3, 4, 5.

From verse 15. Learn, 1. It is but in vain for men to think, that their
terror will drive a man from avowing what he has found in Christ, or received
from him, unless he be under the strong power of a tentation; so much
appears in this man. Albeit they were informed by the neighbors, (for the
man needs not name Christ in his answer, of whom they had made mention) yet
again they also asked him, as thinking their authority and terror might cause
him deny what he had said before his neighbors, that so there might be no more
of the miracle. But all in vain; for he avowes it clearly. And indeed, it is a
wonder how he is born up in all this debate, seeing as yet he neither knew
where Christ was, nor fully what he was; But as sense of this favor obliged
him to Christ, so it may be thought admirable, how much strength, courage, and
ability, men may be furnished with, in defending Christ's cause. 2. They who
would undertake to speak of Christ's working, will but spill it in the telling,
in comparison of these who have sensibly found it in themselves; Therefore does
he, in this answer, add to their report, and lay it out fully, which (it
seems) they had but thought worthy to be mentioned only in the general. 3.
Such as are sensible of Christ's goodness in his working, will look upon every
circumstance in it as remarkable: Therefore does he so punctually relate the
manner of the cure; He put clay on mine eyes, and I washed, etc. not only that
he might satisfy their question, how he had received his sight, but to
testify how much it affected him to dwell on every passage thereof. 4. Christ's
favors are solid and permanent, and ought to be remarked that they are so;
Therefore does he not only acknowledge that he saw, but yet still, I do see, as
observing the continuance of the favor. 5. It is also required in men who
receive favors from Christ, that the continuance thereof do not render them
tastelesse, but that the sense of their former ill condition, and of Christ's
mercy, be entertained, that so the favors may be still fresh: Therefore also
does he say, I do see, to testify the continuance of his affection and
estimation of that mercy.

Verse 16. Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God,
because he keeps not the Sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a
sinner, do such miracles? and there was a division among them.
Follows the several proceedings of the Pharisees upon this matter; And
first, They put the man aside a little, and enter into a debate among
themselves about Christ; some do condemn Christ, as not sent nor approven of
God, because he did these things on the Sabbath day; Others plead, that if he
were such a one, he could not work such miracles: And the debate grows to that
height, that it tended to a division, or, schism. Whence learn, 1. Whatever
boldness and resolution persecutors may seem to have, in prosecuting their
bloody courses; Yet they have more vexations then every one knows, either
among, or within themselves: Therefore, albeit the Pharisees appear very
resolute in their dealing with others, yet here the Spirit draws the curtain,
and lets us see what differences and debates there are among themselves. 2.
Persecutors will be so malicious and impudent in their calumnies, that no
convincing arguments or apologies will satisfy them; for, albeit Christ had
fully refuted this calumny, Chap. 5. yet they maliciously urge it again, This
man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. 3. The malice of
persecutors is nothing the more approven, that it is masked with a pretense of
zeal; but is rather the more hateful, that so corrupt dispositions should be
covered with such a pretense; for, this does not excuse, but add to the fault,
that they should let out all their malice under this cover, he keeps not the
Sabbath day 4. Christ's enemies are so far from giving unto Christ his due
glory, that they esteem him the worst of any; for, they are so far from
acknowledging him to be true God, that they will not so much as acknowledge him
to be of God, that is, to be either a Prophet or Messenger sent of God or a
good man approven of him; which is all one as to account him a vile sinner and
an Impostor, as it follows in the exception given in by others. 5. Some may
be found, even in the Cabin-councils of persecutors, who think not so harshly
of Christ and his followers as others do, and who would do more for him, if
they had an opportunity; for, he^e, even in their Conclave, there are some to
plead a word for him, either a Nicodemus, or some who had convictions, but went
no further. 6. Christ's miracles were such, as even enemies were convinced they
could not be wrought by notorious sinners and deceivers; for, say they, How can
a man that is a sinner do such miracles? Where, by a sinner, we are not to
understand him that only has sin in him, but such a notorious sinner, and so
eminent in a trade of it, as he may be better known by it, then by his name;
And particularly, a notable impost^r and deceiver in the matter of his calling
and doctrine. And as we are not to conceive, that all these who plead for him,
do believe him to be the spotless Lamb of God; So we need not dip into the
strength of their Argument, nor clear how it is consistent with what is
elsewhere recorded in Scripture, that Satan can work wonders, and that
Antichrist shall come with signs and wonders; which though they be lying
signs, in so far as they tend to the confirmation of a lie, yet some of them
may be real in themselves, though not passing the reach of natural causes and
so not real miracles. But we need not stand to justify all their sayings and
apologies, whereof God makes use to mar the present designs of enemies; and
it suffices us to know, that Christ's miracles were so far above the reach of
nature, and so evidently free of jugglery, that his very enemies, and they who
had power to dignosce upon delusions, could not but be convinced. See Joh. 3.2.
7. Albeit truth be the only best second to a man, and that which may make him
stout; Yet nature is impudent and bold in maintaining error, but if it be
convinced of truth, it does assert it but timoutously, so much may be gathered
from their proceeding here. They who are against truth, are bold, and speak
first; But the other party come in last, and propound the matter only by way of
question. 8. Christ, when he pleases, can divide the very Conclaves and
Councils of his enemies, and raise a schism among them, that so he may put a
stop to their violent proceedings; for, and there was a division, or, Schism,
among them, while none of the parties would cede to another.

Verse 17. They say unto the blind man again, What say thou of him, that he
has opened thine eyes? He said, He is a Prophet.
The second particular in their proceedings, is, their re-examination of the
man concerning his thoughts of Christ. Seeing they could not agree among
themselves, they (whether the one or other party, or all of them, is not much
matter) call the man again, to know what his thoughts of Christ were, who had
done this for him: And he, according to the weak measure of light received,
freely declares him to be a Prophet. Whence learn, 1. No rubs, or stops and
disappointments, will break the malice of persecutors, but they will still to
it again; for, when their former examination had not produced unanimity among
themselves, they try the man again, to see if they can draw any thing out of
him, to carry their point. And it may be conceived, that they would gladly have
had somewhat out of the man, whereupon they might condemn Christ; for however
persecutors have so much malice as to oppose Christ, yet they have so much
terror, as to wish others might have a prime hand in it. 2. Christ's friends
must not expect to have done with their trials at one essay, but that enemies,
by multiplied assaults, and many sifting questions will labor to dash and
confound them; for, so do they with this man; after the former examination,
they put him again to it with a new question, They say unto the blind man (who
had been blind) again, what say thou of him? etc. 3. When Christ has done
a good turn to any, it concerns them to consider, what they think of him who
has done so for them; for, this their question is in it self seasonable,
whatever was their aim in it, what say thou of him, that he has opened
thine eyes? 4. When God draws forth weak professors to trial, he can bear them
up, though their knowledge be but little, and can make them endure many, as
well as one assault; for, he is as bold in this as in the former examination.
5. There may be, and is, more true knowledge of Christ in a poor man that has
tasted of his favor, then in a whole conclave of persecuting doctors; for, he
says more to his commendation, and more expressly, then even they who pleaded
for him in the council. 6. When weak professors have said much of Christ, and
more then persecutors can endure; Yet they come far short in setting out his
true worth; for, he says only he is a Prophet, which though it was much,
considering his small acquaintance with Christ; yet it is far short of what
Christ is. For he does not so much as acknowledge him to be that great Prophet,
Deuteronomy. 18.18. far less does he see him to be the Son of God, till afterward
it be revealed to him, ver. 35, 36, 37.

Verse 18. But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been
blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had
received his sight.

19. And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was borne
blind? how then does he now see?


The third particular in their proceedings, is, their examination of the man's
parents: When they can gain no ground of himself, they will not believe that
he had been born blind, and therefore try his parents if they own him for
their son, and if he was borne blind, and how he now recovered his sight; if
so be they might, possibly, bring out somewhat to obscure the glory of this
miracle. Whence learn, 1. It is the practice of corrupt Churchmen, to
appropriate to themselves the privileges and titles of the people of God, as
if none were worthy of these but themselves: Therefore, it seems, the
Pharisees, and council are called the Jews, because they called themselves so,
though it was a name common to all the nation: Because not only were they of
that nation, but they usurped it as only due to them, while as they have a low
esteem of the people, Chap. 7. 49. 2. Persecutors are incessant in their
malice, and endeavors to smother the glory of Christ's clearest working; for,
so do they labor to get it denied that ever such a miracle was wrought; and do
expect that possibly his parents, through fear, may deny that he was borne
blind. 3. When men are led by malice against Christ and his truth, they will
be so impudent, as not to give credit even to what they see, for, they did not
believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, though
they were already convinced of it, and had condemned Christ for curing of him,
verse 16. 4. In a time of trial, not only they who are most eminently concerned
and engaged, but even others, may be brought upon the stage; for, not only the
man, but his parents, are here brought out to give a confession, they did not
believe, until they called the Parents, etc. 5. Persecutors are very subtle
and politic, and know how to make use of all advantages, and tempers and
interests of men, to bear down Christ and his truth; for, so does appear here.
They purpose to obscure and bear down the glory of this miracle, and finding
the man so affected, as they could not draw him to comply with them, they essay
his parents, if possibly they, being less concerned and affected then the man,
might be moved and tempted to deny somewhat of the truth. 6. It is the palm of
persecutors, to confound simple men with multiplicity of questions, and to dash
them with their own prejudged thoughts upon the matter; Therefore do they pose
them with three questions at once, and do in their questions insinuate what
they were inclined to believe, ye say he was borne blind, but we do not
credit it.

Ver. 20. His parents answered them, and said, We know that this is our son,
and that he was borne blind:

21. But by what means he now sees, we know not, or who has opened his eyes
we know not; he is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself.

22. These words spoke his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the
Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he
should be put out of the Synagogue.

23. Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask him,


In these verses, we have; first, his parents answer; wherein they expressly
avow that he was their Son, and that he was borne blind, verse 20. but for
the way of his cure, they wave it and remit the narration of it to himself, as
being of age sufficient to give an account of it, verse 21. 2. We have a reason
why they decline to answer this question, which was the fear of
excommunication, a decree being past among the Rulers, that who so confesses
Christ should be excommunicate, verse 22, 23.

From verse 20, 21. Learn, 1. Natural affections may go very far in natural
duties; and particularly, natural affection does oblige, and will lead parents
not to deny their own children, in their greatest miseries or dangers, or for
any fear: for albeit their son had been blind, and is now in danger, and
albeit they knew not but the Pharisees might be offended at this, yet they
freely answer, we know that this is our son, and that he was borne blind. 2
Natural affection and resolution, how great so ever it be, will not carry men
to confess Christ and his truth, when there is any danger in it; for, how
stoutly so ever they own their son, yet for what concerned Christ, they shift
it, By what means he now sees we know not, or who has opened his eyes we know
not. Wherein, whatever may be said in their behalf, from what follows, that
they desire not the glory of the miracle to be obscured, but remit them to the
fittest witness of it; Yet they sin hainously, by denying their knowledge,
and by their ingratitude, in not avowing Christ who had conferred so notable a
benefit upon them, in the person of their son. 3. Albeit men may hazard much
for their friends in their private quarrels; Yet such as are not stout for
Christ, will decline suffering in their own person, though they should hazard
their dearest friends; and will let them suffer their alone, and it is well
they prove not their greatest enemies; for, they by shifting trouble, do expose
their son to it, he is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself, as
being from under their charge, and able to give an account of his own ways.
And albeit it had not been lawful for them to obtrude themselves on suffering;
yet when they are called to give a confession, it was their fault to desert not
only the truth, but their son also.

From verse 22, 23. Learn, 1. Excommunication from the society of the people
of God is an ancient and lawful ordinance in the house of God, however is be
abused by men; for, it was an Ordinance, even in the Church of the Jews, to
put men out of the Synagogue. See Ezra 10.8. 2. The best and most necessary
Ordinances of God may be abused by wicked men, and the authority of his
judicatories, and the edge of his censures ill employed, when Church-Rulers are
corrupt; for, so it was here, in their council they had agreed to employ their
authority, and the censures of the Church, to bear down Christ. This should
teach men, not to reject everything, which the corruptions of men do abuse. 3.
Albeit the child of God may, for some miscarriages, fall under the censure of
excommunication; Yet it is an evidence of a corrupt time, when the edge of that
censure is turned against the children of the house, merely because of their
adhering to Christ: for, so was it here, they had agreed already, that if any
man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. It
is said, they had agreed, albeit there was not only a Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea among them, but some others who thought more favorably of Christ, as
would appear from, verse 16. and Chap. 12. 42. And that because the corrupt
part did agree; or, these who were more honest being absent, others would not
stand out against the common determination, however they had argued the cause;
Or, fear did make them agree that he should not be acknowledged for the
Messiah, however they had accounted him a good man. 4. Excommunication is a
censure not a little terrible, when it is inflicted upon just grounds; for,
whatever weakness was in their fear, (of which afterward) yet it is an
evidence that the members of the Jewish Church did generally fear to undergo
this censure. 5. Men, through long custom and formality, may be brought to
stand in aw of Church censures, who yet give no evidence, that they stand in aw
to sin against God, but rather of the contrary; for, however it be good in it
self to be afraid of Excommunication; Yet (besides that this was an unjust
decree) their shifting to confess the truth, shows how they durst hazard on
sin, and yet they fear excommunication. It may be, indeed, that some outward
inconveniences followed upon this censure, which made them so carefully avoid
it, as is true in the case of Rulers, Joh. 12.42, 43. But as that is not the
right cause wherefore Church Censures should be dreadful; so though there were
no such thing, yet there are many who would not willingly be secluded from the
privileges of Church members, nor from the Ordinances, who yet never long
after God in them, nor do lay to heart that they may be judicially bound in
heaven, though they be not bound on earth. 6, Albeit just Excommunication be a
sad sentence; yea, albeit when it is unjustly inflicted by a true visible
Church, it be so grievous, as men should not willingly desire it, and should be
affected with it; Yet it is but a slavish and sinful fear, when men are
hindered to confess truth, because men will excommunicate them; for, herein
did the man's parents fail, in that for fear of this sentence, they declined
their duty: And as carnal courage is but faint hearted in Christ's matters,
however it may be invincible in other difficulties, So slavish fear of this and
the like inconveniences, is base, and will prove an enemy to suffering, unless
it be well balanced with says, Psalm. 56.3. 7. They had decreed only, that if
any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue,
and yet this makes them afraid so much as to confess that Christ had cured
their son. The reason may be conceived, that the Rulers were so malicious,
that a favorable word spoken of Christ, was as much as if they had confessed
him to be the Messiah: As indeed, In persecutors account, it is sufficient to
render men as bad as may be, if they be any thing more charitable, or not so
malicious as themselves. Yet seeing they do not inflict this censure on these
among themselves who pleaded for him, at least as not a sinner, verse 16. Nor
do they excommunicate the man for all his free confession, till (as they
conceive) he carry himself unreverently toward them. Therefore it may be
conceived rather that their fear was so slavish, as they durst not so much as
confess that truth, which they might confess without hazard; And so it
teaches, That slavish fear is a very brutish passion, and will not only be
moved at real hazards, but will multiply many imagined dangers. And when men
are possessed and led by it, they will not only do all that persecutors by
their decrees require, but it will drive them even from duties which they might
follow without hazard.

Verse 24. Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him,
Give God the praise, we know that this man is a sinner.
Follows the fourth particular in their proceedings, to verse 35. which is
their conferring of new with the man himself, wherein he endures several
assaults from them, and does answer them so, as at last they excommunicate him.
The first assault is in this verse; wherein, having called him in again, they
deal with him in an insinuating way. And, 1. They exhort him to give God
praise; whereby I do not understand so much, that they supposing the miracle
was wrought, would exhort him to take no notice of Christ in it, whom they knew
(as it is afterward) to be a sinner and wicked man, but to give God all the
glory of it. But comparing this speech with Joshuahs exhortation to Achan,
Josh. 7.19. we will find this to be their meaning, They would have him to
glorify God by a free confession of the truth, that either he was never
blind, or that Christ cured him not, but he had been dissembling or colluding
with Christ in the matter. 2. To press him to this, they hold out their own
thoughts of Christ, that they knew him to be a sinner, and would never believe
that he could cure him, say what he listed. Whence learn, 1. Whatever be the
malicious designs of enemies, or the weakness of these who are called to make
confession of the truth; Yet the Lord can keep his own glory from suffering
prejudice, and enemies from getting advantage: for, so did it prove here.
Albeit the Rulers thought to have gained much by putting his parents to it, and
they did indeed come short in their duty; Yet the matter is so ordered, as they
gain no ground against Christ, and are put to essay other means. 2. Such as
receive most eminent favors at Christ's hand, must look to share in trials
beyond others; for, albeit his parents get one assault, as having shared in the
favor conferred on their son; yet his share being much more in the mercy,
his trials are oftener renewed, Then again called they the man that was blind.
He behoved to get a trial according to the measure of mercy received; and
withal, the Lord would breed him in this first School, till he came to be
sitted for a new proof of Christ, and till the persecutors get a greater dash
by him; as the issue made clear. 3. Among other trials from persecutors, this
is one, that they will smoothly insinuate with such as confess Christ, if so
be they may pervert them by that means; for, here they lay aside all
harshnesse, and speak him fair. 4. It is no strange thing, to see men pretend
to aim at nothing but the honor of God, when yet they are maliciously
opposing Christ, his glory and truth; And this is one of persecutors policies,
whereby they labor to ensnare the simple: Therefore they pretend that, in all
this, they aim at nothing but that he would give God the praise. 5. The
confession of the truth of any thing, whereof men are guilty, is indeed an
honoring of God; when they are called to it; not only in so far as it
glorifieth his justice in what he shall inflict for it, but in so far also as
it gives him the glory of knowing what is secret, and of being a punisher of
lying and dissimulation: Therefore do they urge him to a confession in these
terms, give God the praise. 6. Such is the perversity of Christ's enemies, that
they will not only load him with unjust calumnies, but will obtrude their
judgment and opinion (if they be men in power) upon others, to pre-judge them
in their free confession; Therefore, albeit they require a free confession, yet
they pre-limit him, by obtruding their opinion, as infallible, upon him, we
know that this man is a sinner, that is, albeit thou be deluded so far as to
think him a Prophet, yet we, who have both authority and skill to judge, do
certainly know he is a wicked sinner. 7. It is the malicious cruelty of
persecutors, that they impudently brand Christ and his followers with
calumnies, and yet will never give them a fair hearing, nor make them out upon
them; for, albeit Christ had put them to it, to convince him of sin, chap. 8.
46. yet they would never do that, and yet they will not give over to traduce
him, we know that this man is a sinner.

Verse 25. He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.
The man in his answer, does wave and pass what they had asserted concerning
Christ's person, but as to the matter of fact, wherein they required a
confession, he clearly asserts that he being blind was made to see by him. As
for his answer concerning Christ's person, it may be conceived that it flowed
from his weakness and dissimulation, in part, that he should say, whether he
be a sinner or no I know not; Seeing he knew well enough he was no sinner, in
their sense, as appears from verse 17. verse 31, 33. So hard is it to keep our
feet in continuing trials; And because of this his shifting, it may be
conceived he is put to it, to speak out his light more clearly afterward. But
if we consider the manner of the expression more narrowly, whether he be a
sinner or no I know not, one thing I know etc. it would appear that he not
only adherers to the confession of what Christ had done, but brings a most
convincing argument to refute their calumny against his person, That let them
judge of him as they would, yet he would not stand to debate it with words,
when he could refute them by Christ's deeds; For he, or any else, could not in
reason judge him to be a sinner, who had done so notable a miracle, and he who
had received a benefit, could not but think well of him; Wence learn, 1. It is
a great injustice to calumniate Christ and his followers, when yet their
practice and works do refute these calumnies; Therefore does he think their
charge against Christ to be a sinner, not worth the answering, when this
miracle did clearly refute it. 2. Such as have received kindnesses from Christ,
will not have an ill thought of him, nor will the prejudices or opinions of any
sway them in that matter; Therefore does he reject all their thoughts of
Christ, upon the consideration of what he had done for him. 3. Such as have
participate of Christ's goodness, will not conceal his glory, by denying the
same, whatever hazard there be, or who^ver shift to confess it; Therefore,
albeit his parents had declined to give a confession of this truth, and there
was manifest hazard in confessing it; yet he will not deny it, one thing I
know, that whereas I was blind, now I see. 4. No man can set such a price upon
mercies, or on Christ the Author of them, as they who have tasted of the
bitterness of wanting of them; Therefore, albeit the favor of eyesight be
common generally to men, yet few are so affected with it as he, and that
because it was given him after he had wanted it long, whereas I was blind, now
I see.

Verse 26. Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? How opened he
thine eyes.

27. He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not believe:
wherefore would you hear it again: Will ye also be his disciples?


Seeing he will neither deny the miracle, not yet have evil thoughts of Christ,
they give him a second assault, and pose him concerning the manner and way of
his cure, if so be they might ^ut-weary him, or make him contradict, and so
invalidate his own testimony, verse 26. But he being encouraged by the Spirit,
and perceiving their d^ift, does answer them roundly, chalenging them that he
had told them before, to little purpose; and, in derision, enquires for what
end they were so careful to hear it? if they had a mind to become converts?
which imports that he knew they would not give up their names to Christ, let
him repeat it never so often. Whence learn, 1. Persecutors are importunate and
incessant in their endeavors to pervert such as confess Christ, and to get
advantage against them; for, this repeated question does import, not only that
this poor man put them to great puzzles, driving them to question him so
passionately; but that they would not give over their endeavors, to make him
faint, or entrap him. 2. The obstinate continuance of persecutors, in their
incessant trying of weak Professors, is a sifting exercise, which i^ apt to
prevail with them who might endure one assault well enough; for, they look on
this course of holding him at it, as a mean to prevail at last; and that
however they prevailed not at first, yet when he saw they were not wearied, nor
minded to give it over, he might be broken. 3. The manner and way of working
any good work, is a special way to try, whether the doer of it be approven or
not: Therefore do they so much insist on that, What did he to thee? how opened
he thine eyes? If possible they might gather some ground of chalenging Christ;
as working the miracle in an unlawful way. 4. Albeit persecutors be politic,
and confessors of truth oft-times weak and simple; Yet the Lord cannot only
give them courage, but wisdom also to discern the drift of persecutors; for so
does this man insinuate that he knew it was for little good they were so
inquisitive. 5. It becomes the people of God well, when they perceive men
dallying with truth, and Christ's working, to put on an holy indignation and
zeal; for, so does he here with these Pharisees, who are so inquisitive to know
the way of the miracle, when they mind to make no right use of it. 6. It is
the duty of friends to truth, not to foster up enemies, with answering their
needless questions, propounded only out of malice; for, says he, I have told
you already, and ye did not hear, or, believe, or liked not of it, wherefore
would you hear it again? Since it is just the same it was. 7. They who were in
esteem above others, do, by their malicious opposing of Christ, become justly
contemptible to the basest, and may lawfully be touched in the sore, by the
avowers of truth; for, here they are so absurd, that he who had been a blind
beggar, does taunt them to their faces, and lets them know how he saw into
their malicious disposition. 8. Albeit sinners be invited to hear what God
says, or what is reported of his doings; Yet he will not be slighted by any:
And such as, out of malice, will not give credit to what they hear, it is just
they be denied further information, and that pearls be not cast before such
swine: for, so is imported here, I have told you already and ye did not hear:
wherefore would ye hear it again? 9. The right fruit of all we hear of Christ,
is, to gain our consent to be disciples and followers unto him; and they who
will not yield to that, it is just they get no more of his mind revealed unto
them; for, so is imported in this reasoning, wherefore would ye hear it again?
will ye also (among the rest) be his disciples? For, it implies, that since
they had no purpose to become scholars unto Christ, there was no reason that
his glorious works should be so much revealed to them.

Verse 28. Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple, but we are
Moses disciples.

29. We know that God spoke unto Moses: as for this fellow we know not from
whence he is.


Being angry at this boldness of the man, they give him a third assault;
Wherein 1. They declare that however he, and such as he, were so silly as to
become disciples to him, (which was little matter) Yet they would cleave to
Moses, from whom Christ and his followers made apostacy, verse 28. 2. They
give a reason of their resolution, which they think may render Christ suspected
to him; They think they may lean to Moses with whom they knew God spoke, but as
for Christ, they knew not whence he had his office and authority, as they
allege, ver. 29. Whence learn, 1. Corrupt men cannot endure to have their
idols rubbed upon, and particularly, corrupt Churchmen take it ill, when they
are not in such estimation as they would: Therefore do they rail on him,
because he did not give them reverence enough. 2. It is persecutors policy, to
cast disgrace upon the course they persecute, that so they may shame
professors from it, Therefore do they upbraid him with being Christ's disciple,
as a very odious course, which they would be very loath to join in, Thou art his
disciple. 3. Albeit it be the greatest honor of sinful men, to be admitted
disciples unto Christ; and their greatest ignominy, who are not so; Yet times
may be so ill, even in a visible Church, that it may be accounted the greatest
of reproaches upon men, that they give up their name to Christ: for, they think
it a reproach great enough, when they may say, Thou art his disciple. 4. The
best of men may be mistaken and abused by their carnal successors; and
particularly, it is a great wrong, when any instrument is cried up to Christ's
prejudice, and when men do pretend to the doctrine of the Scriptures, when they
are rejecting Christ; for, say they, as a pretext, whereupon they do reject
Christ, But we are Moses disciples. Moses did set forth Christ, and he pressed
the Law to lead them to Christ, and so none could be his disciples who were not
Christ's disciples also; and yet they made use of Moses, and their adhering to
his doctrine, to oppose and reject Christ. 5. Such as men do admit of as
teachers to their souls, they would make sure that they are called of God, and
have their doctrine from him; for, this was sound, though ill applied by them,
We are Moses disciples; for, we know that God spoke unto Moses. 6, Such as are
led by malice and prejudice against Christ, will not only think basely of his
person, but will not see the clear evidences of his authority and Commission;
for, albeit this point had been often cleared before this, yet say they, as for
this fellow we know not from whence he is, or who gave him Commission.

Verse 30. The man answered, and said unto them, Why, herein is a marvelous
thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes.

31. Now we know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper
of God, and does his will, him he hears.

32. Since the world began was it not heard, that any man opened the eyes of
one that was born blind.

33. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.


In these verses, the man gives a solid answer to their frivolous cavil; He
passes what they had spoken against himself, and does not labor to diminish
Moses due esteem; but only replies to what they had excepted against Christ.
And 1. He propounds his reply by way of admiration, that Christ having wrought
such a miracle on him, yet they should be ignorant of his authority, verse 30.
2. He proceeds, by solid argument, to evince that his working this miracle
proved he was of God. Wherein 1. He lays down a general proposition; that no
gross sinners, but only such as did worship God and obey him, would be heard
or obtain things at Gods hand, verse 31. 2. He subsumes in particular, that
Christ behoved to be heard of God, having wrought so great a miracle, and so
singular, that none of the Prophets, nay, nor Moses, of whom they boasted, did
ever the like verse 32. 3. From this he concludes, that certainly Christ was
not a wicked sinner, but of God, seeing if it were not so, he could not do any
thing of that kind, verse 33. For clearing this argument, Consider, 1. We need
not be curious to evince the truth of this assertion, That Christ his miracles
proved his divine authority, however Impostors and Deceivers may also work
wonders; For, the greatness of his works, and the way of doing them, were so
convincing, that even enemies themselves could not deny it, when they spoke
their real thoughts, verse 16. John 3.2. nor could the greatest enemies
contradict it, unless they maliciously sinned against the Holy Ghost, as
Matthew. 12.24, 31. 2. while he supposes that Christ prayed to God that he might
work this miracle; we are not to conceive that he undestood who Christ was, or
that it was his way to pray to the Father in the state of humiliation, John
11.41, 41. But he only looks on him as mere man; and therefore he does so
commend the instrument, as he exalts the power of God in what he did. 3. While
he proves Christ to be heard, because he wrought this miracle, the meaning is
not to prove that all that are not heard in an extraordinary way, are sinners;
But this holds only good in them who pretend to extraordinary callings, that
they must prove it by some wonders; and does also argue, that none who are so
heard, are sinners. 4. Taking this Assertion generally, God hears not
sinners; it is not to be understood that even the grossest of sinners may not
come to God to have their sins pardoned and removed, and expect to be accepted
and heard through Christ; But the meaning is, that they cannot be heard in
other things, while they purpose to continue in their sins. 5. It is also to be
considered, that in some respect God may hear even gross sinners, so far as to
give them many temporal favors, to their greater condemnation in end; as
witness his answer to Ahabs hypocritical repentance, 1 Kings 21.27, 28, 29.
Yet this that is asserted here does also hold good, not only because whatever
God do for wicked men, yet he hates both their persons and their prayers; or,
because whatever God do for the wicked at some times, yet the perpetual
assistance and favor of God, accompanying Christ in all his life and actions,
did prove that he was none of these. But seeing the man (as appears) knew not
so much of Christ, nor does he insist on any other proof, but this one miracle:
Therefore the very nature of this miracle, whereof the like was never done by
any, did prove that he was of God. For however many miracles were wrought by
Prophets before him, yet some sort of miracles were reserved to be done by him,
to evidence that he was the Messiah. The words being thus cleared in reference
to the present scope, from verse 30. Learn, 1. Most learned men will grow
blind and absurd, when they oppose themselves against Christ and his truth;
for so does this man find these Pharisees to be. 2. Christ may give his
weakest friends so much sound knowledge of him, as will make them wonder at the
blindness and absurdity of persecutors; for, says he, herein is a marvelous
thing that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. 3. Such
as are truly affected with Christ's dealing, will wonder, and be ill pleased,
that every one will not see as much in it as they do; for, he wonders, and
takes it ill, that they are not so affected with the miracle, and with Christ
the author of it, as he was.

From verse 31. Learn, 1. Christ's weak followers will not want a mouth, and
wisdom, and courage, to plead his cause, and confound their adversaries, in a
day of trial; for, this poor beggar is enabled, solidly to reason against the
Rulers, to their confusion. 2. The generality of the visible Church want not
common and received principles, which being well emproven, might refute them in
their many particular miscarriages; Therefore does he bring in a received
principle, to refute them in this particular, we know that God hears not
sinners, etc. and therefore Christ cannot be a sinner. 3. Such as would be
approven of God, ought to be devoted unto him, to worship and call on him, and
employ him in all things; that so they may come speed in particular exigents;
for, here it is required that a man be a worshipper of God, and this makes way
for his being heard in particular cases, such as this in debate was. 4. It is
not enough to prove men religious, or approven of God, that they keep up a
form of worshipping God, unless they walk tenderly in obedience to Gods
will, that so they may come speed in prayer; and do ^mprove grace as it is
received, to enable them yet to more obedience: for, to be a worshipper of God,
and do his will, must go together. 5. Albeit no mere man be free of sin in
this life; Yet such as sincerely worship God, and make conscience of obedience,
do give evidence that they have fled to Christ for justification, and have
attained to some victory over sin: and so are not sinners, or living in a state
of sin, in Christ's account; for, here, to be a sinner, and to worship God and
do his will, are opposed each to other. 6. They only who thus worship God, and
are not sinners, will find access to God in their prayers, and get answers to
what they ask according to his will; for, God hears not sinners, but if any
man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears, that is, they
who have extraordinary callings, will come speed in extraordinary things, and
others will come speed in their lawful desires, according to the tenor of Gods
promises to hear his peoples prayers. It is one special mean to clear men in
the matter of their personal approbation and acceptance with God, when they
employ God much in prayer, and so come to find acceptance and audience from
him: for, by Gods hearing a man, he comes to gather that he is not a sinner,
but a worshipper of God, and doer of his will.

From verse 32, 33. Learn, 1. Christ had many public evidences, to witness
for him, that he was accepted and heard of God, in the discharge of his office;
for, so does he subsume, that Christ by this miracle had proven it. 2. Christ
is omnipotent to do that which never has been done before; And when any come
to him with a distress that never any had experience of the like, he can help
them for all that, and make his dealing to them an experience to others,
inviting them to emply him thereafter; for, since the world began was it not
heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind. I need not
debate whether ever such a cure as that was wrought before, (whereof yet we
read not in Scripture) nor whether other miracles, formerly wrought, may be
paralleld with it. For (beside that Christ wrought it by his own proper power,
not as the Prophets wrought miracles, though the man knew not this) it was
certainly a singular and great miracle; and whatever may be supposed of the
man's mistake; yet the general truth holds good. And the man, in commending it
thus, does evidence that he looks on Gods mercy in granting it to him, as
singular, which is far from their practice, who undervalue the favors
conferred upon themselves, in comparison of what is done to others. 3. Whatever
wonders Satan and his instruments may be permitted to work, to draw men from
the truth; Yet Christ's miracles were such, as did clearly evidence he could
never have wrought them, unless he had been approven and sent of God, for, if
this man were not of God, he could do nothing, to wit, such as this work is.

Verse 34. They answered, and said unto him. Thou wast altogether borne in
sins, and do thou teach us? And they cast him out.
Follows the conclusion of this contest, and the issue of all these assaults;
wherein, being highly incensed, they upbraid him for his presumption, that
being such a base and vile man, he would presume to teach them; and not being
content with this, they excommunicate him. Whence learn, 1. The putting of
persecutors to silence by reason, will not gain upon them, but rather drive
them upon violent rage, as here we are taught. 2. It savours of pharisaicall
pride, for men to account only themselves holy, and to look on others is vile;
for, so do they compare this man with themselves. 3. It is the woeful mistake of
men, that they do not take notice of sin, unless they may grope it in some
sad afflictions; for, upon this ground it is that they say, Thou wast
altogether borne in sins, as bearing the print of it, in being borne blind.
Albeit all have Original sin, yet, it seems, they laid it little to heart,
but where such fruits of it did appear. 4. Men's pride, and conceit of their
calling and gifts, makes them look rather to the Messenger that reproves them,
then to God, and makes them despise to learn any thing from these who are baser
then themselves; Therefore, say they, do thou teach us? 5. It is also men's
pride, that when sound doctrine galls them, it makes them break out upon the
instruments that hold it out; as here was their practice. 6. It is also but an
irrelevant objection, flowing from men's pride, when the weakness or
sinfulness of a Messenger from God makes them reject the message; as here they
will not be taught by him who was altogether borne in sins. 7. It is one part
of suffering for Christ, which his followers are to resolve upon, to be
unjustly excommunicate, in which case, the sentence is null before God; for,
they cast him out, but little to his prejudice, as will be seen in what
follows.

Ver. 35. Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he
said unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God?

36. He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?

37. And Jesus said unto him, Thou have both seen him, and it is he that
talks with thee.

38. And he said, Lord, I believe: and he worshipped him.


In the last part of the Chapter, we have Christ comforting the man after his
excommunication, by two grounds of comfort, the last whereof he maintains
against the exceptions of some of the Pharisees. The first ground of comfort
(in these verses) is, by leading him to knowledge of, and faith in himself the
Son of God. Wherein is recorded. 1. That Christ hearing of his hard
condition, does find him out, and propound an overture to encourage him
against that sentence; which is, to believe, ver. 35. 2. The man professing a
willingness to believe, but desiring to be informed, who was the Son of God,
ver. 36. is resolved and cleared by Christ, verse 37. 3. The man being thus
cleared, does profess his embracing of him by faith, and in testimony thereof,
does worship him, ver. 38.

From verse 35. Learn, 1. Men by the persecution of enemies may be driven to
their thrift, to need and get more proofs of Christ; for, had they let this
man alone, possibly this great mercy might have worn out of his mind; but by
their tossing and excommunicating of him, they put him to it, to need comfort,
and so way is made for his receiving of it. 2. There are none of these who are
dear to Christ, and have tasted of his mercy, but he has an eye upon them, and
does know and take notice what lots they meet with in the world; for, this is
not hid from him, Jesus heard that they had cast him out. 3. When Christ's
people are crushed with troubles and ill usage, then it is his fit time to fall
in and give them a tender visit; when they are deserted by all, they are left
on him; for, at this time he seeks and finds him. He takes advantage to do him
good in this strait, as he had done formerly. 4. Christ will be at pains, to
seek and find his own in trouble, when they little know where to find him;
for, whereas the man knew him not, nor where to find him, yet he found him. 5.
Christ will draw near to them who are rejected of the world for his names sake;
and such as are unjustly excommunicate, will be brought the nearer to Christ;
for, he found him whom they had cast out. 6. Men may be put to trial with a
lesser measure of knowledge, and a further measure be reserved for their
encouragement when they are under it; for, he had endured a sharp trial in
Christ's defense, before he knew him well, and now he is led up to know him to
be the Son of God, for his encouragement. 7. The main matter where upon
Christ tries his own, and their great encouragement against suffering, is,
faith in Christ, whereby communion with him is entertained; for, he propounds
this as his only cordial, and the mean to reap benefit by him, and tries him
about it, do thou believe? 8. Albeit faith must take up Christ, in both his
natures, and all his offices; Yet it never finds sure footing, till it go
through the veil of his humanity, and find him to be true God, and rest on
him as such; Therefore says he, do thou believe on the Son of God?

From verse 36. Learn, 1. Christ may be present with his own, and speaking to
them, and yet they not know him, till he reveal himself; for, says he, when
the Son of God is speaking to him; Who is he, Lord? 2. Weak and ignorant
professors may yet have somewhat to witness their honesty; And namely, their
sense and acknowledgement of their ignorance; Some sparks of love to Christ,
though they know him not well, and a strong desire to believe, and a desire
after the knowledge of Christ that they may believe; which, in effect, is an
evidence of begun faith desiring growth. All these appear in this question,
proving the man's honesty, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? 3.
Whatever good desires there may be in the heart of one who is very ignorant;
Yet true faith is not content to go on implicit grounds; but seeks for clear
knowledge of the ground it goes upon; nor can there be solid faith without
sound knowledge of that which we believe: Therefore he does not please himself
with these beginnings, but desires to have his doubts cleared, that he may
believe indeed; Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? 4. The right end
at which we should aim, in our desires after the knowledge of Christ and
heavenly things, is, not barely to know and contemplate them, but that we may
close with, and embrace them by faith, for, this man desires knowledge for that
end, who is he, that I might believe on him?

From verse 37. Learn, 1. Unto such as really miss Christ, and de^re after
him, he is not so far off as they may conceive, but really present; for, when
he propounded the question, little thinking where he might be, he gets a speedy
account, that he whom he desires to know, is present with him. 2. When Christ
has manifested himself to any of his people, it is his new gift to make them
discern it; for, says he, thou have seen him, to wit, now with bodily eyes,
and before this thou have seen his glory in the miracle, and yet he must be
helped to discern this. See 1 Cor. 2.12. 3. As Christ does insinuate himself
into the hearts and minds of his people, by singular benefits which he
conferreth on them; (as here he makes himself known to this man, by his
admitting him to see and hear him:) so it is his will, that they carefully
remember the favors he has conferred on them* Therefore does he say, Thou
have seen him, or, art seeing him, that he may keep him mindful of the mercy
he had received, in recovering his sight. 4. As it is of Christ's great
condescendence, that he stoops to speak to vile sinners; So the sure way of
taking him up, even albeit he were bodily present, is by his Word; Therefore,
says he, thou have seen him, and not only so, but it is he that talks with
thee; whereby he not only commends his own love that did speak to him, but
leads him not to look to his person only, but especially to his speech and
doctrine. 5. The longer Christ keeps intercourse with a sinner, his
manifestations of himself will be still the clearer and sweeter; for, after he
had made himself so known to this man, as he knew him to be a good man and a
Prophet, now he reveals himself to be the Son of God, for his further
comfort.

From verse 38. Learn, 1. Whatever may be the power of unbelief, when yet men
have much notional knowledge of Christ; Yet when Christ reveals himself to
souls, it is accompanied with such power and life, that they are drawn to
believe, and to confess him, as they have a calling; Therefore, upon this
short information from Christ, he said, Lord, I believe. 2. When one closes
with Christ by faith, it may and will put an end to all his perplexities and
fears; for, this cures him of all his distempers in his trials, Lord, I
believe. 3. True knowledge of the Son of God, and true faith in him, will
beget much subjection, adoration, and reverence, and will draw the heart to do
homage to Christ; Therefore is it subjoyned, and he worshipped him, to wit, as
God manifested in the flesh.

Ver. 39. And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they
which see not, might see, and that they which see might be made blind.
The second ground of comfort (which, it seems, Christ spoke in the audience of
all that were present) relates, chiefly, to the sentence of excommunication
unjustly pronounced against this man: Wherein by judgment, we are to
understand, his authority to administrate the affairs of his own Church and
people, as King and head thereof, leaving the judgment of complete recompense
till the great day. And the effects of the administration of this authority are
expressed in terms borrowed from the late miracle, in opening the eyes of the
blind man, Such whereof as are comfortable, are the proper effects of his
Ministry, and these that are sad, are but the accidental effects thereof,
flowing from men's own corruption. So the meaning is; That he was come into the
world to be the administrator and Ruler of his own Church, and the discerner of
true members from the false, which (though he had not yet taken the external.
Ecclesiastical keys of the hands of the Rulers of the Jewish Church, yet) he
did exerce in a spiritual way upon the spirits of men; by opening their eyes,
who being ignorant, are humbled under the sense thereof; and by discovering
their blindness, and giving them up judicially to be more blinded, who are
puffed up with a conceit of themselves. And by this Christ would show, that the
man had no cause to be troubled at their Excommunication, since it was not
ratified in heaven; but on the contrary, his eyes had been opened to know more
of Christ since his excommunication: Nor had the Rulers cause to glory in their
power and authority, since they were lying under so sad a sentence themselves,
in their spiritual condition. Doctrine 1. Christ is supreme head and Governor
of his Church, and does administrate it justly, to the comfort of all these who
are oppressed by unjust censures, and to the terror of these who do so
oppress them: Therefore, says he, for judgment am I come, to manage the
government of my Church justly, that these who are wronged, and bound on earth
when they are not bound in heaven, may appeal to me, and that these who wrong
them, may expect a just recompense. 2. That which befell and followed upon the
Gospel in Judea, in the days of Christ's ministry, is the same which may be
expected in all places of the world where it comes; for, albeit it was a
particular case to which Christ spoke in the first place, yet, says he, for
judgment I am come into this world. 3. Men's natural blindness and
brutishness in the matters of God, through a veil lying upon their hearts, is
a great and chief part of their spiritual misery; Therefore does he instance
his administration, in the matter of making men see, or be blind; not only
that he may allude to the late miracle, but that under that, he may print out
the great misery of spiritual blindness, and the mercy of illumination. 4. Men
that are indeed ignorant in respect of others, and who are contemned by others
as ignorant, do yet lie very near Christ's help, if they be sensible of their
want, and come to him with it; for, he has a promise for them, which see not,
that is, such as this blind man, who was really ignorant, and despised by the
Pharisees as such, and yet sensible of it, and desiring to have it amended, as
verse 37. 5. Christ has a remedy for all the greevances of sinners; And
particularly, he can open the eyes of the blind, and make them know him, and
these things which tend to their salvation; for, for judgment am I come, that
they which see not, might see. 6. It is a great plague on many, that they are
swelled with a conceit of their own abilities, and so they are blasted to them,
and do obstruct their own profiting by the Gospel; for, there are, who see,
that is, who have a conceit they see, or having some common abilities, do rest
upon them. 7. As the Gospel will discover much to be but real darkness, which
before seemed otherwise; So they who conceit of their own light, will, in Gods
judgment, be given up to reject the light of the Gospel, and so grow more and
more blind: In both these re^pects it is true, They which see are made blind,
their light is discovered to be but real blindness, and they are given up to
blind themselves more, by opposing the light.

Ver. 40. And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and
said unto him, are we blind also?

41. Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now
ye say, We see: therefore your sin remains.


Christ maintains this doctrine against the exceptions of some of the
Pharisees, who following still upon him, and understanding him to speak of
spiritual blindness, do carp that he should insinuate they were blind, verse
40. To which Christ answers, that if they were sensible of their ignorance,
their case were more tolerable, and lay nearer help; but their conceit that it
was otherwise, rendered it incurable. Whence learn, 1. Christ and his followers
will never want observers, who lie in wait, to take advantage against them and
their doctrine; for, albeit he had left the Pharisees Chap. 8. 59. and the man
was cast out by them while they are sitting in Council, verse 34. yet some of
the Pharisees, which were with him, heard these words, 2. Men may have
abilities and judgment to understand Christ's doctrine, and to apply it
pertinently; who yet want grace to make right use of it; for, that they do
understand his speech to be spoken concerning spiritual blindness, and do
apply it to themselves, is in it self right and imitable; and yet it produces
but bad effects in them. 3. It is an evidence of men's blind conceit of
themselves, when they will not believe their misery, when Christ tells them of
it, nor can they endure to hear tell of it, or to take with misery, what ever
advantage Christ hold out to them who do so; for, say they in a rage are we
blind also? even we who are Teachers, as well as others? 4. However conceited
men please themselves in their own dreams; Yet it were their great advantage to
take with that they like so ill: And their being sensible of misery, were an
evidence that they lay near mercy; for, albeit they could not endure to be
accounted blind; Yet Christ tells them, If ye were blind, it were your
greater advantage. 5. Let men's condition be never so bad, yet when they become
sensible thereof, they are in the way to have the sting taken out of it: And an
acknowledged evil condition is nothing, in comparison of men's swelling with
conceit under it, and in respect that Christ will really heal and pardon such:
for, in these respects it holds true; If ye were blind, (in your own esteem,
and coming to me with it) ye should have no sin, to wit, in comparison of
your guilt now, and I would really pardon and heal you, and it should not
remain, as is after declared. 6. Men's conceit of their own condition as good
enough, is a sin against the very remedy; as hindering them from seeing their
case, and consequently, they labor not to cure it, but do go on in it, and as
standing in the way of a pardon from Christ; for, but now you say we see:
therefore your sin remains* that is, I do not pardon it, and ye go on to
increase it daily. 7. There needs no more to make sinners miserable, but to let
them go on and lie over in their sin, and not be helped by Christ; for, this
is the sad sentence against them, therefore your sin remains.

CHAP. X.
THe doctrine contained in the first part of this Chapter* has an immediate
connection with what was spoken in the close of the former; concerning Christ's
authority to administrate the affairs of his Church and people, as their true
shepherd, and the Pharisees being but blind guides; And in this part of the
Chapter, Christ propounds the parable concerning the true and false shepherd,
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. which the Pharisees not understanding, ver. 6. he does
himself explain it, ver. 7. -- 18. Upon which a schism arises among the
people concerning him, ver. 19, 20, 21. In the second part of the Chapter, we
have a sharp contest betwixt Christ and some of his enemies; Wherein, 1. They
challenging him of want of freedom in his doctrine, and desiring him to
declare freely what he was, He declares that both his doctrine and works had
already cleared that case, ver. 22. -- 25. and that their unbelief was an
evidence of their reprobation, ver. 26. seeing they had not the properties of
his sheep, ver. 27. and needed not expect these favors which he and his Father
(with whom he was one) would confer upon his own, ver. 28, 29, 30. 2. They
being about to stone him, pretending that they did it, not for any good work,
but for alleged blaspemy; ver. 31, 32, 33. Christ does prove, both by
Scripture, and by his works, that it was no blasphemy to assert that he was the
Son of God, and one with the Father, but it was their duty to believe it,
ver. 34. -- 38. 3. They being offended at this, do seek to apprehend him; but
he with draws, and leaving the City, goes to the place where John at first
baptized, where his ministry is successeful, ver. 39. -- 42.

Ver. 1. VErily, verily, I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber:

2. But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep.

3. To him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls
his own sheep by name, and leads them out.

4. And when he puts forth his own sheep he goes before them, and the sheep
follow him: for they know his voice.

5. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know
not the voice of strangers.


This first part of the Chapter contains four particulars; Whereof the first
(in these verses) is the proposition of the parable, (as it is called, ver. 6.)
concerning the true and false shepherd, who are described from their contrary
marks and properties; the false shepherd, chiefly, ver. 1. and the true, ver.
2, 3, 4, 5. In it several things occur, to be cleared and observed. And,

First, The occasion and scope of the parable is breefly to be cleared. And for
this end, it is to be considered, that the Scribes and Pharisees took it in ill
part, that they were not looked on as the only Teachers of the Church, and they
did disclaim that Christ had any authority to teach the people, Chap. 9. 29.
And in particular, they were grieved that Christ had not only asserted his own
authority, but had insinuate that they were blind guides, Chap 9. 39, 40, 41.
Therefore Christ, continuing his discourse to the same auditory that were
present, does by this parable point out himself as the true shepherd of his
sheep, and consequently, that he was the true Messiah, who had been promised
under that name, Ezekiel. 34.23. And he does, on the contrary, point out who were
not the true shepherds; under which description are comprehended all these who
either assumed to themselves the office of the Messiah; or, who in their entry
to an ordinan^y calling, were intruders and not of Gods appointing; or were, in
their doctrine, erroneous; or these who albeit they had an external call, and
preached sound doctrine, yet were but hirelings, as to their fidelity in
discharge of their trust. And as for the application of this to the present
Teachers of the Church of the Jews, (which Christ does in the first place
intend here;) we are not to conceive that Christ does contradict his own
doctrine, Matthew. 23.2, 3. where he asserts their lawful calling, and men's
obligation to hear what they taught according to the Word; For, albeit all
that be true, yet they come in among false shepherds; partly, in so far as they
were an order of Pharisees, not institute by God; partly, as they taught
unsound doctrine, and particularly, did corrupt the doctrine concerning the
Messiah, and righteousness to be had by him; and partly, as they were but
mercinary and unfaithful, either in the exercing of any lawful calling they
had, or in dispensing the true doctrine which they acknowledged.

Secondly, Christ's grave asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you, used
both in the proposition of the parable, verse 1. and the exposition of it,
verse 7. may teach. 1 There is great need of frequent excitation and up
stirring to hear doctrine, and lay it to heart; Therefore does he, in whose
mouth no guile was ever sound, 1 Pet 2.22. find it needful to stir them up,
by this grave introduction. 2. It is a matter of no small importance to people,
that they discern who are their true shepherds, and who are but intruders to
deceive them: Therefore does Christ propund it thus, as a weighty point. 3.
Christ by his doctrine has not only gross or open vices, generally condemned
by all to reprove, but even these principles and courses that ordinarily pass
current among all; Therefore also is this asseveration premitted, to show that
it was a very weighty point, and hard to be received, as being contrary to the
general received opinion, that the Pharisees were the only true shepherds. 4.
Such as are employed to carry truth, should publish it in a reverent and grave
manner, and so as their behavior give no occasion to despise or reject it;
Therefore, also, does Christ, by his own grave way of preaching, commend this
doctrine to the hearers.

Thirdly, Christ's practice, both here, and elsewhere, in making use of a
parable in propounding spiritual truths, would be considered. And this way of
speaking truth in borrowed terms, though taken from things known among men,
did serve for these ends. 1. To make spiritual things plain and clear, being
spoken of in terms borrowed from things wherewith we are best acquainted; So
Joh. 3.12. And as this does commend plainness in the way of preaching, and
shows Christ's great skill and happiness in expressing his mind to men's
capacity, (which was a fruit of his perfect knowledge, seeing it is but men's
darkness and confutednesse that renders them unable to express truth to the
capacity of mean ones:) So also it puts us in mind, that it is our duty in
observing these common things, whereof Christ makes use in preaching, to gather
some spiritual instruction from them, as his practice does teach. 2. Albeit the
propounding of parables, being joined with the explications thereof, did tend
to make truth more plain; yet on the other hand, the naked propounding of
parables without the explication, did keep the matter dark, and that in Gods
righteous judgment upon malicious and wicked men, to whom the means of
salvation do no good at all, Matthew. 13.10, 11, 12, 13. 3. This way of preaching
did also tend to inculcate divine and necessary truths; as being not only twice
told, once in the parable, and again in the exposition, but use being made of
such obvious things, as might make the matter (being once understood) take
deeper impression. And herein, Christ's wisdom does meet with an ordinary
disease among men, which is, to receive but a slender impression of most
material truths, which therefore they do easily let slip, Heb. 2.1. 4. This
way of preaching did also tend to beget and excite an appetite after divine
truths, while as the hearers are held in suspense in hearing the parable, and
excited to desire to know the explication, as was the disciples frequent
practice: And indeed, where there is much wealth of spiritual doctrine, nothing
is more difficult, then to keep men in appetite after the Word, and from
leathing of it.

Lastly, somewhat is here to be spoken of the whole structure and parts of this
parable. For albeiet it were very impertinent to explain here the properties of
sheep, and their herds, and folds, in themselves; seeing that is not the
doctrine intended here, but another thing is pointed at under that
representation; And albeit it be only required in a parable, that the matter
propounded be purpose-like in it self, having its own parts, all suitable and
agreeing to the fabrike of the parable; and that some of the chief parts, and
the whole parable jointly considered, have some analogy to the purpose intended
to be spoken of under that parable; So that to press every particular part
thereof to point out some spiritual purpose, is but to wrest the parable, and
the scope of him that uses it: Yea, albeit Christ in the explication, do
chiefly insist upon that of the door, and the true and false shepherd, and do
speak of the true shepherd chiefly with relation to himself; Yet if we
consider, 1. That what is here explained is twice told, that we may be excited
to consider it again and again. 2. That what is not expressly explained, is
yet touched in the by. 3. That this parable is not like to many others, wherein
some purpose or thing is made use of for once, the scope whereof tends to
illustrate the present purpose; but this, for most part, contain nothing but
the very ordinary similitudes and borrowed expressions, whereby the Scriptures
point out spiritual things and truths; and some of them are afterward repeated
in this same Chapter, as familiar and plain doctrine. 4. That some things which
are but hinted in the by in the exposition, are more fully spoken to on the
parable; So that we are remitted to it for the further consideration thereof.
If, I say, we consider these things, we may hold forth the structure and parts
of this parable in these particulars, which are so many instructions. 1. Albeit
the Lord might justly have rejected all Adams posterity, upon the breach of the
Covenant of works; Yet it pleases him, from among these lost ones, to select
unto himself some to be vessels of mercy; for, here he has sheep, whereby,
(as is after cleared) are understood his elect and converted children, who are
differenced from reprobate goats, as will be made visible at the last day. As
for the reason of the name, and the resemblances betwixt them and sheep, sundry
may be brought, from their harmless simplicity, their cleanliness, and
profitablenesse, their readiness to wander, their tractablenesse, etc. But
these may suffice us, which are recorded afterward in the parable. 2. Among
other favors conferred upon Christ's people, he has, in particular, appointed
for them the privilege of a Church society, wherein the elect are converted,
and the converted live under his care and blessing, in the use of his
Ordinances, till they be fitted for glory; for, the sheep have a sheepfold,
which is expounded to be the Church, as may be gathered from verse 16. It is
but a needless alegorizing, to gather from hence the outward baseness of the
Church in this world; seeing the scope is only to show, that their Church
society is as suitable to them, as a sheepfold is to sheep; and that, however
reprobates may be within the visible Church; yet, the good of the privileges
thereof do redound only to the elect. 3. Albeit Christ's sheep are bound to
watch over themselves; Yet are they not altogether left to their own care of
themselves; but he has provided pastors for their better provision and
security; for, there is the shepherd of the sheep, Christ himself and his sent
servants. Whereby is intimate, that they can no more safely want pastors, then
a weak flock can want a shepherd. 4. As God has provided lawful Ministers for
the good of his people; so others are ready to obtrude themselves upon them
under that name, who have no such warrant; for, as there is the shepherd, so
there are thieves and robbers, who yet will seek the sheep to follow them, and
hear their voice, as if they were true shepherds, as is imported verse 5. 5. It
is one clear evidence of a false shepherd, that he does not enter in a right
way, or by the right door, but takes some sinistruous course of his own; for,
so much may be gathered from this, that he enters not by the door, but
climeth up some other way, of which more in the explication. And, on the
contrary, the lawful shepherd enters in by the door, and to him the porter
opens, that is, (without straining what Christ has not explained) he is
admitted as a known man, and enters with Gods approbation, and in his way, as a
porter opens to him whom the Master of the house allows to be let in. 6.
Such as do unwarrantably thrust themselves into the Ministry, are sent, and do
come for little good, but much hurt to the flock, let them pretend to what they
will; for, the same is a thief and a robber, of which also afterward. 7. As
faithful pastors have Gods approbation in their entry; so they do acquit
themselves faithfully in discharge of their trust; so is here held out in
several particulars. His calling his sheep by name, imports his particular
inspection and care of every one of the Lords flock, and his acquaintance with
them and their conditions; which though it be eminently verified on Christ, yet
it is the duty of every faithful pastor in his measure. His leading them out,
to their pasture, must not be so strained, as if the Church, which is their
fold, were not the place of their feeding also, But it imports that faithful
pastors will make it their care, not only to keep the Lords people in some
external Church Order, as sheep within a fold, but to feed them also with sound
doctrine. His going before them, when he puts them forth, (which is the
practice of shepherds in some Countries) imports not only his going before them
by doctrine and good example, but also his vigilance and care about them, and
to protect and defend them. 8. The true sheeps carriage in reference to these
shepherds, does hold forth several properties of Christ's true sheep. As, 1.
They are brought to be sensible of their need of direction from God; for, they
are guided by the voice of the shepherd. 2. They are gifted with discerning to
know the voice and doctrine of Christ, and of his faithful servants; for, they
hear and know his voice, as sheep in some countries do discern the voice of
their own shepherds. 3. What directions they get, they do upon all hazards
follow; for, as sheep in some countries do follow their shepherd upon his call,
so they follow him. 4. They are so far enabled to discern false Teachers and
corrupt doctrine, as they do approve of neither; and not only will not obey
their doctrine, but will flee from them, that they be not infected nor ensnared
with their allurements; for, a stranger they will not follow, (when he calls
them to follow him in a wrong way) but will flee from him, (as one they will
have nothing to do with all,) and that because they know not the vo^ce of
strangers, that is, they do not approve them, though they have a knowledge of
discerning, whereby they know them and their doctrine to be naught. This is
asserted of Christ's sheep, not because they cannot at all err, nor yet only
because it is their duty thus to do, (for that is common to them with
reprobates;) but because, 1. When any do either embrace false doctrine, or fall
in liking with corrupt men, who run unsent, it is no sign of their grace, but
of their corruption, so to do. 2. Whatever dangerous errors a child of God may
be overtaken with, yet he will at length recover out of them. And, 3. Whatever
may be said of a child of God his living and dying in some lesser errors, in
times of ignorance; Yet such as persist in gross errors, and particularly in
seeking another way of salvation beside Christ, (which is the first and chief
thing Christ points at here in these Pharisees) they do prove that they are no
sheep, whatever glorious shows they make.

Verse 6. This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood not what
things they were which he spoke unto them.
The second particular in this part of the Chapter, is, the ignorance of the
Pharisees, and their not understanding what Christ pointed at by this Parable,
which occasions the following explication. Whence learn. 1. Such as are most
taken up with a conceit of their own knowledge and abilities, are ordinarily
most ignorant, especially, of the doctrine of Christ; for, these Pharisees (who
could not endure to be accounted blind, Chap. 9. 40.) understood not what
things they were which he spoke unto them. 2. It pleases the Lord, sometime,
to give unto conceited men many evidences of their own weakness, if so be they
would make use thereof, to humble them; As here he gives a speedy proof that
these conceited men were indeed blind. 3. It is a double mercy, when Christ
not only speaks unto a people, but does make his mind plain thereby, and does
open their eyes to understand it; Therefore is their ignorance marked, to show
the mercy of the following explication. And a particular Sermon is made, to
point out this privilege of getting knowledge of Christ's doctrine and
Parables, Matthew. 13.10, 11, 12, etc.

Ver. 7. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am
the door of the sheep.
The third particular in this part of the Chapter; is, the explication of the
parable, in so far as was needful, or for Christ's present purpose; Which we
may take up thus: 1. Christ declares himself to be the door of the sheep,
ver. 7. both in respect of pastors, ver. 8 and believers, ver. 9. 2. He
declares him else to be the good shepherd, in opposition to tyranous robbers,
ver. 10. and to hirelings, ver. 11, 12, 13. And in respect of his fidelity and
care of all his sheep, ver. 14, 15, 16. 3. He obviates the scandal that might
be taken at that proof of his fidelity, of laying down his life, ver. 17, 18.

In this verse Christ does gravely assert that he was in effect, to his elect
and Saints, what the door of the sheepfold is unto sheep. Whence learn, 1.
Christ is a Teacher who can make his own mind to be understood, and when he
pleases, he will so do, to the conversion, or, at least, the conviction of the
hearers; Therefore, seeing they understood it not, he spoke unto them again,
that he might explain it. 2: Borrowed speeches and types, are plain enough, if
rightly understood; and the name of the type may be given to the thing
typified, without any transubstantiation of the substance of the one into the
other, but only by reason of some similitude of properties and effects that is
betwixt them; Therefore, says Christ, I am the door, because he is that unto
his children, which a door is unto sheep entering the fold. 3. Even Christ's
elect are, of themselves, and by nature, secluded from all access to God, and
from all communion with him, in grace here, or glory hereafter; for, that they
need a door, it imports they are without. 4. It is by Christ only that lost
sinners are admitted to partake of the privileges and benefits of grace here,
or glory hereafter, and who so come to him, and employ him on his own terms,
will be admitted; for, says he, I am the door of the sheep.

Ver. 8. All that ever came before me, are thieves and robbers: but the sheep
did not hear them.
In this verse Christ clears how he is the door in respect of other pastors;
for clearing whereof, we are not to understand that by these that came before
him, are meant the true Prophets, for he speaks of them who came, and not of
them who were sent. But the speech relates, partly, to them who before that
time gave out themselves to be the Messiah, (as some, it seems, there were,
Act. 5.36.) And partly, to them who did intrade themselves into a lawful
office, not entering by him, and his warrant, who is the door, and who did not
preach him up to be the only door by whom believers have access to God, or did
establish any religious means and ways of reconciliation to God beside him.
These, and such as they, whether they be before or after Christ, in respect of
time, yet they come before him, in so far as they run without his commission,
and instructions. And though the context seem to refer it, chiefly, to them
who were before him in time; Yet these are sufficient characters whereby to try
the like persons, or courses in all ages. So the meaning is; That whosoever
take upon themselves the person and office of the Messiah, and whosoever do
usurp a lawful calling in the Church without his call, and do not preach the
sound doctrine of Christ: they are in effect, and ought to be accounted but
murderers and robbers, and whoever do follow them and their doctrine, yet none
of the elect will finally persist in such a course; as had been verified in the
case of former seducers. Whence learn, 1. Such is the vanity and perversity of
men's hearts, and so great, oftimes, is the Lords quarrel against the visible
Church; that there will not be wanting in all ages, men of deluded and corrupt
judgments, to corrupt the doctrine, and usurp the most eminent Offices
appointed for her good; for, there is an all of them who come before him. 2.
However men of old, and of late, have cried up themselves, and their devised
doctrines concerning the reconciliation and salvation of sinners; Yet there is
no Mediator but Christ, nor any access to the favor of God since the fall of
man, but by him; for, all these came before him, as is explained, and so
mistook the way. 3. As faithful Teachers of Christ are a great blessing to the
Church; So they who ^unne unsent, or corrupt the doctrine of reconciliation and
salvation, which is only to be had by him, they are a great judgment and
plague, and ought to be looked on as such; Therefore are they resembled to
thieves and robbers, of which, verse 10. 4. Albeit corrupt men will not want
their own followers, who, for not receiving the love of the truth, are given up
to strong delusions; And albeit not only the unconverted elect, but even
regenerate Saints, may for a time be overtaken: Yet none of the elect will be
suffered to persist finally in following these Sect-Masters, and their corrupt
doctrines; for as it was before, the sheep did not hear them (to wit so as is
expressed in the doctrine) so it will be so still.

Ver. 9. I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and
shall go in and out, and find pasture.
In this verse he repeates the assertion, that he is the door, and clears it
with relation to the sheep, showing that whoever enters by him, shall be put
in a secure condition, till they obtain eternal salvation, and shall be
abundantly refreshed and fed. And, by this he points out the necessity of
pastors entering by him, and their pointing him out as the only way of
salvation, which is the principal scope of the doctrine. To go in and out, is
not to be strained here, as signifying that they who enter into the fold of the
Church, may lawfully go out again; but, as sheep are cared for by their
shepherd, secured in their fold, brought out to pasture, and watched over
there; so they should find in him protection and refreshment; and as men in
times of peace go out and in securely about their affairs, so should they walk
securely under his shadow. See Psalm. 121.8. Whence learn, 1. The absolute
necessity of Christ is a doctrine never enough inculcate upon lost sinners, who
either lie secure, dreaming of Gods favor, or look to make their peace by
other means without him. Therefore is it repeated I am the door. 2. It is not
enough that men be convinced, and in their judgment do acknowledge the
necessity of Christ, and the great privilege of access through him; unless
in their practice they improve and make use hereof; for, he is the door, that
by him men may enter in, and not stand afar off, commending the great
privilege only. 3. Such as come to God through Christ, and do seek salvation
only through him, shall be preserved in all hazards, till they attain to
eternal salvation; for, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. 4. Such
as come to God through Christ, have allowance of much spiritual freedom,
tranquillity, and security of mind, in all their Christian course, till they
arrive at their complete rest; for, he shall go in and out, does import this,
that he shall not be shut up, but at freedom, that he may go about his lawful
affairs, and may do it without anxiety or fear. 5. Such also as do thus come
to God, will find such satisfaction and spiritual refreshment for making them
grow in grace, as they shall not need to complain, or betake themselves to
other comforts; for, he shall find pasture.

Ver. 10. The thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly.
Christ proceeds to declare that, as he is the door, so, he is the true
shepherd. And that first (in this ver) in opposition to these whom he called
thieves and robbers, that is, they who give out themselves to be the Messiah,
or who run unsent and bring corrupt doctrine. These he declares to be enemies
and not shepherds, as coming only to do the flock prejudice; But his errand is
to give them life, and that in great abundance. Whence learn, 1. False Teachers
and seducers will have so many fair pretenses, and plausible shows and
appearances, that the evil of their way will not be soon seen; Therefore must
it be so much inculcate, what it is the thief comes about. 2. Let seducers
pretend never so fair, and people be never so much taken with them; Yet they
do really come for the hurt of the flock, and it will prove ^o, and be seen in
end; for, the thief comes not, but for to steal etc. that is the whole scope
of their work. And this mee^s with the blind charity of any in the flock, who
fear not so much hurt by their errors ^s they expect good by their fair
shows of piety and p^^^. 2. Seducers are but thieves, in regard they do but
make a prey of men, taking them away from Christ, stealing away their food that
they may give them poison and betraying Christ of his glory, and them of their
happiness; and in regard they do all this in a clandestine and indirect way;
Therefore is it said, The thief comes not, but for to steal. 4. How happy so
ever ^^^ded souls may think themselves, in being made a prey to seducers, and
in being deluded with their indirect insinuations; Yet all this tends but to
their destruction, and to their eternal ruin, if mercy prevent it not; for, as
the thief comes to steal, so also to kill and to destroy, and so they are
robbers, or murdering thieves, as ver. 8. 5. Christ is a shepherd who will be
so far from destroying his flock, that he will give life, even to these of them
who are dead; for, I am come that they might have life. 6. Christ's great scope
in coming to the world, is, to purchase and confer life upon his own Elect;
And whatever his dealing toward them be, yet it tends all to this, and when
they find it otherwise, it is their own mistake: for, says he, I am come that
they might have life. 7. Christ by his coming, not only intends life, but more
abundant life to his flock, that is, 1. Albeit he gave life to his people
before his coming, yet he has let it out more abundantly since, to show the
difference betwixt the Son of righteousness now arisen, and the light that
his people had (though from him) before. 2. He will not only give that life
that may simply supply the necessity of his people, but such a superabounding
measure, as may testify his fullness, and may completely refresh them. 3.
Having conferred this abundant life in conversion, he will make it grow more
and more while they are within time, 1 These. 4.1. 4 All this is but a drop, in
comparison of that abundance of life that is reserved for his people in glory.
In these respects it is said, I am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly.

Verse 11. I am the good shepherd, the good shepherd gives his life for the
sheep.
Secondly, Christ declares himself to be the true shepherd, in opposition to
hirelings, who albeit they have a lawful calling, and do not come to kill with
false doctrine, but do preach truth; yet they are unfaithful in the discharge
of their trust. In this verse Christ declares what he is in opposition to
these; asserting that he is that good shepherd, who lays down his life for
his sheep. For understanding whereof, it would be considered, that taking these
properties of a shepherd strictly, they do properly and only belong to Christ,
and by them he is distinguished not only from hirelings or seducers, but from
all true Ministers also that are sent out in his name. But considering that he
does approve of lawful shepherds under himself, and does only oppose himself
here unto hirelings; we may (beside the consideration of what is peculiar to
him, or requires a peculiar consideration in him) look to these properties as
they are taken more largely, and so some of them do belong also to his faithful
servants in their measure and proportion, and by them they are distinguished
from hirelings and false teachers. Doctrine 1. Whatever hirelings or seducers
infest the Church, yet the elect want not a shepherd; And albeit Christ employ
servants under him, yet he does not give over the charge of his people, but
remains still chief shepherd and overseer unto them, to care for them, and
furnish food unto them by his own appointed means; for, in both these respects,
I am the shepherd, says he. See 1 Pet. 5.4. 2. Christ does eminently deserve
the title of a good shepherd, as being infinite in knowledge, to discern all
the necessities of his flock, and in pity and wisdom, to deal tenderly with
them, according to their necessities; for, I am that good shepherd, says he.
See Isa. 40.11. 3. Good and faithful shepherds do prefer the good of their
flock, even to their own life; And as Christ not only gives life to his sheep,
but his own life for them, by way of ransom; so his faithful servants should
not account their life dear, so they may fulfill their Ministry, and bear
testimony to the truth: for, it is the character of a true shepherd, the good
shepherd gives his life for the sheep. And Christ propounds it in general
terms, to intimate that though this was eminently and singularly true of him,
as the Savior of his people; Yet his servants must be resolved to lay down
their lives, not to expiate sin, but for the service of the Churches faith.

Ver. 12. But he that is an hireling and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep
are not, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees: and the
wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep.

13. The hireling flees, because he is an hireling, and cares not for the
sheep.


In opposition to these properties, Christ declares what the hirelings are,
who minding only their gain, and having no interest in, nor affection to the
sheep, do upon the sight of any danger from seducers or persecutors, desert
their stations, and expose the flock to danger, verse 12. And from this
fleeing, Christ concludes that such are hirelings, and care not for the flock,
verse 13. Whence learn, 1. It is not enough that men have an external lawful
calling to the Ministry, and that they be not erroneous; unless also they be
faithful and single in discharge of their trust; for, beside thieves and
robbers, there is also the hireling, who is opposite unto, and disapproven by
Christ, as not the shepherd. 2. Albeit it be the will of God, that Ministers
and laborers get their wages, and be maintained; Yet such as make it not the
scope of their calling, to honor God, and seek the good of souls, but do mind
only, or chiefly, their own game and base ends, they do prove themselves not to
be honest Ministers: for, so is imported in his name, an hireling, and not the
shepherd. 3. As the sheep are all Christ's own, by reason of his purchase of
them, and dominion over them; So every true pastor will account Christ's sheep
as dear to him, as if they were his own, and that because they are Christ's: And
who so do not thus respect them, they prove themselves to be but hirelings:
for, he is an hireling, whose own the sheep are not, not only by way of
possession, (for so they are Christ's only) but in respect of affection, and so
it is expounded, verse 13, he cares not for the sheep. 4. Albeit it be a sad
enough stroke for the Church to be under hirelings, yet Satan is not satisfied
with that, but, by Gods permission, may hound out erroneous Teachers and
Persecutors, to molest and vex her more: for, beside the hireling, there is a
wolf which troubles the sheepfold: whereby we are to understand both false
Teachers, and Persecutors, as readily corrupt doctrine is pressed with
violence. See Acts 20.29. 5. Albeit Ministers in some cases may lawfully flee,
and particularly, when the trial and danger is personal to themselves; Yet when
they look more to their own case, then to the flocks weal, and when to avoid
trouble, they desert the flock in times of error and common hazard, they prove
themselves to be but hirelings: for, he sees the wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep, and flees. 6. Men may have more light, and foresee trials better
then others, who yet want courage to abide them; And corrupt men will no longer
follow Christ and duty, then they think to compass their own ends by so
doing; for, he sees the wolf coming, and knows he is a wolf, and ye he
flees, as hoping to attain no more of his base ends in that way. 7. When Satan
and his instruments are let loose upon a Church, and pastors do prove
unfaithful, there may be great havoke and desolation made in it; for, in this
case, the wolf catches and scatters all the sheep. Some he catches by
error, he makes a prey of some by persecution, and whosoever escape that trial,
may yet suffer scattering, by divisions, or deprivation of mutual fellowship
and solemn assemblies. And albeit all this be the wolfes fault, yet it is also
put upon the hirelings account, who by his example in shifting trouble, and by
his withholding the encouragement of doctrine, and his want of courage in
maintaining truth, does open a gap to the wolf, does expose the sheep as a
prey, and does weaken their hands. 3. Whoever they be that prefer their own
commodity and ease to the weal of the flock, and do desert their duty when the
flock is in danger, they do prove themselves to be but mercenary men and
hirelings; Therefore is it again repeated, The hireling flees, because he is
an hireling, and cares not for the sheep.

Verse 14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

15. As the Father knows me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my
life for the sheep.


Christ proceeds yet to clear that he is the good Shepherd, by other
properties of a good shepherd, which also (with the former) do point out the
differences betwixt him and false teachers and hirelings. In these verses, He
declares himself to be the good Shepherd, and proves it from that familiarity
which is betwixt him and his people; He knowing and taking special notice of
them, and they knowing and acknowledging him, verse 14. This familiarity and
relation is amplified, 1. From a similitude or comparison, that it resembles,
in part, that mutual knowledge and familiarity that is betwixt the Father and
him. 2. From an effect on his part, that his respect and affection is such to
his sheep, that he will give his life for them, verse 15. Doctrine 1. The
tender relations in Christ toward his people are worthy to be often studied and
meditated upon; and how he makes good these relations: Therefore says he over
again, I am the shepherd, and, the good shepherd. 2. Christ has particular and
exact knowledge of all his elect, and who they are that shall be saved, wherein
he will not be disappointed; for, I know my sheep, does import, in the first
place, that he has a knowledge of the individual persons, as 2 Timothy 2.19. Joh.
13.18. 3. As Christ knows all his own, so he has a special affection to
them, and takes special notice and care of them; So that he will not only have
them converted, but being converted, his knowledge and affection will supply
the defect of their prayers, and does prove that his cures to their particular
conditions cannot be misapplied: So much also does this import, I know my
sheep, that is, I affect, and take special notice of them. 4. Whoever are
beloved of Christ, as his sheep, he gives unto them grace to know and
acknowledge and love him; for, it must be mutual, though it begin at him, I
know my sheep, and am known of mine. 5. There is a mutual knowledge,
acquiescence, and affection, betwixt the Father and the Son Christ, which
tends much to the comfort of believers in him; for, the Father knows me, and
I know the Father. See Prove. 8.24, -- 30. 6. Albeit the acquiescence and
affection betwixt the Father and the Son be matchless and incomprehensible;
Yet the relation and affection betwixt Christ and his sheep comes nearest to
resemble it, of any other thing: for, to this purpose is this brought in here,
that, As the Father knows me, and I (as the words in the Original will read)
know the Father; So, I know my sheep, and am known of mine. And albeit it hold
good chiefly on Christ's part, yet their part is not to be wholly secluded; who
though they come far short to make up the comparison, yet this is the pattern
according to which he will carry them on, so far as they are capable, See Joh.
17.21. 7. Christ's affection is so real and great, that he will give proof of
it by the greatest effects his people can need, if it were to die, that they
may live; Therefore does he subjoyne, I know my sheep, as the Father knows
me, etc. and I lay down my life. 8. Christ came into the world, and laid down
his life, only for his own elect, whom he knew, and whom he brings in to
himself by actual conversion; for, I lay down my life for the sheep, and not
the goats.

Verse 16. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.
Christ proves himself to be the true Shepherd, from another property; Which
is, His care to enlarge his Church, by bringing in his own among the Gentiles:
Who albeit they did not belong to the Church of the Jews, yet he would, in due
time, convert and bring them in: And as he is that one Shepherd, so he will
make up one Church of Jew and Gentile, the partition wall being removed. Whence
learn, 1. Whatever be the malice or opposition of wicked pastors against
Christ; Yet he will have his own elect and Church in the midst of them: for,
here it is supposed that he had sheep in Judea, notwithstanding the malice of
the Rulers and Pharisees, with whom he will gather other sheep, from among the
Gentiles. 2. Christ is a Shepherd who not only has a care of those that are
brought in, but he minds also the enlargement of his Kingdom; As here we
see. And herein honest Pastors should imitate him. 3. Albeit Christ, in the
days of his flesh, was Minister of the circumcision only, Romans 15.8. and would
neither go himself, not suffer his Disciples to go into the way of the
Gentiles; Yet the conversion of the Gentiles, as it was fore-prophesied in the
Old Testament, so it was approven by him, and he purposed to have it brought
about in due time: So much does this prediction teach us. 4. Christ's own,
though as yet unconverted, are his sheep, in respect of his eternal purpose to
bring them in; and his heart is upon them, for that end: for, he calls them
other sheep, which I have, though they be not yet called, and he speaks of his
purpose of love concerning them, when they little knew him or it. 5. Christ's
elect sheep may not only be living in nature, for a time, within the Church;
but they may be living without the pale of the Church, to whom he will have the
Gospel sent, to convert them and bring them in: for, those other sheep are not
of this fold, or, no Jews, nor of that Church which was the only Church at
that time; and yet were sheep. 6. Such as are Christ's sheep by election and
purpose, must not only be converted, but brought in to the society of the
visible Church, to live under Christ's care and government; for they must be
brought to the fold. 7. Christ himself is chief in bringing in his elect,
whatever instruments be employed; And he is at pains to seek them and gain
their consent, as being bound in the Covenant of Redemption, to present all
that are given him by Charter, blameless before the Father: Therefore says
he, I bring them, and, I must bring them, the matter not being left arbitrary,
even in respect of his obligation. 8. Gods purposes are so unchangable, and
Christ's grace, conferred and applied to the elect, so efficacious and
invincible in operation, that he can undertake to prevail with them, to whom he
so applies it; for, he undertakes, they shall hear my voice, which includes
both faith and obedience. 9. All Christ's converts, in all times and places,
will carry the same stamp, and have the same properties agreeable to the
Scriptures; for, what was the mark of his sheep in Judea. ver. 3. the same is
the character of converted Gentiles, and they shall hear my voice. 10. As all
true converts are brought in to the society of the Church; So under the Gospel,
the partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile is broken down, and they make up but
one Catholic Church: for, there shall be one fold. 11. Christ is the only one
chief Shepherd of the Catholic Church, dispersed through the world, of Jews
and Gentiles; for, there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

Ver. 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again.

18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I
received of my Father.


Because Christ had given that as one proof that he is the good shepherd, that
he would lay down his life for the sheep; and the Jews could not endure to
hear that their Messiah should suffer; Yea, and his very friends stumbled at
it, Matthew. 16.22. Therefore, in these verses, he closes this discourse with
obviating that scandal. And, 1. He declares, that the Father loves him,
because of this his suffering; which is not to be understood of that love
wherewith he is loved as the eternal Son of God: but of love to him, and
approbation of him, as Mediator, evidenced in his through-bearing of him in
his duty, and his exaltation of him after his suffering. 2. He declares, that
he was to lay down his life, not to continue deaths prisoner, but that having
paid the ransom, he might take it again with the Fathers approbation. 3.
(Which explains that expression of laying down his life) He declares, that
for the nature of his death, it was not forced upon him, but he yielded to it
by a voluntary dispensation, and would prove it was so, by his recovering of
himself again out of the bonds of death. 4. He declares, that he did all this
in obedience to a command laid upon him by the Father, and this is the ground
of the Fathers love to him, and of his voluntary submission. All these, being
put together, may take away all just ground of stumbling at his cross.
Doctrine 1. Christ, held out with his ignominious cross, is the great
stumbling block of the world; for, so is here imported. 2. Albeit shame and
ignominy, joined to the cross, do add to the grievousnesse thereof; Yet all
that could not hinder Christ to undergo it, for the good of sinners, Heb. 12.2.
and that he might cast a copy to his followers, 1 Pet. 2.21. etc. Yea, he not
only bare the cross, but had so much courage under it, as to commend it as
lovely, to them who are ready to stumble at it: Therefore, whoever stumbled at
it, yet not only says he, I lay down my life, but he propounds such
considerations as may make it appear lovely. 3. Christ the Mediator is beloved
of the Father, and is he in whom he is well pleased, that so all who come in
under his shadow, may be accepted in him; for, says he, my Father does love
me. 4. The Father is so well pleased with the reconciliation of lost sinners,
that he loves Christ for the undertaking thereof, and is fully satisfied with
his suffering, for attaining that end; In both these respects it holds good,
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life. The Father is
pleased with him that he undertook that service, and is content with his death
as a sufficient ransom. 5. Crosses that seem very gloomy, and have much
displeasure in them, are yet consistent with the Fathers love toward the
sufferer, especially when they are well borne; So much may we learn from
Christ's experience, who albeit he drank of a verry bitter cup, yet was beloved
of the Father. 6. Gods love manifested toward any, in their following of his
way, is a sufficient cordial against all the bitterness of it; for, albeit
Christ's sufferings were bitter, and stumbled at by many, yet this suffices
him, that therefore does my Father love me. 7. The backside and issue of Christ
and his followers cross, being rightly considered, may sweeten all the rough
way that leads to it; Therefore does he subjoyne, as another encouragement, I
lay down my life, that I may take it again. 8. Christ having laid down his
life for the Redemption of lost man, did take it again; as a testimony that the
Father was satisfied with his sufferings; and to be a ground of strong
consolation to believers; and, to remove the scandal of his ignominious death:
for, all these are to be found in his taking his life again. 9. Christ in
suffering death for sinners, was not forced to it, nor could enemies have
reached him against his will; But he did it voluntarily, that so he might
commend his love to sinners, and might teach us to act and suffer for him
willingly, being confident that enemies can never reach us without our Father,
Matthew. 10.29. for, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. 10.
Christ, by his resurrection, gave a proof how voluntarily he rendered himself
unto death; Therefore says he, I have power (not only an instruction from the
Father, but a liberty at his own pleasure, as to any thing men could do) to lay
it down and I have power to take it again. And by this also he would prove
that he can put a period to the sufferings of his own, when he pleases,
without any help of their crooked ways. 11. The way of accomplishment of our
Redemption was agreed upon betwixt the Father and the Son, before the
accomplishment thereof; Therefore says he, This commandment have I received of
my Father, which clears that he came, into the world instructed how to go about
this work. See Psalm. 40.6, 7. with Heb. 10 6, 7 12. It pleased Christ to suffer
death, not only voluntarily, but in a way of subjection to his Fathers command,
that so the merit thereof might every way be full, and acceptable to the
Father; for, this commandment have I received, He was content to be a servant
by paction, that so his suffering might be accepted for his people. 13. A
command from God makes service, how ignominious like soever, become honorable;
and it is our duty in suffering times, to fix our eye on the command and will
of God, and on his scope and purpose in them, and not on the cruelty or malice
of instruments: for, this is an argument to remove the scandal of his cross,
that he did it in obedience to a command, This commandment have I received of
my Father.

Verse 19. There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these
sayings.

20. And many of them said, He has a devil, and is mad, why hear ye him?

21. Others said, these are not the words of him that has a devil. Can a devil
open the eyes of the blind?


The fourth and last particular in this part of the Chapter is, the effects or
consequents of this Sermon among the people; who are again divided in opinion
about him, verse 19. Many of them do calumniate him, as one possessed and mad,
and therefore not to be heard, verse 20. and others do maintain that his
doctrine and the late miracle do sufficiently refute such a calumny, verse 21.
Whence learn, 1. Christ's doctrine will not want its own effect or operation
among hearers, be what they will; for, here all of them are put to some
exercise about these sayings. 2. It is not to be expected that Christ's doctrine
will have alike effects in all; but as it gains ground on some, so others will
harden themselves the more that they are dealt with: As here we see, in these
different opinions about him and his doctrine. 3. Christ's doctrine, meeting
with diversity of dispositions, is ordinarily an occasion of division or
schism, by reason of the perverse obstinacy of some in opposing the truth,
which others must maintain; for, There was a division (or, schism) therefore,
among the Jews for these sayings. This is neither to be imputed to the
doctrine, nor yet to the maintainers of truth; For it is but men's corruptions
which oppose true doctrine, and the friends of truth ought to reckon, that
division is better than agreement in evil. 4. As Christ's Doctrine ordinarily
finds wicked men as they were, if not worse; So he marks how often they
relapse in the same opposition to him and his truth: For these causes it is
marked that there was a division again, after the former debates of this kind,
Chap. 7. 43. and 9. 16. to show, that they were still the same, and that he
marked that it was so. 5. When divisions and schisms fall forth about Christ
and his doctrine, it is no strange thing to see the most part join on the
wrong side of the contraversie; for, there are many of them who calumniate him,
and but others, or, few only, who take his part. 6. Opposers of Christ and his
truth are ordinarily so possessed with prejudice and malice, that they will not
so much as hear him, nor can they endure that others should hear him patiently;
for, say they, Why hear ye him? 7. The strongest arguments that prejudicate
malice has against Christ and his truth, are, calumnies against him and it,
and the carriers thereof; for, this is their argument, He has a devil, and
(which explains the former) is mad, and therefore ought not to be heard. 8.
Malice is so prejudicate and blinded, that no reason may be expected from those
who are possessed with it; But they will most unjustly and obstinately
calumniate, if it were even Christ himself; for, albeit he came to destroy the
works of Satan, and is the Wisdom of the Father, yet, say they, He has a
devil, and is mad. And albeit they had often reproached him with this, Chap 7.
20. and 8. 48. and Christ had ^efined it, yet they still cast it up again. 9
Let malice be never so prejudged and violent, yet Christ will still get some to
justify him and his doctrine; for there are others who contradict this. 10.
Christ's doctrine and works are sufficient to plead for him, and to refute
adversaries, even to their face; for, they put it home against those malicious
men, These are not the words of him that has a devil: Can a devil open the
eyes of the blind? 11. Such as would own Christ, especially in a time of
opposition, ought to study his doctrine and works, so as the esteem of his Word
in the first place; Therefore do they begin at that, These are not the words of
him that has a de^il, and then the commendation of his work follows, can a
devil open the eyes of the blind?

Verse 22. And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the Dedication, and it was
winter.

23. And Jesus walked in the Temple in Solomon's porch.

24. Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him: How long do
thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.


Follows the second part of the Chapter, wherein is recorded a sharp contest
betwixt Christ and some of the Jews his enemies. It seems to have followed
not long after the former Sermon, and that Christ had stayed in and about
Jerusalem, since he came up to the feast of Tabernacles, Chap. 7. till this
time in winter: And therefore, verse 26, 27. he repeats the doctrine concerning
his sheep, as a thing they had lately heard. The first encounter betwixt them
is contained, verse 22. -- 30. Wherein they put him to it, to speak out freely
if he was the Christ, and he gives them such an answer as was convenient.

In these verses we have recorded, 1. The time of this debate, verse 22. It was
at a feast of dedication, ^or consecrating to God what they had built or
repaired for his service. This feast was not kept in remembrance of the
dedication of the Tabernacle when it was set up in the wilderness, of which
Number. 7.1. etc, For (beside that the Tabernacle was now laid by) that dedication
was in the first month, Exodus 40.2, 17. which answers in part to March and
in part to April likewise, the dedication of the Temple, when it was built by
Solomon, was in the seventh month, 1 Kings 8.2. which answers, in part, to
September; And the dedication of the Temple after the captivity, was in the
month Adar, Ezr 6.15, 16, 17. which answers, in part, to February and March,
for they kept the passover shortly after, Ezr. 6.19. So that this dedication
was that performed by the Jews in the time of the Maccabees; who after they
had repaired and cleansed the Temple, and built an Altar, did appoint a feast
in memorial thereof 1 Macc. 4.59. and that in winter, or the month Chisleu,
which answers, in part, to December. And they did it in this season, because
in the Summer they were infested with their enemies, that they could not get
the work attended. 2. We have recorded, the place where this debate was; to
wit, not only in Jerusalem, verse 22. but in Solomon's porch of the Temple,
where Christ walked, verse 23. It was the place where the people met, 1 Kings
6.3. And albeit that built by Solomon was destroyed by the Chaldeans, yet the
other that was built again, retained the ancient name, so also, Acts 3.11. 3.
We have recorded, their first question to Christ, upon which the contraversie
arises, verse 24. While Christ is walking in Solomon's porch, the malicious
Jews encompasse him, and challenge him, that by reason of his want of freedom
in doctrine, they were kept in doubt and suspense: And therefore desire he
would speak out plainly, if he was the Christ. This they do, pretending to
affect the knowledge of the truth, but in effect, intending to ensnare him, and
bring him upon the stage as affecting a Kingdom, if he should declare himself
to be the Messiah.

That this purpose may be yet more clear for grounding of doctrines, we are to
consider, that much use is made of verse 22, 23. as a warrant for consecration,
or, dedication of Churches, and for observation of Holidays enjoined by the
Church. And it is alleged, that Christ's frequenting of the Temple at that
time, is an evidence of his approbation thereof. But to refute this, consider,
1. Whatever be said of this Dedication in particular; Yet it is certain that a
Dedication of the Tabernacle and Temple was practiced with Gods approbation
under the law; and that the moral signification thereof (as also of dedicating
their houses, and other things) does stand still in force. But the Ceremony it
self is ceased, with the ceasing of the typical holiness of places and
things; and men may as well introduce the rest of the Jews significant
Ceremonies, as this. 2. This feast of Dedication, or the yearly remembrance of
it in an Aniversary feast of eight days, (as the history has it) was but an
humane invention, in these latter and declining times of the Jews; For, beside
that they had no Prophet to authorize this, (1 Mac. 4.46.) as they had, for
their other sacred solemnities; It is remarkable that in the Dedication by
Moses, Solomon, and those of the captivity, albeit they keept a festivity on
that day, yet it is no where recorded, that they appointed so much as one day,
to be yearly observed in remembrance thereof: So that this latter practice, in
memorial only of renewing the Altar and some other decayed things, is rather to
be looked on as an evidence of their declining, then as a laudable pattern. 3.
The Apostles naming of this feast, and Christ's frequenting the Temple at that
time, are no evidence of any approbation thereof. For John does mention it in
the History, only to point out the circumstance of time so as was best known to
the Jews; which does no more import an approbation thereof, than Lukes
describing the time of Paul's travels, by mentioning the Jewish feasts, Acts
20.6. and 27.9. does import his approbation thereof among Christians. And
Christ was present in the Temple at that time, not to honor that feast, or to
countenance their humane invention. Nor does it appear that he was there at
this time, that he might take the opportunity of the concurse of people at that
solemnity, to publish more of his Commission, as was his own and his followers
ordinary practice at other lawful solemnities and meetings of the people. For
he was not now te^ching in the Temple, but only walking in Solomon's porch, when
he was surrounded by the Jews. Nor yet does it appear that there was any great
concurse at this feast in winter, or, at least, that the people frequented the
Temple much at it; But that they spent those days, rather in carnal mirth,
than as holy convocations: (which is the ordinary best fruit that sloweth from
men's own Traditions in Religion.) And therefore, Christ is said to walk in the
porch, there being but few, or none, there, till this crowd came about him. So
that as the feast is named here, only to point out the circumstance of the time
of this debate; So Christ's walking in the porch is subjoyned, only to point out
the circumstance of place, and to show that while Christ is walking there,
(upon some occasion, into which we need not enquire) they enter upon this
debate with him.

From the words, thus cleared, we may Learn. 1. When a Church has backslidden
furthest, in matter of doctrine, and lively and spiritual worship; then she
will be most forward to devise and observe Ceremonies of her own, wherewith to
serve God: for, it is in this Churches declining time, that they appoint and
observe a feast of the dedication. 2. As a Church may, in Gods justice, be put
to such difficulties, as outward troubles will interrupt their intentions of
Reformation; So one right use of such a dispensation, is, when it stirs up
people to lay hold of all opportunities of any breathing time, to set forward
the work of God: for, so much may be gathered from the time of this feast, it
was winter. Whatever fault was in their course, or appointing that feast; Yet
their repairing of the Temple in winter (because of which they appointed and
observed the feast at that time) intimates how they were molested with enemies
in the Summer, so that they could not attend the work; and how they take the
opportunity of a time of breathing in winter, to carry on the work. 3. Christ
and his servants may at all occasions expect, that Satan and his instruments
will not be wanting to cast snares and tentations in their way, and to seek
advantage against them; for, when he is walking in Solomon's porch, he is
assaulted with tempters, who came round about him. But he makes good use of
this, to bring out precious truths; and temptations were a part of Paul's
Library at Ephesus, to enable him to preach, Act. 20.19, 20. 4. Christ's enemies
are full of subtle policies, and they can turn themselves into all shapes, to
draw him (if it were possible) in a snare; for, so does their practice teach,
they pretend great earnestness to be clear and settled in the point, but they
had another design. 5. It is a very dangerous condition, for men to live in
suspense and incertainty about the matters of Religion; and especially, not to
be settled in knowing and resting upon Christ: Therefore, say they in this
particular, How long do thou make us to doubt? (or, hold us in suspense?) if
thou be the Christ tell us. Whether they had any real staggering in conscience,
though overpowered with malice, or pretended to it only, is not much matter;
But they propound it as a very dangerous condition (as it is indeed) to be so,
and so much the worse, the longer it continues. The word imports to have the
mind, or soul, hanging up, as a body in the air, and so to be fleeting,
wanting a foundation to rest on, and this tends to the destruction thereof, as
the word also signifies. 6. Wicked men will not find the cause of their
distempers within themselves, so long as they can allege any thing without
them, (if it were even Christ and his Doctrine) to fasten it upon; for, they
lay it all to his charge, Thou make us to doubt, alleging that he spoke not
plainly what he was; whereas (as Christ after clears) it was their own
blindness, and their darkness contracted through malice, that did hide all
this from them. 7. It is a very malicious disposition in men, when they seek
advantage against Christ and his servants, in their free doctrine; and when
they desire them to speak freely, of purpose to bring them in a snare: for, say
they, If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly, of purpose to entrap him.

Verse 25. Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that
I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me.
Christ's answer to this Question consists of four branches: In the first
whereof (in this ver.) He clears himself from being any cause of their
unbelief or incertainty in this matter, as having already cleared that case
fully, both by his Doctrine and Miracles; and so the blame was all their own.
Whereas Christ says, I told you, albeit we will hardly find that expressly
and in plain terms he had said to these persecutors that he was Christ,
whatever he did to his disciples, and to some others, Chap. 4. 25, 26. and
9.36, 37. Yet we find that he had oft-times said the equivalent, and spoken of
himself in such terms as was only competent to the Messiah. So Chap. 5.25,
26. and 6.35, 48, 51, 53, 54, etc. and 7.37, 38. and 8.12, 35, 56, 58, and in
this Chap. ver. 9.14, 15, 16. and elsewhere. Doct. 1. Whatever be the pretenses
of men for their unbelief, yet the true cause thereof is in themselves, and not
in Christ, or in his way of doctrine or dispensations; Therefore does he clear
himself, and lay the blame on them. 2. Christ word and his works are
sufficient to ground our faith, and confirm it, concerning him, and what he
is, Therefore, says he, to clear himself, I have told you, and, the works
that I do in my Fathers name, (as Mediator, and his Ambassador) they bear
witness of me; to wit, that I am the Messiah. For albeit the Apostles were to
do greater works, Joh. 14.12. yet they wrought them not in the same way, nor by
their own power; but in his name, that they might testify and bear witness to
his glory. 3. Such as do not acquiesce in Christ's word and working, for
confirmation of their faith, they will not profit by any other mean of their
own devising; Therefore does Christ reject their desire concerning any further
information, since they refused to profit by what he had said and done. 4.
Whatever specious name men give to their own not closing with Christ; Yet in
effect it is nothing else but infidelity, and the fruit of an evil heart of
unbelief: Therefore, whereas they said only, they were in doubt, or, suspense,
ver. 24. He tells than plainly, ye believed not. 5. Where the Lord affords many
means of knowledge and faith, there unbelief will be the more heinous; for,
says he, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Fathers
name, they bear witness of me; and yet ye believe not, as is subjoyned, ver.
26.

Verse 26. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto
you.
In the second branch of this answer, Christ points out the true cause of their
infidelity; Which is, not the obscurity of his doctrine, but their not being of
his sheep; that is, not as yet converted, and not only so, but evidenced to be
reprobates, if they continue in that sin. And by this he prevents a great
objection, and the scandal of their not embracing him, who were eminent in that
Church; and shows, that this contempt did not reflect on him, but on
themselves. Whence learn, 1. Despisers of Christ will get no affront rubbed
upon him, but all the prejudice and disgrace is their own; Therefore does he
clear here, that their unbelief reflected on themselves. 2. Albeit Christ will
not reveal unto men his eternal purposes concerning them, till first they
declare what is in their own hearts; Yet as he knows who are elect, and who
are reprobates, and as he has recorded in his Word the evidences of men that
are reprobates, or, at least, in a reprobate condition: So he could have wicked
men affected and affrighted by seeing such evidences in themselves; Therefore,
upon their unbelief, he leads them up to see, ye are not of my sheep, that they
might consider how deep their sin drew. 3. Men's unbelief under the means of
faith, is a clear evidence of their being in a reprobate condition, and their
continuance therein, an evidence that they are reprobates; for, ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep. 4. Christ's doctrine is not yea and nay, but
still the same; and it is men's great fault, that being often warned of their
danger, yet they mark it not, nor make use of it: Therefore does he subjoyne,
As I said unto you, to wit, in the foregoing parable, where it had been
insinuate, and frequently elsewhere he had pointed out their dangerous
condition. And by this he would tell them that his thoughts of them were still
the same, and that it was their great stupidity, not to take notice of what he
had so often repeated.

Ver. 27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
In the third branch of the answer, Christ proves what he had said of them, by
showing the contrary properties of his sheep, which were wanting in them. These
he repeates from the former parable and explication. Whence learn, 1. Whoever
reject Christ, yet he will not want his own peculiar people, and their carriage
will refute such as pretend to be Gods people, and yet live wickedly; Therefore
does he here again record that he has sheep, and what their carriage is. 2. It
is an undeniable and special evidence of Christ's sheep, that they give up
themselves to his teaching and direction, and do incline their heart and care
to take notice of what he says; for, it is repeated, as a special mark, my
sheep, hear my voice. 3. As Christ's sheep hear him, so they meet with special
care and providence from him, in that he not only knew them from eternity, by
special purpose, and draws them to him, by special love, but has an especial
eye and care of them; for, and I know them. 4. As it is the duty and property
of Christ's sheep, not only to hear, but to follow his directions; So the
consideration of his love and care should envite and encourage them so to do:
Therefore, after that, I know them, it is subjoyned, as their bound duty to so
tender a Lord, and they follow me. And this, with the other of hearing his
voice, does complete their duty.

Verse 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

29. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to
pluck them out of my Fathers hand.

30. I and my Father are one.


In the last branch of the answer, least they should account it a small loss
to be none of his sheep; Christ, to grieve them who would not embrace him, lets
them see the fair privileges and allowance which he conserreth upon his sheep.
And, 1. He assures them of eternal life, and of perseverance, till they come to
the full fruition thereof, ver. 28. -- 2. He confirms this, from his own and
his Fathers power, which is employed about them, for their preservation, and
which is above all opposition, ver. -- 28, 29. 3. He confirms further
wherefore he had joined his own power with the Fathers in this work, by
showing, that he and the Father are one in essence, and consequently have the
same power and will. And therefore as none can pluck them out of the Fathers
hand, so none can pluck them out of his hand, who is one with the Father, ver.
30.

From verse 28. Learn, 1. Such as come not to Christ, are great losers, and the
happy condition of these who would not follow them, will be their eyesore one
day; Therefore does Christ preach to them the fair privileges of his people,
to let them see how far they prejudged themselves, and to vex them. See Psalm.
112.10. Mic. 7.10. 2. All who come to Christ indeed, get eternal life begun in
them, in the bud of grace, and in their right by faith; for, I give (says he,
in the present time) unto them eternal life. See 1 John 3.9. 1 Pet. 1.5. Luke
22.29, 30. 3. This great privilege is Christ's gift, being both purchased and
applied by him; for, I give unto them eternal life. 4. Albeit Christ's converted
people may have many shakings and tossings in their condition; Yet their final
perseverance, till they come to full possession of eternal life, is certain: so
that whatever they lose by the way, yet they will not lose themselves
eternally: Therefore he who gives eternal life, does also promise, and they
shall never perish. 5. When Christ conferres his special favors and allowances
on his sheep, he does also take a charge of them and their allowances, and has
a special care of them; for, so is imported here, the sheep, to whom eternal
life is given, are in my hand, says he. The form of speech, to be in his
hand, imports not only that they are under his power, to do with them what he
will, so that nothing is to be feared if he desert them not; But more
especially, it points out, that they are still in his sight and under his care,
whereby he testifies his affection, and prevents any prejudice to them. 6.
Such as are owned by Christ as his sheep, and so are put in a blessed
condition, will not want adversaries to oppose them, and to endeavor to bring
them down from their happiness; for, it is supposed here, that there will be
somewhat (to wit, Satan, the world, and their own flesh) to endeavor to pluck
them out of his hand. 7. Albeit the Lord do confer grace and faith upon his
own, yet that is not sufficient to secure them; but these might decay of
themselves, if it were not for the purpose of God in conferring thereof, and
his power and everlasting arms, preserving the same; Therefore it is that, for
securing of them, they need to be in his hand. 8. Christ is so unchangable in
his purposes of love, and so invincible in his power, that nothing shall be
able to hinder their perseverance unto eternal life, whom he takes in his
custody and charge; Therefore does he confirm their perseverance thus, Neither
shall any pluck them out of my hands. As for these who grant that, indeed none
can pluck them out, unless they go out willingly of themselves; they do
clearly impugn Christ's reasoning, who upon this, that none shall pluck them
out of his hand, does infer, that they shall never perish, whereas granting
that distinction, it might be said, they may perish of their own accord, though
they be not plucked out, But Christ, by this promise, does give assurance of
their certain perseverance.

From verse 29. Learn, 1. It is an argument of the Saints perseverance, and of
Christ's employing his power for that end, that they are committed to him by the
Father to be forthcoming for them; Therefore does he declare in this matter,
My Father gave them me. 2. The Father does so entrust Christ with his sheep, as
yet he casts not off care of them; But as Christ is engaged for them, as the
Fathers servant and commissioner: so the Father is engaged to make them
forthcoming to Christ, as the covenanted reward of his sufferings: And so the
immutable Father and Son, and their invincible power, is employed for their
preservation; Therefore also they are in the Fathers hand, as well as Christ's.
3. The power of God is so invincible, and so far above all created opposition;
and he does so let out his power, in maintaining Saints in the state of grace,
as does sufficiently assure them of the certainty of their perseverance; for,
so does the Argument run, My Father is greater then all, and therefore no man
is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. And here they who except man's
freewill in this point, alleging they may go out of his hand, they do wrong
both the power of God, by implying that the idol of man's will must be exempt
from his dominion, as if he could not command it; and his fidelity, who has
promised to subdue the will to his fear, that Saints may persevere, Jer. 32.40.

From verse 30. Learn, 1. Christ's working in behalf of his sheep does
demonstrate his greatness, and prove him to be God; Therefore does he here
point out his preserving them, with the Father, as flowing from, and being an
evidence of his eternal Godhead. 2. Christ is so God, as he is one in essence
and nature with the Father; for, says he, I and my Father are one. 3. Albeit
Christ be one in essence with the Father, yet are they distinct persons one
from another; for, albeit they be one, yet there is I and my Father, and a
plurality of persons, we are one. 4. Because the Son is one in essence with
the Father, therefore are they equal in power, and with one consent and will
are employed about the same work; for, upon this ground, I and my Father are
one, it follows, that they are both about this work of preserving the sheep,
and that his power is sufficient to preserve them, because the Father, with
whom he is one, is greater then all.

Ver. 31. Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
From this to verse 39. We have a second encounter betwixt Christ and the
Jews, following upon the former. Wherein, they going to stone him, ver. 31. he
upbraids them for dealing so with him, who had showed them so many good works,
verse 32. And they alleging that it was not for his good works, but for
blasphemy, ver. 33. He does vindicate himself of that imputation, and shows
that it was their duty to believe him, ver. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.

In this verse we have the carriage of the Jews upon the former answer given
to them: They, not finding that advantage they expected, whereupon they might
have delated him to the Romans; do take hold (as they clear afterward) of a
pretext of the law against blasphemy, Lev. 24.14, 16. to condemn his doctrine,
and thereupon do tumultuously take up stones to put him to death. Whence learn.
1. Whatever pretenses persecutors have of a desire of plain doctrine, yet they
will not get their malice hid, but will at last bewray that they cannot endure
what they seem to desire; for, they who were so earnest ( ver. 24.) to hear
Christ speak out, are now enraged, when he does speak. 2. Violence and fury are
the strongest weapons of persecutors, and it is that only that may be expected
of them, when Christ and his servants preach that which does not please them;
for upon hearing of the former doctrine, they are so abrupt, as presently they
take up stones to stone him, and that without so much as telling the cause or
pretense, till afterward, ver. 33. that Christ draw it out of them. In all
which we may see how far the fury of men, in opposing truth does outstrip the
true zeal of the godly for truth. 3. As persecutors are incessant in their
rage, upon all new occasions; so the Lord marks that it is so, and how often
men do let loose their fury against his Son and servants; Therefore it is
recorded that they took up stones again, after they had done so before, Chap.
8. 59. and at other occasions.

Verse 32. Jesus answered them, Many good works have I showed you from my
Father; for which of those works do you stone me?
It seems that some stones were cast at Christ, and therefore he says, ye
stone me. But in the heat of this fury, he finds matter of encouragement to
himself, in what he had done to them. And therefore that he may bridle their
rage, he does clear his own innocence, and upbraid them for this their
proceeding, wherein they dealt so injustly, as to reward him evil for good, and
most ingrately, both against him who sought their good in what he wrought, and
against the Father, by whose authority, and in whose name he had wrought.
Whence learn, 1. Times of trial and persecution will put men to make enquity,
and to search what may be in them, drawing on such a lot; for, so much does
Christ's practice teach, who by his commending all that he had done to them,
does insinuate a looking back to what it was he had done. 2. Let men never so
often pick a quarrel against Christ, yet as in the days of his flesh, he
suffered nothing for any fault he had done; so men shall never be able to
instruct any evil he has done, wherefore he should be hated or persecuted;
Therefore, says he, for which works, showed from my Father, do ye stone me?
Importing they could have no quarrel against him, unless they would quarrel a
good turn. 3. It is Christ; way with his people and visible Church, to work
gloriously for them; to multiply these his glorious works; and, by his working,
to set out his own and his Fathers glory, and give evidence of their good will
toward lost sinners: And all this he does, to gain upon their affections: for,
so much is imported in what he says of himself, Many good works have I showed
you from my Father, (manifesting his glorious power, and rich good will, by
working these in his name) because of which he reckons they should rather
embrace, then stone him. 4. Whatever be Christ's and his peoples carriage, in,
or toward the world; Yet they may expect ^n ill meeting, and to be dealt with
not only injustly, in being made to suffer for righteousness and well doing,
but ingrately, in being rewa^ded evil for good; for, thus he has paved the
w^y, who though he had done thus to them, yet says he, ye stone me. 5. Albeit
persecutors be injust and furious, and may sl^nder and cast iniquity upon
suffere^s, Psalm 55.3. Yet such as have a good conscience, will have confidence
toward God, and courage against enemies, in the heat of trial; for, Christ
knowing his own innocence, it does now bear him out, and leads him to gall
them. 6 As sufferers ought to examine well what they suffer for, so persecutors
would consider seriously of the cause of persecution, and wherefore they molest
Christ and his followers; Therefore does he put them to consider, for what do
ye stone me? 7. Such as will persecute Christ and his followers, will never be
able to acquit themselves of injustice and ingratitude, and of their contempt
of God, and of his authority, whe^eby his Son and servants do act: for, this
question is a sharp challenge of their consciences, how they durst deal so
toward him, and his Father, in whose name he wrought.

Ver. 33. The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not,
but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make thy self God.
By this discourse of Christ it seems their hands were bound up for a time, but
not their mouths. And in this verse to avoid the dint of his challenge, they
lay aside the matter of his works (which oft-times they ca^ped at) without
opposition or approbation, and take hold of a p^etence of blasphemy, in that he
being a man, had made himself God, for which they would have stoned him.
Whence learn. 1. Persecutors, though they be most wicked, yet will be ashamed
to avow the true cause of their persecuting of Christ, and that they are
d^ssatisfied with any good thing, or to let their course be seen in its own
colors; Therefore, albeit his works did clear this contraversie, verse 37, 38.
and they did indeed hate him for them, more then for his alleged blasphemy;
yet they are unwilling that that should appear, for a good work we stone thee
not. 2. It is the great policy of Satan and his instruments, first to
calumniate Christ and his followers, and then to persecute them because of
these alleged calumnies; for, say they, we stone the not, but for blasphemy.
3. Such is the perversity of men, even within the visible Church, that having
occasion and a tentation, that they may come to that height of impiety, as to
blaspheme God; And where men do so, they are guilty of death; for, so much does
the Law of Moses, which they pretend to obey here, import, both that some
within Israel were ready to fall in that sin, and that such ought to be
stoned, Lev. 24.16. Blasphemy properly signifies the hurting of ones fame, and
being applied to God, imports the wounding and depriving him of his honor and
glory, which (omitting rash and idle swearing) is committed, when men deny unto
God what is due unto him; when they attribute unto him that which does not
beseem him; when they ascribe unto man that which is due only unto God; and,
when they curse and rail, or reproach God, his Word, and works. And for
preventing hereof, men should avoid unbelief and distrust, pride and
self-love, and murmuring under dispensations. 4. Such corruption may creep
into a visible Church, as even Christ may be accounted a blasphemer, and his
most precious truths condemned as blasphemy; for, so it was here, we stone thee
not, but for blasphemy, and (which explains and specifies what they accounted
blasphemy) because that thou, being a man, make thy self God. Where they do
indeed understand Christ rightly, that he declared himself to be true God,
equal with the Father, nor does he contradict this, but confirm it in the
following answer; Only they wrong him, in accounting it blasphemy. For albeit
it be indeed blasphemy to assert that any mere man is God, in proper terms,
(though in some respect some men do bear that name, ver. 34.) yet he had
abundantly cleared before, that as he was true man, so he was true God also in
the same person.

Verse 34. Jesus answered them, Is it not written, in your Law: I said, ye are
gods?

35. If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came; and the Scripture
cannot be broken:

36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world,
Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?


Christ by two arguments vindicates himself from the imputation of blasphemy,
in asserting himself to be God. The first (in these verses) is founded on that
Scripture, Psalm. 82.6. Wherein, 1. He does in general prove, that it is not
blasphemy to call a man god in some respects, seeing Magistrates get that name,
Psalm. 82. 2. He argues upon this ground, not barely that he may call himself
God, in the same sense that they get that name; But from the less to the more,
thus: If they be called gods who are in that office, much more may I, who am
separate to an higher employment, be called so, without blasphemy. But the
Scripture, which cannot be broken, has called them so. Therefore I may be
called so. And this conclusion he propounds by way of question, to show the
absurdity of their assertion, his reason being considered, and that their
consciences could not decline this consequence. For clearing the words, and
this reasoning, Consider, 1. The ground on which Magistrates are called gods
(to whom the word of God came,) may be understood of their calling to the
office, as it is said of Prophets, The word of the Lord came to them: and so
several Magistrates of the Jews got their office by the Ministry of Gods
servants, bringing that office and call to them. Not that a call, ordinary or
extraordinary, to every office, inferrs that title; but only a calling to that
office of power and authority. It may as well be understood, that the word came
to them, not so much in respect of their calling, as that in that same
Scripture cited, God calls them so, and so it is an exposition of that word in
the Psalm, I said, ye are Gods, that is, the Word came to them, and God
speaking in it, gave them that title; Thus the Argument will run strong enough,
1. Since the Word came to them, and spoke to them under that name, it cannot be
blasphemy to call men gods, as the Jews alleged. 2. If they, who, being on
earth, are spoken to, and commanded, and reproved by the Word, get that title
(as is clear from that Psalm) much more is it due to him, who being from
eternity with the Father in heaven, and not in the world, did stoop to come
into it, to perfect the work of redemption. Consider, 2. As for the ground
whereon Christ argues, that without blasphemy he may be called the Son of
God, (that the Father has sanctified him, and sent him into the world). We
need not understand this sanctification only, or so much, of the sanctification
and cleansing of his humane nature from sin, as of the assumption of his
humane nature into the personal union, and of his consecration from eternity
unto the office of Mediator; upon which follows his actual sending into the
world, in the fullness of time. And albeit Christ, in this first argument,
seems rather to refute the imputation of blasphemy, then directly to prove how
he is God, which he does in the following argument: Yet there is much insinuate
here that evinceth it; As, 1. He sets himself so far above Magistrates who get
that style, as does necessarily infer he is God in a proper sense. 2. The
office of Mediator, in which he is employed, is such, as albeit his
sanctification, and sending into the world, about it, do not make him God; Yet
it does evidence and give us to know that he is God, seeing none but Jehovah
could bear out in that office. Nor does the Fathers sending of him, import any
inequality, seeing an equal may send an equal with consent, yea an inferior, a
superior. 3. He who is first sanctified, before he be sent into the world, did
certainly subsist, and was, before his incarnation and coming into the world.
4. It was no small part of his sanctification and sitting for his office, that
his humane nature was assumed into a personal union with his Godhead, and this
seems to be imported in his sanctification by the Father, and that he calls
himself not God, as Magistrates were, but the Son of God, to show not only,
that he is not God as secluding the Father, but by eternal generation from the
Father; But also, that this sanctification by the Father, upon which he gathers
this, does relate to the elevation of the humane nature into a personal union
with the Son of God, as well as to his office.

From these verses, Learn, 1. The written Word is the Judge and Rule whereby
all contraversies in Religion must be decided; Therefore does Christ appeal to
it, is it not written? 2. Whoever be against Christ, or whatever skill or
interest they pretend in Scriptures; Yet the Scriptures will be still on his
side; Therefore does he appeal to themselves, if the Scriptures, whereof they
boasted, did not clear him of blasphemy, Is it not written in your La^? 3. The
Scriptures are a great deep, and full of treasures, to be gathered by spiritual
and sober observers; Therefore does Christ so solidly and profoundly reason
from that text, to his present purpose. 4. Whatever be the different subjects
of holy Scripture, yet all of it is a Law, in so far as men are obliged to rule
their conversation, affections, faith, hope, and fear, thereby; Therefore,
albeit elsewhere the Old Testament be distinguished into the Law, Prophets, and
Psalms, Luke ^4 44. Yet here the Psalms, whence this text is cited, come
under the name of Law. And it may be also, because the word in the Hebrew
language, (wherein, or in Syriake, a dialect of Hebrew, Christ spoke) rendered
the Law, signifies generally, a doctrine. 5. As it is a peculiar privilege, to
have the W^^d and Oracles of God committed unto men; So it adds to men's guilt,
when they improve not this privilege, but continue ignorant of the truths
therein contained; Therefore does he call it your law, not by way of contempt,
but to reprove them who enjoyed this privilege, and boasted of it, and yet
were ignorant of it, and of what in it might refute their unjust aspersions 6.
It is an evidence of a malicious disposition in men, when they do not put a
favorable construction (in so far as it is consistent with truth) upon the
words and actions of their neighbors; for, so much does Christ's re^^oning in
general, charge upon them, that since the Scripture calls some men gods, they
needed not, if malice had not blinded them, have charged blasphemy upon him,
though he had been but a mere man. 7. Albeit Magistrates be but men like their
brethren; Yet in respect of their office, they have the glorious title of gods
conferred upon them, as being his vicegerents, and as bearing some stamp of his
authority and dominion: Therefore, says the Scripture, I said ye are gods.
This should both engage them to see to their qualifications and the exercise of
their power; and others, to reverence and honor them. 8. Such as would have
right to this glorious title, and the privileges contained therein, ought to
have Gods calling to the office they exerce; for, he called them gods, to whom
the Word of God came, to call them to their employment. 9. Let Magistrates be
never so high, ye are they subject to God, and to the directions and
injunctions of his word; for, so also the word came to them, as to servants, as
appears in that Psalm. 10. Things are in reality as the Word of God calls
them, whatever men imagine to the contrary; for, if the word came to them, and
he called them Gods, -- that sentence must stand without empeachment of
blasphemy. 11. Albeit men, who do not reject the Scripture, will be very
assiduous to wrest and throw it to countenance their opinions and ways, and to
bring their light to it, rather then seek light in it; Yet its verdict does
stand unalterable; for, the Scripture cannot be broken, or loosed; that
sentence, that they are gods, cannot be anulled, let men cavil or gloss it as
they will. 12. Christ is so high above all principalities and powers, as of
necessity he must be, true God; for, so do the force of his argument run, that
if they were called gods, much more might he be called the Son of God. And
therefore all the gods must worship him, even Angels as well as Magistrates,
Psalm. 97.7. with Heb. 1.6. 13. Whosoever shall study Christ's glorious
sanctification and separation from sinners, his glorious endowments, and high
employment and office, must acknowledge that he is the eternal Son of God:
for, that the Father has sanctified, and sent him into the world, does infer
that h^ is the Son of God. 14. Christ's glory and Godhead wants not a witness
in the bosom of the greatest opposer, if Christ lay it at his door; Therefore
does he put them to it, say ye, thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son
of God?

Ver. 37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.

38. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know
and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.


The second argument, whereby Christ proves that it is no blasphemy to call
himself God, and that he is God in very deed, is taken from his works. Wherein
he grants that if he did not divine works, flowing from that power common to
him with the Father, they had some pretense of excuse, for not believing him to
be God, verse 37. But since he did these works, they were bound to lay aside
any prejudice against his person, and to be led by these works, to acknowledge
and believe him to be the true God, one with the Father, mutually existing the
one in the other, ver. 38. And so i^ this argument, Christ asserts and
confirms the very thing they opposed, and what himself had said, ver. 30
Doctrine, 1. Christ did so far condescend to cure the unbelief of men, as to
ad glorious works to his Word to declare who he is; for, he has the works of
the Father pleading for him; That is, not only works done by the Fathers
authority, for so his servants did work miracles, but works done by that power
which is common to him with the Father. 2. Albeit it be our duty to acknowledge
and to believe in Christ, yet he requires no implicit and blind obedience in
this point; But men should accuratly try the grounds of their faith, and then,
on these grounds close with him; Therefore does he put them to this, If I do
not the works of my Father, believe me not, and afterward, that ye may know and
believe. 3. Christ's works were divine, even to the convincing of the greatest
adversaries; and so clear, that Christ was content not to be believed, if,
after trial, their consciences did not find them to be so: Therefore he does
not decline them in this matter, but If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not. 4. When Christ has manifested never so much of himself; Yet
naturally men have prejudices against him, and at believing in him; Therefore,
he supposes it, as their fault, ye believe not me. 5. Albeit Christ get much
wrong by unjust prejudices of men, yet he does not give over to mind and seek
their good; Therefore, albeit they believed not him, yet he follows them with
other means, to draw them to believe, and warnes them of their own sin, if
they did not; Though ye believe not me, believe the works, etc. 6. Albeit it be
our duty to rest content with Gods Word, as the ground of our faith, not
seeking any other proof; And albeit it be our great sin when it is not so;
Yet when he ads works to confirm his Word, he may not only exact believing of
us, but it is our sin undeniable, if then we believe not: Therefore, says
he, If I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works. 7. Christ is never
rightly known and believed on, but when he is taken up as one in essence with
the Father; And that however the person of the Son be distinct from the
person of the Father, in respect of order of subsistence, properties, and order
of working; yet the divine essence is undivided, and there is a mutual
inexistence of one person in the other; for, they must know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him.

Verse 39. Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their
hand,

40. And went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John at first
baptized: and there he abode.


Follows the third encounter betwixt Christ and these Jews, and the event of
this debate, wherein they let out more of their fury, and he departs from them
to a place where he gets more comfortable employment; And so he leaves
Jerusalem, after he had stayed in it, since the feast of Tabernacles, Chap. 7.

In these verses, we have the violent and continued fury of those Jews; who
being convinced, will not submit, but do run upon the light, and seek to take
him: And his avoiding their fury, and withdrawing toward Bethabara, and abiding
there. Whence learn, 1. Convictions of men's judgments will not always gain
upon them, nor will Christ's taking pains for that end, do any good; for, after
all this clear reasoning, which they could not resist nor refute; they do not
yield. 2 The more pains is taken upon malicious Reprobates, the greater will
their malice grow, and their convictions, not being sanctified, will degenerate
into violent opposition to the light, and the Messengers thereof; for, without
any yielding, Therefore they sought to take him. 3. The maine disappointments
wherewith adversaries meet in their cruel designs, will not mollify them, nor
hinder them to pursue their cruel designs, on all occasions; for, albeit they
had essayed this course in vain before, yet they sought again to take him. 4.
Men cannot be so assiduous in prosecuting their cruel purposes, but the Lord
can as constantly disappoint them, and make one attempt prosper no better then
another; for, as of before, so now again, he escaped out of their hands. 5.
Christ, in his own person has sanctified these means, whereof his people need
to make use, in their trials; Therefore does he make use of es^aping, or
fleeing o^t of their hand. 6 When men persist in their contempt and persecution
of Christ, he is provoked to leave them; for, He went away again (having been
there before, Chap 1. ^8, 29) beyond Jordan, or to Bethabara, Chap. 1. 28. and
there he abode. 7. When Christ is banished and pe^secuted from one place, he
will not want another, to which he may repair; for, he has a place beyond
Jordan, wh^rein to abide. 8. Where the Lord has taken much pains on a people,
he will come to crave an account of the fruits thereof; Therefore did Christ go
to the place where John at first baptized, to try what fruits his Ministry had
left behind it.

Verse 41. And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle, but all
things that John spoke of this man were true.

42. And many believed on him.


In these verses we have the success of Christ; Ministry beyond Jordan, in
that many resorted to him, and finding that Christ did surpass John, who never
wrought any miracle among them, and that John's predictions concerning Christ,
we^e all verified, many of them do believe on him, not rejecting John (as many
of his followers did cleave to him, in opposition to Christ) but being led by
his Ministry to Christ. Whence learn, 1. When the Lords servants are preserved
in the midst of many dangers, it is for very good purpose, and that they may
yet do him more service, in their generation; for, Christ is preserved and sent
away, that he may get an abode, and do good in this place. 2. When men do haunt
and frequent public ordinances, it is a presage that Christ has some work to
work there; for, in this place, where many were converted, many resorted to
him, to wit, either of the inhabitants of the place, or of these who by
frequenting the passage there, had occasion to hear John often. 3. When Christ
is well known, he will be found far above the chief of his servants, and all
their excellency nothing to his; for, they said, John did no miracle, as this
man does. 4. No man who speaks to the commendation of Christ, according to his
Word, will ever be found liars; And it is commendation enough to faithful
servants, that they are found true in what they say of him; for, it is John's
commendation, and an evidence of Christ's glory, all things that John spoke of
this man, were true. 5. The excellency of Christ is then only rightly studied,
when men do close with him, and embrace him by faith; for, this is the fruit of
all their reasonings and observations, And many believed on him there. 6. The
pains taken by faithful Ministers may lay long like seed under the ground, and
yet at last, by some new watering, break forth in fair fruit; for, here John's
Ministry has fruit upon Christ's coming, long after he is dead.

CHAP. XI.
THis Chapter contains the history of Christ's return into Judea, from which he
had et^red himself Ch, 10 39 40. and a famous miracle, of raising Lazarus from
the dead, wrought at his return together with some effects and consequents
that followed thereupon. The Chapter may be taken up in three parts. 1. The
Antecedents of the miracle, some whereof are privious to his return to Judea,
ver. 1. -- 16. some of them fell forth after he came near to Bethany, and
before he came to Lazarus grave, ver. 17. -- 37. and some of them, at the
grave, before the miracle was wroug^t, ver. 38. -- 42. 2. The miracle it self,
ver. 43, 14. ^. The effects and consequents thereof, both in the spectatours,
and in the chief Rulers of the Jews, and in Christ himself, ver. 45. -- 57.

Ver. 1. NOw a certain man was sick, named Lazarus ^f Bethany, the town of
Mary, and her sister Martha.

2. (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet
with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.)


This being one of the greatest and most famous miracles, and being one of the
last wrought by Christ, upon occasion whereof many passages of divine
providence are manifested, and much precious doctrine published; Therefore the
Antecedents thereof are so largely insisted on. And the Antecedents previous to
his return, may be taken up in these, 1. A remote occasion of his return, and
Antecedent of the miracle which is Lazarus sickness, ver. 1, 2. 2. A nearer
occasion of his return, which was a message sent to Christ in behalf of sick
Lazarus, ver. 3. 3. Christ's present return to this message, both in word, ver.
4. and action, ver. 5, 6. 4. is preparation at last to return, with his
conference with, and trial of the disciples in that matter, verse 7. -- 16.

In these verses (which contain a remote occasion of his return, and antecedent
of the miracle) we have a description of the person on whom it was wrought, 1.
From his name Lazarus, the same, as appears, with, Eleazar. 2. From his
condition, he was sick, or infirm, as the Word imports. 3. From the place of
his habitation, and friends; He was of Bethany, a village near to Jerusalem,
ver. 18. and Mary and Martha, (of whom Luke 10.38, 39) were his sisters, as
afterward appears. This village is called Mary and Martha's town, because they
were born there, as Joh. 1.44. or, because indeed it was Lazarus and their
property, and so they are afterward visited by them of Jerusalem, as persons of
respect; and the sisters get the name of it, because they have been spoken of
before, Luk 10.38. and so are better known in this history, then Lazarus yet
was. Or, the reason of this designation is, rather because whoever was Master
of this village, yet they are most eminent of any in it, in Christ's account,
they being godly, and he having been entertained there. 4. To make this
description more clear, and because there are several Mary's mentioned in the
Gospel; therefore John describes this Mary the sister of Lazarus from a
particular practice of he^s, ver. 2. Which does not relate to that history,
Luke 7.37 38. which was done by another woman, but to that which is afterward
mentioned, Joh. 12.3, etc. And albeit that was done after Lazarus sickness and
restitution, in order of time; Yet John who wrote the History long after, does
here record it by way of anticipation. Doctrine 1. As the Lords children are
not exemp^ed from ordinary trials, and are never well but when they have some
exercise or other: So, their being under exercise is a mean to make both their
honesty, and Gods love to them, not our; for, Lazarus, a friend of Christ, was
sick, and albeit he was a good man, yet there is no mention of him in the
former history, Luke 10. but only of his sisters, till now that he is sick, and
then he is taken notice of, and Christ's love to him registrate. 2. Whatever
ba^k Saints do bear in the world, yet they be ratify the place where they
dwell, and their house who entertain Christ, is most eminent in his account,
were it never so mean otherwise; for, this is the character Christ gives of
Bethany, it is the town of Mary, and her sister Martha. It is needless to
assert that Martha, who it seems was the eldest, Luk 10.38. is named after Mary
the youngest, because Mary was most eminent in piety, which Christ respects
above all; for in the 5th. ver. we find this order inverted, and Martha placed
first. 3. Christian friends, especially if they be also near in relation, are
useful helps in a day of trial; Therefore is mention made of Mary and Martha,
upon occasion of Lazarus sickness, because they were useful and eminent in the
following passages, relating to their brothers recovery. See Eccles. 4.9, 10,
11, 12. 4 As for that practice of Mary, recorded ver. 2. seeing it is only
mentioned here to distinguish her from others, I shall remit it to the proper
place, Chap. 12. Only we may gather from it. 1. The Lord will not suffer men's
actions to die with them; and particularly, A good turn done to Christ, will
not be forgotten of him; Therefore, according to that promise, Matthew. 26.13.
that this should be told of her, John does here, on this occasion, record it.
2. Love to Christ is that which God takes especial notice of, and which does
commend them who have it; for, it was an act of Mary's love, which is so
diligently recorded. 3. It is the will of God, that posterity take notice of
the eminent graces that have shined in Saints, that they may imitate them; for,
this is recorded not only to her commendation, but that Christ's commending it,
and the savor thereof, may invite others to imitate her.

Verse 3. Therefore his sister sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom
thou love is sick.
In this verse we have a second antecedent and a more near occasion of his
return; to wit, The message of these sisters unto Christ, whose modesty and
care of their sick brother not permitting them to go to him themselves they
send a messenger to acquaint him with the condition of their sick brother; And
to prevail with him, they describe their brother, neither from his name, nor
from any good in him, but from Christ's love to him. And albeit this their
carriage, in sending a messenger to acquaint Christ with their brothers
sickness, may seem to intimate their weakness, in not knowing, or not minding
(by reason of their present grief) his omniscience, which might have taught
them to acquiesce in their pre^enting the matter to him by prayer; Yet, as we
find it not condemned that any came or sent to him, while he was on earth, and
their doing so, contributed to make his glory conspicuous in his working; so
their practice, and the message they send, do afford profitable instructions.
Doct. 1. Albeit Christ be looked on, oft-times, as very troublesome company,
and therefore men do drive him away, either from themselves, by ill
entertainment, or from the places they live in, by persecution; Yet it will be
found, that he may very ill be wanted in any place; for, albeit Christ was
driven away by the Jews fury, Chap. 10. 39, 40. Yet he is now missed and
needed in Judea 2. Albeit the bonds of nature will not always tie friends one
to another; yet true piety will make the society of such comfortable, and make
them truly useful one to another in straits; for, here Lazarus and his sisters
dwell together, and they bear a great weight in this his affliction, employing
all means for his good, and being afterward heavily afflicted, when they
succeed not according to their desire. 3. As Christ has taken on man; nature,
so he has also contracted a friendship betwixt himself and some lost sinners;
And as he respects all his creatures, as he is God and all mankind, his
parents, kindred, nation, friends, and acquaintance in their several relations,
as he is man; and loves all his elect, as he is Mediator: So it has pleased
him also, as a good man, to bear especial love to some of his own elect, as a
man does to his especial friends; Therefore is Lazarus described here to be, he
whom thou love, which does not seclude his love to him in most of the former
respects, but yet especially points at that especial love to him as a
singularly good man. So also did he love the beloved disciple, Joh. 13.23. 4,
Whatever may be the expectations of men upon Christ's love to them yet it will
not exempt them from outward calamities; for, albeit they might think it
strange, that he whom thou love is sick, yet both of these are consistent,
and may stand together. 5. Whatever men's straits be, bodily or spiritual, great
or small, or whatever lawful means they employ when they are under them; Yet
then are difficulties rightly taken up, when men look upon them as needing and
calling for Christ; and when, accordingly, the afflicted and their friends also
do recommend the trial to him; for, such is their carriage, they find a need
of Christ, for help under this bodily and outward trial, and accordingly, sent
unto him. 6. In coming to Christ, and employing of him under difficulties, no
impediment that may deter us, ought to be regarded; for, albeit in sending
this message, it might be suggested, That, possibly, he had more to do, and
might do more good where he was; That being far off, he could not come in time;
and, That it was not safe to expose himself to the fury of the Jews; Yet they
being in need, pass over all these, and sent unto him. 7. Albeit Christ may
make use of a trial, to beget friendship betwixt him and some of his elect; Yet
they have a great advantage, who have it made up before; for, this is the
ground of their confidence, that Christ loved Lazarus before, He whom thou
love, is sick. And therefore, if ever men think they will stand in need of
Christ, they should make acquaintance with him in time. 8. Whatever there may
be on Saints part, that would seem to commend them to Christ; yet true Saints
will renounce all that, and betake themselves only to his free love toward
them; for, so much does their practice teach, They do not describe Lazarus as
their brother, as if they would boast of any credit with Christ by their
worth; nor do they mention any love in Lazarus entertaining Christ's love, but
they betake themselves only to this, it is he whom thou love. 9. Such as do
believe Christ's love toward them, ought also to believe that even their bodily
infirmities are respected by him, and will be an acceptable errand to come to
him withal; for, they do confidently employ him in this, Behold, he is sick.
10. Where Christ's love is believed, it will be accounted enough to lay our case
before him, without prescribing the way of help to him; Therefore, do they
content themselves with this petition, Behold, be whom thou love is sick, and
they say no more. As Saints can never have peace in any condition, till they
tell Christ of it; So they know their needs not much be said to a Father, in
limiting him to their desires; but when they have laid their case before him to
be considered, they may commit the answer to his wisdom and love.

Ver. 4. When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but
for the glory of God, that the Son of God, might be glorified thereby.
Follows a third antecedent of his return to Judea, containing Christ's
present answer to this message, which consists of two branches 1. What he said,
ver. 4. 2. What he did, ver. 5, 6. In this verse we have his speech, directed
chiefly (as would appear) to the messenger, to carry back to Mary and Martha,
for their encouragement; Wherein he declares, that this sickness tended not
to Lazarus death, but to the manifestation of the glory of God, in the
glorifying of his Son. While he sets down the end of this sickness
negatively, that it is not unto death, albeit he did dye; It is not sufficient
to clear it thus, that it tended not to bring Lazarus to eternal death; For,
albeit that be a great comfort, yet it is not chiefly intended here, as appears
from what is after positively set down of Gods purpose in this sickness; But
the meaning is, that albeit he should die, yet not irrevocably, and so as he
should not be restored to live, even here again, as they understood his death,
ver. 24. And thus also, Mark. 5.39. he denies that a damsel is dead, but
affirms that she sleeps, because he was to raise her as out of a sleep.
Doctrine. 1. Whatever Christ do to his own in affliction, yet he allows
encouragement upon them; Therefore does he dispatch away the Messenger with
comfortable news to the sisters. And albeit his after dealing seem to
contradict all this, (a^ there is never an encouraging word given, but a
tentation will be let out after it, to try our faith about it) Yet he would
have, them stick by this, and would have them look on sweet looks and good
words from Christ, as more then half health in the midst of sorest trouble. 2
It is an encouragement to Christ's own in trouble, that he is a skilful
Physician, who takes up their disease rightly, and what it tends to; So that
they shall not perish through want of skill, or wrong application of cures;
Therefore, in the first place, he tells them that he knows the disease, what it
is, and what it tends to, This sickness is not unto death, etc. 3. It is
Christ's allowance that his people, in looking on their troubles, do not judge
of them by the first view, nor by their nearest end (for so the end of this
sickness was death:) Nor yet by what of their own nature they portend, and
tend unto, (for in that respect also, this sickness was unto death:) But that
they look to Gods furthest and most principal end in them, and to what God (who
brings light out of darkness, meat out of the eater, and life out of death)
can bring out of them; for, it is in this respect that God would have them, for
their encouragement, seeing that this sickness is not unto death, as is before
explained. 4. As Gods own glory is his supreme end in all things; so in
particular, his scope in sending afflictions on his people, is to make his
glory conspicuous in their through-bearing under them, and in giving an issue
from them; for, says he, this sickness is for the glory of God. And albeit God
do not manifest his glory in so extraordinary a way, when his people are in
trouble, as he did on Lazarus's behalf, yet the general holds still true, that
he will be glorified in all the exercises of his people. 5. The Lords purpose
to glorify himself on behalf of his people, requires that they be exercised
with sickness and other infirmities, that so he may magnify his power,
wisdom, mercy, and love, toward and upon them; for, there must be sickness,
that the glory of God may shine. 6. Were afflictions never so bitter and so
grievous, yet this ought to sweeten them, if God take occasion thereby to
honor himself; for, this is an encouragement to sweeten the cup, and make
them submit, that this sickness is for the glory of God. See Joh. 12.27, 28. 2
Cor. 12.9, 10. 7. God is glorified, in that his Son Christ is glorified; and
his glory in helping his people under trouble, shines, in proving Christ to be
omnipotent and true God equal with the Father, in giving deliverance to them;
for, he clears, that it is for the glory of God, in this respect, that the
Son of God may be glorified thereby. So that as none do honor the Father,
who do not honor the Son, Joh. 5, 23. So it may encourage Saints, that the
Father accounts Christ's glorifying of himself on their behalf, to be for his
glory.

Ver. 5. Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.

6. When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in
the same place where he was.


In these verses, we have Christ's present answer by deeds to this message, to
wit; That however he loved not only Lazarus, as they propound it, ver. 3. but
themselves also, ver. 5. Yet when he heard of his sickness, he stayed still
two days before he motioned his return to Judea, ver. 6, This he did, that
Lazarus being dead before he came, the two sisters might be the more fully
tried, and his own glory might shine the brighter, for strengthening the faith
of his people, as will be seen in the sequel of the history, particularly, ver.
15. Doct. 1. As God has set his love on sinful dust, and Christ man has by
his own practice sanctified holy friendship; So men's pretending and saying they
are beloved of Christ, is to little purpose, unless Christ say so also;
Therefore is it confirmed here, what they had expressed concerning Lazarus. 2.
Such as, upon Gospel terms and grounds, do lay claim to Christ's love, will
not be repelled nor disappointed; for, they say, it is he whom thou love, and
here, Amen is said to their claim, Jesus loved Lazarus. 3. It is a great mercy
to be beloved of Christ, but it is a double mercy, when the Lord lets out his
love on a whole society and children of a family together; Therefore it is
added, Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus, which might be a
comfort to every one of them, in respect of the rest. 4. Saints sobriety, in
esteeming of themselves, and in preferring others to themselves, will never
loose them any thing in Christ's estimation; Therefore, albeit they mention only
Lazarus as beloved of Christ, ver. 3. yet here themselves also are added.
Unbelief is indeed no sobriety, nor yet is it sobriety in Saints, to shut out
themselves from any part in Christ's love; Yet when men have laid hold on him,
it becomes them to prefer others, and make more noise of them, then of
themselves. 5. Albeit there may be much difference of growth among Saints, and
some may have more blemishes then others; Yet Christ does love true grace in any
of his, how weak so ever; Therefore, albeit Martha was more wordly then Mary,
Luke 10.39, 40, 41, 42. and it appears afterward she was not so broken spirited
as she, yet Jesus loved Martha, as well as Mary. 6. Christ requires that his
peoples heart be guarded against any misconstruction of his dealing, by the
faith of his love and seeing love in all of it; Therefore is this premitted, of
his love to them, to prevent any misconstruction of his stay till Lazarus
should dye. 7. There is no outward crosse-dispensation, nor apparently harsh
dealing, but it is consistent with love, and may slow from love to his own; And
particularly, Christ may dearly love his own, and yet may delay to help them,
even in their extremity, till a fit time come, wherein his glory may shine, and
the mercy be more conspicuous; Therefore upon this, that Jesus loved them it
follows, When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days
still in the same place where he was.

Verse 7. Then after that says he to his Disciples, Let us go into Judea
again.
Follows the last thing antecedent to his return; which is, his preparation
to return, and his trial of the disciples about that matter. This is contained
in several conferences with the disciples, to ver. 17. which shall be spoken to
in order.

In this ver. he excites and invites to go and return with him again, which
draws on the following conference. Whence learn, 1. Such as seem to be but
onlookers in the trials of others, may yet get a sharper trial by it, then they
expect; for, so much may we learn from this conference in general, wherein the
disciples get a trial about Lazarus sickness, by reason of their own fear, and
therefore he conferred with them, and said, to his disciples let us go, etc. 2.
Christ will, in due time, satisfy the ^eedy requests of his own, and will let
it be seen that he does not sl^ight, however he delay them; Therefore, after
that, when the two days are expired, he will go into Judea again, to visit
and restore Lazarus. 3. Christ may make the first view of a calling, or duty,
appear more terrible to his followers, for their trial, then it will prove
afterward; Therefore does Christ propound the invitation in these terms, let
us go into Judea again. Whereby he puts them in mind how they had been driven
out of it, and yet will have them to it again; though yet, for a time, they
found no such hurt by going, as the sequel clears. 4. It may give ground of
hope, that a calling and duty will not be so hurtful as it appears dreadful,
when Christ gives a call to it, and so puts us in his way, and when he offers
to go with us and bear us company; for, so is this sweetened, let us go, says
he, importing his call, and that he will go with them.

Ver. 8. His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone
thee, and go thou thither again.
In this verse is recorded how they relished this invitation; They being weak
and unwilling to meet with suffering, are astonished at the call, and pretend
great respect to him; and therefore oppose his motion as not proceeding from
wisdom, wondering that he, who had been so lately in hazard, would cast
himself in new difficulties. Whence learn, 1. As oft-times spectatours and
on-lookers are more terrified with the cross, then sufferers themselves; So in
particular, Christ did endure the cross, and make for it, with such
resolution, as astonished his followers; for, he invites them to go into Judea,
when they wonder he should go thither again. 2. Such as are afraid to grapple
with trouble, will not readily let it be believed that they are so, but will
bend their wits, to seek some fair pretense, whereupon they may decline i^
Therefore do they only hold out his danger, The Jews of late sought to stone
thee, etc. to hinder that journey; Whereas, however it was true, they did
respect his safety, yet they were as much taken up with fear of their own
danger; as may be gathered from ver. 16. 3. Men in following Gods way, may meet
with enemies, that are very near friends; and even disciples may cast
impediments in their way who are on a good course: for, even the disciples, who
acknowledge him their Master, oppose him in his duty. See Matthew. 16.16, 17,
etc. with 22. 4. Men's wisdom, o^ their conceit of it, is a strong rebel
against Christ; And it is the great presumption of disciples; when in stead of
following Christ, they will offer him a counsel, as if they were wiser then he:
for, herein do they sail, when they vehemently urge him with a question, go
thou thither again? as if he had not considered the matter well enough. 5. The
arguments of the wisdom of the flesh, and of carnal fear, are but invalide to
satisfy the conscience. Hazards, either real or apparent, are strong motives
to dissuade our carnal hearts from duty, but these are no sound arguments in
divinity; for, they think it a strong argument, The Jews of late sought to
stone thee, and therefore go thou thither again? But Christ counts not that
sound, that men should choose their way, according to their apprehension of
dangers or safety in it, but according as God clears a calling, whatever
difficulty be in the way; As reckoning that many difficulties will tryst men
with many proofs of love; and that, as they but sought to stone Christ, and
yet could not effectuate it. So, the Lord can give safety, even in the midst of
dangers, when he pleases. 6. It is the great sin of men possessed with the
slavish fear of trouble, that not only they decline duty, but are selvish, so
that they mind neither the honor of God, nor the good of others, so they may
keep themselves in safety; for, so much appears in their declining Judea to be
free of trouble, never regarding Lazarus or his sisters need, nor the glory of
God, which was to shine in raising him up.

Ver. 9. Jesus answered, are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man
walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world.

10. But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in
him.


Follows Christ's answer to their objection against his resolution, consisting
of two parts; The first whereof (in these verses) is general. Concerning which,
they who understand this day, and the hours thereof, of man's life time,
wherein he is to go about his bussiness, do indeed speak this for truth, that
the time of Christ's calling in that way, was to be ended at his death, and that
men could not reach him till the hours of his life were expired, and therefore
he neede^ not fear But neither does that so fi^ly agree with what is
subjoyned, ver. 10. of men's stumbling in the night, nor ye^ with Christ's own
practice, who, albeit he knew he should be in safety till his hou^e came, yet
he did use lawful means, and follow the Fathers call, in removing from place to
place, as is manifest in his going lately out of Judea. Therefore, if we
consider, 1. The order that God has established in nature, in appointing the
day for men's labor, in all the hours thereof, and not the night, because men
cannot but stumble in it, Psalm. 104 20. 21, 22, 23. 2. Christ's particular
answer, ver. 11. wherein he shows his calling for this journey, I^ ^^ay, we
consider these, we will find the sense of this general answer to be this; That
a calling from God is like daylight to a man, to prevent fear of stumbling, or
inconveniency and danger: whereas he who neglects the opportunity thereof, may
fall in many inconveniences, like a man who neglects his journey till the
evening or night, and therefore cannot choose but stumble, seeing he wants the
light of day, and has no light in him to supply that defect. And by this,
Christ leads them to understand, that as he had a calling to leave Judea, so if
he could clear a calling to return to it again, there was no danger, whereas to
slight a calling would draw on real inconveniences Doctrine 1. The great task
and exercise of Christians ought to be, to turn their eyes from studying
inconveniences and hazards, to study their duty and calling, as their work and
care, and then leave the care of events unto God; Therefore, does Christ draw
them, who were affected with fear of dangers, to consider seriously what
calling there was for that undertaking. 2. As the Lord has honored the
children of men by appointing unto them lawful callings, wherein they may serve
him, whatever their calling be in it self; So he has appointed times and
opportunities of these callings, which are not to be neglected: for, a calling
is like the day, wherein a man may walk, and there are twelve hours in this
day, that is, a prefixed time for going about this calling, (as there is for
daylight;) which is not be neglected, more then a man would neglect the day
time to go about his business in it. The expression alludes to the custom of
the Jews, who divided the day and the night, each of them in twelve hours,
and that both summer and winter, only they shortened the hours of the day in
winter, and lengthned them in summer; and so, (contrariwise) the hours of the
night. 3. A man that follows a calling from God, and emproveth all the
opportunities thereof, is in a safe course, and so needs fear no danger; for,
as, if any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not because he sees the light of
this world, or the sun; so he that has the light of his calling, needs not
stumble, but that may be to him as daylight is to passengers. See 1 Pet. 3.13.
For, albeit following of Gods call will not always keep men from trouble, but
Christ himself, when his course was finished, and very shortly after this met
with it: Yet, 1. They will get their day finished, and shall not be interrupted
till they have finished their work, as Christ's experience teaches, See Luke
13.31, 32. 2. If they be not kept from difficulties, yet following their
calling, they are kept from the guilt of procuring them sinfully. 3 They may be
sure they shall be blessed, and 4. That God who employes them, will make up all
their losses to them So that the clearness of Gods call affords more peace,
then all the difficulties men can m^et ^ith in a calling, can make void.
Doctrine 4. As man's life is but short, so the opportunities of following of a
calling from God are but short, and soon lest in de^mably; for, it is but a
day of twelve hours, after which a night comes 5. As men who run on danger
without a calling, may meet with many a snare; So they who neglect Gods call
for fear of trial, may meet with sover difficulties in their own way; for, if a
man walk in the night, he stumbleth because there is no light in him, to take
up hazards, which God has appointed the Sun to point out unto men. The meaning
is, not only that he who runs without a call, stumbleth, but that as a man who,
having business to do in the day time, yet, does not set out till night, does
exceedingly prejudge himself; so he who either rejects Gods call, and takes
him to follow his own counsels, or he who fits the opportunities of doing his
calling, and comes too late, may meet with sharp trials.

Ver. 11. These things said he, and after that he says unto them, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.
Christ having in general, cleared the usefulness and safety that is in
following a calling, does, in this second part of the answer, clear his own
calling to this journey in particular, to wit, that he might raise Lazarus, who
was now dead. Whence learn, 1. Christ has an honorable relation unto, and a
near interest in them that believe; for, he is the friend Lazarus. See Isa.
41.8. Jam 2.23. 2. The death of believers does not break off Christ's relations
or friendship to them, but he will remember them for good, even when they are
dead; for, he is friend Lazarus when dead, and I go to awake him 3. Such as are
friends to Christ, ought also to be looked on as friends, by all Christ's
followers; Therefore, does he say, Our friend Lazarus. 4. Albeit death be a
common lot to the godly and wicked; yet Christians ought to have Christian
conceptions, and Christian expressions of it, and indeed the nature thereof is
changed to them: Therefore, says he, Lazarus sleeps, which name is given to
death, not only because he was shortly to raise him up, as easily as one awakes
a sleeping man (and so afterward he says, I go that I may awake him, See also
Luke 8.52. etc) but also, because death is a sweet sleep to the godly, and a
rest from their labors, till the morning of the resurrection, that he raise
them up to inherit glory, Rev 14.13. Psalm. 17.15. 5. When Christ propounds
difficulties to his people, he has also the remedy in his own hand; and when
we are called to study difficulties, he warrants us also to study what he can
do for us under them; Therefore, unto this, that Lazarus sleeps, he
subjoynes, but I go that I may awake him. 6. It is a calling to Christ, to go
where he may do good to any of his own, were it through never so many
difficulties and dangers; Therefore does he subjoyne this to the former general
doctrine, as clearing his calling to this journey in particular, These things
said he, and after that he says unto them Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I
go, etc. 7. Christ alone will have the glory of the good done to his people,
and will not suffer any to share with him; for, albeit he had invited them to
go with him, as companions in the journey, ver. 7. yet he will acknowledge no
companions in the miracle, I go that I may awake him. 8. Christ will choose
that way of working for his people that may most manifest his own glory, albeit
it should be a way full of hazard, of delays, and discoveries of his peoples
weakness; Therefore, whereas they might object, that he might more easily send
his word of power, which might do the work more speedily, as Joh. 4.49, 50. and
with less hazard, and cause of fainting fear to them; Yet, says he, I go,
that the glory of the miracle might ^e more conspicuous, as the event testified.

Ver. 12. Then said his Disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.

13. Howbeit Jesus spoke of his death: but they thought he had spoken of taking
of rest in sleep.


Christ's manner of expression in clearing of his calling, being mistaken by the
Apostles, though the phrase was very usual, they urge it against his going to
Judea. For, whereas Christ spoke of Lazarus death, they understand it of his
resting by sleep in his sickness, and therefore propound that this being a
sign of health, he needed not to go heal him. Whence learn. 1. Even disciples
are ready to mistake and misunderstand Christ's mind and words; for, so they
understand Christ's words otherwise then he meant them. 2. One great cause of
our mistakes, is, the averseness of our mind from knowing any thing but what
we please; and that our corrupt affections do oft-times guide our judgments;
for, the disciples being averse from suffering, and glad of any excuse to keep
out of Judea, do grip to Christ's expression of sleep, to gather this fair
pretense from it, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well; whereas, if their
passions and distempers had not blinded them, they might easily have perceived,
that Christ meant more by that expression; seeing he would not have undertaken
such a journey, merely to awake a sleeping friend out of a refreshful sleep. 3.
It is no easy matter to bring even disciples to submit to Gods will, when it
crosses their own dispositions; for, after all that Christ had said, they
bewray that they continue still averse from going to Judea. 4. When Christ puts
his people to it, they may expect to be tried both on the right hand and the
left, 2 Cor. 6 7. and to have both carnal fears of trouble, and deluded hopes
of exemption, let loose upon them, to bring forth what is in their heart;
Therefore, after they are tried with an affrighting sight of danger, ver. 7, 8.
Now, on the other hand, they are tried with hopes of being free of that
journey, and by this they are sifted, as well as by the other, and the
necessity of going was the more searching, after such a fancy.

Ver. 14. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.

15 And I am glad for your sakes, that I was not there (to the intent ye may
believe.) Nevertheless let us go unto him.


Christ having thus tried them, does 1. Plainly, and without allegory or
metaphore, tell them that Lazarus is dead, ver. 14. And so that his calling was
clear. 2. Whereas it might be thought that he had, by this delay, neglected
Lazarus; He declares that it was to good purpose, and for the confirmation of
their faith by the clearness of the miracle that he was not there, but stayed
away: and therefore he was glad of it. 3. Whatever might be objected, that it
was now too late and out of time to go, yet he resolves to go for all that,
ver. 15. Whence learn, 1. Christ does not cast off his own, though they be both
unwilling to suffer, and ignorant, but meekly be^s with them, and speaks again
and again, till they understand him; for, Then said Jesus to them plainly,
Lazarus is dead. 2. It is an addition to the trial of the godly, that oft-times
when their straits are at the greatest, Christ is absent from them; for,
Lazarus is dead, and I was not there, says he, to wit, in his humanity. And
this Mary and Martha resent afterward, ver. 21, 3^. 3. Whatever may be the
Saints thoughts of Christ's dealing under their distresses, yet his way of
dealing is still the best; and he can give a good account that it is so, to
satisfy their mistakes: As here he obviats all carping at his absence, by
showing that if he had been there, he could not have refused the supplications
of the sisters, to prevent Lazarus death; and so there had not been so glorious
a miracle wrought for confirmation of faith. Whereas now, both his omniscience
is evidenced, in telling of Lazarus death, and the miracle should produce
profitable effects. 4. Christ can not only give an account of his seeming
strange dispensations, but can produce matter of joy even out of the saddest of
them; for, albeit Lazarus be dead, and his sisters drowned in sorrow, yet,
says he, I am glad that I was not there, to prevent it. Not that he wanted
sympathy, but that he knew how to bring joy out of it. 5. As Christ minds his
own glory in all his working; so he joins therewith the promoving of the true
good of his people; for, this sickness and death of Lazarus is not only for
the glory of God, ver. 4. but for your sakes, and good. So that Saints will
find his glory and their good still carried on together. 6. Christ in
afflicting any of his own, minds not only their own particular good, but the
good of other Saints also; by their observing the proofs of Christ, manifested
upon, and to the afflicted; for not only Lazarus, but the disciples, (and
sisters also) get good and confirmation out of the trial, and the issue of it.
7. Even such as live under the most eminent ministry, for a long time, and are
very eminent in Christ's house, and who have seen much of Christ, may yet be
very weak in faith, and need confirmation thereof; for, albeit these were
called to be Apostles, and had seen the most of all Christ's miracles, and lived
under Christ's ministry, till now that it is near an end; yet even at this time
they need help to believe, or to be confirmed and strengthened in it, That ye
may believe. And it is still of general verity, that whatever faith Saints
have, yet it needs daily confirmation and growth. 8. Confirmation and
strengthening of faith is ^o needful and useful, that it is not to be thought
strange, if Christ send sharp trials, on our selves or others, to bring that
about; Yea, a Saint is highly honored, when God afflicts him most sharply, if
his afflictions and the issues of them, be a mean to confirm others; Therefore
Christ thinks, Lazarus pain in his sickness and death, and the sharp sorrow of
his sisters, but a small thing, and not to be stood upon, if it produce
confirmation of faith, even in Disciples; I am glad I was not there, to the
intent ye may believe. 9. As any thing that may advance our good, is matter of
Christ's joy; so in particular, there is nothing more pleasant unto him, then to
have his people believing and growing in faith, I am glad, to the intent ye may
believe 10. Albeit Christ's absence from his people for a time, may seem to
discourage them much, yet very absence may tend to the strengthening of their
faith afterward; for I was not there, to the intent ye may believe. 11.
Whatever encouragement Christ allow upon his people, yet it is not to be
expected that he will allow them their own desired ease, by shifting their duty
for any danger; for, albeit he point out all these solid grounds of comfort,
yet go to Judea they must, Nevertheless let us go. And indeed, if they had
gotten their own desired refreshment, they had missed of all these true
comforts. 12. Inability and impotency in the needy, will not hinder a meeting
betwixt Christ and them, but he will go to them, who cannot come to him; for,
such is his dealing to dead Lazarus, Let us go unto him. 13. Christ's going
unto, or dealing even with the dead, is not useless, but to good purpose; for,
albeit it should seem it were too late to go now, nevertheless, says he, let
us go unto him.

Ver. 16. Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples,
let us also go, that we may die with him.
This conference closes with a particular discovery of Thomas, Didymus, or,
the twin, as his name Thomas, in the Hebrew also imports. He seeing Christ so
resolute, invites the rest to go and dye with him, not with Lazarus, but with
Christ: And the meaning is, That since Christ would not follow their counsel,
but would run on his own death; there was nothing better for them, then to run
on the hazard with him, and so once be out of troubles and fears. In this
resolution there does indeed appear. 1. Affection, in cleaving unto Christ,
and, 2. Zeal in exciting others to the same. Yet this resolution is but full of
fear and dissidence, for, had he believed what was spoken ver 15. he would not
have expected this issue of the journey. Doctrine, 1. It is the duty of Christ's
followers not to quit him, though it should cost them their lives; for, so much
does this resolution teach. 2. It is their duty also, to excite one another to
duty, in times of hazard; Let us go, says he, and die. 3. Christ's followers
have more fears and sad apprehensions, then there is just cause; for, let us go
and die, when Christ had told of another thing, imports so much. This produced
an untimous exercise about suffering, wherein he proved not so resolute, when
he was called to it. 4. It breeds men much needless exercise, that they will
not believe nor expect the good that Christ promises them, but will judge of
all things by their own apprehensions; for, so was it with him, his eye was so
on feared danger, as he little regarded what Christ had promised. 5. The Lord
does not approve of that resolution in duty or suffering, that does not slow
from faith, but from distrust; for, herein did Thomas resolution fail. 6. The
Lord also dislikes men's willingness to suffer, when it proceeds from a
desperate wearing of their present lot, which makes them content to rid
themselves of it by sharp sufferings; for, this was also one of his faults, as
has been before explained.

Verse 17. Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lien in the grave four
days already.

18. (Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.)

19. And many of the Jews came to Martha, and Mary, to comfort them concerning
their brother.


Follows to ver. 38. Some antecedents of the miracle, after Christ came near
to Bethany, and before he came to the grave. Unto which, and these that follow
a preface and introduction is premitted in these verses, which will give light
to the following purpose. And namely there is recorded. 1. The length of time
since Lazarus, who was to be raised, had been buried: Jesus finds that is was
four days, ver. 17. 2. The nearness of Bethany to Jerusalem, (namely, that
it was a furlong less then two miles, eight furlongs making a mile) is marked,
ver. 18. And that as for other reasons, so also to point out a reason why so
many Jews came to bear Mary and Martha company, which is the third thing
premitted, ver. 19.

Doctrine, 1. While as it is said, Jesus found he had lien four days, we need
not enquire how he found it, for we may conceive that as he knew of his death
before, and told of it, ver. 11, 14. So now he found by report and information
that it was as he knew: As indeed, his knowledge is infallible. Though it may
be also asserted in general, that Christ as man (being freely acted by the
Godhead) was sinlessely ignorant of some things not incumbent to his calling,
and did learn from experience, information, etc. Luk 2.52. Mark. 13.32. And by
this, he would curb the licentious wit of man, who would presume to know all
things; And does condescend to these who are ignorant of many things, providing
they know what is incumbent to them in their stations. 2. Christ will have the
difficulties of his own singular, and remarked to be so, that his glory may be
singular in ridding them out of these; Therefore, it is premitted that he had
lien in the grave four days already, that his glory in raising him might be
the greater, (...) it might be seen that however he delayed long, yet he came
in time enough to raise him, as is after cleared. For this produced more fruit
in his own, then if he had not died, or had been but new dead; and it made his
death to be devulged at Jerusalem, as appears by their coming to comfort the
sisters, that so malice it self might not doubt of the miracle. 3. Such as
have gotten good news from Christ concerning their difficulties; may yet meet
with many seeming sad disappointments, before they find them accomplished;
for, they got news, ver. 4. this sickness is not unto death, and yet he is
not only dead, but had lien in the grave four days. 4. Men's exercise of their
calling may lie very near to hazards, that so they may exercise faith in God,
for, Bethany, the place where Christ's calling lay, was nigh unto Jerusalem,
where his cruel enemies were, and where he was to suffer, even about fifteen
furlongs off. 5. It is not inconsistent with Christianity, to have moderate
sorrow for the loss of friends, and to be so affected, as to need comfort:
for, Martha and Mary need some to comfort them concerning their brother. Only
that they do come to comfort, it shows, that the sorrow should be moderate,
and that the mourners should not reject consolation. 6. It is the duty of
friends and neighbors, to sympathize with, and comfort others, in distress;
for, so much were these Jews convinced of, who came (from Jerusalem, as is to
be gathered from verse 18.) to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning
their brother. 7. It is a special advantage, when God casts friends and
comforters to be near people, when they stand in need of them; Therefore also,
it is marked, that Jerusalem, whence they came, was nigh to Bethany. Job had
his friends further off. 8. Men may, upon some respects, love some who are
truly godly, and yet not love Christ, nor yet love others who bear the same
image; for, as yet (as would appear from ver. 45.) none of these believed in
Christ, and so could not love him, and some of them were violent enemies; and
yet they loved these godly women, and came to comfort them. It may be, because
they were eminent women, they are respected; And many who will not look on
Christ, will yet look to any who are in eminency: And therefore, the good that
is in such, would be cherished, if so be it may gain others. It is also
ordinary for natural men, to like the parts of gracious persons, when yet they
do not love their graces* And whatever it be, certainly it is upon some
by-respect that this love is founded.

Verse 20. Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and
met him: but Mary sat still in the house.
The antecedents of the miracle, after that Christ came near to Bethany, and
before he came to the grave, may be reduced to these two. 1. Martha's meeting
and conference with him, to ver. 28. 2. His meeting with Mary, and some
consequents following thereupon, ver. 28. -- 37.

Christ's meeting and conference with Martha contains several particulars, to be
spoken in order, whereof the first (in this ver.) is her meeting with him. She,
though a good woman, and sensible of her loss also, yet being of a stronger
mind then Mary, and consequently stirring most up and down, gets first word of
Christ's approach, and goes to meet him; whereas Mary knowing nothing of this,
stays still within. Whence learn, 1. As among he truly gracious, some are
more tender and spiritual then others So the most godly are ordinarily most
affected with griefs, and more broken under them, then others; for, Martha is
able to stir, and gets news of Christ, while as tender Mary sits still under
her sorrows, and hears of no such thing. This may teach the godly, and
especially weak and tender hearted ones, not to measure every one by
themselves; for, these who have real good, may have really different
dispositions, and some come far short of others; And it may teach them whose
minds are broken and made tender, as to guard lest every difficulty take too
deep impression, so also to expect more liberal allowance from Christ, as Mary
afterward found. 2. Whatever comfort or sympathy men meet with from friends in
their trouble; yet comfort from Christ also will be needed by all the godly;
for, albeit they had comforters, ver. 19. yet she went and met him, when she
heard of his coming, to welcome him as a needful guhest; And it may be she me^
him without, as fearing hazard to him from the Jews that were in the house. 3.
Martha had her own prejudice at Christ's carriage, that he had not come sooner,
as appears afterward, as well as she had faith; and yet faith prevails that she
stays not from him, but goes to him: It teaches, that unbelief is never
deadly, so long as a man is not kept from coming to Christ by it; And whatever
complaints a man have of Christ's dealing, yet faith is still the conqueror, so
long as all these complaints are poured out only in Christ's own bosom.

Ver 21. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother
had not dyed.

22. But I know, that even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give
it thee.


In the next place, we have Martha's salutation and discourse to Christ at
meeting; wherein. 1. Her passion breaks out in an indirect challenge ( ver.
21.) that his presence might have prevented her brothers death, and therefore
regrates that he came not in time. And in this her weakness appears, not only
in her indirect challenge; But partly, in her presumption, believing that for
which she had no ground. For upon what ground could she know, but Christ might
have been there, and yet her brother have died, seeing there was no promise to
the contrary? And partly, in her limiting of Christ's power to his bodily
presence, as if he could not have prevented his death, if he had pleased,
though he had not been there. 2. After her passion has broken out, she settles
a little, and corrects it with a profession of her faith, that Christ, if he
pleased, could yet amend all, ver. 22. Though in this also her faith came short
in, that she believes not Christ can do this by his own power, but only as an
instrument employing God, or obtaining power of God to do it, as was the way of
men of God in former times.

From ver. 21. Learn, 1. The dear children of God have so much weakness and
corruption, as to flee ^ut against Christ's way of dealing toward them, when
they are in trouble; for, so much does this indirect challenge teach. 2. Albeit
Saints may have much submission at their engaging in a trial, yet they may be
ready to stagger, if Christ put them to it, to give a real proof of that
submission; for, albeit their message to Chirst ver. 3. spoke much submission,
and a referring of all to his will; yet here the declares that the cannot
digest that it has pleased him to let her brother die. 3. It is not easy for
Saints to take up Christ, and fasten their faith upon him aright; And in
particular, it is sometime their fault, that they give more credit to the
presumptuous drams of their own hearts, for which they have no warrant, then to
what Christ reveals of himself; for, she strongly asserts if thou had been
here, my brother had not died, for which she had no ground at all. And,
generally, it is the fault of men, that in the point of trust and diffidence,
they make a Bible of their own thoughts, apprehensions, and fears, without
regarding what the Scripture says. 4. It is also the fault of Saints, that in
believing Christ's power and good will to do for them, they yet limit him to
their own conceived way of working, out of which they do not expect any thing
from him: And particularly, it is their great fault to limit his effi^acy and
power to his bodily presence; for herein also she failed, never expecting the
preservation of her brothers life, unless Christ had been there, whereas he
could have done it at never so great a distance.

From ver. 22. Learn, 1. Passion, when it is a tentation in Saints, is hasty,
and first out, and takes the start of their better resolutions; for, here it
has broken first out, whereas she has better stuff within, here produced.
And therefore, as we are in straits, to suspect that which posts first to the
door, to get out; Psalm. 116. 11. and 31, 22. So Saints passions, though they
ought not to be justified, yet they ought not to be too narrowly examined and
censured, as being but a violent tentation, treading upon grace for a season.
2. It is sinful in any, and particularly unseemly in a child of God, to
persist in his passion, when it has burst forth; but he ought to revoke and
correct it by faith: As here Martha subjoynes a correction to the former
expressions. 3. There is nothing can fall out, nor can the child of Gods
condition come to such an height, nor can the fruits of delays and
disappointments be so desperate and deadly but faith will see that it may all
be yet amended and made up again, Therefore, albeit it was a sore dash that
Christ came not till he was dead, yet says she, I know that even now, all may
be well enough. 4. It may exceedingly encourage Saints to believe, when they
consider that Gods power is not limited, and that the Intercessour, whom they
employ, will not be refused in any thing he craves: for, on this does she
build; I know that whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee, 5.
Faith, even when it goes very far on in giving glory unto Christ, does yet
ordinarily come far short of what is his due; and when faith sleeth a very high
pitch, it may yet be full of weakness; for, so was it in her faith, and her
correcting of her former distemper. She believes only if he ask, God will give;
whereas, albeit indeed as Mediator and man, he did employ the Father by
prayer, of which we will hear, ver. 41, 42. Yet as God, he wrought miracles by
his own power, communicate with his essence from the Father, by eternal
generation.

Ver. 23. Jesus says unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.
In the third place, we have Christ's meek answer to her discourse; Wherein
passing over her infirmity, he comforts her with a promise, that her brother
shall rise again. Whence learn. 1. Great are the consolations which God has
laid up for his afflicted people; and he will do great things for them, in so
far as he sees good; for, so much does this wonderful promise, given for
Martha's comfort, import. 2. It is a satisfactory and proper consolation
against the death of these we love, to believe a resurrection, wherein they
shall be restored again; for, by this does Christ comfort her, Thy brother
shall rise again. 3. Christ does propound this promise only in general terms,
He shall rise again, not mentioning the time when it should be: And this he
does, partly, to show that however he was to raise her brother presently; yet
the very general promise of a general resurrection, is full of comfort, 1 These
4.13, 14, etc. And therefore he propounds her encouragement in these terms,
left any should stumble, who have no warrant to expect such a particular
favor. Partly, he does it, for the exercise of her faith, and to let see, in
her practice, how far short our expectations may be of what Christ will do for
his people; (she looks for resurrection at the last day, he is to raise her
brother presently) And partly, that he may let in her consolation by degrees
into her narrow mouthed vessel; For as Saints may be allowed to believe and
expect a mercy, when yet they cannot resolve every particular circumstance,
how, or when, or by what means it shall come to pass, Esther 4.14. so they are
so shallow, as they can take in mercies but here a little, and there a little.

Ver. 24. Martha says unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.
In the fourth place, we have Martha's exception upon this promise and offered
comfort; Wherein, albeit she profess faith of a general resurrection and
judgment; yet she seems to look on that as not sufficient for her
encouragement, seeing it is common to all, and but far off. Whence learn, 1. It
ought to be out of all contraversie among Christians, that there will be a day
of judgment at the close of time, and a general resurrection of all the dead,
for that end; for, Martha believes this, though the Paedagogy of the law was
not yet expired, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection, at the
last day. 2. Such is the weakness of men, and their doting on their
particular satisfaction, that they are ready to slight all the mercies and
consolations of God, unless they get that which they account a mercy;
Therefore, albeit the general resurrection be no small comfort, and the
resurrection of the just be far better, then to be restored again to the toiles
of this life; Yet she undervalues all that, in comparison of her getting again
her brother presently. 3. It is no strange thing, to see men believing great
things that are far off, and about which they have no present exercise, when
yet their faith proves weak in the matter of their present trial, even albeit
it be less difficult then that which they profess to believe; for, she can
believe the resurrection of all men, and of him among the rest, at the last
day; when yet she staggers at the matter of his being raised presently, and yet
the one is as difficult as the other, and more difficult also.

Verse 25. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.

26. And whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die. Beleevest thou
this?


In the fifth place, we have Christ's reply to her exception, for understanding
whereof, we are to consider, that whatever faith Martha has hitherto
professed, Yet, 1 She has not looked on Christ as able to do any thing by his
own power, but only by employing God in prayer. 2. She has indeed professed
her faith of a general resurrection, but doubted of her brothers being raised
even now. 3. And in what she believes of a general resurrection, she makes no
mention of Christ's power to do it. Therefore, Christ fits his answer to cure
these evils in her; Wherein, first, He lays down a general assertion, I am
the resurrection and the life, that is, (if we take this truth in its full
latitude, and with an eye to Christ's whole scope here) He is the author of all
resurrection, and of all life, whether bodily or spiritual; as having absolute
power and dominion over death, as God, and being life it self: And therefore
as he was to be eyed in her believing the general resurrection; So his power to
raise and quicken the dead at that time, was sufficient to prove he could even
now raise her brother. And according to this interpretation, his being the
life, which is subjoyned to his being the resurrection, is not necessarily here
to be understood only of that eternal life, unto which the just are raised by
Christ, and of which he gave a pledge, by his raising up himself, as
Mediator; But it is to be taken generally, that he, as God, has power to
raise whom, and when he will, as being the fountain of life, to give life to
whom he will. But if we look to the purpose immediately subjoyned, we may take
this assertion more strictly, and in a spiritual sense, That he is the
resurrection, in his first giving of spiritual life unto dead sinners, which is
further explained in the end of ver. 25. And he is the life, in continuing and
preserving that spiritual life which he conferreth, which is further insisted
on, ver. 26. as shall be cleared. This interpretation as it is true in it
self, and agreeable to what follows; So it needs not seclude the other,
which is more general, and reaches Christ's full scope: But may come in as a
particular specialy comprehended under it, as appears by his own Commentary
subjoyned to it. And therefore, Secondly, He illustrates and confirms this
general in a twofold particular assertion. One is, He that believes on me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live; which though it conclude well, if we
understand it of a bodily resurrection; That they who close by him with faith,
albeit they use bodily, yet he will raise them up to live again, and can do to
when he pleases, Yet comparing it with the following verse, which is conjoined
with it, by the c^pulative and, as a further confirmation, and is undoubtedly
to be understood spiritually, I incline ^ather to understand it spiritually,
and that Christ is here proving himself to be the spiritual resurrection of a
dead sinner, and that they who, being dead by nature, do lay hold on him by
says, shall partake of the first resurrection, and be made to live a life of
grace. And upon this does the second assertion fitly follow, whosoever lives
and believes in me shall never die, wherein he assures her, that believers are
delivered from spiritual and eternal death. And so this adds to the former; For
as in the former, he proves himself chiefly to be the resurrection, by raising
up the dead to a state of life; so here he confirms further how he is the
life, by preserving and keeping in that life eternally, which he had conferred
upon believers, and stated them in it. And this doctrine does very well agree
with Christ's scope in this place; For hereby he not only leads Martha, to eye
him m^re ^hen she did in what she believed, and to believe in him, if she
looked for a comfortable issue of her trial; And to consider the mercy of
spiritual resurrection, when now she is taken up so much with raising up of her
brother; But this instance, of spiritual resurrection and life, is a very
pregnant proof of that general, that he is the resurrection and life, and
sufficient to confirm that he can raise whom and when he will; no less power
being required to the one, then to the other, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Col. 2.12.
Thirdly, in this answer, Christ having thus instructed her, does pose her, if
she believes this, and consequently will close with that promise, ver. 23. as
to be presently performed.

From ver. 25. Learn, 1. Believers have need of daily instruction from Christ,
that they may know and understand these things better which they believe in
part; Therefore, albeit she believe a resurrection. ver. 24. yet Christ finds
it needful to inform her better in many things about it. 2. It is not enough
that we believe great benefits and mercies, unless we believe them to be in
Christ, and seek them in him; for, it is not enough she believe a resurrection,
unless she believe that he is the resurrection and the life. 3. Christ is to
be looked on, not as the instrument of life and resurrection to any, but as the
author and principal worker thereof by his own power; for, albeit many Prophets
and Apostles have raised the dead, yet it can be said of none but he, I am the
resurrection and the life. 4. Such as close with and enjoy Christ, will find
all things in him, and at their hand, which otherwise they may seek far off,
and possibly not fin^^; Therefore, whereas she looked afar off to the better
day, for the accomplishment of Christ's promise, he sets her see it in him, at
her hand, that he is the resurrection and the life, to raise up her brother
even now. 5. As time is a spiritual resurrection of the soul in this life; So
they who are acquainted with Christ's w^^king therein, and in daily entertaining
thereof, need fi^^e no difficulty to exalt Christ is the fountain of life and
resurrection, and to believe that he is able to work wonderful outward
deliverances, were it even to raise a dead body; Therefore, does he being in
this instance in the end of this, and in the following verse, to prove that he
is the resurrection and life, and that he can ^^ise her brother, even
p^^^^^tly. And indeed, all the wonders that God wrought of o^^ upon the
creatures f^^ this pe^^^e, a believer may find them all wrought within him, in
his spiritual restoration. 6. By nature men a^e (...) estranged and far from
grace, ^s a dead man is ^^^m life; for, so is here supposed, that man is dead,
and needs Christ to be the resurrection. 7. The only fountain and cause of the
recovery of this condition, is in Christ, the author of both bodily and
^p^ritu^^ resurrection, as here we are taught. 8. The only mea^ to partake of
this resurrection, is by says to lay hold on Christ, for, he that believes in
me, shall live (...). Christ being thus laid hold on, no bonds of spiritual
(...) shall hinder his quickening virtue to ^^^e them ^p, but he will make the
very dead to live; for, he that believes, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. This is not to be understood, as if any man that is dead by nature could
in that estate, lay hold on Christ by faith; for he must first be prevented by
passive regeneration, and the infusion of grace: But the meaning is that it is
faith only, that puts the sinner in a state o^ life, and is he saving exercise
of infused grace, without which all antecedent exercises, (...) discovery and
conviction of sin and misery, terror, etc. will not avail, as being common to
Saints and regenerate men with temporaries.

From ver. 26. Learn, 1. As the children of God are by regeneration, put in a
state of life; so they prove it by their after carriage, by exercising the
functions of spiritual life, and being lively in their way; for, he to whom
Christ is the resurrection, to quicken him when he is dead, he lives 2. As
spiritual life flows only from Christ embraced by faith; so it must be
entertained and preserved by the same mean of faith in Christ; for, as the
dead, by believing, do live, so he that lives, must believe in me, says he.
The keeping in of our spiritual life is a continued resurrection, as the
preservation of the creatures is a continued creation; And as the same power is
employed in begetting and entertaining this life; so the same mean of faith
must still be kept in exercise. So that they are exceedingly in the wrong, who
in their defections and ^istempers, and in their swoundings and faintings, do
cast away their confidence. 3. The power of Christ will be forth coming, to
preserve believers in him from an utter decay in their spiritual life; So that
albeit they may be overtaken with some degrees of death, yet upon renewing of
their faith, they shall be recovered out of their swounds. He will also
preserve them from eternal death, and bodily death it self shall not
extinguish the life that is begotten and entertained by faith in Jesus Christ;
for, he that lives and believes in me, shall never die. 4. It is the will of
God, that when he reveals truth, we embrace it by faith, and do not either
reject it, or give only a general assent to it in our judgments; Therefore
does he pose her, Beleevest thou this? and thus should we daily pose our own
hearts. 5. In particular, it is necessary that we be well grounded in the faith
of getting life through Christ, and that we make special application of the
general promise made by him concerning this, and that faith be not to seek in a
pinch when Christ calls for it; for, it is in these matters that he requires
her to profess her faith, Beleevest thou this?

Verse 27. She says unto him, Yea, Lord, I believe that thou art the Christ
the Son of God, which should come into the world.
In the last place, we have Martha's answer to this question; wherein, she
assents unto what Christ had required her to believe, and ads a confession of
her faith concerning his person and offices, which she professes she has
believed before, as it is in the original. This she subjoynes, not only as the
ground of her faith in this particular, unto which she now assents, But her
weak grip (as would appear) not being able expressly to apprehend all this
which he has spoken, though she assent unto it; Therefore she passes it in a
word, and professes her faith concerning his person and office, acknowledging
him to be the promised Messiah, the Son of God, and consequently, professes
she believes all that may flow from this. Whence learn, 1. Weak faith may grow
up to more clearness and assurance, by conversing and conference with Christ,
laying open our weaknesses to him, and receiving instructions from him; for,
her answer to Christ's question, is, Yea, Lord, affirming that she believed it,
(though yet weakly) and so she is brought a further length then she had
attained before, ver. 24. 2. In the matter of encouragements and promises, the
Lord has so ordered it, that some should be fundamentals (such as, the
promise, I am thy God, the truths concerning Christ's person and offices, etc.)
which comprehend many promises in them; the rest being but a particular
application of these generals to particular cases; As here her practice
insinuates, recurring to this, as a chief and comprehensive ground of comfort,
that he is the Christ, etc. 3. The consequences that flow from these
fundamental encouragements and promises, are so many, and so full, that one,
who believes the first, may yet not see these consequences so clearly, nor yet
so firmly believe all that flows from it; for, Martha (as would appear) cannot
get all this so distinctly gripped; when yet she believes that he is the
Christ, etc. from which all of it necessarily flows. At least, this is clear,
that she has believed, that he is the Christ, etc. even when she doubted of
this particular which he calls her to believe. And this lets us see, that they
who believe these general encouragements, have much more to be refreshed with,
then they have well considered; and, that it is of Gods rich love,
condescending to our weakness, that he draws out these generals in particular
promises, relating to our particular necessities. 4. When our faith staggers in
any particular exigent, or proves weak in believing particular promises; it is
our duty to recurre to these general grounds of faith and encouragement, and
hold them fast till we get more, and study the fullness that is in them, that
we may be led on to more particular confidence; for, such is her practice;
whatever her former doubting, or present weakness in believing were, yet she
believes, and has believed, that he is the Christ, etc. The studying of
Christ's person and offices is a notable mean to confirm our faith in all the
promises concerning all the benefits to be had in him; for, this she lays
hold on for that end, I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God
which should come into the world. The study of this will make us sure both of
his good will, as Mediators, and power, as God, to do what he promises. 6.
Christ is never rightly believed in, nor taken up, except he be acknowledged to
be the Messiah promised unto the Fathers, and the eternal Son of God; for, so
much does her confession point out concerning him. 7. Christ was not unknown
under the Old Testament, but was revealed and held forth in the promise; And
accordingly, the godly did close with him by faith, Act. 15.11. Heb. 13.8. Rev.
13.8. And as they saw him to be true God, so they did expect and wait for him
to come into the world, at the appointed time, made of a woman, and so to be
God and man in one person: for, says she, thou art the Christ the Son of
God, which should come into the world, intimating that he was revealed, and
accordingly believed in, and expected by them before he came; and that they
acknowledged him, who was to come into the world, by his being made flesh, to
be God, the Son of God. 8. All Gods promises of and concerning the Messiah,
were fulfilled and accomplished in the person of Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary; for, says she of him now exhibited, Thou art the Christ the Son of God
which should come into the world, So that there is no other to be expected. And
as this was true of his person, so all other predictions, concerning the
Messiah, in his life, death, resurrection, etc. were accomplished in him, as is
frequently observed and recorded in the New Testament. And this may assure us,
that all Gods promises shall be fulfilled in him to his people. 8. True faith
in Christ will not judge of him by outward appearance, nor outward lots, but
will pierce through all these clouds, and see his glory; for, when he is in the
form of a servant, and lately driven from Jerusalem, yet says she, I believe
thou art the Christ, the Son of God.

Ver. 28. And when he had thus said, she went her way, and called Mary her
sister, secretly, saying, The Master is come and calls for thee.
Follows the second antecedent of the miracle, after Christ was come near to
Bethany, which is, his meeting and encounter with Mary, with some consequents
that followed, before he came to the grave, to ver. 38.

This may be taken up in six particulars; whereof the first, (in this ver.) is,
the call given to Mary, to come out to Christ; Martha, after the former
conference, comes to her sister (not of her own accord, but at Christ's
command) to carry the news and message to her. Doctrine. 1. Christ should be
acknowledged, by all his own, to be their Master and teacher, whose doctrine
and direction they will follow; Therefore, is he designed by this common and
acknowledged name among his followers, The Master, or, Teacher. 2. Christ may
be very near unto mourners, and they not know of it, and they may be puzzled and
perplexd for his absence, when he is hard at hand; for, while Mary is mourning
at home, supposing that Christ is about Jordan, and grieving that he is not
come, he is at her hand at Bethany, The Master is come. 3. Albeit the
tenderness and crushed condition of some, may suspend their comfort from them,
yet Christ will seek such at last, and not be at rest, till he meet with them,
and comfort them; for, it was by reason of Mary's crushed spirit, that she is
mourning still, and hears nothing of Christ, when Martha has been comforted by
him; Yet Christ knowing her distress, and that she is mourning, he minds her,
and will have her brought to him; He calls for thee. 4. Whoever they be that
come to fetch a tender mourner to Christ, they come not of their own head, but
have his allowance so to do; for, so does Martha tell this mourner, The Master
calls for thee. 5. Such as have tasted of Christ's sweetness themselves, are
most fit messengers, to invite others to him; for, Martha is employed, after
she has met with Christ, and he has fixed her faith on himself; when she had
so said, she went her way (being sent) and called her sister Mary, etc. 6. It
may encourage mou^ners to come to Christ, that his respect to them is not
suspended upon their coming, but he prevents them with warm invitations; for,
so will he have Mary encouraged, The Master is come, and calls for thee. See
Mark. 10.49. 7. Such as have found Christ's tender kindness toward them, will
be tender of him and all that concerns him; Therefore does she call her
sister secretly, lest these Jews who were with them, knowing of him, might
bring him in some hazard. And albeit Christ himself was not afraid, yet it
was very commendable that Christ's safety should lie near their heart, whose
necessity had brought him thither.

Ver. 29. As Soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.

30. Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met him.


In the second place is recorded Mary's obedience unto this call; He arose and
went to him, where he yet stayed without the town. Whence learn, 1. Whatever
jealousy or prejudice mourners have at Christ's dealing; yet he will be still
welcome news unto them, and they ought not to stay away from him; for, though
she was under the same tentation with Martha, yet she also arose and came to
him. 2. News of Christ's approach will make fainting mourners revive, and be
active to run and meet him; for, she who sat drooping and faint in the house,
as appears from ver. 20, 31. now, when she heard that, she arose quickly and
came to him. 3. Such as have the opportunity of comfort from Christ, will
prefer him to all the comforts they can receive from friends; Therefore she
arose quickly, and came to him, leaving all that were in the house comforting
her. 4. In the days of Christ's flesh, his calling went nearest his heart of
any thing, and he preferred the opportunities of doing good, to all his own
case and accommodations: Therefore it is marked, as a reason why Mary went out
unto him, Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in the place where
Martha met him. He had not so much as entered the town to refresh himself, not
for fear of the Jews, (for his hand and providence brings them out afterward,
ver. 31,) but he choosed this as a sit time and place to comfort Mary in, and
his mind was upon working the miracle before he rested. And all this tends to
show what a faithful and merciful high Priest he is, and how enlarged his heart
is toward his people, when now he has no particular necessity of his own, to
divert him.

Ver. 31. The Jews then that were with her in the house, and comforted her,
when they saw Mary that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying,
She goes unto the grave, to weep there.
In the third place, is recorded how the Jews who comforted her, constructed
of her going out, as if she were going to weep at the grave, (as it seems this
custom had crept in among them) and therefore they follow her, to interrupt
her. Whence learn, 1. Such as are most tender, and most sensibly affected and
burdened with trials, may expect not only greater sympathy from Christ, but
also that (in so far as it is good for them) he will stir up other instruments,
to take a more hearty life at their condition; for, so much appears in the
practice of these Jews, who perceiving Mary's greater need, sat with her in
the house, and comforted her, and rose up hastily and followed her, when she
went out, whereas, it appears, they had taken little notice of Martha's going
out or coming in. 2. It is a sinful practice of our nature, to ad to the
burdens laid upon us by God, and feed our own sorrows, by pensive thinking or
looking upon that wherein God afflicts us; for, their apprehension upon her
going out, intimates they had some such custom among them, of going to graves,
to weep there, that the sight of their loss might waken their sorrow. 3. It is
no wonder to see the world and natural men mistake the ways of the godly, and
to see, even their natural comforters in trouble, judge of them according to
their own carnal principles and dispositions; for, albeit there be no
appearance that Mary had used this practice before, yet they misconstruct her
going out, she goes to the grave to weep there, not only because they knew not
her calling to go to Christ, but this being natures practice, they could judge
no better of her. 4. It is our duty to restrain carnal sorrow, if it were but
by interrupting thereof, if we cannot be comforted under it; for, so much does
their practice teach, they rose up hastily, and followed her, thinking to
interrupt and scarre her from her weeping, if she would not be recalled by
them. 5. The Lords providence does oft-times tryst men, in following their
ordinary duty, with very unexpected favors; for, while they are following
Mary, to moderate her sorrows, providence leads them out to Christ, and to be
witnesses of a glorious miracle. 6. There is much good to be gotten in the
fellowship of the godly, and in studying to be steadable and comfortable to
them in their distress; for, it is in Mary's company, and while they are
comforting her, they meet with this favor.

Verse 32. Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him she fell down
at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not
died.
In the fourth place, Mary's discourse to Christ, when she met him, is (...) it
the name ^^^rate which Martha had, ^er. 21. only she exp^^^^^th it with great
reverence and humility, and with much sorrow and many tears also, as appears
from ver. 33. which it seems stopped the current of her speech, that she cannot
declare any thing concerning her faith, as Martha had done. Doctrine, 1. The
same tentation and groundless conceit that a^^aul^s ^e, may also p^^^^sse
another; for, Mary has the same thoughts with Martha. It seems they conferred
together about it, and so had strengthened one another in it, which is an usual
fault among the godly, And (...) this was a tentation, so it is no wonder if
Mary's tenderness were as much supprized with it, as any; for, albeit it be a
fault, yet such weeds usually grow in best ground. 2. The more eminent one be
in grace and acquaintance with Christ, the more humble and reverent will they
be before Christ; for, in this Mary ^^^strips Martha, she fell down at his
feet, 3. An humble and reverent Saint will not be misconstructed of Christ,
under their his of distemper; for, by this she corrects her passionate speech,
in that no prejudice nor tentation takes away her humble reverence, she fell
down at his feet, saying, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not
died.

Ver. 33. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping
which came with her, he groned in the spirit, and was troubled.

34. And said, Where have ye laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see.

35. Jesus wept.


In the fifth place, is recorded Christ's tender sympathy with Mary and her
afflicted company, in this strait, which leads him to the doing of the miracle.
The occasion hereof, is, his observing of Mary's sorrow, with the sorrow of
these who were in her company to comfort her. His carriage, or the expression
of his sympathy upon this, consists in these. 1. He groaned in spirit, and was
troubled, or troubled himself, ver. 33. The word rendered groaning, does
properly signify to have indignation, and consequently, strictly to charge
under pain of displeasure. And so it may point out his indignation, not only at
their weakness, evidenced in the way of their expressions to him, but chiefly,
against sin and Satan that brought on all this misery: But certainly, the root
of all this, was his tender respect to Lazarus, and to Mary's trouble and
affliction. 2. Being thus affected, he enquires for the grave, that he may give
a proof of his sympathy, and being desired to come and see, he goes on toward
it, as appears from the following purpose, ver. 34. 3. Being in the way to the
grave, the exercise of his spirit burst out in weeping, ver. 35.

From ver. 33. Learn, 1. Whatever be the expressions of any to Christ, yet the
chief thing ^e looks to, is, what they express of an affected and sensible
heart, in that wherein they employ him; Therefore, without heeding her
language, it is remarked, he saw her weeping. 2. It is commendable in men, to
be compassionate, and to ^^i^^ with ^^iends in their ^^rrows; for, the Jews
are also weeping, which came with her. 3. None will prove^able comforters of
friends in dist^^^, but those who take deep impression of their sorrows; for
their who came to comfort her, ver. 31. are also weeping with her, 4. Albeit
Christ will respect the sorrows of any of o^e m^u^her, yet it is a good token,
when the sorrows of many concur to plead with him for pity; for, it is when
he saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping with her that his compassion
burst, forth. 5. Christ will have some respect, even to the grief of natural
men, joining with his people, to ^^ment their or his Churches sorrows; for,
albeit there Jews were as yet unco^^^^ted, yet their weeping with Mary has
its own weight with him: He who respects the ^^y of young ^avens and L^ons Joh
38.41. Psalm 104.21. and the mourning of a (...) land, Jer. 12.11. does
certainly respect the sorrows of men, as they are men, and particularly, when
their sorrow is for a right cause. 6. Christ has not only divine power, as
(...), to (...) his own, but as man also, he has compassion and a tender
heart, to take an impression of their difficulties, when they are aff^^ted with
them, for, weeping Mary meets with a (...) compassionate Christ here. And this
may give Saints ^^^dnesse to come to him, Heb. 4.15, 16. Especially considering
that we cannot have sorrow, but he has an eye to observe it, that he may
sympathize, as Mary here finds: And i^ may make tr^^^^e (...) us considering
that we have such a sympath^zer. 7. A^^^^ Christ do not at first cu^e the
troubles of his own; yet ^e does sympathize with them under them. He will first
put the afflicte^ in his heart, and then cure their disease; for, here he first
sympathizes, and then raises Lazarus. And in this respect he (...) all the
sicknesses which he cured, Matthew 3.16, 17. 8. The difficulties of the Lords
pe^p^^ (...) not only wak^^ at his affection and sympathize with them; but this
his sympathy will burst forth in indignation against all their enemies and
causes of their troubles; for, so much also does his groaning in the spirit,
import, that his indignation was kindled against Satan and sin, that drew on
death and all this sorrow. 9. The nature of his commotion, and that he troubled
himself, as it is in the Original; does teach. 1. Christ our Lord was not
muddy in his affections, nor overpowered by them; but he had them at his
command; His commotions of mind were not only like the shaking of pure water
in a clear glass, which still remains clear; but they arose, and were calmed,
at his pleasure. And albeit this was proper and peculiar to himself, who was
true God, and the spotless Lamb of God; Yet if we were more near him, and like
him, we would find our affections to be more servants, and less Masters; And
without this, our very good affections are oft-times so muddy, that they mar
us; Our earnest desires after good are poisoned with impatient have, and our
very joy may mar believing, Luk 24.41. 2. Our Lord has not these affections,
which are needful for his peoples help, far to seek; but they are ready to
burst forth (...) call; for, ^hen Mary's condition needs sympathy, he troubled
himself. And so we, who need suitable affections, and a right frame of spirit,
when many times we cannot attain them; yea, oft-times our diligence in seeking
them, puts us further from them, by reason of our not taking a right way; If we
could employ faith in him, who can command these affections in himself, he
could also soon give them unto us.

From ver. 34. Learn, 1. Christ's tender affection and sympathy with his people
will not lie hid in his heart, not express it self only in some affectionate
expressions; but will at last produce glorious actings for them; for, the fruit
of his groaning and trouble, is, his enquity for the grave, that he may raise
Lazarus. 2. Christ takes pleasure to answer his peoples necessities, by deeds
as well as by words, and (so to say) to do and act his love, as well as to say
it; Yea, in great necessities, he will not delay his peoples help so long as
even to comfort them by words; Therefore, albeit it be his ordinary way, to
comfort his people, first by promises, Zech 1* 13. and then, by actings; and
albeit he dealt so with Martha; Yet, seeing Mary's great need and his heart
being weighted, he says no more, but will go to the action. 3. Albeit Christ
will speedily help his needy people, yet he will so order his working, as his
glory may be most conspicuous in it; Therefore, albeit he could have raised
Lazarus, and made him come to them where they stood; and albeit he knew well
enough where the grave was; yet he will enquire for it, and have them to
conduct him to it, that so he may free this miracle from any suspicion of
illusion, and may have them to be witnesses of his glory in it.

From ver. 35. Learn, 1. As the Son of God did take on man's nature, and dwelt
in our flesh, that he might lay a foundation of reconciliation betwixt God and
man, in his own person; So also he did take on these sinlesse affections and
infirmities, which might not only prove him to be true man, but that he is a
kindly brother and kinsman to miserable men, and might be a fit conduct to
conveigh these bowels of compassion that are in God, toward lost man; for, so
much is evidenced by his weeping. 2. Christ, in the days of his flesh, was a
man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, that therein men might read the
bitter fruits of sin, and they who flee to him, may have matter of joy for
ever; Therefore, it is marked that Jesus wept, which also was his frequent
practice. See Heb. 5.7. 3. Christ has no light touch of the miseries of his
own, but they do deeply afflict and affect him; for, he groans and is troubled,
till he wept again. 4. Christ allows not that his affection and sympathy be
hid from his afflicted people; but he would have them knowing it, and convinced
of it; for, therefore, does his groaning and trouble burst forth in weeping, to
be discerned by the beholders, as ver. 36. 5. Christ's tenderness and affection
to his afflicted people will not long be hid or concealed, but it will burst
forth through never so many clouds; for, when he is troubled, he will at last
weep also in view of them all. Thus when he is dealing most harshly with the
woman of Canaan, yet at last his heart cannot hide it self, Matthew. 15.22, etc.
And in this, Joseph, in his dealing with his brethren, was a type of him. 6.
Christ's inward exercise bursting forth in weeping, may serve also further to
teach. 1. That all who get their bitter and sad exercise and sorrows suppressed
that they break not out to the dishonor of God, or weakening of the hands of
others, have him to acknowledge, who by venting his sorrows, both here, and
elsewhere, especially on the cross, Matthew. 27.46. has shut up theirs. 2.
That, on the other hand, when griefs and sorrows will not smother, that lot
may be sanctified in his person, and we may have him for a companion, who
knows the heart of such a one.

Ver. 36. Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him.

37. And some of them said, Could not this man which opened the eyes of the
blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?


The sixth particular recorded, is the construction the Jews had of Christ's
expressed sympathy: They observing his sorrow, do admire his love to dead
Lazarus, and marvel that he who had wrought such wonders, might not also have
prevented his death. It is most probable, that they who admire his love, were
these Jews who were best affected to Christ, though they have not yet believed
on him, till afterward, ver. 45. and that they who wonder he had not prevented
his dying, are these malicious Jews, who after the miracle, went and informed
the Rulers, ver. 46. and therefore the first sort are indifinitely named the
Jews here, who are called many, ver. 45. and the other sort are, both here,
and ver. 46. called only some of them, Or, it may be conceived, that all of
them concurring in wondering at his love to Lazarus, as a thing they could not
deny, the more malicious sort do add that cavil and exception.

From ver. 36. Learn, 1. Christ's love to his people is a very captivating and
ravishing meditation; for, that which took hold on them, and strikes them with
admiration, is, he loved him, which was indeed a truth, that Christ as he
pitied Mary and her sister, so he respected Lazarus especially, and therefore
burst forth in sorrow, through affection to him and them, and through
indignation at Satan and sin, which drew on these miseries. 2. The fountain of
any compassion showed by Christ to his own in misery, is not any worth in them,
but his own free love; for, his compassionate weeping leads them up to his
love, as the cause thereof. 3. Christ thinks no shame of his love to his
people, but will avow it, and have it known sometime to beholders; for, he does
here so let it out as they mark it. See Rev. 3.9. 4. Christ's sympathy and
compassion toward his people, proves his love to them, although they get not
visible out-gates from their troubles; for, upon his weeping, they gather, he
loved him; his sympathy and tears prove love, albeit the man died. And indeed,
they who get a sight of Christ's tender heart, will believe his love, whatever
his dispensations be. 5. Christ's love and compassion is a wonder to them who
know him not well; Yea, it is in it self admirable, and such as see it, will
rather admire it, then know how to comprehend it: Behold, say they, how he
loved him! See Ephesians 3.18, 19. 6. Christ's love to his own will follow them even
to their graves; As here he gives evidence how he loved him, when he is lying
in his grave. And albeit every Saint do not meet with that proof of love which
Lazarus got, in being raised up again; yet that love rests upon them, till the
general resurrection.

From ver. 37. Learn, 1. Christ's love is readily misconstructed, when he is
letting it out most convincingly, and it is liker an enemy, then a friend, so
to do; for, there are here who indirectly carp at his love, and the expressions
of it, since he sustered the man to die. 2. Corrupt men, and the corrupt
dispositions of men, will not readily believe Christ's love, unless it appear
in some evidences and effects desired by them; for, this is their indirect
exception, that he caused not that this man should not have died.
Misconstructers of Christ's love are ordinarily limiters of his love, to be
evidenced in such and such particulars. 3. Men may have much knowledge, and yet
much malice against Christ; Yea, knowledge is very dangerous, if it be not
sanctified and seasoned with grace and love; for, these men can tell that he
opened the eyes of the blind, chapter 9.6. and, it seems, are better acquaint with
his proceedings then the others, and yet they carp at his love. 4. Christ has
given such proofs of his power, as may convince malice it self, that he can
do greatest things for his people, if it be for their good; for, their
reasoning grants, that he which opened the eyes of the blind, could have caused
that this man should not have died. 5. When malice and prejudice has said its
worst against Christ's dealing, it will be found, in end, that he is doing
better then we could desire; for, all they could have expected, was, that he
should have caused that this man should not have died, which might have been
done, and yet little of Christ or his love have been seen in it; For, it might
have been looked on only as a recovery out of a dangerous disease. Whereas he
is about to do that for Lazarus, which sets forth his own glory, and makes his
love to him conspicuous indeed.

Ver. 38. Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, comes to the grave. It
was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.
Follows, to ver. 43. the antecedents of the miracle, after Christ was come
to the grave; which are, his rebuke of Martha's unbelief which burst forth when
he commanded to take away the stone upon the grave, ver. 39, 40. and his
public thanksgiving to the Father, after the stone was taken away, ver. 41, 42.

Unto these is premitted, in this verse, 1. A declaration of his exercise in
coming to the grave; He again groaned in himself; Partly, out of indignation
at their unbeleeving cavils, ver. 37. which he digested without answering. But
chiefly, this flowed from his sympathy and affection, which still continues,
and is renewed at the sight of the grave; And it seems also that his praying,
of which he gives so comfortable an account, ver. 41. drove him to these
groans. For his prayers were very ardent, and he had hard exercise in them,
Heb. 5.7. that he might be a fellow-feeler with all who tread these steps. 2.
There is premitted, a description of the grave, which seems to be marked,
chiefly, as an introduction to the following command, to take away the stone.
Doctrine, 1. Christ our Lord was very serious in the works of his calling, and
could be very serious about them, even in the midst of outward distractions;
for, in the midst of all this company, and while he is walking on in the way,
he is exercised till he groan again. 2. Christ's compassion and sympathy is not
an evanishing passing thing, but will continue toward the needy, till they get
their issue; for, he cease not his groaning, but groaned again, in sympathy
and prayer, till the work be done. 3. The unbelief of men, when Christ is about
to do great things, is a grievous burden to him; for, this groaning again,
relates also to their unbelief, who were to be witnesses of this miracle, as is
before marked. See Mark. 6.5, 6. 4. Whatever be the desert of unbelief, yet
Christ will not always be hindered by it to do good to the needy; But he will
bear it as a part of our misery, and yet go on to his work; for, he groaned in
himself for it, and so comes to the grave. 5. As decent and ordinary burial
is in it self a mercy, and it is a judgment upon the wicked, to want it, Jer.
16.4. and 22.18, 19. So in the way of burial, there is no respect to be had to
superstitious conceits, nor yet to pomp and vain glory, but only that the dead
be removed out of the sight of the living, Genesis 23.4. and that their bodies be
secured against external violence and injury, as being closed upon hope of a
resurrection; Therefore, it is marked of Lazarus burial place, that it was only
a cave, and a stone lay upon it, that his body might not be violate nor injured.

Verse 39. Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha the sister of him that
was dead, says unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he had been dead
four days.

40. Jesus says unto her, Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe,
thou should see the glory of God?


In these verses, we have the first thing which occurred at the grave; to wit,
a reproof of Martha's fit of unbelief, when Christ begins to prepare for the
miracle. He commanding to remove the stone, her unbelief objects that it was
needless, seeing he was so long dead, and it would raise a noisome smell now
to open his grave, ver. 39. And he reproves this her unbelief, as being very
odious, since he had given her a promise, that upon her believing, she should
see the glory of God manifested in this miracle, ver. 40. Albeit we find not
these express words mentioned by Christ, yet if we compare his general
encouragement, ver. 4. with the doctrine he required her to believe, ver. 23,
25, 26. we will find the same in substance.

From ver. 39. Learn, 1. Whatever haste Christ make, to releeve his needy
people. Yet he will so order his working, as to take leisure to decipher the
hidden unbelief that is in the hearts of any of his; Therefore, when he comes
to the grave, he does not at first raise the dead man, but takes time to have
the stone taken away, that so Martha (who very probably expected a very sudden
miracle, or none at all) seeing him employ no divine power, but only the help
of men, to take away the stone, that he may look on a stinking body; may
discover the unbelief of her heart. 2. Christ's miracles were such, and so
clear, as all beholders might be witnesses of the truth of them, and that there
was no juggling in the matter; Therefore, he who could have put away the stone,
commands them, Take ye away the stone, to prevent all suspicion of collusion or
fraud in this matter. 3. Albeit the Lords people may expect wonderful proofs
of his power and love, in their need, in so far as is for their good; Yet in
any distress, we are not to expect that, where ordinary means may avail,
Christ will work wonders and miracles for us; Therefore, albeit he who could
raise the dead, could have also removed the stone, yet, says he to some about,
Take ye away the stone; For that was a work which men could do, and therefore
he will not appear in it; whereas none could raise the dead but himself. 4.
When Christ is about to do good unto and for his people, they are ready to
obstruct their own mercy by unbelief; as Martha's example does teach. 5. In
times of great strait, Saints may expect to have frequent and sore tossings,
and that after their faith is settled, they may yet be shaken of new; for,
Martha, whom Christ had brought to believe after her doubtings, does now begin
to doubt again. 6. Saints who have had their confidence fixed, when impediments
are at a distance, may yet be in hazard of staggering, when it comes to the
push, and faith is to grapple with these impediments; for, Martha, who closed
her debate with Christ by believing, does now doubt again, when the miracle
comes to be done, and the grave to be opened. 7. It is a great impediment unto
faith, and the exercise thereof, when either new impediments, not foreseen, do
come in, and make a new battle; or when carnal reason bears sway in the heart,
and judges of all things according to its discerning; for, both of these
concur here in her doubting; She had not thought, in her former conference,
of this impediment, and her reason suggests that it was to no purpose to meddle
with a man who stinketh in the grave. 8. When the Lord is bringing the
difficulties of his people nearest an end, he may then give unto them most
humbling discoveries of their own unbelief and distrust ever to see an issue;
that so he alone may have the glory of bringing it about; for, immediately
before the miracle is wrought, Martha's unbelief doubts if ever it shall be. 9.
Such is the frailty and lothsomnesse of men's bodies, that however they have
beauty and vigor while the soul possesses and acts them; Yet a few days
separation of the soul by death will alter them so, that dearest friends cannot
endure them; Therefore, says she, By this time he stinketh, and that albeit he
has been dead but four days.

From ver. 40. Learn, 1. God does so order the affairs and conditions of his
people, as his glory may be manifested in and about them, and this is his
chief aim and end in all he does; Therefore does he describe the miracle from
this, as his chief end in it, that it is a manifestation of the glory of God.
2. It is the duty of the Lords people, to be more affected with the glory of
God shining in his works, then with any particular advantage redounds to them
thereby; Therefore, also, does he hold out the glory of God, to be seen in this
miracle, as rather to be taken notice of by her, then the raising up of her
brother. 3. It may encourage Gods people to expect the performance of his
promise, how impossible so ever it seem, that by so doing, he will not only do
them good, but will get occasion of setting forth his own glory, and that his
glory is engaged to do them good; for, this, further is imported in this
designation of the miracle, as a manifestation of the glory of God, that since
his glory is engaged, she needs not be so anxious. 4. The way prescribed by
God, wherein Saints may meet with experimental manifestations of his glory, for
their good and comfort, is, first to give him glory by believing him and his
Word, the want whereof does justly provoke him not to let forth himself; for,
if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God. See Mark. 6 6.
Matthew. 13.58. Luke 1.20, 45. Joh. 1.50. 5. Albeit faith for present have many
disadvantages to grapple with, yet the sweet fruits that will follow upon
believing, may invite us to believe that we may partake of them; for, albeit
now the stinking body of her brother do mar her faith, yet it pleads strongly
for faith, that if in that case she will hazard to believe, her believing shall
lead her to see the glory of God. 6. Faiths ground, whereupon it may thus
hazard, and expect this fair fruit, is Gods Word, and not carnal reason; for, I
said unto thee, and therefore thou should believe to see. 7. Where God has
past his word, and it is not credited, there is ^ust ground of sharp rebuke and
challenge; Therefore, says he, Said not I unto thee, if thou would believe,
thou should see? See Numb. 23.19. 8. Albeit unbelief go masked, oft-times,
under a fair show of humility, or the like commendable disposition; Yet, in
Christ's account, it is an evil not to be tolerated, but sharply reproved, and
an evil that would be quickly removed, that it get not leave to take root;
Therefore does he so sharply and so speedily rebuke it.

Ver. 41. Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.
And Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard
me.

42. And I knew that thou hear me always: but because of the people which
stand by, I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.


The second antecedent at the grave, is, his thanksgiving to the Father after
the stone was taken away, and before he wrought the miracle. These who were
commanded, ver. 39 taking away the stone, which it seems they had intermitted,
till Martha's unbelief, interrupting them, was reproved; He (who had been
praying to the Father) does now, 1. Publicly give him thanks for hearing him
in this matter, ver. 41. 2. He gives a reason why he published this
thanksgiving, which was not because it was unusual for him to be heard, who was
never refused in any suit, but that these who were present might be convinced
that he is the Mediator sent and approved of the Father, ver. 42. Christ's
making use of prayer in this miracle, does nothing cross what was marked on,
ver. 22.25. of his doing these things by his own power; for, as God, he is a
principal effi^ient, as man, he is the instrument of the Godhead, and as
Mediator, he acts as the Fathers servant. And albeit he had spoken before of
his own power as God, yet he chooses rather to take this way before the
people, to manifest that he was owned and approved by God, and not contrary to
him, as the Jews gave it out.

From ver. 41. Learn, 1. Unbelief in any of the Lords people is not only their
own sin, but when it breaks forth, it is also a stumbling block to others, in
their going on in their duty; for, Martha's exception had hindered the men,
and, it seems, drawn them to doubt with her, Then (to wit, when she is reproved
and passes from it, and not till then) they took away the stone from the place
where the deal was laid. 2. It is an evidence that the people of God have quit
their unbelief, or are not mastered with it, when they silence their reasonings
and exceptions, and do not suffer unbelief to impede obedience to commanded
duties; for, this is the evidence that Martha is satisfied, in that she reasons
no more, and in that she puts no new impediments to hinder the removing of the
stone, as Christ had commanded. 3. Such things as we do earnestly desire, we
ought to pray seriously for them to God; As Christ's practice does teach us, who
had been praying about this miracle, as is here imported. 4. Honest and sincere
prayer will aford matter of praise; And men need not make much show or noise of
their seeking of God; for, God will openly reward them by public testimonies
of his favor, calling for praise; for, herein also has our surety led the
way, who praying in secret among the crowd, gets matter of public praise, and
has the fruits of the prayer appearing in the subsequent miracle. 5. Sincere
seekers of God may know that their prayers are heard, albeit the thing sought
be not as yet performed; for, Christ acknowledges he is heard, although the
miracle was not yet wrought. And albeit he knew this in a peculiar way, yet
Saints also have rules whereby to discern this, Joh. 16.23. 1 John 5.14. 6.
Gods hearing of prayer obliges us to praise; And all these who know their
need, and the mercy of God respecting their cry in their need, will not fail
to make conscience of praise; for, so does his practice teach us, I thank thee,
that thou have heard me. See Psalm. 50.15. 7. As these who expect and desire
their prayers to be heard in mercy, should make sure an interest in God, and
that they are his children; So Gods hearing of his peoples prayers is a sweet
confirmation of that interest, and this should be fed upon with a warm and
thankful acknowledgement of that relation; for, so does Christ's example teach,
who in this thankful account of his Fathers answer, expresses this sweet
relation, Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me, as indeed he was his
Father in a special manner, and did give signal proofs thereof, in hearing him
as Mediator. 8. Christ's people are so dear to him, that not only do their
necessities call him to prayer for them; But his being heard in their behalf
does affect and oblige him, as if it were for himself: for, he does here not
only pray, but accounts it matter of praise, when he is heard. 9. Such as are
rightly employed in spiritual duties, their heart and affections will be toward
God, and heavenward; And these affections will carry the outward man with
them, in so far as is convenient; for, in this thanksgiving, Jesus lift up his
eyes, to testify where his heart was. And albeit in his prayer we find
neither words nor any such signs used, because it was secret; Yet now, in this
public thanksgiving, he will edify the hearers by this very outward directing
of the eye.

From ver. 42. Learn, 1. Christ is a Mediator who continues constant in the
exercise of intercession for his own; for, if he be heard always, then he
prays always. 2. Such is the conformity betwixt the Father and the
Mediators will, and so strictly has the Father obliged himself to his Son,
undertaking that office, that all he prays for is granted; for, Thou hear
me always. 3. It is a special favor not only to be heard of God, but to know
and be satisfied that it is so; that we be not crushed under mistakes;
Therefore Christ publishes it as a part of that favor to him as Mediator, I
know that thou hear me always. See 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 John 5.15. 4. It
concerns the children of men, to understand well how great acceptance Christ
has with the Father, that so it may deter them from coming in opposition to
him, and may invite them to employ him who comes such speed in their affairs;
for, this was his end in publishing this his success, not only to lay before
them a pattern of duty in the like cases, as is marked on ver. 41. But chiefly,
that he may be known, But because of the people that stand by, I said it, that
they may believe. 5. We do then take up Christ comfortably, when not only we
see his own affection and respect to us, but when we see him one with the
Father, and his Ambassador, and that the Father is well pleased, and to be
found in him; for, this is it he would have gathered from his acceptance in
prayer, That they may believe that thou have sent me. And for this cause, he
chooses rather to take this way, then only to manifest his own power in this.

Verse 43. And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth.

44. And he that was dead, came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-cloathes:
and his face was bound about with a napkin, Jesus says unto them, Loose him,
and let him go.


In these verses we have the second part of the Chapter, containing the miracle
it self, which is shortly done. For Christ calling on the dead man, as if he
were alive, to come forth, he comes out in the same posture wherein he was
laid in his grave. And Christ requires some to loose him, that so they might be
further confirmed of the truth of the miracle. Whence learn, 1. The upshot and
close of Christ's dealing will richly compence all his delays, and seeming
harsh dealing; for, the issue of all this procedure, in the former part of the
Chapter, is, that Lazarus is raised again. 2. Albeit Christ may, in his peoples
trouble, take much time to exercise and prepare them for mercy, and to let out
proofs of his compassion and sympathy; Yet when that is done, he can give an
issue, and help them, in a moment; for, now when all these are over here, the
miracle is presently dispatched. And when he had thus spoken, and tried
disciples and friends, removed their unbelief; manifested his own affectionate
heart, etc. he cried, etc. 3. Christ's word of command, whereby the world was
created, and is upheld, is sufficient to effectuate greatest things, if it were
even to raise the dead; for, he did no more, in bringing about this miracle,
but cried, etc. 4. His crying with a loud voice, in the audience of all, was
not only an evidence of his omnipotency, and that, as he employed the Father,
so also, he put forth his own power in this miracle; But further, it points
out. 1. His affection and earnestness to have the thing done, and shows,
That Christ is not a coldriffe friend, but takes a hearty lift in what concerns
his people. 2. It points out his confidence in the matter, and therefore he
publicly interpriseth it in the hearing of all. To teach, that whatever our
unbeleeving hearts say, yet Christ is not afraid of his work, that it shall
miscarry in his hand. Doctrine 5. Christ, in employing his omnipotency, does
not look on things as they are in themselves, or seem to be unto us; But he
calls these things that are not, as though they were, and in speaking to, and
commanding the powerless and dead, he gives them life and strength to obey;
for, he cried, Lazarus come forth. His omnipotency speaks to him, as to one
living, and ready to come forth on a call, because at this very word, he put
life in him to hear and obey. See Romans 4.17. 6. Christ has our life in his
hand, to take it away, or restore it, at his pleasure; and when he calls even
for the dead, they will obey him; for, and he that was dead came forth. 7.
Whatever enjoyments men have within time, yet it is but little of these things
they can take away with them; for, it is marked, that he came out bound with
grave-cloathes, and his face bound about with a napkin. Not so much to point
out a new miracle in the bosom of the other, that a dead man should not only
come out, but come out so bound as might hinder one to walk; for, it may easily
be conceived, that the bonds were so loose, as he might creep one way or other
out, and he knew the place better then to go wrong, though his face was
covered. But the scope, in part, is, to point ou^ how little Lazarus had
carried away with him, even grave-cloathes. See 1 Timothy 6.7. 8. As Christ our
Lord will work no needless miracles; So he will have all convinced of the
reality o^ those he works: Therefore also will he bring him out in his
grave-cloathes, and ^ids them, loose him, and let him go, that he may walk at
freedom, That so they might see him bound as they had laid him in, and
themselves in handling and loosing him, might be further confirmed that it was
a true miracle. As also (as was marked on, ver. 39) he would not loose him by a
miracle, since men's hands could do that.

Ver. 45. Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things
which Jesus did, believed on him.

46. But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what
things Jesus had done.


Follows the third and last part of the Chapter, containing some consequents
and effects of this miracle, which may be taken up in these. 1. What effects it
had on the Jews who were with Mary, ver. 4^, ^6. 2. The consultations and
conclusions of the Rulers of the Jews, when they are informed of it, ver. 47.
-- 53. 3. The course which Christ took on this their resolution, ver. 54. 4.
The diligence used by the Rulers to have their resolutions put in execution at
the feast, ver. 55, 56, 57 As for what was the part and carriage of Lazarus and
his sisters, upon the receipt of this mercy, it pleases the Lord to mention no
more of it, then what may be gathered from their piety, that they were not
unthankful and from his passing it o^^er in silence, (not that he did vilip^nd
it, but) that great mercies will affect his people more, then can be well said
or expressed.

In these verses we have the first consequent of the miracle, which is, the
diverse impressions it takes upon the Jews who were present: Many of them
believing, and others of them persisting in unbelief, and not being able to do
unto Christ what they would, themselves, they delate the matter to the
Pharisees. Whence learn, 1. Christ does not spread his net by doctrine and
working, but for some notable fruit and effect: for, here by raising up of one
dead body, he raises up many dead souls 2. Albeit, for the most part, they
generally are naught; yet at some times, and in some societies, it pleases him
to work upon, and gain the far greater part; for, Many of the Jews believed,
whereas some only, ver. 48. do persist in their ill course. 3. Such as come to
do good unto the godly in their need, may readily meet with more good to
themselves by the means; for, they came to Mary, who find Christ, and are
drawn to believe. It is said they came to Mary only, because they came out to
the grave after her, ver. 31. Or, because, however they came out of Jerusalem
to comfort both her and Martha, ver. 19. yet they did it chiefly for Mary's
sake. 4. Such as do rightly consider of Christ's glorious workings and
manifestations unto, and for his people, may be abundantly convinced that he is
the true Messiah, and see convincing grounds wherefore they should embrace and
close with him by faith; for, when they had seen the things which Jesus did
(not only the miracle, for that alone could not work solid faith, though it
might prepare for it, but his groaning, weeping doctrine, thanksgiving, the way
of the miracle etc.) they believed on him. 5. When Christ is prevailing
fastest, yet his doctrine and working will never be well taken at all hands;
for, some of them, are of another temper. 6. Not only the prevalent example of
many will not work upon the obstinate; But their (other ways) good and moral
principles will not contribute to draw them to Christ; for, not only stand they
out, being a few, when many yield, but though they had compassion to let out
for a godly Mary and Martha, yet they will not embrace Christ. 7. The most
glorious actings of Christ will be so far from prevailing with the obstinate,
that they will rather become the worse of them; for, what greater act could
there be then what Christ did here* and yet they are enraged, and make it a
dittay against him. 8. Albeit wicked men may pretend many prejudices against
Christ and his dealing, wherefore they cannot embrace him; Yet when all these
are removed, they will be nothing the better; for, it was their great exception
against Christ's love to Lazarus, that he had not prevented his death, ver. 37.
Yet when that is removed in a glorious way, they are not gained. 9. Albeit many
who malign Christ, have but small power to hurt him, yet were their horns
never so short, they will have them out against him; for, they cannot hurt
Christ themselves, but they will set others on work to do it. 10. Such as are
prime agents against Christ, he will plague them with much employment of that
kind, to fill up their cup; for, the Pharisees must be told, that may appear
in this business. 11. Such as do instigate and stir up others to persecute, or
do delate the godly to their malicious enemies, are in effect cruel
persecutors; for, it is marked, as the evidence of their malicious disposition,
that they went to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done. 12.
Christ can make use even of the malice of his enemies, to make them publishers
of his glory and praise; for, their malice led them to tell the Pharisees what
things Jesus had done, and so there was no need of his friends to publish and
confirm the truth of this miracle, at Jerusalem.

Verse 47. Then gathered the chief Priests and the Pharisees a counsel, and
said, What do we: for this man does many miracles.

48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans
shall come and take away both our place and nation.


The second consequent of the miracle, is the carriage of the Rulers: being
exasperated upon this information. It contains four particulars, The first
whereof (in these verses) is their conveening in council, and consulting upon
the matter; Wherein, they propound the case; that Christ did many miracles; and
the danger that would ensue, if they took no course with him; that Christ being
so popular, by reason of his miracles, will draw the people after him, and
hereby will incense the Romans, and make them destroy the Temple and their
Nation, seeing the people will be ready to move sedition, and to cry up Christ
as a King of David's progeny. And therefore they wonder at one another that they
do nothing in the matter, and enquire at one another what to do.

From ver. 47. Learn, 1. Christ's enemies are very ready to receive delations
against him, and the more they see or hear that his glory shines, they grow the
worse; for, when this is delated, they are in a rage. 2. It is no strange thing
to see authority and power against Christ; And to see even Churchmen in the
judicatories appointed by him, plotting the ruin of him and his Kingdom; for,
the chief Priests and the Pharisees gathered a counsel, (the Sanhedrim of old
appointed by God) that they may devise means to destroy him. By this the Lord
would discover, that there is no infallibility in men or judicatories; and
would teach, that he can carry on his work, albeit authority and judicatories
be against him; and that he oft-times does so, that he alone may have the
glory; whereas, otherwise, too much would be given to men. These who met, or,
at least, gathered and conveened the council, are called the chief Priests,
not only the High Priest and his deputy, or possibly also these who by courses
succeeded in the High Priesthood in that time of corruption, wherein that
office was exposed to sale, as Histories do record. But it comprehends also the
heads of the twenty four orders of Priests institute by David, 1 Chr. 24. To
these are joined the Pharisees, which was the name of a Sect among them; And
they are named, not because none of these Priests were of that Sect, but to
show that other Pharisees who had place in the council did most frequently
conveene, as being most bitter enemies to Christ. 3. Wicked persecutors are
ordinarily so far from repenting their cruelty, that they are angry they are so
slow, and not more violent; for, notwithstanding all their former violence
against Christ, yet, what do we? say they, or, are we sleeping? 4 The Lords
power and wisdom are so eminently employed about Christ, his truth and people,
that when persecutors have done their utmost, they will find they have made
small progress, as to gaining of their purpose; for, this, what do we? imports
also, that however they had opposed him all along, had traduced him and his
Ministry, banished him, endeavored to ensnare him, sought to take him etc. yet
in effect they had promoved nothing, as to hindering of him in his Ministry, or
the success thereof. And it will be thus still, even when they go a further
length. See Exodus 1.12. 5. Albeit the wits of men may ^ustle one against
another, yet all their wit shall have enough to do, when they employ it against
Christ. And persecution shall be a task to perplexe them, were they never so
wise; for what do we? imports also an anxious perplexity and (...) resolution
what to do for the future, as may appear from Ca^aphas his ^axing their
Ignorance, ver. 49.50. See 1 Cor 1.5. Prove. 21.30. And albeit the Saints may be
also perplexed in Gods way, for their humiliation, and that they may depend on
God, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Yet it is a judgment on wicked men in evil courses. 6.
Whatever the enemies of Christ and his people do say, and give out to the
world; yet many of them may be, and are inwardly convinced in their
consciences, that these whom they persecute, are innocent and doets of good;
for, notwithstanding their many cavillations in public, against Christ and his
miracles, yet here in their Cabin-council they are forced to acknowledge, he
does many miracles, and they have no evil to say of him. So ^^o Act. 4 16.
Christ was indeed thus innocent, and all Christians ought to study it, as being
a great advantage to have such a testimony in the bosom of enemies, whatever
effect it take. 7. Whatever be the innocence of Christ and his followers, or
the convictions of bloody persecutors; Yet ordinarily they take little effect,
they neither heighten their estimation of the innocent, nor abate their rage
against them; for, though they acknowledge this, yet he is but this man, by way
of contempt, and they go on in their bloody resolutions against him.

From ver 48. Learn, 1. When Christ's Kingdom begins to flourish in any
measure, it is to be expected, that carnal men, and especially corrupt Church
men will raise a fire of persecution, as the only remedy they know to blast it;
for, say they, If we let him thus alone all will go to ruin, and therefore
they must persecute. 2 When Christ's enemies are pleased to speak out their
minds plainly, it will be found that their interests and worldly state is
their great Idol, and that which drives them to persecute Christ; for, this is
their fear it substance, that they will lose their reputation, by the peoples
leaving them, and following of him, and that if their Nation ruin, their power
will be gone. 3. Persecutors do look on Christ's success with an envious eye,
and in a multiplying glass, that so it may whet their malice against him; for,
when some few have believed, they take them up as so many, that if he continue
a while, all men will believe on him, in which, experience proved there was but
too little truth. 4. Whatever be the real Idols and Interests of Persecutors;
Yet they will labor to cover them with pretenses of public good and safety;
for, albeit their own reputation and places sweyed most with them, yet they
give out this for their color, The Romans shall take away bath our place, (the
Temple that is dear to us, as what is our own) and Nation. 5. It is the usual
policy of Persecutors, to decline, by all means, to oppose Christ in his
Kingdom as Christ, and truth as truth; But they labor to color the quarrel
with some specious pretenses, that so they may hide the odiousness of their
course from others, and blind their own eyes, that they may not see they are
fighting against God; for, ^hey will persecute Christ, not as the Messiah, but
as one who would bring ruin upon them by the Romans. As Christ was called a
Samaritane, a blasphemer, and one that had a devil, and then they did persecute
him as such a one; And as of old Christians were covered with ^he skins of
wilde-beasts, that dogs and Lions might tea^e them more greedily: So is it
still with Christians and truth, they suffer under odious imputations, that it
may seem more just to persecute them: They are called hypocrites, and under
that cloak, pity is hated, truth is called error, treason, and what not?
and then suppressed. 6. It is the unjust prejudice and erroneous principle of
many, (and especially of Statesmen and Rulers) against Christ and his Kingdom,
that it is inconsistent with the safety of the Nation and State where it is
admitted; And the pretense of a necessity and interest of State, is an old
engine for bearing down of Christ and Religion: for, this in particular, is
their pretense of not ^etting Christ alone. All men will believe on him, and
the Romans shall come and take a^^ay both our place and Nation. 7. It is
hel^^sh injustice against Christ, and his Kingdom, to father any miseries of a
Nation where he is received, on him or it: or to cut and carve upon Religion
and his Kingdom, ^o as men think may best contribute to the safe^ie of their
worldly interests; for, in both these they enjure him. His doctrine allowed of
no sedition, nor did he claim to a worldly Kingdom; the receiving of him, by
whom Kings reign, is the way to uphold States and Nations; and, any calamities
that follow upon the Gospel, are not the fruits of the Gospel, but of men's own
sins, who make not use of such a jewel. And on the other hand, it is their
unjustice, that they will not consult what is right or wrong, duty or sin,
in this matter, but what is profitable or hurtful; and, that they will not
admit of Christ, if he contribute not to their standing. Whereas, though the
Romans should have destroyed them upon that account, yet what was that, if it
were their duty, and they were in the way of God? 8. Such as bend their wits to
find out indirect and sinful courses, whereby they may avoid feared trouble,
and establish themselves, it is righteous with God, to make these same courses
bring their fear upon them; And particularly, they who seek to establish their
own estate and power by the overthrow of Christ's Kingdom, do take the
compendious way to establish his Kingdom, and overthrow their own; for, they
know no way to suppress Christ, and save themselves from the Romans, but to
persecute him; and in the issue this advanced Christ's interest, and in Gods
righteousness, drew the Romans upon them some few years thereafter.

Verse 49. And one of them named Cajaphas, being the high Priest that same
year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all;

50. Nor consider that it is expedient for us that one man should die for the
people, and that the whole nation perish not.


Secondly, in the carriage of these Rulers, we have recorded what was Cajaphas
his over ture for preventing this danger. He propounds, very imperiously, a
common rule of policy, that in a case of danger, it is expedient one should be
cut off for the good of a Nation, rather then the whole Nation perish. And that
therefore Christ was to be cut off, that so the Nation might be freed of that
hazard. This counsel and principle (beside what God intended in it, of which
afterward) may have it is own truth in it; That in the case of danger to a
Nation or society, one is bound to prefer the safety of the whole to his own
particular safety; or, That justice is to be executed on a particular
malefactor, lest the neglect thereof make his sin National, and bring
judgments on a Land: But this does not at all justify the putting of an
innocent to death, for the safety of any; for that were to sin to avoid
trouble. Far less does it justify it, when men do hereby not only cut off the
innocent, but do not avoid, but, in effect, draw on ruin on the Nation. He who
gave the counsel is described from his office, that he was high Priest, of
which use is to be made in the following purpose. Only what is added (that he
was the high Priest that same year) points at the corruption crept in among
them (as is recorded in History) in these latter times, in that the office
which by Gods appointment was astricted to the family of Aaron, and to continue
during life, was either usurped by these who had most power, extending the
possessours, and held so long as they could: Or was purchased by favor, or
money, of their conquerours, for so long time as pleased them, or they did
agree upon. Their own ambition begot these practices under the Grecians, and
that, together with Herod's policies, and afterward the avarice of the Romans,
did continue them. And he is said to have been only for that same year, because
it had been the custom of the Romans, immediately before his election, to
change them yearly; and however some might continue longer, yet it seems the
paction was but from year to year. As to what further may be said concerning
his office, and Annas being joined with him before, Luke 3.2 it may be spoken
to, if need be, on Chap 18.13. Doctrine 1. As the most pure Ordinances of God
are easily corrupted by lewd men. So, in particular, the ambition of men,
taking advantage of times of public confusion and oppression, does oft-times
overturn the precious Government and order of his house; while either they do
what they list and is in the power of their hand, or employ their power with
oppressors, to make merchandise of the things of God; for, thus and upon these
grounds, was the Ordinance of the Priesthood corrupted, while men either
usurped it, or did serve the interests of, or gave money to their conquerours,
to obtain it. 2. As men's wisdom, or their conceit of it, does ordinarily fill
them with pride and contempt of others; So such wit will readily never do well,
nor lead men on right courses; for, he gives his opinion insulting over the
rest, as knowing nothing at all, nor considering, when yet his wit led him only
to crucify Christ. 3. Such as corrupt the Ordinances of God, and take sinful
courses to put themselves in power in Gods house, will prove but small friends
to Christ and his Kingdom, whatever they seem otherwise to be; for, it was he
who procured himself to be the High Priest that same year, that gave this
pernicious counsel against Christ. 4. Albeit it be the duty of all, to prefer
the public welfare of a Church or Nation to their own safety or interests; Yet
it is unlawful to promote, never so public a good, by sinful means; for,
herein did his opinion prove unsound, in seeking to prevent the perishing of
the Nation. 5. It is a sinful principle in worldly policy, to study to preserve
the peace of a Nation by cutting off these who promote the Kingdom of Christ;
for, this, in particular, was the sin of his counsel, that albeit they had
nothing to say against Christ, yet better he perish, were he never so good or
right, then things should be in hazard. Whereas, albeit this might have indeed
preserved them, yet it was not a lawful mean. 6. Men's wit will never lead them
right, so long as they separate profit and expedience, from lawfulness and
right, and do prefer the one before the other; for, in all this he looks only
to what is expedient for us. 7. The rarest wits of men, when they are left of
God, and do make no conscience of sin to compass their designs, will but
miscarry, and run upon the dangers they labor most carefully to avoid; for,
though this seemed most expedient, and a short cut to be rid of Christ and
secure the Nation, yet neither succeeded with them; Christ and his doctrine
prevailed still among them, and their Nation did perish.

Verse 51. And this spoke he not of himself: but being high Priest that year,
he prophesied that Jesus should die for that Nation:

52. And not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in
one the children of God that were scattered abroad.


In the third place, before the acceptance of this overture be recorded, John
does interlace some remarke upon this opinion, Wherein, 1. He points forth the
hand of God overruling him in bringing out such a discourse, v. 51. It is
said, he spoke this not of himself, but he prophesied, etc. The meaning is
not, that he knew not what he would have been at in this opinion, or that he
intended that by Christ's death Israel should be indeed redeemed from sin, or
intentionally prophesied of him. It is clear enough that he purposed nothing
else, but to put Christ out of the way, that there might be no occasion for the
Romans to fall upon the Nation. But the meaning is, that in giving his wicked
counsel, to procure the safety of his Nation from the Romans by putting Christ
to death; God overruled his tongue to bring out an Oracle, concerning his
purpose to save his people by the death of Christ. 2. John enlarges this
prophecy which Cajaphas uttered unawares, ver. 52. showing that, in Gods
purpose, the benefits of Christ's death were to be extended further then to the
Nation of the Jews only, even to all the elect, scattered through the world.
It is further to be considered, that John's saying, being high Priest, he
prophesied, etc. does make nothing at all for their opinion who assert the
infallibility and assistance of the Spirit with Popes, even albeit they be
wicked men, such as Cajaphas was, who yet being high Priest, did prophecy
concerning the death of Christ. For, 1. They have not yet proven from
Scripture, that their Popes have that warrant for their office, nor any of
these diverse privileges which the high Priest of the Jews had. 2. The high
Priests of the Jews, even when they observed Gods order in coming to it,
albeit sometimes some of them did prophecy, and for a time they had the
extraordinary gift of Urim and Thummim, yet they fell in gross errors; Aaron
made the golden calfe, Urijah brought in an altar after the pattern of that in
Damascus, 2 King. 16.10, 11. 3. Since this man came not in an orderly way to
his office, if they will argue from this, it will follow that not only their
Popes whom they account to be lawfully chosen, but even their Anti-popes, whom
they condemn, must have the same privilege of infallibility. 4. Such a
prophecy as this does indeed very well beseem them who sit in the Temple of God
as gods, and yet are bitter enemies to Christ and his truth. For he did not
intentionally bring forth any thing for Christ's advantage, only God overruled
his tongue in venting his wicked malice, that he should propound this Oracle.
5. His being high Priest, is added, not as a reason why he did prophecy
(though some of them of old might have had revelations, and God may when he
pleases, even employ a wicked man that way) but to show that, because of his
authority and place, which would readily incline the rest to follow him,
therefore God over ruled his tongue, that he should bring forth no overture
concerning Christ, but what was agreeable to his purpose in sending his Son
into the world.

From these verses Learn, 1. Gods overruling hand can secure, that in the
consultations of men, nothing shall be concluded concerning Christ or his
Church, but what he has appointed to be done* for, so did he overruled this
consultation, and Cajaphas his overture. See Act. 4.27, 28. 2. The more power
and sway any wicked men have, the more we are bound to believe that the
overruling hand and providence of God will set bound and limits to their
consultations and conclusions, for the good of his Church; for, whereas it
might be little regarded what others might say, whose opinions were of less
weight, yet when the high Priest begins to speak, God overrules it, that he
shall prophecy, and utter an Oracle. 3. In believing Gods providence watching
for his peoples good, we are not to look to the intentions of men, nor to their
malicious projects; But we ought to believe that, even in these, God overrules
them to do nothing, but what is for good; for, he knew not that he was
prophesieing, nor intended any such thing, but was letting out the bitterest of
his malice against Christ, and yet even then he prophesied; God overruled his
malicious counsel, that his purpose should be carried on thereby, and his
tongue in uttering thereof, that it should be, in effect, an Oracle. 4. The
Nation of the Jews, as they had the first offer of the death of Christ, and of
the benefits flowing therefrom; so they have a special interest therein, to be
manifested in due time; for, it is an Oracle, that Jesus should die for that
Nation, that is, his own in it. 5. Whatever be the interest of the Jews in the
Messiah and his sufferings; Yet Gods intentions in giving him to die, and the
fruits of his death, do extend further then to that Nation; for, so does John
guard this, and not for that Nation only. And by his correcting of this, he
intimates how sweet the calling of the Gentiles was to him, and therefore he
will not have it omitted; and how sweet the death of Christ and benefits hereof
were in his account, that he will not suffer that Cajaphas should speak thereof
too disadvantageously, without correcting of him. 6. Albeit Christ's death, and
the benefits thereof, be extended to all Nations, yet not to all and every one
in these Nations, but only to his own elect; for, they are the children of God
only, for whom he dies. 7. Such as Christ has died for, are by nature and in
themselves, in as bad a condition as any, being scattered and separated from
God and Christ, and from the Church, and one from another; for, they are
scattered abroad, not so much in respect of place (though that was true also)
for there is no gathering of them into one place; as in respect of their state
and condition, whereof their being Gentiles, scattered up and down the world,
was a badge and evidence, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. 8. Whatever be the state and
condition of Gods elect before conversion; Yet in respect of his decree and
purpose, they are his children; As here they are called the children of God. 9.
Such as are elected and redeemed by Christ, will be converted, and brought near
into the society of the Church, if they have been Pagans by state, and gathered
together with all the rest of his people in one head, that so they may make up
one body; for, he shall gather together in one the children of God. 10. As
Christ is the purchaser of Redemption for his elect, so he is the applier of
his own purchase; and he who actually converts and brings them to enjoy the
benefits of his death; for, it is he who shall gather them together in one.

Verse 53. Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him
to death.
The last thing recorded concerning these Rulers and their carriage, is, the
issue and conclusion of their consultation and debates; To wit, that agreeing
to Cajaphas his opinion, they plot and contrive how to get it executed. Whence
learn, 1. Church judicatories may not only err, but conclude most cruel things
against Christ and his Kingdom; As here we see. 2. An evil counsel against
Christ is best heard, and gets most general applause among wicked men; for,
Cajaphas his overture prevails, to put him to death. 3. Wicked men are not only
assaulted with violent tentations, as the godly may be, but they come to
maturity in them; for, they conclude persecution. 4. Wicked men are so hot on
mischief, that having once concluded it, they are restless till it be
executed; for, from that day they took counsel together, for to put him to
death, that is, they concluded it, and set themselves to find out all means to
make their conclusion take effect. They had essayed it before in a tumultuous
way, but they do now orderly conclude it, and vigorously prosecute it.

Verse 54. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but went
thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim,
and there continued with his disciples.
In the third consequent of this miracle, is recorded, what was Christ's
carriage upon their conclusion; to wit, that he withdrew himself to a more
solitary and barren place, where he continued with his disciples, till the time
came that he was called to yield himself. The City Ephraim, is only mentioned
here, and 2 Samuel 13.23. It is conceived to have stood on the borders betwixt
the tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin, having that Baal hazar, 2 Samuel 13. toward
the east, and Ai (of which Josh 7.) toward the west of it. And this
wilderness, or, more desert ground, may be conceived to be that running from
Ai toward Gilgal, (and so by Ephraim,) of which mention is made, Josh 8.15.
Doctrine 1. Christ's enemies, in their most secret consultations, will not get a
stroke stolen on him, but he knows all their projects and conclusions, and how
to order his affairs accordingly; for, his fleeing on that ground evidenceth
that he was not ignorant of it, Jesus therefore walked no more openly. 2. Men's
being in Gods way, and their having confidence in him, ought not to hinder them
in wary and prudent walking, that so they may avoid presumption, or tempting of
him, by casting themselves into hazards; for, even our Lord would walk no more
openly among the Jews, when there was hazard, till his time came. 3. As it is
lawful for Christ's servants to flee, when their death is decreed by enemies,
and the persecution is personal; So they are not to take it ill, if they be
often and many times put to hard shifts, for their own preservation; for, after
that Christ has been forced oft-times to withdraw before, he is yet put to it
again. 4. Christ will readily get better shelter and entertainment in obscure
and barren places, then places of wealth and ease will afford him; for, he must
go unto a country near the wilderness, into a City called Ephraim, and there
continue. 5. Whatever be Christ's lot, it is still the duty of his followers to
cleave to him; for, there he continued with his disciples. See Luke 22.28.

Ver. 55. And the Jews passover was nigh at hand, and many went out of the
country up to Jerusalem before the Passover to purify themselves.

56. Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among themselves as they stood in
the Temple, What think ye that he will not come to the feast?

57. Now both the chief Priests and the Pharisees, had given a commandment,
that if any man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take him.


In the last consequent of this miracle, is recorded, what was the diligence of
the Rulers, to have their conclusions executed at the ensuing feast of the
Passover. The order of the purpose seems to be this; The Rulers had given a
charge to the people, especially the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to spy out if
they could find where Christ were, that so they might take him, ver. 57. In
obedience to which, when the people are flocking together for preparation to
the feast, ver. 55. they begin to enquire for him, and to reason among
themselves, doubting whether he would come or not, ver 56. Or it comes all to
one purpose, to conceive the matter thus; That the Rulers and their Emissaries
seeking him, and not finding him themselves, they give a charge to all the
people, that they should give notice, when ever they knew where he were. Whence
learn, 1. Whatever shelter Christ or his followers find, for a time, in the
use of lawful means; Yet in troublous days, they are to submit if it do not
continue long, but that at last they must be brought on the stage; Therefore it
is marked that the Jews Passover was nigh at hand, to intimate that Christ
got not leave to lurk long in that place he retired unto. 2. As for this going
up to purify themselves before the Passover, albeit the Jews in these times
were very superstitious; Yet it is not clear that this was a practice of their
own devising; For, we find that ordinary preparation was requisite for
sacrifices, 1 Samuel 16.5. and particularly for the passover, especially in
purging leaven out of their houses, to which the Apostle alludes, 1 Cor. 5.7,
8. See also Number. 9.6. etc. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. And it appears these who went
up, did it because of some special pollution, because of which they behoved to
offer sacrifices (as appears from the law, Lev. 4. and 5. and 6. Chapters, and
Chap. 14. and 15. ver. 1. -- 16.) which could be offered only at the Temple in
Jerusalem: and therefore it is said many, not all, went up. And it teaches,
That as preparation is required for all the solemn service of God, so in
special for participation of the Lords table; and more particularly, when men
are lying under some notable pollution. 3 The godly can be no more earnest for
Christ and his company, then the wicked are to have his blood; for, as the
godly at such a solemnity would be ready to seek him, as thinking a feast, a
poor feast, if he were not there; and as their affection to have him would
readily be solicitous, and doubtful whether he will come or not; So it is with
these bloodthirsty men; They sought for Jesus, and, not finding him, spoke
among themselves, what think ye, etc? 4. Whatever success God permit eager and
bloodthirsty persecuters to get; Yet they shall not want their own anxieties
and vexations, in getting their will; for, say they, What think ye, that he
will not come to the feast? The root of which expression, was, their anxietie
and doubtfulnesse if he would come at all. And albeit he did come, and they got
him crucified, yet the Lord will plague them with this vexation for a time. 5.
Persecutors are unwilling to have their anxieties known, but they will labor
to palliate them with fairest shows; Yea, and even to make use of a cloak of
piety, to carry on their wicked purposes; for, so much also does this speech
import. They are anxious that he will not come that they may take him; But they
vent it in terms of spite against him, who pretending to so much piety, yet
will not come to that solemn feast. They will traduce him if he come not, and
yet all their end in desiring him, is, that they may shed his blood. 6. When
Rulers are corrupt, they do much mischief, and set a people on work against
Christ; As here we see in their commandment. 7. Christ's followers must resolve
not only on open enemies and opposition, in crying times, but on secret spies
and inquisitours, to ensnare and betray them; for, here they are set on work to
find him out and delate him* that they might take him. 8. Men, sinning against
conscience in a course, are very eager and violent lest it should miscarry, and
they can never be sure enough of their plots; for, this, among others, was one
cause of their vigilance. They sinned maliciously against light, and they
cannot do too much to prevent a disappointment. So, when Judas turns a
traitor, he fears nothing so much as that he should vent his malice, and yet
Christ should escape, and therefore be charge the soldiers to hold him fast,
Matthew. 26.48. and to lead him away safely, Mark. 14 44.

CHAP. XII.
IN this Chapter, we have a rehearsal of several things which occurred betwixt
Christ's return from Ephraim (whither he had retired, Chap. 11.54.) to Bethany,
and his eating of the passover with his Disciples. It may be taken up in these
particulars. 1. His return to Bethany and entertainment there, with some
consequents that followed thereupon, ver. 1. -- 11. 2. His triumphant entry
into Jerusalem, with some remarkable observations upon it ver. 12. -- 19. 3.
The desire of some Greeks to see him, with his doctrine upon that occasion,
seasoned with strange exercise, ver. 20. -- 36. 4 An account of the fruits of
his Ministry among the most part of the Jews; some not believing at all, ver.
37. -- 41. others being but hidden believers, ver. 4^, 43. Together with
Christ's farewell Sermon to them, wherein he points out himself and his
doctrine. ver. 44. -- 50.

Ver. 1. THen Jesus six days before the Passover, came to Bethany, where
Lazarus was, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
The first part of the Chapter, contains these particulars. 1. His return to
Bethany, ver. 1. 2. His entertainment there, ver. 2. particularly by Mary, ver.
3. 3. Judas his quarrelling at Mary's deed, with Christ's Apology for her and
it, ver. 4. -- 8. 4. The resort of the Jews to him at Bethany, ver. 9. with
the Pharisees resolution thereupon, ver. 10, 11.

In this verse we have Christ's return to Bethany, together with, 1. A
designation of the time of his return, it was six days before the Passover,
2. A new designation of the place, taken from the late miracle wrought upon
Lazarus. While it is said he came there six days before the Passover, and yet
Matthew. 26.2. it is said that after two days is the Passover, when yet the
supper here mentioned is after that recorded to be given, Matthew. 26.6. We must
(for reconciling these) consider, that Christ's warning of the Disciples of
Judas treachery, was indeed, in order of time, after that supper, and four
days after his coming to Bethany; for, Judas went not away till after the
disappointment and affront he got about the box of ointment, Matthew. 26.14.
compared with the preceding purpose. And as for Matthew, he does not observe
the order of time, in recording that supper, (for Christ's entry into Jerusalem,
which was after it, ver. 12. of this Chapter is recorded by him long before,
Matthew 21.8, 9. etc.) but having told how Christ warned the Disciples of this
hazard, Matthew. 26.2. he does, upon that occasion, resume things that had been
done before, to clear how he was betrayed. Namely, that the Priests consulting
upon some expedients how they might catch Christ, Matthew. ^6.3, 4, 5. Judas, who
had been disappointed of gain by that ointment pouered on Christ, went and
offered his service to them, ver. 6. -- 14, 15. Doctrine 1. Albeit men are
bound, by all lawful means, to preserve themselves from the unjust violence of
persecutors; Yet when Gods time and calling comes, and when men see it is the
will of God they should suffer, they ought to set their faces to it cheerfully;
for, whereas before Christ withdrew, Chap. 11.54. Now when the Passover, the
time of his suffering, draws nigh, he comes to view again, and draws toward
Jerusalem. See Mark. 10.32, 33. Luk 9 51. 2. He came so long before the time to
Bethany, where Lazarus and others were; Not only that he might stay there, and
give an occasion to Judas to go his way to the Rulers; or to attend till he
people hearing he was there, might meet him in a solemn manner, and he might
be conveyed in state to the place of his sufferings, of which afterward. But
his end, more especially, in this was to refresh and confirm his friends there
with his company, before he should be taken from them, and to refresh himself
also before he went to his trials. And so it teaches. 1. Where Christ has
love, and an interest, he will not stay long away; for, here after his
retirement, he returns to Bethany. 2. When storms are arising, Christ will not
forget his own, to give them a visit, sooner or later, to fortify them
against them; for, six days before the Passover, at which he was to suffer,
he comes to Bethany, to refresh and confirm his friends by his company, and by
warning them of his suffering, as it is, ver. 7, 3. It is a very refreshful
cordial under sufferings, to have the company and society of godly friends with
whom we may converse at any time; for, Christ also subjected himself to make
use of this; And as he seeks it in the Garden, Matthew. 26.38, 40. so here he
seeks it in Bethany. See how Paul esteems of a visit in his bonds, 2 Timothy
1.16, 17, 18. Doctrine 1. Where Christ converseth with his people, he will make
a place famous by eminent proofs of his power and love for them; for, now the
former description of Bethany, Chap. 11.1. is laid aside, and it is most famous
that Lazarus was there, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.

Ver. 2. There they made him a supper, and Martha served: but Lazarus was one
of them that sat at the table with him.

3. Then took Mary a pound of ointment, of Spikenard very costly, and anointed
the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled
with the odor of the ointment.


In these verses, we have Christ's entertainment at Bethany; A supper is made
for him, at which Martha served, and Lazarus sat with him, but Mary anoints
Christ with precious ointments. This supper was made for him in the house of
one Simon a leper, (who, it seems, had been cured by Christ) as may be gathered
from, Matthew. 26.6, 7. where Mary's deed is recorded, but her name suppressed,
and it seems Lazarus and his sisters have been invited also. As for this
practice of Mary, I shall leave what was extraordinary in it, till it is own
place, ver. 7. Only, it being the custom in these countries to anoint their
guests, and wash their feet at feasts, Luke 7.44, 46. she, out of her great
love, will do it with great charge and expense. And whereas here it is said,
she anointed his feet, and the rest say it was his head, Matthew 26.7. we are to
understand that she did anoint both, though she only wiped his feet: and
breaking the box and pouring it on his head, Mark. 14.3. it seems the
copiousnesse thereof made it run from his head to his feet. Doctrine 1. As
temporal things are due unto Christ and his Ministers, who sow spiritual
things, 2 Cor. 9.11. So they who have participate of his bounty, will make him
very welcome; for, there they made him a supper. 2. Albeit it be the great sin
of men to pamper their own bodies, and make provision for the flesh; Yet it is
not unlawful, at some times to enjoy the liberal use of the creatures, in a
sober manner; for, Christ does not decline this supper. Sometimes he went into
the feasts of Pharisees, Luke 7.36. sometime with Publicans, Matthew 9.10. etc.
and 11.19. not for their sare, but that he might gain them; as love is a very
gaining way. And here he feasts with his friends that they may be refreshed
together. 3. As for Martha's serving, albeit she was reproved for this at
another time, Luke 10.38, 39, 40, 41, 42. not simply for her serving Christ
that way, but comparatively, and when it crossed better duties; Yet now when it
interrupts no better duty, her care was commendable, that she would serve,
though the house was not her own. And it teaches, That when Christ is dear to
any, they will not disdain to stoop to do meanest service to him, or his for
his sake; as Martha served here. 4. As Christ's miracles are true and real, and
not lying wonders; So the memory of his wonderful works are not to be
forgotten, nor ought to wear out with length of time; for, both these ends it
is marked, that Lazarus was one of them that sat at table with him, both to
confirm the truth of his resurrection, as Mark. 5.43. Luke 24.41, 42, 43. Acts
10.41. and to keep us in mind of that wonderful work, that he who was once in
his grave should now be eating. 5. According as men abound in love to Christ,
they will bring forth evidences thereof, in serving of him; As here Mary
outstrips them all. 6. Love to Christ is ingenious to find out a way to
evidence it self; and when all are busy, it will find some work that is
undone, to be done to him and for him; for, when some are preparing the supper,
Martha is serving, and Lazarus entertaining him at Table, Mary finds out this,
to anoint his feet. 7. Love is very prodigal (so to say) and will spare no
expenses on Christ; for, she took a pound of very costly Spikenard to do this,
of the worth whereof, see ver. 5. 8. True love is still accompanied with
humility and reverence to Christ, and when it does most to Christ, it keeps a
man still humble; for, when she had done all this, she wiped his feet with her
hair, either to make them clean before the ointment came upon them, or to wipe
off the ointment after it had suppled his feet. 9. As the fruits of love will
not hide, so they have a fragrant smell; for, so much may be gathered, by
allusion from this, that the house was filled with the odor of the ointment,
and so the matter came to be known, which occasioned the subsequent quarrelling.

Ver. 4. Then says one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, which
should betray him:

5. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
poor?


In these verses, is recorded a consequent of this practice of Mary; namely
Judas his quarrelling of it, which also was an occasion of his going and
betraying his Master, as the other Evangelists mark, Albeit the other
Evangelists lay this upon all the disciples, because, in appearance, they
consented to him and seconded him in so plausible a cause; Yet John declares
it was he who raised the debate, and under a pretense of caring for the poor,
condemned this practice as a needless waste. Whence learn, 1. Very gross
hypocrites may be near to Christ in outward profession, and may be entrusted in
eminent employments; for, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, which should betray him,
is one of his Disciples. 2. Such as follow Christ on unsound terms, and will
forsake and betray him in a strait, will be now and then bewraying their
unsoundnesse before hand, if they be well observed; for, he which should betray
him, brings out his covetousness here before hand. 3. It is the great and
woeful art of hypocrites, that they mask their corrupt intentions with fair
pretenses, and that they desire to lurk so long as they can; for, all his
language is, why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given
to the poor? This whole sum, after the English account, amounts (according
to the opinion of some concerning the Roman penny) to nine pounds, seven
shillings, six pence; O: (according to others) to eight pounds, six shillings,
eight pence. And as this points out the great liberality of Mary in this her
practice; So Judas, by his mentioning thereof, insinuates that it was
altogether needless to bestow so much on such a piece of service to Christ; As
indeed, men are ready to account it great waste (as the word is, Matthew. 26 8.)
when a little is bestowed on Christ and his service, when yet they can waste
more needlessly, in serving their lusts, without noise or grudging. But this
wanted not a fair pretense, that Christ cared for no such costly anointing, and
that it did not beseem their low estate. And withal, his great covetousness
is masked with a pretense of care for the poor. It is very dangerous to live in
times, when cloaks of faults are as rife as the faults themselves. 4. It is the
will of God, that the poor be taken notice of, and supplied by every one,
according to their ability; for, so much appears in Christ's practice, who in
his deep poverty, did lay up somewhat for them, as Judas exception imports. See
Joh. 13.29.

Verse 6. This he said, not that he cared for the poor: but because he was a
thief and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.
Before John set down Christ's answer, he does first take off Judas his mask,
and shows that this did not proceed from his care of the poor, but that
having the bag in his custody, wherein any money Christ had was kept, and being
a thief, he was sorry he lost such a prize, whereupon he might have preyed. He
is called a thief, either because he had already interverted some of that
money which was in his keeping, to his private use, or because he had purposed
so to do, being resolved to forsake his Master, since he heard of his
sufferings, and that they were now approaching. Whence learn, 1. Let men
pretend never so fair, to cover the naughtiness of their hearts; Yet Christ
knows all the secret deceipts of the heart, and how contrary their intentions
are to their pretenses; for, here by his light, it is cleared; that he cared
not for the poor. 2. As Christ knows the naughtiness of every heart; so he
will, in due time, one way or other, discover what is within men: for, here the
vail is taken off Judas, This he said, not that he cared for the poor. 3.
Whatever hypocrites pretend, yet it is but themselves, and some interest or
advantage of their own, they drive at in all they do; for, Judass's aim in all
this was, to reap advantage to him self. 4. It is egregious theft before the
Lord, when men do carry on their avaritious designs under pretense of caring
for the poor; and when, in affection or practice, they are not faithful in
what is committed to their trust, but do intervert that to their private use,
which is designed for public or pious uses; for, thus was Judas a thief, in
taking to himself what was to be employed for the use of Christ and his
disciples or for the poor. 5. Riches and the bag are not in such esteem with
Christ, but that the ba^est of his followers may have them in keeping, and
under their power; for, of all the twelve, Judas had the bag, and bare what was
put therein. 6. When Christ suffers men's corrupt affections, and suitable
tentations and objects, to meet, it is a sad judgment and snare upon them, and
a presage that he will give them up to a neck break; for, it was a sad
judgment upon Judas, that being a thief, he had the bag, and so wanted not an
opportunity to satisfy his covetous disposition.

Verse 7. Then said Jesus, Let her alone, against the day of my burying has
she kept this.
Follows Christ's answer and Apology for Mary; In the first part whereof, he
defends her practice which Judas had quarrelled, by showing she did it upon an
extraordinary cause and occasion; to wit, that foreseeing his death by faith,
she would testify her ^ffection to him, by doing this last duty now, which she
could not expect to get done afterward. Whence learn, 1. It is a great sin in
any, especially if they be of any eminency, to discourage any of the Saints, or
interrupt them in their serving of Christ, for, Christ finds it needful to bid,
let her alone, as knowing it might weaken her hands that she was checked by one
of his Apostles. 2. Christ will take the maintenance and defense of these who
serve him, against all that would oppose and carp at them; for, he lets her say
nothing, but interposeth on her behalf; Let her alone. 3. Whoever misconstruct
the honest actions of Saints, yet Christ does judge aright of them, and
allows them his approbation; for, Judas accounted it a waste, but Christ
approves of it, as kept for the day of his burying. 4. Christ in his suffering,
death, and bu^^d, is very honorable in the estimation of Saints who know him
right; And he does esteem highly of his own sufferings; for her keeping this
ointment for the day of his burying, intimates that she by faith saw him
honorable in his death, as well as in his life, and that his death not only
should be acceptable and ^^voury to God, but fragrant to all the Elect. and
should fill the world with a sweet smell. And Christ himself, who was never
sumptuous, yet, allows costly ointment on his bu^ial, to testify how highly
he prized and loved to lay down his life for his people.

Verse 8 For the poor always ye have with you: but me ye have not always.
In the next place, Christ having defended Mary, does now answer to his great
objection and pretense of caring for the poor. The defense is taken from this,
that this opportunity of honoring him would not always last, whereas they
might always have occasion to be charitable to the poor. He speaks it in the
plural number, ye have the poor, etc. either because he would press this as a
common duty, on all, as well as Mary; or rather he speaks it to all the
Disciples, who had joined with Judas in this act, as the other Evangilists
observe. Doctrine 1. Christ is so meek, even to his cruel enemies, that he will
not always tell them all he knows of them, when he reproves them, but will
let them discover themselves; for, he will not tell Judas his false heart, but
simply replies to any ground of objection he alleged. And this he does;
partly, because more were engaged then Judas, whom therefore he will satisfy;
Partly, that he may warn men not to seek to carry their cause by reflections
upon the persons of their opposites, while as they want solid reasons for
their cause; partly, that he may teach all, to beware of judging men's he ^^ts,
when yet they have not discovered themselves; for, he will not deal so with
Judas: And partly, that from this his meek dealing toward a Judas, we may
gather how much more meek he will be to his own. 2. The Lord has so ordered,
that when diverse duty; which cannot be performed together, tryst together in
one juncture of time, the one of them may give way to the other for that time,
without sin; And particularly, Duties, which occur rarely, and cannot be
got done afterward, should be gone about in the opportunity thereof, albeit
other important duties be laid aside for that time, which may be overtaken at
another time; As here he clears in the matter of putting this external honor
upon him, when it trysts with the command of having a care of the poor; And for
this reason he prefers this duty to himself now, The poor ye have always,
but me ye have not always 3. Albeit it be a sin to defraud Parents, the poor,
or others, of what they may expect in duty, justice or mercy; under a pretext
of laying out what men have, for God, Matthew. 15.4, 5, 6. Yet when Christ calls
for any thing we have, no other thing should come in competition with him; for,
when he calls for it, he takes place of the poor here. 4. Men may sometime have
an opportunity of employing themselves, or their substance, in honoring of
Christ or doing him service, which they will not so readily meet with again, if
they let it sl^p; for, so much is imported here, me ye have not always. Mary
could not always have opportunity to testify her respect thus to Christ, nay
not when he was dead and buried, and therefore she takes this present
opportunity. 5. The Lord will have his people never to weary of mercy to the
poor; and therefore does continue constant objects of pity among them; for,
The poor always have ye with you. See Deuteronomy. 15.11.

Ver. 9. Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they
came not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had
raised from the dead.

10. But the chief Priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to
death;

11. Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus.


In these verses, is recorded a consequent of Christ's coming to Bethany, when
it came to be known he was there; to wit, that many Jews resorted thither, not
only for his sake, but out of curiosity also, to see and speak with Lazarus,
ver. 9. Which is amplified from the Rulers resolution thereupon, to put Lazarus
also out of the way, seeing his resurrection was a mean to draw many to Christ,
ver. 10, 11. It is not needful to determine, whether these Jews, were some
dwelling in Jerusalem, and about it, or some of these who came up beforehand
to the feast, Chap. 11.55. who also came out the next day to meet him in
triumph; seeing, whoever they were, their coming contributed to let forth
Christ's honor, and to irritate his enemies.

From ver. 9. Learn, 1. Where Christ pleases to make himself known, he will
get respect and followers, were there never so much hazard and opposition in
the way; for, albeit the Rulers had concluded to put him to death, and he had
withdrawn upon that, and they had given charge to spy him out, Chap 11.53, 54,
57. yet, much people of the Jews, knew that he was there; and they came. So
soon as they heard of him, they flocked to him. 2. Christ gives so glorious
proofs of his power and love, as may invite men to flock unto him; for, he
has with him Lazarus, whom he raised from the dead, to make them flock unto
him. 3 It is an argument to persuade Christ to help his people in their
difficulties, that by so doing, he not only does them good, but does also bring
about the manifestation of his glory, and an increase of followers; for, by
raising Lazarus, he draws them out to wait upon him. See Psalm. 7.6, 7. 4.
Albeit Christ will get glory, even by the unsound actings and appearings of men
for him, Philip. 1.16, 18. Psalm. 66.3. Yet it is the sin of many, that they
flock to him rather out of curiosity, then in sincerity, and that they choose
rather to gaze upon his works, then fall in love with the worker; for such was
their fault here, They came not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus also. They were curious to see such a rare sight, and, possibly also,
to enquire somewhat of him concerning the state of the dead.

From ver 10, 11. Learn, 1. Such as betake themselves to bear down Christ, do
engage themselves in an endless ve^ing life, and an harder task then they are
able to undergo; for, they who would kill Jesus, would put Lazarus also to
death Yea, they would kill many who would kill all whom Christ made objects of
his mercy, for inviting others to come to him. See Exodus 1.12. 2 Men once
engaged in opposition to Christ, will not readily be reclaimed by insuperable
difficulties, nor the convincing beams of his glory shining in their eyes; for,
albeit this was a glorious work prevailing on others, and albeit they see more
and more impediments in their way, yet they will go on. 3. None are so malicious
and bitter enemies to Christ, as corrupt Churchmen, whence they once decline;
for, it is the chief Priests, who are so cruel as to kill a man for being the
harmless occasion of drawing men to Christ, and whom God had newly delivered
from death, and testified he would have him live. 4. It is the great
preferment, and most special mercy that can be conferred on any, when they are
made means and instruments of advancing Christ's honor and Kingdom; for, this
was Lazarus dignity, that because many of the Jews went away and believed on
Jesus It Is not needful to assert that the faith of the most of them was sound,
but the least degree of it in the worst of them, was enough to irritate the
Rulers. 5. Such as have received special mercies from Christ, or are made
instruments of his glory, may expect that they shall meet with a rub, and be
made the But of the malice of enemies; for there is a resolution against
Lazarus life, who was thus highly honored. 6. How mad soever enemies be, or
their projects cruel; yet they would be far enough from their point, if
Christ pleased, though they got their will; for, suppose they had put Lazarus
to death, could not Christ raise him up again as he had done even lately to
their knowledge, and so make his glory shine yet more brightly?

Verse 12. On the next day much people that were come to the Feast, when they
heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

13. Took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried
Hosanna, blessed is the King of Israel, that comes in the Name of the Lord.


Follows to v. 20. the second part of the Chapter, wherein is recorded,
Christ's triumphant entry into Jerusalem according as was fore prophesied.
Wherein, being now about to die, he will first be publicly honored (after the
manner of receiving Kings into Cities) and proclaimed King of Israel, and
David's successor, in such a manner as became his spiritual Kingdom, and that
in despite of all his enemies. This triumph, as it is recorded by this
Evangelist, may be taken up in these. 1. The multitudes part in it, verse 12,
13. 2. Christ's own part and action in it, verse 14, 15. 3. The Disciples not
understanding of all this at present, verse 16.4. The seen cause moving the
multitude to act thus, verse 17, 18. 5. The Pharisees part in all this
solemnity, verse 19. As for what is further, and more amply recorded of this by
the other Evangelists, I remit to its proper place.

In these verses is recorded the carriage of the multitude who are come to the
Feast; who, (the next day after that many had been with Christ at Bethany)
hearing that he was coming to the City, do solemnly meet him, carrying branches
of Palm Trees, and, with loud acclamations, do proclaim him King of Israel,
who is blessed, and comes in the Name of the Lord. As for their action, of
carrying branches of Palm trees (with some whereof they showed the way, Matthew.
21.8. and others, it would seem, they carried in their hands) we find, indeed,
use made thereof at the feast of Tabernacles Lev. 23.40. Neh. 8.15. Now they
carry them before him at this feast of the Passover, to testify that he is
the substance of all the feasts; And by this act, beside what was signified by
the feast of Tabernacles, is pointed out, that he is a triumphant and
victorious King, which is elsewhere signified by carrying of palms, Rev. 7 9.
As for their acclamations, they do thereby acknowledge that they see him to be
the blessed Messiah and King of Israel, authorized and sent by the father to
perform this glorious work; And as for their Hosanna, (borrowed from Psalm
118.25. as appe^reth from the following words, Blessed is he who comes in the
Name of the Lord, taken from v. 26. of that Psalm) it signifies, save now we
beseech the^, as it is rendered in that Psalm. And albeit it we take it as
directed to Christ, by way of prayer that he would save them, it does import,
that it is a special way of honoring Christ in his Kingdom, when we seek and
expect salvation from him, and in him only; yet that seems not to be their
scope here, for, Matthew 21.9. it is, Hosanna the Son of David, or, make safe
now, or, bring safety now to the son of David; And so it imports their hearty
wish that his Kingdom may prosper. Doct. 1. If Christ saw it meet, he could get
himself glory, not only among spiritual observers; but even in the view of the
world; for, by this solemn triumph he discovers how easily he could open the
eyes of men to discern what he is, and incline their hearts to flock unto him,
and proclaim his glory. So that it is not for want of power that Christ does
so often obscure his glory under a veil. 2. As Christ can let out his glory
when he pleases; so, in particular, he delights to appear most glorious in and
about his sufferings; for, here he, who oftentimes entered Jerusalem privately,
will now at this last time, when he is going to the cross, enter in state. He
will go triumphing to it, as well as he triumphs on it, Col. 2, 15. and after
it, Psalm 68.18. 3. When Christ's enemies are raging at him and his success,
he can vex them yet more, by spreading his glory more and and more; for, when
they are vexed with hea^ing of the confluence at Bethany, verse 20, 11. even
the next day, they see him more glorified, coming to Jerusalem. 4. When men of
great eminency in the Church do slight Christ, he can raise up others, even the
meanest, to honor him, and set out his praise, for, it is not the Rulers, nay
nor inhabitants of Jerusalem, who do this, but much people that were come to
the feast, See Mat. 21.15, 16. 1 Cor. 1.27. 5. As it is the duty of the Lords
people, to attend all the Ordinances appointed by him; So their chief care
should be to meet with Christ, and to be most taken up with him in them; for,
albeit they were come to the feast, yet, when they heard that Jesus was coming
to Jerusalem, they went forth to meet him. 6. In Christ is to be found the
substance of all the festivities and solemnities that were among the Jews; for,
before him they carry Palms, at the Passover, which were used at another
feast to testify that the stance of all trysted in him. 7. Christ is a
triumphant and victorious conqueror, who triumphs over all his enemies, and
makes his people always to triumph in him, 2 Cor. 2.14. Therefore also is he
met with branches of palm trees 8. It is the duty and commendtion of the
members of the visible Church, that they be well acquainted with Scripture;
for, here the mult^tude do not only know, but can apply passages in the
Psalms, and concerning David's offspring, very fitly to Christ; And if they
understood so much in these declining times, how much will this aggravate their
guilt, who are grossly ignorant in a time of clear light? 9. Christ is the
true King of Israel and of his Church, to rule, subdue, protect, and defend
them; and they who get open eyes, will see this, and embrace him as such; for
they acknowledge him, the King of Israel. This he will have proclaimed in the
world, oppose who will, Ps. 2.7. compare, ch 1.49. 10. It does commend Christ
unto his people, that he comes with his Fathers power and authority, being
approved and upheld by him in hi^ Kingdom; So that all who embrace him, will
find the Father well-pleased in him, for this adds to the joy and
acclamation, He is the King of Israel, that comes in the Name of the Lord, and
upon this follows, peace in heaven, or betwixt God in heaven, and us, Luke
19.38. 11. Christ is a King perfectly blessed in himself, and a fountain of
blessi^g to all his ^ubjects, and he is to be proclaimed and commended as such;
for, blessed is the King of Israel etc. So Ps. 72 15. and 118.26 It is he in
whom all families of the earth are blessed, Genesis 12.3. and in whom they should
bless themselves, Genesis 22.18. as it is in the original. 12. It is the duty of
all such as love Christ, hea^^^ly to wish and pray for the prosperity of his
Kingdom; for, they cried Hosanna, as wishing safety and success to him and his
Kingdom.

Verse 14. And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon as it is
written.

15. Fear not daughter of Sion, behold, thy King comes sitting on an asses
colt.


In these verses, we have Christ's part and action in this triumph, to wit, that
an ass being provided for him, he rode thereupon, to accomplish that
prediction, Zech. 9 9. of which I have spoken in its proper place. Albeit this
be recorded here after the other, of the peoples acclamations, and it is
probable the people were come to him on the way, to the mount of Olives, or, at
least, were coming on the way, before he sent for the ass, Matthew. 21.1, 2. yet
it is certain that he was riding before these acclamations were. Doct. 1. When
Christ manifests most of his glory in the world, he will have it seen that his
Kingdom is not of this world; for, in all this pomp he rides but on a young
ass, and that a borrowed one, without any furniture save his disciples
clothes, and accompanied but with a train of base people and children; all
which might appear but very ignominious to a carnal eye. 2. We are not to carve
out the glory of Christ's Kingdom, by our carnal conceptions and imaginations,
but by his own Word; for whatever ignominy appear here, yet it is glorious and
greater glory then any we could devise, in so far as it agrees with
Scripture, and foregoing prophesies. 3. Christ's Kingdom is so great a
stranger to carnal glory and pomp, that any mean splendor is very much in it
for this also takes off the ignominy, that this was much glory and state to
him, who never used to ride before. 4. Albeit Christ became poor for us, yet
he wanted not any thing as he needed it, that so he might teach his people what
care he will have of them; for, albeit he possessed not so much as an ass, yet
when he needed, he found a young ass, etc or obtained the use of it from the
owner. 5. Christ is a faithful observer of all that is written, to see it duly
performed; for he did all this, to accomplish what is written. 6. The
encouragements of the Gospel are not held out unto men, to cherish security,
but to be an antidote against all their fears and discouragements; for, the
scope of the allowance, Zech. 6.10 to rejoice, shout, is here summed up in this
fear not 7. Albeit men do not reach the height of consolation and joy allowed
in Christ; yet they are to bless him in so far as they are kept from
crushing fear, for, so much also may be gathered from these two places
compared; They rejoice, in so far as they fear not. 8. Christ is Zions King,
who will respect her, and see her comforted, though all the world biside should
sink; for it is to the daughter of Zion, this encouragement is given from her
King. 9. Whatever be Zions perplexities, yet in Christ there is a remedy
against all she can feel or fear; fear not, daughter of Zion, thy King comes.
10. It is the Church^s comfort; that Christ is a King to her; That he comes to
her, and seeks her to do her good; and, that after long expectation, he will at
last come to give her actual enjoyment: All these are imported in this
encouragement, Thy King comes; He leaves heaven to seek her on earth, and is
now not held out in the promise as coming, but is actually come unto her. 11
Christ in his Kingdom and glory is adorned with me knelle and lowliness; And
this is the comfort of his subjects, that they have to do with such a one; for,
this adds to the comfort, Thy King comes, sitting on an asses colt. 12. As
Christ's love and condescendence ^s admirable in it self, and to be admired by
all who see it; so even the Church has need to be stirred up to take notice of
this as becomes; Therefore a behold is prefixed to this; to point out how
admirable this is in it self, and yet how dull Zion is in remarking it, till
she be stirred up and excited to it.

Verse 16. These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when
Jesus, was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of
him, and that they had done these things unto him.
In this verse, John omitting what is recorded of the disciples part in this
triumph by the other Evangelists, does not only record their not understanding
at present that which themselves or others were doing, till after the
glorification of Christ, that the Spirit was poured out, and then it was
brought to their remembrance that this had been fore-prophesied, and
accordingly had been performed. Whence learn. 1. Men may be in the midst of
great mercies and actings, and may not only be witnesses of the Lords working,
and the works of others, but even actors themselves, in that which for the time
they do little or nothing understand; for, These things understood not the
disciples at the first. Men have much brutish ignorance fed with inadvertency
and may be little expecting the things that God is doing in such a time or
case, Genesis 16.13. and 28.16. and therefore do not discern them. 2. When the
Lords people are ignorant and under a cloud, he uses not to take advantage of
them, but can guide them as ^ight as may be, so that a back-look thereunto,
when they get light, will be ^wee^ unto them; for in all this they act as
rightly as if they had understood, and afterward they find that what was
written of him they had done unto him. See Psalm 73.21, 23, 24. 3. However the
Lord for a time, suffer his people to lie under clouds, and ignorant of what he
or they are doing, yet in due time he will clear them, in so far as is needful;
for, afterward they remembered, etc. See John 13, 7. 4. The treasures of
knowledge hid up in Christ, were not fully opened up, till Christ was
glorified: for, when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they, etc. Hereby is
kept a due proportion betwixt the head and his members, that he shall be first
exalted, before they get their full allowance. And hereby, also, Christ being
exalted, gives evidence that he remembers his people. See, John 7.39. Acts
2.33. Ephesians. 4.8. 5. Confession of infirmity and ignorance is a sweet fruit of
the Spirit poured out; And the more one have received, they will be the more
sensible of, and ready to acknowledge their frailties; for John, the beloved
disciple, being now enlightened, is most forward to record, that they
understood not these things at the first. 6. When the Spirit of God is most
amply poured out, he will still lead men to the Scriptures to discern of
Christ, and compare their own actings by it; for, so was it in the disciples
best days, they remembered that these things were written of him and that they
had done these things to him. 7. It is an evidence of Christ's being exalted at
the right hand of the Father, for the good of his people, when he brings
Scriptures to their mind, makes them clear to them, and cleares their practice
there; for, when Jesus was glorified, this was a comfortable evidence of it,
they remembered these things.

Verse 17. The people therefore that was with him, when he called Lazarus out
of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record.

18. For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had
done this miracle.


In these verses is recorded what was the seen cause (for the unseen was the
overruling hand of God) moving the multitude to come out and conveigh him in
state, to wit, Some of the people (of whom, see chap. 11.45.) their testimony
concerning the miracle wrought on Lazarus; which as they had published before,
and so drew many other people out; so over again they proclaim it on that day,
that they may contribute to the solemnity of the triumph. Whence learn. 1. It
is the part of all such as have been witnesses to Christ's working, on
themselves or others, to publish the same to his praise: for, the people that
was with him when he called Lazarus, etc. bare record. 2 As it is at all times
a sin to smother the praises of Christ; So, in particular, in days of
solemnity, it is our sin not to join and bring in what we know, to make up the
song; for, they bring in that particular to make up the triumph. 3. In a day of
Christ's power, and when he is to ^^t ^l^ay to himself, he can furnish means,
and make them effectual, to bring it to pass; for, he makes ^h^^ miracle an
occasion to bring about this triumph. 4. I^ they encourage men to publish the
praise of Christ; working, as they know of it, that God may make their w^ak
endeavors effectual to work upon very many; for the testimony of some drew out
this great confluence to Christ. 5. It is the duty of them who hear any thing
of Christ's commendation, to go and seek him, and do homage to him; for for this
cause the people also met him, for that they had heard that he had done this
miracle.

Verse 19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye
prevail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after him.
In the last place, John records what was the Pharisees part in the time of
this triumph, and s^^ing i^. They are galled at the heart that they have had so
little in^cesse of their endeavors, and that now all a^e flocking to him. We
find some of them carping in the midst of the triumph, Luke 19.39. as having
gone out with the rest to seek some advantage; but this seems to have been
their language one to another, when they saw the people crowding ou^ of the
City. Doctrine 1. In the day of Christ's greatest solemnity, there will not be
wanting some sore hearts at it; some Michal to despise David while he is
dancing; And that is a part of the glory of the triumph, Psalm. 112.10. Mic
7.10. for, the Pharisees are here galled. 2. It is an evidence of a malicious
disposition, when men will neither serve Christ themselves, nor can endu^e that
others should do it; for, such is their humor here. 3. Greatest enemies will
be convinced at last, that do what they will, their opposition against Christ,
and his installing in his Kingdom, will be to no purpose; for, say the^,
perceive ye, how we prevail nothing? the world (that is all (...) people) is
gone after him, whereas we thought to have p^d that none at all should have
gone. 4. It is a great plague upon persecutors, that when they want success,
they will not observe Gods mercy impeding them in an evil course, nor his hand
resisting them, that so they might stoop; But all their disappointmen^s tend
only to kindle their fury, and heighten their rage; for, under this
disappointment, all they b^eath out is fury and envy. 5. As it is Christ's way,
to make his glory spread, the more it is opposed and envyed, (for the world
goes after him, when they oppose). So the envy of persecutors looks on Christ's
success in a multiplying glass, to augment their own sorrow; for, when they
say, Behold, the world is gone after him, albeit the world be taken for a
multitude of all sorts of people in it, as now strangers and others are
flocking out; yet their liberal way of expression intimates how much they
resent it, and look on it as more then indeed it was.

Ver. 20. And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at
the feast.

21. The same came therefore to Philip which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and
desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus.

22. Philip comes and tells Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip told Jesus.


Follows to verse 37 the third part of the Chapter wherein is contained
Christ's doctrine and exercise upon occasion of some Greeks desiring to see him,
who was now become so famous by reason of this triumph. It may be taken up in
these. 1. Their dear, and way of propounding it, ver. 20, 21, 22. 2. Christ's
answer, wherein, waving their respects tendered to him, he preaches of the
glory and fruit following upon his suffering, ver. 23, 24. and of their duty
who would seek to make acquaintance with him, ver. 25, 26. 3. Lest this
doctrine of his death and suffering should stumble them, he, first, by sore
exercise, ver. 27. and then, by consolation sent from heaven, ver. 28, 29, 30.
does make it evident it was the mind of God he should suffer, and yet not sink
under it. 4. Being cal^^ed in his exercise, and cheered up with the late
sensible consolation; he preaches more fully concerning the glorious fruits of
his death. ver. 31, 32, 33. 5. An objection being moved against his doctrine
concerning his suffering who gave out himself to be the Messiah, ver. 34.
Christ does press upon them to improve the present opportunity of his
presence, and then closes the conference by departing from them, verse 35, 36.

In these verses, we have the first particular in this part of the Chapter, and
an occasion of the ensuing purpose; which is the desire of some strangers to
see Christ. Wherein we may consider. 1. The persons who propound this desire.
They are certain Greeks that came up to worship. We find indeed that the
Jews who were born and bred among the Greeks are called Grecians, or
Grecists, Acts 6.7. and 9.29. because they lived among them, and used the Greek
language, yea, and made most use of the Greek translation of the Old Testament.
But these seem not to have been of that sort, for the designation is different,
in the Original, from that which is used, Acts 6. and 9. And therefore it
appears rather that these were devout Gentiles, who embracing the true
Religion, did come up at solemn times to worship at Jerusalem. And albeit the
natural Greeks, or posterity of Javan, were but a small part of the heathen
nations, and possibly these were none of them; Yet it is not unusual in the New
Testament, to comprehend all (or the most part of) Nations that were not Jews,
under the name of Greeks, Romans 1.16. and 10.12. Gal. 3.28. And that because the
Grecian Empire had, before that time, extended it self far, and so gave a name
to the subjects of their dominion; And withal, the Greek language being
generally in use in these countries, and some Greeks being incorporate with
them, it is nothing strange they be so designed. Consider. 2. Their desire,
which is, that they may see Jesus. It is not needful to determine, whether they
had already seen him in the throng, and now would be more familiarly acquainted
with him; But it is clear from Christ's answer, and entertaining of this motion,
that their desire did slow from curiosity, and as they came not to Jerusalem
for this cause, so they mind no more but to see him. Consider. 3. The way of
propounding their desire, and how it comes to be propounded unto Christ. They
do very respectively propound the matter unto Philip, and he does consult with
Andrew, and then both of them present it unto Christ. Whatever may be
commendable in this procedure; as that they make acquaintance with Christ by
means of his Apostles, and that Philip makes a stand in the matter till he get
further advice, because these were Gentiles who had been excluded in their
first commission, Matthew. 10.5. Yet Christ's strange doctrine, on this
proposition, intimates that he did not relish it well. I shall not determine
that they used this mean, to get a meeting with Christ in private, as not
desiring to be seen owning him, against whom the Rulers had such indignation,
Chap. 11.57. But this is clear enough, that they in propounding, and the
disciples in entertaining it, keep too great a state in it, as if access into
Christ were not easy. Doctrine 1. Albeit it pleased the Lord, till the
fullness of time, to give up all Nations, and did only choose the Nation of
Israel to be his peculiar people; Yet it pleased him, even then, to bring in
some strangers, as the first fruits, till the fullness of the Gentiles should
be brought in, and the portition wall be taken away; for, there were certain
Greeks among them at the feast. And in dedicating of the Temple, a room was
left for these, 1 Kings 8.41, 42, 43. 2. Whatever the Lord confer upon his
people, in their private and secret worship; yet it is their duty not to be
content therewith, nor can they prove that it is sound and sincere, unless
they do also frequent public Ordinances where they may be had, were it at a
great distance; for, these Greeks came up to worship at the feast, though
possibly they lived far off, some of them. Though there was somewhat typical in
these feasts, yet they were also solemn parts of the Jewish worship; And their
frequenting thereof at the Lords command, will condemn them who are not put to
such pains, and yet prove negligent. 3. Christ, when he is known in any
measure, will be thought a desirable sight; Therefore they would see Jesus. 4.
Such as would make acquaintance with Christ, ought not to neglect the ordinary
means, or to make use of his servants; for, in so far they were right, in that
they came to Philip, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus. We need
not conceive that they came to Philip, upon any particular acquaintance,
because he was of Bethsaida of Galilee, which lay nearer the confines of the
Land; But because they met first with him. And they call him Sir, though a
fisherman, as being the civil compellation of these times, given even to mean
persons, Joh. 20 15. 5. Many, even of them who make much noise of desiring to
see Christ, may yet be driven so to do, out of mere curiosity, and for carnal
respects; for, such was their desire here, to see Jesus, and but to see and
gaze on him, who had been made so famous in the late triumph. 6. It is the duty
of disciples, to make men's acquaintance with Christ; for whatever was their
fault, in not taxing what was amiss, or in their own way, yet it was no fault,
but their duty, to make up the acquaintance. 7. It is a great mistake, and an
injury done to Christ, to think that he will keep a state and distance from
sinners who sincerely seek him; And his servants do but an ill office, when
they foment such apprehensions; for, whatever they deserved, yet they mistake
Christ, when they thought he was like a King, who could not be come unto but by
some of his courtiers, and favorits; whereas many needy sinners did come to him
immediately; and Philip finding strangers take notice of him, does sin in
making such a business of state of it, as might confirm them in this opinion.
8. Christ's Court would be but ill guided, if any (though even disciples) did
guide it but himself; Men would readily befriend them who are not so welcome,
and would neglect the needy, and might point out Christ as more strange then
indeed he is; for, here the disciples, who slighted little children and the
woman of Canaan, now, when they think their Master is like to be esteemed of
among strangers, they are foot and hand for them, though they were nothing so
sincere, and they do, by consulting one with another, bear these strangers in
hand, that it was not easy to find access to him, that so they may admire
him the more.

Ver. 23. And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come that the Son of
man should be glorified.
Follows to ver. 27. the second particular in this part of the Chapter,
containing Christ's answer to this proposition; wherein. 1. (in this verse)
Sleighting their curious desire, and tacitly reprehending the Disciples carnal
way of managing it; he shows, that he had other true glory to look to, which
made him vilipend this carnal respect tendered unto him by strangers, to wit,
the glory of, and following upon, his sufferings which were near approaching
And withal, by this doctrine, he points out that they ought to seek
acquaintance with him, not as a man lately cried up by popular applause, but as
a glorified Christ on the triumphant chariot of his cross, and exalted at the
Fathers right hand. Whence learn, 1. Christ takes no pleasure to satisfy the
curiosity of men, nor in worldly glory, nor, will he foster his followers in an
estimation of it; Therefore does he slight this motion, and preaches what was
of more importance. He will not call them into his presence, but by his
doctrine does testify he did not relish the respects they offered to him. 2.
As sad sufferings may be following close after some sun-blenk of glory and
triumph; So it concerns the Lords people to meditate and resolve thereupon,
even in their best days: for, after Christ's triumph, the hour of his suffering
is come, or near approaching: and he is meditating thereupon. 3. Divine
providence is so particular about all things, particularly, about the
sufferings of Christ and his followers; that not so much as the hour when
sufferings shall begin, but it is determined: Therefore, says he, so
particularly, the hour is come, etc. 4. Such as would take a right look of the
sufferings of Christ and his followers, ought to look through all the pain,
bitterness, or ignominy, that is in them, and fix their eye upon the glory
that is in that lot, and follows thereupon; for, thus does Christ leave us an
example, who in speaking of the approaching time of his suffering, declares
that he looks upon it as an hour wherein the Son of man is to be glorified.
This was true, even of his very sufferings, that he was glorified in being
called to exerce the office of a Priest for his people, Heb. 5.4, 5. And so
also Saints have looked on their sufferings for him, as an high honor
conferred upon them, Acts 5.41. But it was more visibly verified in the issue
of his sufferings, 1 Peter 1.11. when in his own person he was exalted unto
glory, Luke 24.26. and by the virtue of his death became great in the world, as
verse 32. of this Chapter. 5. Such as get open eyes to discern the glory of
the cross; and the glory that abides Christ and his followers after their
suffering, will not care for, nor relish worldly pomp and glory, or carnal
respect from men; Therefore Christ sleights this offer, because his eye was
fixed elsewhere; The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. See
Heb. 11.24, 27. and 12.2 6. Christ will entertain no acquaintance with any,
unless his cross be beautiful unto them, and unless they lay aside doting
on his bodily presence, and study communion with him in his sufferings and
exaltation; for, while as they sought to converse with him bodily, and see his
imagined outward glory, he, in his answer, remits them to his suffering and
exaltation shortly approaching, to study acquaintance with him there.

Ver. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit.
In the next place, because Christ's suffering as the way to his glory, did
stumble many of these who had carnal imaginations concerning the Messiah;
Therefore (in this verse) he clears the necessity of his dying, by a similitude
taken from grain, which unless it be towen and die in the ground, can produce
no increase; but being sown, it brings forth much fruit. Even so, unless he
died, there would be no conversion of lost men unto God. Whence learn, 1. The
necessity and usefulness of the cross is not easily believed by the Sons of
men; And it is a point to be received on Christ's word, who will not deceive;
Therefore, does he begin this doctrine concerning his sufferings, with so grave
an asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you. 2. If Christ had not dyed, and
continued for a while under the power of death, we could reap no profit by him,
nor would any have gone to heaven with him; for, Except a corn of wheat fall
into the ground and die, it abides alone, and so had been here. It had been no
prejudice to him, only his love could not be without us, nor had it been
manifested, unless he had brought many Sons into glory, but all the loss
had been ours. 3. Christ's death has produced a fair harvest of fruit on the
earth, many being drawn unto him, and many sweet fruits flowing from his death
to them; for, if it die, it brings forth much fruit, and so is it here. And
thus also does the Lord bless the afflictions, even of Saints, to bring out
much good. 4. The profit that flows from the cross of Christ and his
followers, ought to prevent any stumbling there at; for by this argument Christ
obviates the scandal here. And indeed, if the fruit of the cross be an
argument to move him to embrace it, much more should it take away our stumbling.

Ver. 25. He that loves his life shall loose it: and he that hates his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also
my servant be: If any man serve me, him will my Father honor.


In the last place, Christ having acquainted them with what was his true glory,
and the way to it, does now point out the way how to come and have communion
with him therein, to wit, by taking up the cross, and following him. And for
this end. 1. He sets forth the danger of irresolution, and the good of
resolution, in this point, verse 25. A man that is sparing, if it were even of
his life when Christ calls for it, does take the ready way to lose it, and he
who does hazard it for him at his call, is sure to live eternally. 2. He points
out their obligation to this duty, that if any will be his servants, it is
reason they follow him in the paths he has trodden, verse 26. -- 3. He
subjoins, for the encouragement of such, that if they follow him as servants,
they shall enjoy, his company, and if they honor him, the Father will honor
them, verse -- 26.

From verse 25. Learn, 1. It is not enough that Christ's followers leave off to
stumble at his sufferings, or at the afflictions of others, unless they be
content also to submit to the cross, without stumbling, in their own persons;
Therefore does he subjoine this doctrine to the former concerning his death, to
breed them with the cross in their own persons. 2. Albeit Christ may let some
easily slip through, and others get away with some small loss; yet he approves
of no followers, who are not resolved on the loss of what is dearest to them,
yea, even of life, for his sake: Therefore does he mention our life to be
hated, not secluding other things, as parents, wife, children, houses, lands,
etc. but including them all in this, as being the most precious enjoyment. And
since some are put to that, all must resolve on it. 3. Its not enough that men
quit any thing for Christ, unless it be done with cheerfulness, zeal, and an
holy indignation that any thing, how precious soever, should come in
competition with obedience to him; Therefore is i^ required, that they hate
their life; Which is not to be understood absolutely, as if it were a sin, to
love life, as it is the gift of God, or that they should weary of it; But
comparatively, that they should not love it more then Christ, Matthew. 10.37. and
should abho^re that it should come in competition with duty to him. 4. Whatever
be our obligations to Christ, yet men's inordinate affection to their temporal
life is a great impediment to our duty, when it comes to that push; for, it is
supposed that too many will love their life, (to wit, in this world, or their
temporal life;) so as to prefer the preservation of it to obedience and a
good conscience. 5. Whoever are careful to preserve their temporal life upon
any terms, they take the short cut to loose it, and eternal life also; for,
he that loves his life shall loose it. He both provokes Christ to plague that
life, and cut it off, which he will not employ in a good cause, and however it
fare with his temporal life, yet he loses eternal life. 6. As the loose grip
of things temporal is the surest and best grip; so when a man preferres service
to Christ to his own life, it is the sure way to preserve both body and soul
unto life eternal; for, he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it
unto life eternal. Some time the Lord may continue and preserve a man's life,
after he has submitted to loose it for his sake: But however that succeed, yet
the other encouragement stands firm. 7. They who have the lively hope of
eternal life, will easily digest any temporal loss, especially when that hope
cannot be attained without that loss; for, preservation unto eternal life, is
sufficient to persuade a man, when he is called to it, to hate his life in this
world. 8 Such as live by faith, must renounce the principles of carnal sense
and reason, and be content to walk on grounds contrary to these, especially in
times of trial; for, they must learn that love, and keeping of life is loss,
and hatred, and losing of it is keeping of it.

From verse 26. Learn, 1. Christ will not be content of glorious-like outside
acquaintance with men, unless they engage themselves in humble service to him;
Therefore, in opposition to their desire of seeing him, verse 21. he desires
that men should serve him. 2. Such as give up themselves to serve Christ, must
not in their duties prescribe unto him, but must be content to follow his
directions; And in their lots, they must not think it ill to be no better used
then he was, but should account the worst condition sweet and easy, in that he
essayed it, and paved the way before them; for, says he, if any man serve me,
let him follow me. 3. Such as serve Christ, by following him, shall be sure not
only to see him, but to enjoy his company: He will be with them in trouble, and
not let them be alone, and they shall be brought, at last, to partake of the
sweet issue that followed on his suffering; for, where I am, there shall also
my servant be. See Luke 22.28, 29. John 17.24. Romans 8.17. 4. It is a sweet
encouragement to sincere followers of Christ, that in glory they shall have
constant and near fellowship with him, which they are so much thirsting after
in their pilgrimage; for, this is the encouragement of servants, where I am,
there shall also my servant be. 5. Whatever disgrace Christ's servants may meet
with; yet to serve him is their true honor, and will be rewarded at last with
visible honor; for, if any man serve me, him will my Father honor. See 1 Samuel
2.30. 6. He says here, my Father will honor him, not only to point out that
it is true honor only which is conferred by God, Joh. 5.44. But to teach, That
Christ as Mediator is so accepted of the Father, that he will put marks of
favor and honor upon all his servants.

Verse 27. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from
this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour.
Follows, to verse 31. the third particular in this part of the chapter,
wherein (to prevent stumbling at his death) it is made evident, first, by sore
exercise, and then by consolation sent from heaven, that it was the Will of God
he should suffer, and yet not sink under it. His exercise is recorded, v. 27.
his out-gate and consolation, v. 28. unto which is subjoyned an exposition of
Gods purpose in this way of comforting of him, upon occasion of the several
thoughts of the people about it, v. 29, 30.

In this verse his exercise is pointed out in these particulars. 1. That while
he is preaching of his own death and suffering, trouble does seize upon his
soul in the midst of his doctrine, and he is so overwhelmed, that he cannot get
it hid, but must tell it out before all his hearers. 2. That he is so
perplexed, that he knows not what to say. 3. That getting a vent in prayer,
there is a conflict betwixt his averseness from this lot and exercise, and his
submission to endure what his office called him unto. Now for clearing this
soul-trouble of Christ, (which we find very familiar to him, chapter 11.33. and
13.21. Mat. 26.38. and 27.46.) we would consider. 1. The rise and cause of it
was thus, The Godhead hiding it self from the humanities sense, and the Father
letting out, not only an apprehension of his sufferings to come, but a present
taste of the horror of his wrath due to man for sin, he is amazed,
overwhelmed, and perplexed with it in his humanity; And no wonder since he had
the sins of all the Elect laid upon him by imputation, to suffer for. And so
this wrath is not let out against his person, but again their sins which were
laid on him. 2. Albeit Christ's soul was here troubled, or jumbled, and puzzled,
as the word imports: Yet we are not to conceive there was any sin in this
exercise of his,, though the like may be muddy in us. For we are like foul
water, which being stirred, becomes like a puddle, but he was like clean water
in a clean vessel, which being never so often stirred and shaken, yet keeps
still clean and clear. 3. We are not to think it strange that the Son of God
should be put to such perplexities in this trouble, as not to know what to say;
For, considering him as man encompassed with our sinlesse infirmities, and that
this heavy weight of wrath did light upon him on a sudden, it is no wonder it
did confound all his thoughts as man. These contrary desires and debates of
Christ, in his voluntary exinanition, were without all sinful infirmity; For
in his desiring the trouble to be removed, he testified that his holy and
sinlesse nature did abhor to lie under wrath; and in his being willing to
suffer, he cleares that in respect of his office and being our Surety, he
denies himself, and submits to what his office required of him, and what his
Father had appointed him to suffer, how much soever he abhorred it.

From this whole purpose in general, we may learn. 1. The sad agonies of
Christ's soul, being under the burden of sin imputed to him, is a mirror
wherein we may read the bitter desert of sin, what bitter wrath follows upon
it; and how abominable it is, that produces such fruits. 2. We may h^^^ in
also read how impartial a Judge God is, and how impartial in craving and taking
satisfaction for sin; so that if his own beloved Son come betwixt sinners and
the stroke, he will not spare him, but let out such sad soul-trouble upon him.
And this may make the sins of the Elect bitter to them, that they did pierce
Christ, and did make him a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs. 3. This
may also discover unto us what difficulty there was in the work of our
Redemption, that it put the Son of God to such pressures, and perplexities,
to carry thor^w under it. 4. Herein also shines forth the love of the Father,
in giving his Son; and the Sons love in undertaking this hard task, and
drinking this bitter cup, for their take who were living in enmity against him,
and who cannot be profitable unto him. 5. Such as in the sense of sin, and
deserved wrath, do flee to Christ, will find him a tender Savior, who is
experimentally acquainted with all their sinlesse infirmities, and with all
these tentations they are vexed with, though without sin; for, he has drunk
of that bitter cup. 6. Christ, in his own person, has sanctified trouble and
distress of mind to all his followers, as here is left upon record. 7. In
this exercise we may read, to whom it is we owe any true peace of conscience
we enjoy; even to him, upon whom the chastisement of our peace was, and who
endured this trouble, that we might rest safely under his shadow. 8. The godly
may also learn hence a good use of any trouble of mind that comes upon them;
even to learn hereby somewhat of his bitter sufferings for them, that so he may
be more precious in their eyes. 9. We may read in this exercise and experience
of Christ, how soon a good condition may be clouded, and how one may be well
and have help near them, and yet not see it; for, Christ, while he is thus
troubled, is still the Son of God and beloved of him, and his out-gate is
very near, yet for the present he is over-clouded, and taken up with nothing
but perplexity and horror. 10. Finally, this sad trouble and exercise of
Christ may point out, what will be the sad lot of all the wicked, who have not
Christ to satisfy for them; for, if this be done in the green tree, what shall
be done in the dry? Luke 23.31.

More particularly, from the words and context, Learn. 1. As sin has
infected both soul and body of the Elect, and chiefly the soul, where it has
its chief seat: So Christ, to expiate this sin, did suffer unspeakable
sorrows and trouble in his soul, as well as torture in his body; for, my soul
is troubled, says he. See Isa. 53.10. 2. Albeit some sufferings of the body be
very exquisite and painful, and Christ's, in particular, was such; yet sad
trouble of mind is far more grievous then any bodily distress: As Christ also
found, who silently bare all his outward troubles, but must cry out of the
other, now is my soul troubled. 3. Sad trouble of mind is very hard to conceal
and smother from the knowledge of others, nor have they cause to complain of
extremity, who get it hid: And they who get their exercise hid, ought to
acknowledge Christ; who was put to proclaim his trouble before a multitude,
that theirs might be more easy. And on the other hand, when any are driven to
that extremity, that they must cry out of soul-trouble, they may find this
exercise, sanctified on Christ's person, who in the midst of a multitude, must
interrupt preaching, and cry out, now is my soul troubled. 4. Albeit Christ be
God over all, blessed for ever; yet it pleased him in going through his
sufferings, so to abase himself, as to wrestle with horror, fears, and
perplexities under them, and to fight with the weapons he has left for Saints
in like cases; that so he may be a faithful and merciful high Priest, and may
assure them of success, who in the like case, make use of the like means; For,
whereas upon Christ's former doctrine, of his sufferings, and the duty of his
followers to suffer, any might be ready to think that it was easy for him to
speak of trouble and bear it, in respect of others; Therefore he lets them
see, that he had the same exercise, trouble, perplexities and fears about it
(though without sin) that Saints have, and that he used the same weapons of
prayer, wrestling, and submission, that are left unto them. 5. A special mean
for raising trouble in a tender mind, is their thinking much upon it, which
does beget and waken it; for, so was it with Christ while he is thinking and
preaching of his sufferings, trouble arises: Now is my soul troubled, says
he. And albeit Christ was sinlesse in so doing, yet it is our sin oft-times
to beget trouble, by our musing upon it. 6. There is a vast difference betwixt
the most exact comprehension of trouble in the judgment, and the experimental
feeling thereof in the senses; The one may be without so much vexation and
trouble as the other will produce. This also appears in Christ's exercise, who
though he understood perfectly what his sufferings should be, and had resolved
upon them; yet when he came to feel trouble, it raises all this perplexity.
And however Christ went beyond us in this, that he met with all he resolved
upon, which made it thus heavy; whereas we are oft-times disappointed in our
apprehensions, and get less then we look for; And so the trouble it self is
oft-times easier then the exercise and apprehension of it; Yet this experience
of Christ's may learn all, never to trust their own resolutions for trouble, but
to make ready for it, if God send it on, as another thing to present sense and
feeling then any thing they could imagine. 7. How stout soever the hearts of
men be, yet when the Lord lets out trouble for sin, it will damp them, and put
them to a nonplus in all their resolutions, that they shall not know what to
do or say; for, if the great teacher of his Church, who has much to say for
our counsel and comfort in such cases; if he, I say, under this cloud, be so
puzzled, as he is put to what shall I say? what may others expect? 8. As
Christ, by his perplexity till he had nothing to say, has purchased an open
mouth to his people in their addresses to God; So when any of them are
perplexed, they ought not to be discouraged at it, but should look to him who
has tasted of that cup for their comfort and behoof. Therefore is it left on
record, that he was put to what shall I say? not asking counsel at any by this
question, but testifying his real perplexity. 9. Prayer is the special mean of
relieving troubled and perplexed souls, which will find out a vent and outgate
to perplexity, if there be any to be found under, or in heaven; Therefore
Christ betaketh himself to this remedy. And whosoever do neglect it, and betake
themselves to carnal shifts, will prove Physicians of no value, and will heal
their own wounds slightly, or prove miserable comforters, and add to their own
sorrows. 10. As God does not break off his relations to his people, when he
plungeth them under sad exercises and perplexities, but continues still a
Father; so it is the duty of Saints, to hold fast this interest, and to make
use of it in prayer; and it may be cleaved unto, in the midst of great
perplexities; For, in this Christ has cast us a copy, who in all this agony,
pleads with God as his Father, and teaches Saints, that they have warrant to
do the like. 11. Albeit Christ's wrestling betwixt the inclination of his holy
nature, and his obligation by his office, was free of sin as has been
cleared; Yet his experience of this exercise may teach Saints, that he will be
very tender of their ravings in their fevers, and that he will pity them when
they are tossed betwixt inclination and conscience of duty, betwixt a willing
spirit and weak flesh, and when the fleshes word is first out, and the Spirits
word follows after it, to correct it; for, here he has come as near us in
this exercise as might be without sin, that he might sympathize with us in
it. 12. Were our distress and perplexities never so great, yet it is our duty
to believe the power of God, that he is able to deliver them out of them all,
if he please; for, Christ's prayer, save me from this hour, o^, this sad sit of
trouble, does import that he believes God could do it, if he would. 13. The
sense of wrath is insupportable to humane flesh, and sinlesse nature will abhor
to be under the wrath of God, above any other sad lot; for, both these are
imported in this prayer of Christ, save me from this hour, as is before
explained. 14. Saints ought not to be discouraged, when the strength of
exercise and tentation does overturn their resolutions for a time; but they are
to expect, that after they are laid by, they may yet recover and acquit
themselves as becomes; for, herein Christ has paved a way, though without
sin, who after his holy inclination would have declined his work, yet
continues resolute to undertake it. 15. It is the duty of Saints, not to lean
much to their own inclinations, especially under exercise, how innocent soever
they seem to be; But they ought to reckon that usually their inclinations and
choice are different from what is their duty, and the Will of God concerning
them. For so much does Christ's exercise teach us, who though he without sin
desired to decline wrath, yet he quits that desire, because the thing desired
was inconsistent with that to which God had called him. 16. The conscience of
our duty, and of our obligation to God not to neglect it, ought to moderate our
desires concerning our own safeties; for, so does Christ recall his former
desire with this, But for this cause came I unto this hour. That is, this
calling to suffer, this was laid upon me, and I have undertaken it, and
therefore will not now decline it. 17. Christ commends his love unto his
people; in that he would decline nothing that his office and calling required
should be done for them, how much soever he abhorred it in his sinlesse nature:
Therefore after he had testified his abhorring this cup, yet for our sake he
submits to drink it.

Verse 28. Father, glorify thy Name. Then came there a voice from heaven,
saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.
In this verse is recorded Christ's outgate and consolation; it begins at
submission in his prayer, that God would so dispose of him, as might glorify
his own Name, without respect to his ease or inclination. And as this
evidenceth the calm temper of his mind so his consolation is perfected by a
voice from heaven, testifying that as the Father had glorified his Name already
in Christ's life, so he would glorify it yet more in his death.

From Christ's submission, Learn. 1. It is the duty of Gods children, not to
expect always, or, at the first, an outgate by a change of Gods dispensations
toward them, but rather to seek it by a change of their own disposition within
them, making them fit to undergo such dispensations; for, herein Christ has
cast us a copy, in laying aside the inclination of his nature to be rid of
trouble, and submitting to it. 2. It is the duty of Saints under trouble, to
prefer the honor of God, and to seek how it may be advanced, before their own
ease; for, Christ ends all his debates with this, Father glorify thy Name,
though by my trouble and suffering. 3. Submission unto the Will of God is a
real outgate from trouble, and a special victory over it; for, hereby Christ
gets an issue of his agony and perplexities, Father glorify thy Name. See Mat.
26.39 Acts 21.14. 4. The way to attain submission, is, to be tender of Gods
glory, and to account that dearer unto us then any thing else; for, this leads
Christ to submit unto this bitter cup, that hereby the Father glorifieth his
Name. Whereas on the contrary, men's selfishnesse and want of zeal is a great
enemy to their submission.

From the Lords comfortable answer, Learn. 1. Sorest exercises are not sent on
Gods children to destroy them, but when in their perplexities, they seek to God
and submit to him, there will be a comfortable issue; for, immediately there
came a voice from heaven, etc. and so not only is he delivered, but the sorer
his exercise had been, it is the shorter. 2. There is no true comfort against
soul-trouble, but what comes from God, and is spoken by him from heaven; for,
this comforts Christ, There came a voice from heaven. And albeit we are not to
expect such extraordinary manifestations, (nor did Christ simply need them in
such a way, v. 30.) yet it must be spoken from the Word by God to the heart,
before we get ease. 3. Such as are truly exercised in conscience, will find
ease in comfortable promises, clearing their condition from the Word, albeit
the trouble lie on; for, thus Christ is comforted by a voice from heaven,
clearing his case. 4. Christ is a supplicant whose voice is acknowledged by the
Father, as the voice of his Son, in that for which he seeks to him; for, here
his supplication is answered by a voice from heaven. 5. The Father is glorified
in the life and sufferings of Christ, and not only does the Son glorify him
herein, but he undertakes to glorify himself: As here his answer does show, I
have both glorified it, and I will glorify it again. 6. The Lords answers to
troubled souls are very full, clearing all they do or can propound, and all
they feel, or is lying upon them; for he not only undertakes to glorify his
Name in that wherewith Christ is now troubled, but cleares further what he had
done. 7. Gods speaking to a troubled soul, brings not only comfort under their
present pressures; but is a Pisgah from whence they may take a comfortable view
of their bypast lots, and may see fair ground of hope for time to come; for,
in this comfort, God cleares both by-gones and the time to come, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again.

Verse 29. The people therefore that stood by and heard it, said that it
thundered: others said, an Angel spoke to him.

30. Jesus answered, and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes.


In these verses, upon occasion of the several conjectures of the people
concerning this audible voice, v. 29. Christ does expound Gods purpose in this
public way of comforting him; That he did it, not so much because Christ
needed it, as to testify unto them that he was accepted of God, owned of him
in his sufferings, and would be victorious over them through him. Whence learn.
1. God is very glorious and full of Majesty, and appears so when he reveals
himself; His voice even in consolations, is glorious; for his voice here was
such as the people said, that it thundered, when they heard it. 2. As natural
men are ignorant of spiritual soul-trouble, so do they as little understand the
consolations which God allows on these who are so exercised; for, they
understand nothing of this matter, but some (it seems) who were more remote,
said, it thundered, others more near, said, an Angel spoke to him. 3. It is
the great fault of men that they delight rather to talk curiously of the
extraordinary manifestations of God, then study to know the use to be made of
them; Therefore they are curiously debating what this should mean, when Christ
tells them they should study for whose sake it came. 4. Consolations are then
double consolations, when men are not only refreshed thereby, but are led to
know how they ought to be improven. Thus Christ is led to look on this voice,
for whose sake it comes, and knows what use should be made thereof. 5. All the
glorious testimonies given unto Christ from heaven, tended to point him out
unto sinners; as the true Messiah approven of God; And that for the conviction
of the malicious and for the encouragement and confirmation of their faith who
flee to him; Therefore, says he, This voice came not because of me, but for
your sakes. He needed indeed the consolation, and it might have been imparted
to him in a private way; But this public way of declaring the consolation, was
for their behoof.

Verse 31. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the Prince of this
world be cast out.

32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.

33. (This he said, signifying what death he should dye.)


In these verses is recorded the fourth particular in this part of the Chapter,
namely, that Christ being now calmed in his exercise, and refreshed with the
late consolation, does resume the point he had been upon, ver. 23, 24. and
publishes more fully the glorious fruits and effects of his death. The fruits
of his death, here mentioned, are, 1. The judgment of this world. 2. The
casting out of Satan the prince of this world, ver 31. 3. The drawing of all
men to him when he is lifted up from the earth, ver. 32. which lifting up, he
expounds to signify the manner of his death, ver. 33. Now for right
understanding this purpose, the great difficulty is, to take up rightly the
first fruit of his death, concerning the judgment of this world, which may be
diversely taken, according to the different acceptions of the words judgment,
and world, which may be diverse ways expounded: For, first, Taking the world
for the world of the Elect (as 2 Cor. 5.19. and Joh. 3.16. where the reasons of
this denomination are given) the meaning will be, That they are judged in
Christ their head; That is, partly, they are condemned in him, who in his
sufferings represented and stood Surety for them all, and was accused,
sentenced, and put to an accursed death for them, and so God for sin
condemned their sin in Christ's flesh, Romans 8.2. And partly, that by this
judgment of Christ in their name, there arises a judgment of absolution to
them, in their own persons, through him. This in it self is a clear and useful
truth, and does well agree also with the casting out of Satan, after mentioned;
Yet it does not exhaust the fall scope of this place. And albeit the Elect,
considered by themselves, be sometimes called, the world, yet it is not so
clear in Scripture, that they should be called so emphatically, This world,
(which is usually taken in another sense) especially, when in the next words,
and 2 Cor. 4.4. This world are they of whom Satan is Prince and God; For,
albeit he reign in the Elect, while they are children of disobedience and of
wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3 Yet it is not in respect of them that he
is Prince of this world, and therefore the name is not so proper to them.
Secondly, understanding this purpose of the reprobate world, over whom Satan is
Prince, the meaning is, that they are judged, or condemned, in the sufferings
of Christ; which holds true in these respects. 1. It seals up the condemnation
of all these, unto whom this purchase is revealed, and yet do reject the offer.
2. The suffering^ of Christ are a pattern and exemplary, making manifest what
is the judgment abiding the wicked, for whom this purch^^s is not made: for,
if this be done in the green-t^ee, what shall be done in the dry? 3. They are
condemned in Satan their head and Prince, who was foiled and cast out by the
death of Christ on the Cross, even as the Elect are judged and absolved in the
suffering and victory of Christ their head. These are indeed truths which do
agree well with what followe^h of the casting out of Satan; Yet do not exhaust
the scope either; For, there is more that follows on this ejection of him,
then all that. And therefore, Thirdly, That I may fall upon a more full
interpretation, It would be considered, that the term, this world, or, the
world, at it is sometime taken for this present life and enjoyments thereof, in
opposition to eternity, Luke 20.34. Joh. 13.1. 1 Cor. 7.31. and elsewhere: So
it is used, sometime, to point out the state of this inferior world, and all
persons therein, as they are corrupted and out of frame by the fall of man.
Thus to be of this world, is to be in a corrupt estate, Joh. 8.23. we are not
to be conform to it, Romans 12.2. ought to keep our selves unspotted from it,
Jam. 1.27. The wisdom thereof is condemned, 1 Cor. 3.19. and its courses, Ephesians.
2.2. and the world, and things thereof, are to be disclaimed, as not being of
God, 1 John 2.15, 16. Again, the word, judgment, in the Ebrew phrase, (usual
to the New Testament) does signify the exercise of power and authority, for
reformation of abuses, and restoration of things that are out of frame, to
their right and primitive order. Yet so, as including a condemnation of all
that bred this disturbance, or is worthy to be condemned, and an absolution and
asserting into liberty all these who were wronged under that disorder.
According to these significations of the terms, the sense of the words will
be this; (agreeable to Daniels prediction, of Christ's making an end of sins,
and bringing in everlasting righteousness, by his death, Dan. 9.24.) That,
whereas by the fall of Adam, the world has fallen into confusion and disorder,
man has fallen from integrity and happiness, Satan and sin have reigned and
raged in the world, Romans 5.21. Ephesians. 2.2. The children of this world have
blessed themselves in their bad condition, and the Elect have lien under
slavery and bondage: Now Christ, by his death, has taken away this disorder;
by dethroning and condemning the disturbers, sin and Satan; by bringing in
everlasting righteousness; by manifesting the condemnation of the wicked, and
by restoring the Elect to that happiness they were deprived of by sin. This I
take to be the most satisfactory interpretation, partly, because it is most
comprehensive; for albeit sin and Satan be condemned and cast out only in
respect of the Elect world, and the restoration be only purchased to them; yet
the interpretation also includes all the other interpretations, of condemning
sin and Satan, and of the Reprobates, as is before explained, and the
absolution of the Elect through him who was condemned as their surety: And
partly, because it runs well with the r^st of the fruits of his death here
mentioned. For this judgment of this world, is put first, as a comprehensive
and general fruit, that hereby he reformes these things that were out of frame
by the fall of man. The next of Satan's casting out, is subjoyned, to point out
the mean and way of this restoration, namely, by dethroning the usurper and
disturber. And the third, of drawing all men to him, is added, as an effect and
further explication of this restoration of the Elect world; that he will draw
them to himself, the fountain and channel of that happiness which they lost
in Adam. It is further to be considered, for clearing the words, That while
Christ says, now, in his sufferings, is the judgment of this world, and Satan
cast out, we must avoid two rocks in understanding of them. 1. That we conceive
not of this, as if this judgment, and casting out had not been in the world
before the time of Christ's death: For the Elect were made partakers of the
benefit hereof in all ages before the Incarnation of Christ. But the meaning
is partly, that this world was never judged, nor Satan cast out at any time,
but by virtue of his death which he was now to suffer, and that now he was to
pay the price, and fight the good fight, by virtue whereof it is, that in any
age, Satan is foiled, and the world judged: And partly, that now he was to have
more visible and copious fruits of this judgment then formerly, especially,
thoughout the world, and not among the Jews only. 2. We are not to conceive as
if this judgment of restoration, and the casting out of Satan, were
completed and perfected at the death of Christ; For, albeit the purchase be
then completely made, yet the application does but follow in due time to the
Elect, and that is carried on by degrees, till in the great day, there be a
complete restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. and a solid victory and triumph
over all our enemies. And therefore it is spoken of by way of promise for the
future, the Prince of this world shall be cast out, and I will draw all men.

Not to repeat the several instructions which have been pointed at in the
several interpretations of the first phrase, (all which are included in this
interpretation) we may further, from verse 31. Learn, 1. Whatever be the sharp
exercises of Saints under the sense of wrath; yet it is to be expected they
will have an end, if not also pass shortly over; for, this encouragement is
given us in the experience of our head, who is now in a short time calmed. See
Isa 54.7, 8. And albeit Heman had a long time of it, Psalm. 88.15. Yet he saw an
end of it. 2. When the Lord sees it sit to exercise his children with much and
sore exercise, whereof they will not so soon see an end; Yet such is his mercy,
as not to over-drive them, but to afford them a breathing time betwixt one p^ng
and another, which they should highly esteem of; for, so is also verified in
Christ, who although he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and
another sad storm was abiding him after this; Yet he gets this calm, and a
clear sun-blink among hands. 3. How much soever exercise do perplexe and
confound the thoughts of Saints, so that they will be tempted with strange
thoughts and misconstructions of their lot, and of Gods dealing toward them;
Yet when the cloud is over, they will recall these thoughts, and look as
comfortably on the saddest of their lots as ever: So much also does Christ's
experience teach, who in his exercise abhorred his suffering of the accursed
death, and the wrath of God; Yet now when he is calmed, he has as sweet
thoughts of that lot as formerly he had, verse 23 3. Such as would have their
issues from trouble, and their exercise, blessed unto them, ought to make use
thereof, and to improve them to the best advantage, in their place and station;
for, herein Christ has cast us a copy, who being comforted, and getting a
breathing time, does fall a preaching again, and communicates his consolations
to his hearers. 5. The best way of looking on our sad exercises and straits,
is, to ponder the fruits that God will bring out of them, which may swallow up
the bitterness and grief they put us unto, and which we do pore too much upon;
So Christ is comforted over the bitterness of the cup of his sufferings,
whereof he had a late taste, by looking upon the fruit thereof. 6. By the fall
of Adam, this inferior world is out of frame and in disorder; Not only is the
whole Creation groaning and traveling in pain, Romans 8.22. but all mankind by
nature are lying in wickedness, with their backs upon God, after whole image
they were created; and sin and Satan are raging in them at their pleasure,
and making them fight against God with whom they were entered in a Covenant of
friendship; for, so is here imported, that there is need of a judgment, or,
restoration, in this world. 7. No mean that could be devised, beside the death
of Christ, was able to reform this disorder, nor can put in frame these things
that are out of course; for, says he, now, and by no other mean, is the
judgment of this world. 8. Christ, by his death, has restored the collapsed
estate of this world. Albeit he permit the generallity of men to lie over in
their lost estate, as being debtor to none; Yet even they are judged, in so far
as they are inseparable from sin which he destroys, and as their condemnation
is made manifest. But in reference to the elect world, he has destroyed and
subdued sin (in the guilt, power, and effects thereof) and Satan which disturb
the world, and has brought in righteousness, absolved them, and asserted them
into liberty in himself: for, Now, says he, is the judgment of this world.
9. Albeit it be said, that now, at Christ's death, this judgment is passed; Yet
it is not to be mistaken, when even the converted elect find sin in its guilt
and power, and Satan (of whom in the next part of this verse) so prevalent and
raging: For, (to clear what is already said in the explication) Though the
purchase be then made, and the application be begun at their conversion, yet
the full possession and victory is not attained till the end, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.
2. Whatever exercise it please the Lord to put them unto, yet the victory at
last is sure, this purchase being made. 3. The raging of sin and Satan, which
the Elect feel and groan under, is an evidence they are cast out; whereas
otherwise, they would be at quiet, Luke 11.21, 22. Romans 7.9. 4. The reason why
the converted Elect find so little present fruit of this purchase, is, because
they make so little use of an interest in Christ by faith and of the conquest
we have in him our head, as Rom 6.11. Thus are we to understand this purpose,
Now is the judgment of this world. Doctrine 10. It makes up the great disorder
of this world, in respect of the Elect, that not only they are under the power
of corruption, but Satan also is daily blowing at the bellows of it, and
himself also immediately suggesting wicked tentations; for, here it is added,
as a great cause of this disorder, that Satan is a Prince of this world, who
must be cast out, that this judgment may be. 11. Satan is a Prince and Ruler
of these who live in sin, not by any right, but by tyrannical usurpation, who
does furiously drive them on in the service of sin; for, he is the Prince of
this world. See 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. 12. Satan is an usurper, who
will not quit his possession with good will, unless he be cast out; for, he
must be cast out; Where it is otherwise, and he but goes out, he does but
deceive, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. 13. Christ's death is Satan's overthrow; Then did
he spoil principalities and powers, Col. 2.15. And the merit and efficacy of
his death, will cast him out of the Elect by degrees; for, now shall the Prince
of this world be cast out; Namely, out of his tyranical usurpation in the
world, in relation to the Elect, and out of them.

From ver. 32, 33. Learn, 1. The Elect, who are made partakers of Christ's
death, are in themselves a great number, gathered out of all nations, and sexes
of people, and are Christ's all, whom he cares for; Therefore are they called
all men. 2. Whatever be Christ; purpose of love toward the Elect, and his
purchase for them; Yet in themselves they are at a great distance from their
happiness, till they be brought unto it; for, they are drawn to him, which
imports a distance. 3. The Elect are not only far from Christ, but so averse
from their own happiness, and have so many impediments in their way, that they
must be drawn to it, before they come; for, I will draw all men, says he,
compare Joh. 6.44. 4. Christ will not want his purchase, notwithstanding all
these impediments; his death does purchase life to them, and his efficacious
power will bring them to participate thereof; for, I will draw all men, says
he. 5. They, to whom Christ applies the efficacy of his death, will find no
place of rest, till they be brought to communion with him, and abide with him;
And he will not give over perfecting their happiness and drawing them, till he
bring them where he is; for, I will draw all men to me, that is, to communion
with me through my death, and to be where I am. 6. Christ's Cross will be
glorious in their eyes who see the rich fruits thereof. Therefore does he
describe it, If I be lifted up from the earth (to wit, on the cross, alluding
to the brazen serpent) as a glorious exaltation of him, when so many should
slow to a crucified Savior. 7. Christ knew his own death and the manner of it,
before he embraced it, and so he was not surprised with it, but made it his
voluntary choice; for, he spoke this, before hand, signifying what death he
should die. 8. Christ's victories over sin and Satan are glorious and
remarkable, not only in themselves, but also in the way and manner of them,
that he should overcome by ignominy, weakness, suffering, and death; Therefore
is the exposition of this lifting up given, that we may ponder much this way of
his success. 9. Christ's words ought not only to be reverendly heard, but
should be marked and pondered, till they be understood; Therefore John thinks
it needful not to leave this one word uncleared.

Ver. 34. The people answered him, We have heard out of the Law, that Christ
abides for ever: and how say thou, The Son of man must be lift up? Who is
this Son of man?
Follows to ver. 37. the last particular in this part of the Chapter,
containing an objection of the people against Christ's former doctrine
concerning his sufferings, together with Christ's answer thereunto, and the
close of this purpose.

In this verse is their objection; Wherein, understanding well that title of
the Son of man, to be understood by Christ of himself, and that his lifting
up, was meant of his death who gave out himself to be the Messiah: They do
object, that the Scripture ( Psalm. 110.4. and elsewhere) speaks of the
perpetual endureance of the Messiah; and therefore do disdainfully enquire who
this Son of man is; seeing by his own concessions he could not be the Messiah,
since he was to be lift up and die? The error and mistake in all this
objection, is, their not considering and distinguishing of two natures in
Christ's person, of both which the Scripture speaks, Isa. ^3.7, 8. Seeing he
might be lift up in the one, and yet abide for ever in respect of the other.
Likewise, their confounding his state of humiliation unto the death with his
state of exaltation after his sufferings; in which respect he abides for ever.
Doctrine 1. Christ's sweetest doctrine will not gain on wicked unbeleevers, but
they will carp and stumble; Yea, they will rather voluntarily seek occasion of
quarrelling, then embrace and believe it; for, notwithstanding Christ has even
now been owned from heaven, and his doctrine has been most sweet, yet the
people answered him, and objected against his doctrine. 2. Its a necessary and
commendable duty in the members of the visible Church, to be well acquaint with
Scriptures, and to improve all means for that end; for, albeit they be the
people, or multitude, as the word signifies, yet they can give an account what
they have heard out of the Law. Where, albeit the Scripture pointed at, be
found in other places in the Old Testament, rather then in the books of Moses,
yet they call it the law, for reasons mentioned on Chap. 10.34. And they
mention only what they have heard out of it, either because being unlearned,
they had no means of instruction, but their hearing the Word read in their
Synagogues, and yet they understand so much. Or, because whatever other means
of instruction they had, by their own reading, meditation, or conference; Yet
they neglected not that special mean of edification by the public Ordinances.
3. It is from the Scriptures only, that contraverses in Religion ought to be
determined; for, they object nothing to determine this contraversie, but what
they heard out of the Law. 4. Men's knowledge and good parts will not lead them
to believe in Christ, unless they be sanctified; But will rather furnish them
with weapons, wherewith to oppose him and his truth; For, these are men who
understand Christ's language of lifting up, which John thinks needful to
explain, ver. 32.33. And who are well versed in the Scriptures; and yet all the
use they make hereof, is to carp and quarrel. 5. It is the great comfort of
believers, that the Messiah endures for ever, to apply his own purchase, and
interceed for them, and to make them eternally happy with himself, who is the
eternal and alsufficient God: Therefore was this sweet doctrine registrate in
the Law, that Christ abides for ever. See Heb. 7.25. 6. Christ's lifting up by
death, and his abiding for ever, do very well consist together, if rightly
understood; for, both these are true of him, when the Law says, that Christ
abides for ever, and when himself (who is truth it self) says, the Son of
man must be lift up. And indeed, concerning Christ there are many seeming
contradictions in Scripture, as Isa. 53.7, with 8. Isa. 53.2. with Psalm. 45.2.
Isa 9.6. with Joh. 12.^7. See also Matthew. 22.42, 43. and elsewhere; Which as
they may be easily reconciled; By considering that he is true God, and true
man, in one person; By distinguishing betwixt his state of humiliation and of
glory, and betwixt the carnal look that wicked men take of him, and the
spiritual look of right discerners: So they are very comfortable to study. For
hereby is held out how low he stooped to reach sinners, and yet how high he is,
that he may exalt them. Thus also do the Scriptures speak of his Church and her
conditions in different, and seeming contrary, terms, as Cant. 1.5. 2 Cor.
6.9, 10. and elsewhere; which also are easily reconciled, by distinguishing
betwixt the worlds thoughts, (and sometime her own also) of her, and Gods
thoughts of her; Betwixt what she is in her self, and what she is in her head:
and, betwixt what her conditions are, and do portend in themselves, and what
Christ brings out of them. 7. As all erroneous persons do seek patrociny for
their errors in Scripture, (as here they do) So a special mean of deluding
souls, and breeding error, is, when they look on one parcel of Scripture,
without searching into it ( Joh. 5.39) or comparing it with other Scriptures,
which might illustrate and clear it; (1 Cor. 2.13.) for, so do they run upon
error, by fixing only on such Scriptures as spoke of the Messiah's abiding for
ever, never looking to these which spoke as clearly of his sufferings, as Isa.
53. throughout, Dan. 9.26. Psalm. 22.16, 17, 18. and frequently. 8. Such members
of the visible Church as are not acquaint with soul-misery, and are
prepossessed with carnal delusions and fancies concerning Christ and his
Kingdom, will easily fall in errors, concerning him, were the contrary truths
never so clear in Scripture; for, this was another occasion of their error.
Albeit other Scriptures might have cleared this objection, and these people
generally knew the Scriptures exactly; Yet because, not only they were not
exercised under the sense of misery, needing a suffering Savior (which is an
usual companion of delusion,) but, their heads were filled with a dream of the
carnal glory of his Kingdom; Therefore this blinded their eyes, that they saw
not, or considered not these other Scriptures. This also for a time blinded the
disciples eyes, that they little pondered the doctrine of Christ's sufferings,
Matthew. 20.18, 19, with ver. 20. Yea, and understood it not, Luke 18.31, 32, 33,
34. 9. It is an evidence of an impenitent, unhumbled, and wicked disposition in
men, when they think basely of a suffering Christ, and of his humiliation and
death; for, such is their temper here, in enquiring so disdainfully, who is
this Son of man? and that because he must be lift up. 10. Ignorance error,
and delusion, are ordinarily accompanied with much pride and conceit; for, so
was it with these here. They think they have reasoned so strongly out of the
Law, against his doctrine of the Son of man's suffering, that they insultingly
conclude, who is this Son of man? As if they said; We have undeniably argued,
that though the Son of man cannot be the Messiah, be what thou will: For, by
thy own confession thou must dye, and by the Law Christ abides for ever. Thus 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, pride is joined with error, and knowing nothing, and with doting,
about idle questions, which is an usual mark of delusion.

Ver. 35. Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you:
walk while ye have the light, l^st darkness come upon you: for he that walks
in darkness, knows not whether he goes.

36. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
light. These things spoke Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.


In these verses we have Christ's answer unto, and carriage upon, this
objection, so closing this whole purpose. And first, He will not answer any
more directly to their cavilling objection, nor will he insist to clear how his
suffering and abiding for ever are consistent, having already abundantly
cleared all doubts, by his former doctrine and miracles. Only he indirectly
points at what his former doctrine and miracles had proven; To wit, that he is
the Messiah and light of the world, (of which we heard, chap 8.12.) And that by
his doctrine and Ministry they had the true means of grace to direct them to
heaven. And presses upon them to walk in that light, rather then to bark
against it, which afterward, ver. 36. he expounds to be their believing in him,
and answerable walking. Secondly, He subjoines reasons to enforce this
exhortation. As, 1. They were to have but a little while of this light, his
person first, and then the Gospel holding him out, being to be removed from
them; And therefore they had need to improve the opportunity better, then to
carp and dispute themselves from their happiness. 2. Upon the removal of this
light, darkness of ignorance and misery would follow, and then they should
wander like men in the dark. 3. If they believe and walk in the light, they
shall be the children of light, and his true followers. And by these subjoined
to the exhortation, he clears also that, however it be a truth, that he is to
abide for ever, yet not as they understood it. For he was not to abide for ever
wi^h the Jews in person, f^r less was it his errand among them to set up a
worldly Kingdom: But he came for a while, to purchase eternal redemption, that
sinners might believe in him, and so become children of the light, and heirs of
an heavenly Kingdom. Thirdly, Christ having said this, leaves off his
preaching, and gets away from them. This he did, partly, to avoid danger,
because he saw them begin to heat against him, and knew that his enemies were
waiting for his life: And partly, to begin the verification of that threatening
of the lights departing from them. And however Christ preached and debated much
in public, at this his last entry to Jerusalem, which is noted by the other
Evangelists; yet not much after this. And however it was, yet John mentions no
more of his public preaching after this, save only a little in the close of
this Chapter. All the rest which follows being only spoken unto, and with the
disciples.

From verse 35. Learn, 1. Albeit Christ be very tender of weak ones, who
wander, and has commanded that they be instructed in meekness who oppose, 2 Timothy 2.25. Yet when he has clearly confirmed his truth, he looks upon the
continued carpings of men, as a testimony of their malicious disposition, which
is neither to be dallied nor debated with: Therefore will he not insist to
answer to their cavil and objection, but puts them to their duty upon their
peril. 2. As cavillations and disputes against the truth are an evidence that
men's hearts are dead, and that they are idle in point of practice; So the best
way of dealing with such, after the truth is cleared, is, to press the
practice of godliness upon them, and to let them see the danger of opposing
that truth upon which they should be feeding; Therefore does he, instead of
answering, press them to walk while they have the light, and points out the
hazard of their ill emproving of their time 3. As Christ is the true light of
the world, however he be despised by unbeleevers; Summers sleighting of him does
not diminish his estimation of his own worth, nor should believers think the
less of him; for, whatever their cavillations were, he proposes himself to
be esteemed of as the light. 4. So long as men enjoy Christ and the means of
grace, they enjoy light and a sweet estate, if it be well emproven, be their
outward condition never so sad; for, it may still be said in such a case, the
light is with you. 5. It is a short while, for most part, that men enjoy the
occasion of the means of grace; Either they are taken away from the means, or
the means are taken from them, by persecution, or because of their abuse
thereof for, says he, yet a little while is the light with you. 6. Albeit
Christ will not at first give up with despisers; Yet when men who enjoy the
means, in stead of emproving thereof, do fall a wearying of, and carping at
truth, it is a token they will enjoy them but short while, unless they repent;
for, unto these c^rpers it is said, yet a little while is the light with you,
intimating his mercy, that it was not yet away, and the danger of a sad and
speedy change, if they persisted. And however the Lord continue them with such
for a time, yet they may be so hardened, as not to profit thereby. 7. It may
stir up men to improve the opportunity of the means of grace, when they
consider, how short while they may enjoy them, and that their neglecting of the
opportunity may shorten it; for, it clearly follows yet a little while is the
light with you, therefore walk while ye have the light. 8. Such as do rightly
improve an offer of Christ, and the means of grace, will be so far from carping
thereat, that they will not rest satisfied with any notional estimation
thereof, unless they reduce their knowledge into practice, and in the use of
means be advanced in their way to heaven; for, it is required, they walk while
they have the light as men make use of the daylight, to do their business or
travel in. 9. Such as neglect opportunity, and abuse the means of grace, are
justly deprived of that light, and punished with darkness of ignorance and
wandering in sinful courses, and of affliction and judgments; for, that is the
certification, lost darkness come upon you, when the light is removed, And
that is sad^er, then if they had never enjoyed the light. 10. When Christ is
provoked to desert profane despisers of him; Yet he will not want some to shine
upon in the world; for, the threatening is particular, darkness upon you. For
when he removed his bodily presence from them, and the Gospel also, yet he took
not this light from the world. 11. As it is the great mercy of those who enjoy
and improve the Gospel, that they know what they are doing, and what to do in
every condition, (for, they are as men in day light, who see their way), So it
is a sad judgment on despisers, who provoke God to take away the means, that
they wander in darkness, stumbling on sinful courses, and walking by guess in
very step, and that in affliction they know not whither to turn them; for, so
much is imported in this reason, for he that walks in darkness, knows not
whither he goes.

From verse 36. Learn, 1. Sinners can never enough be admonished of, or ponder
the danger of their neglecting an opportunity of the means of grace, and their
duty to make use of it; Therefore does Christ again repeat the exhortation,
insinuating the short time they were like to have the opportunity, while ye
have the light, believe in the light, 2. Before there can be any answerable
walking to an offer of Christ, or any use made of truth, use must be made of
faith to close with the truth, and with Christ offered in it; Therefore, is
their walking, expounded here, believe in the light, or the truth of the
Gospel, and in Christ shining in it. 3. Such as make use of the means of grace,
do reap fair advantage thereby, in getting, and evidencing a good condition;
for, they are to do this, that ye may be the children of light. A name given to
Saints, Luk 16.8. Ephesians. 5.8. 1 These. 5.8. and elsewhere; And the meaning of this
encouragement, is. That by emproving this opportunity, they shall be translated
out of the power of darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ, which is a Kingdom
of light; They shall become the Sons of God, who is the Father of lights,
Jam. 1.17. and participate of sweet effects of Christ's being the light of the
world; And, by so doing, they shall also evidence themselves to be children of
light, illuminated by divine light, to discern right and wrong, what is their
true happiness, and real misery; to be men who come to the light with their
actions, and who are thirsting after that eternal light of glory. 4. Christ is
not only terrible, but even meek also to his opposers, if they would submit to
him; And all his scope in showing himself terrible, is, to drive them to his
mercy, and to partake of the fruits of his meekness; for, all his threatenings
are sweetened with this, that his scope in them is, to drive them to duty, that
they may be children of light. 5. There is hope, even concerning those who
wickedly oppose Christ and his truth, that they may partake of his mercy, if
they will cast away their weapons, and submit; for, even to such it is offered
here, that if they will do duty, they may be the children of light. 6. It is
needful not only to deal freely with wicked opposers, but to discountenance
them also, to see what that may work; for, these things said Jesus, and
departed, that is, he went away at night to Bethany, as the other Evangelists
observe, and by this means also he did avoid their fury and plots within the
City. 7. Convictions and offers do oft-times so little prevail with wicked men
that they do but heighten their malice; for, Christ behooved to hide himself,
after this doctrine. 8. In cases of hazard from malicious men, it is lawful to
preserve our own lives, by ordinary and lawful means; for, Jesus hid himself
from them. 9. Christ's servants must not weary of frequency of trials, in
discharge of their duty; and to be put to it again and again, even to save
themselves from extreme violence; for, Christ has sanctified this lot in his
own person, who was often put to hide himself.

Ver. 37. But though he had done so many miracles before them: yet they
believed not on him;

38. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled which he spoke,
Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed?


Follows the fourth and last part of the Chapter, wherein John, being about
to close the Narration of Christ's doctrine and miracles among the Jews, does
give an account of his success among the most part of them, (secluding the
small number who believed in him.) Who were either wicked misbeleevers, and
were nothing moved with his doctrine and miracles, but rather hardened, as had
been foreprophesied, to ver. 42. or hidden and timorous friends, who for carnal
respects durst not avow or confess him, ver. 42, 43. And unto this he subjoins
Christ's farewell-Sermon to them, ver. 44, etc.

In these verses is recorded. 1. The open incredulity of the most part of his
hearers. 2. An aggravation of this fault, from the great diligence used to draw
them to him, not only by doctrine, but by miracles, which they so much sought
after. 3. This is illustrate by comparing this event with a foregoing prophecy,
Isa. 53.1. For clearing whereof, and the citation of it in this place,
Consider. 1. This prophecy is applied to Christ's Ministry, not as if it had no
accomplishment in others: for Isaiah makes mention of our report; which
includes both himself and his fellow Prophets, who did publish and
fore-prophesie of the Gospel; and Christ's Apostles and Ministers also, Rom 10
15.16. But the meaning is; That as Isaiah in his time, preaching of Christ, had
cause to complain of bad success, so his complaint is also a prediction of the
like success of Christ, his Apostles and Ministers; in the days of the
Gospel. Consider. 2. This their carriage is compared with the prediction, and
they are said not to believe, that the saying of Esaias might be fulfilled, not
to free them from the sin and guilt of their unbelief, nor does it hold out
that this prediction was a cause thereof, or that God by foretelling thereof,
had any sinful influence in producing their unbelief. But it tends to show that
the event came to pass according to the prediction: and by comparing the
prediction with the event, he would, partly, point out the absolute and holy
providence of God, without which nothing comes to pass, either acting or
permitting it, and therefore he can foretell it so long before hand: And partly,
he would prevent the stumbling of others at Christ and the Gospel, by occasion
of the Jews rejecting of him; Seeing this was rather a proof, that he was the
Messiah, of whom it was foreprophesied that he should be rejected by them.
Consider. 3. As for the citation it self, it contains a proposition of their
fault, in a sad complaint, that few or none gave credit to the report of the
Gospel; And an explication and amplification hereof; wherein. 1. This report is
called the arm of the Lord, because of its power and efficacy unto salvation,
and chiefly because of Christ in it, of whom Isaiah speaks in the rest of that
Chapter, and who is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. 2. Their unbelief is
illustrate from a negative cause thereof, to wit, that this arm of the Lord is
not revealed to them, Namely, inwardly and effectually, for otherwise they did
hear it. And this is spoken without all imputation unto God, who is not a
debtor unto any, to reveal Christ and his Gospel to them, but may justly leave
them in their natural estate.

From verse 37. Learn, 1. Where Christ does sow and take pains among a people,
he will also reap and take notice what fruits they produce; as here, he records
by his penman the fruits of his ministry and pains. 2. The fruit of the Gospel
which Christ requires, is, that men take him up, who is offered there, what he
is, and by faith close with him and make use of him accordingly; for, this is
the fruit he misseth they believed not on him. 3. It is the judgment of the
Lord upon the world, that the offer of Christ in his Gospel does not work upon
the most part of hearers, and most faithful laborers do miss the fruits of
their labors among them; for, notwithstanding Christ's pains, yet they
(generally) believed not on him. See Matthew. 11.16, 17. Isa. 49.4, 5. 4 The
great pains taken upon men contributes to aggravate the sin of their
obstinate infidelity; for, so is their sin agreaged here, Though he had done so
many miracles before them, yet they believed not. These miracles were many in
number, great in their nature, (as the Word will also bea^) and clear, as being
done before them, to their conviction, and yet they prevailed not. 5. Such as
are not bettered by the Word, nor will believe it for it self, no other help
they can crave, will work upon them, nor cause them believe it; Therefore does
he aggravate their fault from the many miracles had been done, not to seclude
the clear light of his doctrine from being an aggravation, but to show that
these despisers of the Word were nothing the better for all the signs and
miracles they so much sought after.

From ver. 38. Learn, 1. The mean whereby sinners are brought to faith in
Christ, is, their receiving and closing with the report of the Word concerning
themselves and him, in the mouth of sent messengers; for, herein consisted
their not believing on him, that they believed not our report. 2. What ever be
unbeleevers carriage, yet it brings no discredit to the Gospel, but to
themselves; for, In this complaint it gets still its honorable titles. 3. The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, and Christ offered in it, is the power
of God to effectuate that for lost sinners, which their own weakness ( Romans
5.6.) or the law ( Romans 8.3.) could not bring to pass; for, this is the
honorable title of Christ and the Gospel, the arm of the Lord. See Romans 1.16.
4. The Gospel, and Christ offered in it, are only effectual in these, to whom
the offer is inwardly reve^led by God; for, they only believe our report, to
whom the ar^e of the Lord has been revealed? ^ee Matthew. 11.25. 5. The Gospel,
in all ages, is met with unbelief in the most part of men, who are left to
their own darkness and wickedness, to reject it; for, Isaias said this of old,
as true in his own time, and in Christ and his Apostles days, who has
believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? The
question imports that few or none did it, or were partakers of this mercy. 6.
The obstinacy of men against the Gospel, is ma^ter of wonder, and of sad
complaint to God, from his faithful servants; Therefore is it propounded so
here, Lord, who has believed our report? where John, following the Greek
Interpreters, adds the word, Lord, which is not expressed in the Hebrew,
though it be virtually included in this, that faithful Ministers know not where
to pour out their complaints, but in their Masters bosom. 7. As even they who
lived under Christ's Ministry, did, for most part, profit as little as these
whom his servants labor among; So he will join in this sad complaint with his
faithful servants against such; for, he had cause to say, and did say with the
rest, who has believed our report? And this is ve^^ ^^d when the S^vi^ur and
Intercessour is put to complain of us. 8 ^n ^ark and misty cases it is useful
to look to what the Scriptures say of them, that we may direct and compose our
thoughts accordingly; Therefore are the foregoing Prophesies looked unto in
this matter ^as a ground of many useful thoughts. 9. Whatever other duties be
required of Ministers, who are sensible of the unfruitfulness of their
Ministry; It is also required, that they comfort themselves in this, that the
holy and sovereign good pleasure of God is still accomplished by the Ministry
of the Word; Therefore is this prediction pointed at, as a special mean to
comfort Ministers, when they see that things are according as God foretold they
should be. See Matthew. 11.25, 26. Acts 13.48. Romans 11.7. 10. However unbeleevers
may think to affront Christ, by their rejecting of him; Yet he will be
disappointed by none of them, and he will improve their opposition to special
advantages: Therefore also is this prophecy cited, to show that he knew well
enough what they would prove, even long before they were, and that their not
believing in him was an evidence he was the true Messiah, as has been cleared.
11. God has an holy Providence, even about things that come to pass by
contingent second causes, and depend upon men's free will; for, he can foretell
them here before they come to pass. 12. Gods Providence is so infallible, that
he will not be frustrate of his purposes; And an argument from the prediction
of his Word concerning any thing, is sufficient to conclude that it will come
to pass; for, here the event answers exactly to the prediction. 13. Whatever
be the providence of God about sinful men, and their miscarriages; Yet God and
his providence are wholly free of blame (He being the sovereign Lord, above
the Laws given to his creatures, bound to none, and not concurrent in the
wickedness of their actions) and the guilt is wholly the sinners, as being
under the Law, and voluntarily choosing the wicked course which he follows.
Therefore, albeit it be declared here, that Gods providence had an hand in this
business, yet both in the prediction it is propounded by way of complaint, and
here, by way of challenge against such sinners.

Ver. 39. Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again,

40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not
see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I
should heal them.


In these verses this their unbelief is further amplified; That not only they
did not, but could not believe; And, That not only the means wrought not upon
them, to draw them to Christ, but they were more hardened in their obstinacy
thereby, according to another prediction of Isaiah, Chap. 6.10. The pertinent
citation whereof is cleared, ver. 41. Now for clearing this purpose, and the
text cited, Consider, 1. As for this impotency that they could not believe,
albeit it be true that all men naturally are unable for it; Yet this place
speaks principally of a further degree of impossibility, through contracted
obstinacy, and judicial obduration, of which the following text speaks,
Consider, 2. As for this inference from the prediction, and the comparing of
the event with it, they could not believe, because Esaias said; If we look to
the simple prediction, it tends to the same purpose with the former, and to
show that the event was according to the prediction, for the ends mentioned on,
ver. 37, 38. But if we look to the matter of the prediction, the obduration and
blinding mentioned have a further hand in the matter of their unbelief, as may
be cleared. Consider, 3. As for the matter of this citation; albeit if we
compare this place with Isa. 6.10. Matthew. 13.15. Acts 28.27. we will find some
diversity in words; Yet the purpose is the same. For the grossness and
fatness of the heart, is the same with the hardness thereof. And albeit the
other places add the making their cares heavy, or dull of hearing, to the
other two here mentioned; Yet the scope of these places and this is the same,
to show that all passages were obstructed, whereby the Word might enter, to
work conversion which brings salvation and healing with it. And for the words
here in particular, albeit their not understanding with their heart, may seem
to import that their heart is to be understood of their mind and
understanding, and the same with their eyes, not bodily, but inward; And so the
plague of blinding their eyes, and hardening their heart shall be the same: Yet
it is more full and clear to understand the words of distinct plagues on the
several faculties of their soul, that the eyes of their mind were blinded, and
their will (signified by their heart) hardened. And so their not understanding,
added to their not seeing, is to be understood, not of a simple act of
knowledge, but such an understanding as produces suitable effects upon the will
and affections, to work conversion, which is subjoyned to it: And so, to
understand, signifies frequently so to know a thing, as to approve and esteem
of it, to be affected with it, or drawn to the enjoyment of it. Consider. 4. As
for the author and efficient of these plagues, if we compare the places before
cited, we will find diverse named, in Matthew. 13. and Acts 28. the closing of
the eyes (and consequently the rest) is ascribed unto the sinners themselves.
In Isa. 6. The Prophet is sent out to make their heart fat, etc. And here it is
ascribed to Christ, even to him whose glory Isaiah saw, ver. 41. who in the
beginning of this verse is spoken of in the third person, and in the end
thereof, speaks of himself in the first person, as is usual in the Scripture.
These are easily reconciled; for as men do sinfully harden themselves, so the
Lord by a judicial stroke gives them up thereunto as a punishment, and the
Messengers of Christ do not only carry and intimate this sad sentence, but
their doctrine is an occasion of men's stumbling and hardening of themselves, as
it is of hewing and slaying, Hos. 6.5. Consider, 5. As for this judicial act of
God, in blinding and hardening sinners, that we may understand it rightly. 1. As
we must not conceive that God does approve this sinful hardness and blindness
in men, though, as a just judge, he inflict the punishment; So we are not to
conceive of it, as if he made them blind who did see, or hardened them who
were soft and tender, but that by witholding of his grace (which he is bound to
give to none) he leaves them to their own blindness and hardness, or gives them
up to augment it, which is most properly a punishment. 2. This judicial
blinding and hardening of sinners, here mentioned, may be called Gods act,
partly, in so far as he sent to them the preaching of the Gospel, which was an
occasion they took hold of to harden and blind themselves, through the
irritation of their corruptions thereby; And, partly, in that, to punish this
their abuse, he witholds his efficacious grace, gives them to a reprobate
mind, and to the power of Satan, to harden and blind them more and more. And
this exhausts the meaning in this place, that as they were hardened and blinded
by Christ's doctrine and miracles, so he gave them up to be punished with more
and more of it.

From this purpose thus explained, Learn, 1. Men by nature are lying in a woeful
and miserable deadly condition, full of deadly wounds and sores; for, they need
to be healed. 2. Whatever course men take to rid themselves of their miseries,
yet there is no curing of their sores, till God put to his hand; for, it is I
that must heal them. 3. However men flatter themselves, yet none are indeed
cured of these diseases by God, but they who find grace to turn to him by true
regeneration and repentance; which is the only way to cure their soul diseases,
to sanctify and sweeten their other miseries, and to ensure eternal salvation
to them; for, this, and this only, is the way, that they be converted, and I
should heal them. 4. Let men have never so many flourishes, yet none are truly
converted, but they who get open eyes, to discern their own condition, and the
true remedy thereof, and whose hearts, will, and affections, are touched with
what they see, to draw them to answerable practice; for, they must see with
their eyes, and understand with their hearts, who are converted. 5. Whatever
convictions, practices, or other changes, are wrought in men by the Word; Yet
they must also flee to Christ, and close with him by faith, before they can
prove they are truly converted; for, to believe, ver. 39. is explained by this
in the testimony cited, ver. 40. to be converted. 6. As all men are naturally
unable to believe or turn to God; So this impotency is still the greater, the
more we are dealt with by the Word, and do not hearken to it; for, so was it
here, they could not believe, and they had blinded eyes, and hard hearts,
opposite to the seeing eye, and understanding heart. 7. As men's increase of
blindness and hardness, under the means of grace, is their great sin; So it
is also Gods judgment upon them, who, as a righteous judge, punishes sin with
sin, and gives them a ^u^fer of what they so much affect; for, he has blinded
their eyes and hardened their heart. Thus Saints are justly put to groan under
in their partial obduration, when th^i^ bands lie on to humble them, after they
are sensible of them. As Isa. 63.15. 8. As Christ is free to convert and save
whom he pleases; So when wicked men are most afraid of any thing, l^st the
Word should be effectual to their conversion, and therefore do obstruct all
passages whereby it might enter: It is just with him to reject them, and to
give them up to multiply such impediments; for, when they shut their eyes, lest
they be converted, Matthew. 13.15. he justly blinds their eyes, etc. that they
should not be converted. 9. The Scriptures are a complete storehouse for all
cases, and for clearing all events, that may occur; for, as before, their not
believing, so here, that they could not believe, has a Scripture to clear it,
because that Esaias said again, etc.

Ver. 41. These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
In this verse the pertinent citation of these prophecies (chiefly the last) is
cleared. And lest any should think these testimonies belonged only to Isaiahs
days, and spoke of the Father; John clears his citation was pertinent, and
that however these passages had their own accomplishment in Isai^hs time, yet
they belong also to these days of the Gospel, and to the times of Christ,
whose glory was seen, and spoken of by Isaiah, Isa. 6.1, 2. etc. and who spoke
of Christ in that and the other passage, Isa. 53.1, 2. And therefore they were
predictions of these times. Whence learn, 1. It is not enough to justify men's
assertions in Religion, that they can bring many Scriptures which seem to
favor their opinions, unless they can clear they are pertinently cited, and
that in their true meaning they hold out what they assert; Therefore John not
only cites Scriptures, but proves the pertinency of his citation. 2. This
passage does clearly demonstrate that Christ is true God, and that there are
three persons in the blessed Godhead; for, Jehovah who appeared and spoke to
Isaiah, is granted by all to be Father, and here the same glorious appearance
is said to be the glory of Christ, and Acts 28.25, 26. The commission then
given is ascribed to the Holy Ghost, as Jehovah, equal with the Father and the
Son. 3. It pleased Christ our Lord to manifest himself to his people under the
Old Testament, sometime in the likeness of a man, as a preludy to his
Incarnation; (as to Abraham and others) and sometime in resplendent glory, to
give evidence of his Godhead: As here Esaias saw his glory, which gives us to
understand that the glory of other visions showed to the Prophets, were the
glory of Christ also. See 1 Cor. 10.9. 4. The more of Christ's glory be seen,
and the more means men have, the greater will the obduration of wicked men be;
for, these thing; (of men's being blinded and hardened) said Esaias, when he saw
his glory, and spoke of him, intimating, that as in his time, there was never
greater hardness then when most of Christ was seen and spoken of; So in the
days of the Gospel, when the Sun of righteousness should shine most brightly,
the hardness would be greatest of all.

Ver. 42. Nevertheless, among the chief rulers also, many believed on him;
but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be
put out of the Synagogue.

43. For they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God.


In these verses is recorded Christ's success among another sort of hearers,
even hid and timorous friends, and these of chief rank. Of these it is said. 1.
That though they did indeed believe, yet they durst not confess, nor avow
Christ. 2. That the impediment hindering them, was fear of excommunication from
the Pharisees. 3. That the reason why this was an impediment, was their love of
credit and applause among men, which they, in this particular, preferred to
the approbation of God. Which albeit where it bears full swey, is an
invincible impediment to grace, Chap. 5.44. Yet prevailing here but in part,
and being only in one particular of not confession, it does not anul the
reality of their grace, though it prove the great weakness thereof.

From verse 42. Learn, 1. Even in times of greatest obstinacy, and where the
Word comes worst speed, the Ministry will still have some success, and not be
in vain; Therefore is it declared, that in this time, Christ had some hidden
ones (beside his own flock that followed and avowed him) who believed on him,
when the generality were hardened. See 1 King. 19.18. Romans 11.4. 2. Christ is
so powerful in the Ministry of his Word, that he will (when he pleases) work
upon them who have many impediments in their way, and who are amongst the most
bitter enemies to him; for, among the chief rulers also (who were bitter
enemies to Christ) many believed on him. And albeit they were under so many
tentations, that they durst not confess him; yet they are made to believe. 3.
Albeit the conversion of any be a work of omnipotency; yet the conversion of
the greater sort of men, who have so many tentations and impediments in their
way, is more to be admired then the bringing in of the meaner sort, especially
in corrupt times of the Church; Therefore is it especially marked, that among
the chief rulers also, many believed on him. 4. There may be true faith and
grace, where yet there is much infirmity, to smother and bear it down; for,
they believed on him, though they durst not avow it. This ought not to make men
flatter themselves in their weakness, but should teach others to be charitable,
and to encourage and stir up such to be more strong, having such a seed in them
as will prevail, and not to weaken their hands from duty, by thinking they are
graceless, because they are weak. 5. Faith is in a very weak condition, when
confession is not joined with it, and when men do not profess Christ and the
true Religion, nor avow him in troublous times, and by their conversation lift
not up a banner, professing that they are his followers; for, this was the
infirmity of their faith, although they believed on him, yet they did not
confess him. Albeit a bate outside profession be to be condemned, yet if it be
well grounded, it is commendable, and as necessary in its own kind, as
believing is in its kind, Romans 10.10. 6. Carnal fear of men, and danger from
them, is a great impediment to the avowing of Christ; for, because of the
Pharisees, they did not confess him. Albeit they were not so powerful against
Christ, as to hinder their heart from believing, yet they deterred them from
confessing with their mouths. This is an impediment to be removed by trust in
God, Prove. 29.25. and by the fear of his dreadfulnesse, Matthew 10.28. 7. It is a
great judgment, and an evidence of great wickedness in men, when not only men
will not come to Christ themselves, but they are a terror to all these who
would embrace and avow him; for, such were the Pharisees here, because of whom
they did not confess him. See Matthew, 23.13. 8. Albeit all men are naturally
afraid to hazard any thing for Christ; Yet, ordinarily, fear prevails most
with them who are eminent, and have most to loose; for, it was the chief
rulers, who, because of the Pharisees, did not confess him, lest they should
lose their place and reputation; But it was otherwise with the blind man,
Chap. 9.30. -- 34. 9. Excommunication is a divine Ordinance in the house of
God, and which was in force in the most corrupt times of the Jewish Church; As,
here, they kept it in use, to put men out of the Synagogue, of which we have
spoken formerly. 10. Not only mean persons, but professors of greatest rank
and place in the Church, are subject to the censure of excommunication, and it
may justly be inflicted, upon their miscarriage; for, herein also they followed
the rule, that even the chief rulers were kept under hazard of being put out of
the Synagogue. 11. In corrupt times of the Church, Christ's Ordinances are all
abused, and the edge of censures turned against him and his followers; for, so
was it here, they who did confess Christ were in hazard to be put out of the
Synagogue. 12. Excommunication is in it self a dreadful censure, and ought to
be esteemed so by all Church members, albeit the inflicting thereof injustly
ought not to terrify men from duty; for, it was their carnal fear that made
them shrink from duty, lest the Pharisees should injustly inflict it, yet their
fearing of it, though chief Rulers, testifies how much that censure in it self
was feared in that Church.

From verse 43. Learn, 1. It is not enough to see the evils into which men
break out and fall, unless also the causes drawing on this evil be seen and
discovered; Therefore does John search into the fountain-cause driving them on
this snare. 2. Shame and disrespect for Christ's cause, is true glory and honor
in Gods account; for, it is supposed that if they had lost the praise of men,
it had been their praise from God. 3. There is no greater snare to draw a man
from duty, then inordinate affection to his credit and reputation; for, if all
other losses they might have sustained, this entangled them most, that they
would loose the praise of men. 4. Self love, and selfe-seeking, and hunting
after credit and applause, are evils so dear to men, and so deeply rooted in
them, that even believers may be overpowered by strong remainders thereof, even
sometime to the neglecting of Gods testimony and approbation; for, even they
who believed on him, ver. 42. yet loved the praise of men more then the praise
of God. 5. So long as men let thoughts of earthly credit and reputation
swallow up the thoughts of divine approbation and praise, they will never
clearly avow Christ and his truth, in a time of trial; for, they did not
confess him, ver. 42 for, they loved the praise of men more then the praise of
God. Whereas the more men study to approve themselves to God, and rest in his
approbation, the more vile will this worlds praise grow in their eyes, and it
will stumble them the less to want it. 6. Such as are taken up with their
credit, and with applause from men, neglecting Gods approbation, they do make
a very poor choice, and lose more then they can gain; for, it is insinuate, as
their fault and di^advantage every way, that they loved the praise of men
(which is of no worth) more then the praise of God, wherein men's happiness
consists.

Ver. 44. Jesus cried, and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me,
but on him that sent me.
Follow^th Christ's farewell-Sermon to the Jews, c^ncerning his person, office,
and doctrine, pointing out the advantages that men reap by believing in him,
and the danger of rejecting him and his doctrine. And albeit the G^e^k
particles which answer each to other, ver. 42, 44. do import that this doctrine
had a special relation to the faintheartedness of these believers formerly
spoken of; Yet the subject matter extend, both to the open unbeleevers, and
them. And the whole purpose may be taken up in several arguments, pleading
against the unbelief of many, and the faintheartedness of believers, who did
not confess him. The first argument is insinuate in Christ's practice, of
crying, whereby he insinua^es the importance of this subject, that they should
believe in him, however they slighted it, and avows his zeal in this matter,
when others hid themselves. The second argument (in this verse also) points out
the advantage of faith from the object thereof, who is God. They who believe on
him, believe not on him, but on him who sent him: which is not to be understood
simply, that Christ is not the object of faith, but with relation to their
conceptions of Christ, as a mere man, and opposite to G^d: and so the meaning
is; That which he calls them unto, is not a faith in him as man, but a faith in
God, and not a faith in him only, but a faith in the Father also, who is in
Christ, and one and the same God with him, as the following verse clears. And
so the encouragement is, That be being true God, equal and one in essence with
the Father, their faith in believing on him, should be in God, and they should
find the Father in him, which might both stir up the unbeliever to believe,
and the fainthearted believer, to avow him. Whence learn, 1. Whatever be men's
thoughts, concerning Christ, and faith in him, for attaining salvation; yet it
is in it self a matter of greatest consequence and importance; Therefore,
Jesus cried, and said, when he spoke of it, as being necessary to be in^^lcate.
2. Whatever be men^ carriage, in maliciously rejecting or not avowing of
Christ: Yet true ze^l in others ought not to be blunted, b^t ^ather set on edge
thereby; for, herein Christ is a pattern, who cried, in commending his person
and doctrine in the midst of that corrupt and fainthearted g^^e ^^i^n. 3.
Christ's diligence and earnestness, in persuading sinners to come to him, is
such, as will leave all despisers inexcusable; for, not only does he come again
in public, after he had lately departed from them, but when he comes, he
zealously and affectionally cried, to persuade them. 4. The reason why faith in
Christ is so little endeav^u^ed after by men, and way believers are so little
bold in avowing of it, is, because the worth and consequence thereof is so
little seen; Therefore Christ points out the excellency thereof, as a special
mean to convince and persuade them. 5. The worth of faith is then taken up,
when men study the object thereof well, and that they are not called to make
flesh their arm, or to trust in dumb idols, but in the living and true God:
Therefore does he commend says here, that by believing on him, they believe
also on him that sent him, and consequently, on him as true God one with the
Father. See Joh. 14.1. 2 Timothy 1.12. 6. It may encourage also to says, that
believers do not only fasten upon an infinite deity, but do ascend up to God
through Christ the Mediator, and tryst with the Father in him, who is true God
one in essence with him; for, this is the order here, by believing on me they
believe on him that sent me, says he. See 2 Cor. 5.19. and 3.4. 1 Pet. 1.21.
7. For taking up the right meaning of Scripture, men must not always look to
what the outward sound of words at first view would seem to say; but all
circumstances, and the speakers scope, must be seriously pondered; for, unless
we take these word^ as spoken with an eye to the Jews apprehensions of Christ,
we shall fall in a foul error, that believers do not believe on Christ, which
is contrary to the very scope of the place, and to other Scriptu^es, Joh 14.1.
8. Albeit it pleased the Father to send Christ as his Ambassador into the
world, and he came in obedience to that call; Yet this diminishes not the
glory of the sender, nor of the person sent: for, both Christ, and he that sent
him, is true God, the object of saving says.

Ver. 45. And he that sees me, sees him that sent me.
In this verse we have a confirmation of the second argument, that believers in
Christ believe on the Father also; showing, that Christ being one, not in
person, but in essence, with the Father, none can see him spiritually and by
faith, but they must see the Father also, not only with him, but in him, and
one with him, as being the brightness of his glory, and express image of his
person, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.15. Whence learn, 1. True faith is accompanied with
knowledge, and faith must contemplate Christ, to feed on his fullness, and six
its eye on him for help and relief, as of old they did on the b^azen serpent;
for, he that believes on me, ver. 44. is expounded to be, he that sees me. 2.
Such as get an eye of faith to see Christ, will see him true God and one with
the Father; for, be that sees me, sees him that sent me. Unto a believer and
a discerning eye, the glory of his divinity will thine through his greatest
abasement, as Matthew. 16.16. and 27.54. 3. The Father is not to be seen but in
the Son, nor can believers know what he is, but by seeing what the Son is, and
what they see the Son to be, that the Father is in him; for, he that sees me,
sees him that sent me.

Ver. 46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me,
should not abide in darkness.
The third argument pleading against these evils, is taken from the fruit and
utility following on faith in him; to wit, That he coming to be the light of
the world, believers in him will partake thereof, and not abide in darkness: of
which we have had occasion to speak before. Whence learn, 1. The world without
Christ is lying under the power of darkness, both of ignorance and
wickedness, and all miseries following thereupon, for, the world needs light.
2. Christ is the discoverer of men's misery, and of the remedy thereof, and is
the true cordial and comfort of sinners against all their miseries; for, says
he, I am come a light into the world 3. As Christ is the true light of the
world, so it pleased him to be at pains to manifest himself unto the world, to
make men partakers of the fruits and benefits thereof; for, I am come a light
into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness. 4.
The way to partake of the benefits that are in Christ, is to embrace his person
by says, and so to draw out that fullness of consolation that is in him; for,
the promise is made to whosoever believes o^ him. 5. Believers in Christ, as
they ought to shine as lights, being illuminate by him, who is the light of the
world, Phil. 2.15. and as children of light, Ephesians. 5 8. So they shall by faith
be translated out of the Kingdom of darkness, as to the state of their
person, Col. 1.13. and shall daily partake of that light of direction,
refreshment, and consolation that is in him; for, whosoever believes on me,
shall not abide in darkness. And if men would in the first place cherish
faith, their light and consolation would grow more.

Verse 47. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: For
I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

48. He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges
him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.


The fourth argument is taken from the sad judgment abiding all unbeleevers
and rejecters of him, and his doctrine; For which end, he appealeth them to the
judgment of the last day; Declaring, that however in his first coming, his e^
and was not to judge, but to offer salvation and mercy to the world; Yet they
should be judged in the last day; And though there were no other witness, yet
his Word preached should be a sufficient testimony against them, at that time.
For further clearing of what is said of the end of Christ's coming, compare,
Chap. 3.17. Only it is to be marked, that this argument strikes mainly against
the wicked unbeleevers, and not the other sort, save in so far as by continuing
in not confessing of him when he inculcates that duty upon them, they prove
themselves never to have been sound believers.

From verse 47. Learn, 1. Not only rich promises and gracious offers, but even
sharp threatenings are a mean appointed of God to stir up men to embrace the
Gospel; Therefore is the argument subjoyned to the rest here. 2. Albeit the
Gospel be glad tidings of joy, and contain cordials and remedies against all
the curses and threatning^ of the Law; Yet it contains also threatenings against
despisers, as terrible as any threatening of the Law; as here we see. 3.
Whatever be the judgments to come on these who hear not the Gospel, yet their
danger is by far greatest, who hear and obey not; for, this threatening is
against them who hear Christ's words. See Chap. 15.22. 4. Not only are they
guilty of sin, and liable to judgment, who having the opportunity, yet will
not hear, or who hearing, do persecute; But even they also who hearing, will
not believe nor give credit to what has been said, and close with it
accordingly; for, the threatening goes out against them who hear and believe
not. 5. Such is Christ's mercy and long suffering, that when men do not believe
on him, yet he will essay them with mercy* and leave them ro^me for repentance
and faith; for, says he, I judge him not, to wit, as yet, and I came to save
the world. Albeit the unbeleeve^ be already condemned by the sentence of the
Law, Joh. 3.18. and does carry his dittay in his bosom with him, yet the full
sentence and execution is not past at first, but he is yet waited on. 6. Albeit
Christ be always Judge of the world, yet in his first coming, he laid aside
the person of a Judge, and took on the office of a Mediator and Savior, to
offer and purchase mercy; for, I judge him not; for, I came not to judge the
world. but to save the world. 7. In Christ's ^^st coming his proper errand was,
and the nature o^ his work tended, to save sinners; So that if it be an
occasion of condemnation to any, they have themselves and their own corruptions
to blame, in that they stumble at, and do abuse their own mercy; for, it is
held out here as Christ's proper errand, not to judge the world, but to save the
world.

From verse 48. Learn, 1 Christ and his doctrine are inseparable, and as the
one is entertained, so is the other; for, rejecting him is joy^ed with not
receiving his words. So that where the Word has no place, he is rejected. 2.
Whatever use men may seem to make of Christ's Word, yet none are believers
thereof, but they who so hear, as to receive and admit it into their hearts,
and Christ in it; for, so, not to believe, ver. 47. is expounded, he rejects
me, and receives not my words. 3. It is not their sin who are studying to
believe and yet are kept wrestling under the power of unbelief, that Christ
will bring into judgment; but the sin of these who care not to believe; for,
such are to be judged here, who reject me, etc. 4. It is a sad plague on wicked
unbeleevers who hear the Gospel, that their unbelief is joined with disdain to
Christ, and contempt of his Gospel and grace; and that Christ will so judge of
it; for, so Christ calls it here, he that rejects me (with contempt and
disdain, choosing other things before me, as the Word imports) and receives
not my words, not accounting them worthy to have any place with him. 5. Albeit
sin be not soon punished; yea, albeit Christ be the Mediator of sinners; yet
such as despise him, he will not keep them from judgment; for, such a man has
one that judges him, whereby is meant, not so much that the Father does judge
them, though the Son at his first coming, do not, as that certainly they will
not escape a Judge and judgment, as is after cleared. See Prove. 11.2. Eccles.
8.11, 12. 6. However the Lord deal with men here, and however in his
forbearance they may escape judgment; Yet they will not escape the judgment
of the last day, which will sadly enough compense all delays; for, he shall be
judged in the last day. 7. Albeit in the day of judgment, wicked men will be
called to an account for all their sins against the Law; Yet the contempt of
the Gospel will be their saddest dittay; for, he that rejects me, the word
that I have spoken shall judge him, that is, the Word of the Gospel delivered
by Christ, in whose mouth soever it be, though it will have its own peculiar
weight against these who heard him, that he came and spoke it himself. 8.
Though all other witnesses against a wicked man were gone; yet the Word
preached will stand up against him, as a witness and dittay in the great day:
for, the word shall judge him in the last day. It shall be a witness of what
was offered, and make up a dittay against him for his contempt, upon which
Christ shall pronounce sentence. 9. The Word of God is so sure and infallibly,
that Christ's sentence in the great day (when heaven and earth shall pass away)
shall proceed according to the verdict and testimony thereof; for, the word
that I have spaken, shall judge him in the last day. Christ will pronounce then
according to what it says now, and that as well in favors of believers, as
against unbeleevers.

Ver. 49. For I have not spoken of my self; but the Father which sent me, he
gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.

50. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak
therefore even as the Father said unto me so I speak.


The last argument serves to confirm and clear the former, and is taken from
the authority of his doctrine. For, whereas they might except, that they were
not afraid of his words, as being only his own. He answers, that he spoke not
of himself, but what was the Fathers word also, And to confirm this, 1. He
declares that he had received a commission from the Father who sent him,
concerning his doctrine, and what to say and speak. 2. That he was persuaded
this doctrine delivered to him by the Father, points out the true way to
eternal life. 3. That he had exactly followed this commission in preaching,
both for matter and manner. Hence the argument concludes strongly two ways. 1.
That his Word and doctrine being divine, and the Fathers as well as his, it was
sufficient to judge and condemn all despisers. 2. That his doctrine only
pointing out the true way to life, and means of attaining it, they could not
miss condemnation who would not hearken unto it. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
Christ's doctrine be his own, as he is true God and the wisdom of the Father;
Yet it is not his own, as mere man, nor as secluding the Father, who is one God
with him, and who gave him a commission and instructions as Mediator; for, I
have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, etc. 2. The Father is the author and approver of Christ's
doctrine, no less then Christ himself; for, I have not spoken of my self,
etc. 3. No word, but Gods Word, is sufficient to condemn men for disobedience;
and if men cannot prove their doctrine to be divine, it is neither to be
obeyed, nor are terrors for the neglect thereof to be regarded; Therefore
Christ takes this as the proof that his Word shall judge men, ver. 48. for, I
have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And this he exactly
followed, as ver. 50. The two words, of saying, and speaking, may be taken
comprehensively, as pointing out all the ways of delivering his commission, by
set and solemn preaching, or occasional conferences; and the whole subject
matter of his preaching, in precepts, promises and threatenings. And so it will
import, that his commission from the Father was full, both for matter and
manner, and his discharge thereof answerable. Yet this variety of expression is
not to be insisted on, seeing in the following verse Christ uses one of the
words in place of both. 4. When men speak by commission from another, and
according thereunto, the refuser of the message must be accountable to the
Author and sender thereof; for, so does Christ prove his Word should judge
them, seeing God is the author thereof, who will call them to an account. 5.
The sum of Christ's doctrine, which he delivered from the Father, is, to point
out eternal life to lost sinners, and the way and means leading thereunto; for,
his commandment (or the doctrine, which I, at his command, have preached) is
life everlasting. See Joh 17.3. 6. Whatever esteem sinners have of the Gospel;
yet it is sure in it self that there is no salvation by any other way or
doctrine, but by embracing thereof; and as Christ is, so every Preacher ought
to be persuaded of the excellency thereof; Therefore, says Christ, in
opposition to all their misconstructions, I know that his commandment is life
everlasting. 7. Christ is a true Prophet, who spoke neither more or less in
the doctrine of the Gospel, then what was the Fathers will should be delivered
to us; for, whatsoever I speak, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. 8.
It is the duty of the Messengers of the Gospel to cleave close to their
commission, without adding or diminishing; for, herein Christ's practice is a
pattern of their duty. 9. Such as are persuaded of the excellency and absolute
necessity of the Gospel, will cleave to it, and publish it in their stations,
were their discouragements never so many, or the opposition made to them never
so great; for, upon this, I know that his commandment is life everlasting,
Christ infers this by way of conclusion, whatever I speak therefore, even as
the Father said to me, so I speak. Intimating that upon this knowledge of the
worth of his doctrine, he cleaves to it, and speaks it, however they contemned
him and it.

CHAP. XIII.
HItherto John has recorded Christ's proceedings in his ministry with all sorts
of people, and especially these things in his doctrine and miracles which had
been omitted by the other Evangelists. Now in this and the following chapters,
to chap. 18 he records Christ's carriage toward his disciples, in taking his
farewell at the last passover; omitting (for most part) what the rest have set
down, and recording what they had omitted. And in this Christ having warned
them of a traitor among themselves, of his removal from them by his death, and
his resurrection and ascension following thereupon, and of their own trials and
exercises they were to meet with; He does largely let forth his heart unto
them, in sweet cordials against his death and departure from them, in notable
directions and encouragements unto them as preachers of the Gospel, and in
delivering his full Testament to them, and to all Saints in them: Closing all
with a solemn and public prayer to the Father.

In this chapter is recorded, 1. Christ's washing of the disciples feet, with
the interpretation thereof, ver. 1. -- 17. 2. His discovering of Judas the
traitor, ver. 18. -- 30. 3. Christ's doctrine to the disciples, upon Judas his
removal, ver. 31. -- 35. 4. His repression of Peter's rash presumption, ver. 36,
37, 38.

Ver. 1. NOw before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour
was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.
This first part of the Chapter, containing Christ's washing of his disciples
feet, may be taken up in this order. 1. The circumstance of time is noted,
wherein this and what follows was done, together with some causes and
considerations moving Christ so to do at such a time, ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. The fact
it self is recorded, ver. 4, 5. 3. The interpretation thereof is subjoyned,
partly, upon occasion of Peter's refusal, wherein, chiefly, this was^ing their
feet is expounded as it is a sign of inward washing, ver. 6. -- 11. and
partly, after he had done with washing, wherein he expounds what he meant by
his doing of that servile employment of washing their feet himself at that
time, ver. 12. -- 17.

In this verse we have recorded, a more general designation of the time, that
it was before the feast of the Passover; together with the first and chief
cause and consideration leading Christ to this practice, and what followed;
Namely, that he did constantly and unchangably love his own, and therefore,
knowing that now his time to depart from them was approaching at this feast, he
was resolving beforehand to give them some ample proof of his love, as
accordingly he did in washing their feet, preaching sweetly unto them, and
praying for them. For clearing the words, Consider, 1. While John says, that
this was before the feast of the Passover, it was not so to be understood, as
if this were done before the feast, for that supper, ver. 2. after which he
washed their feet, was the passover. But the meaning is; That he was thinking
and resolving on this practice before he sat down, either that same day, or
possibly some days before: And, that albeit it was done at the supper of the
passover, yet it was done before the feast of unleavened bread at the
passover, which began the day following, Lev. 23.5, 6, 7. yea, and before the
day which the Jews observed for eating the passover, as we will hear on ver.
2. Consider, 2. Whereas this love of Christ toward his own, breaks forth in
these sweet effects toward the disciples only; Yet in this they are not to be
looked on as so many individual men, nor as Apostles, nor yet as representing
Ministers only, but also as representing all Christ's true children, who are
edified and comforted by what he did to them, and whose allowance and legacy
Christ did here commit to his Apostles in their name, as to the general
Teachers of his Church, to be by them and their successors published to his
own throughout the world. And therefore the denomination is general, his own,
that every one who make sure an interest in him, may put in their own name.
Doctrine 1. As Christ came into this world, to work the work of redemption; so
there was a set time wherein he departed out of it, in respect of his bodily
presence; for, there is an hour, wherein he should depart out of this world. 2.
Christ choosed the time of the Jewish passover to suffer in, that he might
prove himself to be the substance of that type, whose blood it is that
delivers us from the destroying Angel, and by whose obedience unto death we are
delivered from the bondage of sin, the tyrany of Satan, and the leaven of
corruption and unsoundness, answerable to the temporal delivery of Israel from
Egypt and Pharaoh, and their observation of the feast with unleavened bread;
Therefore it is marked that at the feast of the Passover, his hour was come
wherein he should depart out of this world. See 1 Cor. 5.7. 3. Christ was not
surprised with his sufferings, nor were they carried out according to the will
of enemies; But the time thereof was determined, and he knew of it before hand:
for, Jesus knew that his hour was come. 4. Christ may be trusted by his people,
and they may commit all their lots to him, who is on all his Fathers counsels,
and knows all the machinations of his enemies; Therefore is he pointed out
here, as knowing all that was coming, even the treachery of Judas also, that he
may be trusted in as an omniscient Lord. 5. It is not enough to foresee what
troubles will come, or may come, unless we spend our time profitably, in
preparing and making ready for them; Therefore is Christ's knowing that his hour
was come, marked, as a reason why he was so busy in the following purpose;
Namely, that as his enemies were making ready, so he was making ready also; and
having nothing to do for himself, he spends his time in preparing the
disciples for the storm. 6. Christ not only lets out proofs of his love to
his own, when they need them; But he is thinking thoughts of peace, and
resolving to let them out, when they little dream of such a thing, till it
appear: Therefore it is marked, that before the feast of the Passover, Christ
was foreseeing the storm, and resolving to let out proofs of love to his
disciples, which yet appeared not till after supper, ver. 2. 7. There is no
difficulty so sad, but Christ and his followers may get a comfortable look of
it, were it even of death it self; for, herein Christ has cast a copy, who
looked on his sad and bitter death, with what followed in his resurrection and
ascension, as a departing out of this world, unto the Father. 8. It is a
comfortable sight of death unto Saints, that hereby they are translated from
the miseries, toiles, and vexations, of this world, to go rest with, and enjoy
God; for, herein has Christ led the way, who departed out of this world, unto
the Father, and did so look on his death. 9. It adds to the comfortable sight
of death, that Saints do hereby not only go to God, but do go to him as their
Father through Christ; for, so did Christ; for, so did Christ depart unto the
Father, and made way for our going to him as a Father in him, as Chap. 20.17,
10. It ^ds also to the consolation, that as the time of our change is
determined by God; so it is measured by hours, which will at last come to an
end, and the prisoners be set free; for, now after some time and hours in
serving his generation, the determined hour was come, wherein he should depart
out of this world. 11. Albeit Christ conversed but a short while in the world,
in respect of his bodily presence; yet he did make and daily makes a fair
purchase in it by drawing sinners to himself; for, he has his own in it. 12.
As Christ's people ought to resign themselves to him, and be wholly for him; so
he has a peculiar interest in them, is specially concerned in all their
conditions, and, allows special favors, privileges, and care, upon them;
for, they are his own, or his property and peculiar ones. 13. Love, even the
infinite love of tender hearted Christ, is the allowance and portion of all his
peculiar ones; for, he loved his own. 14. Albeit Christ leave his children in
this tempestuous world, to be humbled with the relics of sin, and tossed with
the tempests of time; Yet that does neither take away their interest in him,
nor his love toward them; for, he loved his own in the world. 15. The
disadvantages of Saints, and particularly, their being lest in the world when
Christ went out of it, is so far from hindering his love toward them, that it
is rather an argument why he should love them, and let out more of it; for, it
is not only not an hinderance of his love, but an argument also, he loved his
own, because they were in the world. And especially now, in his farewell, he
would give a proof of it, considering the dangers unto which they were left
exposed. 16. It is not enough to see Christ's love toward his Saints in some
particular passages, but they must labor to see an uninterrupted course
thereof, from the time of their closing with him; Therefore, now at his
farewell, he clears all by-go^ as, that he had hitherto loved them, as well as
he was now to give a proof of it. Having loved his own, etc. 17. Christ's love
is not to be measured by kind outlettings to the satisfaction of sense, but
the sum o^ all his dealing toward his own, is love, which ought to be read in
every condition and dispensation, were it even in keeping up his tender heart
for a time; for, albeit there had been many several passages betwixt him and
his disciples, and some of them very cross to their humors; yet all is summed
up in this, he had loved his own. 18. Christ's special love toward his own is
unchangable, and incessant, till they be perfected, and enjoy the full effects
thereof; for, having loved his own, he loved them to the end, He continued his
love from the beginning till now he is to dye for them and depart from them,
and continues it even then, and will do so, till they be brought to the end of
their journey. 19. Christ's love is not a decaying love, but a love that
continually grows in effects; Nor is it a love that consists only in good
affection and wishes, but breaks forth in notable expressions, as he has
witnessed by his dying for his own; for, he loved them to the end, even to the
death he suffered for them, and in so doing, he loved them perfectly, as the
Word also will signify, proving that his love was a growing love, in letting
out such abundant effects at the last. 20. When Christ's followers are in any
danger, then unchangeable love will be on foot, to cover their infirmities
under tentation, and to provide cordials for them, and testify his special
care of them; for, this his love is marked as a cause why now, (when he is to
remove they are to be scattered and shaken with tentation, and left desolate,)
he will let out so much of his heart in the following purpose, and give them
such sweet instructions in the following sign and explication thereof. And
indeed, his love suffers much in his Disciples need, and if there were no more,
his love is enough to move him to see them well.

Verse 2. And supper being ended (the devil having now put into the heart of
Judas Iscariot Simons son to betray him)?

3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hand, and that
he was come from God, and went to God:

4. He rises from Supper, --


In the first of these verses, the circumstance of time, wherein Christ did
these things that follow, is more exactly noted, that it was after supper; Unto
which is subjoyned a second consideration leading him to the following
practice; Namely, That Satan had now prevailed with Judas to betray his Master;
which as it holds out a ground why our mild Lord, who hitherto had borne with
Judas naughtiness, and pointed at it only in general, is now pressed to
discover him more particularly, ver. 21. since it concerned him in his glory to
foretell it before the hand: So, more especially, it is a ground of his washing
their feet, and of his following sweet and useful doctrine. For knowing his
time to be now short, and that this night Judas would betray him; He does
busily bestir himself, to pour out his heart in his disciples bosom, and will
let no minute of time slip, but in that one night did fully discover his heart
unto them, and give an ample proof of that love mentioned, ver. 1. In the
other verse is subjoyned a third consideration moving him to this practice,
Namely, That notwithstanding Judas treachery, and his approaching sufferings,
yet he knew his own excellency and greatness, that all power and authority is
committed to him, and that as he came from God by his incarnation, so he was
but returning to God by the chariot of his sufferings. Which as it points out
his admirable condescendence, that in the midst of such thoughts, he will stoop
to so base an employment; So it contains a sweet ground of his following
practice, in that, however his hazard was near, yet seeing through all these
clouds, he is at leisure to mind and promove his disciples good, who would be
in greater need through his suffering and removal from them.

For further clearing of ver. 2. Consider, 1. Whereas it is said, that supper
being ended, he did this, and yet ver. 12. he sat down again after washing,
and ver. 26. meat is before him, of which he distributes to Judas; we are to
consider, that the words may very well be rendered, not only supper being ended,
but while the supper was, or, while it was supper intimating that he did what
follows in the time of the supper, and did interrupt it for a time, for that
end. However, it suffices us to know that the Passover was eaten before he
arose, and that which he sat down to again, was a second service, or common
supper subjoyned to it, during which he instituted the Sacrament of the Supper.
Consider, 2. It is a greater difficulty to clear how Christ should e^t the
Passover this night, and yet it should seem the Jews did not eat it till the
night following, Joh. 18.28. They who assert that Christ did anticipate the
time, and eat it a day sooner then was appointed, that so he, who was our true
Passover, might suffer on that day, whereon God appointed the Passover to be
killed and eaten; They, I say, seem not to remember that Christ was a fulfiller
of all righteousness: Nor was there any such prediction of Christ's suffering
on that day, as should necessitate him to transgress a positive precept. Nor
do they sufficiently clear the difficulty, who assert, that the Jews did eat
the Passover the same night with Christ, being the fourteenth day of the
month; and that what is said, Joh. 18.28. of the Jews keeping themselves
undefiled, that they might eat the Passover, is not to be understood of the
Paschal lamb, but of the peace offerings on the first day of the feast of
unleavened bread, whereof the sacrificers had a share to feast on For it will
not be cleared from Scripture, that to eat the passover, is spoken of any
other thing then of the very Paschal lamb. Beside Joh. 19.14. the day whereon
Christ suffered, is called the preparation of the passover, and ver. 31. the
sabbath day thereafter is called an high day, which imports more, as we shall
hear. 1. Therefore, for clearing the difficulty, it is to be conceived, that
the Jews by an ancient tradition (received, as is supposed in Babel) when ever
any extraordinary solemnity fell on the day immediately preceding an ordinary
Sabbath, they used to translate the festivity to the Sabbath following, lest
there should be two days concurring wherein they might not work. And so here
the first day of the feast of the Passover, or unleavened bread, (which, with
the last of the seven days of the feast, was an holy convocation, Number. 28.16,
17, 18, 25.) falling according to the appointment of the Law, upon the day
immediately preceding the Sabbath, they deferred not only the following feast,
but even the eating of the Passover till the evening of the fifteenth day of
the month, which should have been the first day of the feast, (as seems to
be clear from Joh. 18.28. and 19.14.) and the least it self, they conjoined
with the ordinary Sabbath following for which cause it is called an ^igh day,
Joh. 19.31. because of the conjunction of two festivities. For the mid-dayes of
the feast of unleavened bread, betwixt the first and the last, were not so
solemnly observed, as to give such a denomination to this Sabbath. Now Christ,
not heeding their Traditions, did punctually observe the day institute by God,
not so much out of necessity, because he had no longer time to live (for he
might have prorogate his sufferings) as to show how closly we ought to cleave
to a rule in the matter of institute worship, and how dangerous it is to
deviate, let the alteration have never so many fair pretenses for it. And
whereas it may be objection, that this differing from the common practice would
have been full of hazard to Christ, and matter of accusation against him, which
yet they never produce: It is to be conceived (for answer) not only that Christ
did not stand on hazard who was now going to lay down his life, but further
also, that this matter being private amongst his disciples and the Master of
the house, (who it seems was a secret friend) could not so easily come to their
knowledge: Or, rather, (seeing Judas, when he went to the high Priests, might
easily have told it, if he had not been restrained) that the Jews did so
observe this Tradition, as yet in these troublous times, any who pleased to
submit to the institute rule, did follow it. Consider, 3. While it is said,
that the devil had now put it into the heart of Judas, to betray him, the
meaning is not, that either Satan only now began to tempt him to it, or that
the matter was now perfected; For it is clear from Matthew. 26.6. -- 16. that
upon occasion of the loss of the ointment, of which we heard, Chap. 12, 3, 4,
etc. he had made a bargain with the chief Priests about this matter, and from
ver. 27, 30. of this chapter it is clear, that after this he was wholly given
up to Satan, not only to project and capitulate about this business, but to
put it speedily in execution. So the meaning is, that Christ took notice at
this time, that Judas was lately prompted by Satan to go and capitulate about
the betraying of him, as a reason why he would now be busy with his disciples;
And so the words will read, that already (before this supper) the devil had put
it in his heart. To which may be added further, that through his abuse of the
Sacrament of the Passover, the devil got more footing, to confirm him in this
wicked resolution.

From v. 2. thus cleared, Learn, 1. Such as do seriously mind their duty, and
consider the short time they may have for it, will diligently improve every
moment of opportunity; for, supper being ended, (or in the time of the supper)
Christ falls to work, and will not let that moment of time betwixt the paschal
supper, and the rest of that meal, and his instituting of the Sacrament, pass
away without some useful instruction to his disciples. 2. Such as
conscientiously employ their time, may in a short minute thereof, (which being
idly spent, would seem nothing) do much good in their station; for, in a part
of that night, after supper was ended, Christ not only taught his disciples by
washing of their feet, but did deliver the sweet doctrine, and put up the
solemn prayer that follows. 3. As at all times, so especially before and after
the participation of the Sacrament, men ought to study purity, and their
obligation thereunto, that they may employ Christ to work it in them; for, so
much does this circumstance of time, wherein he washed the disciples feet,
import. It was, supper being ended, after their eating the paschal lamb, to
teach them their obligation to purity, who were made partakers of such a mercy:
And before the Sacrament of the Supper, to teach them preparation. 4. Albeit
Christ seem not always to take notice of men's plots against him; yet he has
still an eye upon them, and will give proof that he knows them, when either he
is to discover, or prevent, or improve them: Therefore, albeit John record
nothing of Christ's taking notice of Judas treachery, when he was disappointed
of the ointment, yet here it is remarked that, in due time, use is made hereof,
to move Christ to be diligent in dealing with the disciples, and to decipher
him. 5. As the right use of Sacraments, is a special mean of much good to the
godly; so Satan never gets greater advantage of wicked men, then after their
profane abuse of such precious Ordinances: Therefore also is it marked, that
supper being ended, the devil has now put it in his heart to betray him, or,
confirmed him yet more in this wicked resolution. 6 Albeit men's corruptions be
prone to all evil, and Satan have some hand in every evil; yet there are some
sins that are singularly diabolical, and wherein Satan has a chief hand, as
being such as could not be acted by a man in an ordinary course of sinning,
unless he were possessed and acted by Satan in an extraordinary manner; for,
this sin is not simply attribute to Judas, but the devil put in the heart of
Judas Iscariot, Simons son, to betray him. It was not a sin of humane
infirmity, but a devilish sin so to do. Such diabolical suggestions may be
darted into the bosom of believers, and therefore they are warned to quench
them, Ephesians. 6.16. But the wicked do give way to them. 7. The way whereby Satan
prevails with wicked men, is, first to haunt and pester their heart with his
suggestions, till they be gained, and then he will easily carry them in their
practice to act for him; for, thus did he begin here, he put it in the heart of
Judas Iscariot, etc. 8. Albeit the tentation and suggestion unto evil be from
Satan, yet men's corruptions furnish him matter to work upon, and their dwelling
upon wicked thoughts does furnish occasion to him to tempt, and blows up the
spark of his tentation into a flame; for, thus it appears, Satan got into his
heart by reason of his covetousness; for, being disappointed of the price of
the ointment, chap. 12.5, 6. he is grieved and vexed at it; and while he is
thinking how to make it up some other way, Satan darts in this, that he should
essay the trade of treachery, which presently kindled, as when fire is put to
powder. 9. Whatever be Satan's design against the man whom he tempts, or
against the Saints, when he stirs up persecutors; yet his great design is
against Christ himself; for, here he put in the heart of Judas to betray him,
not so much regarding the disciples, so long as he was in the world, to be the
Butt of his malice. 10. Satan does oppose himself against Christ and his
followers, not only by more immediate tentations, (whereof Christ also had
proof, Mat. 4) or by stirring up open persecutors; But one of his special
engines, is, to employ treacherous friends, to betray him and them; for, this
was Satan's great work, to get a domestic, Judas, to betray him. 11. Satan
getting way, may not only prevail with most eminent visible Professors, or
ordinary Teachers, but even with some among the very Apostles, to do a piece of
the worst service that ever was done to Christ; for, here he puts in the heart
of an Apostle, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, (so described, to distinguish him
from another Apostle of the same name, as chap 6.71.) to betray him. 12. No
apprehension or thoughts of trouble did alter Christ's heart toward his people;
but the more violent and near the storm was to him, the more diligent was he
to lay out himself for their good; Therefore is this treachery of Judas marked
here, to show that Christ's thoughts thereof, did but stir him up to be more
sedulous in instructing them. And if the thoughts of distracting trouble could
not take him off from his care of them, we have the less cause to fear his
forgetfulness of us, now when he is above all storms, in his own blessed
person.

From v. 3. Learn, 1. Whatever were the attempts of Satan and his instruments
against Christ, and whatever his condescendence was, to give way unto them; yet
he was truly excellent and great in the midst of all his condescendence and
sufferings; for, even when Judas is consulting to betray him, it held true that
the Father had given all things into his hands, etc. 2. Whatever it pleased
Christ to condescend unto, in his voluntary exmanition; yet he needed to be
little discouraged at the attempts of enemies, or his sufferings, as knowing
his own excellency, even in his greatest abasement; for, when Judas is seeking
to betray him, Jesus knew, even then, that the Father had given all things into
his hands, etc. 3 It is the duty of Saints in the time of their abasement and
trials, not to dwell always on the thoughts of these; but to raise up their
hearts in the consideration of their esteem with God through Christ, however
the world account of them, and of the issue of their trials however the world
think to cut them off thereby, as the offscouring of the earth; for, herein
Christ has cast them a copy, who while Judas is projecting his ruin, has his
heart fraught with thoughts of his own dominion and glory, and that as he came
from God, so he went to God, by his sufferings, 4. Christ, as Mediator, has a
sovereignty and power over all things committed to him, for his Churches good:
for, the Father has given all things into his hands etc. See chap. 3.35.
Wherein, as we may read his glory; so also, 1. That Saints may sleep soundly,
having such a friend at the helm of Providence. 2. That however wicked enemies
seem to rage at their pleasure against Christ and his followers; yet they are
given also into his hands; And, that as he in the midst of traitors and
enemies, was yet in the hands (if not of friends, yet) of servants and slaves;
so the most pernicious of them are given, through him, to the Church, for her
good. 3. That men are but great fools, when, notwithstanding all their
covetousness, they must be content with a few things, and yet all things might
be theirs, in a right sense and due order, through him, 1 Timothy 4.8. Matthew.
6.33. Romans 8.32. for all things are his, and theirs in him. 4. That they are no
less fools, who make themselves slaves to any thing, whereas in Christ they
might be Masters of all things. See 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Doct. 5. Whatever were
men's thoughts of Christ, yet he came from God in respect of the divine way of
his conception, and his Godheads stooping to converse with us in the shape of a
servant; And, he was his Ambassador, sent to deal with lost man in his Name;
for, he was come from God, yet so as he did not leave him. 6. However Christ
and his sufferings were looked on by carnal man; yet thereby he returned to
God, to be glorified with him as Mediator, yet so as he has not left his
people; for, he went to God. 7. Christ's thoughts of his excellency will not
hinder his condescendence to his own; but in his thoughts of greatest glory, he
will evidence greatest humility; and his knowing of his own excellency makes
him fit to mind his people in the midst of his greatest sufferings; for, this
purpose is premitted to his washing their feet, to show, how consistent his
thoughts of this are with his lowly stooping, (knowing all this, he rises from
supper, etc.) And it is subjoyned to Judas treachery, to show how little that
would hinder him, who was so high, from thinking upon his poor followers.
Hereby also we are assured, that as his thoughts of his glory did not, so his
possession of it does not hinder him from condescending to the necessities of
his own.

-- and laid aside his garments, and took a towell, and girded himself.

5. After that he pours water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples
feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girded.


In these verses, the fact it self, of Christ's washing his disciples feet, is
recorded. Wherein appears his admirable humility and self-denial, in that he
lays his state and his own refreshment, and rises from supper while his
servants sat still: he lays aside his upper garments, (which were loose) as
servants used to do when they went to work, or, to serve their Masters; he
girded himself with a towel, both to fasten his other garments upon him, that
he might be more fit for the work, and to have it in readiness to wipe their
feet with it. And having provided and brought the basin with water, he began to
wash and wipe their feet (which lay out behind them, as they leaned at table,
and) which was a most servile employment, 1 Samuel 25.41. I shall not need here
to enquire, whether the Jews had such a custom as this, to wash their feet
after their eating of the paschal Lamb, which Christ here imitates in so
singular a way, and emproves to so notable spiritual advantage. Nor shall I
need here to insist on this practice, which is so fully explained afterward.
Only, for present, Learn, 1. As Christ is infinitely glorious and exalted in
himself, so is he admirably humble and condescending to his people; for, our
High Lord rises from supper, etc. and began to wash his disciples feet. 2.
Christ's humility will stoop to do meanest things for his people, were it even
to become a servant to them; for, he acts all the parts of a mean servant here.
And he did this, being on earth, to give proof what mean necessities of ours he
will stoop to take notice of, though he be absent in body. 3. True humility is
the compendious way to true honor, and to be least in Christ's house is the way
to become greatest; for, so does he teach us, in that when he is about to go to
God, v. 3. he most eminently kithes his humility. 4. It is a special proof of
Christ's love, and of his care of his people in the midst of his sufferings and
glory, when he teaches humility and promoves it in them, by his Word, Example,
or Dispensations; for, herein all the former considerations, of his love to
them, and his care of them, when he thinks of his sufferings and glory, did
appear, in that he took this pains not only to stoop to them, but to cast them
a copy, and give them a lesson of humility.

Verse 6. Then comes he to Simon Peter: and Peter says unto him, Lord, do
thou wash my feet?

7. Jesus answered, and said unto him, What I do thou know not now: but thou
shall know hereafter.


Follows to v. 12. an exposition of this fact, upon occasion of an
interruption made by Peter; wherein chiefly this fact, and his doing of it, is
explained, as it is a sign of another inward washing. This Exposition may be
drawn out in three branches, contained in his threefold answer to Peter's
proposals and resolutions. In the first branch of the Exposition upon occasion
of Peter's question, testifying his admiration, and shunning of such
condescendence, he gives notice in general, that there was somewhat more in it
then the bare act, or then he saw for present, whereof he should be informed in
due time. And this relates to his doing this act, both as it was a sign, and
as it was a servile employment in it self. We need not curiously determine,
whether he had washen any before he came to Peter, who had made no such scruple
of it; But shall hold to what John here records, that coming to Peter, he meets
with this stop flowing from Peter's forwardness, and gives an answer to it.

From v. 6. Learn, 1. Our Lords humility yet further shines, in that not only
does he stoop to do meanest services to his people, but will be at all the
pains himself to do them good; for, he comes to Simon Peter, to wash him,
while he is sitting still at Table. 2. There is no interruption or impediment
laid in the way of Christ and his working, but he can, and does improve it to
precious ends and advantages; for, out of Peter's refusal and interruption he
beings out these precious instructions, which he would inculcate by his washing
of their feet. 3. Christ's abasing of himself, and condescending to his people,
ought not to obscure his Majesty, nor make them forget it; for, in the midst of
this his stooping, he is to Peter, Lord. 4. Christ's abasement and
condescendence for his peoples good, is truly admirable, and will be so in the
eyes of the truly godly; for, says he, by way of admiration; Lord, do thou
wash my feet! 5. The admirablenesse of Christ's condescendence will appear, if
we consider, either how glorious he is who stoops, even the Lord, or how low he
does stoop, even to wash feet; or, to whom he stoops, even to them who are
unworthy of what he does, and whom it beseems not to be so dealt with, though
it beseem him well so to deal; do thou wash my feet? says humble Peter. 6.
As it is commendable to fear, even at Christ's manifested goodness, Hos. 3.5.
So Saints ordinarily run to an extremity in that case, and do so fear and
tremble at it, as they are ready to decline and not to embrace it; for, Peter's
question imports not only his admiration at, but his desire to shun this
condescendence, and does put a stop to Christ's washing and conferring this
favor on him. See Luke 5.8. 7. Albeit Christ's stooping to us be a great
abasement of himself; yet it is the great error of Saints, to think that he
will not account it his great glory to serve them; for, herein also Peter
failed, in thinking Christ had forgot himself in this condescendence.

From v. 7. Learn, 1. Christ is very tender of the weaknesses of his own, so
long as they discover no obstinacy therein; for, he gives a mild answer to
Peter at first, till afterward his weakness burst forth. 2. Every work of
Christ toward his people, beside the work it self, carries some precious thing
of him in the bosom of it, and is laden with lessons and great things of his
wisdom, power, goodness, etc. for, so is supposed here, that Christ is doing
somewhat which Peter knows not. Which is not to be understood of the simple
washing their feet, (for Peter knew well enough that he was about to wash his
feet) but that this washing carried somewhat in the bosom of it. 3. That which
the Lord is doing by his works, is not often seen in the mean time, by them to
whom it is done; for, What I do thou know not now. Yea, wherein do not we
proclaim our ignorance and mistakes of what he is about? And no wonder we be in
the dark here, if we consider, 1. That the worker of these works is wonderful
in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 28.29. Infinitely beyond
Politicians, whose projects and purposes are oft-times hid from us, and
therefore much more his. 2. That the way of his working and bringing about of
his purposes, is very strange and unperceivable; for, he brings things out of
nothing, Romans 4.17. one contrary out of another, as light out of darkness, 2
Cor. 4.6. he brings meat out of the eater, and takes enemies in their own
snares. 3. That his end in working is not to satisfy our sense and curiosity,
but he chooses such a way, as may leave enemies to harden their hearts, and
may try and humble his people. Doct. 4. Albeit we cannot dive into the depth of
Christ's counsel in his working, yet we ought to reverence and adore him
therein, and not to contest with him; and to yield implicit obedience to his
Will, revealing our duty in such a case; for, albeit Peter know not now, what
he does, yet he would have him so far crediting that he did it not in vain, as
to submit to have his feet washed. 5. Christ will have us first yielding
obedience to his Will, because it is his Will, and to wait his leisure till we
know the reason of it: Otherwise, we do not obey because it is his Will, but
because of the reason of his Command; for, he will absolutely have him stoop to
be washed by him, and then wait till hereafter, to know what it means, and for
what end he does it. 6. Such as in dark cases do absolutely submit to Gods
Will, in the matter of duty or dispensations; they shall, in due time, see a
reason of his Will, and know so much of his counsel and purpose in his working,
as is needful for them; for, upon Peter's obedience is promised, that though
what I do, thou know not now, yet thou shall know hereafter. As accordingly
was made good in the following explication of all this, and when the Spirit was
poured out, he, with the rest, understood more fully this and other things.

Verse 8. Peter says unto him, Thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered
him, if I wash thee not, thou have no part with me.
In the secend branch of this Exposition, upon occasion of Peter's more
peremptory refusal, there is a further Exposition of the meaning of this
washing, and of the necessity of what he intended to point at thereby. For
Peter not acquiescing in what Christ had told him, but proceeding from
admiration to a wilful refusal, that Christ should wash his feet, as conceiving
it his duty in modesty to refuse; however Christ should press it: Christ
taking hardly with this, renounces all communion with him, and disclaims that
Peter had any interest in him, unless he did wash him. Which does not import
only that his wilful refusing to stoop to Christ's Will in this external
washing, would, if he persisted in it, prove him to be in a bad condition,
though that be true in it self: But chiefly, (as the following exposition of
washing their feet in particular makes clear) it points out that Christ, by
washing their feet, would (not institute a Sacrament, but) put them in mind of
soul washing, which as it can only be done by him, so without it, men can
prove no interest in him. And so the meaning of this washing in general is, to
point out the necessity of washing sinners by Regeneration, Justification, and
begun Sanctification, which was also the signification of their several washing
under the Law, Ps. 51.

From Peter's refusal, Learn, 1. Men may have much seeming humility in the
matters of God, which yet is but preposterous and sinful, and learnt from
carnal reason; for, such was Peter's humility, condemned by Christ here. See
Col. 2.18, 23. 2. It does not justify men's tentations and sinful humility,
that it seems to rise from much good, but we are to distinguish betwixt what is
really good, and what tentations Satan fastens on it; for, this condemned
humility did begin at admiration, at Christ's condescendence, v. 6. and grounded
it self upon his respect to Christ, and disesteem of himself. 3. It is an
evidence men are under a tentation, when they are stiff, and do pertinaciously
stand out against Christ's verdict; And in particular, it is but sinful
humility, when men will not submit to Christ's verdict and Will; for, this was
the fault in Peter's humility, that he would not take satisfaction from Christ,
concerning what he was doing. 4. It is but sinful and preposterous humility,
which refuses Christ's offer, whatever it be, or how unworthy soever we be of
it; for, this also was Peter's fault, Thou shall never wash my feet; He thought
himself unworthy of this condescendence, and therefore utterly refuses to
admit of his offer; so the contrary of this in the Churches admitting of
Christ's commendation, seeing he was pleased to have a desire toward her, Cant.
7.1, 2, etc. with v. 10.

From Christ's answer to Peter, Learn, 1. Saints, by what they do out of a
pretext of humility, may be running on a snare, and deserving sad threatenings
from him; for, Peter's humility meets with this entertainment. 2. It is Christ's
method, oft-times with his people, to break their obstinacy with sad
threatenings, and to boast them to their mercy, and from their preposterous
humility, when fair dealing will not persuade them; for, thus does he deal
with Peter. 3. It is the saddest of threatenings and judgments, to be secluded
from an interest in, and communion with Christ; Therefore is it held out to
Peter as a very sad case, Thou have no part in me, that is, no interest in him,
and consequently, no communion with him, nor share in that inheritance
purchased by him, and so is no coheir with him. 4. The contempt of an Ordinance
or Command of Christ, how mean-like soever, deserves the saddest of
threatenings, and that the contemner should be secluded from Christ; for, this
holds true, even of the outward washing, and his resisting thereof, when Christ
required it, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. By which sad
threatening Christ drives Peter to submit. 5. Soul-purging from sin is so
necessary, that without it men can have no evidence of interest in, or
communion with Christ; for, it holds chiefly true of the thing pointed at, If I
wash thee not, thou have no part with me. 6. It is neither the goodness of our
nature, nor legal purifications, or our own endeavors, that can either prove,
or make us clean; But it is Christ alone who must wash us, that we may
participate with him, and who must apply the merit and efficacy of his blood
for that end; for, If I wash thee not, faith he, thou have no part with me.

Verse 9. Simon Peter says unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head.
In the third branch of this exposition, upon occasion of Peter's running to
another extremity, Christ declares what he meant by washing their feet only. In
this verse we have Peter's proposal, occasioning the explication: He, being
afrighted with the former threatening, and (belike) now understanding what
Christ meant by this external washing, he is so far from refusing that Christ
should wash his feet, that he offers hands and head, and all to be washed.
Whence learn, 1. It is so terrible a thing to be threatened with separation from
Christ, that the thoughts thereof will cause a child of God draw nearer to
him, and make him condescend to any thing, rather then admit of that; for, this
brake Peter's obstinacy, and made him say, Lord, not my feet only, but also my
hands and mine head, before that be. 2. Saints, being sensible of sin, are
ready to forget their renewed and justified estate, and to look on themselves
as altogether polluted and corrupt; for, this may also be understood as Peter's
language, when he understood the signification of this washing. In which case,
he sees not only foul feet, but head and hands, and all to be washed, and
therefore upon that account, he offers them all to Christ. Which, though Christ
clear it to be his mistake, yet it is ofttimes the sad exercise of Saints. 3.
It is the great infirmity of Saints, that they run, for most part, upon
extremes; And when they leave one extremity, they return not to the right way,
but fall on the contrary extremity; for, whether we look to the external
action, or signification thereof, Peter did thus err, first in declining to be
washed at all, and then in offering more to be washed then Christ required.

Verse 10. Jesus says to him, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.
In this verse we have Christ's answer to this offer of Peter, wherein he clears
what he meant by washing their feet only: Namely, not only to testify his
humility by stooping so low, but further, to point out somewhat concerning
them. And 1. He propounds his mind in general doctrine, wherein the similitude
runs thus; That as a man going home from a bath needs not wash his whole body
again, but only his feet, which contract filth by walking, as they used in
these hot countries to travel barefooted: So Saints who are already washed, by
begun renovation and the Justification of their persons, need not ever again
wash, as if every spot did alter their state, but ought only to be purging
their affections and actions from the relics of sin, by getting daily renewed
remission, and studying sanctification daily. In saying, he who is washed, is
clean every whit. He does not assert an absolute purity in any within time, nor
yet is it only his meaning, that he is clean by begun renovation, which is
perfect in parts, though not in degrees: But the sense chiefly is, that by
Justification his person is clean, and that the man who, being renewed and
justified, does make daily use of his privilege of having access to the
fountain opened up, for daily renewed remission, and washing of his foul feet,
he is clean every whit in Gods account, nor is there any spot in him, for which
God will condemn him. 2. Christ makes particular application of this doctrine
to the disciples, pronouncing that society clean, though with exception of
some, (for which a reason is after given) and that therefore they needed to
wash no more but their feet. Doct. 1. It is the Will of Christ that Saints in
their exercises, do put a difference betwixt the state of their persons, and
the several conditions into which they may fall; for, here is a washed and
clean man, who yet has feet to be washed. 2. No man can be in an acceptable
state, but he to whom it is gifted by Christ, and communicate through his blood
and spirit; for, he is washed, who is clean See 1 Cor. 6.11. 3. Saints, whose
persons are clean, have yet, while they are within time, some pollution and
relics of sin left, for their exercise and humiliation; and in their
affections and actions are daily contracting filth; for, he that is washed,
needs to wash his feet. See Psalm. 130.3. and 143.2. 4. The infirmities of
washed Saints are not universal, nor like the voluntary wallowing of swine in
the puddle, 2 Pet. 2.22. but are only defilements of their feet, or of their
affections and conversation in going through this polluted world; for, so much
is imported, that they need but to washed their feet. Where the similitude
imports, that this pollution reaches not their best parts, at least reigns not
there; that it breaks forth rather in their practice, then utterly poisons
their heart; and, that however it have a fountain within, yet it is much helped
on, by reason of pollution and entanglements without them, as men's feet are
fouled by the ground they tread upon. 5. It is the duty, and ought to be the
care of Saints, not to please themselves in this, that their defilements are
but infirmities, but they must be washed from them; for, he that is washed,
needs yet to wash his feet. So did Paul pursue the least relic of sin, Romans
7. 6. Not only the Justification of our persons, but even the washing of our
infirmities, must be Christ's work; for, the external action Christ is about,
teaches, that he also must wash the feet. 7. Albeit a justified sinner can
never be separated from Christ; yet as a man who never employes Christ for
pardon and purging of his daily infirmities, does evidence that he is not
justified; so a justified man will pursue these relics of sin, that so he may
thereby be more and more confirmed in the assurance of his interest in Christ;
for, unto this washing of the feet, Christ applies that, v 8. If I wash thee
not, thou have no part with me. 8. It is not Christ's Will that Saints, upon
every new out-breaking, should cast loose their state, as if their
Regeneration, and Justification, and Reconciliation were made void thereby; but
they are to hold that fast as a thing not to be renewed, (though when the
discharge is dim, they may seek a new Extract) and so go on to get that washed
which is foul; for, be that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet. 9.
Albeit Saints be weak in faith, and imperfect in Sanctification, yet there is a
Gospel-reckoning accordto which they are every whit clean; Namely, when they
are justified and their sins pardoned, and when they are daily studying
Sanctification, and making use of daily remission and cleansing; for, such a
one is washed, and clean every whit. 10. General doctrine is then only useful,
when particular application is made thereof; Therefore Christ applies this to
them, And ye are clean. 11. It is not they who justify themselves, that are
clean, but these whom Christ accounts to be so; and his absolving word is
sufficient to secure a Saint, who is humbled with his own spots, that he is
clean in his account; for, here he gives this for their security, Ye are clean.
12. Hypocrisy and uncleanness are so universal, that its rate to see the
cho^cest or smallest society free from some infected therewith; for, even among
this select company there is an exception, Ye are clean, but not all, or, all
the persons in this society, as the word in the Original clears And no wonder
it be so; for, hereby the Lord would refute the conceit of the godly, that they
can be fully separate from the wicked within time; Hereby also are they
exercised; and these unclean persons are made use of in the society, as vessels
of dishonor in an house, to carry forth the filth from the rest: as heretics
do take the tentations of Saints to be their opinions; and hereby the Lord
leads Saints to abhor them, who otherwise gave too much way to them. 13.
Christ never lets out his approbation unto any, but ordinarily he subjoynes so
much with it, as may make them very circumspect and jealous of themselves; The
clore, after that sentence, Ye are clean, be subjoynes so general an exception,
but not all, neither declaring whom or how many he excepted, that so every one
might try himself.

Verse 11. For he knew who should betray him, therefore said he, Ye are not all
clean.
John subjoynes a reason why Christ made this exception, and points out who it
was that he meant by this exception, even Judas the traitor. Whence learn, 1.
Christ knows a reason for every thing he says or does, whether we know it or
not; as here we see. 2. Albeit neither can men discern, nor ought they to judge
hardly of others, who have not discovered themselves; yet Christ can
distinguish betwixt true professors and latent hypocrites, and may let forth
what he knows, when he pleases; for, he knew who should betray him, and
therefore said this. 3. Were hypocrites and traitors in never so excellent a
society, and never so like Saints in outward appearance, yet are they not clean
in Christ's account; for, Judas is excepted from among the clean by Christ,
though he was among the Apostles, and nothing yet had visibly appeared. 4.
Doctrine delivered in mixed societies ought to be well guarded, that the
unclean (if there were but one of them) do not put out their hands to the
allowance of the clean; for, Christ upon this ground makes the exception, for
he know who should betray him, therefore said he, Ye are not all clean.

Verse 12. So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and
was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?
Follows to v. 18, an exposition of this washing after Christ had done with
it, wherein he explains it, as it was a servile employment performed by him to
them, that hereby he might teach them humility. In this exposition we may
observe six particulars, whereof the first (in this verse) contains somewhat
antecedent to the exposition; Namely, that before he perform his promise to
Peter, ver. 7. he goes on to wash all their feet, and having taken his
garments, and sitten down, he enquireth at themselves if they understood what
he meant by all this. Whence learn, 1. Whatever be the strugglings of Saints
against Christ's dealing, yet he will have his will, and carry through his
purpose; for, notwithstanding Peter's opposition (wherein others, as humble as
he, might have been ready to imitate him,) yet he washed their feet. 2. Christ's
favors are not tendered complements, but really conferred mercies, and he will
come over much opposition, to make them effectual; for, he not only offered,
but really did wash their feet. 3. Albeit Christ's servants and people have a
promise, that he will make known his mind in things that concern them, which
he will perform in due season; Yet he will exercise their submission and
obedience at leisure, before he perform it; for, he washes all their feet,
takes his garments, and sat down again, and propounds this question, before he
make good that promise given to Peter, ver 7. 4. Where Christ is about to teach
his people, he will first humble them under the sense of their own ignorance,
and then will teach them; for, this question, know ye what I have done unto
you? tends to discover their ignorance of the matter, to humble them. 5. It is
the duty of Christ's scholars, to be serious in attending what he is doing about
them, and to them; and to rowze up themselves to attend what he will teach
thereby: for, this question is also put, to stir them up to attend to the
former action and following explication.

Ver. 13. Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well: For so I am.
In the second place, Christ lays down a ground whereon to press the
following doctrine and explication of this action; which is taken from the
titles due to him, and given to him by the disciples. Whence learn, 1. Christ
requires acknowledgements and due titles from his people, and they who know
him, will not deny them; for, so was their use, Ye call me Master, (or,
Teacher,) and Lord. 2. Many titles, and all sovereignty over us, is due unto
Christ; He will not be content to be a Master to teach, as the Pharisees
sometime pretended to acknowledge, unless he be taken also for a Lord, who must
be obeyed, and to govern and rule us; Nor will he be pleased with glorious
titles, of Lord Lord, when men will not stoop to hearken to his doctrine.
Therefore, are they conjoined, Master, and Lord. 3. We can give no glorious
titles to Christ, but they are due to him, and as he will accept of them, so he
will be answerable to them; He is a faithful Teacher, and a Ruler who will
protect and defend them who come under his protection; for, says he, ye say
well, for so I am. 4. Christ will not be content of titles or fair professions,
unless men do improve them in practice, and do not give their own tongues the
lie; Therefore Christ takes hold of their acknowledgement, to urge the
following doctrine upon them, as being obliged thereunto by their own
professions.

Ver. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought
to wash one another feet.
In the third place, we have Christ's doctrine inferred upon this ground, and
the exposition of his carriage in washing their feet; Namely, that by his doing
thereof, who was their Lord and Master, to them his servants, he would teach
them their duty, to condescend so low, as to wash one another feet. Whereby we
are not to understand only this particular service to be mutually done, (as
some do formally and superstitiously imitate him herein) but under this one
abject peace of service, all duties of love and condescendence, how base
soever, are required. Neither yet are outward actions of love to be understood,
as only comprehended under this; but includes also all the internal ingredients
thereof in the heart, such as humility toward God, a low esteem of our selves,
an high esteem of others, etc. And by this direction enforced from his own
example, he would obviate the great emulation among his Apostles, which (if not
cured) might do so much hurt after his departure. From this purpose, (leaving
the force of his example till the following verses.) Learn, 1. Humility, love,
and condescendence, are most necessary among the members of Christ; Therefore
does he so seriously press these here. See 1 Pet 5.5. 2. True humility does
not consist in external shows, but will stoop to the meanest service, wherein
one may be steadable to another; were it even to wash one another feet. See 1
Cor. 9.19, 20, etc. Gal. 5.13. 3. Albeit it bring rich advantage to the man
himself who is humble and condescending, though none other should join with
him in it; Yet it is necessary for the general good of the Church, that mutual
subjection to perform basest duties, be the bond to bind Saints one to
another; for, they should wash one another feet. The Church does then live in
true peace, when every one of her members becomes a servant to another. 4.
Albeit men be ready to look on this humility and mutual condescendence as a
free will offering, for omitting whereof they are not convinced, and in
performing of it they are much puffed up; Yet it is a commanded duty, not to be
omitted without sin, and in the performance whereof we are still unprofitable
servants; for, ye ought to wash one another feet. 5. Humility and mutual
condescendence are especially necessary in Ministers, that their pride and
emulation do not mar^e the work of the Gospel; Therefore, Christ stooped so
low, as, by his own example, to bind this upon his Apostles. I have washed
your feet, that ye may wash one another feet. 6. The Lord allows of no
superiority in any of his Ministers over the rest, and requires also that they
lay aside any personal preeminence or prerogative, and by love serve one
another; for, they are all to wash one another feet.

Verse 15. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done
unto you.
In the fourth place, This duty is more distinctly enforced from Christ's former
practice in washing their feet; wherein he shows, that he did it as an
example to them, which therefore they are bound to imitate. Whence learn, 1. It
is a commendable duty in the Lords children, to study to be good examples in
their carriage, one to another; for, herein Christ has led the way, in giving
good example. 2. Albeit Christ, as God, and Mediator, has done works of
omnipotency and by way of satisfaction for sinners, which are or can be imitate
by none; Yet in the matter of obedience to the Law, he has done works
expressly for imitation and example, which are to be marked; for, says he, I
have given you an example. 3. As in all duties of obedience, so especially in
the matter of humility, Christ has cast an excellent copy to his followers;
both to encourage poor sinners to come to him, and excite them to follow him;
for, this is the particular, wherein, says he, I have given you an example.
See Matthew. 11.29. 4. Such as acknowledge Christ to be precious, as they will
subject themselves to all his commands, so they will count it a strong
obligation to any duty, that Christ has gone about it in his own practice, and
thereby commended it to them; for, they ought wash one another feet, ver. 14.
for I have given you an example, etc. 5. It stands as a general rule, that what
Christ has done to us in love, we stand bound, in our stations, and to our
power, to do the same to others; for, ye should do as I have done to you. Our
imitation comes always short; but we must follow him in so far as we can
attain. See Matthew. 6.14, 15. 1 John 3.16.

Verse 16. Verily, verily I say unto you, The servant is not greater then his
Lord, neither he that is sent, greater then he that sent him.
In the fifth place, This practice and example of Christ is further urged to
press this duty, from the consideration of his excellency, which he had laid
down as a ground, ver. 13. and summarily urged, ver. 14. As Christ's greatness
above his servants is urged elsewhere to make them content with the lots he
was exercised with, Joh. 15.20. Matthew. 10.24, 25. So here it is made use of, to
press them to that humility one toward another which he had showed toward
them. And this makes the argument from his example conclude more strongly, that
they, who were so far inferior to him, should not disdain to practice that
condescendence he had used. Whence learn, 1. Whatever dignity Christ confer
upon his Servants and Officers; Yet he is the authorizer of them all, and Lord
above them all, and over all his Church: And it is the greatest dignity of any,
to be his servants and represent him in a commission: for, so is here imported.
2. Christ's greatness and excellency contributes to set forth and commend his
humility to us; Therefore, in this action he is so often spoken of as Lord and
sender of his servants. See Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. 3. It becomes Christ's followers to
affect no greater eminency in this world, then Christ had and not to disdain to
stoop so low as he did; for, if the servant be not made less then his Lord, it
is no reason he should look to be greater. 4. The consideration of our baseness
should keep our minds lowly, and free of affecting superiority over our
brethren; for, Christ presses the duty on this ground, that they are but
servants, and sent. 5. Whosoever does refuse to walk humbly toward his fellow
disciples, he does in effect deny his inferiority to Christ: for, either he
must deny that the servant is not greater then his Lord, or he that is sent,
then he that sent him, or else he must stoop to wash the feet of others. 6.
Albeit our baseness be very visible in it self, especially when we are
compared with Christ; yet it is not usually pondered by us as it ought, nor so
studied as the fruits thereof may appear in practice; for, it must be born upon
them with Christ's ordinary asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you. to
drive them to this condescendence. 7. Whatever be the shiftings of our
ambitious hearts; Yet Christ will not on any terms dispense with the want of
humility and condescendence in his followers; But he will either have them
stoop, or else he will abase them; Therefore also does he urge this with a
verily verily, to press it as a grave and necessary matter: and in the ^est of
the words he so speaks, as may import both their duty to imitate their Lord and
Master, and his will (especially if they did not so) that they should meet with
such humbling lots as he did.

Ver. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
In the last place, Christ not being content with a bare speculation in this
matter, and having sufficiently informed them of their duty in it; He comes
very earnestly to press the practice thereof, and to encourage them thereunto,
by an annexed promise of blessedness. Whence learn, 1. Christ does not approve
of blind ignorance in his people, whatever their practice or conversation be;
But requires that their practice be founded on sound and solid knowledge of his
will; for, he requires that they know these things, and then do them. 2. When
much pains is taken to inculcate duties, yet men may remain very ignorant,
partly, through their natural impotency, and chiefly, through their
inadvertensie, and being transported with lusts and carnal imaginations; for,
If ye know these things, is not only a supposition that knowledge must go
before practice; but may import a doubt also, if yet they were made capable of
this doctrine. For they were so transported with a carnal dream of the
Messiah's Kingdom, that they could not understand his clear predictions of his
sufferings, Luke 18.31, 32, 33, 34. And what wonder if their carnal emulation
did hide this doctrine from them also? 3. The doctrine of humility and mutual
condescendence is very comprehensive, and contains many duties in the bosom of
it, which are called for in variety of cases and exigents* Therefore does he
speak of what is understood by washing one another feet, ver. 14. in the
plural number, know these things, and do them. 4. The Lord approves not, in the
matters of Religion, that men content themselves with knowledge and
speculations; But it is his will, that men, having known their duty, do put it
in practice, and do prove the sincerity and soundness of their knowledge, by
their practice; for, so does this connection import, If ye know these things, do
them, and so prove that ye know indeed. See Jam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25. 5. In
particular, the Lord requires the practice of humility, and it is the
touchstone of men's sincerity, not what knowledge they have of it, the
contemplation and notion whereof may be sweet: But what they do in practice on
particular exigents, which will be more bitter and trying then contemplation
was; for, this, in particular, is the duty wherein he requires that practice
follow knowledge. 6. Albeit our obedience and practice deserve nothing; Yet it
has such a blessing in the bosom of it, and is the way to such rich
blessedness, as does compense all loss and disadvantage; for, this is the
encouragement, happy are ye, if ye do them. 7. Albeit the condescending and
humble man seem to lose much thereby in the world; yet blessedness is allowed
to make it up: And to attain the practice of humility, is a blessedness in it
self, in so far as it hides a man from many storms and discontentments,
wherewith others are blown over; for, of this in particular, it is said, happy
are ye if ye do them. 8. Ambitious proud men are so far from blessedness, that
they lie under a curse; especially if they know their duty and will not do it;
for, it follows on the contrary, If ye know these things, cursed are ye if ye
do them not. See Jam. 4.17. Psalm. 119.21.

Verse 18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: but that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me.
Follows to ver. 31. the second part of the Chapter, wherein Christ
discovers Judas treachery, and that he was the Traitor. The words may be
taken up in four steps of progress in this discovery. 1. Christ in general
intimates that there were some unsound among them, and guardeth this
business, and the intimation thereof, with necessary cautions and
instructions, ver. 18, 19, 20. 2. Being pressed to it, and they not laying hold
on the former intimation, he intimates more distinctly, that there was one
among them so rotten hearted, as to betray him; whereat they are amazed, ver.
21, 22. 3. John being set on work by Peter, to enquire concerning this
traitor, Christ by a sign does discover Judas to him, ver. 23, 24, 25, 26. 4.
This discovery producing woeful effects in Judas, Christ discovers more of his
mind concerning his treachery, to himself, when he is going out to effectuate
it, ver. 27, 28, 29, 30.

In this ver. 1. Christ proceeds to this general discovery (whereof some hint
had been given before, ver. 10.) by way of exception to the former doctrine. As
he had formerly made an exception in pronouncing them clean, ver. 10. so here
he declares that he expected not from all of them, that they should be blessed
in practicing humility and mutual condescendence, ver. 17. But some one or
other of them would be so far from serving his fellow disciples, that he would
rise against his Master. 2. He gives the ground of this exception, and why he
did thus pronounce of any of them; Namely, that he knew whom he had chosen, The
meaning whereof is not so much that he knew what every one whom he had chosen
to the Apostleship would prove, and Judas among the rest; (though that be also
true) But he knew who they were whom, beside election to the Apostleship,
(wherein Judas shared also, Chap. 6.70.) he had chosen to eternal life, and
whom not; And consequently, knew who would prove faithful or false to him. 3.
If any should enquire, wherefore did he choose such a man to be an Apostle, who
he knew would prove a traitor? He answers, that hereby was fulfilled a
prediction in Ps. 41.9. that one of his familiars and domestics should
ingrately recompense his kindness, as if a beast fed by his Master, should kick
against him. And this is the first caution and instruction subjoyned to this
intimation, that they should not stumble at the business. As for this
connection of the prediction with the event, compare what is said on Chap.
12.38. Only here it would be considered, that this is not a simple prediction
relating only to Christ and Judas, but was in part accomplished in Ahithophels
treachery against David, who in his sufferings of this kind was a type of
Christ's sufferings from Judas, in whom that was chiefly accomplished. And
albeit so much only be cited as is clearly applicable to Christ; that of a
friend in whom I trusted, being more proper to David, seeing Christ never hoped
for any good of Judas. (And so we ought to be wary in expounding
Scripture-types) Yet even that may in some sense be true of Christ, who
entrusted Judas not only with the bag, but with the Ministry and Apostleship it
self, as well as the rest. Doctrine 1. Christ is very tender of his weak
followers, and loath to grieve them, by bringing forth what may displease or
stumble them; Therefore does he at first prepare their minds for these sad
news, with such general intimations and cautions. 2. It is not sufficient that
men hear truths, unless they make application thereof to themselves in
particular; for, Christ's exception supposes an application of what he said, on
their parts. 3. When truths are spoken in a general auditory, men are very
ready to misapply them; for, therefore is a guard and exception needful. In
this case, (to say nothing of the state of men's persons, whereby they may know
much what they have right unto) we would consider. 1. Want of fear in
application of what is comfortable, is a sad evidence of wrong application. 2.
What ever men's right be to what is comfortable, yet they cannot comfortably
apply it, unless they stand in real and sensible need of what is offered, for
their encouragement and furtherance in good; or do in sincerity lay hold on the
offer, to quicken them in their sense of need. 3. Albeit they may have right to
apply comforts, who sometime will fall a sleep upon them; yet the application
is never comfortable, but when some fruits thereof appear. So also threatenings
are not savingly applied, but when they stir up to diligence. 4. Ordinarily,
the hearts of good and bad are so froward, that they are best at applying what
they have least right unto; Saints when they are humbled, can lay hold on
threatenings, but cannot hear of promises; the wicked make no doubt of promises,
but take no notice of threatenings; and Saints are most apt to grasp at promises
when they are most secure. Doctrine 4. So general is the corruption of men, and
their societies, that comfortable things can hardly be spoken to the choicest
and fewest number of them, but there will be some to be excepted against, as
having no right thereunto; for, when Christ is propounding to his very twelve
Apostles, a promise of happiness upon the practice of humility, there needs an
exception, I speak not of you all. 5. Ministers are not faithful, nor do they
declare the whole counsel of God, unless with general promises, they publish
also needful cautions, that none do stumble upon, or abuse them; for so much
does Christ's practice, in excepting Judas, teach. And albeit they cannot do as
Christ did in pointing at the man; Yet they must set down Scripture cautions
and limits to the promises, and the Scripture qualifications of these who have
right thereunto. 6. Whatever may be the excellencies of men, and especially of
Christ's servants, in respect of their gifts and success; Yet true happiness
belongs to none but to the chosen and Elect ones; for, albeit the Apostleship
had very eminent effects, yet they are only happy in obedience, whom he has
chosen. See Luke 10.17, 18, 19, 20. 7. Men may be chosen to very eminent
employments, who yet are not chosen to eternal life; for, by this exception,
Judas is secluded from among these whom he has chosen. So that we have need
not to do at so much on what is adorning, but to seek what is saving. 8.
Whatever be the means whereby men are kept faithful, and carried on to
happiness; Yet the fountain of all this slows from the Lords electing them to
these means, and to the end following thereupon; Therefore, the Apostles
walking in the ways of happiness, is attribute not so much to their grace, as
to his election, the fountain of their grace, I know whom I have chosen, and
who therefore will be happy in doing these things. And this is held out,
partly, that all the good we have, we may trace it up to this fountain; and
partly, that having made our calling and election sure, we may be comforted
under the sense of great inward weakness. Hence it is that glorification is
subjoyned to election and justification, Romans 8.28, 29. and election is laid as
a ground of security against final defection in trying times, Matthew. 24.24. 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. 9. Christ is the author of Election, as God equal with the
Father, and he knows the number of his chosen ones, and who they are; for, I
know whom I have chosen. See 2 Timothy 2.19. 10. Christ is not ignorant what any
of his followers will prove, and that from the beginning; for, Judas did not
deceive him, I know whom I have chosen. 11. There is much of Christ to be seen
in the old Testament, by a discerning eye; and much acted in types which has
its full accomplishment in him: for, the scriptures, speaking of David's
suffering in the type from Ahithophel, is fulfilled in Judas treachery against
Christ. 12. In all the lots that befall Christ and his followers, we are to
guard against stumbling at them, by considering a sovereign providence of God
in all of them; for, Christ here guards the disciples minds in this matter, by
letting them see that God foresaw it long before, and did foretell that which
was now fulfilled. 13. Christ is most tender of fulfilling all Scriptures, that
so we may be encouraged to rest our confidence on what he says in them;
Therefore does he admit of a Judas into his fellowship, and permits him to
betray him, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, and there might be no cause
of questioning the truth thereof. So Joh. 10.16. albeit he had affection to the
Gentiles, yet for the truth of God, he confined himself to the ministry of the
circumcision. Romans 15.8.14. Christ and his followers do suffer not only from
open enemies, which were in many respects an case; But they are also persecuted
by false bosom friends and familiars; for so found David the ^^pe, and Christ
the substance, he that eats bread with me, has lifted up his heel against
me. See Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. 15. It is the great treachery, and horrid
ingratitude of enemies, that no favors nor familiarity will draw them from
their enmity, but rather emboldens them thereunto; for albeit he eat bread with
him, and his bread too, (as it is Psalm. 41.9.) yet want only and ingrately, he
has lift up his heel against me. 16. Whatever be the carriage of enemies, yet
it is the duty of Christ's followers to heap coals on their heads, by doing them
all the good they can in their stations; for, herein Christ has left an
example, who albeit he knew what Judas was, yet let him eat bread with him. See
Psalm 35.12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 12.20.

Ver. 19. Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may
believe that I am he.
In this verse a second caution and instruction is joined with this intimation;
Wherein, (as in the former he gave a reason why he permitted such a thing to
be; so) he gives a reason why he now foretells of this treachery before hand:
Namely, that when they should compare his prediction with the event when it
came to pass, they might be so far from stumbling at it, that, on the contrary
it might aford them an encouragement to believe on him, who by the prediction
did prove himself God omniscient, and by his suffering these things, did prove
himself to be the true Messiah, of whom these things were fore-prophesied.
Whence learn. 1. Christ is omniscient as God, and knows, and can foretell
things before they come to pa^^e; for, now I tell you before it come. See Isa.
48.5. 2. Christ does so order his own and his peoples afflictions, as in stead
of bitterness and stumbling, a right observer may find many confirmations and
advantages by them; for, he so orders Judas treachery, (which would seem to
have ruined all) as it may contribute to confirm them that he is God and the
true Messiah. It is he indeed who brings meat out of the eater. 3. It is a
notable fruit and advantage by saddest storms, to be helped to know and
believe more of Christ his excellency and sufficiency; for, this is the fruit
here, that ye may believe that I am he. 4. Whatever degree of knowledge and
faith in Christ Saints attain to, yet they need more increase and confirmation,
and to attain this is a difficult task: for, albeit the disciples knew and
believed what he was, yet he finds this pains needful, that they may be helped
to believe more. 5. Christ rightly taken up, will be believed to be matchless,
singular, and inexpressible, in his fullness and excellency; for, this he aims
at, that ye may believe that I am he, or, that I am, to wit, that singular and
inexpressible one. 6. A special mean to confirm faith by saddest
dispensations, is, to compare these events with predictions concerning them;
wherein we may read Gods omniscience and providence, knowing, and setting
bounds to all these storms; for, I tell you before it come, that when it is
come to pass ye may believe.

Verse 20. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that receives whomsoever I send,
receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.
In this verse we have a third caution and instruction subjoyned to this
intimation; Wherein Christ holds forth this encouragement to all his faithful
messengers, and all who receive them and their message; That these his servants
are so dear to him and his Father, and his Father and he are so neatly
interessed in them and their message, that the respect showed to them and it,
redounds both to him and his Father. His scope in this doctrine is, partly, to
remove another exception that might be propounded upon occasion of Judas
treachery; for, whereas upon his deserting and betraying of his Master, men
might be ready to think that he was but a bad Master, and that the office of
Apostleship was of little worth, since he had so lightly deserted it: Christ
declares, that this office was honorable in it self, and (however Judas had
played the traitor, yet) he would get men to exe^ce it, and to entertain them
who did so, to their own rich advantage. And therefore his treachery did no way
reflect on him or his service, but did aggravate the traitors guiltiness, who
had deserted so honorable an office, owned not only by Christ, but by his
Father also. Partly also, his scope is, hereby to encourage the rest of the
Apostles, (as it is made use of, Matthew 10.40.) who being to be left by their
Master, and sent out on service, wherein they might expect great difficulties,
(as is declared, Matthew. 10.) and being also pressed with the necessity of
humility and condescendence, they might be ready to think this a very hard and
disadvantageous service. Withal, Judas his treachery, who was one of their
number, might give them occasion to suspect that Christ would abhor their
society for his sake. Therefore he declares, that notwithstanding all that had
come, if they would go about the employment as he required, he should own them
in it, and whosoever received them, should receive him and the Father also.
Doct. 1. Men's deserting of Christ and his service does no way reflect on him or
it, but upon the deserters themselves; nor will he want servants, and these who
will entertain them, desert him who will; for, so much does this doctrine, as
it is a caution against Judas treachery, teach, that he will have some to send,
and some to receive them, when Judas is gone. 2. Our Lord Jesus has large
understanding and capacity, to take many things into his mind, and meet with
all necessary cases at once; for, by this doctrine he not only obviates Judas
treachery, but meets with the discouragements of the rest of his disciples, as
has been explained. 3. Albeit Christ's doctrine, concerning the excellency of
his service, get but little credit in times of defection; And albeit his
encouragements have but little place with these of weak hands: yet what he
says to the one or the other case, is most grave and undoubted truth;
Therefore is doctrine, which groundeth against the scandal of Judas defection,
and encourages his disciples, confirmed by his ordinary asseveration, Verily,
verily, I say unto you. 4. In times of defection, such as continue faithful
shall be the more precious in Christ's sight, and be allowed special
encouragements by him; therefore does he hold out such a cordial to his honest
disciples, now when Judas is to forsake him. 5. Whatever be the difficulties
attending Christ's service; yet the service it self has encouragement
sufficient in its bosom, against all of them; Therefore is this encouragement
held forth, against their difficulties in the exercise of their office. 6 The
humble condescending man is so dear to Christ, that he shares in all his lots,
is respected in all the respects put upon him, and accounts himself slighted
in all the affronts offered to him; for, this doctrine also tends to encourage
them to the humility he had pressed upon them, by showing that he will do all
for the humble, and will share with them in their entertainment in the world.
7. Whatever be the want of outward splendor, or the ignominy and contempt of
Christ's servants in the world; yet it is sufficient dignity and authority to
bear them out, that they are clothed with a Message and Commission from him;
for, it is here supposed as their dignity, and sufficient to bear them out in
the exercise of their office in the world, that he sends them. 8. It is the
duty of people in relation to Christ's Messengers, to receive and embrace their
doctrine, and their persons for their doctrines sake, and to guard against
prejudices at their persons, lest they stumble at their message: for, so is
here imported, they should receive whom I send. See 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb.
13.17. 9. Christ's faithful servants are so taken up with zeal to their Master,
and love to the welfare of souls, that their great encouragement within time
is, when their Message, and themselves for its sake, are received and get place
amongst men; for, this is their encouragement, that encouragement is given to
men to receive them, as being their great scope. See 2 Cor. 7.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19,
20. 10. Such as would approve themselves to be Christ's Scholars, ought not to
hearken unto, nor receive these who run without a calling, but only these whom
he sends, 2 John 10. Nor ought they to respect them who are sent, upon any
carnal respect, Jude v. 16. but as they are sent and faithful in their trust,
Matthew. 10.41. nor are they to disrespect any who are sent and authorized by
Christ, but whatever different measure of gifts there be, they must respect,
and reverence, and hearken to all of them, as they are called to it; All these
are included in this, that they are to receive whomsoever I send. 11. Whatever
be the opposition unto, or contempt of Christ's Messengers, yet there will still
be some to receive them, when he sends them out; for, so is imported, that
there will be some to receive whomsoever I send. 12. It is a comfortable
encouragement to Ministers in the discharge of their trust, and to people to
receive them and their doctrine, That as God is inseparable from his Son
Christ, in his Person and Office, so is Christ and his Father in him,
inseparable from his servants; The respect that is paid to them first, is
paid in them to Christ and his Father; and so, on the contrary, does the
contempt of them reflect on him: for, He that receives whomsoever I send,
receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me, where, in
the first place, their interest in Christ is asserted, and in the Father
through him, and for further confirmation the Fathers interest in Christ is
asserted, who is not received nor known, but in the receiving of Christ.

Verse 21. When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified,
and said, Verily, verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
Follows the second step of this discovery of Judas, wherein he more
distinctly clears his treachery, showing that the lifting up of the heel, v.
18. was in effect a betraying of him, and in stead of that general, that they
were not all clean, v. 10. nor had all of them an interest in that promise of
happiness, v. 18. he determines upon the number, that it was one of them who
should betray him. The reason of this repeated and more particular discovery,
may partly be gathered from the following purpose; that they did not
understand, nor were affected as became with the former intimation, and
therefore he repeats and presses it, till they be rowzed up by it: and partly,
it is expressed in this verse to be Christ's trouble in spirit, while his
thoughts are upon Judas treachery, a taste of his own sad sufferings following
thereupon, is let out upon his soul; and withal, his sorrow and indignation at
the odious and ingrate treason, and the sad judgments to follow upon it, (as
it is deduced, Mat. 26.24.) did so take hold on him, that he must reveal it
with serious testifications and asseverations. Whence learn, 1. Soul-pressures
and troubles were no strangers to our blessed Lord, and he would have it well
studied that he is acquainted with such conditions; Therefore is his trouble in
spirit here again marked. 2. Saints ought not to think it strange, if after
deliverance from soul-trouble, they be again plunged into it; but must see that
case sanctified unto them in Christ's person, who after that sad fit, chap.
12.27. is again troubled in spirit. 3. Treacherous hypocrites in the Church are
a great trouble, and matter of much vexation to the godly, either through their
grief at their carriage, or by reason of the troubles which they raise to
others; for, upon Christ's speaking of Judas treachery, he is troubled at it in
both these respects, as has been cleared, When Jesus had thus said, he was
troubled in spirit. 4. Treacherous hypocrites, who are the instruments of
Christ or his followers sufferings, are in an horrible and woeful condition,
both in respect of guilt, and the judgments abiding them; for, Christ could not
think of Judas treachery and end, without trouble; and so will it be with all
right discerners, whatever these hypocrites think of themselves. 5. Albeit
soul-trouble be bitter, yet it is useful (especially in Ministers) to draw
forth truth, with more clearness and edge, to others, for, herein Christ has
given a proof, the fruit of whose soul-trouble is, that he speaks out more
distinctly what they understood not before, and brings it out solemnly,
testifying it. 6. When Christ is about to exercise his people, and they will
not be put to it by some means, he will still put them to it, till he rouse
them up; for, they making no use of the former intimation, he inculcates it
again, till it become an exercise to all of them. 7. Christ perfectly knows
all men, and particularly, these who are more near to him in relations and
fellowship; for, he can give a distinct account that one of them is a traitor.
8. As great naughtiness may be in these who are very eminent; so their
eminency renders their guilt more odious and horrible; that one of you should
betray me. 9. It is hard to believe, if not almost incredible, what
naughtiness there may be in eminent Professors and Ministers, which yet
Christ knows well enough; therefore he must confirm it with, Verily, verily I
say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. 10. Such as are really affected
with the sin of treacherous hypocrites, will not bluntly speak of it, in
discovering or reproving it, but will evidence much zeal and indignation: for,
Jesus being troubled in spirit, testified, and gravely, and with much
seriousness, intimates it. 11. In times wherein we may discern Satan to be
employing eminent Professors in an ill turn, it concerns every one to be upon
their guard: Therefore is this intimation yet more general, one of you, not
determining who, that all might be set on edge to try and search, as afterward
it follows, and more fully in the other Evangelists. See Matthew. 26.21, 22.

Verse 22. Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spoke.
In this verse we have an effect of this discovery among the disciples, that as
men amazed they look one upon another, being ignorant of whom he spoke. Their
looking one upon another may be supposed, partly, to flow from their general
amazement, and partly, from their desire (who were conscious to themselves, of
no such intentions) to know by one another countenances who was the guilty
man. And it is like, that at first they gazed one upon another through
amazement, not knowing who might be the man, from which followed their
particular enquiry at Christ, Matthew. 26.21, 22. And that afterward being
somewhat more confirmed, they looked if they could discover it by any Symptoms
in others, which not succeeding, Peter takes another course, in the following
purpose. Doct. 1. There may such things fall forth in the Church, and be acted
by members thereof, as will surprise true Professors with astonishment and
amazement, who could never have believed such naughtiness to be in their
societies; for, so does the disciples carriage, upon this intimation, evidence.
2. When the Lord makes any intimation of a defection to be in the Church,
sincere Professors will be jealous, and put to search themselves whether they
be guilty or not; for, upon this intimation of but one among twelve, all of
them looked one upon another, doubting of whom he spoke: and albeit they were
not conscious to themselves of any such wicked purpose, yet since he had
spoken, all of them are jealous, and enquire concerning themselves, as the
other Evangelists observe. As for Judas, it is only marked that he enquired
last of all, rather to hide himself from the rest, then for any other end. 3.
It is an evidence of sincere Professors, that they truly abhor all treachery
against their Master, and will desire to know who are guilty of it, that they
may abhor it in them: for, their looking one on another, (together with their
enquiry concerning themselves) doubting of whom he spoke, intimates also their
abhorrency of that crime, with their desire to know who was guilty of it. 4.
Albeit Christ, sometime, give very clear intimation of some defection to be
among his followers; yet he uses not to discover who the treacheron hypocrites
are, till they decipher themselves; for, albeit he had warned them of the
treachery of one of their number, yet they doubted of whom in particular he
spoke, as not being particularly named. 5, Treacherous hypocrites may lurk so
close, and carry matters so fair, as none can spy them out before they
discover themselves, unless Christ extraordinarily reveal and point them out:
for, Judas in this business put on such a countenance, as when they looked
about, yet they still doubted of whom he spoke, and Peter and John are put to
another shift to find him out.

Verse 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his disciples whom
Jesus loved.

24. Simon Peter therefore beckened to him, that he should ask who it should be
of whom he spoke.

25. He then lying on Jesus breast, says unto him, Lord, who is it?

26. Jesus answered, he it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it,
and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it Judas Iscariot the son of Simon.


Follows a further effect of the former discovery, in Peter, occasioning the
third step of the discovery, and a particular designation of the traitor unto
John. The sum of this purpose is; the intimation that there was a traitor in
their society, and the impossibility to know who he was, either by that
intimation or by his countenance, kindles in Peter an earnest desire to know
him. And being neither willing to propound his desire openly, seeing Christ had
hitherto forborne to name him; not being able to propound it secretly to Christ,
by reason of his distance: He makes a secret sign to John, the beloved
disciple who sat nearest Christ that he should enquire; who accepting of the
employment, and propounding the matter to Christ, Judas is discovered to him by
a sign secretly agreed upon betwixt Christ and him. For clearing this a
little, consider. 1. Whereas John is said to lean on Jesus bosom, it points at
their custom in sitting at table, that they did lie upon beds or couches with
their feet outward, and their heads inward, leaning themselves on their elbows,
and so the head of one lay near to the bosom of another, as John did here to
Christ: yet not so near but there was some distance, for John, v. 25. must lie
on Jesus breast, or, raise up himself a little and fall upon it (as the
original is) before he can propound the matter secretly. Consider, 2. Christ
chooses this way to discover Judas unto John, by giving a sop when he had
dipped it, (which was some part of that Supper before the Sacrament was
instituted) partly because this was a more secret way of designing him, seeing
it was usual for Christ to distribute meat amongst them, and so none could know
the matter but John who understood his purpose in it, and (belike) Judas
himself. And partly because this sign was most agreeable to the prediction,
Ps. 41.9. and might put Judas in mind of his ingratitude.

From v. 23. Learn. 1. Albeit Christ love all his disciples and followers; yet
as man he had degrees of of love and familiarity with some beyond others; And
as God also, he may let out sensible evidences of love to some, beyond others;
for albeit he loved all his own, v. 1. yet here there is one disciple whom
Jesus loved, in a singular way, to wit, as he was man, and in respect of kind
manifestations of himself. 2. Such as are indeed beloved of Christ, will esteem
highly of this as their chief dignity, and far above any love they can have to
him; for, this is the character of the beloved disciple; Albeit he loved
Christ, yet there is no word of that, but of Christ's love to him; and he gives
himself no other name or title, as accounting it his chiefest glory to be
called one of his disciples whom Jesus loved. So also c, 19.26. and 21.20. 3.
Such are beloved of Christ, albeit they account it their great glory; yet they
will entertain it with much modesty and sobriety; for John in writing the
history, when he speaks of these his privileges, yet never names himself who
he was, till c. 21.20.24. that closing the history, he must declare who was the
penman of it. 4. Such as are beloved of Christ will delight much in intimate
familiarity with him, and will be admitted thereto; for it is John's choice and
Christ's allowance, that he leaned on Jesus bosom.

From v. 24. Learn. 1. An honest heart is not satisfied with its own testimony,
unless also it get Christ's approbation; for, Peter would know who it should be
of whom he spoke, not only that he might know him, but that himself also might
be assoiled by Christ. 2. It is necessary for these whose infirmities do
frequently burst forth, that they do witness their integrity, by zeal and
forwardness for Christ, and by being as eminent in duty, as sometime they are
in their failings; for here Peter, who was oftimes further wrong then the rest,
manifests more zeal then all the rest, and is as eminent in his indignation
against treachery. And indeed his failings were (for most port) not in the
extreme of luke warmness, but of rash zeal and respect to Christ. 3. It is
commendable when the fruit of many reproofs appears in taking with faults, and
reforming them in practice; for, this is also to be observed in his carriage,
who being often reproved for his rash forwardness, does now modestly becken to
John, that he should ask, though shortly after he returned to his old
rashness. 4. It may be easily discerned by any, that such as are most beloved
of Christ, will get most of his mind; Therefore, Peter beckoned to him, that
he should ask, not only because he was nearest Christ, but because being
beloved of him, he hoped he would tell him as soon as any.

From v. 25, 26. Learn, 1. Such as love Christ, and are beloved of him, may be
very bold with him, without misconstruction; for lying on Christ's breast, he
propounds the question. 2. Loves boldness does not seclude revence, but takes
it along with it; for in the midst of this boldness, he calls him Lord, and
lies on Jesus breast, to enquire secretly, till he should know his pleasure,
whether he would reveal it or not. 3. As latent hypocrites are known only to
Christ, so they must be left to him to discover them, and we must not sit down
on his throne of judgment; for; John goes to Christ to know this traitor,
Lord who is it? 4. They are not mistaken, who expect that much of Christ's mind
will be revealed to such as are beloved of him, and that in their familiar and
reverent addresses; they will be made welcome; for, John gets a good answer as
Peter expected. Jesus answered, he it is to whom I shall give a sop, etc. 5.
Christ may be doing good to them who are but traitors to him, and by his
outward favors, be discovering to right discerners, how disapproven they are
of him; for, he gives a sop to Judas Iscariot the traitor, and by this
discovers to John that he is a traitor. 6 Saints to whom Christ reveals not
such things as they desire, must reverence his dispensation; And when he does
not clear their doubts fully to them, they are to rest satisfied in the
testimony of a good conscience; for, Peter having done his duty to know the
traitor, must rest satisfied that he is designed only to John, and when Christ
does not clear him expressly that it was not himself, he is left to look to the
conscience of his own integrity.

Ver. 27. And after the sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him,
That thou do, do quickly.

28. Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spoke this unto him.

29. For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said
unto him, Buy those things that we have need of against the Feast: or that he
should give something to the pooor.

30. He then having received the sop, went immediately out: and it was night.


In these verses, we have the consequents of this designation in Judas himself,
occasioning a fourth step of this discovery, wherein Christ declares more of
his mind to Judas himself concerning his treason. The sum of this purpose is
to be conceived thus; Judas guilty conscience making him suspect all things, he
could not but observe the whisperings betwixt Christ and John, and that Christ
after that had given him a sop, which (it is like) drew John, who knew the
scope of that sign, to eye him in an odd way. Therefore perceiving or fearing
that he was discovered, he is so imbittered and vexed at it, that he gives
himself wholly up to Satan, and resolves to prosecute his treason speedily and
effectually. Upon which, (and possibly he was now on his feet to go out to the
chief Priests) Christ lets him know that he knew his design, and bids him do
his worst, v. 27. which as the rest understood not, but some of them supposed
that, as purse-master, he was sent out to provide somewhat against the
solemnity of the next day, or ordained to give somewhat unto the poor, v. 28,
29. so he is more hardened thereby to go on in his wicked course, and
accordingly goes out to effectuate it, though it was dark night, verse 30.

From v. 27. Learn, 1. As Satan gets possession by degrees of wicked men; so it
is hard when once he gets footing, to prevent a more full possession; for,
Satan, who before trysted with him, by casting tentations into his heart, now
gets full possession, and entered into him. 2 Traitors and hypocrites are so
far from being reclaimed by the discovery of their naughtines, that they are
rather more irritate thereby; for, upon his perceiving that Christ had
discovered him to John, by giving the sop, Satan entered into him. 3. Christ in
his holy providence and righteous judgment, may do to hypocrites that,
whereupon they may take occasion to harden themselves unto perdition, and to
forsake him, yet without all imputation to him; for upon this discovery he is
set on edge by Satan against Christ, as if he had affronted him. 4. Satan gets
ready entry in a man, nor can he long stand, when he is given over of God; for,
Judas is given up by Christ to himself, to do quickly what he did, when Satan
possessed him to do this mischief. 5. As Christ knows all the naughtiness of
traitors, so he is the permitter of the same, without any approbation of their
sin; for, That thou do, do quickly, is not a command, but a declaration of
his prescience and permission. 6. When Christ has long struggled with corrupt
men, to restrain and curb their naughtiness; he may at last, let loose the
reins to them, to do their worst, for, having a traitor so long restrained in
his company, he at last gives him up to himself. See Psalm. 81.11, 12. Prove.
14.14. 7. Christ's willingness to suffer for his people, made all attempts
against him to be nothing terrible; for, this permission imports also that he
was willing to suffer, and therefore cared not how soon he would put him to it.
And thus our willing resolutions would take off much of the terror of our
sufferings. 8. Christ needs never restrain any of his enemies, for any fear he
has of them; but can carry on his purpose, and triumph over their most violent
oppositions; for, this upgiving is also a defying of Judas to do his worst, and
when he had so done, yet Christ should redeem his people, and triumph over all
the sufferings he brought him into by his treachery. 9. Men given over by God
unto Satan, will be very wrestlesse to execute mischief, and may speed well at
it, for a time; for, do quickly, is also a prediction of his activity and
success, as to the outward suffering.

From v. 28, 29. Learn, 1. It is no fault in sincere professors, to be
charitable even of hypocrites, so long as they keep close; for, it flowed, in
part, from their charity, that no man at the table knew for what intent he
spoke this unto him, and some supposed some other thing. And it seems that John
himself to whom he was particularly discovered, did not suspect he would
presently go about his treason, and therefore understood not this discourse,
though possibly he joined not in the opinion some others had of him and it. And
as for the rest, albeit it seems they should have known his treachery from
Christ's answer to his question, Mat. 26.25. Yet it seems that Christ gave him
that answer secretly, or he propounded that question but immediately before he
went out. 2. Christ did so willingly suffer for his people, that by his own
overruling hand he kept back all things that might hinder instruments to act
therein; for, this ignorance also flowed from the hand of God, lest they should
have hindered him, and so should have marred the work Christ came about. See Mat
16.20. and 26.52, 53, 54. 3. It is the will of Christ, that were men's portion
but mean, yet they should not only provide for their own necessi^ies thereby,
and so live in an honest way; but they should also be beneficial to the poor
and indigent, for this construction, which some of them put upon Christ's words,
teaches, that it was his custom as at other times, so now, out of his small
stock, to buy these things we have need of against the feast, (or the solemnity
of the first day of unleavened bread, being the morrow after the passover,
Lev. 23.5, 6. Numb. 28.16, 17.) and to give something to the poor, and his
practice in this is our rule.

From v. 30. Learn, 1. Checks given by Christ to enemies, which might reclaim
them, do but irritate and render them worse; for, after all this, he having
received the sop, went out. 2. Men given over by God, and possessed by Satan,
are so impudent, that they will not only attempt highest wickedness, even
against Christ, but will commit it even in Christ's presence, and when they know
that he knows and sees them; for, albeit Christ had intimate that he knew
what he was doing, yet he went out to act it 3. Satan is violent in driving
these acted by him, very hastily, and over all impediments, to commit mischief;
for, having received the sop, he went immediately out, and that though it was
night, as being too good for works of darkness.

Verse 31. Therefore when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man
glorified: and God is glorified in him.
Follows, to v. 36. the third part of the Chapter, containing Christ's sweet
doctine to his disciples upon Judas removal; wherein he speaks comfortably
conce^ning Judas errand, and does direct his disciples concerning their
carriage. It contains three points of doctrine, In the first whereof (in this
verse) he points out how h^ lo^ked upon what was to come upon him by Judas
^reachery; Namely, that he was to be glorified in and after his sufferings, and
God to be glorified in him. Concerning this doctrine we may compare what is
said, on chapter 12.23. Here we may Learn, 1. Albeit hypocrites cannot pollute an
Ordinance of God to any but themselves; yet they are oft-times, such a burden
and impediment to the societies of Gods people, as the company will fare the
better, when they are out of it; Therefore, Christ who was speaking sad things
while Judas was with them, and weighted and troubled, v. 21. now, when he is
gone out, his mind is elevate, and he speaks comfortably and familiarly to the
rest. 2. As there is no condition so hard, but a child of God, through him,
will get through it, Phil. 4.13. And as there is no humbling pressure under
their lot, but they may expect a blenk of comfort and ease after it: So
oft-times, the Lord makes their sad lots easiest, when they are nearest to come
upon them, by his giving at that time the spirit of that employment; for,
Christ who before was troubled, v. 21. now when Judas goes out to act his
mischievous treachery, is elevated in mind and comforted. See Heb. 3.16. And
by this his comfort and rejoicing at this time, he learns us how to rejoice
when our dissolution is near, though we were to go through a red sea of blood
and suffering unto that promised land. 3. Such as would rightly bear a cross,
ought to take a look of their condition, quite contrary to the verdict of
sens;e and reason; for, so does Christ look on his sufferings, as a glorifying
of him, both in themselves, and in the effects thereof, which is a point flesh
and blood would never reveal. 4. How ignominious soever Christ's sufferings were
in themselves; yet they were not only the way to his glory, chapter 17.5. Luke
24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11. and the fruits thereof glorious; and such as exalted him in
the world; But they were also glorious in themselves, and he glorified thereby;
in respect of his obedience to his Father, even to the death; his love that
shined therein; the testimony of innocence he received from enemies; the
glorious miracles in the time of his sufferings; and, in respect that hereby he
redeemed his elect, trampled upon, and spoiled Satan, and triumphed over sin,
and blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances against us. For, says he, the
Son of man is glorified, and that, now, not only certainly, but instantly.
And if he counted seeming ignominy to be his glory, in respect of the service
done thereby to people; how much more should we account that our glory which
may honor him. 5. Such as are truly zealous of Gods honor, will count no
condition honorable, unless God be glorified thereby, and where he gets
honor a very ignominious condition will be honorable in their eyes; for this,
glorifies the Son, that God is glorified in him. 6. As Christ was glorified
by his own sufferings; so also the Father was glorified in him; Not only in
that he, being in the Son, all the glory of the Son is his also; but that
Christ in suffering, did glorify him, in giving obedience to his will; The
truth of his threatenings, and his justice did shine in what he inflicted on his
Son, and his wisdom and goodness did shine in the redemption of lost man by
such a mean; for, says he, and God is glorified in him. And albeit none can so
glorify God in suffering as Christ did; yet through him, he takes glory to
himself in the sufferings of his servants, as they are a testimony to his
truth, and a commendation of his excellency, that they will not love their
lives unto the death for his sake. See c. 21.19.

Ver. 32. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself,
and shall straitway glorify him.
In this verse he confirms, the one branch of the former doctrine by the
other; and shows that if God be glorified in him and in his sufferings, then
certainly, he would glorify him in himself: And again inculcates that this
should be straitway done, in his approaching sufferings, and the glory
hastening upon the back of that. Whence learn, 1. Albeit God be glorious, and
to be glorified in all his working; Yet his special glory, wherein he delights
most, is that which is offered to him, and shines in his Son; for, this is the
glory of God which Christ insists so much on, that he is glorified in him See 2
Cor. 4.6. 2. Gods being honored in any condition, or by any under such a
condition, is a sufficient evidence that the condition is honorable, be what
it will, and that they themselves are and shall be honored therein; for, so
does Christ argue, If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in
himself. See 1 Samuel 2.30. It is honor abundance to get leave to honor God,
and it portends much dignity to them who so do. 3. It is a sure evidence of
future glory, when men make it their chief study to honor God here; for, so
much also does Christ's arguing teach. See 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 4. Whatever our
discouragements may object, to weaken our own hands from doing or suffering in
a hard time; Yet it is our duty to reason against unbelief, for our own
encouragement; for, so does Christ's debating and reasoning the certainty of his
approaching glory, teach. 5. God will not only give fair promises to them who
glorify him; but will at last give performance; And as we may always, in some
respect, look on this not as far off, but near hand. So after a whiles
exercise, our expectation will, at last, come to an issue. Therefore does he
add, he shall straitway glorify him. 6. Christ and his followers true glory
may be so little delayed by clouds of sufferings, that it may be very near when
they are engaging in the throng of afflictions; for, at that time, says
Christ, he shall straightway glorify him.

Ver. 33. Little children, yet a little while I am with you: ye shall seek me:
and as I said unto the Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come: so now I say to
you.
The second point propounded here to his disciples, is, a sweet and warm way
of intimating his departure, unto them; Wherein, letting out his affection in a
warm title and compellation, he intimates that he was shortly to depart from
them, in respect of his bodily presence; and that (as he had said unto the
Jews, Chap. 7.34. and 8.21.) though they should seek him, yet they were not
able to come whether he went, and was. Whereby we are to understand, partly,
that while they entertained any carnal conceits of the Messiah, as the Jews
did, they should not find satisfaction in them, nor should they (as they were
wont when they missed him) be able to follow him, and enjoy his bodily
presence. And so when they sought him at the grave, they could not find him.
But chiefly, we are to understand, that as the unbeleeving Jews were secluded
from coming to him in heaven, so was their coming to him there, delayed, and a
thing above their power, till he should come and fetch them. And particularly,
their following him to heaven, through the valley of suffering, was delayed for
a time, to as many of them as were to be called thereunto, as is cleared, ver.
36. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Christ's presence be the sweet cordial of his
followers; Yet he sees it meet, for wise ends, and for their exercise, to
withdraw it from them sometimes; As here he did from his disciples. 2. Christ,
having fulfilled his Ministry on earth, did withdraw in respect of his bodily
presence, not only from his foes, but even from his followers; for, even to the
disciples it is now, a little while I am with you. 3. It is Christ's kindness
to his followers, that he advertiseth them of what is to come upon them, that
so they may be armed against it, and prepared for it; as here he beforehand
intimates his removal to his disciples. 4. It is our duty to consider for how
small a moment we may have the occasion and opportunity of mercies, that we
may be very busy, and improve it well; for, therefore does he advertise his
disciples, a little while I am with you, that they might not trifle away that
moment of time wherein he was so busy with them in the following Chapters. 5.
When Christ does any thing that his followers think hard to digest, they are
bound to believe that he does it not for want of care and respect, but in the
abundance of his love to them; And that they have so much more room in his
heart, that his dealing is sad; and that he leaves his heart with them, when
otherwise he withdraws; Therefore does he sweeten this sad intimation with a
sweet title, not so usual before, little children 6. A sweet word, importing
Christ's love, is sufficient to bear up Saints under saddest dispensations; for,
this is a sufficient cordial here, to make up his removal, that he calls them
little children. 7. Such as do not undervalue the sweet consolations of Christ's
Word, and his speaking to them, will find him speak more sweetly in trouble
then ever before; Therefore does he reserve such a title for such a time. 8.
Whatever be Christ's dealing, in removing and withdrawing from his followers;
Yet he still retains the relation of a Father to them, and will have such a
care of them as Parents have of their young and tender children, who cannot
care for themselves, and who use to be most dandled and tenderly dealt with;
for, so much does this compellation, not only of children, but little children,
import. 9. It is not inconsistent with Christ's love to his own, that he deal
and speak as sharply against their corruptions, as against the corruptions of
the wicked; for, in so far as the disciples were carnal, he says unto them, as
he said unto the Jews, as has been explained. 10. Christ, by removing his
bodily presence, has cut off all grounds of hope of any carnal way of
intercourse or communion with him, and laid on a necessity of studying a
spiritual way of coming to him, on all these who would enjoy him; for, so much
also does this intimation, common to them with the Jews, import. 11. The
wicked and the godly, even in their best frame, may be under the same outward
dispensation, but in as far different a way as is betwixt their states and
conditions; for, even in respect of their coming to him in heaven, he says, As
I said unto the Jews, etc. so now I say unto you, but in a far different
sense; for, To the one, he intimates his departure in judgment, by way of
rejection of them; To the other, it is full of mercy, and accompanied with
sweet affection; To the one, coming to him is absolutely denied, To the other,
only delayed; To the one is intimate, that, as they cannot, so they shall not
come where he is; To the other, it only intimates what they cannot do of
themselves, but does not seclude what he can do or will do for them. 12.
Whatever men esteem of an enjoyed Christ, yet when he is gone, he will be
missed by his own; for, when he is gone, ye shall seek me, says he. 13.
Christ's withdrawings tend to kindle desires after him, and to be at him, in the
hearts of his own, together with earnest pursuing after him; for, so much also
is imported in this, ye shall seek me. 14. Christ, by removing his bodily
presence from earth, has taught his disciples, to spend their lives in a sober
desire, and hastening to be with him in heaven; for, when he is gone, ye shall
seek me to come whether I go, says he. 15. Saints must not expect always to
get satisfaction, at first, in their most honest desires and endeavors, but to
be excused with further desiring and seeking: And particularly, they must not
expect to get up to rest with Christ in heaven, till first they have wrastled a
while, and served their generation: for, in this respect, though they seek him,
yet whither I go, ye cannot come. 16. Christ's own by all their endeavors are
not able to get up to him in heaven, unless he come and fetch them: for, in
this respect also it holds true, ye cannot come, to wit, not only presently,
but of your selves, even no more then the Jews can do.

Verse 34. A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another.
The third point propounded by Christ, contains a direction concerning their
behavior in his absence, that they should love one another: Which he presses
upon several grounds, whereof the first is, that the command enjoining it is a
new commandment given by him: and the second (in this verse also) is taken from
his own example, which might both persuade them unto, and regulate them in, the
performance of that duty. While he calls this commandment new, the meaning is
not that it was not enjoined before: for, we find it enjoined in the law it
self. And this same Apostle does recommend the whole doctrine of following
Christ, as being so new, as yet it was old, 1 John 2.6, 7, 8 and particularly,
he recommendeth love as an old commandment, and not new only, 2 John 5. Nor
does it fully exhaust the meaning, that he made it new, by renewing of that
commandment and vindicating it from the corrupt glosses of the time, as he did
also the test of the law: Nor yet suffices it to say, that as it is a
commandment which can only be performed by the new man: so it is enjoined in a
new way by Christ, in conferring power and grace with the command, and writing
it on our heart, that it may be obeyed, which no man had under the law, by the
law it self. For this is true also of other commands, and believers also under
the law had it, though by another covenant, then that of the law, as it was a
covenant of works. Therefore I conceive that by calling this commandment in
special, new, is pointed out (beside the former considerations) partly, that
the thing commanded is excellent, and so a new song, seems to be understood
for an excellent song, Psalm. 33.3. And therefore Christ pitcheth on it, as a
chief and singular duty above many, to be recommended to his disciples. And so,
if we look to this command, it is not only new, or renewed, in the enjoying
thereof; Christ's recommending it anew, adding a new obligation to what was
lying on by the authority of the law; But the very matter of the command is
new, and declared excellent, in that Christ does so much and so specially
recommend it above others, and adds his authority and credit with his
disciples to the former injunction of the law, to make it to be studied. And
partly, hereby is pointed out that it is new, in respect that it is urged upon
a new ground, and after a new pattern and example; Our love to others not being
now to be regulated only according to our love to our selves, as the tenor of
the law runs, but a new ground and pattern being laid in Christ's loving of us,
which makes the whole complexe commandment, be a new commandment. And upon all
these considerations it follows, that this commandment should still be new to
us, our obligation to such a commander still sweetly binding, the subject
matter so recommended by him, still new and fresh, and sweetly alluring to
obedience, and such a pattern still drawing our hearts to imitate it. Doctrine
1. The doctrine of the Gospel contains not only sweet comforts, but necessary
commands and directions also, for our attaining, emproving, and clearing our
right in these comforts; for, here is a commandment given, and pressed by
Christ in his sweet farewell Sermon. 2. Christ is true God, and sovereign Lord
over, and lawgiver unto his people, having authority to give a law unto them,
binding their conscience; for, a commandment I give unto you, says he. 3. Sad
lots may be made up and compensed, not only by sweet comforts from Christ, but
may be made easy, and much sweetened also, by our cleaving to duty in such a
lot; for, here, mutual love is recommended, as a mean to sweeten that sad lot
of his removal; So our love to him is left us to make up his being not seen, 1
Pet. 1.8. And indeed, they are never sadly deserted, (however they want
comfort) who are not driven from duty; Nor is comfort allowed on any, but these
who cleave to duty. 4. While Saints are absent from Christ, in respect of his
bodily presence, it is especially required of them, that they entertain mutual
love; That so they may be mutually useful and comfortable one to another in
such a languishing time, and while they are hated in the world; That they may
not fall in emulation and quarrels, during their Masters absence, and so mar
his work, and their own peace, and expose his ways to reproach and obloquie:
And, That they may be fitted to partake of the sweetness, blessing, and
consolations, which God has commanded upon his people in their being united,
Psalm. 133.1, 2. 3. For these causes (among others) does Christ in his absence
enjoyne, that they love one another, and so may partake of the consolations
left in his Testament. 5. Albeit, oft-times, we look on love as an indifferent
and arbitrary thing, which we may practice or forbear at our pleasure, and
according as we judge our selves obliged or disobliged; Yet Christ has not
left it arbitrary to us, but enjoined it as a debt and duty by his command;
for, says he, A commandment I give you, that ye love one another. See Romans
13.8. 6. Whatever Christ commands, his enjoining of it puts a new obligation
upon his children, and commends the thing enjoined, as excellent for his sake,
which therefore should not be entertained with formal and dead dispositions;
for, it is a new commandment, as has been cleared. 7. Christ has loved his
disciples and followers, and so loved them, as may well be a copy and pattern
of all love; for, says he, I have loved you, and so loved, that he makes it
their copy, to love one another as I have loved you. As Jonathans love
surpassed the love of women. 2 Samuel 1.26. So does his love infinitely surpass
Jonathans. And this is the reason why he presses love so much, even because it
was so much in his own heart. 8. Christ's love to us is a new obligation,
pressing on us to love one another; Whosoever believe his love, cannot but love
him again, and will account themselves obliged to obey what he commands and
recommends by his own example; And particularly; to love them who have obtained
like mercy with themselves, and do bear his image, and are begotten of him,
who has loved them; And they will be sensible of so much tenderness in him
toward them, as will oblige them to be tender and condescending toward their
brethren; for this is an argument, and makes it a new commandment, in a special
manner, that ye love one another as I have loved you. And that so much the
rather, as the one is the evidence of the other. See Matthew. 18.23 -- 35. 9.
Christ's love is not only an argument obliging, but a pattern directing Saints
in their mutual love, and albeit none can imitate him in the nature and kind
of some acts evidencing his love, (as being acts peculiar to his office of
mediator:) Nor yet can any come up to his measure, in what is imitable: yet
his love to us is a copy after which we should strive to write in this matter;
By being willing, ingenuous, and free, in our love, as he was; By loving
sincerely, and not for by ends; By loving the Saints as such, and because of
their interest in him, as he loved his own, John 13.1. (and so love them all as
he did, John 13.1. not as James 2.2, 3, 4. and specially them that are most
gracious, as John 13.1. with John 21.20.) By loving them, however they may hate
us, as he loved them when enemies; By loving them not in word or tongue only,
but in deed and real truth, as he gave his life for them he loved, by bearing
their infirmities, and not pleasing our selves, but them for their good to
edification; as he also did, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. And, by loving them constantly,
as he loves his own, John 13.1. so much is imported in this: A commandment I
give you, that as I have loved you, ye also love one another.

Verse 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another.
This verse contains a third argument pressing this duty of mutual love, taken
from the necessity thereof as the badge of their profession. For, as all S^^^s
and societies have their badges and observations, whereby they are known and
distinguished from others: So Christ has appointed this mutual love to be the
badge whereby his followers may be discerned. Whence learn, 1. As Christ has
disciples in this world, so they serve a master of whom they need not be
ashamed: but they may and ought to avow him in well and woe, and look profanity
and trouble out of countenance: for, it is supposed here as great honor, that
all men know that ye are my disciples. 2. Albeit true Saints should not be
ostentative, nor self-seekers: yet as they ought to assure their own hearts of
their good condition before God; So they ought, in their station, to shine and
appear such as they are; for, it is their duty, by ^wful means and right
walking, to make all men know that they are Christ's disciples. 3. As true
mutual love of the brethren is an infallible evidence o^ regeneration. 1 John
3.10, 14. and 4.7. So this love is the Ch^^stians badge whereby they are known
to the world, and without which, Christ and men may look upon them as m^^^wayes
from their colors, be what they wi^^ otherwise; for, By this shall all men
know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. See 1 Cor. 12.31. with
Chap. 13.1, 2, 3, etc.

Verse 36. Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered
him, Whither I go thou can not follow me now: but thou shall follow me
afterward.
Follows the last part of the Chapter, wherein Christ reprehends and
represseth Peter's (...) presumption, in conceiving of his own ability to suffer
with and for him, by foretelling his denying of him. And by this the wound is
made yet wider, in that they were not only to want their Master, and one of
them to betray him, but another to deny him under tentation, and all of them to
forsake him, as this intimation was further enlarged at another time, Matthew.
26.31, 32, 33, 34, 35. The purpose contains two conferences or discourses that
past betwixt Christ and Peter. In the first whereof (in this ver.) Peter
reflecting on what Christ had said, ver. 33 propounds a question to Christ,
whither he went; which he did not so much out of ignorance, as wondering that
he should go any where from them, where he could not follow, as the following
discourse makes clear. Christ gives a mild answer to this proposition,
assuring him that for the p^esent he could not follow him, but should get the
honor to follow afterward. Whereby is not meant only, that he was not yet ripe
to come to glory with Christ, till he had finished his course; but chiefly,
that he was not yet strong enough to suffer with and for him, and so follow him
in that path to glory, as he should do afterward. Hence learn. 1. It is an
evidence of our great weakness, that in hearing, one point may put us by the
hearing of many other points, and the hearing of our danger impedes our hearing
of our directions and encouragements under i^; for, by Peter's insisting on this
point only, it appears he had not so well hearkened to what Christ said after
that, ver. 34, 35. but that point had so vexed him, that he could not rest till
he thus burst out. 2. Such as have t^sted of the sweet of Christ's society, will
be very loath to part with him, but would follow him where ever he goes; for,
albeit Peter erred in limiting the comforts of Christ to his bodily presence,
and in trusting too much to his own strength, yet it is commendable, that he
cannot digest Christ should go, to wit, where he and the rest might not follow.
3. Saints are, oft-times, little acquainted with their own weakness, and the
deceitfulness of their heart; especially, when their affection and willing
spirit is locked unto, without considering that they have weak sl^sh also; for,
it flowed from Peter's ignorance of himself in this heat of affection, that he
propounds this question, Lord, whither go thou? to wit, to be separate from
us, or that any thing should hinder us to follow Not only may presumption think
such a proposition of Christ's hard, but even love may sometime dream of greater
abilities then indeed it has 4. Christ deals tenderly with Saints at first in
the budding^ of their infirmity, before they come to an height; As considering,
not only what they are in their state, but, what honesty there may be under
their infirmities; Therefore at first he gently informs Peter, as knowing what
love to him lurked under his rash expression of his resolution. 5. Christ knows
his own followers, and their weakness, better then they do themselves; And his
verdict of them will prove true, whatever they think of themselves; for, he
repeats that doctrine which Peter questioned, as still true, whither I go thou
can not follow me. 6 As no man is able of himself to follow Christ, or
suffer for him; So they may be true Saints, who yet are so weak for a time, as
they are not able to suffer; for Peter is a disciple, and yet cannot follow
Christ now. 7. Christ is so tender of his grace in his own, that he will spare
them, and not put them to it above their strength; for, as Peter is not able
now, so his hard work is delayed till afterward, till he be better trained,
and more strengthened See Isa 28.27, and 42.3. 8. The refreshments of Saints, in
services or comforts, are only delayed and not denied, when they are withheld
from them, for, to follow Christ by suffering, and so to come to him in glory,
is only denied now, but not afterward. 9. Unto such as love Christ, and ^^e
sensible of their own weakness, it will be matter of encouragement to get a
promise that they shall be able to serve Christ, and come to enjoy him, were it
in a holy chariot of martyrdom; for; it is a promise and encouragement unto
Peter, now grieved, thou shall follow me afterward, to wit, by suffering into
glory. And so was it afterward, when Christ received him into favor after his
denial, Chap. 21.18. 10. Such as the Lord keeps for a time under much we^kness,
yea and corrects their presumption with a fall, may ye be raised up and
strenthned to suffer eminently for Christ; for, Peter weak at present, and
afterward slipping through his presumption, g^^s a promise, thou shall follow
me afterward.

Ver. 37. Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay
down my life for thy sake.

38. Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily,
verily I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me
thrice.


In these verses we have the second discourse betwixt Christ and Peter;
wherein, Peter not digesting that he could not now follow, and looking on a
violent death as the greatest impediment, he conceives it not impossible to
hazard on that, and therefore rashly offers to follow him, though he should lay
down his life for his sake, ver. 37. which presumption being detested by
Christ, he represseth it by a prediction that he should deny him thrice, that
same very night, before the cock should crow, ver. 38.

From ver. 37. Learn, 1. Men are not easily convinced of their presumption,
till experience discover it, nor do they always see reason to doubt of their
own strength, even albeit Christ should warn them of it; Therefore replieth he
against Christ's warning, why cannot I follow thee now? 2. The greatest external
impediment to hinder a man from following Christ, is a violent death for his
sake; for, so does Peter suppose here. 3. Albeit it be a very great difficulty
in it self, to suffer death for Christ and his truth; Yet it is not a thing to
be stood upon, when we are called to it; And love to Christ should make it
easy, and us willing to undergo it; for, this is in it self commendable, that
he was so willing to die, I will lay down my life for thy sake. 4. As it is
commendable to be valiant, courageous, and resolved for troubles for Christ's
sake, so ofttimes, in stead of this, Saints may be pestered with presumptuous
resting on their own strength to endure sufferings for Christ; for, this offer
flowed not from true magnanimity, but rash presumption in Peter, who vilipends
death, and yet trembled at a damsels voice. 5. The evidences of this
presumption (as it is distinguished from true courage and resolution in God)
may be gathered from Peter here. As 1. Men are presumptuous, when they heed not
the words verdict concerning their weakness, nor are humbled by what it
discovers; for, he heeds not, but contradicts Christ's verdict. 2. Men's
condition looks like presumption, when they lean to their present disposition
and affections, and are not sent out of themselves, to deny all these, and
trust in God only; for, Peter here builds too much on his present sit of
affection and resolution. 3. If men would avoid presumption, they ought not to
boast of their courage before they have a do, and be called to it, and get the
promise of fortitude, for, Peter is now stout, when it is not his work, and he
has not the promise till afterward. 4. It is a great token of presumption,
when men look only on outward impediments, and do not seriously consider their
own inward fainting dispositions; for, he speaks only of death, as an
impediment, but considers not his own disposition, and how much is requisite
within a man for such an undertaking, without which lesser sufferings will be
formidable. 5. Presumption is always attended with that want of sobriety,
whereof true courage is free; for, in all this he boasts, without any fear or
trembling, See 1 Cor. 10.12. Romans 11.20.

From ver. 38. Learn, 1. Presumption is detestable and abominable to Christ,
were it even in his own followers; for, so much does this question, by way of
indignation, import, will thou lay down thy life for my sake? 2. Christ knows
all his followers well, and what they will prove, even when he chooses them,
and leteth out his love upon them; as being God over all, and having diligently
pondered all predictions concerning him as man; for, he can tell Peter what he
will prove, and so all the disciples, from the predictions of the Prophets,
Matthew. 26.31. 3. Presumption and carnal confidence will never do service to
Christ, But, on the contrary, men may be very presumptuous and confident of
themselves, when they are very near a fall; for presumptuous Peter is to deny
his Master, and that before the cock crow, which was the sign whereof Christ
made use afterward, to reclaim him. 4. It is incredible, how contrary men's
carriage, in a time of tentation, may be to their presumptuous resolutions;
Therefore Christ must confirm it with a verily, verily. 5. When no other thing
will convince men of their presumption and carnal confidence, Christ will
refute them by letting them feel their own weight; for, when Peter will not
believe Christ ver. 36, he gets this, to show him his folly? Yea, it seems from
Matthew. 26.34, 35. that he ven^ed the ^ame presumption again in the way to the
Garden, and would not give credit to it, when Christ over again warned him of
his danger, and therefore he must be humbled with such a fall 6. When men once
give way and yeel to tentation, they would make no end of defection, if mercy
did not stop their course; for, Peter is warned that he shall deny Christ
thrice, and would have gone on, if Christ had not reclaimed him.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the former chapter. Christ, as a faithful friend, not willing to delude his
disciples with false comforts, has ripped up all their wounds: by telling them
what they were to meet with. Now, in this and the two following Chapters, He,
by comfortable doctrine, proves himself to be the sympathizing high Priest,
and kithes his skill in curing these wounds. And for this end, as he points out
his sense of their case in themselves, through his absence; and that they would
be troubled, orphans, hated and persecuted: So he hold, forth rich consolations
unto them and antidotes against these evils; together with directions
concerning their duty, for attaining and entertaining, these consolations,
which should tend to their peace and joy.

In this Chapter Christ's chief scope is, to guard and encourage their hearts
against that fear and trouble which scised upon them, when they heard of his
death and departure, and the treachery and faintheartednesse that was among
themselves, as may be gathered from ver. 1. -- and ver. -- 27. where he
disswades them from these passions and distempers: For which end, he propounds
several antidotes and grounds of consolation and encouragement, which may be
reduced to these heads. 1. Faith in him, as true God, equal with the Father,
ver. -- 1. 2. The consideration of his errand in going, and that there was a
necessity of his departure to heaven, for their good, ver. 2. 3. That he would
come again (having done his work) to fetch them, ver. 3. 4. That in the mean
time, they know whither he went, and what was the way thither; Both which are
propounded, ver. 4. and further cleared in answer to Thomas objection, ver. 5,
6.7. and the first of them yet further insisted on, upon occasion of Philips
proposition, ver. 8.-14. 5. That if they would prove their love to him by
obedience, and not by heartlesse dejection for his absence, ver. 15. He would
send the Spirit unto them. The excellency of which gift, and the advantages to
be had by him, are recorded, ver. 16.-26. 6. That he leaves his peace in legacy
to them; Upon which he repeats the exhortation, ver. 27. And (being to conclude
this part of his discourse) he reproves them for not entertaining this
intimation of his departure and return, with joy, seeing it tended to his glory
and their advantage, ver. 28. and the prediction of it would do them good
afterward, ver. 29. And declares, that he was not to speak much more unto
them, but was shortly to be assaulted by Satan, and to suffer, not for any
thing in himself, but in obedience to his Fathers will, ver. 30, 31. and
therefore they ought to heed better what he said.

Ver. 1. LEt not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me,
This verse contains. 1. Christ's scope in this doctrine, which is to guard
against, and dissuade from that heart-trouble and perplexity, which his former
doctrine had raised in them. 2. The first antidote or argument of consolation
to cure this distemper, which is double; For, herein he supposes that however
he was to die as man, yet he is God equal with the Father, and the object of
faith. Next, he proposes faith in himself with the Father, as a cordial to
uphold their fainting and perplexed hearts. Whence learn, 1. Christ's dearest
disciples and true followers are subject to much trouble of heart, and to have
their spirits so crushed, as only God can support and uphold them; for, so was
it with the disciples, their hearts were troubled perplexed and confounded. So
that whole minded men have need to look about them. 2. The Lord makes use of
heart-trouble and exercise, to sit his own for the consolations and proofs of
his tender heart which he allows upon them, whereof otherwise they are not
capable; for, their heart-trouble draws out this sweet comfortable doctrine. 3.
Albeit heart-trouble be needful for Saints, as a mean of much good; Yet they do
ordinarily so exceed in it, and debord under it, as it becomes a fault in them;
Therefore does he dissuade from it, let not your heart be troubled. And herein
they failed, both through excess, and being immoderate in their sorrow, and in
being troubled at that which might afford joy, ver. 28. 4. Albeit Saints do,
oft-times, give over themselves to heartlesse dejection and discouragement, as
conceiving they have no other cause or allowance; Yet be their case what it
will, it is not the will of Christ they should entertain such a disposition,
but that they should strive against it; Therefore does he exhort them to oppose
this distemper, Let not your heart be troubled. Albeit nothing could seem
sadder to them then the removal of his bodily presence, yet he counts it their
fault that they were so addicted to sense, as they could not expect to be
comforted another way against it; And therefore exhorts them to oppose their
sorrow See 1 Samuel ^0.6. Psalm. 42.5, 11. And upon the same ground ought Saints
to oppose all discouragements (how just cause soever it seem to have) under
which they would lie down and rest, without expecting an issue, or that the
matter of their discouragement may prove a mean leading to an higher end; and
which would drive them from Christ, and mar his allowed consolations. And for
this end, they would beware of passion, which desires do quarrel with, and be
jealous of Christ; of ignorance, and mistaking his mind in trouble; and of
carnal expectations, the disappointment whereof may crush them. 5. Whatever be
Saints duty, to oppose discouragement and trouble; Yet it is Christ only who is
the Physician of troubled souls, and who must speak the word, and set them on
work; for, he it is who gives this comfortable counsel and direction. 6. Christ
is so tender of his grieved and troubled people, that whatever weakness they
kithe, yet he will make it his chief work to see to their encouragement;
Therefore, albeit he had his own bitter trouble, Chap. 13.21. and was, that
night and the day following, to grapple with wrath, and hell and death; Yet he
forgets all that, and spends his time in comforting and easing them, Let not
your heart be troubled. 7. Such as take up Christ rightly, will not be much
dismayed at what befalls him or his; Therefore does he point out himself as God,
that they might not stumble at his suffering, nor their own scattering. 8.
Christ, notwithstanding his abasement and suffering as man, is true God, the
object of saving says, equally with the Father: Therefore does he urge
believing in him, as they did believe in God. 9. The says of humbled and
troubled souls can, bottom or fasten on nothing that is inferior to God; nor
can any other thing bear their weight; for, it is a proof of his deity, that
he is the object of faith. 10. Albeit Christ do not remove from troubled Saints
the afflictions which raise their trouble; Yet they have comfort sufficient, if
they believe; for, this is their encouragement who had Christ himself to
comfort them, believe. 11. It is the will of God, that Christ's bodily absence
be supplied and made up with faith, which will make an absent Christ present to
a believer; for, it is to cure this disease that this remedy is applied,
believe. 12. Whatever other ground of consolation Christ allow upon his
followers within time; Yet the first encouragement must begin at believing, and
faith must grip him, and hold him fast, till other encouragements spring up in
it is hand: for, this is the first encouragement, that must go before all the
rest here subjoyned, and make way for them. 13. Faith in God and Christ is so
acceptable and well-pleasing unto Christ, that troubled souls are commanded and
invited to it: so that they sin if they believe not: for, says he, ye believe
in God, (or: believe in God,) believe also in me. 14. While he conjoynes
himself with the Father, and presses to faith in both, it serves to teach.
1. Faith, in laying hold on Christ, must ascend up through the vail of his
flesh and office of Mediator, and fasten on him as true God, one in essence
and equal with the Father: for, so does this exhortation import. 2. Faith in
God the Father must be joined with faith in Christ, in whom the Father is to be
taken up in the matter of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. and through whom we must
believe in God, 2 Cor. 3.4. 1 Pet. 1.21. Therefore it is required that with
their believing in God, they believe also in him. 3. It is a notable
encouragement, inviting troubled souls to believe, when they consider the
infinite latitude of the object of faith, as it closes both with the Father
and the Son, not secluding the Holy Ghost; For in the Son they will find
eternal Redemption, everlasting righteousness and satisfaction: In the Father,
infinite love, and free grace accepting the Elect in Christ: In the Holy Ghost,
infinite virtue and power applying Christ's purchase: And in both Father and
Son, (not secluding the Holy Ghost) infinite power upholding and preserving the
Elect, till they come to full fruition. So much also may be gathered from the
distinct naming of the Father and Son, as the object of their faith.

Verse 2. In my Fathers house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would
have told you: I go to prepare a place for you.
In this verse is contained the second Argument of consolation, which (as
Christ's consolations are all rich) contains a double encouragement in the
bosom of it. For, 1. He presupposes it as a ground of the following
consolation, that heaven, to which he went, was his Fathers house, and was
designed not for him alone to ascend unto, but for many more through him, (for
whom there is room enough) for their perpetual rest and abode. 2. He confirms
this supposition, from his fidelity and good will to them, assuring them he
would never delude them with vain hopes. 3. He subjoynes the principal
consolation: that his going to heaven was for their good, to prepare a place
for them, Whence learn, 1. Such as study encouragement by says, ought to lift
up their hearts to the hope of future glory, that so their consolation may be
strong; Therefore is this encouragement from the hope of glory, subjoyned to
the former, of living by faith for the present, ver. 1. 2. Whatever be the
tossed life of Saints here, which the Lord, in deep wisdom, carves out for
them, that they may indeed be strangers and pilgrims; Yet it may encourage
them, that there is a solid and quiet resting place prepared for them in
heaven; for this cause does he give it the name of a mansion, See Heb. 13.14.
Rev. 14.13. 3. There is abundance of room in heaven, and in Gods love, to
receive sinners: And albeit it has not seemed good to him to save all, nor the
most part; Yet there are many to be saved and admitted into that blessed rest:
Therefore it is designed Many mansions: which is not to be carnally conceived
of, as if heaven were divided into so many Cel's; Nor yet as pointing at
several degrees in glory; But the expression is to be understood in opposition
to Christ's ascending at this time his alone. And by it he would intimate, that
there was room in heaven, not for him alone, but for many through him, in
whose name he was a forerunner, as is after cleared: So that none need to be
deterred from coming to Christ, by reason of the paucity of the Elect. 4. It
may sweeten the hope of glory unto Saints, when they consider that heaven is
the house of God, wherein he will familiarly converse with his domestics;
wherein they will get a clear and full fight of him; shall enjoy full glory, as
being in the Kings Palace; shall get a secure and quiet habitation, beyond the
reach of enemies, enjoying the treasures which they laid up there before; And,
wherein all the children shall at last be gathered together: Therefore it is
here described to be the Fathers house. 5. It adds to the consolation of
Saints, that however the glory and riches of heaven might crush their hopes
that ever such unworthy ones as they should be so dignified; Yet Christ as
their head is Lord and heir thereof, and he will come speed there for their
behoose; Therefore does he so comfortably describe it, my Fathers house. 6.
Christ is no false Prophet or deceiver of his people; He reveals all that is
necessary for them to know, nor will he hide any thing that is for their good:
for, in this he bids them credit his fidelity and love, If it were not so, I
would have told you. 7. Christ's deed and performance will never give his Word
the lie, nor will there be anything less found in heaven then he has
promised: So much also is imported in this here, If it were not so, I would
have told you. 8. There is no trial so bitter and sad, but Christ can draw
precious consolations out of it to his own, and bring it about for their good;
for, what more sad to the disciples, then to be separate from their Master? and
yet he draws ground of comfort out of it, I go (says he, speaking of his
voluntarinesse in dying) to prepare a place for you. 9. No man by nature has
any right to heaven, until it be acquired and prepared for him; for, so is here
imported, that a place, must be prepared, even for disciples. 10. Albeit in
Gods decree heaven was prepared for the Elect from the foundation of the world,
Matthew. 25.34. Yet it is through Christ only that they come to get actual right
to it: for, I prepare a place for you, says he. 11. As Christ by his death did
purchase a right and title to heaven for Saints; So by his ascension into
heaven, he prosecutes and applies that right. For in his ascension he is
declared acquit and righteous in our name; He led captive all these who might
hinder us from it, Ephesians. 4.8. As harbingers go before, to prepare rooms for
these who are to follow after; So he ascended as a common person, to take
possession in our name, Heb. 6.20. Ephesians. 2.6. As the High Priest entered into
the most holy place, with the names of the children of Israel, on his breast,
and with the blood of the sacrifices, Heb. 9.7. So he has entered heaven with
our names on his heart, to present the merit of his blood continually, to pour
out his spirit to fit us for glory, and by his Intercession to promove our
going thither. See Heb. 9.11, 12. Therefore says he, I go (not only to die,
but to my Fathers house) to prepare a place for you. So that his ascension
proves the way is patent, is a pledge of our ascension; and assures us that the
inheritance will be kept, till we be ripe for it. Which yet is not to be
understood, as if heaven had not been prepared for any before his ascension,
but that without his miret (either as ascended or to ascend) none has access
to heaven; So that he ascended first, in priority of nature, as the cause of
the ascension of all his followers, though not first in priority of time. 12.
Whatever be Christ's condition, it is still for the believers good; and wherever
he be, he is about their affairs; for, as he descended from heaven, when our
affairs required it, so also he ascended again on our affairs. 13. It is an
undoubted pledge that Christ, exalted in glory, will not forget his followers
on earth, that their affairs was a great part of his errand thither: for, if he
go to prepare a place, we may be sure he will not forget his errand.

Verse 3. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also.
The third argument of consolation is, that having done his work in heaven in
their name, he will return and fetch them to glory and the full fruition of the
promises. Which is not only to be understood of his fetching particular
believers at death, but chiefly, of his coming at the great day, when he shall
make one errand of all, and take up all his followers, to perfect them both in
soul and body. This consolation is confirmed. 1. From his errand in departing,
If he go away on their affairs, he will stay no longer then their affairs
require; but when he has done his work, he will return. 2. (Which is also a
description of that blessed estate, to the possession whereof he will take
them) from his love to their society, and therefore he will have them to be
with himself, and where he is. Whence learn, 1. The says of the second coming
of Christ ought to uphold the hearts of believers, during his absence; for,
this another consolation, I will come again, and receive you. See Act. 1 11.
Titus 2.12, 13. 2. It is the great consolation of believers, that their living
by faith, shall at last end in fruition; And albeit this be only believed for
the present, yet it may make all other exercises of faith comfortable, that
this is one among the rest, even that their faith, having carried them through
many a tempest and dark cloud, will at last resolve in sight and enjoyment;
Therefore is this consolation, of his receiving them, subjoyned to the former
of faith and hope, ver. 1, 2. as that which will perfect them all, being the
day of full redemption, Luke 21.28. See 1 Cor. 15.19, 54, 55. 3. It is ample
matter of encouragement to believers, that not only shall they be eternally
glorified, but that Christ does condescend to do all the duties, for perfecting
their happiness, that can be expected by reason of his relations; for, as
bridegroomes use to fetch their brides, so he will not decline to do that duty
to his bride, how naughty soever she be, I will come again, and receive you. He
not only knows she could never come to him otherwise, but his great love to
her, and his purpose to make her glorious, does endeare her to him, so that he
will stoop to such duties. 4. It does commend the love of Christ to believers,
and augment their comfort, that he is so eminently active in promoving their
eternal happiness, in all the steps thereof, and takes the whole burden of it
upon himself, leaving them little or nothing to do; for, as it is he who
descended for their behoof, and came to seek them when they had no mind of
him; so it is he who goes up again for them, who prepares a place for them
there, ver. 2. and who after all that, comes again and receives them. It is
true, He has enjoined believers their duty, which they must not slight
through presumptuous leaning on him: Yet not only does not that merit any
thing, but he lays on a yoke of duty on us, that we may employ him to work
all our works in us, and for us, and so he will work in us both to will and to
do. 5. A right study of Christ's errand to heaven, may assure us that he is
engaged to come again and perfect us, and that he will return when he has done
our employment there; for, so does he confirm this consolation; If I go and
prepare a place for you, (or, when I go and shall have prepared a place for
you, as the one particle is often put for the other) I will come again and
receive you. This does most clearly follow, because his love having taken on
that employment, will not put it off again, nor will he be unanswerable to his
trust, nor lose all the pains he has taken to purchase and prepare a place, by
not coming again to perfect his own. 6. Albeit Christ removed his bodily
presence from his followers, yet his love to them and their fellowship did not
cease, nor will he rest satisfied till he and they meet to enjoy his company;
for, he who delighted among the Sons of men, before the world was, Prove. 8.31.
who delighted to converse with his people in humane shape before his
Incarnation, and who took pleasure to spend his time busily among them, while
he was with them in the days of his flesh, Joh 9.4, 5. Even he is so tender in
his love, that he has mind of returning before he go away, and before he want
their company, he will yet leave heaven for their sakes, and come again (says
he) and receive you unto my self, and that for this end, that where I am,
there ye may be also. 7. As Christ's followers are in this life called to be
conform to his image, and to partake with him in sufferings; So his love will
have them at last advanced to communion in glory with himself, in that measure
which they, as his members, are capable of: for, this is his purpose concerning
them, that where I am, there ye may be also, 8. It makes the hope of heaven
sweet to Saints, when they consider that there they will meet with, and fully
enjoy Christ, whom they have so often delighted to look upon through a vail,
and whose company has oft-times offered them much of heaven upon earth, and in
their saddest lots; and that they shall never again be separated from him:
Therefore does he propound this as their sweet encouragement, I will receive
you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. See 1 These. 4.17.

Ver, 4. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know.
The fourth argument of consolation (propounded in this verse) is, that however
he was to leave them; yet they knew whether he went, and which was the way
thither. For clearing whereof, Consider, 1. As the place to which he went, was
to his Father, and his house (as is cleared ver. 2. and in the following
purpose) so, by the way here, he points out not only the way wherein he was to
walk to glory, but the way also wherein they were to follow, as the following
enlargement of this consolation makes clear. 2. The way to heaven is (so to
say) twofold; First, the way of dispensations and lots, wherewith Saints are
essayed in going through; And thus, as Christ went to his Father by sad
sufferings, so believers enter into the Kingdom through much tribulation, Act.
14.22. Secondly, the way of their duty, and the means whereby they may come to
God, and walk through these difficulties, till they come to him in heaven; And
thus, as Christ paved a way for himself, so is the the way to all others, as
we will hear, ver. 6. Now albeit the first of these be not to be excluded here;
for we are to follow him in that way, 1 Pet. 2.21. yet the last is chiefly
insisted on in the explication. 3. As for the disciples knowing of these,
(which is contradicted by Thomas) his assertion imports not only that they had
been sufficiently furnished with means to have known, but that they did also
know them, in part, and in some respect. So the meaning is, that it might
sufficiently encourage them, that they knew heaven and the Father, to whom he
went and they were to follow, and were instructed that suffering and
tribulation was the high way to heaven, both for him and them: And that albeit
he withdrew his bodily presence, yet they knew the way of corresponding with
the Father in heaven, and had a sure way to guide them home. Doctrine 1.
Believers, who do seriously study to know heaven, and what the resting place of
pilgrims is, will find rich consolation in it; for, this is one branch of the
encouragement, ye know whither I go. 2. It contributes exceedingly to believers
encouragement by knowing heaven, to know that Christ is gone there, and
glorified with his Father for their good; for, this is the particular
consideration, rendering this knowledge of heaven comfortable, whither I go ye
know, namely, that I succumb not under my sufferings, but ascend to heaven to
my Father. 3. It contributes much to the comfort of believers, and is their
peculiar privilege in their absence from the Lord, as to know God and heaven,
so to know the way that leads thither, to be the way indeed, and to be armed
against all misconstructions of the way, being compared with the end of it, to
which it oft-times looks so unsuitable; for, so much is held out in this
encouragement, as it relates to the way of dispensation, wherein Christ went to
heaven, and believers follow him. It is an encouragement, the way ye know, and
need not mistake sad sufferings, as if they were not leading to a crown, as too
many do little believe that to loose, is to gain, and to dye, the way to life.
4. It is not sufficient for the encouragement of believers, that they have a
contemplative knowledge of heaven, and the difficulties that lie in the way to
it; unless also Christ's removal out of the world do estrange their affections
from it, and make them become pilgrims, and set them on work to know the way
and means how they may hasten after him, to come where he is; and in the mean
time may keep intercourse and correspondence with him, and through him with the
Father. For, this is the great encouragement, ye know the way, namely, that he
is the way to the Father to whom he goes, as is after cleared. 5. Christ has
not left his followers without sufficient means of information concerning
heaven and the way to it, and without such a measure of knowledge of these
things, as might be ample matter of encouragement, if they knew how to discern
and improve it; for, he asserts, for their comfort, not only in respect of
means, but as to their actual knowledge also, whither I go ye know, and the way
ye know. 6. Christ knows his people, and what they are, better then they do
themselves, and his verdict of them is to be preferred before their own; for,
notwithstanding their doubts afterward mentioned, he asserts, whither I go ye
know, etc.

Ver. 5. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go: and how
can we know the way?
Follows to ver. 8. A further clearing of this argument of consolation, in
answer to Thomas objection. His doubt is propounded in this verse, wherein
being rash, incredulous, and timorous (as was usual to him. See Chap. 11. 16.
and 20. 25.) and supposing that Christ would retire some whither and leave
them, he objects, in name of all the rest, that they knew not whither he went,
and consequently, could not know the way. This being a contradiction to Christ's
assertion, ver. 4. The reconciliation thereof is not to be taken from this,
that Christ only speaks of sufficient information given, whereby they might
have known; and that Thomas objects that, for all this, they did not actually
know. For Christ afterward asserts, that that they actually knew in some
measure. But the true rise of the difference betwixt Christ and Thomas, is, 1.
Christ asserts they did know, which holds true, though they did but know
confusedly and in some measure; Thomas finding no such distinct knowledge as he
desired, objects, that he knew not at all. 2. Christ knew that in this matter
his disciples did know more, then Thomas understood that he and they did know,
and therefore he thus objects: For they know Christ in some measure, which was
in substance the knowledge of the Father to whom he went, and of the way to
him, as is after cleared; Yet he knew not these things under the notions and
terms of place and way, and therefore objects his ignorance. Whence learn, 1.
The knowledge that Saints attain unto, is very little, in respect of what they
might have in the use of means afforded them; for, in respect of measure, it is
true which Thomas said, and yet contradicts not Christ's assertion; we know not.
2. None will ever study to know, nor can they rightly know the way to heaven,
till first they attain to some knowledge of heaven it self, to set them on
work to enquire after the way; for, upon this, we know not whither thou go,
Thomas infers strongly, how then can we know the way? 3. Such as are
convinced and humbled under the sense of their ignorance, will not stand to
acknowledge it, that they may abase themselves before the Lord; for, so does
Thomas acknowledge it here? 4. Such as are convinced of their own ignorance and
infirmities, will thereby become more sensible of the weakness of others also;
for, upon this ground it is that he speaks in all their names, Lord, we know
not. 5. It is an usual weakness in believers, that their conviction of short
coming does drive them to think they have no good at all; for, in this respect
Thomas his confession comes short, and contradicts Christ, in saying simply, we
know not. 6. Saints may have true good and knowledge of Christ, which he
knows and allows them to be encouraged in, whereof yet they may be
ignorant, and will not take with it; for, Christ has told them, ye know, ver.
4. and yet says he, we know not. Sometime, Saints are under tentation and in a
fever, and so cannot discern their grace; Sometime, they do so conceive of
grace in its highest perfection, that they cannot discern the small beginnings
they have; And, sometime, they know truths in substance, yet they cannot give a
name to what they know, nor understand it under the notions and terms by
which it may be expressed, as Thomas knew Christ, but not distinctly under the
notion of the way, or as he in whom the Father is to be known. This may teach
men condescendence in their expressions to others, and to beware of making
their own conceptions of grace and truth's, a rule whereby to judge of all
others; but they must vary expressions and notions, till it be seen whither
they know the thing it self or not.

Ver. 6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the Father, but by me.
Follows Christ's answer to this objection, wherein he clears these grounds
of consolation propounded, ver. 4. And first, (in this verse) as to the way to
that place, he forbears to speak of the way of difficulties he and they were to
go through, and clears only the way whereby they might come to heaven through
these difficulties; to wit, by himself, who as he made a way to himself by
his own proper power and authority; so he is the way to all others, by whom
alone men can come to the Father, as is inferred in the end of the verse, Unto
this is subjoyned, by way of amplification, that he is the truth, and the life;
which as it holds true in many respects; That he is truth in his doctrine, the
truth of all the types, and the quickner and preserver of spiritual life in his
people; So it here points out, partly, the properties of this way, that he is
that true and living way; and partly, the order of walking in, and making use
of that way, that, first, we must close with him by faith, as truth, and doing
so, shall find him to be life in our walking, which is to be perfected, as our
prize, at the end of the journey. Whence learn, 1. Christ is very tender of the
acknowledged ignorance of his own, and will take pains to help it; for, here he
instructs Thomas, who confessed his ignorance. 2. However Saints may look
upon their infirmities, ignorance, and doubts, as very burdensome and useless;
Yet Christ can bring much good out of them, to clear and confirm themselves
and others the more; for, Christ makes use of Thomas doubt to clear up this
argument of consolation more fully, for the good of believers in all ages. 3.
Such as rightly know heaven, and the way and means to wrestle through unto it,
may easily digest difficulties in the way; for this cause it is that Christ
insists no more on the rough path of trouble which leads toward heaven, because
the knowledge of heaven, and of the Father there, and of Christ as the way
thither, is enough to swallow it up, and therefore he insists only on that. 4.
Man by nature is subject to many necessities and spiritual miseries, as being
subject to go astray from the womb, and wanting a path wherein to walk toward
happiness; being subject to error and seduction, and wanting light to discern
the way of his happiness, and to guide him in it; and, being dead in sin
legally and spiritually, unable to walk in the way, though it were pointed out,
and needing no less then eternal life to prevent his eternal misery; for, all
these necessities are supposed in this, that he must be the way, the truth, and
the life. 5. Christ is an al sufficient remedy for all our wants; He is the way
for wanderers, and the path wherein exiles may return toward lost happiness; He
is the truth, to lead them surely, and to point out their path unto them: And
he is the quickner of his people; for, I am the way, the truth, and the life,
says he. 6. Christ is the way to heaven and to the Father, not only, as it is
through him we must ascend up to the knowledge of the Father, or as he points
out the way to happiness, as a Prophet; But as having, by his merit and
satisfaction as Priest, made a patent door, whereby sinners may enter and
approach to God; and being their effectual leader in that way, as King; In
these respects he is called the way. See Heb. 10.19, 20. So that through him
sinners may come forward. 7. Christ also is the truth, not only essentially in
himself, and he from whom all truth is; But more especially, he is the truth
as a way to his people, and a true way; Partly, in opposition to types and
legal ceremonies, which were but shadows of this true way, Joh. 1.17. Col.
2.17. Partly, in opposition to all delusions, and vanities of the world,
whereby men think to attain happiness; all which as they draw from Christ the
true way, so they will prove a lie, and not the truth; Partly, in respect of
the promises, whereby we are encouraged in our way; All which in him are Yea
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. And partly, in respect of his directing us in the way;
He is not only a way wherein to walk, but a way that will direct the passengers
in walking; by the infallible directions of his Word, by the inward direction
and illumination of his Spirit accompanying the same; and, by his gracious
providence, hedging them in from many debordings. In all these considerations,
it is Christ's prerogative, that he is the way and the truth. So that Saints may
trust his guiding, and lean on their beloved. 8. It is Christ's prerogative
above all other ways, that not only he is the truth, but the life also; For
other ways cannot furnish passengers, but they may faint and die in them; nor
can they lead to a blessed rest: But He is a way who quickneth the dead, when
they are brought to it; who furnishes the passengers that walk in him, so that
they will walk and not be weary, and, who is the author of eternal life, who
living by himself, and having merited life by his death, does confer eternal
life upon walkers, at the end of their journey: Therefore is it subjoyned, I am
the life. See Chap. 17. 2. 9. The right method of making use of Christ as a
way, is first to close with him as truth and in his Word of truth, and to walk
on believing, upon which life will follow, both for present and everlastingly;
for, this way is, first, the truth, and then, the life. 10. It is man's chief
misery to be separate from God, and his happiness, to have access to him, and
enjoy him; for, that is the advantage to be had in this way, even to come to
the Father. 11. Christ is so the way to God, as there is no other beside, unto
which a man can lean, but it will deceive him; No saving knowledge of God can
be had but by him, our reconciliation, vocation, access to God in prayer, and
glorification, must be through him and by him; for, No man comes to the Father
but by me. 12. Albeit there be no way unto God beside Christ; yea, albeit all
things beside would discourage poor sinners: yet such as have fled to Christ,
may draw near with boldness; for, albeit no man comes to the Father but by
me, and all doors beside be shut, yet says he, I am the way, the truth, and
the life.

Verse 7. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also, and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.
In this verse the other ground of consolation propounded, ver. 4. is cleared,
in answer to the second branch of Thomas his doubt, concerning the place
whither Christ went, or the Father to whom he went in that place. Christ
shows, that this might be known by knowing of him, he being one in essence
with the Father, the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.15. and he
in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Hence Christ infers, in
answer to Thomas his objection, that from hence forth they know and have seen
him, not only in respect of sufficient means, but they having known him, Chap.
6. 69. they might henceforth know that they knew the Father in him, and had
seen him formerly, in seeing of him. Whence learn, 1. The Father is savingly
known in the Son, and in him only; To know or see him with mortal bodily eyes
is impossible; the knowledge of him in the creation, and in external
representations and manifestations of his glory, is but imperfect, nor can it
suffice to salvation; To know him in the Law, or covenant of works, does but
work wrath: But in Christ he is held out to be known perfectly, and to
salvation; for, if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. And
this further clears that to know him, is life eternal. 2. To know Christ
rightly is the sum of all saving knowledge, both of God, and of the way to
him, and happiness with him; Therefore does he solve all Thomas his doubts, by
pointing out himself as both the way, and he in whom the Father may be known.
3. Christ's followers do need a new gift to discern what they have or know
savingly, and to have it born upon them by him, for their encouragement;
Therefore, albeit the disciples had saving knowledge of the Father in some
measure, yet they knew not so much, till Christ bear it upon them, ye know him.
4. It is the duty of believers, to improve the means of encouragement which
Christ affords them, and it is their fault not to see what he discovers to them
of their enjoyments and condition; Therefore, says he, from henceforth ye
know him; Not that upon the matter, they knew him not before, in knowing the
Son; But that now after this information and discovery, they were bound no more
to doubt, but to know that they knew him, for their own encouragement. 5. It is
the duty of these to whom Christ reveals their good condition, not only to
improve it for the future, but to look back to the times, of their mistake and
ignorance, and make use of that which they then had, and observed not, both for
humiliation for their short coming, and for encouragement in him who was better
to them then they were aware; Therefore, does he not only allege, ye know
him, for present, but, have seen him, for the time past, that they might
observe and improve that.

Ver. 8. Philip says unto him, Lord show us the Father, and it suffices us.
From this to ver. 15. this branch of the consolation, of knowing the Father in
the Son, is further insisted on by occasion of a new proposition of Philip,
another disciple. And by this means also he clears up that argument of
consolation insinuate, ver. 1. that he was God, one, and equal with the Father.
This verse contains Philips proposition; Wherein, he expresses a great desire
to have the Father showed unto them, promising great satisfaction to himself
and the rest thereby: But he fails, in that he is not satisfied with the right
way of seeing the Father; but, declining to be led so far about to know the
Father, as he conceived the seeing of him in Christ to be, he desires, for
their satisfaction, an immediate and clear sight of the Father, his glory and
majesty. Whence learn, 1. The doctrine of Christ is not taken off his hand,
even by disciples, except with much difficulty; for, after Thomas his
objection, Philip starts a new difficulty, when Christ is clearing them most
sweetly. 2. It is the duty of disciples who are convinced of their ignorance,
not to rest in such a condition, but to labor after knowledge; for, Philip not
knowing the Father as he desired, would have him showed to them, and this is
commendable in him. 3. Such as would have saving knowledge of God and divine
mysteries, must expect and seek it only from Christ; for, this is commendable
also, that he takes this course, Lord show us the Father. See Matthew. 11.27. 4.
Such as expect to be taught by Christ, must employ him by prayer, with much
humility and reverence; for, Lord, says he, show us the Father. 5. It is not
sufficient we desire after knowledge of spiritual things, unless our desires
be chiefly carried after the best things, and particularly, to know God
himself, Lord, show us the Father, says he. 6. The sight and knowledge of God
is full of satisfaction and refreshment, and believers will rest content
therewith, whatever be their case beside; show us, says he, the Father and it
suffices us. See Psalm. 16.11. 7. Saints, even in their best and spiritual
desires, are subject to infirmities, and ready to be unsatisfied with Christ's
way and manner of satisfying them; for, Philip not being satisfied with what
Christ said, of knowing the Father in him, would know him in a way of his own,
and have a nearer cut of it, as he thought, Lord, show us the Father. 8. The
way of seeing and knowing God by faith, as he is revealed in his Son, is a way
not satisfactory to a carnal heart; and believers themselves have a jealousy
of it, in so far as they are carnal; for, this is the sight of God which Philip
declineth, and would have another; before it suffice him. 9. When we are
unsatisfied with Christ's way, and would have a way of our own, we will find,
upon trial, that the way we would be at, is either impossible or unsit, or
comes far short of what we enjoy; for, whereas he desires Christ to show them
the Father, if he desire an immediate sight of him, that is impossible, and
would consume mortal men; and if he mean only such a sight as Moses and others
got, it comes far short of what they had already.

Verse 9. Jesus says unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have
thou not known me Philip? he that has seen me, has seen the Father, and how
say thou then, Show us the Father?
Follows Christ's answer to this proposition, clearing the encouragement and
his u^ity with the Father. It may be taken up in three branches; whereof the
first (in this verse) is a reprehension of Philips ignorance, and a complaint
that, notwithstanding his long converse with them, yet, he knew him so ill, as
not to see the Father in seeing of him, but taking no notice of that, did still
call for a sight of the Father. Whence learn, 1. Even Christ's disciples may,
for a long time, be but ill scholars and slow of conception; As here Christ
finds them. 2. Ignorance in disciples is rebuke worthy, and Christ will not
spare it in them; As here he reproves Philip. 3. Christ takes notice of the
means of knowledge his people enjoy, and the continuance thereof with them,
that he may aggravate their continued in ignorance; for, Have I been so long
time with you, and yet have thou not known me? 4. Christ may be very long with
his people, and they be studying to know him, and yet not know him fully; for,
have thou not known me, Philip? Not that he was simply ignorant of Christ, but
that he knew him not so, as to know the Father in him. 5. Christ does reprove
the ignorance of followers with much tenderness, and so as may witness his
affection to them and their welfare; Therefore, does he propound the challenge
by way of regrate, Have thou not known me? 6. As the Father can only be
savingly known in Christ; So none do know Christ rightly, and as they ought,
unless they know the Father in him, who is the express image of his person,
and he in whom the fullness of the undivided essence of the Godhead dwells
bodily; for, Philip has not known Christ aright, since he says, show us the
Father, and that because, he that has seen me, has seen the Father. So that
if he had known him as he ought, he had not been ignorant of the Father. 7. The
knowledge of God which is to be had in Christ, is a most clear and distinct
knowledge; for, it is a sight, he that has seen me, has seen the Father. 8.
The excellency and preciousnesse of things desired by Saints, will not bear
weight before God, if they be not put up in a right way, and if the desire be
joined with inadvertency and not emproving of means received; for, albeit, show
us the Father, be a commendable desire, Yet in so far, as he propounds it in
these terms, to know him without the Son, and as if they had not seen him
already in the Son, Christ rejects it. He that has seen me, has seen the
Father, and how say thou then, show us the Father?

Ver. 10. Beleevest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The
words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: but the Father that
dwells in me, he does the works.
The second branch of Christ's answer contains an information of the ground of
this assertion, that they who know him, know the Father; Namely, that he is one
in essence with the Father. This he presses upon Philips conscience, if he
would not assent to it by faith; and confirms it from his Word, which is the
Fathers with him, and from his works, which were wrought not only by him, but
by the Father with and in him, these being external works, which are common to
the whole Trinity, by reason of the unity of essence, though they be distinct
persons. Whence learn, 1. Christ, when he reproves his people, does mind their
good, and is willing to inform them, and direct them how to amend; Therefore,
does he subjoyne an information to his reproof, clearing the ground of their
knowing the Father in him. And by this he teaches all Ministers to join
doctrine with reproof, 2 Timothy 4.2. 2. The true ground of our knowing the
Father in the Son, is his unity in essence with the Father, so that though
their personal properties be distinct, yet the essence is the same in both, and
the one is in the other; for, by this he clears his former doctrine, I am in
the Father and the Father in me. 3. It is faith only, and not our sense or
corrupt reason, that must be employed to take up the mysteries of Religion, and
particularly, that Christ is God coessential with the Father; for, it is faith
that is put to it, in this matter, beleevest thou not that I am in the Father,
etc. 4. It is our duty to put our hearts to it, to see what they believe in the
mysteries of God; that so we may not take the naked assent of the mind for
faith, and may be ashamed to harbor that secret unbelief in our hearts, which
we dare not avow nor own; Therefore, does Christ so put him to it, Beleevest
thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? to shame him from
thinking otherwise. 5. The Word, preached by Christ, and transmitted to us in
Scripture, is the very Word of God, the Father and the Son; for, the words that
I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, not only not of his own head, as he
was an Ambassador, but not of himself without the Father, as is further
cleared, ver. 24. So that the Word was his and the Fathers who is in him. 6.
Christ's works, both miraculous, and these wrought in believers, being done by
his own power, do prove him to be true God, one in essence with the Father, and
the Fathers also with him, by reason of that unity; for, The Father that
dwells in me (being the same in essence) he does the works, to wit, with the
Son. 7. It is our duty to make use of Christ's Word and works, to confirm our
faith in him, as true God one with the Father; for, these are not only
arguments proving the point, but serving to excite Philip and the rest, so to
study them, as to find proofs of a deity in them. 8. They who would profit by
Christ's Word and works in the knowledge of him, should first begin and bottom
themselves on his Word, and find him God there, and then look out to his
works, for further confirmation; Therefore, does he first urge the argument of
his Word, and then subjoynes that of his works.

Ver. 11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works sake.
The third branch of Christ's answer contains an exhortation to all the
disciples, that they would believe this truth of his unity in essence with the
Father. Which he presses and confirms from three reasons; whereof the first
(in this verse) is the same in substance with that ver. 10. that he who is the
truth speaks it, and has confirmed it by his works. Whence learn, 1. The deity
of Christ, and his unity in essence with the Father, is the main article of the
Christian Religion, to be studied and believed; Therefore does he press it,
Believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. 2. This point of saving
truth ought to be seriously and distinctly inculcate, and studied and learned;
otherwise our consolation arising from the knowledge of our Mediator, will not
be so solid, and so full, as is allowed; Therefore, notwithstanding any
imperfect knowledge they had of him, and what he had pressed on Philip, he does
again urge that they believe this, Believe that I am in the Father, etc. 3.
Christ does so take care of one of his followers, whose infirmities become
visible, as he will not forget others, who may be in the like need; for, as he
pressed Philip, ver. 10. so he presses here all the rest to believe, whom he
knew to be ignorant as well as Philip, though they had not expressed it.
Believe ye, says he, to all of them, in the plural number. 4. The knowledge of
Christ to be true God, under the vail of his manhood, and state of humiliation,
is as difficult as it is necessary; and a study wherein believers will find
much matter of humiliation for their short coming; for, so much also does this
insisting on it, teach us. 5. Christ takes pleasure in the soul-prosperity of
his servants, and that for this end, they study him well, who is their fountain
and storehouse, and, do close with him by faith as true God; Therefore, does
he exhort and entreat them to believe. 6. Christ is a witness who will not
lie; And as it is only on his testimony we must fasten in matters of faith; So
his testimony is worthy of all credit and acceptance by faith in our hearts;
for, the exhortation is a reason to it self, believe me, says he, since I
have said it. 7. Christ, by his condescending, to add works to the testimony
of his Word, for confirmation of our faith, and that albeit he be God who
cannot lie, does teach his people, not to try men by their words, but their
power, 1 Cor. 4.19. And to examine all the fair professions of men, by their
fruits; for, this other branch of the argument, taken from his works, is added,
not because his Word needs such a witness in it self; but, in part, to teach
us caution in the like case. 8. Christ's works, joined with his Word, do so
clearly point him out, that they may extort an acknowledgement of his Godhead
from men, and will exceedingly heighten the sin of them who will not trust in
him as God; Therefore says he, or else believe me for the very works sake.
Whereby he does not allow them not to believe himself speaking in his Word, nor
yet approves of that faith as saving, which is begotten by his works, without
the Word; But declares, that his works were so clear proofs of a deity, as
none without impudence could deny it, nor without great sin misbeleeve a truth
so confirmed.

Ver. 12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me, the works
that I do, shall he do also, and greater works then these, shall he do, because
I go unto my Father.
The second reason confirming this truth, and pressing the exhortation, (which
also is an argument of consolation against his removal) is contained in a
promise that believers in him shall do the works that he did, ^and greater
also, through faith in him, who after his ascension shall let out proofs of
his deity with them, in a more ample manner then he manifested himself in the
state of his humiliation. For clearing of this purpose, and the scope thereof,
Consider, 1. The works of Christ, which here he paralels with these to be done
by believers, are not his works of Redemption, as Mediator, nor his works of
creation and providence, as God, which are incommunicable with any but his
miraculous works, and works wrought on the hearts of men by giving success to
his ministry. 2. As for these believers who are to do these, and greater works;
whatever may be said, in a sound sense, of every believers doing great things,
and overcoming the world, through faith in him; Yet the parallel holds clearer
to restrict it to the Apostles and others in the primitive times, who were
endued with extraordinary power, and sent abroad to preach the Gospel. 3. As
for the parallel it self, that it is promised they shall do these, and greater
then these, and that albeit Christ did raise the dead, open the eyes of the
blind, etc. and cure every disease; It may be thus cleared, partly, they were
greater in respect of number; they working many miracles for number, beyond
what he did; and many for kind, which he did not, as speaking with new
tongues, and the like. See Mark. 16.17, 18. and elsewhere; partly, albeit his
miracles in themselves were as great as any of theirs; yet in the way and
manner of them, the power did shine more conspicuously then in some of his. For
he did cure men by his Word, and by the touch of his garment, but they did cure
many by their shadow passing by, Act. 5.15. and by napkins carried from them,
Act. 19.12. And partly, and chiefly, this is to be understood of the effects of
these their miraculous works, and of their ministry which these works did
accompany. For Christ was the Minister of the circumcision only; and by his
doctrine and miracles did prevail but with few of them, as himself often
complains: But the Apostles did bring in thousands by one Sermon at
Jerusalem, and by their doctrine and miracles did bring down Idols, and set up
the Kingdom of Christ through the world. 4. Whereas Christ by his works
proves himself equal with the Father, ver. 11. and yet promises they shall
do greater things; We should be far from conceiving that this does any thing
weaken the argument whereby he proves his deity, far less does it exalt them
to aspire to any equality with him; for, whatever difference there be betwixt
the works wrought by him and them; yet herein is the infinite difference
betwixt him and them, that he wrought them by his own power as God, but all
they did was by faith in him, who put forth his power to do the works; and
accordingly, they did them in his name. So that albeit the doing of these works
tended to their encouragement, yet the glory thereof redounded only to him. 5.
This reason why they shall do greater works, because I go to my Father, does
not infer there should be any addition to his power then, as God, but that at
that time his Godhead (which in the days of his flesh, was hid under the vail
of a servants shape) should more gloriously manifest it self. 6. This
encouragement of their doing greater works, tends not only to prove him exalted
as Mediator after his sufferings, as Act. 2.33. but also to prove that
assertion, ver. 11. that he is one with the Father. Because it is an evidence
of his absolute and divine power, that he can confer this dignity upon others
(not as the Apostles did ministerially, by laying on of hands, but) through
faith in his name. And withal, it is he who does these works by them, as is
after cleared, ver. 13, 14. Doctrine, 1. We have need to be often excited, to
consider seriously the weight and gravity of that which Christ speaks;
Therefore is so frequent use made of this asseveration, Verily, verily, I say
unto you. 2. Christ will bring that unto Saints, out of their worst and saddest
conditions, which they could neither apprehend nor believe, unless he had said
it; Therefore, does this promise, of the great things, for which his removal
makes way, need to be confirmed with a verily, verily, that the disciples
might give credit unto it. 3. As it is by faith in Christ only, that Saints are
enabled to do great things, (and therefore the promise is made to him, that
believes on me; It will make Peter walk on the Sea, and only unbelief will
make him sink) So the want of Christ's bodily presence needs be no hinderance to
faith, to close with him, and draw virtue out of him, for enabling to do
greatest things: for, the promise is made to him, that believes on me, that he
shall do the works that I do, and greater then these, after he is ascended. 4.
Albeit Christ only, of all the Sons of men, was true God and man in one person;
Yet the power and virtue of his Godhead is not astricted to his own person,
but is communicable in the effects thereof to his members; So that he will do
that in them and by them, which only God can do; and they shall not want divine
power, for carrying them through in what they have to do: for, He that
believes on me, the works that I do, shall he do also, etc. 5. Christ can, and
oft-times does work that by weak and contemptible means, which he does not by
stronger and more probable causes; And he did more in the world by his weak
Servants, then he was pleased to do himself: for, albeit believers be but weak
creatures, yet greater works shall he do (says he, of every one here intended)
then these done by himself, who is God over all. 6. Men's lawful and spiritual
employments, and Christ's presence with them therein, are notable encouragements
to believers during Christ's absence; for, their work and great success in it,
is one great encouragement to the disciples here. And as Christ allows
encouragement upon none who are not about their employment; So it is a great
comfort, that the saddest of conditions afford matter of comfortable employment
about them, and that work may keep Saints, in their pilgrimage, from thinking
too much long. 7. Christ is a wise dispenser of his allowances, who, oft-times,
reserveth greatest manifestations of himself for saddest times, wherein as
they are least expected, so they are most needed: Therefore is this more ample
manifestation reserved for that sad time, wherein the disciples were saddened
with his departure, and might be ready to think that all that power whereby he
wrought, was quite removed with his own bodily presence. 8. Christ's exaltation
has neither diminished his power, nor his tender care of his own; But, on the
contrary, he does make his exaltation, his unity as God, and acceptance as
Mediator, with the Father, conspicuous in the world, by his liberality and
bounty toward them; for, this is the reason why believers shall do greater
works, because I go to my Father. See Ephesians. 4.8.

Ver. 13. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.

14. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it.


The third reason confirming this truth, and pressing the exhortation, (which
also is not only another argument of consolation against his removal, but does
further clear the former promise, ver. 12. by showing the way how faith
employeth Christ for doing these great things) is contained in a promise, that
he will do for them whatsoever they ask in his name; which he twice inculcates,
for further confirmation, and amplifieth the promise from his end in it, which
is, that the Father may be glorified in and through him, in what he does in
answer to their prayer. For further clearing of the purpose. 1. This general,
whatsoever ye ask, etc. does not open a door to vent all our desires to God,
be what they will, in hope of audience, for we must ask according to his will.
But the meaning is, that what things are agreeable to his will, and fit for
them to receive in their station, and for advancing his glory and Kingdom
therein, they shall be done for them, being sought in faith, were they never so
difficult, never so many for number, and never so frequently needed. And it is
comprised in this general, that it may take in, not only that particular, of
power to do these great works, but all other things also, which believers may
need. 2. This promise contains not only a proof of his Mediatourship and his
success therein, in obtaining what is sought in his name; and a proof of his
love to them in his absence, by giving them occasion to believe their own eyes
in his answers: But a proof of his Godhead also; partly, in that none can be
Mediator betwixt God and man, but he who is true God as well as man; and
partly, because he promises to be, not only a Mediator to procure, but, a God
to act and work these things, and that hereby God shall be glorified in him, as
working in and with him, by reason of the unity of essence. Doctrine 1. As they
who are sensible of Christ's bodily absence in heaven, will send many Messengers
of prayer thither where he is gone; So prayer is a special mean whereby we may
know much of Christ's deity, and of his love in his absence: for, here he
recommends asking as that which they will be put unto, and that whereby they
may know what he is. So that it is no wonder, that these who neglect prayer, do
fall in many mistakes of Christ. 2. True faith and prayer are inseparable
companions; as being begotten together, so that faith begins its life in crying
to God; and, as growing up together, mutually streightening and setting one
another on work, till at last they end together, faith resolving in sight, and
prayer in uninterrupted praise: Therefore are they conjoined here, to believe
on him, and to ask in his name. 3. True prayer is conjoined with, and flows
from, a sense of indigency, setting the supplicant on work to his duty, with
earnestness and humility as a needy beggar; for, so much does the word,
rendered to ask, import in the Original. And where this is not in some measure,
men do but what they can to work God in prayer. 4. Prayer must be offered up to
God, in the name of the Mediator Christ; It is through him we must go to God,
and our encouragement in pleading, and our hope of acceptance, must be grounded
on his merit and intercession, and on the Fathers love to him, and to sinners
in him; for, this is the description of true prayer, what ye ask in my Name. 5.
The Lord allows and requires frequency, and multiplicity of employments, to
be put upon him by prayer; And let us put him to it never so often, and for
never so many things, he will never weary of it, but rather will suspend us in
what we ask, because we ask not enough: for, so much is imported in this
general, whatsoever ye shall ask, even all that we would have Christ doing for
us, as is after cleared. 6. It is the will of Christ, that supplicants, who
come to the Father through him, be not discouraged with the difficulty, or
seeming impossibility, of what they need and ask according to his will; But
that they expect to obtain that by prayer, which they cannot effectuate any
other way: for, so much also is imported in this, whatsoever (how difficult
soever it be) ye shall ask. 7. As the answer of what we ask in Christ's name, is
most certain; So it is Christ who is the doer thereof, and who delights to
manifest his Godhead much, in dispatching the affairs of his people; for,
says he, whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do. 8. Christ's end,
in answering the desires of his people, is, the setting forth of his own and
his Fathers glory, which as it may encourage us to expect he will do that which
will thus glorify his Father and him; So it should teach us to glorify him,
in observing his power and goodwill in answering, and to improve what we
receive, to his glory; for, says he, That will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. 9. As Christ is glorified in his doing for his people, so
is the Father glorified in him, as being true in his testimony concerning him,
and as being in him working these things; for, the Father is glorified in the
Son. 10. Albeit believers have many jealousies concerning the answer of their
prayers; yet they are all without ground; and it is most certain their desires
will be granted; Therefore does he again repeat the promise, ver. 14.
intimating that they need such confirmations, and that this is a word he will
not recall. 11. It is not enough to be sure of the answer of our prayers, or
that we do receive them, unless we see much of Christ's heart and activity
therein; for this cause it is again repeated, I will do it.

Ver. 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.
Follows the first Argument of consolation against their heart-trouble,
contained in a promise of sending the comforter, even the holy Spirit, unto
them; And because of the riches thereof, and because the other consolations are
emproven by receiving of the Spirit, therefore this purpose is largely insisted
on, to ver. 27 in this order. 1 He presses upon them their duty toward him in
his absence, especially, that they may attain this promised comforter, ver. 15.
2. He subjoyns the promise of the comforter, ver. 16, 17. 3. He insists upon
several benefits which they shall reap by enjoying of this comforter, verse 18.
-- 26.

In this verse he enjoins them their duty in his absence; that they should love
him, and evidence the same by observation of his commandments. And by this
direction, partly, he corrects their fond way of expressing love to him, by
doting on his bodily presence, and sorrowing immoderatly for his absence;
Partly, he prescribes a remedy and antidote against their heart-trouble, by
diversion or revulsion, in turning the stream of their affection, which b^ed
this heart-trouble, into the channel of diligence about duty; and partly, he
sets them on the right way of attaining the promised comforter, as the
connection with the following verse imports, keep my commandments, And I will
pray, etc. Whence learn, 1. It is the character of every true disciple of
Christ, that they do love their Lord and Master; for, so is supposed here as
their duty and practice, ye love me. See 1 Cor. 16.21. 2. The love of disciples
to Christ must not, and will not be obstructed by his seeming hard
dispensations, nor quenched by his absence; for, though he be now to remove,
yet he supposes they have, and will have love to him, ye love me. 3. Love to
Christ must not be said only, nor will it lie lurking in the heart, but must
and will break forth in proofs and evidences of it self; Therefore, Christ
requires a proof of their love, if ye love me, keep my commandments. 4. True
love to Christ may sometime be so overpowred with unbelief, have, and our
impetuous passions, as the proofs thereof, how vehement soever, yet, are not
so right as becomes; Therefore is there need of direction how to evidence their
love, in opposition to the proofs they gave thereof. 5. Obedience to the
commandments is of the true touchstone and evidence of love to Christ; And in
Christ's absence they do not evidence such pure love to him, who are ready to
lie down and die through discouragement, as they who are most at their work,
and are most busy about his errands; for, by this does he try them, and this
does he recommend as an evidence of love in his absence, If ye love me, keep my
commandments. 6. True obedience must flow not only from the fear of God, but
from love and sense of our obligation to Christ also, and disciples will look
on commandments, and give them obedience, as very sweet for his sake; Therefore
also does he presuppose love to him, as a principle of obedience, and
recommends the commandments to be observed as his, keep my commandments. 7. To
be much about duty and service, in obedience to Christ's commandments, is a very
present diversion and cure of heart-trouble, which is but fed with idle
discouragement; And it is the way to a more perfect cure, which cannot be
expected by lazy drowpers; for, this direction is both a cure in it self, and
fits them for obtaining the following promise, as has been said in opening up
of the words.

Ver. 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever,

17. Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees
him not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you.


In these verses is contained the argument of consolation it self, and the
promise of the Spirit, which is subjoyned to the former direction, as a fruit
following thereupon, and as an encouragement against the difficulties they
would meet with in doing their duty; Not that formerly they were wholly
destitute of the Spirit, but that now they were to receive him in more ample
measure. The gift promised is here described. 1. From the way of his coming,
Christ interceeds with the Father, and he sends him, not secluding the Son as
God, from whom he proceeds and who also sends him from the Father, Chap. 15.26.
and 16.7. though here he speak only of himself as Mediator. 2. From his
titles, taken from his office and work in believers; He is a Comforter, and
Advocate, as the Word also is rendered, 1 John 2.1. and another Comforter, as
being a distinct person from the Father and the Son, and working comfort in
believers in a distinct way of applying Christ's purchase to them, and sealing
and bearing witness to it in them, he is likewise called the Spirit of truth,
ver. 17. not only in his own essence, but in his operation in believers,
leading them in all truth. Of which afterward, ver. 26. and Chap. 16.13. 3.
From his permanency in believers, that he will abide with them for ever, and
not depart from them, as Christ took away his bodily presence. 4. From the
singularity of the gift, as being peculiar to believers; For the world cannot
receive him because of their ignorance; but they having knowledge of him by his
begun presence, their knowledge and communion shall be continued and augmented.
By the word here, we are not to understand only these who are eminent in it, or
all without the Church; but all who are of the world, in the state of nature,
and addicted to the world and under the power of sin. And while it is said, the
world cannot receive him, it holds true of reprobates, whom the Lord has
determined to leave in their woeful natural condition, that they can never
receive the Spirit of regeneration, nor any comfort flowing therefrom, though
they be partakers of the common, and even extraordinary, gifts of the Spirit.
But if we take the world more generally, for men in the state of nature
(whereof there may be many elect) the meaning is, that they cannot receive him,
to wit, so long as they continue in that state, and till he translate them. Far
less are they capable of such a gift in the increase thereof, (which is the
thing here promised) more then a dead man is capable of nourishment. Though in
this place he seems chiefly to point at the reprobate world, who are of the
world, and continue so. And albeit the promise be made particularly to the
Apostles, and they had the accomplishment thereof in a singular way; yet the
encouragement is to be extended to all believers, who find the Spirit a
Comforter and Spirit of truth to them, though not in so extraordinary a manner.

From ver. 16. Learn, 1. None can expect the consolations of Christ by his
Spirit, unless they testify their love to him by obedience; And they who do
so, have his Word, whereupon they may expect needful comfort; for, upon these
terms mentioned, ver. 15. I, says he, will pray the Father, and he will give
you another Comforter. 2. Christ's bodily presence was a great comfort to his
disciples, and during the time of his converse with them, he was so tender of
them, so kind to them, and took such burden and care of them, as did much
refresh and ease them; for, while he promises another Comforter, in st^ad of
himself, it intimates he had been a Comforter himself. Hence it was that he
would not let them fast, nor did put hard burdens on them, but let them see
his glory, preached sweetly unto them, and went betwixt them and all
difficulties, 3. Christ does not remove one Comforter from his people, but he
will give another, and make up their loss; for, when he is to remove, another
Comforter is promised. 4. As disciples can have no true comfort but by the
Spirit, so a large measure thereof is allowed them, to supply the want of
Christ's bodily presence; for, he is the Comforter during Christ's absence,
namely, in a larger measure then they had before. 5. Whatever be the operations
of the Spirit of Christ in believers; Yet the scope of all his employments, and
his exercising of them, tend in end to comfort them; Therefore gets he this
style, of a Comforter, in relation to them. 6. The Spirit of God in believers
is not only a Comforter, to plead, apply, and bear in the consolations of God,
purchased by Christ, upon their hearts; But is their Advocate also, who pleads
their cause with God, by furnishing them with prayers and groans that cannot be
uttered, to be put up in the hands of Christ, the Mediator of intercession:
for, the Comforter, is the Advocate also, as the Word imports. See Romans 8.26,
27. 7. The Holy Ghost is a person in the Godhead distinct from, and equal with
the Father and the Son; for, he is another Comforter, distinct from the Son,
and equal with him, in that he is a Comforter also, as he is: And he is given
by the Father, and so distinct from him; and his giving, or sending, him is no
note of superiority, nor being sent, of inferiority, for equals may send one
another; but it only points at the order of the persons in their substance and
operation: And so, as the holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, so
he is given by both, in their order of subsistence, to believers. 8. In
expecting this great promise of the Comforter, believers ought not to look to
their own merits, or the worth of their obedience, which can promise no such
thing; But their eye must be fixed on the free grace of God, who does freely
gift his Spirit to his own: for, albeit a duty be required of them who expect
this mercy, ver. 15. Yet, says he, the Father shall give you another
Comforter. 9. As it is Christ's work in heaven to intercede for his people, and
to procure their comforts, notwithstanding the sinfulness and short coming of
their prayers, and the difficulty of things desired; And therefore he should be
acknowledged in all the comforts they receive, as minding them in heaven: So in
particular, the Spirit, who is the great Comforter, is conferred upon them
through his Mediation, which is the channel through which free grace runs out
toward sinners, For, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter. 10. Albeit many, yea, all the outward comforts of believers are
moveable; yet the holy Spirit is given unto them without reversion, and is an
abiding consolation and Comforter, for all times, and all cases; for, he is
given, that he may abide, (and abide a Comforter, answerable to his name) with
you for ever.

From ver. 17. Learn, 1. As the Spirit of God is true, yea, truth it self in
his essence and person, so is he true in his office of Comforter to believers;
all his consolations being solid and real, and free of delusion; for, the
Comforter is the Spirit of truth. 2. As the holy Ghost is the revealer of
truth; So he comforts by the Word of truth, and by leading believers to rely
thereupon; for, thus is he the Spirit of truth, leading men to the Word of
truth, and making it effectual for their comfort. So that without the Word
there is no enjoying of the Spirit of Christ. 3. As the gift of the Spirit, in
his special dispensations, is very rare; So it will add to the commendation of
this encouragement, if we study the singularity thereof, and what a difference
the Lord puts therein betwixt his own and the world; Therefore is he commended
from this, the world cannot receive him, but ye know him. So also are other
mercies commended, and to be studied, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. 4. The
world and natural men are great strangers to the Spirit of Christ; they are not
capable of such a gift, nor do they desire after it, but believers live on hid
Manna to them; for, he is the Spirit of truth, whom the Word cannot receive. 5.
As the Spirit of Christ, where he is received, brings light and knowledge
along with him; So the reason why he is so little desired, is, because he is so
little known, and what sweetness is to be had in enjoying of him. And so it
rubs no indignity on him, that the world desires him not; for, that which is
subjoyned, because it sees him not, neither knows him, is both a cause of
their not receiving him, as 1 Cor. 2.14. and a proof that they have not
received him, since they do not know him, as on the contrary, in the end of the
verse, disciples know him, because he dwells with them; Their knowledge is a
fruit of inhabitation. As for the two words here used, of seeing, and knowing,
we need not be curious to put a difference betwixt them, as if the first
pointed out, that as they saw him not with bodily eyes, so they took as little
notice of his visible operations; and the second charged upon them, that they
did as little understand with their heart, as they did see with their eyes: Or,
that the first points out their simple ignorance and not seeing of him, and the
second, that since they have not seen him, they do not esteem of nor desire
him, since knowledge must draw out affections. It suffices to know, that by
these expressions is pointed out their utter ignorance of him, and Christ
prevents all curious criticismes, by comprehending the contrary case of
disciples in this one for both, ye know him. 6. A cause of men's ignorance, and
not desiring of the Spirit, is, that they are of the world, and so transformed
into a conformity with these things they lust after, as they become brutish,
and can neither discern nor desire what is their true excellency and
happiness; for, they are the world, and therefore cannot receive him, not see
or know him. 7. The brutish stupidity of the world, will not hinder Gods
kindness to his own, in communicating and revealing his Spirit unto them; Nor
should it hinder disciples to study to know and desire after him; for, says
he, But ye know him, ye both know and desire after him. 8. No light will
discover the Spirit but himself; nor can any know him, but they who enjoy him:
for, ye know him, for he dwells with you. 9 The Spirits presence in believers
is very intimate and familiar; for, he not only dwells with you, to be
assisting in what they need, but shall be in you, as in his Temple, 1 Cor.
3.16. and 6.19. 10. Where the Spirit is given, he will not change his dwelling;
but believers enjoyment of him shall be blessed with constant and increasing
enjoyment; for, as he dwells with you, so he shall be in you, in a more large
measure, and constant abode.

Ver. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.
Follows, to ver. 27 the third particular in this argument of consolation,
wherein Christ propounds (for their encouragement) and, where need is,
amplifieth several benefits which they shall reap by enjoying his Spirit. They
may be reduced to six, which I shall name as I go through; And some of them may
be conceived as the Spirits more proper work as he is a Comforter, as most of
the first five, and the last as more peculiar to him as the Spirit of truth,
Though we need not so curiously distinguish, seeing in every one of them, he is
both a comforter and Spirit of truth.

The first benefit (in this verse) is, that he will not leave them in their
uncomfortable and Orphan-condition, but will come again unto them, not only in
his bodily presence after his resurrection, and at the great day; but by his
Spirit, as an assured pledge of his presence, till at last he return to
complete their Redemption. Whence learn, 1. Such is, oft-times, the weakness
of believers faith, and the abundance and greatness of their discouragements,
that promises must be often repeated, before they can admit of them, or be
comforted in them; Therefore, after the former promise, of another Comforter,
he must and does over again tell them, I will not leave you comfortless. 2.
Believers, in Christ's absence, and without him, will stand in need of great
comfort, being like Orphans, exposed to deceits and injuries, unable to do for
themselves, and having none to do for them, but desolate and despised, and
exposed as a prey to every one; for, so is supposed here, that they are
comfortless, or, Orphans, as the word is. 3. Albeit believers may be such
Orphans in themselves, yet they have Christ's Word for it, that they shall not
be left so, but taken up and cared for by him; for, says he, I will not leave
you comfortless, or Orphans. 4. Let believers have what they will, yet they
are still Orphans and want comfort, unless it come by the Spirit of Christ;
for, it is by the Spirit this is made good, I will not leave you comfortless.
5. The Spirit in comforting, takes the patronage of believers, as a Tutor of
Orphans, guiding and defending them, and managing their affairs; So that they
who expect his comfort, must give up themselves to be led by him; for, it is by
his presence, that they are not left Orphans, but have him for a Tutor. 6.
Christ loves so well to be present with his people, that he never withdraws his
presence one way, but he comes to them another way; Therefore, says he, when
removing in respect of his bodily presence, I will come to you. 7. When the
Spirit comes unto believers, Christ comes unto them, not only because they
are one in essence; But partly, because it is equivalent to his bodily
presence, yea, and richly compenseth all that ever any had thereby; So that
they who have the Spirit, ought not to complain of his absence in that way he
was present with the disciples, nor of any thing the Church can expect within
time. And partly, because the coming of the Spirit is not to obscure Christ, or
cause him to be forgotten, but to keep his memorial fresh, as if he were come
again in person, of which more on Chap. 16. 14. For these causes it is, that by
sending of the Spirit, I will come unto you, says he.

Ver. 19, Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but ye see me,
because I live, ye shall live also.
The second benefit they reap by enjoying of the Spirit, is, a sight of Christ,
while as the world are to be deprived of the sight they had and abused. This
was performed not only, or so much, in their seeing him bodily after his
resurrection, as in a sight of his spiritual presence coming by his Spirit,
whereby he will confirm his coming to them, ver. 18. and which they shall
enjoy in the present time (as the words read, ye see me) till they come to that
everlasting and full sight in glory. The third benefit, is, life, whereby they
are enabled to see and enjoy him, whereof he gives his own life, after his
resurrection, as a pledge. Whence learn, 1. It will not suffice believers that
Christ do come unto, unless it be gifted them also to discern and see him when
he is come; Otherwise he may be present, and yet they want the comfort thereof,
because they see him not; Therefore, to the former promise, of his coming, ver.
18. this is added, ye see me. 2. It is the deplorable and woeful estate of the
world, that when Christ is most earnest in comforting his own, they are thrust
by, as having nothing to do with these consolations; Therefore is the
encouragement guarded, and amplified from the contrary state of the world; The
world sees me no more, but ye see me. 3. Whatever manifestation of Christ
contemners of him enjoy, they will be deprived of it; for, they are to be
deprived of what they had of his bodily presence, The world sees me no more.
4. Contempt of Christ does ripen fast for a stroke; for, yet a little while,
and the world sees me no more. 5. Such as do not acknowledge Christ's coming in
the flesh, shall never see his coming in the Spirit; and such as despised
Christ in his humiliation, deserve that they should never get another sight of
him to their comfort; for this also is imported in this, the world sees me no
more* not only that they should not enjoy his bodily presence, but that they
should see him no other way, as the contrary promise to the believer makes
clear. 6. It is the great misery of the wicked, that they are eternally
debarred from a sight of Christ in favor and mercy, though they will see him
one day in terror; for, so much also is imported in this general, The world
sees me no more. 7. As a sight of Christ is the sweet life and happiness of
believers; so it is their advantage, that in saddest times, when Christ is, to
outward appearance, dead and gone, and the world secluded from seeing him; yet
by his Spirit they shall enjoy a sight of him, till they come to see him in
glory; for, in opposition to the world, it is subjoyned as their comfort, but
ye see me. 8. The Spirit of Christ is an enlivening Spirit, making believers
capable of his presence; he is their present life, and a pledge of their living
eternally; for, it is added as another benefit by the Spirits coming, ye shall
live. 9. Albeit our Lord Jesus died for believers, yet it was not possible that
he should be holden of death but he rose again and lives for ever; for, it is
held out as a truth after his departure through the valley of the shadow of
death, I live. See Rev. 1.18. 10. The life of believers is derived from Christ's
life, who is our Head, communicating quickening virtue by his Spirit to all his
members; And their life stands in a continual dependence upon his life, without
which it cannot subsist; for, because I live, ye shall live also. 11. Christ
has made the life of believers in him as certain, as it is certain he lives;
seeing by his living after his death they are absolved, and life is purchased
to them, and in his exaltation, he has taken possession in their name, and
stands engaged to make his members partake of his life and fullness; for, so
much also is imported in this, Because I live ye shall live also.

Verse 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and
I in you.
The fourth benefit redounding to them by the Comforters coming, is, that
whereas they had lately bewrayed much ignorance of him, and of his unity with
the Father; then they should understand the great mysteries of Gods Kingdom,
that he is in the Father, and consequently the Father in him, and that there is
a communion betwixt believers and him, and consequently, the Father and them in
him. This was accomplished to the Apostles, when the Spirit was poured out, and
is, in its own measure, made good to every believer, in due time. And under
this is comprehended the substance of the mystery of Redemption, that there is
an essential union betwixt the Father and him as God, and that as Mediator, he
is in the Father by dependence, and the Father in him by sustentation of his
humane nature under his sufferings, and by approbation; and that there is a
mystical union betwixt him (who is in the Father) as Head, and all believers,
as members. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Christ be, oft-times, little known, yea,
and much misconstructed; yet it is most necessary to know him, and what his
interest in the Father is: Therefore it is hold out as a singular fruit of the
Spirit, to understand this. 2. Albeit true believers may be clouded with much
ignorance; yet Christ has his time and way to make them understand the
mysteries of God, to their comfort and salvation; for, at that day, when he
sends the Comforter, ye shall know, though now ignorant. 3. Christ rightly
known, will be seen to be one in essence with the Father, and consequently,
approven of him, and he in whom the Father is to be found; And to know this, is
the great encouragement of believers; for, it is held out as their
encouragement, Ye shall know that I am in the Father. 4. It exceedingly adds
to the comfort of believers, to know that Christ, who is one with the Father,
has also a mystical union and communion with them, so that God and sinners
tryst together in Christ, who is in both, though in a different manner; for,
this compleats the encouragement, Ye shall know that I am in the Father, and
you in me, and I in you. 5. The communion betwixt Christ and believers is
mutual, they being in him by faith and needy dependence, and he in them by his
Spirit, as the root of their spiritual being, and to make all his fullness
forthcoming for them; for, it is, you in me, and I in you. 6. The communion
betwixt Christ and believers is very near and intimate, so that there can be no
separation, and the fruits and comfort of it must be very real; Therefore is it
called a being in one another. 7. Believers may have an intimate communion with
Christ, who yet stand in need to be made to know that it is so; for, this
communion is true for the present, I am in the Father, and you in me, etc. and
yet the knowledge of it is but to come, Ye shall know in that day. So that it
is a great privilege to know our privileges already received.

Verse 21. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves
me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him:
and will manifest my self to him.
The fifth benefit, (the same in substance with some of the former) is, that
they shall be beloved of the Father and him, and in testimony thereof, he will
manifest himself to them. This he illustrates and amplifies from their duty,
and the qualification required in Christ's disciples; Namely, that they evidence
love to him by their respect to his commandments; which as he had formerly
inculcate, v. 15. as the way to obtain the Comforter, so he presses it over
again as the mean to attain to these benefits, which they were to reap by the
Spirits presence. Whence learn, 1. When Christ is most sweetly comforting his
people, it is not his mind they should be emboldened to cast off duty thereby,
but rather that they be encouraged to duty, as the way to clear their right to
these comforts, and to assure them, that what they receive, is not a delusion,
nor are they abusing it; Therefore does he again, in the midst of these
consolations, put them in mind of duty, and of the evidences of true love to
him. 2. Christ is a Lawgiver to give Commandments to his people, and who
renders them sweet by coming from him who has evidenced so much love to
sinners, and by so imposing them, evidenceth that he knows their burden, and
is ready to take employment to enable them to obedience; for, he owneth the
rule of believers duty as his Law, my commandments. 3. As variety of duties are
imposed upon believers; so it is the Will of Christ that none of them be
slighted, and that none please themselves in observing one or more, when yet
they lay others aside; for, he requires a duty in reference to his
commandments; even all of them. See Psalm. 119.6. 4. Christ's commandments are
not entertained as they ought, except when there is an endeavor of actual
obedience thereunto; for, he requires it of the approven man, that he keep my
commandments. 5. None can make conscience of obedience as becomes, unless
they first know their duty, and unless they have an high estimation of the
authority of the Law, and excellency of the thing commanded; for, it is
required, that first they have the commandments, by knowing them in their
judgment, and by keeping them in their heart as a precious jewel, and then
they will keep them, and testify their respect thereto, by having them still
in their eye, and regulating all their practice thereby. See Psalm. 119.11. 5.
Albeit many loose professors pretend love to Christ, who yet neglect their
duty; yet, in Christ's account, none do truly love him but these who make
conscience of obedience; Therefore, to refute all such delusions, he says
again, He (and he only) that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is
that loves me. 7. Albeit we be unprofitable servants, when we have done all,
Luke 17.10. yet, of free grace through Christ, obedience will not want a
reward; as here he promises. 8. To get more confirmation and evidences of the
love of God in Christ, is a rich reward and encouragement unto duty, and this
every tender walker is sure of; for, this is the promise here. 9. As the love
of God in Christ does prevent our love and obedience; so it is his will, that
the sensible manifestations and refreshful proofs thereof, be drawn out by us
in the way of obedience, and diligent use of means; for, this is the order
here, He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father; Not as if our love begun
first, 1 John 4.10. but that his love setting them on work to obedience, and
begetting love in them, as it did prevent them, so it will give them a rich
meeting. 10. As the love of God in Christ is the rich allowance of obedient
believers, whatever they get beside; so his conferring of his Spirit upon them,
is a rich evidence of his love; for, that the Father and Son loves them, is
evidenced by the sending of the Spiit unto them, as the scope of this whole
purpose teaches. So does it also prove Sonship, Gal. 4, 6. 11. Christ is so
acceptable to the Father, that whoever respect him, are beloved of the Father,
and his love and the Fathers do still concur, so that who is beloved of the
one, is beloved of the other; Therefore, says he, He that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him. 12. Christ's love to his people
consists not in empty complements, but in real manifestations of good will;
for, I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. 13. As Christ allows
special manifestations of himself upon his own, by lifting up the light of his
countenance upon them, by intimating his good will unto them, his fullness and
righteousness for them: so this unto a believer is above any evidence of his
love beside; Therefore is this given as the proof of his love to them, I will
manifest my self unto him. See Psalm. 4.6, 7. and 17.4. 14. As only believers
and tender walkers are capable of special manifestations of Christ; so their
tende^ walking is so far from obscuring of Christ, that the more tender they
are, they will need more of Christ, his goodwill and righteousness, to be
manifested to them, to cover them and the defects which they will discover in
their walking; for, even a keeper of the commandments needs this encouragement,
I will manifest my self to him. 15. Christ can be known only by his own light,
and until he manifest himself, believers will remain ignorant of him, and be
ready to mistake him; for this cause, says he, I will manifest my self.

Verse 22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou will
manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world?
In this and the two following verses, this their duty and encouragement is
further insisted on, by occasion of Judas his question, who is declared not to
be the traitor, but a good man, the brother of James the son of Alpheus, and
the Penman of that Epistle of Jude, as appears from the first verse thereof,
and who also is called Lebbeus, Matthew. 10.3 with Luke 6.16. He in this verse
hearing of the former promise, desires to be informed how Christ would
manifest himself to them, and not to the world. Which is to be understood not
only of this manifestation, and the way of it, in it self, and that Judas being
acquainted only with bodily manifestation, wondreth how Christ should show
himself to his own, and the world not see him: But chiefly, he desires hereby
to be informed of the cause and reason why the Lord makes that difference in
his special manifestations. And we are to conceive, that his desire in this
flows not so much from any undervaluing thoughts of grace, as if it were not
rich enough for all the world; nor yet from any low esteem of himself and the
rest, making him wonder why they are admitted to this favor, when others, no
worse then they in themselves, are secluded: As from some pride and conceit of
somewhat in themselves, differencing them from others, to which he desires
Christ's assent. As may be gathered from Christ's neglecting to answer directly
to his question. Whence learn, 1. It is the Will of God, that neither the
wicked be honored, nor the godly disgraced, but that honest men should be
known and reputed such, and that traitors be accounted what they are;
Therefore, mentioning Judas, he guards that it was not Iscariot, that none
should brand this honest man, because he was of the same name. 2. Christ's
disciples may find many difficulties in his doctrine, which will put them to
many questions; As here we see, comparing it with the practice of some of the
rest, even in this same chapter. 3. All doubts and difficulties, wherewith
disciples are puzzled, ought to be put up to Christ for resolution, as here
Judas his practice does teach 4. Ignorance, and carnal conceptions of the
things of God, breed many difficulties in things that otherwise are very clear;
for, so, how is it that thou will manifest, etc? may relate to his conceit of a
bodily manifestation, which makes it a difficulty to him, how a difference can
be made. Though the other interpretation seem to reach the scope better. 5.
There is a real difference put by Christ betwixt the world and his own, in the
matter of special manifestations; for, so is here imported. 6. Albeit there be
no cause in the creature, why Christ should make this difference; yet even good
men, when privileges and mercies are heaped upon them, are ready to dream of
some inherent worth in themselves preferring them above others; for, so much
does this question teach, How is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us,
and not to the world? that is, not only what way will thou take that the one
shall see thee, and not the other, but what moves thee to make the difference?
wherein he desires somewhat from Christ, to confirm him in a conceit of some
worth in them.

Verse 23. Jesus answered, and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my
words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him.

24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings, and the Word which you hear
is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.


In these verses we have Christ's answer upon this question; Wherein, 1. He
repeats his doctrine concerning their duty, asserting again, that love to him
will draw men to keep his words and obey them. 2. He repeats and enlarges the
former encouragement, assuring them that the Father and he will love such, and
that his manifestation of himself shall be by his Fathers and his coming to
make abode with them. 3. He amplifieth this their duty from the contrary, v.
24. that disobedience to the Word argues, that there is no love to him, and
that this is an heinous sin, and will obstruct these comfortable promises,
seeing the Word which they observe not, is the Fathers as well as his. Now for
the scope of this answer in relation to Judas question, we find not that
Christ does directly answer to his question, either as to the way of this
manifestation, or cause of this difference in it. Only as by his propounding
the matter in general, he curbs him for appropriating that privilege to
themselves only; so by repeating and amplifying the former doctrine, he leads
them from enquiring about others, to see to themselves; and from studying the
secret counsel of God, and causes of his dispensations, to study the means that
God has appointed for attaining communion with himself, and to abhor the
contrary evils, because of the sinfulness thereof, and because they would
deprive them of so great a mercy.

From v. 23. Learn, 1. Albeit Christ be very tender of his people, yet he will
not cherish them in their folly and humors, nor satisfy their curiosity or
conceit; Therefore does he so much wave his question in this answer. 2. It is a
great fault when disciples become curious priers into the case of others, and
the secret counsel of God and causes thereof, neglecting what is commanded, and
turning idle in the point of duty; for, this is the fault Christ finds in his
question, that it imports so much idleness, as needs the enforcing of duty,
and terrifying from disobedience. As indeed, much idleness in the point of
real duty, makes but too much work about what we have nothing to do withal. 3.
Whatever be Christ's tender condescendence to his people, yet he will not lay
aside his Sovereignty over them, nor exempt them from duty; for,
notwithstanding all his encouragements, yet he still insists upon the necessity
of love and obedience, if they would partake of his comforts. 4. A true lover
of Christ is faithful to him and his interests, and what he commits to him in
his Word, he will carefully observe it, in his understanding, affection and
practice; for, If a man love me, he will keep my words. 5. Christ will never
recall nor make void what he has promised for the encouragement of his own, and
whosoever love him, shall find themselves richly recompensed, in his and the
Fathers free love: Therefore, says he, again; And my Father will love him, to
wit, in, and with, and through me. 6. Where God loves any, both the Father and
Son will make a sweet and intimate fellowship with them, and will be at pains
to make up the distance; for, we will come unto him etc. 7. God and Christ's
fellowship with believers is constant, for all times, and all difficulties,
till they be taken up to be with him for ever; for, we will make our abode with
him.

From v. 24 Learn, 1. It may stir up believers to their duty, when they
consider the great sin and loss of disobeyers; Therefore is this illustrated,
by propounding the contrary sin, which imports the contrary hazard of being
deprived of fellowship with God. 2. Disobedience to Christ, and want of love to
him, are inseparably conjoined, let men pretend what they will; for, He that
loves me not, keeps not my sayings. 3. It aggravates the sin of
disobedience, that the Gospel is the very Word of God, both the Fathers and the
Sons; Therefore, does he set out their sin from this, The Word which you hear
is not in me, (to wit, as he is man, or his alone as he is God) but the Fathers
which sent me. 4. Obedience to the commandments of God is not required as a
simple act of love and courtesy; but as a testimony of subjection to divine
authority: and these who will not study love to Christ that they may obey him,
ought to look to the authority of God which will not be vilipended; Therefore
is the authority of the Word thus held out to despisers, as also to guard
believers, that they be not driven from their duty by the fear of men; The Word
which you hear is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.

Verse 25. These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you.

26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name: he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.


The sixth benefit which they shall reap by the Spirit, it, instruction and
teaching as he is the Spirit of truth. And that however Christ had taught them
all things necessary, and yet they continued rude and incapable, and his
doctrine was very dark to them, as appears by the many questions they had
lately started, v. 5, 8, 22. yet the Holy Ghost should effectually and clearly
teach them all things, and bring to remembrance what he had spoken, but they,
through ignorance, negligence, or sorrow, had forgotten. It is not needful for
us to determine, whether these all things, to be taught by the Spirit, be the
same with these all things, which Christ had said, which the Spirit not only
brings to remembrance, but does make them plain unto them? or, whether, beside
what Christ had said, and the Spirit brings to remembrance; some particulars
were remitted to the Spirits immediate and extraordinary teaching of the
Apostles, as chapter 16.12, 13? For in this it suffices us to know, that these all
things, be what they will, were revealed to the Apostles for the good of the
Church, and by them to the Church in writing; so that there is no room left for
traditions, or extraordinary and immediate revelations; Nor is it to be
expected that the Spirit, who brings Christ's doctrine to remembrance, as true
and excellent, will reveal and teach any new thing contrary to what Christ
said, which were to make the Spirit to contradict himself Yet, if we consider
the matter narrowly, we will find that the Scripture warrants us rather to
assert, that these all things which the Spirit taught them, were the same which
Christ had said. For chap. 15.15. Christ made known to them all that he had
heard of his Father, namely, which is necessary for the Church to know, and
Acts 1.3. Christ, after his Resurrection, continued with them forty days,
instructing them, and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God,
and that so fully, as their Commission is limited to whatsoever he had already
commanded them, Matthew. 28.20. It is true, the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.12, 25, 40.
mentions somewhat wherein he gave direction, being guided by the Spirit, to
which the Lord had not so expressly spoken; But in that he relates especially
to things that had not been determined in the Law of Moses, nor to what Christ
had said; and however it be, these particulars are not sufficient to make so
general a distinction betwixt the expressions. And so here is held forth a
twofold work of the Spirit in reference to Christ's doctrine, 1. Whereas Christ
had revealed to them the sum of all Christian Religion, and yet they were not
capable thereof; therefore the Spirit was sent to enlighten their
understanding, and to explain these things more fully and distinctly, which
Christ had spoken summarily, as they were able to hear them; And of this is
that to be understood, chap. 16.2. not of any new doctrine or articles of
faith, but of the more distinct explication of what he had delivered. 2 The
Spirit by this teaching, did bring to the Apostles remembrance, for their
further confirmation, that these things had been spoken by Christ, though then
they did not understand them, and afterward forgot them, as chap. 2.22. and
12.16. Doct. 1. The seed of the Word may be sown, whereof yet no visible fruit
may appear for a time; as here is to be seen in Christ's speaking to the
disciples, who for a time were not much (if at all) bettered by it. 2. The Word
of the Lord may not be operative and fruitful, even in the godly, for a time,
and when they first hear it, which yet afterward may do much good; for, Christ
sows the seed among the disciples, which yet took not effect till the Spirit
was poured out, and then i^ did good. 3. The efficacy of the Word does not
always accompany the outward Ministry, not does it depend upon the ability and
liveliness of the Teacher, unless the Spirit do accompany it in the hearts of
hearers; for, albeit even Christ (considered as an outward Teacher,) spoke
these things, being present with them, yet the Comforter is needed to make them
effectual. 4. It is the Holy Spirit only who makes the Ministry and outward
teaching effectual, and who, where he comes, does freely, fully, and
effectually, make the Word plain and livelie to believers: for, albeit Christ's
Ministry took not effect^^^ them at first, yet here is the remedy, the
Comforter shall teach you. He is a remedy against gross ignorance and error,
against our not making progress in knowledge, against our ignorancie and
inadvertencie through astonishment in trouble, and against our perplexi^^s
through the multitude of dark steps in our path. All which should stir us up to
seek after, and entertain such a Teacher 5. As the Spirit is the great
Comforter of his Church, particularly by his teaching, which all tends to their
comfort; so he is a Comforter to none, to whom he is not also a Sanctifier;
for, the Comforter is the Holy Ghost, in respect of his sanctifying operation.
6. The special benefits, (and particularly, the Spirit) bestowed upon
believers, are given through the mediation of Christ, and serve to be tokens of
his love and remembering them in his Kingdom; for faith he. The Father will
send him in my Name. 7. The Apostles were fully instructed by the Spirit, in
all things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, so that in the matter of Religion,
nothing is to be hearkened unto, beside, or contrary to that which God revealed
to them, and by them to the Church; for, He shall teach you all things 8 The
true Spirit of Christ taught the Apostles no other thing, but what Christ had
said unto them; nor does he teach believers any thing but what Christ has
taught, by his Prophets, himself, and his Apostles: for, these all things which
he shall teach, are all things whatsoever I have said unto you, as has been
cleared. 9. Christ's disciples are frequently subject to forgetfulness of what
Christ says unto them; occasioned, partly, by their ignorance, chapter 12.16.
partly, by the little interest and felt need they have of what the Word says;
partly, by their slothful negligence, being taken up with other things; and
partly, by their trusting to their own understanding and memory; Therefore need
they to have all things brought to remembrance. 10. The ignorance, dullness, and
forgetfulness, of disciples does lose them many a fair opportunity, and would
irrecoverably deprive them of fair advantages, if mercy prevented it not; for,
Christ, their wealth is away before they knew what it meant, and they are left
ignorant and forgetful of what he had taught. 11. Such as are humbled under the
sense of their ignorance, and do seek after, and entertain the presence of the
Spirit, will find him a remembrancer of saving truths, which they have heard,
as they need them; for, He shall bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

Ver. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives, give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid.
Christ being now about to close this exhortation and part of his
farewell-Sermon, does, in this verse point out the sixth argument of
consolation; Namely, his peace, as a result of all the rest, which both in its
own nature, and donation, differs far from the worlds peace. And upon this he
repeats the exhortation propounded ver. 1. and so goes on to the conclusion of
this part of his discourse. Whence learn, 1. Christ's disciples are allowed true
peace in all dispensations, to uphold their hearts; So that whatever their
outward trouble be, yet they may have peace with God, Romans 5.1. quiet under all
dispensations, and an ordering of outward afflictions, so as they need not
mar their peace; for, peace is his allowance here. 2. True peace is Christ's
peace, as being the purchaser thereof, the object in whom they have it, Chap.
16 33. and he who gifts it; Therefore calls he it, my peace. 3. Christ's peace
does not depend upon his bodily presence, but may be continued when he is gone,
and is an antidote to supply that want and loss; for, when he is to remove,
peace I leave with you, says he. 4. Whatever be the believers unworthiness, or
not deserving of peace, yet it may answer all objections, that it is Christ's
legacy and free gift; for, peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. 5.
The excellency of Christ's legacies, and the privileges enjoyed by his people,
ought to be studied as far transcending what they enjoy at their best, who do
not come to him; Therefore does he make the comparison betwixt the worlds peace
and his. 6. Christ's peace is far different from the peace which is given or
enjoyed by the world; for that is, oft-times, in sin, or is but a lethargy of
security portending sad trouble, or but (at best) a freedom from outward
trouble, when yet thy are at enmity with God: But his peace is solid and true
peace. Therefore, says he, not as the world gives, give I unto you. 7.
Christ's peace does also differ from the worlds peace, in the way of giving it:
They, ofttimes, give words of peace without reality, but he is real in what he
says; They may wish peace, when they cannot give it, but his peace is real and
effectual, Joh. 34.29 They cannot perpetuate any peace they afford or wish, but
his peace is firm, and he preserves his people in it. This also is imported
in these words, not as the world gives, give I unto you. 8. The heart-trouble,
wherewith Saints are oft-times exercised, is ready to beget many heart-terrours
and fears, for the future; for here, heart-trouble and being afraid, go
together. 9. Christ may be dealing very comfortably with his people, when yet
their perplexities and fears do continue and lie on; for, as at the beginning,
ver. 1. so here, after all his sweet discourse, their distemper continues,
their heart is troubled, and it is afraid. 10. As there is no true cure of
heart-troubles and fears, but in Christ; So his consolations and peace are
sufficient to guard the heart against them all; So that Saints having this
allowance, cannot without sin continue in their perplexities; Therefore, after
all these consolations, and particularly, that of his peace, he repeats the
exhortation, as a duty which they cannot decline, Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid.

Ver. 28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto
you. If ye loved me ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: For
my Father is greater then I.
From this to the end of the Chapter we have a conclusion of this part of the
discourse, in prosecution of that exhortation, ver. 27. which may be reduced to
two heads. 1. A reproof that they entertained not his doctrine, and
particularly, the r^ws of his departure, with joy, for which he gives two
reasons, ver. 28, 29. 2. A declaration that this was his farewell-Sermon, and
therefore to be better hearkened unto, ver; 30, 31.

In this verse is contained. 1. The sum of what he is now teaching them, to
wit, concerning his departure and return again to them. 2. The use they should
have made, even of the saddest part of this doctrine, concerning his departure;
Namely, not to be grieved and troubled, as they were, but rather to rejoice. 3.
What the want of this evidenced in them, even the want of such love to him as
became them, which would have made them rejoice. 3. The first reason why they
would rejoice if they had loved him; Namely, because he went to the Father who
is greater then he, (not as God, but as man and Mediator, and in his present
state of humiliation) and therefore his exaltation out of his estate of
humiliation, into glory with the Father, should have made them rejoice,
especially considering that this his exaltation tended to their advantage.
Doctrine 1. It is needful that disciples consider seriously what they hear, and
that for this end, needful doctrines be frequently repeated and inculcate upon
them; Therefore does Christ put them in mind what they had heard; ye have
heard how I said unto you, etc. 2. Saints are not to pore only on what is sad
in Christ's doctrine or dealing, but to study also what lenitives he allows, to
sweeten the other; Therefore, with his going, which is bitter, he mentions his
return, which is as sweet, ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and
come again to you. 3. Albeit there were no other encouragement by the way,
during Christ's absence; Yet the hope of his coming again might allay the grief
of his departure; Therefore, it is subjoyned, as a sufficient lenitive, I go
away, and come again unto you. 4. Not only Christ's sweet dispensations, but
even the hardest trials of Saints, and his most sharp dispensations to them,
afford matter of joy, if rightly studied; Therefore does he pitch upon the
saddest of it, and urge it as matter of joy, ye would rejoice because I said, I
go unto the Father. See Jam. 1.2. 5. Christ by departing out of the world, is
exalted unto a more glorious estate then that in which he was during his abode
on earth; for, so is imported in that he goes unto the Father, who is greater
then he; Whereby, as man and Mediator, he is advanced to be next in glory to
the Father, and as God, he lays aside that vail under which he appeared in
his state of humiliation, and lets out that glory which he had with the Father
before the world was, Joh. 17.5. 6. The exaltation of Christ is a ground of
much joy to believers, as being not only his advancement, but an evidence that
he has accomplished all things for which he came into the world, and a pledge
that he will execute his offices in a more glorious way, for their good; for,
this is matter of joy, I go unto the Father, for the Father is greater then I.
7. It is the great fault of believers, that they choose rather to carp at
Christ's dealing, then to study matter of encouragement in it; and that their
self-love, (desiring to be much humoured and pleased) does mar all right use
of his dispensations: Therefore does he give them a mild challenge, that their
desire to enjoy his bodily presence, had marred the joy they might have
gathered at his departure. 8. Saints may seem to have much fond love to Christ,
and their love to make a great stir, when yet it is not love to him, but
self-love, that aileth them; Therefore, albeit they thought it was love to him
that so disquieted them, yet says he, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, etc.
9. True love to Christ will make a man submit to what honors him, how much
soever it cross them; for, albeit this separation might be very sad to them,
yet, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto my Father, to
be exalted. 10. Albeit self-love make Saints think they are upon the only way
of their own good; Yet, upon serious search it will be found that in opposing
Christ's will, they oppose their own real good also; for, his exaltation being
for their advantage, they who rejoiced not at it, did forsake their own mercy.

Ver. 29. And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come
to pass ye might believe.
This verse contains a second reason why they ought to rejoice at this
intimation of his departure to the Father; Namely, That this prediction,
compared with future events proving his exaltation for their good, would
confirm their faith. And therefore they were bound to rejoice in whatsoever
would advance faith. Whence learn, 1. It should be the great study of Saints,
in this vale of their pilgrimage, to acquaint themselves with believing, as
that whereby Christ's bodily absence is mainly supplied, and that which will
bring them the peace and joy which is allowed upon them, Romans 15.13. Therefore
does Christ take so much pains to train and breed them, that they might
believe. 2. The scope of Christ's Word to his people, is, to lead them to
believe in him; for, now I have told you, that ye might believe. 3. Such as
would rightly improve Christ's Word, for feeding of faith, ought to compare his
dealing with his Word, and to see somewhat of him, and the accomplishment of his
Word, in every thing that comes to pass; Therefore he requires, that they not
only hearken to what he told now, before it come to pass, but observe also
what he does, when it is come to pass. 4. The comparing of Christ's predictions
with events according to the same, contributes much to the confirmation of
faith; as pointing out Christ's fore knowledge and providence, and the certainty
of the Word, which he saileth not to accomplish; Therefore, says he, Now I
have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to pass, ye might
believe. Compare Chap. 13.19. 5. Our Lord may make disciples hard condition
contribute more for their good, and the strengthening of their faith, then if
they had not met with these conditions; Therefore does he so order it, that his
departure and the consequents thereof shall contribute so much to their further
confirmation. 6. True disciples ought to rejoice in whatsoever may contribute
to confirm their faith, how much soever it vex them otherwise; for, this is a
reason why they ought to rejoice, that this intimation contributed that they
might believe. 7. Whatever be Christ's dispensations toward his people, yet he
is not deficient in whatsoever is needful to encourage them to believe, and to
confirm them in it; for, in all these sad dispensations, he was still doing
what might help them to faith, that ye might believe. 8. As there is no faith,
but it needs that we should grow in it, (as here the disciples, who believed,
need to believe more;) So the Lord, when he gives many encouragements to
believe, requires more faith of his people: for, now when he gives this new
help, of a prediction and the accomplishment thereof, he requires an
answerable measure of faith, That ye might believe, yet more. 9. Albeit we are
ready to think that Christ's bodily presence were a notable help to faith; Yet
Christ, by his exaltation unto glory, gives such proofs of his deity and
fullness, and of his minding of his people, as lays on a stricter obligation
to believe in him, then any beside; So that not to believe much now, is a more
heinous fault, then at any other time; for, when it is come to pass, and
evidenced by effects that he is gone to the Father, it is specially required
then, that ye believe.

Ver. 30. Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world
comes, and has nothing in me:

31. But that the world may know that I love the Father: and as the Father gave
me commandment, even so I do: Arise, let us go hence.


These verses contain a second branch of the conclusion of this part of his
discourse; Wherein, he intimates that this was his farewel-Sermon, and that he
was not to speak much after this with them, being to enter the lists with Satan
at the Fathers commandment. And therefore it is to be inferred (for nothing of
his scope, or the use they were to make of this, is expressed here) that they
were to hearken better to this discourse of their Lord and Master in taking his
leave, which could not but contain matter profitable to them, (as being his
last words:) and not suffer themselves to be distracted with fear and trouble.
In the words there is, 1. An intimation that he was shortly to break off
discourse with them, being to engage in his sufferings, against Satan the prime
instrumental cause therein. 2. To prevent any scandal that might arise upon his
being exposed to Satan's malice, and his dying in that conflict; He declares
that he went to dye, not because Satan had any power over him, or ground of
challenge against him in himself, but merely that he might testify his love
and obedience to the Father, who laid that duty upon him. 3. To testify how
willingly he obeyed this command, he declares himself willing to go meet his
enemy, and warnes them to make ready to go out with him, to see his obedience
acted, and withal, that they might have better opportunity to shift for
themselves. Now concerning this, that Christ bids them Arise, etc. it should
seem that Christ at this word arose from the Communion Table, and that the rest
of his Sermon, and the Prayer, in the three following Chapters, were spoken,
either on their feet in the same room, or in the way to the garden. But it is
clear from Chap. 18. 1. that after all that, and not till then, he went forth;
and with all, it is not very probable that this his solemn Sermon and Prayer
were delivered in a confused posture, or that Christ continuing still in the
same room, would quit the grave and composed posture wherein he and they were
sitting, and put them all to their feet to hear it out. And therefore it seems
that by this exhortation, he only puts them in mind to make ready to go away
when he had done; And so goes on with his Sermon. Doctrine 1. When
difficulties, to which we are called, draw near, we should make ready to go and
meet them; Therefore, Christ is making ready to meet with his sufferings, and
intimates that he would close his preaching, for that end. 2. It should stir
up believers to improve opportunities of grace, and of Christ's company, when
they consider how soon they may be deprived thereof; Therefore he stirs them up
to attention, by putting them in mind that they would not have opportunity to
hear him much after this. Hereafter I will not talk much with you. 3. Christ
will never be so throng, but he will take leisure to speak what is needful for
his needy people; Therefore, albeit he knew the Jews were making fast ready,
yet he says not, he will talk no more, but not much, and for all the have, he
goes on to speak out his mind; So in the midst of his sufferings, he has a
look to reclaim sliding Peter, Luke 22.61. and a word for his mother and John,
when he is on the cross, Joh. 19.26, 27. 4. It is a point to be frequently
studied, that Satan, through Gods permission, exercises a tyranical dominion
among the sinful children of men; that so it may be lamented that Christ wants
so much of his due: for this cause is he so often pointed out to be the Prince
of this world. 5. Christ in his sufferings for the Elects sin, had to do, not
only with the malice and cruelty of men, but with Satan and the powers of hell,
who also have chief hand in all the persecutions of the Saints; Therefore does
he describe his sufferings from this cause, The prince of this world comes, to
wit, in, and with his instruments, to use his utmost endeavors against him. 6.
It may add much to the comfort of Saints, that Satan and all his forces did
bend and essay their strength against Christ their surety; So that if they
prevailed not against him, Saints may, in him, look upon them as conquered
enemies; Therefore has he recorded for our comfort, that the prince of this
world comes against him. 7. Albeit the best of men have much within them, of
corruption and naughtiness, upon which Satan may fasten his tentations and
suggestions, and inflame them with his fiery darts; and much guilt, upon which
he may accuse and foil them, if left to themselves: Yet Christ being without
sin, Satan had no power over him in any of these respects: for, he has
nothing in me, that is, his power over men came in only by sin in them, but
Christ being free of sin, Satan had nothing of his own in him, either of guilt,
for which to accuse him, or of corruptions, upon which to fasten his
tentations, and make them prevail. 8. It is believers great advantage, that
what Christ did undergo was for nothing in himself, but all for them;
Therefore does he hold out, for their comfort, he has nothing in me. 9. All
the power, malice, and policy, of Satan cannot prevail over Christ, and his
followers in him, save in so far as God permits; for, so much also is
imported in this, he has nothing in me, and consequently, could not prevail or
have power over him, unless he voluntarily yielded himself to suffer, as is
after subjoyned. 10. Satan is so malicious a tempter and assaulter, that he
will not spare even these in whom he has no right, and against whom he knows
he will not succeed; for, he comes against Christ, though he has nothing in
him. And therefore they who take all his tentations for current, do far
mistake; for he durst offer to call in question unto Christ himself, if he was
the Son of God, Matthew. 4.6. 11. All that Christ suffered for the Redemption of
sinners, was by the order, and at the command of the Father, who did Covenant
with him concerning this work; for, as the Father gave me commandment, even so
I do. 12. In our going about duty, and enduring of hard lots, it is good to eye
the will and appointment of God, not only that we propound not wrong ends, but
that we may look more to God and his mind in these lots, then to men's malice
and projects; Therefore does Christ so much fasten his eye, not on Satan, but,
on the Fathers commandment. 13. As love to God ought to be the rise of all our
obedience; so true love to him will draw men to obedience, in hardest services;
for, herein Christ has cast a copy, the motive of whose suffering was love to
the Fathers glory, I love the Father, and as the Father gave me commandment,
even so I do. 14. It is of singular importance and use, that men do study
Christ's love and obedience to the Father in his sufferings, both for admiration
and delighting in it, and for imitation; for, he does this, that the world may
know that I love the Father, and that as the Father gave me commandment, even
so I do. 15. Christ allows not that men say much of their love and obedience,
unless they prove it by practice; Therefore after he has professed so much of
his love and obedience, Arise, says he, let us go hence, that I may give
proof thereof. 16. Christ did enter the lists, in his sufferings, with much
willingness and alacrity, with much courage and resolution; That so he might
commend his love to us, and encourage us to do the like through him. Therefore
says he, Arise, let us go hence, that I may grapple with the difficulty. 17.
Christ was so real in his resolute undergoing of sufferings and death, that he
did not decline any witnesses and triers thereof; Therefore, says he to them,
Arise, let us go hence, taking them out with him, not only that he being taken
in the Garden, they might have better opportunity to flee, then if he were
taken in that room, but that being with him, they might, as much as they
durst, be witnesses of his willingness and courage.

CHAP. XV.
IN this Chapter Christ continues his farewell-Sermon to the disciples;
Pressing upon them that they would study communion with him by says, whereby
they might not only enjoy his presence (which they so much desired) in a
spiritual manner; but also might be made fruitful, which is so acceptable to
him: And more particularly insisting that they should love one another, as he
had loved them; and that so much the rather, as they should meet with much
hatred in the world.

So the Chapter may be taken up in three parts. The first part contains an
exhortation to communion with him and fruitfulness in obedience. For which
end. 1. In borrowed expressions, from a vine, husbandman, and branches, he
premits a general doctrine, pointing out the order of divine dispensation of
spiritual things, for enabling professors to fructify, and Gods answerable
dealing, with them, according as they declare themselves, ver. 1, 2. 2. He
makes application of this to the disciples; declaring what sort of branches
they were, ver. 3. and, exhorting them, partly, to perseverance in communion
with him, as the root and cause; from the consideration of their barrenness
without him, and their fruitfulness being in him, ver. 4, 5. From their
danger, if they neglect it, ver. 6. and, from the advantage of access to God,
if they be in him, ver. 7. And partly, unto fru^tfulnesse; as the effect, (the
exhortation to which is only employed) as honoring God, and evidencing their
good condition, ver. 8. and as a mean to keep them in Christ's love, ver. 9, 10.
3. By way of conclusion to this part of the Capter, he shows that his scope in
all this doctrine was, not to discourage them, but, to promove their constant
and full joy, ver. 11.

In the second part of the Chapter, having pressed fruitfulness in general, he
singles out one peculiar fruit, of mutual love, as most necessary for them in
his absence: And presses it from his own example, ver. 12. And to enforce
this. 1. He gives evidences of his love to them, in his dying for them, ver.
13. (which is a friendship, in which they should assure themselves of an
interest, ver. 14.) in communicating secrets with them, ver. 15. and, in
preventing them by his grace, and furnishing them with ability, in their
persons and callings, to glorify him, and giving them access unto God for any
thing they wanted, ver. 16. 2. Upon this he repeats and enforces the
exhortation by way of conclusion, ver. 17. In the third part of the Chapter, he
forewarns them of the hatred and persecution they were to meet with in the
world, and armeth them against the same, by several arguments of consolation
and encouragement. Some whereof do guard them against stumbling at their own
afflicted condition: And are taken: From his own example and lot, ver. 18. From
their good condition, which their trouble from the world evidenceth, and the
inevitableness of trouble, considering they are not of the world, ver. 19.
From the equity that was in exercising them with that lot, and the
inevitableness thereof, considering their relation to Christ, ver. 20 and,
from the goodness of their cause, ver. 21. Some of them do yet further
vindicate the former arguments from any exception might be made against them.
For whereas in them it is supposed, that Christ was unknown and hated in the
world, and they would be hated for his sake, at which his weak followers might
stumble; Therefore Christ propounds arguments not only to encourage them under
their sad lot, but to obviate all scandal and offense at his being hated in the
world, and his followers for so good a cause: Namely, That this hatred of him
did evidence the miserable condition of persecutors, as being inexcusable, and
haters of the Fathers also, ver. 22, 23, 24. That this their unjust hatred was
foretold in Scripture, ver. 25. and, that all these unjust aspersions against
him should be wiped off by the testimony of the holy Ghost concurring with, and
assisting them in their ministerial testimony concerning him, ver. 26, 27.

Ver. 1. I Am the true Vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
Christ being in the first part of this Chapter to recommend communion with
himself, and fruitfulness, to his disciples; He does (in this and the next
verse) premit a general doctrine thereunto, in borrowed terms, consisting of
two branches; Whereof the first (in this verse) points out the order of divine
dispensation for enabling professors to fructify; That himself resembles a
vine, being the vine-stock into which the branches are engrassed, and he and
his members a vine with many branches; That the Father resembles an
husbandman, in his care about this vine: and, That professors are as branches
engraffed into him the vine, that so they may fructify, as is here supposed,
and is further intimate in the next verse. Now we need not insist on the
occasion or rise of this discourse, whether it was upon seeing a vine from the
window of the room, or because this Metaphor is very frequent in Scripture, or
was fit for his present purpose; Nor is it convenient to insist on these
borrowed expressions and comparisons further then may set out Christ's present
scope; which is, That Christ is the root and fountain of his peoples spiritual
subsistence and fruitfulness, and that the Father has a special hand and care
about him and them, for that end. Doctrine 1. Figurative expressions are
neither unusual, nor obscure, in Scripture language; whereby one thing is said
to be another, though distinct in their nature and kind; And that without any
transmutation of the one into the other, or annihilation of either: But because
of some mystical representation and signification, or because of similitude of
properties and effects: Therefore does Christ say here, I am the Vine,
accounting that expression nothing obscure to his rude disciples, although he
and a vine were very different things, only because it did resemble him in some
respects 2 Spiritual minds may and ought to profi^ much, by the observation of
common things, and by improving of them to spiritual use and advantage;
Therefore does Christ use these borrowed terms, to teach them, whenever they
observed vines, (which were plentiful in that country) to be put in mind
thereby of somewhat in Christ. And to this scope do his other parables, taken
from common things, tend. 3. Christ, in his offices and relations to his
people, does most fitly resemble a vine; as being but small and weak in outward
appearance in the state of his humiliation, as vines are especially in winter;
As being planted in the fat soil of the love, life and favor of the Father,
the fullness of the Godhead, and the Spirit without measure, that he may have
influence in abundance for all his members: As vines are planted in a fruitful
soil, Isa. 5.2. as spending himself in fruitfulness to his people, as vines
are only useful for fruit-bearing; as yielding refreshful and sweet fruit, to
cheer up the hearts of his people; as the vine does for the use of man, Psalm.
104.15. as submitting to be trod in the wine press of Gods anger, that thereby
fruit might redound to his people, as the fruit of the vine is pressed, that it
may be drink unto men; and, as being the root in which all his members must
subsist, and the fountain of all their spiritual life and furniture, as the
vine is to all its branches. For these, among other causes, does Christ
resemble himself unto a vine in Scripture: And here especially for the last
cause, I am the Vine. 4. What Christ is unto his people, that he truly and
really is, whatever they look to beside for spiritual support and influence,
will but deceive them: And whatever excellency there be in good and necessary
things for the use of man, it is all but a shadow of that perfection which is
in him for the good of his people, and what they are in their kind weakly,
that he is in a more excellent way in his kind; Therefore, says he, I am the
true Vine: not that he really is a vine, or that a vine is not true in its own
kind; but that he, and he only, is that fountain of grace and life unto his
people, which is pointed at under this similitude; and that in his fullness in
this kind, he far outstrips the excellency of the vine in its kind. 5. As
Christ, in his relations to his people, resembles the vine; so the Father in
this matter resembles an husbandman; As being the planter of this vine, and
appointer of Christ to be the Head of the Elect, and endowing him with
sufficiency and fullness for that effect; As being also the engraffer of the
branches in the stock, by bringing the Elect to Christ, and giving them faith
whereby they are united to him: And, As, testifying his love and delight in
this new plantation, by caring for it, visiting, supporting, protecting,
pruning and purging it, that it may be fruitful; for these causes says he
also, my Father is the husbandman. By which we are taught that both the Father
and the Son do concur in procuring and promoving the prosperity of believers.

Verse 2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every
branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
The second branch of this general doctrine points out the Fathers various and
answerable dispensations, as Husbandman toward professors and branches of this
vine, according as, by their fruitfulness or unfruitfulnesse, they declare
themselves to be true or counterfeit branches, and to be really, or in show
only, engraffed in Christ. Taking away such as are unfruitful, and purging the
fruitful, that they may abound in fruit. Whence learn, 1. The condition of
Professors is most fitly resembled to branches of a vine; as having no
subsistence nor sap of themselves, but in Christ, more then branches have
without a vine-stock; and, as being obliged to have as strict and near
conjunction with him, as branches have with the tree; Which they will have, if
they be really engraffed in him: For these causes does he call them branches,
here. 2. Professors are not all of one sort, nor are they all in Christ after
one way and manner; some being only in him, by external and visible communion,
as being in the visible Church, and externally covenanting and professing
relation to him; others being also in him by faith, as having spiritual inward
communion with his person; for, so is here expressed, that there are branches
in him who bear not fruit, and branches that bear fruit. 3. The true
touchstone whereby to discern one sort of branches from another, is, not
their leaves or profession, but their fruit; for, here the character of the
one, is, every branch in me that bears not fruit, and of the other, every
branch that bears fruit. And in this they fitly resemble vine-branches, which
are useless if they be not fruitful, Ezekiel. 15.2, etc, 4. External and
fruitless branches will at last be taken away, by the discovery of their
hypocrisy and unsoundnesse, and that they have no interest in him; sometime
also by their just seclusion from Church society, and at last by their final
separation from Christ; for, every branch in me that bears not fruit, he
takes away, as the Husbandman takes away useless branches from the vine. See
v. 6. 5. There is no branch so fruitful, but it has many imperfections and
wants; for, even every branch that bears fruit needs to be purged, and to
bring forth more fruit. 6. One particular imperfection in fruitful branches,
is, that they have many luxuriant superfluities, growing up with their fruit,
which hinder the increase thereof; Not only a remainder of corruption, but much
corruption growing up with their grace, especially when they are in a
flourishing condition without exercise; Therefore do they need to be purged, as
vine-dressers do with luxuriant branches in vines, which grow up with their
fruit. 7. Whatever be the imperfections of these who hold inward communion with
Christ; yet they shall not be taken away, nor separate from him, but their
imperfections and frailties shall endear them to the Lords care; for such
branches shall not be taken away, but purged. 8. It is a rich blessing and
reward of fruitfulness, in the godlies account, to be blessed with more
fruitfulness; for, this is a promise to them, it shall bring forth more fruit.
9. However the Lords dealing with his people may cross their humors, and cut
off many superfluities, which are dear to them; yet he minds their real good,
and fruitfulness thereby; for, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit 10. Men are then assured that the operations of the Lords Word and Spirit
upon them, and the afflictions and crosses they meet with, are blessed to purge
them from their dross, when they abound in solid and real fruits; for, when he
purges it, it brings forth more fruit.

Verse 3. Now ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you.
Follows the second thing in this part of the chapter, wherein application is
made of this general doctrine to the disciples case, in a declaration, and an
exhortation. In this verse is contained a declaration what sort of branches
they were; Namely, not fruitless, but clean ones, that is, who by being purged
and cleansed from their superfluities, (as is promised, v. 2.) are assured that
they are fruitful branches, really and internally engraffed in Christ; and so
were they regenerate, justified, and sanctified, in part. This their purity is
amplified from the instrumental cause or mean thereof, which is the Word he
had spoken to them. Whereby we are to understand, partly, that the Word
preached by him, and believed by them, and the mean which wrought on them to
come to him to be cleansed; and partly, and more particularly, because by the
general sentences already pronounced by him concerning believers in him, (such
as that, John 3.36.) and more especially, by that sentence passed in their
favors, applying that general to them, chapter 13.10. they might be confirmed and
assured that they were already clean and justified. Hence learn, 1. It is the
duty of all Professors to make sure what interest they have in Christ; and for
that end, to find some difference betwixt them and formal and external
professors; Therefore, Christ speaking of diverse sorts of branches, finds it
needful to assure them that they were not of the worst, but best sort, Now ye
are clean, to learn them and all others to make that sure. 2. Albeit it be the
duty of Professors, who are doubtful of their state, to study after
fruitfulness in Gods way, whereby at last they will come to have their
interest cleared; yet it is a notable encouragement to fruitfulness, if first
they be assured of an interest, and they are to make much use of faith for that
end; Therefore does Christ premit this, Ye are clean, that hereby he may make
way for the following exhortation to fruitfulness. 3. Such as are indeed
ingraffed in Christ, are also indeed clean, not only by imputation of his
righteousness, hiding all their impurity, but by sanctification also, whereby
they are clean in part, in respect of what they were, and others still in
nature are, and a purification of them is begun, which will constantly be
carried on, till it be perfected in the day of Christ; Therefore is a branch in
him, v. 2. declared here to be a clean branch, Ye are clean. And thus does he
graciously account of them, notwithstanding their many spots, whereas he would
look otherwise upon a painted Pharisee. 4 As it is the work of the Spirit, and
of faith, to apply Christ's merit and efficacy for cleansing of sinners; so his
Word is also instrumental therein; as being the glass wherein to see our
corruption; that which sets us on work to seek purging, which discovers our
remedy; and, which being hid in the heart by faith, will keep us from sin; for,
Ye are clean through the Word that I have spoken unto you. So that where the
Word is not operative on men, it is no evidence they are purged, or that what
they seem to be, is real. 5. Such, as by faith have fled to Christ for
righteousness, and are set on work by the Word to study sanctification, are
(by virtue of Christ's sentence pronounced in the Gospel, that believers shall
not be condemned, but have eternal life) actually justified and absolved from
sin in Gods sight, albeit as yet they have not attained to refl^ct upon
themselves, and to know that they have believed, nor yet to partake sensibly of
the seal of the Holy Spirit of promise, which uses to follow after believing;
for, so much also is imported in this, Ye are clean through the Word which I
have spoken to you, or, the general sentences past in favor of believers in
his doctrine to them, are theirs, and do absolve them, albeit both before and
now they need to have it told to them by him.

Verse 4. Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.


Christ by this declaration, having assured them of their good estate, does now
subjoyne his exhortation; wherein, he does press them to communion with him,
from several arguments and considerations, to v. 8. And because fruitfulness
is the necessary effect thereof, which he aims at in the exhortation, therefore
he presses and commends it also, v. 8, 9, 10.

In these verses is contained, 1. The exhortation to perseverance in close
communion with himself, as the root and cause of that fruitfulness which he
requires of his members. 2. This is not only pressed by an argument couched in
the very bosom of the exhortation, that their abiding in him is the way to
have him abiding in them, and so the communion should be mutual; But further,
there is the first express reason and argument pressing the exhortation,
subjoyned; And it is taken from the inseparable connection that is betwixt
communion with him, and fruitfulness, so that the latter cannot be without the
former. This he declares, 1. Negatively, That without him, and communion with
him, they can no more be fruitful, then a branch that abides not in the vine.
2. Positively, That abiding in him, they shall abound in fruit; which again is
confirmed and amplified by their impotencie to do any thing without him. Whence
learn, 1. When believers are assured of their good condition, it is their duty
to cherish it, and persevere in it; Therefore does he subjoyne this exhortation
to the former declaration. 2. It is the duty, and will be the practice of
lively believers, who are in Christ, to entertain the sense of their own
impotencie and emptiness, and to love to be kept in a dependence on Christ;
that so they may study an intimate and constant conjunction with him, and
dependence on him; for, so much is imported in this exhortation, Abide, which
imports constancy, and that in me, which imports intimacy. 3. Such is our
dullness and laziness, and our averseness from self-denial, and the way of
dependence; that even when we have tasted the good of communion with Christ, we
have need to be exhorted and encouraged to continue in it; for, so much do
these exhortations, and the pressing thereof with so many arguments, import. 4
As the conjunction and inhabitation must be mutual betwixt Christ and
believers; so the union shall not break on his side, but if they abide in him
by faith and needy dependence, he will not fail to abide in them by his
gracious presence and furniture: for, says he, Abide in me, and I in you. The
latter part whereof is not an exhortation, (save in so far as he exhorts them,
by abiding in him, to continue his presence with them) but a promise. 5.
Holiness and fruitfulness ought and will be so lovely and desirable in the
esteem of true believers, that the hope of progress therein will persuade them
to submit to the use of all appointed means, and particularly, to make much use
of Christ; Therefore it is urged as a pressing Argument to abide in Christ,
that unless they do so, they cannot be fruitful; And the urging of this as an
Argument, is in effect the exhortation to fruitfulness, which afterward is
further pressed and urged. 6. It is as certain that a person not abiding in
Christ, for securing the state of his person, and for continual influence and
furniture, cannot do good works, as it is certain a withered branch, cut off
from a tree, cannot bring forth fruit: for, as the branch cannot bear fruit of
it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. 7.
As believers are to study their own emptiness, so ought they to study the
fullness of Christ, as able and willing to supply all their wants, if they
abide in him; for, these two are held out together, that he is the vine, as
they are the branches. 8. The more we study faith in Christ, and close and
constant adherence to him, the more will we, not only be fruitful, but abound
in fruit; for, He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much fruit. 9. It is no easy matter to convince believers of their own
insufficiency without Christ, but again and again self-conceit will lift up its
head, unless it be frequently hammered down; therefore it is again needful to
assert, without me ye can do nothing. 10. Whatever moral commendable actions
men may do upon moral principles; yet unless a man's person be in Christ, he is
utterly impotent to do a good and acceptable work; And whatever a regenerate
man may do by the power of gifts, or habits of grace received; yet he cannot do
it in a lively and acceptable way, without a constant dependence, and
entertaining of communion with Christ; for, it is an argument why they should
be, and abide in him, without me, or being separate from me, ye can do nothing.
11. It is not sufficient that men see their impotencie to do greater or more
difficult things without Christ, unless also they be convinced of inability to
do the least thing; for, the assertion is, without me ye can do nothing. See 2
Cor. 3.5. 12. The sense of our inability is never rightly studied, when either
we lie secure or discouraged under it, unless it be an argument inviting and
persuading us to draw near unto Christ; Therefore, it comes in here by way of
argument pressing that they would abide in him, that they may have much fruit,
for without me ye can do nothing.

Verse 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
burned.
The second Argument pressing the exhortation, is, an enlargement of what is
said, v. 2. and taken from the danger of Apostasy, and which these Professors
will incur, who being outwardly, by visible communion in Christ, do not
evidence the reality of their inward fellowship, by constant adherence to him,
and drawing virtue from him for fruitfulness, but do fall off and decline.
This is held forth under the usual similitude, that as branches which do not
incorporate with the tree, but do hang by it, or fall off, are by the
vine-dresser cast away, and having withered a while, are gathered to be fuel
for the fire; so rotten members who make Apostasy, are cut off from Christ,
and in due time sent unto the pit. Whence learn, 1. As the case of these who
are altogether without Christ is dreadful; so their case is much sadder who
have been in Christ by visible Profession, and study not reality that they may
abide. Saddest of wrath will look them in the face when they look out of
Christ, and go from him; for, such is the threatening here against them that
abide not in him. 2. Albeit no real Saints can totally and finally fall away
and perish; yet the Elect have need that the danger of Apostasy, and the
dreadful wrath following upon it, be laid before them, to make them afraid of
defection; Therefore is this threatening laid before the disciples, to press
them to their duty, albeit it will be only verified in the outward fruitless
b^anches, who are to be cut off, v. ^. And the propounding thereof to the
disciples, does not import they were of that sort, or that they could make
total defection from Christ and grace; but only that there is an inseparable
connection betwixt such Apostasy and wrath. And this intimation of the danger
of Apostasy is one of Christ's means, whereby he makes the Elect to persevere.
3. As Apostates do voluntarily fall off, and choose to depart from Christ, so
he does cast them forth as fruitless branches, by giving them judicially up to
their Apostate courses, (whereby Christ will disown them, as having no interest
in him, his love and favor, according as they renounced him) if not also by
their excommunication from the society of the Church; and all this as but an
earnest of his rejecting of them for ever; for, If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch. 4. Apostates, who are fallen off from Christ, and given
up by him, will not only dry up in all their gifts and seeming graces, their
performances and fair blossoms of professions; but shall grow worse and
worse, and ripen in prophanity by degrees, till the day come, wherein all their
false hopes and peace, their carnal joy and sensual comforts, shall quite dry
up and forsake them; for, as a branch cast out of the vineyard, so shall they
wither. 5. Whatever Apostates may think they reap for the present, yet the
issue of Apostasy will be eternal wrath and hell, which is only suspended till
their cup be full; And in the last day all Apostates shall be sent thither
together; for, they shall be as withered branches, which men gather, and cast
them into the fire, and they are burned.

Verse 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you.
The third argument pressing the exhortation, (wherewith also the exhortation is
repeated and further explained) is taken from the great advantage of access to
God, and success in prayer, if they be, and abide in him. Whence learn, 1. As
the communion betwixt Christ and believers is very intimate; so they who have
attained to it, need frequent up-stirring to persevere in it, not only to prove
the reality of what they have thereby, and that by continuance they may reap
the fruits of communion, which they will not find at first, John 8.31, 32. But
also because for the most part men are so ignorant of the way of constant
employing of Christ in all things; so unwilling to deny themselves and depend;
so ready to swell with conceit, if they have any thing for present; And so
hotly assaulted with tentations, if their faces be toward Christ; and kept so
poor and empty in themselves, in Christ's deep wisdom, that they get not leave
to run away from him; That they are every day ready to weary of this duty:
Therefore it must be again recommended, that ye abide in me. 2. Albeit when a
man has fled to Christ, he may exercise him sharply, and permit him to be
buffeted very sore; yet nothing does warrant him to give over abiding in him,
or to think that Christ will cast him off; for, whatever his dealing be, we are
allowed to credit nothing to the prejudice of his Word, which still says to
such, Abide in me. 3. Such as do entertain communion with Christ, will not only
be much conversant with his Word, but will study to have it deeply rooted and
constantly settled in their heart, by faith, meditation and prayer; for, of such
as abide in him, it is verified, my words abide in you. See Col. 3.16. 4. The
way how such as have fled to Christ, to find communion with him, ought to take
him up and find communion mutual, is, in and by the Word; for, on our part,
when we are driven out of our selves to be found in him, our only recourse is
not to seek to climb up to heaven, or descend to the deep, but to lay hold on
him in a word of promise, and to trust to it, whatever be the verdict of
tentation, or sense or dispensations. And on his part; He is to be found in his
Word, hid in our heart by faith, and being sought without his Word, he is
sought without himself; and it is by his breathings on his Word laid up by
faith in our hearts, that he sensibly evidenceth how near he is to us.
Therefore, in place of his abiding in us, as the other branch of mutual
communion, he puts the words abiding, to show that he is to be found only in
his Word, and that they who have the Word abiding in them by faith, have him
abiding in it. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you. See Romans 10.6, 7,
8. 5. As it is sense of need which drives believers to Christ; so by their
coming to him, their sense of need is not taken away, but rather augmented;
their clearer light making greater discoveries, and enjoyments begetting much
work and many errands; for, here it is supposed, if they abide in him, they
will have yet more work for prayer. And indeed, it is by this means that he
keeps them abiding in him, whereas otherwise they would be ready to run away.
So that to grow in sense of need is not a mark of one wanting communion, but of
the contrary. 6. Whatever be the wants and necessities of them who keep
communion with Christ; yet abiding in Christ will breed them, that they can see
no out-gate but by prayer, nor can they essay any other mean till first they go
to God; for, Abiders in Christ are put to ask, and see the necessity and
excellency of prayer. 7. As prayer is the only out-gate for abiders in Christ,
so they are actual supplicants, and their keeping of communion promoveth
prayer, the Spirit being a Spirit of prayer in them, and their keeping
communion with him, making them delight to have many errands to him, that so
they may be much in his company: for, of them it is said, ye shall ask. 8. Such
as keep communion with Christ, will thereby find a conformity promoved betwixt
God and their will, in the matter of their desires; so that in so far as they
are renewed and hold, communion with him, their unruly lusts will be subdued,
and their unlawful desires, whether for matter, manner, or end, will be laid
aside, and they will acquiesce in the good pleasure of God, and seek the most
excellent things; Therefore it is offered here, Ask what ye will; Not that men
are warranted to pray for what they will, or to expect an answer in whatsoever
they desire; but that in so far as they abide in him, and his words abide in
them, their wills will be limited in asking, by his Word and Will, and the
Spirit in them will make intercession according to the Will of God, Romans 8.26,
27. Though otherwise their unrenewed part will be debording, and when they
interrupt their communion, lusts will make their prayers muddie. 9. Such as
keep communion with Christ will not only see their wants, and be put to prayer,
but they will have an high estimation of the answer of their prayers, as a
thing they cannot want; for, it is an encouragement to them, that it shall be
done unto them. 10. A right sense of need in supplicants, and a due estimation
of the hope of audience, is an argument to move them to entertain communion
with Christ, and not to go far from him, lest they miss their help when they
have most need; for, it is an argument, strongly pressing them to abide in him,
that what they ask, shall be done to them. See Mic. 7.7. 11. Such as,
entertaining communion with Christ, do conform their desires to his will, and
present and prosecute them by prayer, though they were never so many, or
difficult to compass; yet they shall get a good answer, and they, dwelling
constantly in Christ's bosom, shall find it but a short step to go to God
through him; and get audience in every particular need; for, ye shall ask,
even, what ye will, and it shall be done to you. And albeit he may exercise
supplicants for a time, for their good, yet they shall succeed at last,
according to the tenor of the promise. See 1 John 5.13, 14. Whereas the ill
entertainment of communion makes us speed worse in our particular suits, even
albeit the things desired be lawful.

Verse 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye
be my disciples.
In this and the two following verses, Christ does press fruitfulness upon his
disciples, which formerly he had recommended as the effect of keeping of
communion, and as a strong motive to it. So that by these arguments he does not
only press fruitfulness in it self, but also does more strongly urge them to
keep communion with him, since fruitfulness (which is so commendable) cannot
be attained without it. The arguments pressing fruitfulness are three; whereof
the first, is, that it honors God, and the second (also in this verse) that
it evidenceth unto them, and confirms them in their good estate and high
privilege, of being his disciples. Whence learn, 1. Christ abhors all
pretenses of keeping communion with him, which does not appear in effects; for
this end it is, that he is not content to press abiding in him, unless he
press fruitfulness also, as the true evidence thereof. 2. Such as would prove
themselves to hold communion with Christ, ought not to rest satisfied with
flowers and leaves of a profession and external shows, but must study for
solid fruit and good works; for, he requires fruit. 3. True members of Christ
ought to abound with fruit, even all the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23,
24. (Not pleasing themselves with some few that they would cull out, neglecting
others, 2 Cor. 8.7. nor seeking most after what may please or adorn
themselves, neglecting the really best things, 1 Cor. 12.31) And studying
chiefly to abound in these fruits, which the dispensations of the time and
their own stations, in their several relations, call for, Romans 12.15 1 Pet.
3.1, 2, 3, 4 5. Therefore it is required that there be much fruit. And albeit
truly fruitful souls, as sometime they find no fruits of Gods dispensations
toward them, so they fin^e not themselves abounding in fruits of duty Yet if
they be sensible of their barrenness, and it be matter of lamentation and
humility that they are so, and that they do not keep communion with Christ to
make it otherwise; if they seriously desire fruitfulness in duty and under
dispensations,; and do not rest on any measure they have Christ will look on
them as having much fruit, and they are bound to believe fruit, when they do
not see it. 4 As Christ sought his Fathers glory in all he did, so true
believers, who keep communion with him, will be tender of, and dearly affected
with Gods honor, and what may promove it; And will be ashamed of
selfe-seeking, or want of zeal for God, who by many favors has proven
himself a Father, and purchased them that they may be for his glory; for, as
this prevailed with Christ, so he propounds it as a strong argument to move his
followers to study fruitfulness, Herein is my Father glorified. 5.
Fruitfulness, especially when we abound in it, (otherwise men may get through,
who do not honor him as they ought) does indeed honor God; As evidencing his
fullness and fidelity to his own, Psalm. 92.13, 14, 15. As begetting high
thoughts of him in their hearts, who participate of this his bounty, Joh.
16.14. And, as drawing in others to glorify him, Matthew. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.12.
for, however, some think they glorify him by a naked profession, and others
are so presumptuous, as to pretend to glorify him by persecuting his servants,
Isa. 66.5. yet says Christ, Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit; So that they have need to look to it, who by their barrenness would
reproach him, as if he were a wilderness, Jer. 2.31. 6. How contemptibly soever
men think of a relation to Christ, Joh 9.27, 28. Yet it is the high dignity of
sinful men to be disciples to him; Therefore it is held out, as a sweet
encouragement, to be my disciples. 7. Such as are disciples indeed, will need
daily confirmations that they are so; And will look on it as a privilege
whereof they ought daily to assure themselves, and make evident to others that
they have right to it, by submitting to be taught by him, and following his
directions daily: for this is the force also of the argument pressing them to
their duty, ye shall be my disciples, that is, not made disciples, for that
goes before fruitfulness, but confirmed that they are such indeed, Joh. 8.31.
and the world convinced of it, Joh. 13.35. Which is in its own kind as needful
as to be a disciple; for, they who are admitted to that privilege cannot but
daily feed upon it, and need daily confirmations of it; their good condition
not permitting them to sleep, but cherishing tenderness in them. 8. Albeit our
fruitfulness do not merit heaven, nor be any cause of our good condition; Yet
it is the way to happiness, and the infallible evidence of our good condition
and estate; for, So (by bearing fruit) shall ye be my disciples.

Verse 9. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my
love.

10. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have
kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love.


The third argument pressing fruitfulness, is, that hereby they continue in
his love. For understanding whereof, albeit his love, wherein we are to
continue, may be understood of our love to him, as a special effect of
communion with him, and of his love to us, which he so much commends, ver. 9.
And as a root of fruitfulness and obedience, which is enjoined, ver. 10. And
it is true indeed, That love to Christ is one of the fairest fruits of faith
and communion with him; That love must be the root of well-doing, and is never
idle, but must be about obedience, Joh. 14.15. That the faith of his love to us
cannot but beget love to him; That Christ delights to be loved by us, and
therefore exhorts unto it; and, that he requires constancy and continuance in
this love, as, if it be sincere, it will be constant. It is true, I say, these
points are sound, and arise from this exhortation and purpose annexed to it, so
understood. And it is not sit to restrict the interpretation of Scripture,
where it may be taken largely; Yet the purpose and scope in this place, seems
chiefly, if not only, to lead us to understand it of his love toward us, in the
assurance and sense whereof we are to continue, and which we are to entertain
by tender walking. And so, in the words. 1. He propounds the greatness and
matchlesness of his love to them, ver. 9. -- 2. Upon this he infers, that it
was their duty, by all means, to entertain the sense of that his love
constantly, and not to forfeit the right, or loose the sight of such a jewel,
ver. -- 9. 3. (To press the point of fruitfulness) He assures them there was
no way to abide in this love, but by tender walking, which he further confirm,
from his own example, who by obedience did continue in his Fathers love, ver.
10.

From ver. 9. Learn, 1. It tends to the advantage and comfort of these who have
fled to Christ, to know that he is dearly beloved of the Father, and therefore
the Father cannot but be well pleased with them in him; Therefore does he tell
them, the Father has loved me. 2. Christ, being beloved of the Father, is a
storehouse to receive, and a conduit to conveigh that love to his people
through him, as his assigns and members, and he does himself love them; for,
the Father has loved me, and I have loved you. 3 The love of Christ toward his
own is matchless, and can be resembled by no love on earth, but is like the
Fathers love to him, as being eternal, sincere and intimate, in comprehensible
infinite, and unchangable, as the other is; for, as the Father has loved me,
so have I loved you, compares 10.15. 4. It is not enough, in Christ's account,
that he has matchless love toward his own, unless they also know of it, and
he persuade and assure their hearts thereof, notwithstanding the sense of their
own unworthiness; and their mistakes in measuring his love by themselves, who
are but shallow creatures; Therefore does he take pains to assure them, that so
have I loved you. 5. Such as are assured of the love of Christ, and are
sensible of the matchlesnesse thereof, will be most tender of entertaining the
sense of it, and for a world would not provoke him to withdraw it: Therefore,
from the former intimation of his love, he infers, not only as their duty,
but what will be their practice, if they study it rightly, continue ye in my
love. And this he premits as a forcible motive to press them to fruitfulness.
See Cant. 2.7. and 3.5.

From ver. 10. Learn, 1. Christ's matchless love to his people ought not to
turn them idle, nor does disingage them from duty; But he has imposed a yoke
upon them, which should be sweet because imposed by him; Therefore, with his
love, he intimates that he has service for them, my commandments. 2. The sense
of Christ's love begets a love to him, which will not be idle, but very
laborious; for, to be beloved, and to keep his commandments, go together. See 1
These. 1.3. 3. As obedience is an evidence of our love to Christ, so it is the
mean of keeping us in the sense and assurance of his love to us, without which
we are but deluded; for, If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love.
See 1 John 2.5. 4. True fruitfulness, and tender walking in the sense of
Christ's love to us, must appear, not in service of our own devising, but what
he prescribes; and in obeying the commands, no^ out of fear only, but out of
love to Christ; for, to bear much fruit, ver. 8. is here explained, to keep the
commandments, and, my commandments. 5. Christ has fully performed all that was
enjoined him to do, and suffer, as the surety of believers; for, in this he is
a wonderful pattern and mirror of obedience; I have kept my Fathers
commandments. See Chap. 17 4. 6. Christ by his obedience to the Father does
continue in his love, and is not out of Court, but in a capacity to make
sinners welcome through him; for, says he, I abide in his love. 7 Christ, in
his great love to his people, has essayed these duties and means of
entertaining the love of God, which he prescribes unto them; That so he may
make their way easy by his going before them; may sympathize with them in
their hard services, may engage them not to decline to follow such a leader, or
the way he took for attaining special favors; and, may by his perfection cover
their infirmities, so that through him they may have that success which he
himself had: For these ends does he urge their duty from his own example, even
as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. And
particularly, that they may not seek another way of entertaining the Fathers
love, then he walked in, and that he may assure them, their weak endeavors
through him should keep them in the Fathers love, as he by his perfect
obedience did abide in it. 8. Such as would entertain the love of God, ought to
look on Christ's example, not only as an engagement to obedience in general; But
as a pattern to be imitated particularly, in what is imitable; And namely, in
his humility and selfe-denial; his submission to the Fathers will, his
meekness in suffering, his cheerfulness and delight to do the will of God;
his universal and constant obedience, etc. for, so much also is imported, that
they should keep the commandments, even as I kept, etc. that the practice was
not only an engagement, but a pattern to them.

Ver. 11. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.
This verse contains the last particular in this part of the Chapter, wherein
(by way of conclusion) Christ points out his scope in all this doctrine, (which
also holds true of the whole Word of God as it is spoken to believers, Joh.
20.31. with 1 Pet. 1.8) For whereas by these many and pressing exhortations,
they might readily be discouraged, and mistake him; Therefore he declares that
his aim in all this was to have his joy abiding in them, in a full and
constant manner, and that therefore he had pressed communion with himself, and
fruitfulness flowing there from, as the way to attain and entertain such a
mercy. And so it is a new argument to fruitfulness, that so they may promove
and secure their own true joy. Whence learn, 1. Christ's dealing and speaking to
his people, may seem, oft-times, so contrary and cross to his great scope, as
they will readily mistake him, unless himself expound what he aims at;
Therefore must he declare for what end he has said this, These things have I
spoken to you, that my joy may remain, etc. as being a thing they could not
well discern of themselves. 2. Christ does allow on his people joy and
rejoicing, on his own terms, and in his order; for, this is his scope here,
that my joy might remain in you. 3. Believers, in laying hold on their
privilege of rejoicing, ought not to look on their worth of deserving, but on
his allowance, and what he has purchased, and will confer upon them; for, so
much does he intimate (as a part of the meaning) when he calls it, my joy, by
way of purchase, allowance, and gift, and therefore your joy, by right. 4.
Whatever believers may apprehend in Christ's sharp dealing and doctrine, or
whatever be Christ's nearest end in it; Yet ultimately it tends to testify his
care of their welfare, and to further and advance their true joy; for, These
things (even pressing exhortations to difficult duties, and sharp threatenings,
which could not but humble and exercise sensible souls; Even, these things)
have I spoken unto you, that my joy may remain in you. See Chap. 14. 28. 5.
Albeit the joy of believers be Christ's purchase and free gift; yet it is
allowed upon none, but these who walk in the ways of fruitfulness and
obedience, as an evidence of their good estate and interest in him; for, These
things, concerning fruitfulness, tend to their joy; So that the joy of
wilfully fruitless souls is but delusion, (albeit they who are humbled in the
sense of unfruitfulnesse, may rejoice in free grace offered in the Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5.) and our laziness is a great obstructer of our joy. 6. As believers
will disdain to rejoice in any thing beneath Christ; So, albeit they do
evidence their interest in joy by fruitfulness; Yet they will be far from
rejoicing therein; Only it leads them up to rejoice in him, who is the author
of all, and with wh^m they are assured they hold communion, by their
fruitfulness; Therefore also unto fruitful disciples, it is called my joy,
namely, a joy in him, and not in their own fruitfulness, far less in other
carnal things. 7. Christ does allow unto believers not only flashes and fits of
joy, but a constant solid uninterrupted joy; for, his will is, that my joy
remain in you, whereas the wickeds will wither. See Phil. 4.4. 1 These. 5.16. 8.
If believers would make more conscience of tender walking, and of constancy in
fruitfulness, their joy would be more constant and less interrupted: for,
fruitfulness, which he has been pressing, is the mean to attain this end, that
my joy remain in you, whereas by barrenness they over-cloud their own good
condition. 6. The joy of believers in Christ, is in it self a full joy, needing
no other carnal joy to be added with it, to fill the heart: being a joy that
will bear out under all discouragements; and, a joy far different from the
worldlings joy, which is full of heaviness. Prove. 14.13. for, so it is here
called, a full joy. 10. Believers, within time, do never taste so much of
spiritual joy, but more is allowed, and more is to be expected in the way of
tender and fruitful walking; for, his scope in exhorting to fruitfulness, is,
That your joy might be full, yet fuller, not in regard of the object, but in
their sensible enjoyment thereof. 11. Whatever be the small measure of joy
believers do enjoy, by reason of their fruitlesness, diffidence,
discouragement, and straitning in their own bowels, and how often so ever that
they have be interrupted; Yet it is Christ's purpose and aim to have their joy
constant and full, and he will not give over till it be so; for, his ultimate
scope, in his dealing with them, and his doctrine to them, is, that your joy
might be full, as it will be at last, Psalm. 16.11. Matthew. 25.23. And herein it
differs from the joy of the wicked, which ends in heaviness, Prove. 14.13.

Verse 12. This my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Follows, to ver. 18. the second part of the Chapter, wherein Christ singleth
out one particular fruit of mutual love, which in this verse he enjoyneth, and
presses from his own example. Compare Chap. 13. 34. Doct. 1. Albeit Christ
require that we study an universal obedience, and fruitfulness in all that he
has commanded; Yet it is his will, we be carried most toward these fruits
which are most excellent and necessary; for this cause it is, that, having
formerly pressed fruitfulness in general, he now descends to press this one
particular fruit. See 1 Cor. 12.31 -- 2. The true touchstone of our communion
with Christ, and of fruitfulness in the duties of his service, is, the
conscientious performance of duties of the second Table; Therefore does he
insist so particularly in this duty of mutual love, as a mean to evidence the
reality of their fruitfulness. 3. Of all duties to our neighbor, and,
particularly, of one Saint to another, love is the most excellent, as being the
sum of the law, the fountain of all other duties, and the mean of making
believers useful each to other; Therefore, does he require this in particular,
that ye love one another. See 1 Cor. 12.31. with Chap. 13.1, 2, etc. Romans 13.8.
4. It is a sufficient obligation to mutual love, that Christ has commanded and
enjoined it, who must be obeyed, whatever our inclinations be; for, says he,
This is my commandment, that ye love one another. 5. Christ love to believers
is both an obligation unto mutual love, and a pattern of it. And whoever would
be sure of his love to them, ought to study mutual love, as a fruit thereof:
Therefore, says he, Love one another, as I have loved you. This will persuade
us to love even them who are base, unprofitable, who have wronged us, etc. as
he did.

Verse 13. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends.
That Christ may enforce this duty from his example, he does commend his love
to them (which they are to imitate) from several evidences thereof. Whereof the
first (in this verse) is, his laying down of his life for them. Which being the
greatest evidence of friendship among men, Romans 5.7. does set out the
greatness of his love to them; And that so much the more, as though they were
friends in his purpose when he died for them, and were to be reconciled and
brought into friendship by his death, yet they were then in themselves enemies
Romans 5.8, 10. Whence learn, 1. Christ will let no opportunity slip, whereby he
may unfold his heart, and manifest somewhat of his love to his people;
Therefore, in pressing this duty of mutual love, he insists on such arguments
as may not only press it, but may also aggree with his principal drift in this
Sermon, which is, to let out his tender heart unto them. 2. Such as would make
right use of Christ's love, ought to be much in the study thereof, and to know
distinctly what it is; Therefore, does he insist to commend his love, that the
example may be more binding. 3. Christ's love to believers is so large, that we
cannot comprehend or take it up, but in resemblances and comparisons; Therefore
must he set it out here by the shadow of the love of friends. 4. Christ did
really lay down his life for, and in place of, his people; They standing guilty
before the Tribunal of divine justice, He, as their surety by the covenant of
Redemption, was surrogate in their room, their sins being charged on him, and
they set free; for, he laid down his life for his friends. See Isa. 53.5. 5.
The benefit of Christ's death is intended only for his friends, who are chosen
of God, and given to him to be reconciled and made friends; for, he laid down
his life for his friends, and them only. 6. Christ's laying down his life for
his people, is the clearest mirror, wherein to read his love; for, he proves
that he had loved them, in that he laid down his life. 7. Christ's love, in
dying for his people, does shine in this, that although they were enemies in
themselves; Yet he had a friendly respect to them, and did follow them, till he
drew them into a covenant of friendship; for, this does commend his love, that
he laid down his life for them as friends, though they were enemies. 8. Christ's
love to his people is the most matchless of loves, and essay whom we will,
none will bid so much for us or our love, as he; Therefore does he commend it
as singular, greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends, yet he had done this, and more also, in that he had done it
before they were brought into actual friendship with him.

Ver. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.
Before Christ proceed to another evidence of his love and friendship, he takes
occasion to apply this privilege of his dying for his friends, to them, upon
condition of their obedience: Hereby commending this his friendship, as worthy
that they should assure themselves of an interest in it, by friendly carriage
and obedience on their part; which makes way for the exhortation to mutual love
in particular, which he afterward resumes. Whence learn, 1. Christ's offers of
friendship are never esteemed of as they ought, unless we be stirred up
thereby to make sure an interest therein, on right terms; Therefore does he
take occasion to urge them to make sure of such a privilege. And indeed, even
disciples are not rashly to lay hold on it, but upon sure ground^. 2. There is
a real friendship made up betwixt Christ and believers, consisting in an
intimate conjunction and unity, harmony and aggreement in mind and will,
sympathy and fellow feeling, mutual delight in the fellowship of one another,
communion in estates and conditions, etc. Therefore, says he, ye are my
friends. See 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isa. 41.8. Sam 2.23. 3. Friendship with Christ does
not disengage his friends from duty, nor will they so far miscarry, as to
neglect obedience as bond-servants; for, these two will go together, to be my
friends, and to do what I command you. 4. As friendship obliges to obedience,
so only friends to Christ can obey rightly; Friendship will carry them through
the hardest of duties, and will make them cordial, cheerful, zealous,
universal, and constant, in their obedience; for, in this respect, also, do
these go together. 5. Albeit Christ will not over-drive his friends in his
service, yet his dominion over them is unlimited, and he will have them to
decline nothing which he shall be pleased to enjoyne; for, they must do
whatsoever he commands. 6. Obedience unto God is a true evidence of
friendship with him; And they who, having fled to Christ, do yet keep
themselves in the posture of servants, and are willing to do service to him, he
will esteem of them as friends; for, ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you. See Jam. 2.23.

Ver. 15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what
his lord does: but I have called you friends: for all things that I have heard
of my Father, I have made known unto you.
A second evidence of Christ's love, (and a reason why he changes their style
from that of servants usual to him before, Matthew. 10.24. Joh. 13.16. into that
of friends) is, his communication of secrets and of his counsel with them, unto
which no mere servant is admitted by his Master. For understanding of this,
Consider, 1. While he refuses to call them servants any more, but friends, it
is not to be understood, as if they were henceforth to be exempted from
obedience, or from being servants indeed; For in the former verse, and v. 20.
we have both name and thing of servants continued. But the meaning is, they
were not to be mere servants, but friends also, and used like friends. 2. This
also clears what is said, that a servant knows not what his Lord does,
Namely, that common and ordinary servants in the world, though they know so far
of their Lords mind, as to understand their duty, yet they are not admitted on
their Masters secrets, Nor to know his purposes in what he employes them about.
But the Disciples were privileged servants, who were admitted to know the
counsel of God revealed to Christ. 3. While it is said, that henceforth he
changes their title, it is not to be understood, as if they were not friends
before; yea, he calls them so with an eye to their after sufferings, Luke 12.4.
But that now being to remove, he lets out his heart and good will more fully.
4. As for Christ's revealing to them all that he had heard of the Father,
compare what is said, Chap. 14.25, 26. Only, it is not to be understood of that
infinite treasure of knowledge communicate from the Father to the Son, as God;
But he speaks here as the Prophet of the Church, sent out to reveal all things
necessary to salvation, whereof he kept nothing back. Doct. 1. Albeit Christ's
followers ought to be his servants, as being created, and espeeially, as being
redeemed by him, and because of the many benefits conferred on them daily; yet
by being servants, they are friends also, in regard of intimate communion and
tender usage; for, I call you not servants, but I have called you friends. 2.
The dignity of believers is a growing dignity; so that the longer they follow
Christ, they will know more of the high privileges allowed by him upon them;
for, this cause, says he, Henceforth I call you not servants, but I have
called you friends; and so after his resurrection he goes higher, and calls
them brethren, John 20.17. 3. Christ has many sweet encouragements and proofs
of his love abiding his people in a time of trial, which they will not get at
another time; Therefore he reserveth this sweet style till the time of their
sad trial by reason of his departure. And therefore it is given them before,
when he speaks of their sufferings, Luke 12.4. 4. Christ's love to his people is
not diminished by his bodily departure from them, but rather he thereby takes
occasion to let out more of it; Therefore also does he choose to call them
friends, now when he is to remove. 5. In so far as believers list themselves
to be servants to Christ, they must stoop to be ignorant of what he pleases
not to reveal; and must bless him that they know their duty, and should go
about it, not enquiring into the reasons of it; for, this is the lot of
servants, (though disciples be advanced to get more, when their Master
pleases, ( A servant knows not what his Lord does. 6. All the Fathers
counsel, and what is needful for us to know, is faithfully revealed by Christ
to his Apostles, and by them to the Church; for, All things that I have heard
of my Father, I have made known unto you. 7 As the Apostles were admitted into
great friendship, in being taught the mind of Christ; so it is an evidence of
Christ's friendship to his people, that they understand the counsel of God in
his Word, and that the secret of the Lord is with them, to clear their Election
unto them; to make them know and esteem the mysteries of the Kingdom of God;
to make them discern the secret of his favor and good will, notwithstanding
their unworthiness, and many thick clouds; to clear his purposes in his
strange working in the world; and, to clear their way in dark steps and cases:
And all this by his Word, made clear and lively to them by the Spirit; for,
this is the reason why he calls them friends, which is true of all believers in
their measure, as of the Apostles in theirs; for, all things that I have heard
of the Father, I have made known to you.

Verse 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that
you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my Name, he may give it you.
A third evidence of Christ's love is held out in three particulars, each of
them following upon another, 1. That his mercy had prevented them in their
election, both eternal unto salvation, and their effectual calling as the
effect thereof, as also unto the office of Apostleship. 2. That being chosen,
he had appointed them to bring forth much and remaining fruit, in their private
stations, and public callings. 3. That for any thing they needed to enable
them to be fruitful, they should have access to the Father through him, for
obtaining thereof. Whence learn, 1. Such as are true believers, and have indeed
given up themselves to Christ, to do him service, ought and will have a
singular estimation of Christ, preferring and exalting him in their hearts
above all other things; for, ye have not chosen me, is not an absolute denial,
but, on the contrary, imports they had done so, only in respect of order he had
chosen them before. See Phil. 3.12. 2. It is naturally incident to all men, to
dispute in their minds against the freedom of Gods grace, and to be ambitious
to have matter of boasting in themselves, and to see somewhat moving God to let
out his love upon them; Therefore must Christ not only assert his choosing of
them, but remove any conceit of their choosing him first; ye have not chosen
me, etc. 3. Whatever debate there be in this matter, yet our Lord is the
preventer of all good in us, both by his eternal election, and by effectual
vocation, as also by predeterminating concurrence and influence to every good
work in particular; for, ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. See 1
John 4.10. 4. As no man may take any office to himself in Christ's Church,
unless both the office be appointed by him, and they appointed and called to
it; so the reason why he calls any to do him service in a particular office in
his Church, is not any worth in them, but his own free grace, who furnishes
them and sets them to work; for, this holds true also of their office; ye
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. 5. Such as God has chosen to
eternal life, and effectually called, are likewise ordained to serve Christ,
and bring forth fruit to him, in their private stations, and public
emploiments; Therefore, it is subjoyned, and ordained you that ye should bring
forth fruit. 6. Such as Christ has honored with a Ministerial charge in his
house, ought not to loiter in it; nor to please themselves with an high conceit
of their own dignity and advancement: But it should be their care to spend
themselves, in gaining souls, and bringing in fruit to Christ: for, this holds
true of the Apostles in their calling in particular, I have chosen you, and
ordained you that ye should go and bring forth fruit. See Matthew. 28.19. 7.
Albeit believers, and Christ's servants, be bound to their duty in their
stations and offices; yet their fruitfulness depends not on their diligence,
but upon Christ's commanded and appointed blessing; for, this, I have ordained,
(or put, and appointed you to go and bring forth fruit, imports not only that
he had appointed them to endeavor fruitfulness in the use of means, but that
he had appointed fruitfulness to follow upon their endeavors. See Ephesians. 2 10.
Acts 13.48. 8. The fruits of a man's carriage and calling which Christ approves
of, must be real and solid, not empty and evanishing; for, it is fruit that may
remain. 9. The solid fruits which believers and Ministers bring forth, shall
not be lost, but they will remain to Gods glory, and their own good, nourishing
and confirming their faith and hope, and confirming Ministers in their calling,
that they are approven of God in it; for, thus also their fruit remains, in
its use and effect. 10. Whosoever are faithfully studying to be fruitful in
their calling, and particularly, honest Ministers, will find many humbling
wants in themselves, for carrying through in it as becomes; Therefore it is
subjoyned to the former, that they will be put to need prayer. 11. Such as
truly discern their own inabilities and wants, will find no help for them, but
by prayer to God, nor any access to God in prayer, but through Christ; for,
they will be put to ask the Father, and that, in my Name, says he. 12. It
commends Christ's love to his people, that when he emptieth them, that they may
be sent to God through him, they shall not be disappointed, but get a good
answer, were their difficulties never so many, or so great; for, this is an
evidence of his love, Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my Name, he
shall give it you. 13. Albeit it be only of free love, and through Christ's
merit, that the prayers of believers do find access; yet their fruitfulness
is the way, wherein to come speed; as evidencing their persons to be
reconciled, their condition to be good, and that they seek not things from God,
to consume on their lusts, Jam. 4.3. but to enable them to more fruitfulness;
for, this depends on the former, that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever
ye shall ask, etc. he may give it. Where fruitfulness is commended as the way
to come speed, and yet no merit to be placed in it, but the supplication put up
in Christ's Name.

Verse 17. These things I command you, that ye love one another.
Christ having thus commended his love to them, as the pattern and motive of
their duty; he does repeat and resume the former exhortation, v. 12. and
presses it over again by way of conclusion from the former grounds. Whence
learn, 1. Mutual love is a duty of great importance, and very excellent in the
sight of God: Therefore does Christ so often repeat and inculcate it. 2. Our
hearts by nature are very dull in taking up our duty, and very untoward and
averse from the duty of mutual love; for, so much also does the inculcating of
this exhortation, teach us. 3. Such as take a full and serious view of Christ's
love to them, cannot but see themselves engaged to mutual love, and to be
without excuse, if they neglect it; for, upon the former grounds he here
repeateth it, as a duty that cannot be declined. 4. The duty of mutual love is
very comprehensive, and contains many duties in the bosom of it, to which
love will stoop and condescend; Therefore Christ exhorts to it, as to many
duties; These things I command you, that ye love one another. See Rom, 13.8. 1
Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.

Verse 18. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.
Follows the third and last part of the chapter, wherein Christ, that he may
yet more excite them to mutual love, does forewarn them of the hatred and
persecution they were to meet with in the world; and armeth them against the
same by several arguments of consolation and encouragement, to v. 22. Which in
the following purpose he further confirms, and vindicates them against all
stumbling blocks and exceptions.

In this verse their case is intimate that the world would hate them; unto
which is subjoyned the first argument of encouragement, taken from his own
example and lot, so assuring them that in their sufferings, they had fellowship
with him, who was hated of the world before them. Whence learn, 1. As believers
may look for love from Christ and Saints, so they must expect trouble and
hatred from the world; for, unto the former doctrine, concerning Christ's love,
and their duty to love one another, it is subjoyned, that the world will hate
you. 2. The worlds hatted of believers is a strong argument to persuade them to
love one another; for, this is also subjoyned as an argument to press mutual
love, that they are sure to meet with hatred from others. And indeed, when love
decays, God uses to kindle it up by storms of persecution, which cause
Saints to draw together. 3. Christ is a faithful Master, who will hide from his
servants nothing of their danger and difficulties; and it may assure us of the
reality of his encouragements, that he gives so free warning of dangers:
Therefore, does he faithfully warn them here. 4. Persecution arises from men's
worldly dispositions, and their being of the world; and all who are so, are
fair to be cruel persecutors, as they have opportunity; for, the world hates
you, says he. 5. As the persecution of Saints flows from implacable malice
in the world against them: so whoever do hate godliness, and the godly for its
sake, they are already engaged in a course of persecution, and will go a
further length, as they have permission and opportunity; for this cause does he
comprehend all their persecutions and sufferings under the name of hatred, as
being a persecution in Gods account, and the rise of all the worlds cruelty. 6.
Hatred and persecution from the world, is a very hard and difficult lot to
Saints, unless Christ do encourage them against and under it; Therefore does
he not only forewarn, but arm them also. 7. Such as would bear out under sad
lots, ought to be well acquainted and study seriously the condition of Christ
and his Church in all ages; and what they know, Christ will put them to it, to
improve it; Therefore, does he appeal to their knowledge in this matter of
their encouragement, ye know, etc. 8. Christ is the prime object of the worlds
hatred, and they who hate his members, do hate himself first, and them, because
of somewhat of him in them; for, says he, it hated me, before it hated you. 9.
As it is a great encouragement in suffering times, to know that believers
before us have met with the like lots, Mat. 5.12. So, in particular, Christ's
going before us in enduring the worlds hatred, may exceedingly encourage
sufferers, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. For, hereby not only is his great love commended,
who would offer himself to an ingrate world, Luke 23.34. But it serves further,
to guard our hearts against the calumnies cast upon us in our sufferings, since
he, who was innocent, and the Lord of glory, was persecuted under the notion of
a Samaritane, and what not? To point out our dignity, that we should be made
conform to our Head, were it but in suffering, and that we should be served
heirs to that enmity that began at him, and which lights on us for his sake:
To assure us of his sympathy, in whose quarrel we are embarked, and who drank
of that cup himself: To assure us how easy this suffering will be, he having
essayed it before us, (as nothing will prove hard to a believer which Christ
has once tasted of) so that we need no more but to follow him to the spoil;
and, to assure us of the victory, since he has already triumphed over the
worlds hatred in our name. So much is held forth, for the comfort of sufferers,
in this Argument, If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it
hated you.

Ver. 19. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: But because ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you.
The second argument of consolation is taken from what their suffering from the
world may evidence* unto them; Namely, that they are not of the world, but
chosen out of it, and therefore the world hates them; whereas if it were
otherwise with them, the world would love his own. So the force of the
Argument, is, partly, that they behoved to make for trouble, as being
inevitable, considering they are not of the world; and partly, their suffering
from the world was so clear an evidence of their good condition, that they
ought not to be discouraged at it. What Christ says, that the world would love
his own, does not contradict the frequent experiences of wars, contentions and
emulations, among men of the world. For, 1. If we compare the hatred they carry
toward their own, with what they have against the godly, it is nothing so
violent and extreme. 2. They dister not in contrary general principles and
ends, but only in contrary lusts, and when the interest of one interferes with
another, and crosses it. 3. They do easily agree in hating the godly, as Herod
and Pontius Pilate did. 4. Albeit some wicked men hate some wickedness, yet it
is not a pure hatred, but for their own corrupt ends. Doct. 1. There are in
this world two seeds, who stand in opposition one to another, and betwixt whom
there is a conspicuous difference; for, there are some of the world, and some
not of the world 2. The difference betwixt the godly and the world is not of
the godlies making, but does slow from Gods free grace; for, ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, by eternal election, and actual
vocation, whereby they are made not to be conform to this world, in judgment,
affections and practice. 3. Christ by his free grace can make a great change in
men, and make excellent vessels out of the vilest matter; for, says he, I have
chosen you, to all this dignity and excellent condition, out of the world. 4.
Saints, being separate from the world, and their courses, must expect to be
hated by the world, upon that very account; and that because the world hates
God and his image in them, and they cannot endure to be condemned by the light
that shines in the godly; for, because I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore does the world hate you. 5. As the world do keep up their love from
the godly, so their love will be little worth to a right discerner; when he
considers that to be beloved of the world is but an ill token, and evidenceth
that either the person beloved is of their own stamp, or, at least, complieth
too much with their evil fashions; therefore, does he illustrate this from the
contrary, If ye were of the world, the world would love his own. 6. As
evidences of our Regeneration are worthy to be sought after, at any rate; so in
particular, it may sweeten the worlds hatred to Saints, when they consider that
the world cannot sincerely love what is good: And therefore their hating of
them for good, is a real confirmation of their good estate; for, this is the
encouragement, that the world hates you, because I have chosen you out of the
world.

Verse 20. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater
then the Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: If
they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.
The third Argument of consolation (amplifying and enlarging the first, and
wherein he expounds that hatred, v. 18. to comprehend both persecution of their
person, and contempt of their doctrine) is taken from the inevitableness of
trouble, considering their relation to Christ, as servants to their Master; and
the equity that is in this, that they should be no better entreated then he
was, both in their person and Ministry. Whence learn, 1. Christ's words are not
spoken at random, but to good purpose, and may, long after they are heard,
serve us in much stead; Therefore does he remit them to the word that he said
unto them, Matthew. 10.24. John 13.16. 2. The Word of God, rightly emproven, is a
special mean of patience and encouragement under sufferings; Therefore does he
send them to it. 3. As we ought not to slight the Word, but lay it up as we
hear it; so in an hour of tentation and trouble, we ought to remember on what
we have heard, as being spoken for our use in such cases: Therefore, says he,
Remember the word that I said unto you, when they are to resolve on troubles.
4. Of all that we hear, nothing is so effectual to arm us with patience, and
encourage us under troubles, as to be much acquainted with Christ, his usage in
the world, and his deportment under it; Therefore does he, in particular, call
to remembrance, what he had said concerning his suffering, who was their
Master. 5. Christ's servants cannot in reason expect better entertainment then
he found in the world; for, he mentions his sufferings, that they may close
with that truth, The servant is not greater then the Lord, which, as before, it
preached humility, chap. 13.16. so here, patience and submission. 6. Such as
have a sow esteem of themselves, and an high esteem of Christ, who yet stooped
to suffer more then they are put to, will easily be brought to stoop, and be
patient in trouble; Therefore does he propound the comparison under the terms
of servant and Lord, that thoughts of the one and the other may persuade them
to submit, and not think it strange, that if they have persecuted me, they also
persecute you, etc. 7. Hatred against Christ and his servants, will resolve in
cruelty against their persons as there is opportunity: for, so does he explain
it, They persecuted me, and will persecute you. 8. As contemners of doctrine in
the mouth of faithful messengers, are upon their way to persecute their
persons: so also their very contempt is a most cruel persecution in Christ's
account, and in the account of godly Ministers, who cannot but be sadly
afflicted with the ill success of their Ministry; for both these causes, it
is added to the persecuting of their persons, If they have kept my saying, they
will keep yours also, that is, they will keep the one no better then they did
the other. 9. Whatever pretense of respect men may have to the Word, yet they
are but real despisers thereof, so long as they do not lay it up as a treasure
in their heart, and observe it in their practice; for, this is it he requires,
that they keep his saying. 10. It is the great advantage of believers, that
Christ and they have the same common friends and enemies, and are embarked
together in sufferings; therefore does he parallel their case with his, If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you, if they have kept my saying,
they will keep yours also.

Verse 21. But all these things will they do unto you for my Names sake,
because they know not him that sent me.
The fourth Argument of consolation is taken from the goodness of the cause of
their sufferings, as being for his Names sake. Which is further amplified from
the cause of the worlds violence on that quarrel; to wit, their ignorance of
God who sent him, and consequently of the wise contrivance of the mystery of
Redemption. Whence learn, 1. The godly, and particularly, faithful Ministers
ought to expect trial from the world, in great multiplicity and variety;
Therefore, says he, All these things will they do unto you, pointing chiefly
to that opposition both against their persons and doctrine, v. 20. 2. It is the
duty of believers, and particularly, of faithful Ministers, to own and avow the
Name of Christ, his truth and glory, whatever befall them; for, their suffering
for his Names sake, imports that they stand for it. 3. The great quarrel of
the world against believers, is, for the Name of Christ; And as when the world
was heathenish, this quarrel was avowed: so however now some other thing be
pretended, yet it is the quarrel still; for, All these things will they do unto
you for my Names sake. 4. A good cause may make suffering for it, easy, when
we consider our mercy to be honored to be for Christ; and that we have so much
sin and guilt, as might draw on more uncomfortable exercise; for it is an
encouragement here, that they will do these things unto you for my Names sake.
See Acts 5.41. 5 None do oppose the doctrine of the Gospel in the mouths of
Christ's servants, or do persecute them for its sake, but they bewray their
gross ignorance thereof, and of God and Christ, and what relation he has to
the Father: for, they will do these things, because they know not him that sent
me.

Verse 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but
now they have no cloak for their sin.
Because the former Arguments of consolation contain somewhat at which his weak
followers might readily offend; As namely, That Christ should be unknown and
hated in the world, yea, and so hated, as they his followers should be hated
for his sake, Therefore Christ subjoynes other Arguments to encourage them, by
obviating all scandal which might be taken at the cause of their suffering, and
his being hated in the world. The first argument is taken from the miserable
condition of persecutors, which their hating of him did evidence. This is
prosecute in three particular aggravations of their sin who did so: In the
first whereof (in this verse) is declared. That however their ignorance, v. 21.
might seem to plead for them; yet his presence and doctrine did take away all
excuses and pretexts; did prove them to hate him out of inexcusable malice;
and, did so aggravate their guilt, that it had otherwise been nothing, in
respect of what it is now. Whence learn, 1. The consideration of the great sin
of persecutors may encourage the godly, and guard their heart under suffering;
as being an evidence that God approves of them and their quarrel, when he is
so displeased with these who oppose them; and that they cannot take them to the
other side, but they must make God their party; for, this is an Argument of
consolation, taken from the aggravation of the sin of persecutors. 2. As the
presence and doctrine of Christ in the world, is the greatest of mercies
offered unto it; so it is a sad case, when that mercy is by men turned into a
plague, and matter of dittay against themselves; as here, his coming, and
speaking unto them, was an occasion to render them inexcusable, 3. Albeit all
men, even these who live without the written Word, be guilty of sin, both
original and actual; yet sins against the Gospel, and of these who hear it, are
of so deep a dye, that the^sins of the world besides are no sins, in comparison
thereof. And that because these sins are against the greatest of mercies, yea,
and the remedy of sin, and against great means; Therefore, says he, If I had
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin. 4. It is a great snare
upon sinners, that when they do greatest wrongs, they may have many cloakes of
hypocrisy, or pretexts of ignorance, necessity, infirmity, etc to hide from
themselves and others the odiousness thereof; for, so is imported, that they
had some cloak, or pretext of excuse for their sin. 5. Albeit the Lord will
graciously consider and pity his own, who plead ignorance, infirmity, or
tentation, in particular sailings, providing they be sincere, and flee to the
blood of Christ, even for purging away of these failings; Yet the doctrine of
the Gospel does take away all pretense and excuse from wicked sinners, as
holding out convincing light that they cannot pretend ignorance, and letting
them see a remedy, if they will come to Christ: for, Now, they have no cloak
for their sin. 6. It does highly agravate sin, when men persist in it after
all pretexts are taken from them; for, this made other sins to be no sin in
comparison of theirs, that now they have no cloak for their sin, and yet do
sin on.

Ver. 23. He that hates me, hates my Father also.
The second aggravation of their sin, is, that their hatred of him is joined
with hatred of the Father also. Whence learn, 1. Whatever wicked men do
pretend, yet naturally they are haters of God, in so far as they love him not
with all their heart, or do hate that he should cross their lusts* by his
commands, providence, and corrections; for, there are, says he, who hate my
Father. 2. The great opposition and hatred against God in the world, appears
chiefly in opposition against Christ, who is the great Butt of contradiction in
the world; Therefore are they conjoined here, and the one is clearing the
other. 3. Let men pretend never so much holiness or respect to, God; Yet if
they hate Christ or his Gospel, they are but haters of God; who is one in
essence with his Son; who sent him into the world as his Ambassador; and, who
is in him reconciling the world by the Word of the Gospel; Therefore, whereas
Christ's being hated by the Pharisees, who gave out themselves to be so eminent
for God, might seem to rub on himself, he removes and retorts this, saying, He
that hates me, hates my Father also.

Verse 24. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did,
they had not had sin: but now have they both seen, and hated both me and my
Father.
The third aggravation of their sin, is taken from his great miracles; That
having done so great and singular works among them, which they had seen, yet
they did both hate him and his Father: and so came to an height of sin, in
comparison of which, other sins were as nothing. While he says, he had done
works whith none other man did, to omit what is said of his promise to his
disciples, Chap. 14.12. whose works are not here to be secluded, but are a part
of his works, rendering them inexcusable. It is only to be marked, That however
many miracles were done by many before him, yet his did surp^sse them all, for
number, variety, kind, (as not being terrible as many of Moses his miracles
were) and manner of doing them, in his own name, and not as others, who
obtained the doing thereof only by prayer from God. Beside, this was sufficient
for their conviction, that no wicked man, such as they supposed him to be,
could do what he did. Doctrine 1. Christ did work such miraculous works, as
were singular, and evidently cleared what he was; for, they were works which
none other man did. 2. Christ's condescending to prove what he was, and to
confirm his doctrine, by unparalled miracles, does aggravate the sin of
despisers, far above what it would be without them; for, as he said before of
his doctrine, v. 22. So here also of his miracles confirming the same, If I had
not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin.
And this does also reach us, who have the same doctrine confirmed by the same
miracles. 3. Clearest light and conviction of Gods singular power in, or, with,
any of his, will not gain enemies; But the more God manifests of himself to,
or, in his people, they may look for the more opposition: for, they have seen
(not only with their eyes but many of them convinced in their minds) and yet
hated. 4. The clearness of conviction and light, when it does not gain men,
will contribute much to heighten their malice against what they see, and will
not embrace: Therefore is hatred subjoyned as following seeing; they have both
seen, and hates both me and my Father.

Verse 25. But this comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is
written in their law, They hated me without a cause.
The second argument of consolation, obviating the scandal of his being hated
in the world, is taken from the prediction thereof in Scripture. For this end
he cites a passage from Psalm. 35.19. which though it had its own
accomplishment in David as a type, yet it relates also unto Christ, as the
substance. For this connection of the prediction with the event compare what is
said on Chapter 12.37, 38, 39, 40. Only Hence learn, 1. The eying of God, and his
decree and providence about hard lots, is a mean to make them more easy, and
less stumbled at; for hereby we are encouraged to believe that there is more
in them, then we can see, and that nothing comes to pass without him:
Therefore does he guard against their stumbling at his lot, by pointing out a
decree and providence in it, intimate long age. 2. The comfortable sight of
Gods purpose and providence about his people, is only to be found in
Scripture, and when it is found agreeable to a Scripture way; Therefore does he
remit them to see this, in what was written in their law. 3. It is a sad case,
when men's greatest dignities contribute to aggravate their iniquity, as it will
be with the abusers thereof; Therefore, does he call the Scripture, their law
(of which title, see further on chapter 8 17. and 10.34) to point out their great
sin, whose privilege it was to enjoy the Word, Romans 9.4. and yet were
persecutors, rather accomplishing what was foretold of persecutors, then
obeying the directions thereof. 4. The Scriptures are of infallible verity, and
may be leaned to, in what they declare, promise, or foretell; for, This comes
to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that was written in their law. He
will see nothing of it unaccomplished. 5. Christ has been a very sweet subject
to the Church of the Old Testament, to think, speak, and sing of him; for, by
many citations applied to him, it is apparent he has been much in their mind.
6. Christ's sufferings are a very sweet meditation to Saints in their troubles,
as assuring them of a sympathizer, and that the sting is taken out of their
sufferings; Therefore, David in the Psalms, speaking of his own sufferings,
does so often look out of the sufferings of Christ, as this and other citations
make manifest. 7. It evidenceth the worlds malice against Christ and his
followers, that their innocence cannot shelter them from their cruelty; And it
is Christ and his peoples encouragement, that their malice and cruelty is
causeless; for, so much is imported in the Scripture cited, as it relates to
David and Christ both, They hated me without a cause. See Psalm 109.4.

Verse 26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me.

27. And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.


The third and last argument of consolation, obviating this scandal, is, That
however he had suffered injustly, and lien under many aspersions cast upon him
by the world, and much hatred of his person and doctrine from them: Yet all
these should be wiped off by the coming of the Spirit, who should testify of
him, and make his person and doctrine to be acknowledged in the world. And they
themselves should be enabled to bear witness concerning him, having been with
him from the beginning. As for the conjunction of the Spirits witnessing and
theirs, it is thus to be understood; That the Spirit being poured out on them,
should enable them to bear witness of him, and should be assisting to them
therein; partly, by his extraordinary work upon themselves, and the miraculous
works accompanying their doctrine; and, partly, by accompanying their testimony
with conviction upon many, and with his inward seal upon the hearts of
believers.

From v. 26. (omitting what has be^n said of this Comforter, and Spirit of
truth, on Chap. 14 16, 17.) Learn, 1. As the Father and Son are two distinct
persons in the Godhead, so the Holy Ghost is the third person, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, for, he is sent, and comes and testifies, which
are things proper to a person; and he proceeds from the Father, and the Son
sends him from the Father, which necessarily supposes his proceeding from
him; because this order of operation and sending by the Son from the Father,
follows upon the order of his subsistence. 2. The great doctrine of the
Gospel, is, to hold out Christ, what he is, that men do not mistake or
calumniate him, but may embrace and believe in him; for, in this, all these
witnesses must concur, to testify of me. 3. The doctrine of the Gospel,
concerning Christ, is so great a mystery, that it is very hardly believed and
received in the world; for, so much is imported in that there must be so many
witness. So 1 Timothy 3.16. it is a mystery, that he is believed on in the world.
4. Neither the hearing of Christ himself preach, nor the sight of his glorious
miracles, will work on a people, without the concurrence of the Spirit poured
out: Therefore, albeit Christ had these witnesses. v. 22, 24. yet it is needed
further, that the Spirit testify of him. 5. The Spirit of the Lord did
sufficiently vindicate Christ's glory, and confirm the truth of the Gospel, by
his miraculous operations in the primitive times; for, by this mean, was Christ
testified of, and to this does Christ remit his disciples for their
encouragement. 6. Not only did the Spirit afford sufficient matter of
confirmation and conviction, in these his extraordinary operations, but where
he pleases to carry these in on hearts, he will either make men savingly
acknowledge the excellency of a despised Christ, or, at least, convince them
thereof; for, this prediction, He shall testify of me, imports, not only that
he shall afford sufficient matter of testimony, but, that eventually also it
should be, one way or other, effectual on many.

From v. 27. Learn, 1. The Spirit bea^eth no testimony unto Christ, but with,
and according to the testimony given by the Apostles in their doctrine and
writings; for, they are conjoined here, he shall testify, and ye also shall
bear witness. See Act. 5.32. 2. It is the great work, and high honor, of
Apostles and Ministers, to commend Christ, and to bear witness of his
excellency, against all calumnies, prejudices, and misconstructions, of one or
other; for, it is their work, to bear witness 3. Such as would be faithful
witness-bearers of Christ, have need of much of the Spirit, to enable, assist,
and accompany them; Therefore, the one must go before, and with the other, he
shall testify, and ye shall bear witness. 4. It may confirm our faith in
embracing the Apostles testimony of Christ, that what they delivered concerning
him, they were eye and ear witnesses thereof, and they intended not to deceive
us; as may appear from the nature of their doctrine, so cross to our humors;
by their not seeking their own ease or interest in preaching it; by not going
into corners with their testimony, but avowing openly what was openly done,
none daring refute them; and, by their harmony among themselves; for, they are
sit witnesses, because ye have been with me from the beginning. See 1 John 1.1.
Hence it was that only such a one was chosen to supply Juda's room, Act. 1.21,
22. 5. As God admits any of us to know any thing of Christ, we are bound to
witness the same, in our places and stations: for, so much may this general
teach us, ye shall bear witness, because ye have been with me, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
IN this Chapter (wherewith this farewell Sermon is closed) Christ goes on to
let out more of his heart unto his disciples, and does resume many of the most
necessary points formerly spoken of, and sweetly enlarges the same. The
Chapter may be taken up in four principal parts: In the first whereof, Christ
further prosecutes that purpose begun in the former Chapter concerning their
sufferings: Wherein, he intimates his scope in foretelling thereof, v. 1.
expresses more particularly what sufferings they were to meet with, v. 2.
propounds grounds of encouragement under such a lot, v. 3, 4 -- and gives a
reason why he did no sooner give them this distinct warning, v. -- 4. In the
second part of the Chapter he again intimates his departure: reprehending
their abuse of this warning, v. 5, 6. And encourages them against the
bitterness of this lot, 1. By the promise of the holy Spirit, who would not
come, but on his departure, v. 7. and who, being come, would convince the
world, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. instruct them, v. 12, 13. and glorify him, by what he
should communicate of and from him, who is one and equal with the Father, v,
14, 15. 2. By a promise, that however he was shortly to be removed, yet they
should shortly after that, see him again: which is propounded, v. 16. and (by
occasion of the disciples doubtfulness, v. 17, 18.) is more fully explained, v.
19, 20, 21, 22. 3. By a promise of their increase in knowledge, and (4.) of
success in their prayers put up in his name: both which are propounded, v. 23.
and further amplified and enlarged, v. 24, 25, 26 27, 28. In the third part of
the Chapter, The disciples making a fair profession of their proficiency by his
former doctrine, v. 29, 30. their presumption herein is checked, and they
forewarned of their scattering and deserting of him, v. 31, 32. The last part
of the Chapter contains the conclusion of the whole Sermon, pointing out his
scope in all of it, v. 33.

Ver 1. THese things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended.
In the first part of the Chapter, Christ prosecutes his former doctrine
concerning his disciples sufferings, in four particulars. In the first whereof
(in this verse) he points out what he aimed at in intimating and foretelling
this their hard lot; Namely, that by this warning they might be so armed, and
so fortified by the encouragements subjoyned, as not to stumble at it, when it
came to pass. Whence learn, 1. Christ speaks nothing to his people at random,
but what he has well digested as needful for them, and which they should
accordingly ponder and esteem of; Therefore does he shortly resume what he had
spoken, as being of much importance, and seriously to be thought upon by them.
These things have I spoken unto you. 2. It is not enough to consider what
Christ says, unless also we take notice of his scope in speaking of it; which
oft-times we are ready to mistake, unless he reveal it. Therefore, whereas they
might be ready to sink in sorrow upon this intimation, he must tell them he
has another scope in it, These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should
not be offended. 3. It is no strange thing to see many things concerning
Christ's person, doctrine, way of dealing, etc. occur as stumbling blocks in
the way of professors, to make them fall and turn out of the way; And
particularly, affl^ctions and persecutions accompanying Christ and the Gospel,
are grievous stumbling blocks, and do prove a neck break to many: for, it is
here supposed, that by reason of this lot they will be ready to be offended,
or, stumbled and scandalized, to divert them from good, and tempt them to make
apostasy. 4. Afflictions and persecutions are so searching, and trying, that
even the best have need to be guarded against the scandal thereof; for, even
disciples have need to be spoken unto, that they be not offended. 5. How
strongly so ever tentations and prejudices may seem to plead for stumbling at
Christ, in a day of trial; Yet it is most necessary that professors do not
stumble; seeing there is no safe retreat without a neck-break; Therefore does
he propound it, as a necessary duty, that however matters go, they be not
offended. 6. Whatever stumbling blocks be laid in the way of professors, and
how many soever do stumble and fall upon them; Yet there are, sufficient means
to prevent their stumbling, and to convince them that there is no just cause,
why they should offend; for, here he intimates, that he had taken sufficient
course, that they should not be offended. 7. The Word of Christ (and
particularly, his intimation of the cross, and encouragements against the
same) is a sufficient guard against offenses and scandals at the cross; For,
1. His intimation warns men of their danger, so that they have themselves to
blame, if they be not armed with resolution, but still promise great things to
themselves. And it does assure believers, that he has an eternal purpose and
effectual providence about these things which he can foretell before they come
to pass. 2. He guardeth this intimation with so many encouragements and
antidotes in the Word, as it cannot prove deadly to them that improve the same.
3. The Word rightly emproven, does purge out idols and lusts, which tempt men
to stumble; does direct their way in dark cases, that they may not stumble;
and, does afford such confirmations of faith, as may support their hearts under
trouble, and such intimations of the severity of God, as may deter them from
apostasy. Therefore, says he, These things (both of intimation and
encouragement mentioned in the former Chapter) have I spoken unto you, that ye
should not be offended. Not only was this the scope of his doctrine and
intimation, but these were a sufficient mean to prevent their stumbling,
however they not emproving the same, were offended for a time, Matthew. 26.31.

Ver. 2. They shall put you out of their Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.
In the second place, he more particularly expresses what sufferings they were
to meet with, not naming every particular kind of suffering, but instancing in
two of the saddest kinds thereof, which may comprehend all the rest, as
inferior thereunto. One, of spiritual censures of the Church, of which
excommunication is the saddest: The other, of bodily sufferings, whereof a
violent death is the sharpest. Both these he warnes them of, foretelling that
they may look for excommunication from the Jews as a Church (of which see
Chap. 9.34. and 12.42.) and for violent deaths from them or others, in a
tumultuous way, or from civil authority abusing their powers. Yea, and that
they may look, in their saddest sufferings, to be laden with reproach, their
persecutors, through blind zeal thinking it acceptable service, and a sweet
smelling sacrifice to God, to put them to death. In speaking of excommunication
and death, he subjoynes death to the former, as sadder then it; Not because it
is simply sadder to dye, then to be cut off from the society and privileges of
Gods people (if their excommunication had been such) But because in this case
their excommunication was unjust, and therefore the less to be regarded. And
albeit they did suffer death also unjustly; Yet it was more sharp, in respect
that death is naturally bitter to men, and because that by death, they were cut
off from doing service to their Master, whereas they might go on in their work,
notwithstanding the sentence of excommunication. For it is further to be
considered, That (beside that this sentence was eminently unjust, in regard of
the cause, being for preaching in the name of Christ) the Jews after their
rejecting of the offer of Christ, that was first to be made unto them, Acts
13.46. did become no Church, and so had no power of Church Censures, and
consequently, any they inflicted were null in themselves. And however they had
continued a Church, yet the Apostles being general officers, they were above
the reach of any particular Church power. And consequently, however such a
sentence might now affright them to think of it when they were rude and
ignorant, and afterward it might be some trial, in so far as it did render them
odious and suspected to them who could not discern aright, and so put some stop
to the success of their Ministry: Yet the sentence being null, they might
warrantably go on; Yet not at all leading a preparative to any particular
Ministers, to contemn the sentences of a true Church; upon their own
alleagance of the corruption thereof, and of the injustice of the cause of the
sentence, as may be cleared from what is said. Doct. 1. As persecution and the
cross do usually accompany Christ and his followers; So general resolutions
for afflictions are not of any worth, unless men also lay their account, and
resolve on what in particular they may meet with; Therefore does he warn them
particularly what they may expect, that they may accordingly be resolved. 2.
Such followers of Christ as would be armed indeed, ought to resolve that they
will meet with, not one, but many trials, of all sorts; and that they may be
essayed with the utmost violence, that men's malice can invent, or their power
in Church or State can reach, either in an orderly, or tumultuous way;
Therefore does forewarne them of variety of particular trials, and that in the
greatest extremity. 3. A fixed resolution, through the power of Christ's grace,
may carry a Saint through the greatest difficulties he can meet with; for, all
these are propounded as things they may g^t digested in their resolutions. See
Act. 20.23, 24. 4. Followers of Christ may lay their account, not only to be
persecuted by Pagans, or openly profane men; but even by Church Members, yea,
and Church-guides or they who pretend to be so; for, whereas he had f^retold
them of the worlds hatred, Chap. 15.18. Now he explains it, that even they who
have power to put out of Synagogues, would be against them. 5. Albeit a Church
censure, unjustly inflicted, and by them who are no Church, o^ have no such
power, be of no weight before God, yet it is an afliction, requiring much
resolution in the sufferers, that persecutors account themselves not only a
Church, but the only true Church; yea, and are very eminent in power in it; and
do account Christ's suffering followers, not worthy to have ^^ome in it, but
that they ought to be excommunicate, for in this respect he propounds it as a
trial to be digested by them, They shall put you out of the Synagogues. 6. When
followers of Christ have tasted of lesser sufferings, they are not to sit down
there, but to lay their account that they may meet yet with sadder, and by
bearing lesser troubles, they are to prepare themselves for greater; Therefore
does he subjoyne a violent death, as a trial to be expected after they are
excommunicate. 7. The consideration of sadder sufferings which Saints have
endured, and our selves may meet with, ought to sweeten lesser trials, and make
us digest them with the greater moderation, and will do so, if we be preparing
as we ought, for these sad things; Therefore does he teach them to swallow up
the thoughts of excommunication, with apprehending what sadder things they
should make ready for. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea (or, but)
the time comes that they shall kill you. 8. As no extremity of torment can
justify men in denying Christ and his truth, nor will prevail with them who
love and cleave to him, to do so; So followers of Christ ought to prescribe no
measure of sufferings for themselves to endure, less then a violent death it
self, for Christ's cause: Therefore does he require that they have a resolution
even to be killed in this quarrel, whosoever kills you. 9. Death it self
were easy to be digested by Saints if so be the quarrel and their integrity
were clearly owned; But they must resolve to have shame and ignominy
accompanying their cross, to be buried under ignominy and calumnies, as if
they were malefactors, and their cause to be traduced, as unjust, odious,
seditious, etc. for, this is the bitter sting of their suffering, that
persecutors pretend they are for God, even in persecuting them, whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service. See Heb. 12.2. 10. Corrupt
and erroneous men may have much blind zeal in their false way, which is very
furious and violent, and the cause of much cruelty and bloodshed against true
professors; for, from this zeal does their cruelty flow, whosoever kills
you, will think that he does God service. 11. It will never justify men's
actions, that they have good intentions in them, or do follow their blinded
conscience and zeal; But they may grossly err under these pretexts, unless
what they do be warranted by the Word; for, they had all these pretenses who
killed the Apostles, who so ever kills you, will think that he does God
service.

Verse 3. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the Father, nor me.
In the third place, he subjoyneth two lenitives and encouragements to sweeten
this hard lot, and make them digest it: The first (in this verse) is taken from
the Original and cause of persecutors malice; which is their ignorance of the
Father and him; Of which chap. 15.21. Doct. 1. Persecutors of Gods children, as
taking no notice who they are, do bewray their ignorance of God and Christ* at
least in so far as they persecute, were they never so good otherwise; for, and
these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor
me. 2. Men who are, and continue ignorant of God and Christ, are in hazard to
turn persecutors, if they have the tentation; for, this being the cause of
persecution, it is no wonder the effect follow upon it. 3. Albeit it be in it
self a sad case, that so many men pretending to be for God, should yet be
ignorant of him and his Son; yet it should sweeten the sad cup of sufferers,
that they know their persecutors are so ignorant; for, the quarrel may comfort
them, they need not fear them who are not approven of God; and, if he be not
known, they should not take it ill, if they be not acknowledged for what they
are, 1 John 3.1. therefore does he comfort them, by letting them see this
ignorance of persecutors.

Verse 4. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye
may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said unto you at the
beginning, because I was with you.
The next lenitive and encouragement (in the beginning of this verse) is, that
this prediction should be useful and comfortable to remember it, when it came
to be accomplished. Whence learn, 1. As, much is heard by Gods people, whereof
they reap little profit, till affliction bring them to remember it; so, in
particular, afflictions will bring the doctrine of the cross to remembrance;
for, when the time shall come, you may remember that I told you. 2. It is most
necessary, that Gods people be forewarned, in peaceable times, of approaching
trouble; if not for any present use they get of it, yet because of what it may
produce afterward; for, These things have I told you, that when the time shall
come, ye may remember. 3. However predictions of trouble by Christ may be ready
to sadden the hearts of Saints: yet the prediction being compared with the
event, and the remembrance thereof when it comes to pass, is very comfortable:
The prediction thereof before hand, serving to acquaint us therewith before it
come, that we may be disposed for it, by a voluntary resolution, and patience:
serving also to prove him to be the Omniscient God, and that he has a
providence in our troubles, and is not an idle spectatour thereof; And the
certainty of his predictions, being verified in the matter of trials, may
assure us of the certainty of what he foretells concerning our deliverance,
Zech. 8.14, 15. Therefore is this given them as an encouragement; But these
things have I told you, that when the time shall come, you may remember that I
told you of them.

In the fourth and last place (in the end of the verse) Christ having told the
usefulness of foretelling this now, does obviate an objection, and give a
reason why he gave warning no sooner. Namely, because he was with them, and so,
as they were tender and weak, needing his bodily presence; so, he was the great
Butt of men's malice in that time, and they lurked safely under his shadow.
Albeit Christ had formerly inculcate, that disciples behoved to take up their
cross, and had told them much of their hard lots, when he gave them their
first Commission, Matthew. 10. yet he says, These things I said not to you at
the beginning. Not only because they were a while with him, even before he had
said so much to them, and before they were called to the Apostleship; nor yet
only because he gave them now, v. 2. a more distinct and particular intimation
of the kind and degrees of their suffering, then at any time formerly. But,
chiefly, what he formerly foretold at a distance, he now foretells as things
they were shortly after his removal to be essayed with. Doct. 1. Christ is a
prudent and tender guider of his followers, and knows the fit seasons of
tender usage, of general intimations of troubles at distance, of putting them
in mind to make for approaching trouble, and of laying the cross actually on;
for, so much is imported, in his not telling his disciples at the first, what
he now tell them; and they afterward met with. 2. His not telling his disciples
these things at the beginning, because he was with them, may serve to teach us,
in all ages. 1. Christ is so tender of his followers weakness, that he will
not put them to hard essays till they be confirmed, and trained, and fitted
for them; Therefore did he at first stay with them as a Tutour and Safeguard,
and trained them up with seeing sufferings endured in his person, till they
themselves were confirmed; See Matthew. 9.16, 17. so that when Christ puts Saints
to trials, they may reckon they are fitted for them, unless they have
neglected the opportunity, or do for present cast away their confidence. 2.
Christ's presence is the only sweet shelter and safeguard against troubles and
storms; for, as he gave them an easy life while he was with them, Mat. 9.15.
so, in all cases, his spiritual presence will arm sufficiently against
trouble, if not to prevent it, yet to take the sting out of it. 3. It may
encourage Saints in their sufferings, that Christ is the great object of the
persecutors malice, and they for his sake. So that if they could reach him,
they would not care for them; for, so much appears, in that while he was with
them, they had no present use for the doctrine of sufferings, as any way like
to fall on them. Doct. 3. When Christ has trained his people, till their
strength grow up, they may expect that after his sweet presence and sensible
consolations, they will meet with a storm; for, now he tells them of that as
near approaching, which he said not at the beginning. 4. Saints, after long
sparing, may expect their trials will come thick and threefold upon them, and
that their being under one trial will not be a shelter to hide them from
another; for, now he is not to be with them, which was a trial sad enough, and
they are to make for other sad sufferings, at the same time. 5. The Lord may so
order, as to send afflictions on his people, when they seem to be worse
provided for them, and yet they shall be better borne through, then if it had
been otherwise; for, it might seem very unseasonable to them, to tryst their
trials with the time when they should want his bodily presence, and yet he made
them in a better condition, when deprived of his bodily presence, and having
trials, then when enjoying it and wanting trials; as the event did prove.

Verse 5. But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me,
Whither go thou?

6. But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your
heart.


Follows, to v. 29. the second part of the chapter, wherein, Christ by
several encouragements, comforts them against his departure. Unto which, in
these verses, he premits, 1. The repeated intimation of his departure to him
that sent him. 2. A reprehension of their not making use of, but rather abusing
this intimation, in that they did so give up themselves to sorrow at the news,
as they neglected the opportunity of informing themselves concerning his
departure, and whither he went, which might have been of special use to them.

From v. 5. Learn, 1. The sensible and sweet enjoyments of Saints are not
permanent, but subject to changes while they are within time; for, I was with
you, v. 4 But now I go my way. 2. Whatever violence was used toward Christ, in
his removal out of the world; yet his departure was voluntary in his own due
time, after he had done his work, and not till then; for, says he, I go my
way, and that, now, having done my work, and not till now. 3. Christ and his
followers never want sufficient considerations to beautify and sweeten their
saddest lots, and to swallow up the bitterness thereof; Therefore does he
point out his sufferings in lovely colors, I go my way to him that sent me,
which takes in the whole passages of his removal, in his death, burial,
resurrection, ascension, and glorification; And this was a most comfortable
sight of it, both to himself, who after his toil, was to triumph with his
father, and to them who were hereby taught, that he had finished his work, and
was to be exalted for their good and behoof. 4. As men ought not to undertake
employments, unless they be sent of God to do them; so they who are entrusted
by him, must again appear before him, to give an account of their trust, and to
be rewarded by him, if they have been faithful; for, herein Christ is our
pattern, who being sent of the Father, does now go his way to him that sent
him, to give an account of his commission, and to be glorified with him. 5. It
is a sweet consideration to these who are exercised about the absence of
Christ, to know where he is, and whither he is gone, that so they may know
where to find him, what to do in his absence; and, what advantage they may
reap by his exaltation; for, he propounds this as the great and needful case to
be resolved, Whither go thou? 6. It is our great fault, that we can reckon
ou^ l^sse by Gods exercising of us, but are not careful to see the advantages
therein; for, they studied enough upon his going away, but nothing upon thi^,
wherein the advantage lay, whither go thou? 7. It is not enough to look upon
our sufferings in their present bitterness, unless we look also upon the
issue of them; for, so much does Christ teach us in his own case, that they
should not only consider that he did go, but whither he did go 8. The issue of
Christ and his followers troubles, is not easily discerned by us; nor can we
understand it, without his teaching, for, it is he who must re^^lve that
question, whither go thou? and it must be asked at him. 9. Christ is most
willing to teach his people, what may be for their instruction and comfort, and
will quarrel when they do not put him to it: for, he quarrelleth, that none of
you asks me, whither go thou? 10. It is the great sin of Saints to trifle
away their time, and, particularly, not to improve short opportunities of
enjoying Christ, and before a storm; that they may get somewhat to fit them
for it; for it is his challenge, that knowing he was to depart shortly, they
passed away that moment in sorrow and stupidity, not emproving the present
opportunity of his company, to resolve cases, which might be comfortable to
them, when he was gone. Now I go my way, and none of you asks me, whither
go thou? Where he insinuates, that it was their duty to be throng and
busy, during that moment. 11. Men may seem to be somewhat busy about
important cases, and in seeking resolution of great difficulties, who yet in
Christ's account are but really idle; for, albeit Peter did propound this very
question to him chap. 13.36. yet he challenges, none of you asks, etc
because he did not so ask as seeking the right use of the resolution, to be
confirmed in the exercise of believing, or informed concerning the effects of
his departure for that end; but only in a way of carping, and presumptuous
boasting of his own strength.

From v. 6. Learn, 1. As it is no wonder Saints be, oft-times, exercised with
sorrow under the apprehension of trouble; so it is most usual for them to keep
no moderation in their sorrow, but to let loose the reins to themselves in it:
for, sorrow filled their heart. 2. Christ approves not of immoderate sorrow in
his followers, did the cause and rise thereof seem never so lawful; as being an
imputation on him, as if he were a cruel Master, and a mean to defer others
from his service; Therefore does he challenge them for this, sorrow has filled
your heart. 3. It is the great weakness of Saints, that, in their distempers,
they turn even the good Word of God, which is spoken for their encouragement,
into matter of grief and sorrow; for, says he, because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow has filled your heart. This intimation tended to guard
their hearts, and the news contained what was useful and comfortable for them,
v. 7. and chap. 14.28. and yet they filled them with sorrow. 4. A great cause
of Saints excessive distempers under the dispensations wherewith they are
exercised, is, because they are too much addicted to sense; so that if it be
not satisfied with the outward or inward sensible comforts, which sometime
accompany Profession and Religion; or if they be deprived of what is sensible,
sweet and pleasant to them, they account all to be gone; whereas believing is
more comfortable and useful: And, because they look for great things in the
world, and therefore are confounded with disappointments of their expectations;
for, it was upon these grounds these news did so afflict them: They were
exceedingly taken up with his sensible bodily presence, and hoped to be
advanced in the world by him, when he should come to that temporal Kingdom
which they dreamed of; And therefore could not endure to hear of his removal,
which deprived them of their present enjoyments, and future carnal hopes. 5.
Immoderate and excessive sorrow is exceeding sinful, (as for other reasons, so)
because it stupifieth men, and lays them by from needful duty, to which they
are called in their difficulties; for, he reprehends their sorrow, not only in
it self, but as it caused that sinful negligence, which he re^rehends, v 4
None of you asks me, Whither go thou? But because I said these things unto
you, sorrow has filled your heart.

Verse 7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I
go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I
depart, I will send him unto you.
From this to v. 16. we have the first encouragement, whereby Christ sweetens
these sad tidings, and labors to mitigate their excessive sorrow. The
encouragement is taken from the promise of sending the Holy Spirit, to compense
the want of his bodily presence: Concerning whom, 1. He asserts in this verse,
that they could not partake of that mercy, but upon his removal. 2. In the
following purpose, he propounds the benefits to be expected by the Spirits
coming, beyond what they enjoyed by his bodily presence, that so they might be
induced to submit to his departure, as making way for the Comforters coming.

In this verse Christ asserts that, however they relished the news of his
departure; yet it was expedient, and for their behoof, that he should remove.
Which he clears, by showing the necessary connection betwixt his departure,
and the Spirits coming, who is so excellent a gift. This he instructs, both
negatively, that if he did not go away, the Spirit would not come; and
positively, that upon his removal he would send him unto them; which is not to
be understood, as if they or others could not, or had not received the Spirit
before his Ascension; But that the Spirit was not to be poured out so largely
upon the members, till after his exaltation and glorification, who is their
Head, as chap. 7, 39. Doct. 1. Christ's dealing may be very expedient and
useful, when yet it is very unsatisfactory to sense; for, what filled their
heart with sorrow, is nevertheless expedient for you, says he. So that he is
to be Judge of what is good for us, and not we our selves. 2. We are,
ordinarily, so addicted to our corrupt sense, that the usefulness of an
afflicted and humbling condition is hardly believed, even out of Christ's own
mouth; Therefore must he so strongly assert it, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient. 3. As all Christ's Word is of infallible verity, so we are to look on
it as such, that it may comfort us under afflictions, and uphold us against the
testimony and apprehension of our sense; Therefore does he lead them to lean on
this, as their support, under all tentations to the contrary, I tell you the
truth, it is expedient for you that I go away. 4. As Christ does nothing for,
or to his people, but what is useful and profitable for them; so he is so
tender, as not to withhold what is useful, because it satisfies not their
sense, but is grievous to their flesh; as knowing well, that what is profitable
will be pleasant in end, however they look on it for present; for, it was of
his mercy, that since it was expedient he went away; therefore he did go, let
them resent it for present never so sadly. 5. Christ's people and their welfare
are so dear to him, that in all that he did, and that befell him, and in all the
changes of his condition, he was still doing and minding that which was for
their profit, for, as it was because it was expedient for them, that he came to
earth, and stayed in it; so he went away again, not because he was weary of
them and their company, nor yet only because he was to be glorified himself,
but, because it is expedient for you that I go away, and be exalted into glory.
6. The Spirit of God, as he is largely communicate under the Gospel, is so
sweet an Advocate and Comforter, that his presence may compense the saddest of
losses, were it even of the bodily presence of Christ; for, here it is
insinuate, that he is such a gift, as it is a great favor to want Christ's
bodily presence, to make way for his coming; And that, because he is that
Comforter, by way of excellency, above that comfort they had by his bodily
presence, and who can comfort believers in all places at once, whereas his
bodily presence was confined to one place; Therefore, says he, If I go not
away, the Comforter will not come, but if I go, I will send him. 7. As Christ's
bodily presence is not the most powerful and refreshing way of comfort, however
it was needful in its time, and refreshful in its measure; so believers are not
capable of the full consolations of the Spirit, but by the removal of his
bodily presence out of the world; for, not only did he, by his death and going
out of the world, merit it, and he must be glorified, and enter into his
Kingdom, before his members participate so largely of his fullness; but they
were so dull while he was with them, that they could not be capable of these
comforts, till they were weaned from a bodily presence, and exercised with
trouble; Therefore, says he, If I go not away, the Comforter will not come. So
that they who dote still on a corporal presence of Christ, do thereby stop the
way of the comforts of a spiritual presence, 8. Christ, by sending of the
Spirit after his Ascension, does not only prove himself true God, the second
Person of the blessed Trinity; from whom (as from the Father) the Holy Ghost
proceeds and is sent; But also, That as Mediator, justice is satisfied by
his death; That he, as the Head of believers, is glorified, chap. 7.39. and
entered in possession of his dignity. Acts 2.33, and, That being thus exalted,
he is still mindful of his brethren. So much is imported in this, If I depart,
I will send him unto you. 9. Christ being now exalted, there is free access to
partake of the Spirit, by all these who do employ him for that effect; for,
being departed, he will send him to them who ask him.

Verse 8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.
The benefits to be reaped by the Spirits coming, (which would richly compense
his departure) are three; The first relates to the world, whom the Spirit will
convince of three great points, sin, righteousness, and judgment; which being
here named only, are distinctly insisted upon in the three following verses,
and the grounds upon which they shall be convinced of every one of them, and
the evidences thereof, produced.

For clearing of this purpose a little, Consider, First, as for the Act here
ascribed to the Spirit, of reproving, or rather, convincing, I take it to
import, not only his offering and affording sufficient means, which might
convince men, but also the success of these means, and his effectual and
actual convincing of them thereby; And that not only by illuminating them with
knowledge, which may be without conviction; nor yet by bearing in challenges
and reproves only, for there may be challenges and reproves without through
conviction; But further, by arguing them out of their principles and grounds to
a contrary opinion, (as the word imports) and bearing in of truth so, as they
are put to silence, and cannot in reason gainsay it.

Secondly, as for the object of this work of the Spirit, by the world, who
shall be convinced, I understand men in the world; and particularly, men in the
state of nature, and yet unconverted, whether they be elect or reprobate, and
that not a few, but many of them: All which are frequentlie expressed in
Scripture by the name of the world.

Thirdly, as for the nature, scope and tendencie of this work of conviction,
what it shall produce or tend to, there is some difficulty in determining
thereof; for some, however they speak of this conviction of the world in
general, as a common work, yet in explication of the particulars, whereof they
are to be convinced, they restrict it to the world of the Elect, whom the
Spirit convinces of these things in order unto, and in working of their
Conversion, as shall be after cleared. Others again, do restrict all of it to
the reprobates, who get no more but conviction, or, at least, do understand it
of a work of conviction of these particulars, common to both Elect and
reprobates, whereby the Spirit bears witness unto Christ, and the truth of
Christian Religion among men; whether the Lord carry them on a farther length,
or let the work sist only there. I do conceive it most suitable to understand
it as comprehending both of these, both what is common to elect and reprobates,
and what the Spirit further works upon the elect in the work of their
Conversion. And for clearing hereof, and the scope of the whole purpose. I
shall speak a little to a few things. 1. It would be considered, that however
the purpose here mentioned, do relate to what the Spirit will work upon the
world; yet Christ's scope in speaking of it, is to encourage his disciples, as
appears from v. 7. It is expedient for you that I go away, for I will send the
Comforter to you, and be shall convince the world. They were much sadned with
the apprehension of his removal, and that in his absence they were to be
engaged in a difficult service of the Ministry, and of standing for him,
wherein they might probably expect much hazard and difficulty, and little
success; they being but weak men; their Master, for whom they stood, but
despised, as a seducer and mock King, even among the Jews; their message very
unpleasant, as being so contrary to flesh and blood, and the principles
universally received, and carnal interests of men: and consequently, the
opposition to be made unto them, very strong, violent and universal. Now to
guard against all these, Christ gives this encouragement (among others) that
they should receive the Spirit, by whom this raging world should be convinced,
and so their opposition taken off, or blunted and made easy. 2. This being
Christ's scope in this encouragement, it is most safe to extend this promised
conviction to all the effects of their Ministry, and of the Spirits work
accompanying the same, both on the Elect and Reprobates; And, that we so take
in his common work upon them, who are reprobates, and continue still in the
state of nature, notwithstanding that work; as we seclude not his saving work
in gathering and drawing in the Elect; for, as it was to be a comfort to them,
to see the Spirit so owning them, as even the world should be convinced: so it
would be much more comfortable to them, when the Spirit should make that
conviction saving on any, and so not only take off, or blunt their opposition,
but make them real friends, 3. It would be considered, (for clearing the
purpose) what were the means of working this conviction, or the operations of
the Spirit in bringing about the same, for the encouragement of the disciples.
These were many, without, and extrinsecal unto the persons convinced, if taken
one by one; as namely, the extraordinary endowments conferred in large measure
upon the Apostles, whereby they, who were known to be unlearned mean men, were
enabled to speak with many tongues, and to preach learnedly, powerfully and
boldly; Their daily preachings (being thus endowed) of the sweet doctrine of
the Gospel; and the Law in subordination thereunto; and that notwithstanding
all their sufferings and ill usage, which they went through with invincible
courage and fortitude; The many miracles and cures wrought by their hands; The
casting out of devils; The gifts of the Spirit conferred by the laying on of
their hands; The silencing of Satan's oracles through the world, by the sound of
their Ministry; and, The glorious effects of their doctrine, where it was
received, by destroying the kingdom and power of Satan, and bringing in of
light, holiness, and consolation. Unto these (and diverse others) without them,
several operations are to be added, which were wrought in, or upon, the persons
convinced; As namely, extraordinary cures wrought upon some of themselves, both
Elect and reprobate; Common and clear illumination, and temporary gifts,
conferred upon both of them, and some of them in an extraordinary measure;
Strong impressions to take notice of these operations of the Spirit without
them; Together with saving operations accompanying all these upon the hearts of
the Elect. 5. The effects of these means and operations, or the conviction it
self wrought thereby, to the encouragement of the Apostles, come next to be
considered. And as these means were extraordinary, so the effects were to be
answerable. For if we look upon the History of the Acts, which contains a
signal accomplishment of this prediction, we will find strange effects
following upon the pouring out of the Spirit, even in these who were not
converted, at least not as yet; Some were pricked at the heart, who had not yet
attained to evangelical repentance, Acts 2.37. with 38. Some, in the gall of
bitterness, did desire to share with the Apostles in their great privileges,
Acts 8.18, 19. Some upon their thrones were almost persuaded to be Christians,
by a prisoner in a chain, Acts 26.28. some had strange changes, illuminations,
and fl^shes, for a time, who yet were not converted, as is to be supposed of
many, who were drawn in by the Apostles preaching, and of others who afterward
did, and daily do embrace the Gospel; Some were forced to magnify them, who
did not join with them, Acts 5.13. Some would have worshipped them, who were
yet Pagans, Acts 14.10, 11. Some were astonished with what was done by the
Apostles, Acts 8.14. and with their fortitude and abilities, Acts 4 13. and
were non plussed in their resolutions what to do with them, when they were in
their power, Acts 4.16, 17. yea, and so bridled, that they were afraid to
meddle with them, Acts 5, 34, 35. unto all which, and many more wounderful
effects of these operations, may be added, That the Elect did not only share in
these common operations, but were in due time, (by these means, and
particularly by the Word) savingly convinced and brought to Christ and fixed
upon him. All which conviction though it be attributed to the world, and was
indeed very general in process of time; Yet it is to be understood with this
necessary limitation that some, yea many, remained still in their stupidity,
and were not effectually convinced for all this; Yea, some who were convinced,
were yet not bridled, but given up to contradict, and blaspheme against the
holy Ghost, for the trial and exercise of the Apostles, and other professors,
and that the Spirit might magnify his power in them, and convince the world,
by their invincible courage and patience, and Gods preserving of them many
times, and making the work prosper in their hands in the midst of their
sufferings, more then if these malicious men had never opposed them.

Fourthly, as for the particulars whereof they are to be convinced, sin
righteousness, and judgment, they come to be more distinctly spoken to in the
following verses, where the grounds of this conviction are spoken of. Here, in
general, it suffices us to know, 1. If we ^ook upon this work of conviction,
as it is common to elect and reprobate, and as the Spirits testimony about them
relates to Christ and the Christian Religion; These were the points of
contraversie betwixt the Apostles in preaching of the Gospel, and the world;
For, Christ being the subject of the Gospel, the great opposition related unto
him, whether he was the Son of God and true Messiah, and therefore, whether
they were guilty of great sin who did not believe him, and receive his
testimony, and continued still in a state of sin so long as they embraced not
him: Whether he was righteous in himself, and the only giver of righteousness
to sinners, or a seducer and Samaritan, and one without whom they were
righteous, as the world alleged: And, whether he was an exalted Prince, above
Satan, and all powers and idols, able to absolve his friends and subjects, and
condemn his enemies; or only a mockery and a base person, as he was traduced
to be. All which he promises shall be determined to their advantage. 2. If we
look on this, a^ it is proper to the Elect, in the work of their conversion,
the words contain a sweet method of bringing about this work; first, to
convince them of sin, by letting them see the hazard of their natural
condition, through continuance in unbelief. Next, to convince them of
righteousness to be had in Christ only, as a remedy to this condition. And
then to convince them of judgment and dominion, and of deliverance from
spiritual slavery, and the pulling down of Satan's kingdom, by being in him. Of
all which, albeit the reprobate may get a common conviction, as it is hinted in
the former consideration; yet these things are further, and more effectually
and savingly, carried on in the hearts of the Elect, to their conversion and
settling upon Christ.

This purpose, thus explained by parts, may be taken up in this brief sum;
That whereas the Apostles after Christ's departure, were to be engaged in hard
service, with much disadvantage and difficulty; Christ comforts them, by
showing that he would pour such a measure of the Spirit upon them, and by his
Spirit so accompany them in their Ministry, as should make it successeful in
the world, to the conviction even of enemies and reprobates, and to the further
gaining upon others; So that the work should go on, his Kingdom be established
in the world, and his glory shine, and they be comforted and carried through,
notwithstanding all the opposition they should meet with.

From the words, so cleared, Learn, 1. The service of the Ministers of Christ,
in carrying through the work of the Gospel, is not only difficult, but
impossible, unless they be singularly assisted by Christ therein; for, so is
here imported, that they need the Spirit for carrying on of this work. 2. The
Spirit of Christ accompanying weak means and instruments, can bring about great
things, to the advancement of his Kingdom in the world, without any visible
force, and with mere spiritual weapons, in despite of all opposition can be
made thereunto; for, so is here promised, that the Spirit, in them and with
them, shall effectuate this work, how weak so ever they were. 3. It is the
great consolation of Christ's faithful servants and followers, to enjoy his
presence and blessing upon their calling and employment, and particularly, of
faithful Ministers, to have his Kingdom prosper, and men wrought upon by their
Ministry; for, this is the Apostles encouragement, and in this the Spirit is a
Comforter to them, that he shall convince the world, to make their labors
successeful. 4. The men of the world are very corrupt and ill principled in
reference to the doctrine of the Gospel; and have very many mountains standing
in the way thereof; for, they need to be convinced of all these points here
mentioned, and have opinions and principles opposite thereunto to be rooted
out, as the Word imports. 5. These corrupt principles of the world are not
easy to be rooted out, but will require great light and strong conviction,
before they be put from them; for, they must be convinced, and argued out of
them to the contrary opinion, before they quit them. 6. For conviction of the
world, it will not be sufficient that never so sharp reproves be given them,
nor yet only that they have clear light and evidence of what they are to assent
unto; unless also the Spirit come to bear in these things upon them, and
effectually convince thereof; for, it is he who must convince the world, not
only by sufficient external means and operations without them, but by inward
working, making that effectual. 7. The Spirit of the Lord is an effectual
convincer, where he pleases to work, where clear illumination and strong
reasoning will not avail, he can irresistibly convince and batter down strong
holds; And, where he will not convert, yet he can so put to silence and bridle
opposition, that it shall be ineffectual: for he shall convince the world,
says he. 8. As Christ's saving work on his people must begin with, and be
carried on by the convictions of the Spirit; So they may get convictions and
that by the Spirit, who never yet more, and are never converted: for, on the
one hand, conviction is so far from saving grace, that they who have it in a
deep measure, have yet need not only of faith, but also of repentance, Acts
1.37, 38. and on the other hand, it concerns God in his honor, sometime, to
go this far on with the world, for the promoving of his Kingdom, and that they
may not go on with a high hand; Therefore it is promised, that he shall
convince even the world. So that they who were never convinced, are yet in a
worse condition, and do not know how soon the Lord may kindle that sire in
their bosom, though they sleep secure for the present. And men would not rest
upon convictions, when the Lord lets them see sin, and yet never removes it,
righteousness, and yet never conferreth it, and judgment of authority, to
absolve the righteous and condemn the wicked, and yet never gives them to
flee to Christ to obtain the one, or to be freed from the other. 9. The Spirits
manifestations and operations in the primitive days of the Gospel, do
abundantly assert the truth of Christian Religion, and refute all the corrupt
principles of men concerning Christ; So that all who then saw or felt them, or
since do hear thereof, by the sound of the Gospel (still accompanied with the
ordinary operations of the Spirit where it is received) are without excuse if
they continue ignorant of, or averse and opposite unto the true Religion, and
Christ offered in the Gospel; for, by these means the Spirit has convinced the
world, of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment, as the great points in
contraversie concerning Christ and the Christian Religion, as has been
cleared. So that however all in all ages be not actually convinced, yet (beside
that generally it is so, in some measure, where the Gospel comes) it is a
standing testimony leaving all these without excuse who hear the Gospel, and
yet continue in Atheism, Infidelity, Scepticisme and Irriligion. And the
effectual conviction of others leaves them yet more without excuse. 10. As
there are many steps and degrees of operation in converting souls to Christ: So
the Spirit of the Lord, where he undertaketh this work in his own, will
effectually carry them through them all, in their due order; for, so much also
does this work of convincing of sin, righteousness, etc as it is proper to
the Elect, import, That he will not only give them a light touch, and in
effectual impression of these things which reprobates may have, but will
effectually carry them from step to step till they be convinced of the truth of
these things, and of their need of the two last, and made to close therewith to
their comfort. And herein the order of the Spirit is to be observed, so that if
we miss the comfortable conviction of righteousness, we would see if we do not
stop it by want of conviction of sin, and if we want comfortable conviction
of freedom from slavery and ab^olution through Christ, we may find it
obstructed, by our not closing with righteousness, when we are convinced of sin.

Ver. 9. Of sin, because they believe not on me.
The particulars generally named in the former verse, are now more particularly
insisted on, and cleared from the grounds upon which the world shall be
convinced of them. And first, for sin, they shall be convinced thereof, because
they believe not in him; Which, being taken more generally in reference to the
conviction of the world, both Elect and reprobate, holds out, That the
operations of the Spirit, communicate by and from Christ now ascended, shall
prove him to be the Son of God, the great Prophet, and true Messiah, and so
shall convince them of their great sin in rejecting, and not believing him and
his testimony. Being taken more particularly in reference to the Elect, it
holds out, That the Spirit shall begin at convincing them of sin, and shall
withal convince, that the wretchedness and desperateness of their condition
lies not so much in their other sins, as in their unbelief, and not closing
with Christ. Whereof the world also may get a taste, in being convinced of their
miserable condition by reason of sin, since they do not embrace him the remedy,
though they do never amend it, whereas the E^^^t are convinced, till they make
use of the remedy. Whence learn, 1. The world without Christ is lying in a
miserable condition and state of sin; for, so is here imported. 2. The world is
so blind and stubborn in their course of sinning, that neither natural light,
nor judgments and afflictions, yea, nor the doctrine of the Word, without the
assistance of the Spirit will discover sin, nor let them see the sinfulness
thereof; And that because men are blind by nature, that they see not their own
case; and they have so many subter-fuges, of fathering their sins on others,
(as Adam, Evah, and Aaron did, Genesis 3.12, 13. Exodus 32.22, 23, 24.) of pretense
of custom, of giving fair names to foul sins, etc. that they see not the
sinfulness of what they acknowledge: Therefore it must be the Spirit who
convinces of sin. So that when men have the Word, it must be made searching
by the Spirit of God, before it discover them to themselves, Romans 7.9, 13, 14.
Yea, and loving kindness, must be applied and believed, before sin be
abominable as it ought, Ezra 9.13, 14. 3. The Spirit is able to convince men,
who otherwise will not be convinced of sin, and does so to many whom he will
never convert; for, he shall convince the world of sin. 4. Conviction of sin
is the first work that the Spirit works upon a soul, which he is to draw in to
himself; for, this conviction in reference to the Elect, begins here. 5
Unbelief is the great sin, whereof men are to be convinced, and do need the
Spirit for that end. This holds true in diverse respects. 1. If we look on this
sin in it self, it is the great sin against the Gospel, and their great guilt
who opposed and rejected him; A sin greater then any against the Law, and very
injurious to Christ, and a sin, that (however men by natures light may see
other sins,) we will never see the ill of it, but by the Spirit. 2. If we look
on it in reference to other sins, it is the sin that defiles all our actions,
how morally good soever they be; the sin that binds all our other sins upon us,
seeing it is only by faith in Christ we draw virtue for subduing thereof; and,
the sin which renders all our other sins incurable and unpardonable, as being a
sin against the remedy, and holding us back from it; Therefore is this
conviction of sin thus instructed, because they believe not on me, Not only as
it is a prime and great sin in it self, but as it has influence on other
sins, and serves to convince men of the woeful ill of their sin^ul condition,
so long as they continue to reject the remedy. Doct. 6. It is not enough men
see a g^neral view of their sinful state, unless they take it up distinctly,
and the root and cause thereof; without which ^hey will never know how to set
about the cure of it: Therefore, in convincing of sin, he convinces of
unbelief as the root from whence the misery, or, at least, the desperateness
of that condition, sloweth. 7. All conviction of sin is ineffectual, unless
men also see their unbelief, and the sinfulness thereof, to be convinced of
it, and humbled for it; for, so much does this working of the Spirit import, he
convinces of sin, because they believe not on me. 8. Faith in Jesus Christ is
a duty, so spiritual, and above the reach of nature, and a duty which souls
convinced of sin are so averse from, that the neglect hereof, and the sin of
unbelief, will not be seen without the working of the Spirit; for, this is a
conviction of sin, requiring the operation of the Spirit, that men see
themselves guilty of sin, because they believe not on him. 9. When
selfe-condemned sinners, are led to find faith, and the necessity thereof,
pressed upon them, and are made to see the ill of unbelief* and to endeavor to
be rid of it, and to essay faith; They ought not to look on this as a
tentation, or presumption in them, but as the very work of the spirit of God:
for, he is sent forth for this end, to convince men of sin, because they
believe not on me.

Verse 10. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.
The next thing whereof the Spirit convinces the world, is righteousness, not
their own, but Christ's; And that both the righteousness of his person, and his
righteousness as Mediator, imputed to his people to their Justification. Both
these are strongly grounded and concluded from this, that he goes to the
Father, and continues with him, so that even his disciples see him no more
after his a^cension. For, 1. When the Spirit, sent from Christ, by his
extraordinary operations does make it manifest that Christ remained not dead,
but rose again, and ascends and lives with the Father in glory and Majesty,
(as these gifts and operations sent down by him do evidence,) it will
necessarily follow, that he was not a seducer and Samaritan, but that righteous
One, Who, however he was rejected of men, yet, is approven of God. 2. As Christ
laid down his life to purchase righteousness for us, which otherwise was
unattainable by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.21. so by his resurrection and
ascension, and pouring out of the Spirit in large measure, he makes it evident,
that he is accepted by the Father in our name, and lives for ever to apply his
righteousness unto us, Romans 4.25. So the scope of this is, That however the
world did traduce Christ, and, leaning to their own righteousness, did reject
him and his righteousness. Yet the Spirits coming, as a fruit of his ascension,
shall convince them that he was just and righteous, and that righteousness is
to be had only in and through him; And further, this same Spirit, making use of
these means, and particularly of the Word, shall convince selfe-condemned
sinners, that they ought, and may rely on him for righteousness. Whence
learn, 1. Even Christ himself was not free from the horrid imputations of the
foul mouths of traducers, more then his followers; for, his righteousness was
in debate among them. 2. Whatever be the imputations c^st upon Christ and his
followers, in their sufferings; yet God will make the issue thereof at last
clear them; for, what ever thoughts they had of him while suffering, or what
ever pretense they might seem to have, while he was on earth subject to our
sinlesse infi^mities, yet his going to his Father after that did serve
sufficiently to convince them. 3. Christ's exaltation with the Father, and the
evidences thereof communicate to the Church by the Spirit, do abundantly
proclaim him to be that holy and righteous One, of whom it is blasphemy to
harbor any prejudice and misconstruction; for, he shall convince the world of
righteousness, because I go to my Father. 4. It is not sufficient that men be
convinced of sin, unless they also be driven to seek righteousness to cover the
same; for, this conviction of righteousness must follow upon the former, of
conviction of sin. And without this, neither a sight of sin, nor
acknowledgement of Christ as righteous in his own person, will avail. 5. It is
a point which the Spirit has put beyond all contraversie, that the
righteousness of fallen man is only in and through Christ; so that all who
seek another way of righteousness, do go against a clear conviction; for, he
shall convince the world of righteousness. 6. Imputed righteousness is a
point whereof the Spirit only can convince men, and make them submit to it. Men
are not only naturally ignorant thereof, as not being according to the Covenant
of works, Romans 3.21. but their proud hearts are averse from such a way of it,
Romans 10.13. and selfe-condemned sinners, finding nothing in themselves, are
affraied to lean to that which is without them, till the Spirit bear it in upon
them, and cause them to close with it: Therefore they must be convinced of the
righteousness, and that by the Spirit. 7. Christ's acceptance with the Father
after his suffering, evidenced by the pouring out of the Spirit, does evidence
his righteousness to be so perfect and acceptable to the Father, and himself
in such a capacity to apply his righteousness, and to own them who flee unto
him; That selfe-condemned sinners may with confidence rest under the shadow of
his righteousness: for, so much is imported, in that he will convince of
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and there live for ever to make
intercession. See Romans 8.33, 34. 8. Such as would have the comfortable use of
Christ's righteousness, must not lean to sense or sight, but betake themselves
to faith; for so much may be imported in that, ye see me no more, which not
only confirms his going unto, and continuing with the Father, because they see
him no more, but find rich gifts come from him; but shows, that in
participation of his righteousness, they must not expect to have sense
satisfied with a bodily sight of him. He says, ye see me no more, to wit,
after his ascension to the Father, till the day of judgment, and though they
saw him after his resurrection, yet not in his former state, and but in a
transient way.

Ver. 11. Of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged.
The last thing whereof the Spirit convinces the world, is, judgment, in the
understanding whereof, we will be much helped by what is said on Chap. 12. 31.
For judgment in Scripture, in relation to the object, on things about which it
is employed, does oft-times signify, the exercise of power and authority to
dispose of them, and put and keep them in order. And in relation to the
subject, and person in whom it is, it signifies, the having of authority. So
to order these things, Here the interpretation may be fetched from Acts 2.36.
that Jesus in his exaltation is made both Lord and Christ, and here the Spirit
convinces the world that he is both; That he is Christ, by convincing them of
his righteousness, v. 10. and, That he is Lord, by convincing them of
judgment, and that all power and judgment is committed to him; which is
evidenced and proven by his judging Satan the prince of the world, over whom he
triumphed in the Cross, Col. 2.15. and made his purchase and conquest evident
by his casting out of Satan, from these possessed by him, his silencing Satan's
Oracles in the world, and casting him out of these who receive the Gospel, and
are converted, destroying the Kingdom of wickedness and darkness, and
translating them into his own Kingdom, and into a state of holiness and
light. This the general scope of this purpose, that the world shall be
convinced of Christ's dominion, by his seen power over Satan, under which (among
many other things) is to be comprehended, a judgment of condemnation of all
the wicked in Satan their Prince and head; and a judgment of absolution, and
vindication into liberty and freedom from Satan's slavery, in favors of these
who flee to him, and in whom the work and Kingdom of Satan is destroyed. Doct.
1. Satan is a Prince, who, by his tyrannical usurpation, and by a voluntary
consent of deluded souls, does get and exercise a tyrannical government over
the children of men, so long as they are without Christ; for, he is the Prince
of this world 2. Christ by his death did condemn and overcome Satan, and has
made his conquest evident to the conviction of men, by the effects and
operations of his Spirit, in doctrine condemning Satan and his work in men,
casting him out miraculously, and destroying his work in believers; for, he
supposes it as a clear and undeniably truth, that the Prince of this world is
judged. 3. By this judging of Satan, the Spirit has made it undeniably
evident, that Christ has all authority and power to preserve his Church,
triumph over his enemies, and order all the confusions that Satan and sin have
occasioned in the world; for, whatever were their thoughts of Christ, yet when
it shall be evident that Christ took Satan, the great disturber, to task, and
foiled him, it cannot in reason be denied, but he is Sovereign Judge and Lord,
having all power in his hand, and all his adversaries under his feet: He shall
convince the world of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged. 4.
By the power of Christ, evidenced in condemning and triumphing over Satan, it
is made apparent to all the wicked, that their condemnation is already passed,
in the judgment and condemnation of Satan their head and Prince, and to all
the godly who flee to Christ, that they are abso^ved and freed from the tyranny
and Kingdom of Satan, in Christ the conqueror; for, thus this ju^gement may
be branche^ out on both hands, as provi^g the condemnation of the wicked, and
absolution of the be^eever, because the Prince of this world is judged. 5 Such
as are savingly convinced of Christ's righteousness, ought also to be convinced
of their absolution and deliverance from Satan thereby, and to feel the
effects of Christ's dominion, in his daily subduing of Satan within them, and it
will be their comfort to fi^de this. For, so much is imported in reference ^o
the Elect, as this is subjoyned to the former particulars. That not only,
having fled to Christ for righteousness, who has given visible evidences of
his dominion over Satan; they may be comforted in their deliverance from such a
Tyrant. But that, having found righteousness in Christ to cover their guilt,
v. 10. the next wo^k of the Spirit will be, to convince them of Christ's
authority to rule and that not so much by any outward, or common effects
without them, as by his destroying of S^tan and his Kingdom within them. For
upon the justification of believers, the Spirit evidenceth Christ's getting a
throne in their heart, to vindicate them from the slavery of corruption, by
casting down Satan from his dominion and power over them, and convinces them
of judgment, and freedom from slavery thereby, because the Prince of this
world is judged. And where conviction in this particular is not, it brings
conviction of righteousness in question.

Verse 12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now:

13. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth: For he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak, and he will show you things to come.


Hitherto Christ has insisted upon the first benefit to be expected by the
coming of the Spirit, for their encouragement; The second follows, in these
verses, relating more immediately to the Apostles themselves; wherein is
promised, That however, for present, they were not capable of the many things
he had to say unto them, v. 12. yet the Spirit should, by his coming, supply
that defect: And, 1. Should guide them into all truth, as being the Spirit of
truth, and speaking what is common to him with the Father and Son. 2 Should
show them things to come, by being a Spirit of prophecy to them, as
extraordinarily gifted men, and by revealing the great things abiding them and
others, as beelevers, v. 13. how this purpose, v. 12. compared with v. 13.
ought to be understood, is already cleared on chap. 14. 25, 26. compare also
chap. 15. 15. In sum it imports, That whereas Christ had spoken many things
summarily, which he was ready to enlarge, but that their incapacity hindered
him; he here undertaketh that the Spirit should make up this, by enlightening
their understanding to take up what he had said, and by explaining and
enlarging the same more distinctly. They who (to savor unwritten traditions,)
do assert from this, that the Spirit did teach somewhat, which Christ had not
taught them, do nothing at all promove their own cause; for whatever was taught
them by Christ himself, or by the Spirit afterward, was by them faithfully
communicated to the Church, and committed to writing. And for these things
which men urge as unwritten traditions, beside the Sripture, they are such
toys as Christ needed not say, ye cannot bear them, seeing they might easily
be born by them, who have less then the Apostles then had, and are more common
and trivial then many things he had taught them. From v. 12. Learn, 1. Many are
the precious truths of the Gospel, to be learned by believers, and which are
needful and comfortable for them to know; for, there are many things to say. 2.
Christ's heart is so large, and so tender toward his followers, that he has
never said enough when he has said most, for their instruction and
encouragement: for, after all the former sweet doctrine, I have yet many things
to say unto you, says he. 3. Our hearing and learning much of divine truth,
ought to tend, mainly to let us know that there is more to be learned, that so
we may be humbled in what we know, and our desires may be kindled after the
knowledge of more; Therefore also does he break off the former sweet
instructions with this, I have yet many things to say unto you. 4. As men by
nature are incapable of divine truths, till they be taught them by the Spirit;
so even they who have received the Spirit, in some measure, may yet remain very
incapable, so long as they want a further measure of the Spirit, and do
continue under weakness and errors of mind prepossessing them, or do give up
themselves to excessive sorrow; for, so it was even with the disciples,
notwithstanding the measure of the Spirit they had received. They continued
still so carnal and weak, were so prepossessed with errors concerning Christ's
Kingdom, and so taken up with sorrow, v. 6. that he must say, ye cannot bear
these many things now. 5. Men are never sufficiently capable of divine truths,
unless their understandings do comprehend them, and their hearts and
affections do digest them, as not to be stumbled or quarrelled at, that so they
may reap the fruit of them; for so much does the expression, ye cannot bear
them, import. It may allude to burden-bearers, who do shrink under too heavy
burdens, as their weak understandings and preoccupied affections were ready to
do under these high and spiritual truths; or, to weak stomachs which cast up
the strong meat they cannot digest. 6. The most choice of outward means and
advantages will not profit men, nor cause them to make progress, unless the
Spirit concur therewith; for, they had even Christ to teach them, and yet
they cannot bear his words to profit thereby. 7. Our own infirmity, dullness
and incapacity, do obstruct our mercies, and hinder the revelation of many
precious truths unto us; for, Christ says, not these many things, because they
cannot bear them. 8. As Christ takes particular notice of the state of his
disciples; so he tenderly deals with them according to their strength, and
condescends to their weakness and incapacity; for, he spares at this time to
let out these things unto them, because they cannot bear them now. See Mark
4.33.

From v. 13. Learn, 1. There are no infirmities of Saints, wherein they do not
approve themselves, for which Christ has not a remedy; nor do they lose any
opportunity which he cannot make up; Therefore, whereas they lost many
advantages they might have reaped in his company, by their own greatness, he
subjoyns this as a comfort, that it should be made up by the Spirits coming. 2.
It is by the Spirit only, that men, who do not profit under outward means, will
be enabled to profit; who when he comes, does reveal truths clearly, and bear
them in with life and power upon the heart, and does renew men's spirits to
embrace and submit unto them; for, it is by this means that the disciples
losses are made up, Howbeit, when the Spirit is come, he will guide you. 3. As
it is the duty of believers, to know all revealed truths, necessary for them in
order to salvation, or in their places and stations: so they will need the
Spirits teaching and guiding, for taking up all and every divine truth, even
the least and smallest point of it; for, it is needful, he guide into all
truth. 4. The doctrine revealed by the Spirit unto the Apostle, contains all
necessary truths, and so is a most perfect rule of faith and manners: for, it
is promised unto them, that he will guide you into all truth. 5. It does set
forth both the truth and divine authority of the doctrine of the Apostles, that
it is taught by the Spirit, who is a Spirit of truth, and that the doctrine is
not his only, but communicate by him from the Father and Son also; Therefore is
he here called the Spirit of truth. And it is given as a reason why he will
guide into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself only, but whatsoever he
shall hear (with and from the Father and the Son,) that shall he speak. 6. It
contributes to the encouragement of believers, that the Spirit of God, who
takes charge of them, knows things to come, and so can reveal them that they
may be encouraged or warned, and has a sovereign providence over and about
them; for, this his knowledge is imported, in that he will show things to come.
7. The Spirit of Christ did communicate unto the Apostles, and by them unto the
Church, such infallible predictions of things to come, as were needful to be
known, and are useful to the Church in all ages; for, he will show you things
to come, says he. 8. The Spirit of Christ by the doctrine of the Apostles did
bring life and immortality, and the future glory of believers to light, 2 Timothy
1.10. And where he comes, does so clearly and fully persuade believers
thereof, as may bear them out under all present pressures and discouragements:
Thus also does show things to come, by their doctrine, and to them and all
succeeding believers.

Verse 14. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you.
The third benefit to be expected by the Spirits coming, (and an enlargement of
the former) is, that he shall glorify Christ, by communicating and showing
unto them, what he receives of him. Which is to be understood, not only of that
truth that he communicates from Christ unto them, of which, v. 13. but also of
all these extraordinary gifts, and that power to work miracles; of that
efficacy, accompanying and bearing in the doctrine of Christ; of his bringing
all that to a glorious effect which Christ had done for his people in his state
of humiliation, which otherwise seemed very ignominious; and, of his
communicating the influences of the fullness of Christ in heaven to believers
on earth. By all which, communicate from Christ, he shall make it evident that
Christ is glorious, and to be acknowledged as such by his people. Whence learn,
1. It is not only the particular satisfaction of believers, but Christ's honor
also, that they should look to in their spiritual enjoyments; so that it is not
enough they be refreshed and satisfied, unless he also appear glorious, and
become great in their hearts thereby; for, this tends to their encouragement,
that by what they shall receive from the Spirit, he shall glorify me, says
Christ. 2. Albeit Christ's person, doctrine, actions and sufferings, in the
state of his humiliation, were clouded under obscurity and ignominy; yet as he
is still glorious in himself, so the Spirit after his Ascension did, and in all
ages does proclaim his glory and excellency, in his person, doctrine, and
operations, to the conviction and satisfaction of believers; for, he shall
glorify me. 3. It is the work of the Spirit, where he is communicate, not to
extol or teach men to cry up themselves who do receive him, nor yet to glorify
and exalt any other thing in the Church but Christ alone; exalting his person,
making his Word singularly effectual, pointing out his ignominious sufferings,
as the only mean of life, and himself, as the storehouse of his people; for the
true Spirit shall glorify me, says Christ. 4. As all the fullness communicate
by the Spirit to the Church, in the primitive times and after-ages, is
communicate from Christ, (for, it is mine, says he, he shall show unto you;)
so the way to have Christ high in our hearts, is to have the Spirit keeping
intercourse betwixt him and us, and conveighing daily of his fullness, and the
warm thoughts of his heart and good will to us; for, this is the Spirits
employment, and by this he glorifieth Christ; for, he shall receive of mine,
and show it unto you.

Verse 15. All things that the Father has are mine: therefore said I, That he
shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you.
Lest by the former expression, of the Spirits receiving and communicating of
what is Christ's, the Father should seem to be secluded from this great work;
Therefore he subjoyns for explication, that by reason of the unity of essence,
all things are so the Fathers, as they are his also, and therefore he might
call these things his which the Spirit should show, as being communicate by the
Spirit, from the Father and him. Whence learn, 1. The way to understand aright
what Christ says, is, to compare one passage with another; Therefore does he,
by this following passage, explain what seemed harsh in the former, that he
shall take of mine, and show it unto you. 2. Christ is to be so eyed in the
large allowances communicate unto his Church, as we forget not the Father, but
rather we ought to see the fullness and rich good will of the Father in what
Christ communicates, and Christ's own excellency, who has all fullness that
is in the Father, to communicate; Therefore he asserteth, that all things that
the Father has are mine, as the reason of that expression, He shall take of
mine, etc. 3. Such is the strict union of the Persons of the blessed Trinity,
that there is among them a perfect communion in all things; for, all things
that the Father has are mine, and so the Spirits also. 4. As there is an union
in essence, and communion among the Persons of the Trinity: so their order of
subsistence and operation is distinct, the Son being and working from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son; for, says he, all
things that the Father has, are mine from him, and the Spirit shall take of
mine, and show it unto you.

Verse 16. A little while, and ye shall not see me, and again a little while,
and ye shall see me: because I go to the Father.
From this to v. 23. is contained the second encouragement, whereby Christ
comforts his disciples, and mitigates their excessive sorrow for his departure.
In this verse the encouragement is more briefly propounded; That however he was
shortly to be removed from them in respect of his bodily presence, being now to
suffer death, and leave the world; yet they should shortly after that see him
again, and he should find a way to be indeed present with them. For
understanding whereof, albeit that reason of his going to the Father, may lead
us to understand it of his appearing again to them bodily, after his
resurrection, and that since he was not to abide under the power of death, but
to rise again and ascend to his Father; they should get a sight of him by the
way; yet I take not this sight to be understood here further, then as it was a
forerunner of greater things. For this is to be done in that day, wherein they
were to be endowed with much knowledge, and to come much speed in their prayers
put up in his Name, v. 23. which is not to be restricted to that time betwixt
his Death and Ascension, but was rather verified after his Ascension. And upon
the same ground, albeit the enjoyment and sight of Christ in heaven, (which
every believer may expect after a short while) do indeed complete that joy
which is propounded, v. 20. as the fruit of their seeing of him; yet it is not
to be restricted to that either. For in that day they will need no prayer, as
v. 23. it is said they shall in the day they shall see him. Therefore it is
most clear to understand the encouragement thus, That however he was shortly to
die and remove from them, yet seeing he was not to abide under the power of
death, but to ascend and be exalted with the Father; he would therefore give
proof of his exaltation and goodwill toward them, by pouring out of his Spirit,
whereby they should enjoy a spiritual sight of him, as chap. 14. 19. and by
this their sad hours should be sweetened (as also all believers) till they come
to full sight and full joy in heaven. Now albeit this encouragement, thus
explained, together with the rest that follow, do all depend upon the pouring
out of the Spirit, as fruits and benefits to be reaped thereby, as well as
these that are formerly mentioned in this chapter. And so may all be reduced to
that general encouragement, of the coming of the Holy Ghost; yet seeing Christ
does not here (as in the former) name this as a fruit of the Spirits coming,
therefore I have made it a distinct encouragement. Doct. 1. The life of
believers within time is made up, and consists of great variety of lots, having
and wanting, sweets and soures, mixed together, and succeeding one to another;
for, so it is here declared, they are now seeing, shortly, not to see, and
after that to see again. 2. The great exercise of believers, is about the
enjoying or wanting a sight of Christ; and this sight of Christ is so precious
to them, that it moves all the wheels of their affections, and makes fair
weather or foul, according as they want or enjoy it; it being still winter
when he is absent, and whenever he returns, he brings the Spring with him;
Therefore is all their exercise summed up in this, ye shall not see me, and, ye
shall see me, and this is it which begets the joy and sorrow after mentioned.
3. Whatever be Christ's tender condescendence, at sometimes, to his people; yet
they are to expect that within time, they will get satisfaction to their sense,
but for a short time; for, so did the disciples find its the matter of his
bodily presence, and so will believers find in the matter of sensible
enjoyments, a little while (being all put together) or, but now a little while
in respect of what they had enjoyed, chap. 14. 9. and ye shall not see me. The
word imports a serious and intent seeing and contemplating, and is attribute
oft-times to a sight of the mind; and it may insinuate, that now they should
not get him seen so distinctly as formerly, or that his removal should so
confound them for a time, as they should not so much as get him contemplate
with the eyes of their mind, till the Spirit come upon them. 4. It is the Will
of Christ, that believers be not surprised with the withdrawing of Christ
sensible presence, but that in the midst of enjoyments, they resolve and be
armed for it; Therefore, while they enjoy his company, he does warn them, a
little while, and ye shall not see me. 5. Christ when he does withdraw his
sensible and bodily presence, is yet not absent from believers, but has a way
of presence, wherein spiritual minds may discern and see him; for,
notwithstanding his removal, ye shall see me, says he. The word imports a full
and clear sight, as if he were before their eyes. 6. As the sensible enjoyments
of believers are but short, while they are within time, so their desertions and
clouds are but short also; They may think the time long, because of their
affection, and they may prolong their own affliction, by taking in an idol in
the room of an absent Christ, and by not making use of desertion as they ought;
But he allows that their sad hours be short, and however it be, they are so
in respect of eternity: for, again a little while, and ye shall see me, 7.
Christ's suffering for, and departing from his people, has neither changed his
affection to them, nor deprived him of ability to do for them; But they are the
rather so much the dearer to him as the price of his sufferings, and by his
exaltation he is able to be powerfully present with them, by the pouring out of
his Spirit; for, it is a reason of their seeing him, because I go to the
Father, having laid down the price of their Redemption.

Verse 17. Then said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that
he says unto us: A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, A little
while, and ye shall see me. And because I go to the Father?

18. They said therefore, What is this that he says, A little while? we cannot
tell what he says.


In these verses is recorded the occasion of Christ's further enlarging and
explaining of this encouragement, taken from the ignorance and stumbling of
some of his disciples; who repeating this doctrine, and making enquiry among
themselves about the meaning thereof, do still remain ignorant of his true
sense therein, not understanding any part of the words, and least of all, that
they should see him, because he goes to the Father, seeing thereby, it would
seem, he would rather be removed out of their sight. Whence learn, 1. It is
commendable in disciples, that they hear Christ's doctrine with such attention,
as to receive and retain it, though they do not understand it; for, so do they
repeat all he said, testifying how attentive they were, however their
understanding was darkened. 2. Let doctrine be never so plain, and never so
frequently repeated, and let means be never so many and hea^ers most attentive;
yet they will continue ignorant, till Christ enlighten their minds; for,
albeit this plain doctrine had been inculcate before, and almost in the same
terms, chap 13. 33. yet, say they once and again, What is thi^ that he says
unto us, etc. 3. When Christ's followers are ignorant of any truth, it concerns
them to be inquisitive about the same, and to make use one of another for that
end; for, they said among themselves, what is this that he says unto us, a
little white, etc? 4. Using of means will not avail, nor can believers help one
another to understand truth, unless Christ shine in with light; for, after
their repeating of the words, and an enquiry among themselves once and again,
he result is, we cannot tell what he says. 5. When believers are in trouble,
and essaying to rid themselves out of difficulties, without employing of
Christ, ordinarily such a condition and exercise are attended with fits of
bitterness; for, they being much grieved this night, and laboring among
themselves to clear this matter, but to no purpose, do repeat his words, and
once and again enquire, what is this that he says? and in end resolve, we
cannot tell what he says. Whereby they not only express their own ignorance,
but some bitterness also, indirectly carping at his expressions, and
challenging that he should so speak unto them.

Verse 19. Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto
them, Do ye enquire among your selves of that I said, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, A little while, and ye shall see me?
In this verse is contained Christ's preface to the explication of this
encouragement; wherein, by making known that he understood their perplexity,
and their desire to be resolved, he testifies his willingness to clear their
doubt, and makes way for it, preventing their enquiry. Whence learn, 1.
Whatever be the perplexities of Saints, and their weakness under them; yet
they know Christ to be the only resolver of their difficulties, and they cannot
be at rest till they get light; for, their enquiry among themselves not
succeding, it is subjoyned, notwithstanding their indirect carping, that they
were desirous to ask him, that so they might attain to light in the matter. 2.
Albeit believers stand, oft-times, in sensible need of Christ's help, and be
desirous thereof, yet they are kept back from employing of him partly, by their
unwillingnesse to bewray their own indigence; and partly, by reason of their
ill-ordered respect to him, which keeps them at a needless distance with him;
for, albeit they were desirous to ask him, yet they proceeded no further then a
desire, as being unwilling to bewray their ignorance, and respecting their
Master so as they were afraid to ask him. 3. Christ is so infinitely
omniscient, and has so vigilant an eye over the condition of his people, as he
knows and takes notice of their secret doubts and perplexities, before they
be propounded to him; for, Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and
by that question, do ye enquire among your selves, etc? he lets them see he
knew their secret reasonings and debates. 4. Christ will not cast off his dull
and weak followers, but their necessity has a mouth of its own to his
omniscience and infinite love, whereof he will give proof by preventing their
enquiry; as here, however they were ignorant, and stood off from asking him,
yet he prevents them with a resolution of their doubt. 5. When disciples are
about the use of some means, for resolving of their doubts, Christ will in due
time come and clear them; for, so much is imported in that he takes notice that
they were enquiring among themselves of that he said; and while they were about
that mean, he comes and resolves them. 6. Albeit Christ do prevent his
perplexed people, and do approve of their use of any lawful means; yet he
accounts it still a fault, that they should not employ him in doubtful cases;
for, this question, do ye enquire among your selves, etc? does not only import
his notice-taking of their exercise, and an approbation thereof, in so far as
they were not resting in ignorance, but making use of that mean; but also, an
indirect challenge that they should enquire among themselves, and not employ
him.

Verse 20. Verily, verily I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but
the world shall rejoice: And ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy.
In this verse is subjoyned Christ's exposition of this encouragement; wherein
(explaining the causes by the effects) he declares, that however, by his
absence, they should have sad sorrow, while the world should be rejoicing; yet
their sorrow should end in joy. Which as it was verified to the disciples in
their joy after their sad homes, for his suffering and removal; so it is also
made good to believers in all ages, who have their joys and sorrows succeeding
each other, but still their joy last. Doct. 1. Christ's doctrine to his
followers, especially concerning their allowed comfort under and after sorrow,
is not empty and vain promises, but serious and solid truth; Therefore is it
conformed here, and v. 23. with a double asseveration, Verily, verily I say
unto you. 2. It is the great fault of discouraged believers that they are slow
of heart to believe Christ's allowed encouragements; and yet it is most
acceptable to him, that they give credit to them, and rest upon them; for, this
asseveration imports not only the gravity of the matter, but further also, that
we are averse and unwilling to believe it, and that Christ is earnest we should
give credit thereto. 3. It is very suitable that answerable affections go along
with our conditions, and that our conditions be evidenced thereby; Therefore,
does he here explain his being not seen, or seen, by them, v. 16. by their
sorrow and joy, as evidencing how they were affected with these dispensations.
4. As it is the lot of believers, to meet with sorrow in the world; so Christ's
absence and removal will be the chief cause of most bitter sorrow to them; Not
that they are allowed to mourn without hope, but by their sorrow for this they
testify their estimation of him, that nothing can be comfortable to them
without him, and that they do keep his room in their heart till he come again:
And withal, when he is absent, and their sun down, they will meet with many
dark clouds and sharp showers, to fill them with grief; for, when they see not
him, ye shall weep and lament, says he. 5. The world are so opposite to Christ
and his people, that it is the time of their joy when Christ is removed, and
the godly set down in sorrow thereby for, these two go together, ye shall weep
and lament, but the world shall rejoice. See Rev. 11.10. 6. As it is the
wretched disposition of the world, to rejoice in the want of Christ out of the
world, and in the godlies affliction: So the Lord, in his holy providence, may
sometime permit them this advantage of rejoicing; partly, that it may add to
the exercise of his afflicted people; partly, that the disposition of some
wicked men may be discovered, who otherwise would carry smoothly, Luke 2.34, 35
Partly, to let them see that when they have got their will for a time, yet it
will not avail them; and partly to embitter their future sorrow by these fits
of joy, Rev. 18.7. For these causes it is that the Lord permits that the world
shall rejoice. So that such advantages might be matter of terror to them, if
they looked rightly upon them. 7. Christ would not have his people pleasing
themselves, with the dream of a constant calm, but seriously laying their
account to meet with sorrow and grief, for their exercise and trial, and to fit
them for his joy; Therefore does he again tell them, ye shall be sorrowful. 8.
As the wickeds joy is but for a moment, and goes before a sad storm of
sorrow, which will be their lust and final portion; So the sorrows of the godly
will end in joy, and joy will be the upshot of all their griefs; yea, their
present sorrow shall afterward afford matter of joy: for, your sorrow shall
(not only end in, but) be turned into joy, as he turned water into wine. See
Psalm 126.5, 6.

Verse 21. A woman when she is in travel, has sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish for joy that a man is borne into the world.

22. And ye now therefere have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your
heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.


This explained encouragement is (in these verses) illustrate from a similitude
taken from a woman in travel, which is propounded v. 21. and applied v. 22. to
this purpose, That as a woman in travel has bitter pangs and sorrows, and yet
all that is shortly swallowed up in the joy she has for the birth of a
man-child; So however they were in sorrow, yet his seeing them again shall
afford them cordial and perminent joy.

From v. 21. Learn, 1. The Lord, in the ordinary course of his providence in
the world, has given ample proof of his power and goodwill, and that he is
able to bring bitter lots to a sweet issue, whereof the godly should make use,
for their own encouragement in sad lots: Therefore does he lead them to comfort
themselves by the example of a woman in travail, and elsewhere he remits them
to the consideration of other his works in the world. 2. The godly may expect
that their hours of sorrow will be very sharp and bitter, that so their trial
may be complete and searching; Therefore it is compared to the sorrow of a
woman in travail, as being very bitter, and nearer the birth, the sharper, and
such as God only can open the womb and give an issue from it. 3. Their sorrows
also do resemble that of a woman in travail, in respect that as this pain is
the fruit of Evah's transgression; So whatever be the Lords love, or scope in
exercising his own, yet the Original and rise of all their troubles, is sin,
and they are sent to put them in mind what they are to chasten, and humble
them for bypast failings, or to mortify the roots of sin, and prevent it for
the future. 4. It may contribute to sweeten the bitter sorrows of Saints, that
they are as necessary to make way for the consolations of Christ, as pangs are
to make way for childbearing; for, in this also the comparison holds. 5. The
sorrows of Saints may be more easy to them, when they consider that they are
but for a set time, and by their violence and extremities are hasting to an
issue; for, so a woman's sorrow is, when her hour is come, and but an hour,
which will pass over. 6. It is ample matter of hope and encouragement to
sorrowful Saints, that their afflictions and sorrows will not only have an
issue, but are bringing forth somewhat, that will be as a man-child brought
forth by a travailing woman; for, so is here imported, that their afflictions
are as a travailing in birth, bringing forth some fruit, and that they shall
not miscarry, but a man-child be born. 7. The fruit of Saints afflictions and
sorrows will be so full, as may swallow down all the bitterness of their
former trouble; for, in this also they resemble a woman delivered of the child,
who remembers no more the anguish (that is, thinks nothing of it, though
otherwise it be good to remember it for instruction) for joy that a man is born
into the world, See Heb. 12.11. 2 Cor. 4.17.

From v. 22. Learn, 1. Believers sorrow for the absence of Christ is so great,
that the very apprehension and intimation of his removal, begets sorrow; for,
now therefore, says he, ye have sorrow, even before I be gone. 2. Christ does
take special notice of the sorrow of his own, when it is for his sake, and
because of his removal; for, he intimates so much to them, ye now therefore
have sorrow. 3. The sorrow of Saints for Christ's absence will not be perpetual,
but ought to be measured by the present now, as not knowing how soon he may put
a period to it; for, so much also is imported in this, now ye have sorrow, but
I will see you again. 4. Kindly sorrow of Saints can only be removed by Christ's
coming to them, and their enjoying the light of his countenance; And he will
not stay away, but be at pains himself to comfort such; for, I will see you
again, to remove your sorrow. 5. It compleats the joy of mourning Saints, that
not only they see Christ, but do know that he sees them, and has an eye of
kindness toward them, and an eye of providence and care about them; Therefore
in place of, ye shall see me, v. 16. it is here, I will see you again. 6.
Albeit the joy of the godly may be interrupted for a time; yet it will never
totally be extinguished, but will revive after sorrow; for, here is rejoicing
after sorrow. 7. It is Christ's work, not only to afford matter of joy unto his
people, but effectually to bear it in, for their encouragement; for, here he
undertakes, ye shall rejoice. 8. The joy of the godly does far outst^ip the
carnal delight and mirth of the wicked, whose heart is sorrowful in the midst
of laughter, Prove 14.13. whereas this is a solid joy, which upholds and
refreshes the heart; for, your heart shall rejoice, says he. 9. The joy of
believers is a permanent joy; whereof they shall never be totally deprived,
till they enter into the Ocean of eternal joy, Matthew. 25.21, 23. for, your joy
no man takes from you. It cannot be denied but sometime it is interrupted by
their peevish refusing of it, and by tentations taking it from them: But yet.
1. They want not still some measure of joy, in so far as they are not totally
discouraged. 2. They want not matter of joy, when themselves do put it from
them. 3. Tentations prevail to take away their joy, when they put not
themselves and it in Christ's custody; who here undertakes to make them rejoice.
4. Whatever their wrastlings and faintings be, yet they shall be carried
through, till they come to obtain everlasting joy, where sighing and sorrow
shall flee away, and not be found, though they were sought, whereas now we both
seek and find them too often.

Ver. 23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.
In this verse we have propounded the third and fourth encouragement, whereby
Christ mitigates the excessive sorrow of his disciples because of his departure
from them. The first of them is, that, in that day when the comforter shall
come, they shall see him again, they shall ask him nothing. Which is not be
understood of prayer, as if he would have them exempted from prayer, or that
they should not pray to him alone, but to the Father with him and through him.
For the first of these is blasphemous, and the second not to the purpose,
seeing it is not to be supposed they had neglected the Father in their prayers
formerly, and betaken themselves only to him. Withal, the grave asseveration
prefixed to the latter part of the verse which speaks of prayer, evidenceth
that there he begins a new purpose, different from this here spoken of: And
the word here rendered to ask, albeit it sometime signifies to desire or seek by
prayer, and be so used by Christ speaking of his own praying to the Father, v.
26. and often in chap. 17. Yet, 1. In the latter part of the verse where he
speaks of their praying, he uses another word, which properly signifies to
seek by prayer, that so by the different words he might point out that the
purposes are different. 2. The word here does properly signify, to ask
questions, or to propound doubtful things, whereof we are ignorant, that we may
get resolution in them; and so it is used in this same chap. v. 5, 19, 30. In
relation to which passages, and to what is said by way of explication, v. 25.
compared with v. 29, 30. I take this encouragement to contain a promise of
their illumination and growth in knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel,
propounded by way of opposition to their present necessity of asking many
questions at him, in regard of their dullness and ignorance. But now he
promises that, in that day they shall have more illumination than to make a
doubt of every thing, and should ask him nothing; which yet is not so to be
understood, as if after the Comforter were come, there should be no doubts, or
that he would exempt them from a necessity of depending upon and employing of
him for resolution thereof; But it is to be understood comparatively, in
reference to their present condition, That they should not, as now they did,
stick at every scruple, and be puzzled and perplexed about every purpose of
divine truth, but should be more familiarly acquainted with his doctrine.
Whence learn, 1. Ignorance of divine mysteries is so great an affliction to
disciples, and illumination and knowledge thereof so great a mercy, as it may
sweeten sad dispensations, and deserves a special remark, in their account;
for, it is here an encouragement against his departure, and it is a day of
remark (that day) to be delivered from their ignorance. 2. It is by the Spirit
only that men are enabled to understand divine mysteries, and this is more
fully and clearly communicate by him in the days of the Gospel, then formerly;
for, it is in that day, when the Comforter comes, that they shall ask nothing.
3. As Christ is very gracious to his people, in granting them sense of
necessities, and in supplying thereof when they come unto him; So he also
tenders their weakness by preventing them in many needs, and so prevents their
many perplexities and anxieties, which otherwise they might be put to:
Therefore is this promise thus propounded, ye shall ask me nothing, because
albeit it was enough to have him ready to resolve their questions, when they
put him to it, yet this was very hard to them, and therefore he, prevents them
with a gift of knowledge. So, albeit he will never have his people freed from
dependence on him, yet out of his respects to their weakness, he gives sense
many visible props, where faith is put to an exercise. He could feed the world
immediately from heaven, as he did Israel; but since our weakness would be
ready to faint under such a dispensation, therefore he has established another
course.

The other encouragement here propounded, is, that they shall have success in
their prayers put up in his name, concerning which compare Chap. 14. 13, 14.
and 15. 7. Doct. 1. The matter of hearing the prayers of believers is of great
importance in Christ's account; And whatever our fears and tentations be about
it, yet the verdict of his word is to be trusted to in that matter; Therefore
does he begin this encouragement with his usual asseveration, Verily, verily I
say unto you. 2. There is no measure of enjoyment which believers have within
time, which should take them off from prayer and seeking; for, when the former
promises are accomplished, it is yet imported they must ask. 3. Times of much
light have need of much prayer, to sanctify that light, and make it effectual
for answerable ordering of our practice; for, in that day, when they shall get
knowledge, and ask nothing, they must still ask by prayer. 4. As the
necessities of believers, and the good things they expect, are many; So all
their comfortable enjoyments must come by prayer: for, whatsoever ye shall ask,
imports that their prayers must be universal, reaching to all their felt needs
and expected mercies. 5. Prayer must be offered up through Christ and in his
name, as testifying the sen^e of our own unworthiness to come before God with
our services; our high estimation of Christ's worth, merit, and credit with the
Father, who can make our services acceptable; and, our confidence that he will
own us and our services, and that the Father will be well pleased therewith in
him; for, they must ask the Father in his name. 6. Prayer put up in Christ's
Name for things lawful, will get a good answer; And albeit the Lord will
exercise our faith, to believe this when we see it not; our patience, to wait
for it; and, our discerning to take up his wise contrivance of answering, when
he suspends the particular we desire. And albeit he may also suspend and deny
answers, for a time, to particular suits, when either we are lying under
unrepented guilt, or have neglected prayer till we come to a strait, or have
not sense as we ought of what we seek; And also that he may try what men's
deportment will be when their prayers a^e not answered: Yet this is a truth of
eternal verity, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you. 7. Such as are given to prayer, and do receive answers thereunto from
heaven, need not be discouraged for the want of Christ's bodily presence; seeing
by the acceptance of their prayers in heaven, they will get constant proofs of
his good will; for, this is an encouragement here against his removal, that
they shall have intercourse with him, by their praying and his answering. And
indeed, to be frequent in prayer is the way to entertain the sense of his love,
and the want thereof begets jealousies and coldrifenesse.

Ver. 24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name: Ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full.
In this ^^d the following purpose, to v. 29. both these encouragements are
amplified and enlarged, though not in the order they are first propounded. The
purpose may be ^educed to four heads. In the first whereof in this verse^ he
amplifieth the last of these encouragements, concerning prayer; declaring that
hitherto they had not asked any thing in his Name, an ^xciting them to amend
this, that so by receiving go^^ answers, they might have full joy, to guard and
refresh their hearts, which were so grieved at the news of his (...) ^^^e. As
for that he says, Hitherto you have asked nothing in my Name, it is not so to
be understood, as if the disciples and other godly persons, had not prayed only
before that time, or had not directed their prayers to God through the
Mediator: But the meaning is partly, more generally, to point out the
difference betwixt the way under the Law and under the Gospel; In the one,
their use making of a Mediator in prayer was involved under many types and
shaddows, particularly that of the mercy seat, and though they directed their
prayers to God through a Mediator, and by virtue of the Covenant, Yet it was
without any particular application of that office of Mediator unto the person
of Jesus, the Son of Mary, as not being yet manifested. And it is not unlike
that the disciples and others, whatever thoughts they had of Christ, Yet
hitherto they had not so distinctly made use of him, in his office of
Mediator, in the matter of prayer. But under the Gospel, especially after the
pouring out of the Spirit, vails are taken away, and the Mediator exhibited in
person, to be distinctly and clearly made use of in prayer. Partly, the meaning
is, more particularly, to point out the short coming of the disciples, who
whatever use they made of Christ in prayer, yet had asked and received nothing,
in comparison of what they were allowed to ask, and should afterward receive*
Whence learn, 1. We are so unwilling, upon the one hand, to pray, and Christ so
willing to be employed, that he can never enough press us to that duty;
Therefore does he insist in pressing them to ask, and is so forward in it, that
he enlarges it before the other encouragement mentioned before it, in the
former verse. 2. It is a notable encouragement unto prayer, that now under the
Gospel the person of the Mediator is exhibited in our flesh, acquainted with
all our infirmities without sin, and the way of employing him more distinctly
and clearly held out, then under the Law; for, by this he excites them to ask,
that hitherto they had asked nothing in his Name, but now might ask, as has
been explained. 3. It may also encourage Saints to prayer, that let them seek
never so much in his Name, yet he will be so far from reproaching them with his
bounty, that he counts they have sought nothing, in respect of what his love
allows, and what he will do for them, if they ask; for, so much also (as has
been explained) is imported in this, Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name,
and therefore ask yet more, says he. 4. It does yet more encourage men to pray
to God through Jesus Christ, when they consider, that his fair offers of
audience, are not empty promises, but will be seconded with real performances;
for, ask, and ye shall receive, says he, appealing to their own experience,
concerning the reality of his offers, if they will employ him. 5. Christ
allows joy unto his people, to sweeten and cry down the noise of all their
discouragements and sorrows; for, he allows they should have joy, to assuage
their grief, because of his departure. 6. The j^y allowed by Christ upon his
people is a full and complete joy, and grows up by degrees, till they find
it so, according as they make use of the means wherein it is to be found;
Therefore does he call it a f^ll joy, or, a joy fulfilled to their
satisfaction, by their praying and his answering. 7. As the joy of believers
comes to them by the mean of prayer; So they are allowed joy even in their
addresse-making to God through Christ, considering what hope there is in such
in undertaking, and what a dignity and mercy it is, that such as they should be
drawn to such an employment, and admitted to serve in it; for, if joy be
fulfilled, when they get an answer, then, certainly, it should be begun while
they are praying. 8. Such as pursue prayer in Christ's Name, till they get an
answer, will find their joy thereby completed; as evidencing how glorious
their head and surety Christ is, and how acceptable naughty persons and
performances are in heaven through him, and as putting a luster and double
beauty upon every mercy, when it comes that way out of the hand of God; for,
ask, says he, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full, or, fulfilled.

Verse 25. These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: the time comes,
when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly
of the Father.
In the second place, Christ insists upon, and amplifieth that encouragement
which was first propounded, v. 23. concerning increase in knowledge. And as
there he propounded the promise in opposition to their present necessity of
asking questions; So here it is propounded in opposition to his present way of
teaching, And that he would not speak to them in proverbs, or, parables as
formerly, but would fully and plainly reveal the Father to them. As for these
things, which Christ says he spoke in proverbs, they are not to be restricted
to the immediately preceding purpose in this Chapter, but should be more
generally extended, to the most part of his doctrine hitherto particularly, in
this last Sermon; much whereof they did not understand, as appeared in their
frequent objections, reasonings, and questions. He says, he has spoken these
things in proverbs, or, parables; whereby we are not to understand any dark or
aenigmatick speeches, as if his doctrine had been obscure in it self; for his
doctrine was plain in it self, and what he spoke darkly to the multitude, he
explained to them. But, the meaning is, partly, that much of that he spoke,
however it was clear in it self, yet to them it seemed as obscure as if it had
been all parables, and so appears from v 16, 17, etc. but after the Spirits
coming, he was to speak plainly and fully, even in respect of their conception
and understanding. Partly, that Christ in regard of their weakness and
incapacity, had but briefly touched many things, which would be but dark to
them till the Spirit should come, as v. 12, 13. and had often made use of
similitudes and parables, in this Sermon, and at other times; whereby, albeit
he condescended to their capacity, yet, (as he says chap 3.12.) he spoke but
earthly things and not heavenly; that is, pointed out heavenly things by
earthly resemblances, which did eclipse much of the luster these truths should
have, when he should teach them plainly by his Spirit. Whence learn, 1. As
clearest truths will be but dark mysteries, even to disciples, till the Spirit
enlighten them; So Christ lets out light by degrees, and teaches according to
his peoples capacity; for, both these are held out in this acknowledgment,
These things have I spoken to you in proverbs. 2. It is the comfort of Saints,
that what measure of light and instruction they need, and yet want at one time,
it is but reserved for another; for, it sweetens their case to whom he had
spoken in proverbs, that the time comes when I shall no more speak to you
(says he) in proverbs. 3. The clear and full manifestation of saving truth was
communicate by the Spirit to the Apostles, and by them to the Church; for, it
is at that time, I shall show you plainly (says he) of the Father. 4. The
great and fundamental doctrine of the Gospel, revealed by the Spirit, is, the
knowledge of God as the Father of Christ, and our Father in him; and
consequently, of the mystery of Redemption; for, this is the doctrine he will
teach, I shall show you plainly of the Father.

Ver. 26. At that day ye shall ask in my Name: and I say not unto you, that I
will pray the Father for you:

27. For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God.


In the third place, Christ resumeth, and yet f^rther amplifieth that purpose
concerning prayer in his Name; promising that when the Spirit shall come, they
shall get alacrity and willingness to the duty of prayer, and shall find
easy access in their suites having Christ's intercession to make way for them,
and the Fathers love (as it were) preventing that. And that because they have
loved him and believed him, to be the Mediator and Ambassador come out from
God For clearing of the Words, Consider, 1. While Christ says, I say not that
I will pray the Father for you, the meaning is not that he will lay aside his
office of intercession for believers, which as they will still need it, so it
is a strong pillar of their confidence, Rom 8.33, 34. Heb 4.15, 16. and 7.25.
Neither is it only the meaning, that by this sort of speech he would most
certainly assure them of it; it being a privilege so sure, as he needed not
say more to assure them of it; As indeed his love is a real love, which has
more substance then show. But conjoyning it with what follows in the
beginning of the next verse, we will find the meaning to be, That they had not
only his intercession, but the Fathers love, upon which to ground their hope of
audience; and, That he was not to intercede for them with the Father as with an
enemy, or one unwilling to accept of them, being now reconciled; but, that the
Father did love them, and out of his love to them had appointed him Mediator.
2. While Christ sercheth the reason of the Fathers love from their love to him,
the meaning is not that their love to Christ did prevent the Fathers love to
them, but that the Father having loved them and brought them to love Christ,
does reward this their love with more proofs of his love, in hearing their
prayers. Doct. 1. Not only is the answering of prayer Christ's work, but it is
he also who ^nd^^^akes to make his people pray, and gives them his Spirit for
that effect; for, says he, by way of promise, at that day, when the Spirit
shall come, ye shall ask in my Name. 2. The prayers of Saints put up in Christ's
Name are so many ways welcome in heaven, as they cannot but be accepted;
Therefore he assures them of access, by showing them how many things concur
to obtain access and an answer. 3. We ought so to eye Christ's intercession, as
we forget not also to ascend up to the Fathers love, as rendering our persons
and prayers acceptable; That double encouragements may make our consolation
strong, and, that we may not have wrong thoughts of the Father; for this cause,
says he, I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you, for the
Father himself loves you. 4. Such as are beloved of God, do get grace to flee
to Christ, and to love him; for, ye, whom the Father loves, have loved me. 5.
As Gods love does beget love in his people; so he is graciously pleased to
reward and foster this love with more of his love; for, the Father, (whose love
prevents his people) loves you, because ye have loved me. 5. Love to Christ
cannot be without faith, and where love is, it proves faith; for, ye have loved
me, and believed. 6. True faith ought to close with Christ as the great
Ambassador of the Father, God and man, coming out from the Father by his
Incarnation, and coming into the world, to work the work of our Redemption;
for, ye believed that I came out from God: which includes the Fathers good will
in sending of him, and proves his Godhead, in that he came from God, as well as
the truth of his manhood was confirmed, by his appearing on earth, and his
office to be the only Mediator, as coming out from God for that effect. 7.
Faith in Christ is so acceptable, that God will reward it with proofs of his
free love; for the Father loves you, because ye believed that I came out from
God.

Verse 28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I
leave the world, and go to the Father.
In the last place, Christ to confirm them in what they had believed
concerning him, v. 27. and explain that which they understood not, v. 16. does
set forth himself more fully as the object of saving faith, both in his state
of humiliation in his coming into the world, which they had already
comprehended, and in his state of exaltation in going out of the world, which
they should after understand more fully. Whence learn, 1. Christ craves nothing
to be believed by his people, but what is the real truth; for, as he commends
them for believing that he came out from God, v. 27. so this is the very truth,
I came forth from the Father, etc. 2. Jesus Christ, as he is the Ambassador of
the Father; so he is true God equal with him; for, being with the Father,
before his Incarnation, he came forth from the Father, and was not sent only.
3. It pleased Christ Jesus, out of love to his people, to leave the Father and
come into the world; not by being separate from the Father, but by obscuring
his Deity and glory, under the vail of our flesh, and sinlesse infirmities, and
conversing with us for working of our Redemption; for, so is this to be
understood, I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world. 4.
Christ, having perfected his work on earth, did leave the world, by ascending
up to heaven to perfect the work of our Redemption and salvation, where he
manifests his glory, having put off the vail of our infirmities; for, again, I
leave the world, and go to the Father. And by this he clears the matter of his
removal to them, and lets them have a sweet sight of it. 5. As Christ's coming
into the world was voluntary, and flowed from his love, so was his departure
also voluntary, and he was not compelled thereunto by men; for, I am come,
says he, into the world, and, I leave it, and go. 6. The way of Christ's coming
and being into the world, may serve to clear contraversies, concerning the
matter of his removal; for, the one is here paralleled with the other. And
therefore, as his coming was sensible, and in a bodily way, so also is his
removal sensible, and takes away his bodily presence. And as his humanity and
body were not in heaven, while he was in the world: so it is not here now,
after that he is gone to the Father.

Verse 29. His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speak thou plainly, and
speak no proverb.

30. Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need not that any man
should ask thee. By this we believe that thou came forth from God.


In these and the two following verses, is contained the third part of the
chapter, wherein Christ does give a meet entertainment to their fair
profession of proficiency and faith concerning him. These verses contain their
profession; wherein, 1. Being satisfied with his former way of doctrine, they
profess that he spoke plainly, and without proverbs, and consequently, that
they had made proficiencie and understood him. 2. They deduce two inferences
from this, testifying their further proficiencie, beside the understanding of
what he said, 1. That by his preventing their question, v. 19. they were
persuaded of his omniscience, and that none needed to inform him of their case
by questions, as if he were ignorant thereof. 2. That the knowledge and
experience of this his omniscience, did further confirm them in the faith of
his Deity. Now concerning this profession, as it cannot be denied but there is
some good in it, and they had sound faith, which Christ acknowledges, v. 27.
and they had already professed it, chap. 6.69. so when we consider Christ's
entertainment thereof, we will find some excess of presumption in it; for,
albeit Christ did indeed speak plainly, yet the time was not come, wherein he
had promised they should ask him nothing, v. 23. And therefore they presumed
more of their knowledge, then they had cause; and albeit they believed that
truth, that he came forth from God, and that upon solid ground; yet their faith
was not full enough, since they had not employed their faith about the matter
of his removal, which he had pressed upon them, v. 28. Doct. 1. Whatever divine
truth Christ seems to speak more obscurely in one place, it will be found fully
cleared and explained elsewhere; for, now, say they, speak thou plainly, and
speak no proverb. 2. It is a great comfort to Christ's followers to
understand his Word, and it is the property of divine truths, that when they
are apprehended in any measure, they do wonderfully affect and refresh the
heart; for, say they, by way of admiration, lo, now speak thou plainly, etc.
being wonderfully refreshed with the light they received. 3. Christ will be
found omniscient, by all them who know him rightly; for, we are sure that thou
know all things, etc. 4. Preventing means give his people but little to do,
and are very affecting when they are found; for, it held in their pains, and
did very much affect them, that he gave proof, he needed not any man should ask
him. 5. Christ does then become very precious to hearts, when he by his Word
meets with what is in their hearts; for, this did ravish them, that he needed
not be asked, but lighted upon what was in their thoughts, v. 19. 6. Christ is
then rightly taken up in his properties, when he is acknowledged to be God, and
when faith closes with him as such; for, it follows on the former, By this
we believe thou came forth from God. 7. When weak beginners get any measure
of knowledge or faith, they are in peril to run upon the extremities of
rashness, and presumptuous conceit; for, with this was their profession here
hinted, wherein they speak, as if they had attained to a full measure, and
needed not depend on the promise of the Spirit. 8. When we try the solidity of
our faith, we should look especially to its ground, whether it be the solid
Word of God, or some extraordinary work only, which may affect for a time, but
not prove constant enough; for, in this their professed faith was faulty, that
it was begotten, rather by the act of his proving his omniscience, then by the
Word. 9 We may have very low thoughts of our own faith, as its best, when we
consider the many defects thereof, and how far short it comes; for, in this
their faith was faulty, that however they believed he came forth from God, yet
their faith fell short in what was their present exercise, concerning his
return to the Father.

Verse 31. Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?

32. Behold, the hour it comes, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered,
every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone,
because the Father is with me.


These verses contain Christ's entertainment of this Profession; wherein, taking
hold of their profession of faith in so far as it was real, and checking their
presumption and carnal confidence therein, (for both these are imported in that
question, v. 31.) he warns them, that their faith should get a trial, and
their presumption a sad shake very shortly, when at his trial they should be
scattered, and put to shift for themselves, leaving him alone, who yet should
not be alone, having the Father with him. Whence learn, 1. Christ takes notice
of no effect his doctrine produces, unless faith be one, and a chief effect;
for, of all they said, he takes notice of that, as of greatest importance, if
it had been such as they thought it was, do ye believe? 2. When men have
attained to some measure of faith, they may have yet cause to be humbled, that
they have been so long in learning that lesson; for, do ye now (and not till
now) believe? 3. Christ takes notice of men's attaining to any measure of faith,
that he may put them to work; for, do ye now believe, is a taking hold of what
they grant, that now he may put them to that exercise mentioned afterward,
which before could not so conveniently be done. 4. Christ does hate presumption
and carnal confidence, were it even in his dearest people; for, this question
does also import his disdaining of their presumption, and that he would shortly
give them a proof how far they were mistaken. 5. As when men are enabled to
believe, they ought to look for work; so presumption mixed with faith, does
portend a winnowing storm, and that near at hand; for, do ye now believe? the
hour comes, yea, is now come, even that same night, that ye shall be
scattered, etc. 6. Presumption is a disease not easily cured by any caution and
warning from the Word, till the presumptuous find his own weight in trial:
for, this must refute it, an hour of scattering. 7. Though Christ be most
tender of the broken spirits of his people, and of their sad condition, yet he
will not spare to humble them, when presumption is aloft, were their condition
otherwise never so sad; for, when he is comforting them against his departure,
he has yet a sad word to check their presumption. 8. The doctrine of trials is
oft-times but carelessly heard by presumptuous men, and they may meet with that
which they little ponder; Therefore, a behold is prefixed to this doctrine. 9.
The trials of Christ and his followers, as they are violent, so are they
determined by God, and short; for, it is an hour, a bitter hour indeed, but a
determined and short hour; and therefore we should take heed an hour produce
not that, which may shame us for ever. 10. Continued-in presumption and carnal
confidence, will undoubtedly cause men to fall, when trial comes, were they
even Christ's own dear children; for, here the ensuing storm is described, from
the sad effect it should produce in them, of scattering and leaving him. And if
we consider their true grace, their special and intimate acquaintance with
Christ, the many proofs of favor conferred on them, the many proofs they got
and saw of his divine power, their singular engagements to Christ, and, their
being forewarned of their danger: If, I say, we consider these things, and that
yet they fall, it may let us see that nothing will bear out men, if deserted,
or given up to the power of presumption. 11. Scattering, and the dissipation of
the societies of Gods people is one of the sad fruits of persecution; for ye
shall be scattered every man. 12. Scattering is then not only our affliction,
but our sin and weakness, when trouble and hazard makes us selfish, and seek
to shift for our selves, little considering the hazard of the interest of
Christ; for, this follows on their presumption, ye shall be scattered every
man to his own, that is, not only going to their own home, as afterward they
did, but their shifting for themselves, when they leave their Master alone in
the garden. 13. It is a part of the trial of honest sufferers, that in their
sharpest conflicts, they may be deserted, even of them who not only make fair
professions, but have real honesty, and may be left in the gap there alone;
for, herein Christ has paved the way, who was left alone; And albeit none
could join with him in enduring these sufferings, whereby he redeemed his
people; yea, albeit his care was to have them exempted, chap. 18.8. yet it was
a trial and exercise unto him, to be thus left alone. 14. Let never so many
desert Christ and his truth, yet he will own and stand to it; for, he is left
alone, and yet stands alone in that conflict. 15 The condition of sufferers is
not so desolate and solitary, as spectators or sense at first view would judge;
for, though they leave him alone, yet I am not alone, says he. 16. God may be
pursuing his own dear children in great displeasure, with whom he is yet
graciously present, upholding them with the one hand; as he smites with the
other; for, the Father is with me, says Christ, when yet the Father is
pursuing him hotly for the sins of the Elect, and deserting him, Matthew. 27.46.
17. The presence of God alone is sufficient to sustain a soul, when deserted of
all under saddest difficulties: for, though ye leave me alone, yet I am not
alone, because the Father is with me.

Verse 33. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace:
in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world.
In this verse is contained a conclusion, not only of the immediately preceding
purpose, or chapter, but, of the whole farewell Sermon; wherein, having spoken
many and diverse things to them, wherewith they were variously affected, he
shows that his scope in all of it was to promove their peace in him. The
necessity whereof appears from the troubles they shall meet with in the
world; And the efficacy of his peace, to counter-ballance the bitterness of
worldly trouble, is held out, partly, in the effect thereof, that having peace,
they may be of good cheer, or bold; and partly, in the ground of this courage,
that Christ has overcome the world. Whence learn, 1. As peace is Christ's
allowance to his people, so the drift of all he speaks to them, tends to
promove their good and peace; his very brangling of their presumption, and
warning them of dangers, tends not to take away their confidence in his good
will, nor to brangle their peace, but to excite them to make it surer; for,
These things (in this Sermon, and in the immediately preceding warning) have I
spoken unto you, that ye might have peace. 2. It is Christ only who can give
and speak peace to his people; for, I have spoken that ye might have peace. See
Psalm. 85.8. Job 34.29. 3. The peace of believers is begotten by the Word, as
faith is; and it takes root there; so that while the Word is for them, they
need not be dismayed; for, upon this, I have spoken, does this follow, that ye
might have peace. 4. The peace of God conferred upon believers, is a most
excellent gift, and sufficient though they have no more; as being the fruit of
justification and reconciliation; as being that which gives a deliverance in
the midst of troubles; which will guard hearts in midst of violent blasts,
Phil. 4.7. which will make men keep from sinful courses, which would disturb
their peace, more effectually, then the apprehension of wrath and hell; and,
which stays the mind on God in the midst of inward shakings, Isa. 26.3. For
these reasons is all their allowance from Christ comprehended under the name of
peace. 5. It is in Christ alone that we have right or access to any true
peace, and in him we must entertain it; for, says he, that in me ye might have
peace. 6. Peace with God through Christ will not keep men from blasts of
outward trouble, but the one is consistent with the other; yea, the worlds
hatred will readily follow on Christ's friendship; for, when in me ye have
peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation. 7. Saints may not only expect
trouble from the world, but that their trouble shall be very pressing and
searching; for, ye shall have tribulation, or, a pressing distress, as the
word imports. 8, Even the dearest of Saints are obnoxious to tentations, of
fainting, fear, and diffidence, when sharp trouble assaults them; for, they
will need a word of encouragement, be of good courage. 9. No outward trouble
ought to disturb Saints peace, but their peace with God ought to appear in
courageous and confident encountering with trouble; for, after his allowed
peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, or, bold,
says he. 10. The world and all things therein, that might disquiet Saints, are
vanquished and overcome by Christ upon the cross: so that they may well
testify, but cannot hurt them; for, I have overcome the world. 11. Christ's
victory over the world is ground of encouragement to all his suffering people,
against the power and policy of the world; considering, that however Christ
will not exempt them from a battle and exercise, yet they are partakers of his
victory by faith, 1 John 5.4. and shall (abiding in him) find, in end, that
they have to do with enemies already vanquished; for, says he, Be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world.

CHAP. XVII.
THis Chapter contains Christ's solemn prayer to the Father after the farewell
Sermon; wherein by supplicating for himself, his disciples, and all his
members. He sanctifies the use of prayer to all his followers, by making use
thereof in his own person for obtaining what he needed; he makes his latter
Will and Testament, leaving his legacies to his followers, and leaves us a
pattern of his perpetual intercession in heaven, as our great High Priest, for
upholding the Ministry and Church; showing what his heart will be in his
absence, and what he lives for ever to accomplish. And he speaks all this
openly in his disciples audience, that he may confirm them in the faith of his
love, may assure them of what he prays for; and may teach them, by his
example, what to ask for themselves.

The Chapter may be taken up in three parts: In the first, He prays for
himself, that the Father would glorify him; pressing the same by Arguments,
taken not only from the sweet relation betwixt the Father and him, but more
expressly, from the time wherein he asks this, from his glorifying the
Father, being glorified by him, v. 1. from his calling and charge to give
eternal life to the Elect, v. 2, 3. and, from his fidelity in his Charge and
Commission, v. 4. upon which he repeats and explaines his petition, by way of
conclusion, v. 5. In the second part of the Chapter is contained his prayer for
his eleven Apostles expressly; Wherein, 1. He describes them for whom he is to
pray, giving an account of his diligence and success with them. v. 6, 7, 8. 2.
He appropriates his praye^ and intercession to them, in opposition to the
world, for several reasons, v. 9, 10. 3. He propounds his first petition, for
their preservation, that so they may be kept in unity, v. 11. pressing it upon
several grounds, v. 12, 13.14. and repeating and explaining the same, v. 15.
reinforcing one of the former reasons to persuade it, v. 16. 4. He propounds a
second suit for their sanctification, v. 17. pressing it by two arguments, v.
18, 19. In the third part of the Chapter, He prays for the Apostles and the
whole Church expressly, v. 20. wherein he prays for spiritual unity to them, as
being notably advantageous, v. 21. (...) for attaining whereof he allows
excellent privileges upon them, v. ^2. particularly, union with God through
him as the way to union among themselves, v. 23.) and for union in place with
himself in heaven at last, v. 24 In the mean time, recommending them, (and
particularly, the Apostles) on weighty grounds, to the Fathers love and his
inhabitation, v. 25, 26.

Verse 1. THese words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee.
In this verse, (after a short transition, intimating a connection betwixt the
former doctrine and this prayer, and a declaration of his posture in prayer
with his eyes lift up to heaven) is contained, 1. A proposition of his petition
for himself, that the Father would glorify him, of which more on v. 5. only in
sum, it imports his desire that God would glorify him; by sustaining him in
his approaching agony, that in it he might triumph over all his and his peoples
enemies, by proving him to be the Son of God, even in his sufferings, as he did
by many miracles at his death, Mat. 27.45, 46, 51, 52, 53. And all this but as
a preludie to his being glorified in his Resurrection, Ascension, and
Exaltation at the Fathers right hand, of which v. 5. and which was to be
manifested in the world by the propagation of his spiritual Kingdom. 2. Some of
the reasons pressing this petition: one is couched in that sweet relation
betwixt: the Father and him, implied in the titles of Father and Son. But there
are more expressly subjoyned, 1. A reason taken from the time, wherein he
asks this, that the hour is come, namely, the hour of his agony, wherein he
expected support, and to be glorified, according as he would need, and was
promised to him in the Covenant of Redemption, Psalm. 89, 21, 22. Isa. 49.8. and
50.8, 9. Psalm. 16.10. with Acts 2.31. As also upon the back of that, the hour
of his promised exaltation, having waited his time, and done the Will of the
Father in the form of a servant. 2. Another reason taken from a consequent of
granting his desire, and his end in propounding of it; namely, that the Father
glorifying him, he might also glorify the Father, whose glory shines in the
glory of his Son, and in his obedience, sufferings and success. From all
which, Learn, 1. Prayer to God is a special mean to make believers lively in
all duties, and to make the Word and all our endeavors effectual for that
end; for, These words spoke Jesus, in preaching, and then subjoynes prayer for
a b^essing upon what he said, wherein he asks these things of the Father which
^e had pressed upon them. 2. Christ is so real in his love to his people, that
he will say nothing to them for their encouragement, but what he will say of
them and for them, in his compeering before the Father on their behalf;
Therefore, having spoken these things to them, wherein he had let out much of
his heart and love to them, he does now confirm the same, by speaking as much
of them to God, hereby assuring them that he would be the same in absence, that
he was when present. 3. As it is the duty of the Lords people, to study always
spiritual mindedness; to set their affections upon things above, and to visit
their fair inheritance, by sending their affections thither, till themselves
follow after; so, in particular, it is their duty in prayer, to row^ up their
affections, and set them to God, and heavenward, and to testify their, want
hereaway, and that all their confidence and expectation depends on God; and on
his help and consolations sent from heaven; for, so much does Christ's example
teach, who in prayer, lift up his eyes to heaven, or, to God, in that place
where his glory is specially manifested, and his followers made completely
happy with him. And by this posture did testify the heavenly and depending
frame of his Spirit. 4. Albeit the Lord know the most secret desires of the
heart, and do respect and hear the very thoughts of his people; yet it is their
duty, as they have opportunity, to make use of their tongue in prayer, that so
they may do him homage with the whole man; may, by that means, (among others)
excite their own affections in prayer; and may edify others in their place and
station, for some (at least) of these causes it is, that Christ in prayer spoke
in the audience of his disciples, he lift up his eyes, and said and by his
practice and example would teach us our duty, 5. Prayer is a notable mean for
carrying men through in trials; And Christ has sanctified it, and encouraged
his followers to make use thereof, by employing of it as his weapon in his
greatest extremity and need, and that upon grounds of common interest; that so
in all things he might be like his brethren; for, here in the apprehension of
his approaching agony, he betakes himself to prayer on his own behalf, using
arguments of interest common to him, with his breth^en in him, Father glorify
thy Son. 6. So rich is the Lords allowance to his people, that in the midst
and th^o^g of their saddest pressures, they may have hearts filled with
thoughts and expectations of great glory to be conferred upon them, in and
after their sad sufferings; for, his thoughts, when he looks upon his
approaching sufferings, are, glorify thy Son. 7. Christ, in his saddest
sufferings, was still glorious in himself, and appeared so to the conviction of
others, and all his sufferings are now crowned and shut up in great glory; for,
now and shortly after, was the Son glorified. 8. God has it absolutely in his
hand, to confer glory and honor upon his suffering children, and to glorify
himself in them, so that none can impede him in it; for, says he, Father,
glorify thy Son. 9. Albeit Saints need not persuade God to grant what they ask
agreeable to his Will; yet it is necessary they use arguments in prayer; that
they may assure their own hearts may evidence their confidence, to his glory;
and, may testify their instancy in urging of their suites; Therefore does
Christ press his petition with so many reasons. 10. Interest in God, and
familiarity with him, are of great use in a day of strait, and are the wheels
upon which prayer to God will move sweetly; Therefore, does Christ couch this
encouragement in the bosom of his prayer, that God is his Father, and he his
Son, to teach us, to make that interest sure, which may beget so much
confidence in prayer in a day of need, seeing a father can deny nothing that is
good to a child, nor will many words be needed to a father, when the child is
in distress. 11. Christ ha^h a sweet fellowship with, and spceial interest in
the Father, and his approaches to him, for himself or his people, are full of
Sonly confidence, and such as cannot be ineffectual; for, to him it belongs in
a special manner, (and to all others only through him,) to plead these
relations of Father and Son, and to expect audience because he stands in so
near relation to God. 12. Whatever be the excuses of Saints in ordinary; yet
they may still expect that needful and promised proofs of love will not be
withheld in the hour of their distress, and that honest prayers will avail
much, when distress is great, and nothing left but prayer; for, now when the
hour (or the set time appointed for his suffering) is come, he betakes himself
to prayer, confidently expecting that then the Father will glorify his Son.
See Heb. 4.16. 13, The only way to come speed at Gods hands in obtaining
promised mercies, is, patiently to wait his time, submitting to be exercised,
in our faith, audience, patience and subjection to him, till the hour of
deliverance come; for, Christ having a promise of being glorified, not only in,
but after his sufferings, does quietly continue under the form of a servant,
till now the hour is come, wherein God had promised to glorify him. See Heb.
10.36. 14. As Gods being a Father gives sweet ground of encouragement in prayer
to his children: so it is an evidence of Sonship, when they have cleanly aims
in their prayers, and are led to make sweet use of the answer of prayer; for,
so Christ clears his Sonship from his aim in this suit, and the use he
purposed to make of it, that thy Son also may glorify thee. 15. To be cleanly
in our aim in prayer, and make honest use of the answer thereof, is the way to
come much speed in prayer; for, this is an argument p^^ssing audience, that the
Son being heard, will glorify him. See Jam 4.3. 16. It is a true evidence of
Sonship when men's chief aim in all they ask and obtain, is the glory of God,
and that they may be enabled activ^ to concur in glorifying of him; for, this
is Christ's first and chief aim, premitted to all the rest: That thy Son also
may glorify thee. 17. The glory of ^^e Son is the glory of the Father also;
And he is glorified in the glorifi^^^ion of his Son, and by his Son so
glorified: In the suffering of his Son; he is glorified in his obedience, his
justice against sin, his wisdom in finding out a way of Redemption, and his
love to lost man, shine in that matter; In his exaltation, he is glorified, in
his fidelity and power, and consummating the work of Redemption by his Son. And
Christ thus exalted, glorifieth him, by the preaching of the Gospel, and
subduing the world to his obedience; for, these two go together, glorify thy
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. 18. It may assure believers, that
their well-being will bear much sway in heaven, when they consider that both
the Father and Son are glorified therein; That the Son is glorified, in being
carried through in suffering for them, and in perfecting their Redemption, and
in triumphing over all their enemies, and that the Father is glorified in thus
glorifying of his Son; Therefore is this spoken in the audience of his
disciples, to encourage them, by hearing the Father and Sons glory so much
concerned in this business.

Verse 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him.
In this verse is contained a third express Argument pressing his petition; it
is taken from the trust committed to him, and that the Father had given him
authority over all persons, to order and dispose of them so, as he might bring
about the salvation of the Elect. And therefore he desires to be glorified,
that he may be answerable to that trust: That the Father would bear him through
in suffering, that so he may purchase eternal life to them, and would glorify
him after his sufferings, in his exaltation in heaven, that he might perfect
his work, and exerce that power and authority, and apply his purchase, for the
actual salvation of the Elect. So the Argument contains a second subordinate
end which he propounds in his prayer, namely, the glorification of the Elect,
which also is a mean of his glorifying of the Father, who delights to be
glorified in their salvation. Whence learn, 1. It is Christ's great care, next
unto his Fathers glory, to discharge his trust faithfully, in order to the
eternal welfare of his own; Therefore does he make it an Argument why the
Father should glorify him, that he may discharge this trust. 2. Such as are
entrusted and employed by God, may expect that he will not desert them in the
discharge of their trust, when they come and employ him by humble confident
prayer; for, Christ in prayer expects, that the Father, as he has given him
this power, etc. will glorify him, that he may do what is committed to him. 3.
Christ, even as Mediator, has sovereign power and authority over all things,
so that they are but frail flesh before him, and he may dispose of them as he
will: for, there is power, or, authority, over all flesh, given to him by the
Father, or a donative power and Kingdom as Mediator. He restricts this power
to all flesh, not secluding all other things which are under his power, Matthew.
11.27. and 28.18. John 3.35. but comprehending them under those, as being the
great visible obstructers of his peoples happiness. 4. Beside the power given
unto Christ over all creatures, there are a certain number of men given by the
Father unto Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, that he may redeem, take
charge of, and be forth coming for them: for, there are here some thus given
him, of which more, v. 6. See Joh. 6.37, 38, etc. 5. Life eternal is that which
Christ intends for his people, and he will never rest satisfied, till he crown
his other mercies to them with putting them in possession thereof; for, it is
his aim here, to give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. 6. Life
eternal is a gift peculiar only to the Elect who are given to Christ, and is
conferred only upon them, and upon all of them; for, he gives eternal life to
as many, or, to all thou have given him, and to none else. 7. Whatever be the
gracious endowments conferred upon the Elect within time, yet eternal life is a
free gift unto them; for, he give^ eternal life to as many at thou have given
him. 8. It may confirm the Elect, who are drawn to Christ, in the certain
expectation of eternal life, that the dispensation thereof is committed unto
Christ their Head and Surety; for, thou have given him authority, that he
should give eternal life. 9. I^ does yet further confirm their says, that it
is by the consent and appointment of the Father, that Christ has this
dispensation, and does let forth all these proofs of love which they feel;
for, says he, thou have given him power, that he should give eternal life. 10.
The accomplishment of the Elects society, in b^inging them to heaven, is a work
of no small difficulty; for, it requires a Mediator so eminently qualified,
with power over all flesh, to bring it about. 11. There is in Christ sufficient
ground of confidence, that he will save his own, whatever difficulties be in
the way. He has not only sufficient merit to purchase it, and wisdom,
fidelity, love and care, to guide them in the way to it; but power also to draw
them in and hold them in, and power over all things that might impede or
promove their salvation, to dispose of them so, as they may be subservient to
that great work: for, Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him.

Verse 3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
The former argument is further explained, by clearing what life eternal is;
Namely, a saving knowledge of God, as the only true God in his essence and
attributes, in opposition to idols, and a knowledge of him as he is manifested
in Christ, the Fathers Ambassador; which is both the way and mean of attaining
eternal life, and the beginning of it, while it is known by faith here, and
eternal life hereafter shall consist in the full sight and fruition thereof.
For further clearing of this purpose, Consider. 1. Christ's scope in inserting
this explication in his prayer, is not to inform the Father; but partly, to
inform the disciples, for whose edification he thus prayed in their audience;
partly, to press the argument strongly: for the glorifying of Christ to give
eternal life should glorify the Father, by his being known and acknowledged by
believers; and it was needful Christ should be supported in his agony, and
afterward exalted to give eternal life, seeing eternal life consisted only in
knowing God in his Christ. Consider, 2. While Christ propounds the Father to be
the only true God, the meaning is not to seclude himself and the holy Spirit
from being the true God also, one in essence, and equal in power and glory with
the Father. For that is a truth fully asserted throughout the Scripture, Joh.
20.28. Act. 20.28. and elsewhere; and in the same prayer, v. 5. Christ is said
to have had glory with the Father, before the world was; Now before the world
was, there was nothing subsisting to have glory or any other thing, but only
the true God; and so Christ, with the Holy Ghost, must be true God also. But
for clearing of the words, we would consider that this exclusive, only, is not
joined with the word, Father, as if it ran thus, Only the Father is the true
God, but it runs with the words that follow, the only true God. And so when it
is said, the Father is the only true God, the meaning is, that God, or the
deity which subsists in the person of the Father, is the only true God, or
godhead, in opposition to all idols and supposed deities, not secluding the
other persons in whom that true Godhead subsists also, seeing the essence is
one in all the three, and every one of them are that only true God. Withal, for
confirmation of this, it would be considered, that in Scripture there are such
words of restriction made use of, in things ascribed to one or other person of
the Godhead, which yet are not to be taken absolutely, as secluding the rest of
the persons, but only in relation to the creatures; as Matthew. 11.27. it is
said, None (as it is in the Original) knows the Son, but the Father, or,
the Father, but the Son, etc. in both which assertions, it is not to be
supposed that the Son, or Father, are secluded from knowing themselves, though
the knowledge of the one be ascribed only to the other; but it is to be
understood that no creatures know the one or the other, until the Son reveal
them. Nor is the Spirit either secluded from knowing the Father and Son, by
these expressions, seeing he searches, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2.10. but only the creatures. So here, take this restriction as we will, and it
secludes not the Son and Spirit from being that true God, but only shows that
idols are not that true deity. Doct. 1. The happiness of believers would be
much studied by them, wherein it consists, and what is the way to it; And for
this end, there is need of Christ's own teaching; Therefore does he take
occasion, for their edification, to insert this description of life eternal. 2.
It may sweeten believers condition unto them, when they consider how much the
Father and Son do interesse themselves in their happiness; Therefore does he
propound their eternal happiness. as a thing wherein both of them are so much
concerned, as has been explained. 3. The estate unto which believers are and
will be advanced by Christ, is a state of life, and only worthy of that name;
any other estate beside, being but a state of death; Therefore does he call it
life, and life eternal, even as it is begun here. See Act. 5.20. where it is
called this life, by way of excellency. And for our assurance of an interest in
this state, we should be sensible of our being dead without it, and sensible of
what annoyeth this life, when we have received it; we would seek after food
suitable for entertaining of our life, and be active in such motions and
duties, as do slow from the principle of such a life. 4. Whatever other life
men live, yet it is but fading, their best days, vanity, and few, and evil;
But it is the happiness of believers, that their begun-life is everlasting,
and will be perfected in glory; for, it is life eternal. 5. Eternal life, as it
is begun here, and the way to attain to the full enjoyment thereof in heaven,
consists in the knowledge of God, as it includes faith in him, and suitable
affections and practice; for, This is life eternal, that they might know thee,
as knowledge consists not in a bare act of the understanding, but takes the
will and affections along with it. 6. It is necessary to the saving knowledge
of God, that he be taken up as God, in his nature and attributes, as he has
revealed himself; and that he be known to be really and truly that which he
reveals himself to be; for, they must know him God, and, the true God. 7.
Albeit there be many things cried up as god in the world, and in men's
estimation; Yet they are but vanities and lies, and only Jehovah is the true
God; And they who know him savingly, will acknowledge him as such, renouncing
and crying down all idols, all delights and confidences, beside; for, he is the
only true God; and they must know, and acknowledge him as such. 8 Whatever
knowledge of God men attain unto, as the true God, in opposition unto idols;
Yet that will not be sufficient unto salvation, unless Christ the Mediator be
known also, and God in him and in his dispensation of grace, in sending him
into the world: Therefore are these conjoined here, to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. 9. To know Christ savingly, or to
salvation, is to know him, as in his person and natures, so, in his offices and
the trust committ^d to him; and to know that he is sent and approven of the
Father in going about his work; and what are the terms upon which he engaged
and did come into the world, to perform this work; what the Father promised
unto him, and he again unto the Father; for, so is the knowledge of Christ, in
order to salvation, qualified, to know Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Ver. 4. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do.
A fourth argument pressing the petition, is taken from his fidelity in
discharging the trust committed to him, in that he had glorified the Father, by
accomplishing the work which was laid upon him to do; Upon which (in the next
verse) he repeats his suit. He says, I have finished the work: for, albeit in
heaven he be still working for us, and working that which was given him by the
Father to do, namely, in so far as concerns the application of his merit for
the actual salvation of the Elect, Yet the work of Reconciliation (as the
distinction is Romans 5.10.) or, of purchasing Redemption, was given him to be
done on earth, and he finished it there. And albeit he had not as yet, when he
prayed this, finished all that was given him; yet he might well say this
because he had finished all that was hitherto requisite to be done, and had in
his will and resolution gone through all that was yet before him, and was
shortly to perform all things till he might say, It is finished, chap. 19.30.
In reference to which he makes this profession. Doct. 1. None are sent into the
world to be idle, but have a task and service laid upon them, of their general
calling and particular station; for, Jesus Christ himself had work on earth.
2. We cannot acceptably serve our generation, nor will God accept any work we
do, unless his glory be our chief aim in it; for, I have glorified thee,
says he, in this work. 3. To glorify God is so much the more remarkable, as
it is not suspended till we come to heaven, where we may do it without
interruption; but is set about on earth, where so few mind that work, and
where there are so many difficulties and tentations to divert us; for, it
contributes to commend his service, that I have glorified thee on earth, says
he. 4. Christ, by his preaching, miracles, sufferings, and obedience to the
death, and his whole conversation, and frequent ascribing of the great things
he did, to his Father, did glorify him, and demonstrate his power, truth,
wisdom, justice, mercy, and other attributes: for, says he, I have glorified
thee on earth. Which may encourage believers, that their surety has served God
so acceptably. 5. Such as have been sincerely aiming at Gods glory, will still
be endeavoring to glorify him more and more; for, he who had glorified him on
earth, propounds it, v. 1. as his aim still, tha^ thy Son may glorify thee,
6. As God is glorified by men's work and actings, and not by bare professions
only; So God is the imposer of men's tasks upon them, and he will be glorified
by no works of men, but what are by himself assigned to them in their
stations; for, I have glorified thee, in the work which thou gave me to do.
7. Men must not only begin, but perfect also their work unto the end, before
they receive a full reward; for, so much does his example teach, I have
finished the work. 8. Christ did nothing on earth, in working out our
Redemption, but what was the will of the Father, and by him committed unto him;
for, his work was the work which he gave him to do. See Joh. 6.39. So that
Christ working it, and it being the will of the Father, it must be acceptable.
9. There was nothing committed to Christ by the Father, to be done on earth,
for the purchasing of our Redemption, but he did finish it: So that the debt is
paid, justice satisfied, and sin, Satan and death spoiled, so that nothing
remains now but the application of his purchase, and communication of that to
his people which they already have in him their Head; for the doing whereof he
is now exalted and glorified; for, I have finished the work which thou gave
me. 10. Such as expect a comfortable issue of their life, and desire to make a
comfortable Testament, ought to make it their chief care to glorify God, in
going incessantly about his service in their station, till they finish their
course; for, herein Christ has left us a pattern, who being to seek to be
glorified with the Father after his death, v. 5. has here this sweet
testimony, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work, etc. See 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Isa. 38, 1, 2, 3.

Verse 5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee before the world was.
In this verse Christ repeats and explains his petition, by way of conclusion
following upon the former argument; Wherein he restricts the former general
petition, to be glorified, v. 1, to the enjoyment of that glory he had before
the world was, as presupposing his being glorified in being born through in his
sufferings, and including, by way of consequence, the manifestation of his
glory in his spiritual Kingdom in the world. The sum of the petition, is,
that since he had finished his work on earth, therefore the Father would
advance him to the possession of that glory he enjoyed from all eternity. For
clearing whereof, we are to consider, that as Christ was from all eternity, the
glorious God, so we are not to conceive of any real change in this glory of his
Godhead, as if by his estate of humiliation, he had suffered any diminution, or
by his state of exaltation, any real accession were made to his glory, as God.
But the meaning is, That Christ, having (according to the paction past betwixt
the Father and him) obscured the glory of his Godhead, for a time, under the
vail of the form of a servant and our sinlesse infirmities, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7,
8. does now expect, (according to the tenor of the same paction) after he has
done his work, to be exalted, and openly declared to be the S^n of God, Romans
1.4. the vail of his estate of humiliation, though not of our nature, being
taken away. It is further to be considered, That however this eternal glory be
proper to him as God, yet he prays to be glorified in his whole person,
glorify me, because not only was his humane nature to be exalted to what glory
finite nature is capable of, but the glory of his Godhead was to shine in the
person of Christ, God-man, and in the man Christ, though without confusion of
his natures and properties. Doct. 1. It is the property and prerogative of the
true God, to be glorious and excellent, and consequently, to be delighted in as
such, and reverenced; for, this is the evidence of his Godhead, that he has
glory proper to him. 2. The glory of God is not borrowed from the creatures,
but is essential, immutable, and eternal before any creature was; for, it is a
glory before the world was. 3. Jesus Christ is true God, and was infinitely
glorious from all eternity; for, he who now appears in the form of a servant,
had glory before the world was. 4. As all solid glory is only in heaven with
God, so Christ's divine glory is with the Father, communicating with him in the
divine essence and glory; Therefore is this glory expected with thy own self,
and the glory which I had with thee; Whereby is not only to be understood, that
he is to be glorified in heaven with the Father, and exalted these in his
person as God-man, before he spread his glory as Mediator in the world: But
that in his glory, as God, he communicates with the Father, being in and with
the Father, and rejoicing always before him, as the Son of his bosom, John 1.1,
18. Prove. 8.30. 5. It pleased the glorious Son of God, in obedience to the
Father, to humble himself, and obscure the glory of his Godhead; that he might
be like his brethren, and a sit Mediator for sympathy and suffering; and, that
he might engage his life and glory for redeeming of the Elect, and lay by his
robes of Majesty, not to be reassumed till he gave a good account of that work;
for, here he humbles himself, to have his glory to seek from the Father (in
respect of his person God-man) upon the performance of what was entrusted to
him, I have finished the work, etc. v. 4. And now glorify me, says he. 6.
Christ did so faithfully discharge his trust, and perfected the wo^k of our
R^demption, as the Father was engaged by paction to glorify him; and
accordingly, Christ; God incarnate, is exalted with the Father in glory and
Majesty; for, now he h^th so finished the work, as he may seek to be glorified,
as he is. So that believers may be as sure that all things, necessary for their
R^demption, are done, as it is sure that Christ is glorified: And as by the
incarnation of the Son of God, his Godhead is brought near unto us, and he
sitted with these humane affections, and sinlesse passions, suitable to what we
needed of him, and to a surety and high Priest: So by the uniting of his
humanity to his Godhead in one person, and the exaltation thereof unto that
height of glory, he is elevated above all such weaknesses, of mutability and
emptiness, which do accompany, and usually corrupt these affections and
passions, and render them useless and uncomfortable in these who are but mere
men.

Verse 6. I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of
the world: thine they were; and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
word.

7. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee.


Follows, to v. 20. the second part of the Chapter, wherein Christ prays
for his eleven disciples. Wherein, albeit some things be peculia^ to them, yet
several grounds of the petitions, and the petitions themselves, are common to
them, not only with Ministers, but, with all the Elect to be converted by the
Apostles Ministry, either mediatly or immediately. And so they may in this part
of the prayer, be looked on as representing the whole Ministry and Church, and
the purpose as much one in substance with the following part of the Chapter.
Only Christ, for the full encouragement of his followers of all sorts, would
first pray somewhat for the Apostles expressly, lest they should think they
were lost among the bulk of professor. And would have somewhat expressly for
all believers in all ages, that they might not think they were forgotten by
him, and only his disciples cared for in this his solemn prayer to the Father.

In the first branch of this part of the Chapter, Christ describes these whom
he prays for, and gives an account of his diligence about them, and success
with them. Whereby, he not only gives a notable instance of his fidelity which
he had asserted, v. 4. but does also recommend them to the Fathers care and
love, and that the petitions put up for them may be answered. This description
and account is propounded in these verses; which may be taken up in this order;
That, for interest, these for whom he prays, were the Fathers by eternal
election, and committed to his care and trust, to purchase, apply and promove
their happiness. And for the matter of diligence and success; He had in
discharge of his trust, taken them in teaching, and revealed the Father unto
them; which (being don in sub^erviency to his eternal purpose of Election) had
so succeeded, as they had kept the Fathers Word, and acknowledged Christ to
have received his authority, commission, furniture and doctrine, from the
Father. And so Christ gives a fair account of his bringing in of the Elect, in
that he had converted the Apostles who were to be his instruments in converting
of the rest throughout the world; And lays a ground of confidence to be heard
in their behalf, taken from Gods eternal interest in them, and their converted
estate. Whence learn, 1. It does commend the love of God toward fallen men,
that fallen Angels being cast off without hope of recovery, they are admitted
to the hope of Redemption and restitution after their fall; for, this great
trust of Christ is discharged toward men. See Heb. 2.16. 2. Christ's commission
extends not to all the world, but to some in it only; for, he gives an account
of the men which thou gave me (says he) out of the world, even the Apostles,
and other Elect. 3. Whatever difference there be in Gods eternal purpose, or
wrought by Christ's grace, in these committed to him; Yet Gods love and Christ's
grace finds them in the same condition with others, till the difference be
made: for, they are given out of the world. 4. All these of whom Christ takes
special care, are the Fathers by a peculiar interest, as being appropriate for
him in his eternal purpose of Election; for, thine they were, says he, Not as
all other things are: but elected by him to be his peculiar people. 5. The
Elect, being the Fathers property, are not entrusted with that happiness
intended, and to be conferred upon them; But are given over to Christ, and
committed to him in the covenant of Redemption, that he may die to satisfy
justice and obtain eternal Redemption for them, and may apply his purchase, in
converting them, and preserving them and their furniture, till they come to
obtain everlasting life: for, Thine they were, and thou gave them me, Not
only to the Apostleship, of which, v. 12. but entrusted to him, with all the
Elect, in that paction betwixt the Father and the Son, of which Chap. 6.37, 39.
So that they who are under his charge may be sure, considering his infinite
sufficiency for it, and his fidelity to the Father who has entrusted him. 6.
The first visible evidence of election, and of men's being committed to Christ's
trust, breaks forth in the work of conversion; for, upon these two it
follows, and they have kept thy Word. This is not only Christ's charge to see
it done, but the Fathers also, who engages to draw Christ's purchase unto him,
Joh 6.44. So that conversion is a fruit of Gods eternal love, land of Christ's
taking charge of us, both which we may look back and read, when we find that
change wrought. See Acts 13.48. 7. True and effectual conversion is wrought by
the Word of God, as the instrument; So that any change wrought by another mean,
will not avail, nor is there any hope of them who contemn the Word, let them
have what other means they will; for, I have manifested thy Name, and they have
kept thy word. See 1 Pet. 1.23. Luke 16.31. 8. It is not the naked proposition
of the Word that will avail to conversion, unless the heart be opened, and the
Word born in with such efficacy, as to reveal God in his nature, and
attributes, of justice, mercy in his Christ, power, holiness, etc. as the
fragrant smell thereof may invite sinners to draw near; for, I have manifested
thy Name, says he, in order to their conversion. 9. Who ever be the instrument
administering the Word; yet it is Christ that must reveal the Father in and by
it, and make it effectual; for, I have manifested thy Name, says he; Not only
by his preaching in person, but by his powerful operation and illumination,
which must be his work in all ages, though Ministers be his instruments. 10.
However reprobates do live obstinate under the Word, to their own perdition;
And however the Elect may lie long unconverted; Yet the Word, being administered
to them as a subservient mean of executing the decree of Election, will in due
time prevail in Christ's hand, to their conversion: for, I have manifested thy
Name unto the men which thou gave me, who were thine, and they have kept thy
Word. 11. Such as have found the Word effectual to their conversion, will be
sure to lay it up in their heart, as their daily food, and to observe it in
their practice; and to do so, because of the Authority of God shining in it;
for, this is an evidence of their conversion, they have kept thy Word, that so
they may be nourished by the same mean by which they are begotten. 12. It is
also a special evidence of true conversion, to know Christ savingly and the
mystery of Redemption, to know Christ's union with the Father, his commission
and authority from him as Mediator, and to see God in Christ; for, this is
another evidence of his success, they looked not on Christ as the malicious
Jews did, but now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me
(the office of Mediator, and furniture for it) are of thee, and not usurped by
me, or of my self, nor any invention of man, but all divine and heavenly.
Which commendation, with what follows, v 8. seems to be grounded on their
profession, Chap. 16.30. 13. Whatever may be the weakness and ignorance of
true converts, for a time; Yet being in Christ's hand, and through his blessing
on the means, they will at last come up to a more full measure: for, says he,
Now they have known, etc. to wit, in respect of degrees of knowledge, and
fixedness in it. 14. Jesus Christ, the great Advocate of his people, does cover
their defects, esteem of their small beginnings, considering what he purposes
to make them; And however he point out their faults to themselves, to humble
them, yet he will present and commend their weak beginnings to his Father.
Therefore, albeit he chide their presumption in their professing after his
commending of them, chapter 16.27, 30, 31, 32. yet here, and in the following verse
he does notably commend them to the Father. 15. Albeit it be our duty to
embrace Christ offering himself, and to be converted, and it is our great
happiness when it is so; Yet it is put on Christ, that he should not only give
an account of his diligence, but of his success also, and that he not only
offer salvation to the Elect, but present them also converted to his Father. As
here, and in the following verse he does. 16. Such as have embraced Christ's
offer, have sweet ground of confidence to be respected of the Father, and heard
in prayer; Considering, both his eternal love and interest, and the grace of
God in them, needing his preservation and upholding; Therefore does Christ
present them as these who were the Fathers, and are now converted, that so he
may be accepted in his prayers for them; for, albeit he intercede and prevail
for the conversion of the elect, as knowing who are given him; yet they can
have no comfort of it, unless they be converted.

Verse 8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they
have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they
have believed that thou did send me.
In this verse Christ insists to enlarge and amplify this his account of
diligence and success about them; showing that he delivered them no Word but
what the Father had given him, and that they had received it, and certainly,
believed the truth concerning his person and office, that he came out, and was
sent Ambassador from the Father. Whence learn, 1. Christ is not a sleighter of
his trust, nor will he content himself superficially to discharge it, but will
so go about it, as he may abide the strictest inquest concerning his fidelity
in it; Therefore does he over again, by way of confirmation, insist to give his
account, for I have given, etc. as not declining to be tried and better tried
concerning it. 2. Conversion unto God is a business of so great importance, as
men ought not easily to satisfy themselves about it; Therefore also does he
again give an account of the way of their Conversion, that we may learn to try
and try again if we be converted indeed. See 2 Pet. 1.10. 3. In the trial of
Conversion, it is not enough to see what change is wrought, but what the Word
is that wrought it; that it be not a word of error, but the sound Word of
truth coming from Christ; for, says he, I have given unto them the words which
thou gave me, and they have received them. 4. Whatever word be held out for
the conviction and conversion of sinners; yet the divine original and authority
thereof must be studied and acknowledged, before it be effectual, or received
and obeyed; for, in order to their Conversion, he says, I have given unto them
the words which thou gave unto me, even divine truth, which they acknowledged
to be of God, v. 7. 5. The word of divine truth concerning the conversion and
salvation of lost man, is delivered by the Father to Christ, the great Prophet
of his Church, that he may communicate the same to his people, and see to the
preservation thereof in the world; for, these words, are the words which thou,
(says he,) gave me. So that the doctrine of the Gospel proceeds from the
Father, and Christ is entrusted with the preservation thereof in this corrupt
world. 6. Christ is faithful in his Prophetical office, and has concealed no
truth necessary to salvation, but delivered all that was entrusted to him by
the Father; for, I have given them the words which thou gave me. 7. As the
Elect do all of them, in due time, welcome and entertain God and Christ's Word
and all of it, whatever it say; so they who do receive the Word so as to open
their hearts to it, as a word of truth, admitting the convictions, consolations
and directions thereof, do give true evidence of their conversion thereby; for,
this was an evidence thereof in the Apostles, they have received them, which
includes that knowledge and believing after-mentioned And where the Word is not
thus received and welcomed, there it will pursue and overtake sinners, Zech.
5.6. 8. The Word of Christ is never savingly received, but, when Christ is
known and embraced, as offering himself therein; for, this was the sum and
^cope of his doctrine, and the obedience of their Conversion, that they have
known that I came out from thee, etc. See chap. 20.31. 9. Christ is to be taken
up by l^st sinners, not as their fancy or fear would point him out, but as he
has revealed himself in his saving Word; for, they have received the words,
and thereby have known, etc. 10. Christ is then savingly known, when he is
known in his person and offices, and that the Father is in him, and he his
Ambassador, reconciling the world; for, they have known that I came out from
thee, and that thou did send me; of which, chap. 16.27. 11. Beleever^ ought
to be well rooted in their knowledge of Christ, his person and offices;
considering the many tentations and assaults they will meet with, to shake them
in this particular; for, they have surely, (or, truly) known, etc. 12. For
settling of believers in the point of knowing Christ, they must not expect such
evidences as are usual in natural things; but must submit and be content with
the evidence of faith, which, how ob^cure soever it seem, is a sure knowledge
in its own kind: for, they have surely known, is expounded, they have believed
that thou did send me.

Verse 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world: but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine.

10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine: and I am glorified in them.


In these verses is contained the second branch of this part of the chapter;
wherein Christ appropriates his prayer to his Apostles, and his elect in them,
in opposition to the world. For which he gives several reasons; As 1. That
they are his charge given him by the Father. 2. That they are the Fathers also
by eternal election; unto which he subjoyns an illustration, clearing how they
are the Fathers, being given to him; namely, that both as God he has a
communion with the Father in all things, and as Mediator also, as the Elect
were given to him by the Father, and all things for their behoof, so they
continued still the Fathers in respect of election, and it was his work to make
them the Fathers again, by converting and dedicating them to him. 3. That he
was glorified in them, and therefore would intercede for them. All which makes
it clear that he does not restrict this intercession to the persons of the
Apostles only, but to all these who are not of the world, but have the same
interest in the Father and him; for whom also he prays expressly, v. 20. Doct.
1. Jesus Christ is the great High Priest, not only to offer up himself a
sacrifice for sin, but by his prayer and intercession, to complete his work,
and apply his purchase; for, I pray, says he, as giving in this action a
pattern of his perpetual intercession in heaven. 2. It is no small privilege
to have interest in Ch^ists intercession, who has perfect knowledge of all the
necessities of his people, and of the true remedy and supply thereof; who has
fidelity and tenderness not to slight those whom he undertakes; who is not
refused of any suit he puts up for them, chap. 11.42. and whose merit and
intercession is sufficient to render naughty persons and services acceptable;
Therefore it is held out as a special privilege I pray for them, etc. See Heb.
7.25. 3. Christ did not go about the exercise of his Mediatory-office at
adventure, not knowing whether many or few, all or none, would reap benefit
thereby; But he knew distinctly for whom he appeared, and for whom not: for,
says he, I pray for them, I pray not for the world. 4. Christ was so far from
laying down his life for all in the world, that all in and of the world are
secluded from any part in his intercession, except only the elect; for,
whatsoever some do say of Christ's praying as a man under the Law, wherein he
looks not so much to the event, as his duty, and so may pray for them in whose
behalf he is not heard; to which they refer that prayer, Luke 23.34.
whatever, I say, they assert of this kind, (wherein I shall not be positive,
though that petition, Luke 23. for his ignorant persecutors, got a large answer
in the Conversion of so many of them, Act. 2. and afterward) yet the world is
here secluded from his intercession as Mediator, and only the Elect taken in;
I pray for them, I pray not for the world. Which yet does no way militate
against our duty of praying for all manner of men who have not sinned unto
death; for his praying is grounded upon the distinct knowledge of the Will of
God, and whom he will save, and therefore he prays distinctly. Whereas we,
wanting this knowledge, ought to pray for all men, with submission to the Will
of God. 5. Whatever the elect be in themselves, even after they are converted;
yet the charge and trust of them being committed to Christ, it does engage him
to intercede for them: so that all his wounds bleed, and his credit in heaven
is employed, when they have to do; for, I pray for them which thou have given
me, says he, 6. The Elect are so given to Christ, as they are still the
Fathers, in respect of his eternal election and good will toward them; for,
them which thou have given me, they are thine. 7. It is a notable encouragement
to employ God on behalf of the Elect, that he has such an interest in them,
and being chosen by him, they are cast upon him, and left upon his help; for,
upon this consideration does he commend his given ones to the Father in prayer:
for they are thine, and that he commends none to him, but those whom he first
gave him. 8. Christ's people have room in his heart and affection, not only
because of his interest in them, and charge of them: but because of the
interest the Father has also in them, whose beloved Son he is; for, this is
not only a reason why the Father should respect his prayers for them, but also
why he so heartily undertakes to pray for them: for, they are thine. Which
should teach all, in their stations, heartily to respect and care for those
persons or things wherein God has an interest. 9. There is a communion and
reciprocal interest in all things betwixt the Father and his Son, who is heir
of all things, Heb. 1.2. and betwixt the Father and Christ as Mediator, in the
Elect; for, All mine are thine, and thine are mine. 10. This communion and
interest tends much to the advantage of Gods people, as having interest both in
the Father and the Son; so that Christ will not neglect those who are not only
his own peculiar property entrusted to him, but his Fathers also, and will have
a care to make them forthcoming to the Father: And the Father will respect
those, and his Son in interceding for them, who are not only his beloved Sons
charge, but his own also. Therefore are both the former Arguments conjoined in
this; And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, to assure us how careful
Christ will be of them, and how acceptable these endeavors will be to the
Father. 11. Christ who is the Lord of glory, and needs nothing from the
creature, does yet stoop to take glory from his people, in so far as he
glorifieth himself in them; for, I am glorified in them. 12. How unworthy
soever Christ's people be, yet it is a sufficient argument moving him to do for
them, and to prevail in what he does, that he does manifest his own glory in so
doing, and by the fruits thereof in them; for, this is another argument why he
intercedes for them, And I am glorified in them, namely, by doing good to them,
and by their behavior being so dealt with; And particularly, as they were
Apostles, by their preaching to the world, his triumphs were proclaimed, and
the world subjected to his obedience. And this may assure us, that the more our
endeavor and aim be to glorify God and Christ, we have the clearer ground to
expect the acceptance of our prayers.

Verse 11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
come to thee, Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have
given me, that they may be one, as we are.
Follows to v. 17. the third branch of this part of the Chapter, wherein his
first petition for his Apostles is propounded, pressed and explained. In this
verse the petition is propounded, that the Father would preserve these whom he
had given him, in an ill world, that they may be kept in unity. The petition is
ushered in with a proposition of their case, that they are to be left in the
world, deprived of their Masters company who had a care of them, and therefore
he must leave them upon divine protection, not secluding his own spiritual, but
only bodily presence. Which purpose is more fully expressed in the following
verse. Doct. 1, Christ after his Ascension is no more in the world in respect
of his bodily presence, though he continue still in it as God, and by his
governing and assisting Spirit; for, says he, being now shortly to die, and
ascend to heaven; Now I am no more in the world. 2. Christ when he removed out
of the world, did ascend to his Father, and enjoy full fellowship with him, as
having done his work on earth, and being to appear constantly in heaven, in
name of his children; for, says he, I come to thee. 3. Albeit Christ's people
be all dear to him, yet he does leave them behind him on earth for a time, that
they may glorify him by serving their generation; may have occasion to draw
out many proofs of his love, and be trained and fitted for their eternal
inheritance; for, Now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world. 4.
Albeit Christ's followers will get tender usage while they are weak and infirm,
yet they must not expect always to lurk, and be dandled, but must come out and
meet with blasts, wherein they may give proofs of their proficiency by such
tender usage; for the disciples who were sheltered so long under their Masters
protection, are now left alone deprived of his bodily presence; I am no more in
the world, but these are in the world, See Matthew. 9, 14, 15. 5. The world is so
barren a soil to grace, Saints corruptions lay them so open to the tentations
thereof, and these of the world are so bad company to these who are gracious,
that they would be very miserable unless they had somewhat beside the world,
and the consolations thereof, to sweeten their lots unto them, and uphold them;
Therefore does he recommend them to the Fathers care and pity upon this
consideration; These are in the world. See 1 Cor. 15.19. 6. None of Christ's
given-ones are obnoxious to miseries and hazards, but only these who are yet in
the world, all the rest who are gone hence, being in a condition of complete
and immutable happiness; Therefore he is only solicitous and prays for these
that are in the world. 7. Christ, by removing his bodily presence, took not
away his heart from his people on earth, nor did cast off his care of them;
for, in his farewell he discovers much sense of their need; These are in the
world. 8. As Christ's removal did not, so neither does his exaltation into glory
change his heart from respecting his people; but he looks on his exaltation, as
calling for some fruits to descend to his followers on earth from him their
exalted Lord; and his tender heart will never be free of cares and desires
about them, so long as he and they are not in one condition, but he exalted at
the Fathers right hand, and they left wrestling on earth; for, upon these
considerations does he recommend their case; These are in the world, and I come
to thee. 9. Christ's tender heart, and care of his people in his absence,
appears, in that he is very sensible of their difficulties on earth, (These
are in the world;) in that his keeping of them in the world, to honor him, and
do him service, does endear them to him, and engage him to see to all that may
befall them, (as here he does take notice of them before the Father, since he
left them in the world;) and, in that in his bodily absence, he is careful to
supply all wants by his intercession; as here his practice does teach. 10.
Saints on earth, (though truly gracious, yet) do need constant preservation, as
having many trials and tentations of Satan, and much laziness and inward
lusts, to deprive them of their good condition and ruin them; for, this is a
necessary suit, keep them. 11. As Saints ought to be content with preservation,
so they will get it, (for, what he prays for is granted,) and when Christ
withdraws one mean of preservation, he will still afford another; And what his
followers want of outward or sensible encouragement, shall be supplied in a
spiritual way; All these are imported in this, that when Christ who had kept
them, (as it is v. 12.) is to be removed, he finds out a way of their
preservation, I am no more in the world, Father keep them. 12. The want of
Christ's bodily presence on earth, to oversee and preserve his flock, is richly
supplied by his intercession as Mediator, and the divine protection of the
Father to whom they are committed; for, I am no more in the world, and to
supply that, he prays, Father, keep them, making up that loss by his
intercession, and the Fathers power. 13. It is the duty of all such as have
souls committed to their charge, to put them on Gods hand, and to be earnest
with him for his care over them; as Christ's example does teach, Father keep
those whom thou have given me. 14. As the elect are committed to Christ's
charge, to give an account of them; so also is the Father engaged for their
Conversion, ( John 6.37. Isa. 53.11.) and for their preservation, being
converted, as being not only his own, given to Christ out of his love to them,
but as being engaged to Christ, that he shall not be frustrate of the reward of
his sufferings, but have a seed to glorify him eternally: Therefore does
Christ not only constantly preserve them by his Spirit, but does leave that
burden also on the Father, Father keep those whom thou have given me. See John
10.28, 29. 15. It gives great ground of confidence in Christ's intercession for
his people, that he prays to his Father, and their Father in him; And
believers, in their addresses to God through Christ, ought to take him up as
Christ's Father, and theirs in him; for, by this warm title, Father, Christ
would not only intimate his own familiarity, but would give us a fair ground
of hope that he shall be heard for us, and direct us how to pray for our
selves. 16. Confidence of interest in God, should be seasoned with much
reverence in prayer, and we should close with such attributes in God as are
suitable to our conditions and petitions, and may help our confidence; for both
these causes does Christ add that Epithet, Holy Father, to teach us, that as
he is a Father, so he is Holy and reverend, and that none who draw near to him
should entertain motions or desires contrary to his holiness; and to assure
us, that a petition for preservation from the evil of the world, cannot but be
acceptable to an holy God; and, that he who is the holy God, is able to
preserve and continue them holy, and will not make void his promise to his Son
concerning his given-ones Thus is his holiness engaged in every promise, Psalm.
60.6. and 89.35, 17. God, who has undertaken the preservation of his people,
does hold out in himself sufficient ground of confidence, that he is both able
and willing to do it, and can find reasons in himself for it; for, so is
imported in this, keep them in, or, through thine own Name; which imports,
both that Gods Name, or what he has revealed of himself, is a strong tower to
which they may flee, there being sufficiency of power, wisdom, mercy,
immutability, etc. in him, to keep them safe on all hands; as also, that he
will preserve them, because his Name is called upon them, and for his Names
sake, and because his glory is engaged, and will shine in so doing, whatever
they be in themselves; and because he can reveal his Name, and make his Name
known unto them, that they may cleave to him, and be preserved. 18. Only these
who are given to Christ, have assurance of divine protection and preservation;
and all of these have warrant to expect it, even the smallest and weakest; as
well as the greatest Apostle; Therefore is the prayer conceived generally,
without ^^st^^ction to the Apostles only, keep those whom thou have given me,
all of them, and only them. 19. Union among the children of God, in judgment,
Romans 12 16 affection, Gal. 5.14, 15. and practice, (evidenced by entertaining
society, Mal. 3.16. condescendence, Romans 12.16. and mutual admonition, Col.
3.16.) is a special blessing and fruit of Christ's intercession; the great fruit
of their preservation by the Father from the evils and snares of the world;
and, the condition and state wherein they may expect all other promised and
needful blessings, Psalm 133.1, 3. Therefore does he comprehend all the good
things intended for them, in this one, that (as they have many bonds of union,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. so) they may be one, and in being one, participate of the
blessings purchased by him, and evidence their p^eservation from the snares of
the world, and their being kept near God, keep them, that they may be one And
as this is a singular mercy, among professors of all sorts; so especially
among Ministers; such as the Apostles were. 20. Albeit this union among the
people of God cannot any way equal that incomprehensible union betwixt the
Father and Son; Yet it ought and will in some measure resemble it, and look
heaven like: And that, partly, in respect of the strictness of the union, they
being in their own measure one in nature, judgment, will and operation, as the
Father and Son are; and partly, in respect of the sweet exercises of holiness
truth and righteousness, wherein they are united, as the Father and Son do
eternally delight each in other. For this cause does he pray, that they may be
one, as we are. 21. Whatever be the bonds tying Christians together, Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6. and whatever prudential considerations and motives they have to induce
them to obey the command of God in keeping together in unity; (as Gal. 5.15.
and else where) yet it is only the power of God that can keep the bond of unity
inviolable; and unless he keep them near him, and free from the evils of the
world, their union will break, and there being over powered with flesh will
break out in the bitter fruits of strife and division. Therefore, says he,
Holy Father keep them that they may be one as we are.

Ver. 12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name; those
that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of
perdition: that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
This petition Christ presses by three Arguments; The first whereof (in this
verse) is taken from his care of these given him while he was bodily present
with them. He had such a care of them, as he can make a fair account that none
of them are lost; Only Judas was gone, who though he were chosen to the
Apostleship, chap. 6.70. yet was never given to be redeemed or saved by him,
but was one destinate to perdition, of whose defection and ruin the
Scriptures, speaking of him under the type of Achithophel and other of David's
enemies, ( Acts 1.20. with Psalm. 69.25. and 109.8.) had foretold. From which
Christ would infer, that he being (not to quit his charge which he exerceth
with the Father still, but) to remove from them in respect of his bodily
presence, as v. 11. and 14. therefore the Father must keep them, that his pains
be not lost. Whence learn, 1. Christ the Son of God did for a time condescend
to be present with his people in humane shape, as for other ends, so, to
testify his tenderness and respect to their infirmity, Matthew. 9.15, 16. and
to give a proof that he will still be tender of his people; for, I was with
them in the world. 2. There is no time wherein disciples, while they are in the
world, will not need care and over sight without themselves, for their
preservation; for, as now they were to need, so then they did need to be kept.
3. Albeit Christ, while he was in the world, had his own throng of sharp
exercise and sufferings; Yet all that did not hinder him to lay out himself in
caring for his people, and to make his bodily presence comfortable to them;
for, while I was with them in the world, I kept them. 4. Christ did exercise
this charge of keeping his people in the Fathers Name, that is, not only out of
love to the Father whose name is called upon them, (as true Ministers ca^e for
them, because of their relation to Christ, Joh. 21 15.) but also by the power
of God, and his attributes, communicate to him from the Father as God, and
concurring with him in carrying on his work as Mediator. Whereby as he leaves
us a pattern of selfe-denial in the enjoyment of all our gifted excellencies;
So he teaches all believers to ascribe the glory of their perseverance to God
only; for these causes, and in these respects, he says, I kept them in thy
Name. 5. Christ is so faithful in caring for these committed to him, that he
can make a fair account of one and all of them, and of his dealing and
dispensations toward them, that none of them are a missing, but all well and
safely kept and guided; for, These that thou gave me, I kept, and none of
them is lost. And this is some shadow of the great account he will make of all
his flock in the last day. 6. When Christ has taken pains upon his people, as
they will still need more, so he takes an argument from what he has done, to
do more for them, because he will not lose the pains he has taken; Therefore
does Christ plead, that since he had taken so much pains and kept them,
therefore the Father would keep them still, as he has desired. 7. As there are
in the world given ones, of whom Christ will have a care, so there are sons of
perdition and men appointed to destruction for their sin; for, so says Christ
there is but the son of perdition. Which cannot come in here by way of
exception, as if the meaning were, I have lost none of them whom thou have
given me, except Judas: for it is clear from Joh. 6.37, 39, 40. that none of
all these the Father gave him shall perish. And Judas was never given to Christ
to be redeemed, but only to the office of Apostleship. But it comes in by way
of opposition, (as the Original particle is frequently used) to this sense, I
have lost none of them thou have given me; but Judas is lost, or, though Judas
be lost. And the expression used for designation of Judas does serve to obviate
an exception; for, whereas it might be objected, how had he lost none, since
Judas was gone; He answers that he was therefore lost because he was never so
given to him, but from the beginning was a son of perdition, or, a man
appointed to destruction, as the Hebrew phrase imports 8. Sons of perdition may
be not only in the world, and in the visible Church, but even very high in
Christ's Court as to external employment and service; for, so was Judas given to
be an Apostle, whose defection necessitates Christ to vindicate himself that
he was not the less faithful in his trust, though such an eminent man did
perish. 9. Sons of perdition are such as will not be the better of any means,
or care, but will perish were they even in Christ's own company, and his hands
(as to outward dispensations) about them; for, so Judas in Christ's own Court,
is the Son of perdition, and will and does perish. 10. The defection and
destruction of Reprobates, were they never so eminent, does not any way rub on
Christ's fidelity in his account, they never being given to him, to save them;
for, he gives a faithful account to his Father, though the son of perdition be
lost. 11. God is not deceived by the defection and perishing of any, how
eminent soever, but as he had his eternal purpose about them, so he could give
an account what would become of them, if it were needful, long before they had
a being; As he gives proof in his foretelling of Judas and his defection and
ruin, so long before, in the Scripture. 12. The Scriptures of God are of
infallible verity, in threatenings, promises, or predictions; for, the Scripture
must be fulfilled. 13. The best way to read strange and cross dispensations,
is, to see an hand and providence of God in them, which may quiet our hearts,
till we get a more full and distinct account of his mind in them; Therefore,
in mentioning the son of perdiction. he leads us to the Scripture, wherein God
by foretelling thereof, testified his providence about it, and to the
fulfilling thereof by his defection, that we may see nothing in it, but that
wherein he had an holy hand.

Verse 13. And now come I to thee, and these things I speak in the world, that
they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
The second argument, pressing the petition, is taken from Christ's end in
putting up the petition in the disciples audience, and the event that should
follow upon the Fathers granting the same; Namely, the fulfilling and
completing of their joy, who were much discouraged with the removal of his
bodily presence. The sum of the argument is, That he being to remove and take
away his bodily presence, which had been so comfortable to his disciples;
albeit his intercession in heaven might have sufficed for obtaining what they
needed; Yet he would recommend them to the Father, and pray for preservation to
them, in their own audience, that so they might be encouraged, seeing his care
of them, and having hope of audience to such a suit put up by such a
petitioner. And therefore he would infer that the Father will not disappoint
their hope, but fulfill their joy by granting the request. Whence learn, 1.
Christ's removal out of the world looked very sweet upon him, as being a coming
to his Father with whom he is so familiar; And in him death is sanctified and
sweetened to all his followers, as being a departing to him, that they may be
with him for ever, Phil. 1.23. 1 These. 4.17. So does he describe his removal,
Now I come to thee. 2. Christ is very condescending in his dealing with and for
his people, and does not only what is simply needful, but what in reason may
abundantly satisfy them, notwithstanding their tentations and infirmities,
for, albeit his intercession being exalted at the right hand of the Father was
sufficient to bring about needful benefits; yet for their satisfaction, he will
even pray in their audience, These things I speak in the world. And this should
gain our consent to say, he does all things well, and by what we see of his
condesendence in any particular, to trust him in others more dark. 3. Joy is
allowed by Christ upon all his followers: It is his scope in his dealing toward
them, and he has done and daily does what may breed them joy; for, this is his
scope here, that they may have joy. See Phil. 4.4. 1 These. 5.16. 4. The faith
and knowledge of Christ's intercession for his people, that they may be
preserved and made to persevere, is such a pledge of their sure estate and of
his good will toward them, as may afford abundant matter of joy in their
saddest case; for, These things I speak in the world, that they may have joy.
5. The joy of believers is of Christ's allowing, is his work in them, and a joy
in him over all that they find in themselves; Therefore does he call it my
joy. 6. Christ's joy, allowed on his people, is a complete joy, far beyond the
empty joy of the world, in midst whereof the heart is sorrowful; And albeit the
full degrees of their joy will meet them in heaven, yet their joy here is full
in parts, as satisfying the mind, calming their storms, and staying their
foot against all essays, if they improve it right. Therefore is this joy in
that he prays for them, and their joy in obtaining their answer, called a
fulfilled joy. 7. Christ does not only take care to give his people cause of
joy, but to make them rejoice in it also, and that with an inexpressible joy,
whereof others are ignorant; Therefore will he have it fulfilled in themselves,
that is, their hearts filled with it, and feeding on that hid Manna, whereof
strangers are not pertakers, as Prove. 14.10. 8. The Father does allow that
which Christ does for the encouragement of his people, and will not let it be
ineffectual: For this is Christ's argument for obtaining his sure, which
certainly has weight with the Father, These things I speak in the world, that
they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

Ver. 14. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
The third argument pressing the petition, is taken from the worlds opposition
to them being converted. The word which Christ gave them, ver. 8. had so far
wrought upon them, as to regenerate them, and make them dissent from the world
in judgment, affection and conversation, so rendering them conform, in some
measure, to him their Head. And this change made them incur the worlds
hatred, which does call for divine preservation. Whence learn, 1. As it is
Christ's great favor and kindness to give his Word unto his people: so where
it is given with a blessing, and rightly received, it draws the receiver to a
disconformity with the world, and not to be of it, though he be in it: for, I
have given them thy Word, and they are not of the world. 2. It does exceedingly
commend the grace of God in Saints, that albeit they kept in the world, and
forced to walk among the many snares thereof, yet they are separated from it
and not conform unto it; for, though they are in the world, v. 11. yet they
are not of the world. 3. Whatever civility men of the world may have, yet all
of them are so opposite to grace and godliness, that they will not only oppose
it in themselves, but hate and persecute it in others one way or other, if it
were but by traducing piety, that they may persecute it under some odious name;
for, the world has hated them, because they are not of the world So that when
it seems to be otherwise, we may reckon, either that professors of Religion
are but too much like the world, and little like Christ, or that the worlds
malice is but overpowred and bridled, till they get an opportunity. 4. It may
encou^age Saints to endure opposition from the world so Religions sake, that
the quarrel wherein they suffer, is most glorious, and what the world hates in
them, is their g^^atest ornament before God; for, he points out to them that
the quarrel is, because they are not of the world. 5. It may encourage them
also in this conflict, that in their state and suffering, they have a
conformity with Christ their Head, conformity with whom is a great dignity;
for, by this also does he encourage them, they are not of the world, even as I
am not of the world. He or his Kingdom are not of this world more then they
are, and their suffering on this account redounds to him, who is first hated,
and for whose sake and because of conformity with him, they are hated. 6. The
worlds opposition to Saints, because of their separation from it, does engage
God to see the more carefully to their p^eservation; for, it is an argument why
the Father should keep them, The world has hated them, because they are not of
the world.

Verse 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou should keep them from the evil.

16. They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.


In these verses, 1. Christ repeats and explains the former petition, showing
(for their instruction) that he desired not as yet they should be freed from
all danger and trouble, by taking them away out of the world by death, but that
he would preserve them in the midst of troubles from the tentations and snares
of their troubles, v 15. 2. He presses and enforces the petition, thus
explained, upon the reason propounded, v. 14. taken from their condition
opposite to the world, and conform to him their Master, v. 16. Whence learn,
1. Christ's followers have need to guard against mistakes of what he says, that
they do not delude themselves, nor let their own lu^ts put a commentary upon
his doctrine; Therefore does he explain his own meaning, not to inform his
Father, but to prevent their mistakes. 2. Such as are employed to speak in
public for the edification of others, ought to make it their study to
accommodate their speech to the capacity of their hearers; As Christ here does
so speak as may clearly explain his meaning unto them. 3. Christ has more
ways then one whereby to secure his people against all they can meet with; As
here he has one way of preservation, which he lays by for a time, and
another, which he pitcheth upon. 4. There is one fair outgate from all troubles
abiding Saints, when by death they shall be translated out of the world, and
above the reach of all their difficulties; for, this is one outgate, though he
will not make use of it, at this time, to take them out of the world. See Job.
3.17, 18, 19. Rev. 14.13. 5. Albeit death be very often desired by Saints in
their perplexities; Yet Christ sees it meet rather to exercise them for a
time, and fit them for proofs of his love, then to grant that desire: And
however we ought still to have our eye upon our rest, and make ready for it;
Yet we are not anxiously to long after it, till his time come, nor to weary of
life, especially because of any trouble, persecution, or inconvenience we meet
with in his service; Therefore Christ, who loves his people better then they do
love themselves, will not pray for this, I pray not that thou should take
them out of the world. 6. ^eleevers, while they are thus left by Christ in the
world, are exposed to manifold hazards, having not only outward troubles, but
Satan and sin taking advantage of their troubles, to drive them wrong; for,
they are in this world, in the midst of the evil, not so much of outward
trouble, from which he will not always preserve them, but Satan the wicked one
(as the word will read) and the evil and wickedness to which they are exposed
in an evil world, and by the many pressures they meet with. 7. Albeit Christ
will not remove his people from these hazards, yet they are no way able to
guard themselves against them, but they must resolve to have much to do, and
very little, or rather nothing, in themselves wherewith to do it; for, they
must be kept, or else they are undone. 8. When Christ sees it not fit to
remove his own out of the world, he will see to their preservation in it; So as
though they get now and then the foil, yet his intercession is a sure pledge
that they shall recover again; for, these two go together, I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them. 9.
Christ does abundantly testify his care and diligence about his people, when
albeit he does not exempt them from troubles, and these it may be very sharp,
yet he keeps them from the evil thereof, or from spiritual hurt thereby; And
when, albeit he does not deliver them even from assaults, and tentations from
that evil, yet he upholds them by sufficient grace, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9, 10. for,
herein does his care appear, in praying that the Father should keep them from
the evil, 10. Albeit many, when they look upon Christ's promises and allowances,
and his intercession for his people, be ready to delude themselves with vain
hopes of that which Christ never allowed upon them; Yet they who are content
with being preserved from evil, however they be tempted and exercised, are no
way deluded when they expect this from Christ; for, it is his express will,
when he explains himself, that they should be kept from the evil. 11. It is
frequently to be studied by believers, that their separation from the world, is
an evidence of their conformity with Christ, and consequently, that they are
like to him, in enduring opposition from the world, because thereof; Therefore
is it again held out, They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
12. Believers disconformity with the world and conformity with Christ, is a
sure pledge that the Father will keep them from the evil of the world, and will
not lose these good things which grace has begun in them; for, this is an
Argument why he should keep them from the evil, v. 15. They are not of the
world, etc.

Verse 17. Sanctify them through thy truth: thy Word is truth.
Follows the fourth and last branch of this part of the chapter, containing
Christ's second petition for his Apostles, which is propounded in this verse,
and pressed by two Arguments, v. 18, 19. The petition is, that the Father would
sanctify them, which albeit it sometime signify the consecrating of a man and
setting him apart to an office, as the Apostles also were, v. 18. yet here it
imports somewhat beside, and subservient to that: namely, that the Lord would
confer upon them the grace of sanctification, and so consecrate them unto
himself, as believers, and so also fit them for that employment to which he had
devoted and consecrated them. Unto this is subjoyned the instrumental cause of
their sanctification, through thy truth, whereby is not only signified, that he
would have them sanctified in truth, or, truly, of which we may hear, v. 19.
but that the Word of truth is the mean and instrument of sanctification: And to
prevent all mistakes, he declares that this truth is in the Word, against all
them who seek truth beside it. Whence learn, 1. Such as are Christ's followers
indeed, and may make comfortable application of other benefits of his
intercession, must be men sanctified, by habitual graces of holiness infused
into them, which will not only break forth in some few acts of Religion and
righteousness, but must so devote and consecrate them to God, as they may not
withdraw themselves to another use: for, so much is imported in this that
Christ prays for, unto his Apostles, Sanctify them, intimating, that where he
intercedes for any, he also prays for, and, in due time, works this in them.
2, It is not enough that men have a begun work of sanctification in them,
unless they grow up in it daily more and more: for, he prays for these who
were already converted and sanctified, as he makes his account, v. 6, 7, 8.
that the Father would sanctify them, and carry them on in sanctification till
it be perfected in glory. Such will be invited to grow, who entertain the sense
of what they have received, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. who are sensible of their
short-coming in what they have, Phil. 3.12, 13. and who fear backsliding, and
consider that not to grow, is the way to decay: and they will study to evidence
this growth, by persevering in their first principles, not loving age in what
once through grace they loathed, nor building up what they once destroyed; and
by growing in graces, especially in sense of their pollution, humility, love,
painfulnesse, etc. 3. Whatever principles or obligations men have to keep them
from the evils of the world, and from Satan in it: yet all these will not
avail, unless they be not only truly sanctified, but be growing therein:
Therefore is this petition, sanctify them, subjoyned to the former, v. 15. of
keeping them, as being the effectual mean of their preservation. 4. As
sanctification is the duty of believers, laid upon them by God; so it is also
his work in them, who principleth them for it, and works it in them, when they,
in the sense of their own inability, do put it upon him: for, Christ by prayer
seeks it of the Father, sanctify them. 5. As the truth of God is the rule of
true sanctification, nothing being holiness in Gods account, how specious
soever it be, unless it be according to that truth; So the truth of God which
is the instrument of regeneration, has also a special influence in the matter
of daily sanctification, 1 Pet. 2.2. The word of command being made effectual
to press the duty, the word of promise to encourage it, 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet.
1.4. and the Word and doctrine of the Cross of Christ holding out virtue
enabling to duty, 1 Cor. 1.18. and exciting faith which purifieth the heart,
Acts 15.9. In both these respects he prays, Sanctify them through, or, in
thy truth, both as the rule and touchstone of sanctification, and as a mean and
instrument of it. 6. It is not safe for men to cry up their own or others
sanctification, to the countenancing of the errors which they maintain; but
they must prove the truth of their holiness, by the truth which has been
instrumental in it, and must reckon that the holiness they have, is either
counterfeit, or else has been wrought, not by their errors, but by the power
of some real truths which they have, or do still hold, and that therefore by
embracing error they do exceedingly wrong their piety, by depriving themselves
of the mean which does beget and cherish it; for these causes does Christ so
expressly pray, not only, Sanctify them, by what mean soever, but Sanctify
them through thy truth, as the only mean of true holiness. 7. Whatever
efficacy truth has in the matter of sanctification: it does all come from
God, who must be employed by prayer to make the word successeful for that end;
for, so much does Christ, example teach, who prays to the Father, Sanctify
them through thy truth. See 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. 8. Whatever ways men do dream of,
for finding the truth of God, yet it is only to be found in the Word of God,
and all other ways beside will but produce delusion and lies; Therefore does
he subjoine, to prevent all mistakes, Thy Word is truth. 9. Whatever may be the
hesitations of men, concerning the Word of God, yet it is his infallible
verity, and will not deceive them who betake themselves to it for direction and
encouragement; for, Thy Word is truth, See Psalm. 12.6. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Verse 18. As thou have sent me into the world: even so have I also sent them
into the world.
The first Argument pressing this petition, is taken from their emploiment and
calling to be his Ambassadors in the world, which presses the necessity of
their sanctification. This their calling and Commission is amplified from its
similitude and likeness unto the Fathers sending of him. Which (as all
similitudes have their own dissimilitudes, and are not to be strictly pressed
in every thing) is not to be extended to all the ends of Christ's coming into
the world, for he alone came to die for, and redeem his people; but only to his
Ministerial office of preaching the Gospel; In which, albeit there was some
resemblance betwixt Christ and the Apostles, as to the matter of extraordinary
calling and assistance, immediate direction, and great difficulties; yet there
was also as great difference, both in respect of their persons and authority,
he being the Lord and true God, but they were men and servants: in respect of
the manner of their furniture, he being furnished inwardly by the substantial
in-dwelling of the Godhead, they by extrinsecal revelation and assistance; and,
in respect of the measure of assistance, he being furnished without measure and
constantly, and they only but in part, and when it pleased the Spirit to
breath. Doct. 1. Christ is the great Apostle of our Profession, sent to us by
the Father; so that we need not think shame of a Profession which is owned by
such a one as he is; for, Thou have sent me into the world. See Heb. 3.1. 2.
Christ has employed the Apostles, and their successors in their own room, to
be his Ambassadors, and to supply his place as he was a Preacher of
reconciliation; so that as they ought to study an imitation of him, 1 Cor. 11
1. so they ought to be received in their Ministry, as coming in Christ's stead,
2 Cor. 5.20. Gal 4.14. Therefore, says he. As thou have sent me into the
world, so have I also sent them, as is before explained. 3. It does commend the
love of God, that he has employed the Ministry of his Son and servants even in
this corrupt world, that out of such base materials he may build up an
excellent Church and habitation to himself; and that he may encourage the most
desperate to come to him, who out of such gathers his precious jewels, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11. Tit. 3.2, 3.4. Therefore it is said that both he and they are sent
into the world. 4. Beside the obligations and necessity which lie upon
Ministers, with all Saints, to be holy, Heb 12.14. their calling does
particularly call for sanctification and separation from the world, as
necessary by divine precept, and for the well-being of the Ministry, that so
they may stand in their Masters counsel, and be kept near him, that their face
may shine, and they may be more successeful in their Ministry; for, this is a
condition calling for the granting that suit that they man be sanctified, even
that they are sent into the world. It is true, men may be lawful Ministers,
yea, and successeful also in their Ministry, who are not sanctified themselves;
for, even Judas was an Apostle. And Christ is here more expressly praying for
his eleven Apostles, who beside that they were Apostles, were given to him also
by the Father, in opposition to the world, and the son of perdition, who yet
was an Apostle, v 9, 1^. yet his reasoning in prayer does lay before all
Ministers, how needful it is they be sanctified, not only in order to their own
salvation, but even that their labor may be more successeful, and this his
reasoning does plead for holiness to all Ministers, (who employ him for that
end) in their own measure; however the extraordinary emploiment of the Apostles
did plead for an extraordinary measure of this sanctification, that they might
be kept from error, being sanctified through the truth, and made fruitful in
their great work. 5. When God does call his servants to any employment, his
calling may assure them of furniture, and what they need for discharge of that
calling: And particularly, Christ will have a special care to furnish
Church Officers sent out by himself; for, this is the face of Christ's pleading
in prayer, which prevails with the Father, that since they are sent into the
world, therefore they may get sanctification, Sanctify them, v. 17. for, I
have sent them into the world. See John 20.21, 22.

Verse 19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.
As the former reason, pressing this petition, is taken from their need of
sanctification in respect of their calling: so this second is taken from the
cause and purchase of their sanctification, by his sanctifying himself, that
they may be sanctified; For clearing wherefore, Consider, 1. Christ's
sanctifying of himself, is not to be understood of any personal cleansing now
in doing, or to be done by him, for he was without spot from his first
conception, nor yet of that purity of his nature only, but with relation to
some further sanctification; But as in the language of the Old Testament,
things are said to be sanctified, when they are set apart, fitted and prepared
for some special service and employment, and particularly, Priests are said to
be sanctified to their office, and sacrifices to be offered up: so Ch^ists
sanctification imports, that as the Father did sanctify, or consecrate and
send him into the world, John 10.36. so he did consecrate himself unto the Lord
on the Elects behalf, a Priest and sacrifice without spot; and did consecrate
himself to the whole work of his Mediatory-office, and particularly, did offer
himself a sacrifice for sin, that they might be sanctied. Consider, 2. The
effect of his sanctifying of himself, is, that they may be sanctified through
the truth, or, in truth, whereby may be understood, as formerly, v. 17. that
the virtue of his death accompanying the Word of truth is that which
sanctifies, and further also it may import, that by his sanctifying of
himself, they are s^nctified in truth, or truly, and that not only in
opposition to counterfeit sanctification, but in opposition also to legal
purifications by the use of the ceremonies of the Law, which were but a shadow
of true holiness, whereas the virtue of Christ's death being the truth of these
shadows, does truly and in truth sanctify, Doct. 1. Christ, in going about the
office of Mediator, and offering up himself a sacrifice, did wholly consecrate
and set himself apart for his peoples behoof, that he might be theirs, and seek
their well and not his own; for, for their sakes he sanctified, or,
consecrated, and set apart himself, to that work; which may engage them not to
be their own, but wholly his. 2. As the Father did consecrate and sanctify his
Son to the office of Mediator, John 10.36. so he also did consecrate himself,
as having inherent worth, and not needing external consecrations, and as being
a most willing Agent in this work; for, I sanctify my self, says he. 3.
Albeit the elect be in themselves polluted, and have no worth to merit any
purification from God; yet there is enough in Christ and his consecrating
himself a sacrifice to the Father, to supply all their worthlesnesse; and
obtain what they need; for, for their sake I sanctify my self, that they may
be sanctified. 4. True sanctification of the elect slows from Christ's
sanctifying and consecrating himself to the Father for them; not only does the
merit of his suffering, being imputed, make them appear without spot and
wrinkle in him, but the virtue of his death and sacrifice must be applied, to
sanctify them inherently; for, I sanctify my self, that they may be
sanctified. 5. Christ did sanctify and consecrate himself a sacrifice in the
Father, not for these who die in their pollution, but for these only whom he in
time sanctifies thereby; for, I sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified,
the one follows upon the other, not in the Apostles only, but all the Elect.
6. Christ does approve of no sanctification, but that which is truly such, and
abhorres all counterfeits of it, and such as rest on outside sanctification, or
shadows of true holiness only; for, that is his aim, that they may be
sanctified in truth. 7. Whatever effects good inclinations and education, moral
principles or example, or Church Discipline and Ordinances, or afflictions on
men, may produce; yet true sanctification slows only from the application of
Christ's sacrifice, and it is that which m^^es the Word of truth effectual for
sanctifying of them truly; for, upon his sanctifying himself, it follows that
they are sanctified in truth, and, through the truth.

Verse 20. Neither pray I for these alone; but for them also which believe on
me, through their word:

21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that
they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou have sent me.


Follows the third part of the Chapter, wherein Christ prays for the
Apostles and whole Church of believers expressly, seeking several benefits unto
them. In these verses, 1. He describes these for whom he prays; namely, not
the Apostles only, but all these who to the end of the world should by the Word
preached by them, either immediately or mediately in the mouth of other
messengers, be converted and drawn to believe on him, v. 20. 2. He propounds
his first suit for them, the same in substance with what he had sought unto the
disciples, v. 11. Namely, that they may be preserved in unity, and be one in
the Father and him, as he and the Father are one, and the Father in him, and he
in the Father. This suit he amplifieth and presses from the final cause
thereof: namely, that by their union the world may be convinced and made to
believe the truth of Christian Religion, and that Christ is an Ambassador,
sent by the Father into the world, v. 21. This unity prayed for, does indeed
include and presuppose their unity in relation to Christ and God in him, in
which they are stated by believing, and which is the root of the other unity;
But that which it most expressly holds out, is unity in love flowing from the
other, and which is visible to the conviction of the world.

From v. 20. Learn, 1. Albeit Christ when he departed out of this world, left
but a few followers, and his weak disciples being entrusted with the word of
reconciliation, were to meet with persecution and opposition; yet he knew
certainly his Kingdom was to spread, as accordingly he has accomplished in
the world; for, here he supposes for certain, that there will be them who
shall believe. 2. Christ's love and heart are enlarged, to take in all his
people throughout the world, and to employ himself in his Mediatory office and
intercession for them; Therefore, after his prayer for himself, and for his
Apostles, he does now show how large his affection is, Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe. 3. Christ's love toward his
people is a preventing love, even before they have a being, and before they
come to him; and whoever do in any age embrace him, shall find that they were
in his heart, and were as tenderly regarded and minded of him, in his suffering
and solemn intercession on earth, as any of his followers then present with
him; for, here before they are, or do believe, they are remembered, and he has
left a blank that all believers in all ages may put in their own name, as
prayed for by him, when he prays for his Apostles, Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe. 4. The character whereby Christ's
followers, and those whom he prays for, are discerned, is, their faith in him,
whereby they are driven out of themselves to embrace and rely upon him, and to
have all their subsistence by him; for, I pray for them which shall believe on
me. Where albeit he pray for them before they believe, and that the means may
be kept to them, till they be brought to believe; yet the thing here prayed for
supposes them in a state of believing, and him interceding for what is needful
to them in that state. And albeit his intercession have influence also upon
their believing, and is a mean to draw them to it; yet Christ does not mention
that in the Apostles audience, because none can make comfortable application of
Christ's intercession to themselves, till first they be drawn to believe. 5.
True faith is begotten by, and grounds it self upon the Word of God delivered
by the Apostles, without doting on signs and wonders, or expecting any other
revelation of the mind of God; for, they believe on me through their word.
Which also imports, that that Word will be continued, and a Ministry to preach
it, so long as there is a Church, or any to be converted. 6. Such as are taught
to discern the divine authority of the Word, will not stumble at the
despicablenesse or meannesse of instruments carrying the same, but will close
with it by says to salvation; for, albeit it be their word, as the
instruments, who were but mean and despised men in the world, yet they believe
on me through their word.

From v. 21. Learn, 1. The whole bulk of believers and Catholic Church, though
of different Nations and conditions, are but one body in Christ their Head,
having one Spirit, one faith, one baptism, etc. Ephesians, 4.4, 5, 6. for, this is
Christ's aim, wherein he succeeds, that they which shall believe, may be one.
2. Whatever adversity there be among believers, in administrations, gifts and
operations; yet this does not, nor ought hinder their being one in him; and all
of them have alike interest in him and his love; for, when he mentions the
Apostles, who were extraordinarily gifted, and all believers of all sorts, he
prays that they all may be one. 3. As it is the great dignity and privilege
of believers to be one; so their emproving of this privilege and living in
unity, is the sum and compend of their happiness, and the mean of obtaining
all other blessings; Therefore does Christ so often pray for this, and for this
only in place of all, that they may be one. See Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3. Jam 3.16. 4.
Whatever be the bonds of unity among believers, or their obligations to it, yet
the emprovement thereof to the uniting of them, must be sought and given of
God, and Christ's intercession made use of for that end; for, so much does
Christ teach us, while he prays, that they all may be one, 5. The union of
believers, prayed for by Christ, is not every combination or consent, even of
Saints, nor a conjunction in any sinful course, but it is an union in God, and
in the ways of God; for this does Christ pray for, that they may be one in us.
6. The way to keep up true union among Saints, is, that they keep close
communion with God in Christ, lest otherwise, if they be carnal, this breeds
strife, 1 Cor. 3.3. for, so much also is imported in this prayer, that they may
be one in us, or, by being in us, and keeping communion with us 7. The true
union of believers among themselves, does resemble that union betwixt the
Father and Son; partly, in respect of the strictness of the union, that this
union comes nearest to that inexpressible union, (though indeed it be
infinitely short of it,) and does far surpass any other conjunction; And
partly, that as the Father being in the Son, and the Son in the Father, they do
mutually delight each in other, as a consequent of their union, Prove. 8.30. so
this union of believers is testified and entertained by spiritual exercise of
mutual edification; to which also may be added, that from this union betwixt
the Father and the Son who is our Mediator, this union of believers does flow,
that they are made one in them: Therefore again does Christ pray, That as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, they may be one in us 8. The true union of
believers will not consist in contemplative notions, or outward professions,
but ought to express it self in visible fruits; as here is subjoyned, that the
world may believe, etc. 9 In expressing the f^u^ts of union, believers ought
not only to respect the honor of God and their own edification, but they ought
to study such a conversation, as as may either convince or convert others, and
bring them to the acknowledgment of Christ and his truth; for this the end
propounded here, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. See 1 Pet.
3.1, 2. 10. The people of God then walking in an united way, is a special mean
to convince the world of the excellency of Christ; and of the truth of
Christian Religion, and so either leave them inexcusable, or convert them;
whereas schisms and rents among them is a ready mean to beget and cherish
Atheism in the world; for, when they are one in us, the world shall believe
that thou have sent me.

Verse 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may
be one, even as we are one:
In this verse, Christ (to press this suit before the Father, and convince his
Apostles and all believers of the necessity of this union) holds forth what
excellent privileges he had conferred and allowed upon them to advance their
union; even a communication of that glory given to him by the Father. Which is
not to be understood as if the essential glory and attributes of Christ as God,
or the glory of the personal union of the manhood of Christ to his Godhead, or
of the office of Mediator, were communicable to any other, or that any glory
given to him, is communicate to any in the same measure with him: nor yet only
of the glory of the Apostleship or Ministry committed to him. For that was
given only to the Apostles and their successors, this to all believers; But
the meaning is, That as his incommunicable glory is made forthcoming for them;
so the glory of Sonship, of his sanctification without measure, of being on
Gods secrets and dwelling in his bosom, and of his union with the Father, is
communicate to them in its own kind and measure, and they are made Sons,
sanctified in part, admitted to the knowledge of the Fathers secrets, and to be
one with the Father in him, and all this in order to their union, which also is
a resemblance of that glory of his unity with the Father communicate unto them.
Whence learn, 1. Christ is truly glorious, having not only essential glory, the
same and equal with the Fathers glory, and which was declared to be in him, by
his exaltation, but our nature being exalted in him to the glory of the
personal union, and of the offices and dignities following thereupon; for,
there is the glory which thou gave me. 2. Christ is communicative of his
fullness to his people; all his excellencies being either communicate to them
to partake of, or daily forthcoming for them; for, the glory which thou gave
me, I have given them. 3. All that is in Christ for believers, or communicate
to them from him, comes by free gift, without any deserving on their part, and
should be esteemed of as an excellent gift; for, I have given them the glory.
4. What believers have in and from Christ, does advance them to a glorious
estate, and is their begun glory and salvation; so that none but they have any
true glory, nor is any thing enjoyed by men truly glorious, but the grace and
other privileges they enjoy in and from him; for, it is the glory which I have
given them. 5. It is not enough we know what we have in Christ and from him,
unless we also take up the end for which it is allowed, and improve it
accordingly; Therefore does he subjoyne, I have given them that glory, that
they may be one. 6. All Christ's communication of himself to believers, does
tend to advance their union; Their union among themselves in some sort of
resemblance with that union betwixt the Father and him, and their union with
God through him for that end, is in it self a part of that glory which he
gives them; And all their participation of the fruits of that incommunicable
glory which is in Christ, and all that is communicate by Christ to them, should
sit them the more for union, and make them grow in humility and mutual
condescendence for that effect, and not puff them up; for, the glory which
thou gave me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one. 7.
Christ would have the excellency of union studied, in the gloriousness
thereof, in his large communications for the advancement thereof, and in the
resemblance it has with the union betwixt the Father and him; Therefore does
he so point it out here, to the conviction of all, I have given them the glory,
even to be one, and that they may be one even as we are one. 8. Such as would
promove the welfare of Gods people, ought not only to wish or pray for it; but
must also be active in their station for promoving thereof; for, so much does
Christ's practice teach, who, as he prayed for this union, so he gave them the
glory, that they may be one. 9. It may, upon the one hand, shame believers from
division and dissension, that hereby they do what they can to deprive
themselves of that glory gifted by Christ, to be one as the Father and he are,
and to make void the fruit of all his glorious communications; And, on the
other hand, it may assure them who long for union, that Christ whose desire and
allowance it is, and who has laid out so much for it, and is daily interceding
with the Father for that effect, will, in due time bring it about among his
people; Therefore, both to shame his people from their contentions and neglect
of union, and to press his suit before the Father, how averse soever they be,
he uses this Argument, The glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that
they may be one, etc.

Verse 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and
that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me.
In this verse Christ yet insists to clear and press his suit for obtaining
union of believers among themselves. And for this end, 1. He propounds the way
of their union among themselves, instancing one particular branch of that glory
given them, v. 22. for that end, even union with himself, and with the Father
through him. Which as it is a great dignity in it self, so it tends to the
perfecting of their union among themselves. 2. He again amplifieth and presses
the suit from the final causes thereof: where, unto that end formerly
mentioned, v. 21. of the conviction of the world of his authority and
Commission, another also is added, that hereby the world shall be convinced of
the Fathers love to his followers, according as he loved him. Whence learn, 1.
Christ takes up an inhabitation in his people by his Spirit, so that they
become one with him; for, it is their allowance, I in them. 2. The Father
dwells in Christ, not only as he is one God with him, but also as he is man, in
whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; so highly is our nature
dignified in his person; for, thou art in me, says he. 3. Albeit there can be
no union betwixt God and fallen man immediately, yet through Christ this union
is made up: and Christ being in us, and we united to him, the Father also, in
him, is in us, and we in him; for, thus is our union here with God made up, I
in them, and thou in me. 4. It is by our union with Christ, and with God
through him, that our, union among our selves is perfected; for, by this mean
they are made perfect in one. 5. Whatever excellency the Lord confer upon
every particular believer yet their perfection consists in their union among
themselves, and with Christ their Head and Storehouse, and with the Father in
his fullness through him; for no one member has the perfection of the whole
body, but of a part only, nor has it that perfection separate from the body,
but in it, and being united with it, to supply its own proper function; and the
whole body thus united, has its perfection in and from Christ and the Father;
for, so does Christ's conjoyning of all these teach us: I in them, and thou in
me, that they may he made perfect in one. 6. It is never enough studied, how
necessary union is, to convince the world of the excellency of Christ and his
doctrine; therefore it is again repeated, as a forcible argument pressing this
union, that the world may know that thou have sent me. And as the Apostles
union and consent in doctrine ^id contribute to this end, so also does the
union of the people of God in every age, in its own measure. 7. It tends to the
great encouragement of believers, that Christ their Surety is beloved and
accepted of the Father; for, thou have loved me, says he. 8. Every believer
also is really beloved of the Father; so that whatever he do unto them, there
is still love in it, and they keep a room in his affection, for, thou have
loved them, says he. 9. The Fathers love to believers does resemble his love
to his Son Christ; for though his love to his eternal and only Son be
matchless and necessary, not voluntary, us his love to us is; nor are we loved
for our own sakes, as he is; nor is he capable of some effects of love we
receive; yet this love does most resemble it of any; and albeit, considering
him as Mediator, there is a great difference betwixt us who are beloved, and
him for whose sake we ^e beloved; yet the resemblance does also here hold, And
the Father loves Christ and all his, as one mystical body, and loves them
eternally, immutably and freely, as he loved the Mediator; yea, that same love
that is le^^ out on Christ as Mediator, is conveyed through him to us; for,
thou have loved them, as thou have loved me, not in respect of equality, but by
way of similitude and resemblance. 10. The love of God toward son of fallen
mankind is such, as ought not to be concealed, but Christ would have it
published, to the conviction or conversion of others; Therefore he would have
the world know that thou have loved them. 11. Union among believers is so great
a work of God, evidencing so much of his care and love; and is the condition
upon which he raines so many showers of blessings and mercies, that it serves
exceedingly to convince the world of Gods love to them, when they are thus
united, and are reaping the fruits thereof; for, hereby the world shall know
that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.

Verse 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
In this verse is contained another suit put up by Christ in behalf of all his
people; Wherein, having prayed for their spiritual union among themselves, and
for union with him and with the Father through him; he now prays for their
union in place with himself in heaven at last, and describes the blessed
estate of believers in heaven. 1. From their company, that they shall be with
him where he is. 2. From their exercise, which shall be to behold that glory
given unto him, which is further commended from the fountain cause thereof,
even the Fathers eternal love to him. Of this glory of Christ compare v. 1, 5.
Doct. 1. It is a sweet way to keep our hearts fresh and lively in prayer, when
we have many thoughts of that tender relation betwixt God, to whom we pray, and
us; Therefore Christ, who began his prayer with the sweet style of Father, v.
1. does so often repeat the same, v. 11, here, and v. 25. that the thoughts of
that relation might sweeten his heart, and renew his ardour and affection. 2.
The thoughts and hope of eternal life ought and will warn believers hearts
toward God, and excite much alacrity and affection in them; for, so much also
does Christ's practice reach, who beginning to speak of his glory flowing from
the Fathers love, and of heaven and eternal life to be conferred upon all his
followers, his heart warmeth, and he breaks out with that sweet compellation,
Father. 3. While Christ expresses his petition in these terms, I will, it
does not import any imperious commanding way, repugnant to his former way of
humble supplication; But it only imports that in this his supplication, he was
making his latter Will and Testament and leaving his legacies, which he was
sure would be effectual, being purchased by his effectual merits, and
prosecuted by his affectionate and earnest requests and intercession, all which
are imported in this expression. And so it teaches us, That as all these
things sought in this prayer, are believers duty to study after them; So are
they Christ's legacies, purchased and earnestly prayed for by him, which will
certainly be forthcoming to them: for says he concerning them, I will that
they be. 4. Christ is very desirous and much taken up with his peoples
fellowship and company, so that before he remove his bodily presence from them,
his heart is upon meeting and fellowship again; As here we see in his prayer
before his departure. And this he makes evident from day to day, in that,
until that time of meeting come, two or three are not gathered in his name, but
he is in the midst of them. 5. Spiritual communion with Christ, will, at last,
end in glory, and in communion with him in place in heaven: Christ will never
rest satisfied till their begun communion be thus perfected; And however the
world and our hearts do, oft-times, look on spiritual communion but as a fancy;
Yet heaven shall confirm the reality thereof, and that it was to good purpose
to believe and wait on: And what difficulties we find in entertaining
communion here, shall then be removed, and we shall get Christ conversed with
without an impediment. Therefore, unto the former way of union among
themselves, and with him, v. 22, 23. this union in place is subjoyned. 6. Such
as have attained to spiritual communion with Christ, and are growing therein,
will long after the completing thereof in heaven, and after union in place
with him; As here Christ's practice and method does teach, who after praying for
the former, does ascend higher, to pray for this also. 7. As it is only the
elect who are given to Christ, that do attain salvation, and all they do
certainly attain it; So whatever preparations Christ work in them in order to
their salvation; Yet as free love is the fountain, so it is also the perfecter
of their salvation, and grace will be as free in a saved man's account, the last
hour, as the first; Therefore, in this suit, Christ does only design them,
they whom thou have given me, to intimate, not only, that only such and all
such do attain salvation, but also that this is to be looked to as the great
cause and fountain of their salvation, as well as of their conversion, Chap. 6,
37. So much also does he intimate by his praying for their salvation, as well
as for their conversion. 8. The glory and happiness of heaven to the Elect
will consist much in being in Christ's company, in whom they belight so much on
earth; to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, and to enjoy him fully,
without separation any more; for, so is heaven here described in Christ's
prayer, that they may be with me where I am, though not secluding the Father in
this nor in what follows, with whom we are through the Son. 9. Christ, the
Head of believers, is now truly glorious and highly exalted in heaven; His
glory being openly declared as God, and he put in possession of glory as man:
for, says he, there is my glory which thou have given me. 10. Whatever ways
of Christ's glory be made manifest, to believers on earth, in his Church and his
manifestations to them; yet it cannot be fully seen on this side of time, so
transcendent and infinite is it; for, it is not till they be with me where I
am, that they shall behold my glory. 11. The day is coming wherein believers
shall be completely happy in a sight of Christ's glory, when he shall be
conspicuously glorified and admired in his Saints, 2 These. 1.10. and glorified
by them; and when, all veils being laid aside, and they fitted for a more full
fruition, shall visibly and immediately behold and enjoy him; Therefore is their
condition in heaven described as consisting in this, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me. 12. Spiritual and heavenly mercies are then
rightly seen and acknowledged, when Gods love, as the fountain thereof, affects
their heart; for, so much does Christ's practice teach us, who speaking of the
glory given him, does fall out in a commendation of that love whence it flowed,
for thou lovedst me. 13. Christ the Mediator is beloved of the Father with an
everlasting love, evidenced in his exalting of him in glory, that so sinners
may expect to be accepted in him; for, says he, Thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the world.

Ver. 25. O righteous Father, the world has not known thee, but I have known
thee, and these have known, that thou have sent me.

26. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it: that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.


In the close of this solemn prayer, Christ, having prayed that his people may
be glorified with him, does (in the mean time, till they come to that blessed
state) recommend them to the participation of that love, wherewith himself was
loved, and to his own inhabitation. Which desire he grounds upon their
condition opposite to the world, and that they were separate from the worlds
fashions; For whereas the world does not know God, nor acknowledge him as they
ought; Yet it was not so with them. However (as is imported) they knew not the
Father fully, yet he knew him, and they knew Christ to be the Fathers
Ambassador; And he had revealed the Father to them in some measure, and would
reveal him yet more, that so they might partake of these mercies desired. This
desire is not so much propounded prayer-wise, as by way of confident assurance,
that he should obtain from his righteous Father what he desired to them,
considering what they were, and what he would make them; Hereby yet further
assuring us of his success with the Father in the work of intercession. It is
also to be marked, that however this suit have place for all believers, when
they are brought to that condition here mentioned; Yet, considering that here,
Christ speaks expressly of these to whom he had already revealed the Father,
v. 26. -- we are to conceive that, in the first place, he points at his
Apostles already converted, and that he would close his prayer with a word yet
again more expressly in their behalf, for their encouragement. Doct. 1.
Christ has so large an heart, and so distinct an eye upon his people, that at
once, without any distraction, he can be taken up with his whole Church, and
yet not forget any particular member or society of his people; And he has such
a care of every one, as if he had no more to care for but that one; for here, in
praying for all believers, he brings out a word more expressly for the
Apostles, to let them see how one thought and care does not justle out another
with him. 2. In our prayers we ought to ground our selves well upon the
knowledge of God in his attributes; That as we may be ashamed to seek such
things as beseem not such a God to give, so we may be encouraged in what we are
allowed to seek; Therefore does Christ give this title to God, righteous
Father, it being a righteous and approven petition, and God who is righteous
engaged to Christ and to believers in him, by his promise, to grant it. 3.
Christ is a supplicant, who according to the tenor of the paction betwixt the
Father and him, can face the b^r of righteousness and justice on our behalf,
and be sure to come speed; Therefore also does he design him righteous Father,
expecting that in righteousness he could not be refused. 4. Albeit the complete
happiness of believers be laid up in heaven, yet Christ allows enough for
their through-bearing, till they come there; As here we see in this large
allowance till that suit, v. 24. be granted. 5. The love of God in Christ, and
the enjoyment of an interest and communion with him, is sufficient for
believers encouragement, till they arrive at full fruition in heaven; for,
that, in particular, is their allowance here. 6. As Christ the Mediator is
dearly beloved of the Father, so he is a storehouse thereof and a conduit to
conveigh that love to his people; for, so is his desire here, that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them. See v. 23. 7. It is Christ's
allowance and desire, that not only his people be beloved of the Father, but
that they have the faith and lively feeling thereof, to refresh their hearts,
and drive away clouds and jealousies; for, it is his desire that his love may
be in them, and they possess it, and feel it, and dwell in it, and feed upon
it. 8. It is by being and abiding in Christ that believers come to partake and
possess the love of the Father; and when they wander away from him, it is no
wonder if a cloud come over their good condition; Therefore are these
conjoined, That the love, etc. may be in them, and I in them. 9. Christ is so
tender and liberal toward his people, that he communicates himself, with all
he gives them; His love (so to say) being given over again with his love, and
his heart communicated with all he bestows: For this cause also are they
conjoined, The love in them, and I in them, to show that he gives himself with
that love which is laid up in him, to be derived through him to them. 10. As
Christ knows to whom he prays, so he knows well, who and what they are
for whom he prays, and on whose behalf the Father will hear him; And he
would have all his people, who expect the benefit of his intercession, to make
sure their acquaintance with God, and their separation from the evil manners of
the world: Therefore, as he takes up a righteous Father in this suit, so he
recommends these he prays for, as not like the world, who have not known the
Father, to teach us, That however he intercede for the Elect who know him not,
that they may know him; Yet none but such as this change is wrought upon, can
make comfortable application of the benefit of his intercession. 11. It is the
great sin of the world and men unconverted, that they do not know God, whatever
they pretend: What they seem to know, is but by hearsay, they have no solid
impression of it; They do not know God in Christ practically and savingly, and
therefore all they know beside is nothing; They do not affect and love God, and
true knowledge in Scripture language imports also affection; and, They do not
practice what they know, and so are but really ignorant. For these causes, and
in these respects, it is said, The world has not known thee. 12. As Gods
sovereignty does shine in withholding the knowledge of himself from whom he
pleases, Matthew. 11.25, 26. So also his righteousness is conspicuous in it: For
the world does not love to know God, and therefore justly are they filled with
their own ways, Psalm. 81.11, 12. They will not be at pains to know him, Psalm.
10.4. And what wonder they suffer hunger because of their idleness? and, They
abuse what light they have, and therefore it is justly taken from them, Romans
1.21. -- 24. etc. Therefore, as in other respects before mentioned, so in this
respect also, he is called righteous Father, in that the world has not known
him, 13. Albeit the world do not know nor acknowledge God, yet he is content
with the acknowledgement he gets among his people; and it is their commendation
that they do know him, when so many are ignorant of him: In both these respects
is their condition here held out and commended to the Father, in opposition to
the world. 14. The best of Saints within time will find no perfect opposition
betwixt the world and them in themselves, but only in Christ, and what he is
for them and for their behoof; Therefore, to supply their defect in knowledge,
(which is here supposed) the opposition begins with this, but I have known
thee. 15. Christ does perfectly know the Father, that he may cover and rectify
all our ignorance, in our uptaking of him, and addresses to him; and that he
may be assured he will give no false character of him: for, it is recorded for
the disciples behoof and advantage, I have known thee. 16, Whatever degrees of
ignorance Saints lie under, yet it does commend them to God, if they know
Christ as Mediator and Ambassador of the Father, and so know God in Christ, and
in order to salvation; for, in this, Christ commends his rude disciples, these
have known that thou have sent me. See 1 Cor. 2.2. 17. What ever measure of
knowledge of God, believers have attained unto, it comes all from Christ; who
is the fountain of all the light the Church receives; and, who only can
manifest him truly and savingly unto sinners; for, so does he commend their
weak knowledge from the cause of it, I have declared unto them thy Name. 18. As
what Christ has been, or is, that he will still be, to his people; (for, I
have declared, and will declare, says he) So he is an undertaker to his Father
for his people, and engages himself to be forthcoming for what is wanting in
them; that so their imperfections may not deprive them of his allowance:
Therefore, that they may not be deprived of what here he desires to them, he
undertakes for what they want, I have declared, and will declare it 19. Albeit
the knowledge and grace of believers be but small, yet if it be growing, it
will not want the reward of a larger measure; Therefore does he undertake for
the increase of their knowledge, I will declare thy Name, that upon this
consideration they may be admitted to partake of this prayed for mercy. 20.
Christ has so absolute power over the hearts and understandings of his people,
that he can when he pleases, break in with light upon them, and cause their
hearts take with it; for, he undertakes, I will declare thy Name, which is not
only a promise that he will afford sufficient means, but also that he will
effectually make them know the Father, and so put them in a condition for
receiving this desired mercy, which the offer and having opportunity of means
could not do. 21. As the true knowledge of God in Christ is an evidence that
men are converted, and so have access to the possession of the Fathers love,
and communion with Christ; So, in particular, the true knowledge of him will
beget says in him and love to him, whereby the sense and assurance of his love
is made clear to their hearts: In both these respects does Christ on these
grounds recommend them to the Fathers love, I have declared thy Name, etc. that
the love may be in them, etc. because this knowledge did evidence them to be
converted, and so to have right to this love, and because it did put them in a
near capacity and fitness to partake of the sense and fruits thereof. And so
their possession of this love depends and follows upon this knowledge.

CHAP. XVIII.
HItherto John has recorded Christ's life and doctrine, with some miracles
confirming the same; insisting chiefly on what the rest of the Evangelists had
omitted. Now he proceeds to record his exercise and sufferings, chap. 18, and
19. and his begun victory over them, in his resurrection, which was confirmed
by several apparitions, chap. 20, and 21.

Christ's sufferings may be taken up in this order. 1. His sufferings in the
Garden, where he was taken. 2. His sufferings in the High Priests hall. 3. His
sufferings in Pilats judgement-hall. 4 His sufferings in Mount Calvarie, the
place where he was crucified. 5. His burial, which was the capestone of his
sufferings. In handling of all which, albeit an harmony of all the Evangelists
would take in all circumstances, Yet I shall keep by what John says, (who, no
doubt, has a sufficient, as all of them together, an abundant Narration)
clearing what is spoken here, and so far as I necessary, from the rest. And
however every particular and circumstance of his sufferings be full of rich
mysteries which can hardly be dipped into; Yet we cannot go wrong, if in
interpreting thereof, we follow these general Rules. 1. That Christ really
suffered and died for his people, and in their stead; satisfying divine justice
for them* and bearing that curse which was due to man for sin, 1 Pet. 3.18. and
elsewhere. 2. That Christ did suffer all this meekly and willingly, not by
compulsion or constraint, Isa. 53.7. Joh. 10.17, 18. 3. That by what he
suffered, is pointed out what we deserved, and that by his suffering of it, we
are delivered from it, and a contrary good purchased unto us. He was condemned
by an High Priest, that we, who deserved condemnation, might be absolved by our
High Priest: He ware a crown of thorns that we might ware a crown of glory,
etc. 4. That in his way of suffering, he is a pattern to his people, how they
ought to bear the afflictions he sends upon them, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. 5.
That by his drinking the cup of sufferings, he has sanctified these
afflictions to his members and followers, who fill up what is behind of his
sufferings, Col. 1.14. Namely, in so far as they are a testimony to the truth.
See Joh. 15.18.

In this Chapter, first, John records Christ's sufferings in the Garden,
(whether he went after his former doctrine and prayer, v. 1. and to which Judas
(as knowing the place, v. 2.) brought a band of men to take him, v. 3) Where,
after a conference with these who came to take him; Wherein he gives a proof
of his Deity, though he be going to suffer, v. 4, 5, 6. and exempts his
disciples from the trial, v. 7, 8, 9. And, after a reprehension of Peter's rash
behavior, v. 10, 11. He is taken and bound, and carried away to the High
Priests, v. 12, 13, 14. Secondly, He records Christ's sufferings in the High
Priests hall, together with Peter's threefold slip there. And, 1. He declares
how Peter with some difficulty, getting in after his Master, v. 15, 16. does
at the voice of a damsel, deny him, v. 17. and yet stays still in a place so
full of snares, v 18. 2. He gives an account of Christ's conflict with the High
Priest, v. 19, 20, 21. and with one of his servants, v. 22, 23, 24. 3. He
declares that Peter, staying still there, did yet twice deny his Master, v.
25, 26, 27. Thirdly, He records a part of Christ's trial in Pilates
judgement-hall, to which the Jews brought him, v. 28. Wherein after some
debates betwixt Pilate and the Jews, about entering of the process, v 29, 30,
31, 32. Pilate examines him concerning his kingdom, and gets a meet answer, v
32, 34, 35, 36, 37. Which Pilate little heeding goes o^t to the Jews, and
absolveth Christ, v. 38. and endeavors (but in vain) to release him, by
occasion of their custom at the feast, v. 39, 40.

Ver. 1. WHen Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples
over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered and his
Disciples.

2. And Judas also which betrayed him, knew the place, for Jesus oft-times
resorted thither with his disciples.

3. Judas then having received a band of men, and officers from the chief
Priests and Pharisees, comes thither with lanthornes, and torches, and weapons.


John, omitting Christ's agony in the garden, as having been largely spoken to
by the rest, and contenting himself to record (in this part of the Chapter)
how he was taken and bound there, and carried away from thence; He does premit
three necessary particulars to that Naration; The first whereof, (in these
verses) is the conveening of all parties in this place, He first records how
Jesus, after the former sweet exercise, goes out of the City to this garden
beyond the brook Cedron, wi^h his disciples v. 1. Next, he declares that this
being a place frequently haunted by Christ and his disciples, and so known to
Judas, v. 2. He came there well guarded, to take him, v. 3. I need not here
insist to describe this garden, nor yet to show that as Adam sinned in a
garden, so Christ would suffer in a garden, to expiate the guilt of this sin in
all his people. But we may from v. 1. Learn, 1. It is the duty of Christ's
followers, not to expect always so sweet a life as preaching, hearing,
communicating and prayer, but to lay their account that after such exercises,
they may be called to suffer, and after fair blenks, may meet with black
storms; for, so much does Christ's example teach, who, when he had spoken these
words, (in preaching and prayer, and had instistute and celebrate the Supper)
he went forth, etc. to his trial. 2. Such as have committed themselves to God,
and lest any of whom they have charge, on him, may very safely leave them in
the midst of hazards, and themselves hazard to look trouble in the face; for,
more particularly, When Jesus had spoken these words, (in the former prayer,
wherein he had prayed to the Father for himself, and left his disciples upon
him) he went forth to encounter death, and is not afraid to be taken from his
disciples, and leave them in the world, since he had put them in so sure a
hand. 3. It is the duty of the Lords people to be resolute in undergoing
suffering, and to offer themselves voluntarily to God, to underly it, in so far
as they have a calling; And herein Christ is an eminent pattern, who went forth
over the brook Cedron (a little brook running betwixt Jerusalem and the mount
of Olives, of which see 2 King 23.6. and elsewhere) and entered into the garden,
where he was to meet with several conflicts. 4. His taking his disciples with
him, and their following of him, may serve to teach; Partly, how affectionatly
Christ is to be followed, when he is foretelling of his departure; for, on
their part it imports their hanging on him, Luke 22 39. as Elisha did on Elijah
till the fiery chariot parted them. Partly, That we should be thrifty in
spending every moment of our time, whatever encumbrances we have; for, Christ
in all this throng, took them with him, that by the way he might inform them
of their scattering, and appoint the meeting place after his resurrection, as
it is recorded, Matthew. 26.31, 32. Partly, That Christ has sanctified in his
own person, the desolate and low condition of his people, wherein they would be
glad of the meanest encouragement, even from the company of weak Christians,
and yet cannot have it; for, he also took them with him that they might watch
with him in his agony, wherein yet they disappointed him, as is recorded Mat.
26.38, 40. And partly, That as naturally we are averse from trouble, especially
from suffering for Christ; So it is his peoples duty to train and breed
themselves for such lots, both by the observation of the courage of others,
Heb. 6.12. and 12.1. (which, no doubt, made many in the primitive times so
stout) and by the observation of their own weakness in lesser assayes, that
being humbled thereby, they may put themselves in Christ's hand, who may make
notable instruments of these who at first are very weak; Therefore also did he
take them with him, not that they might suffer at this time, but that they
might be bred for their after sufferings, by beholding his courage and power,
and by getting a taste of their own weakness, to make them more selfe-denied,
and eager to recover themselves at another time. 5. Such as would bear out
under trial and persecution, ought not to be found sleeping, but in the first
place should make all sure with God, that trial do not surprise them, while
they have not entreated the face of the Lord, 1 Samuel 13.12. Therefore also does
he enter into the Garden, that there he may endure his agony, and wrestle with
his Father, before Judas came, as is cleared by the rest.

From v. 2, 3. Learn, 1. As it is our duty to be very diligent with God when
troubles are eminent or incumbent; So we ought not to leave all to the pinch of
extremity, but should be making ready beforehand; for, Jesus oft-times
resorted thither with his disciples. See Luke 21.37. and 22.39. And this he
did, not only to sanctify unto his followers ill entertainment,
notwithstanding the services they do to the world, as he preached all day, and
yet lay in the fields all night, Luke 21.37. or, to sanctify essays of
hazards and trials, whereby they are fitted for greater trouble when it comes;
as he was long before so pursued, as he could not conveniently lodge by night
in Jerusalem; But further, he did this, that in the night time he might give
himself there to prayer, (as was his custom,) Mat. 14.^3.) and that before his
Agony came. 2. As believers ought not to rush upon trials without a calling, so
they ought not timerously to decline them, but should set their face toward
them, Luke 9.51. Mark 10.32. for he went where Judas knew the place, to show
that as he would not run to Judas, so he would not go out of his usual way,
though he knew his knowing of it would afford him an advantage. 3. Christ may
be persecuted by men who have been very eminent in his service; even by one of
his twelve Apostles, as Judas was, and by them who in their office were types
of himself, such as the chief Priests were. And this should prevent our
stumbling at the defection of such, and by this all are warned, that were they
never so eminent, or had stood never so long, yet they ought to take heed of an
entertained idol, lest that draw them in the snare, as these Priests were by
their credit, and Judas by his love to the world. 4. Wicked apostates and
persecutors are not asleep in their designs and actings, but are very vigilant
and active, when, it may be, Christ's followers are asleep and careless; for,
in the dark night Judas comes with his crew, and that at the time when Christ
could not get his disciples kept awake, as is recorded, Matthew. 26.45, 46, 47.
5. Christ will not stand to let persecutors have all outward advantages of him,
that so his victory over them may be more conspicuous; for, therefore is there
a Judas who knew his retiring places, to lead out a band of men, (of these
Romans who kept the Tower next the Temple, whether with Pilates consent or
not, is not needful to determine) and officers or servants from the chief
Priests and Pharisees, and that with lanternes, and torches, and weapons. And
all this against Christ him alone. They made use of lanternes and torches,
although it was full moon at the time of the feast, that so they might be sure
to find him out. 6. Persecutors want not their own fears and tossings, in the
violent courses they undertake against Christ and his people; but may have,
ofttimes, more perplexity, then the sufferers have in bearing what they are
permitted to inflict; for, therefore also was it that Judas came, and they sent
him thus attended and provided; even out of fear lest the matter should
miscarry.

Verse 4. Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, went
forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?

5. They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am he. And
Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them.

6. As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell
to the ground.


The second thing premitted to Christ's taking in the Garden, is, a conference
betwixt him and them who came to take him. The conference is twofold, or the
same conference twice repeated, in order to his twofold scope in it. His scope
in the first conference (in these verses) is, to give a proof of his Deity,
even in this his low condition, as may be gathered from the progress. In it we
may consider, 1. The posture wherein Christ was at their coming, v. 4. -- which
was the cause of his so courageous going out to them, and his conferring so
mildly with them; where it is to be conceived, as is recorded by the rest, that
he is now a little eased of his Agony, Luke 22.43. and that (as is here
recorded) he saw clearly through all the sufferings he was to meet with, and so
is composed in his mind. 2. The conference it self, v. 4, 5. wherein,
enquiring and getting an account that they were seeking Jesus, he meekly
informs that it was he. 3. The effect that followed upon this declaration, v.
6. his meek word is accompanied with so much divine power, that upon the
hearing thereof, they fall backward to the ground.

From v. 4, 5. Learn, 1. Peace with God in a trial will make all the rest of
the trial, in so far as it is outward, very easy; for, his stout and meek
going forth to encounter trouble, follows upon his ease of his Agony. 2. The
Lord can so order the exercises of his people, as however they may have heavy
pressures upon their mind; yet he can intermit the extremity thereof when they
need strength for outward difficulties, and let it return again when the strait
is over; for, so it seems did he deal with his Son, who though he had an
inward Agony all the while of his passion, yet the violence thereof is
intermitted in the Garden, when they came to him, and we hear no more of it
till they leave him on the Cross, where again he is made to cry out of it. 3.
The consideration of the inevitableness of trouble, in Gods providence, ought
to make us willingly stoop thereunto; especially, when we have tasted of former
gracious deliverances and preservation, we ought to stoop when his hour
comes, and not seek always to be free; for, Jesus therefore knowing all
things that should come upon him, went forth; That is, knowing that this was
the time of his suffering, and that now he was not to be preserved and hid as
formerly, he went forth to them, and not away, as at other times he had done.
4. There is nothing makes us more readily to be dashed with trouble, then our
not knowing or considering what trouble is: when we misrepresent trouble, it
terrifieth, but when we look, not only on the necessity and inevitableness,
but on the usefulness, measure, and event of it, it will appear much more
tolerable, and rather a friend then an enemy; for, so much also is imported in
this, Jesus knowing all things, etc. went forth. He saw through his sufferings
what they should be, and what they would tend to, and therefore was not afraid,
but went forth. 5. Such as are at peace with God, and have seen through their
sufferings, will be in a very composed frame, and at themselves, in the height
thereof; for, this conference and enquiry, Whom seek ye? imports not any
ignorance or curiosity, but, that on his part, he was meek and composed, his
Agony being somewhat settled, and he seeing through his trouble. 6. It concerns
persecutors to take good heed what they are doing, and especially to consider
with whom they have to do, and against whom their attempts are; for, this
question, Whom seek ye? as to them, imports that they should have considered
whom they were seeking, which if they had well considered, they had not done as
they did, 1 Cor. 2.8. 7. The Lord, when he pleases, can hide and preserve his
people, not only among lions and in sires, but even in the midst of their foes;
for, their answer imports, that at first, albeit Judas stood with them, yet
they knew him not, otherwise they had not so spoken, we seek Jesus of Nazareth,
but we seek thee. See Genesis 19.11. 2 Kings 16.18, 19, etc. Jer. 36.26. 8. It is
the usual trade of Satan and his instruments, to hide Christ and his followers
with reproachful titles, that under these they may persecute them more
securely; for, so much does the name given to Christ by them, Jesus of
Nazareth, import, A contemptible and false designation, invented by the
Pharisees, and i^ stilled into the multitudes head, that so they might ^^e more
safely persecute him, without fea^ing to wrong their Messiah, who was to come
out of Bethlehem. And this may warn us, that where Christ and his Ordinances
are traduced, contemned and reproached, there he may be crucified. 9. Christ
our Lord did not shift trouble, but voluntarily offered himself when he was
sought in his peoples stead, that so enemies might blame themselves if they
were not satisfied; Therefore, says he, I am he, and shifts it not. 10. It is
subjoyned to this answer, that Judas which betrayed him, stood with them, not
only to point out Christ's meekness, who gives this answer, though provoked by
his presence. And to point out the Providence of God, who hid him that he could
not be known, though Judas was with them. But further it points out, That
Apostates will grow very impudent, and that this is taken notice of by Christ;
Therefore, it is marked, that in this black course, Judas impudently stood with
them.

From v, 6. Learn, 1. It was not the power of men prevailing over Christ, but
his own willingness, that brought him to suffer; nor would Christ have any
thing to out shine his affection in his sufferings; Therefore before he is
taken, he causes them go backward, and fall to the ground, to testify that
they could not have taken him, unless he had consented to it. 2. It is a very
dreadful and terrible thing to be in opposition to Christ, how con^emptible
soever he and his followers seem to be; for, so much does this shake upon them
who came to take him, teach us. 3. Believers may expect that much of divine
power will be manifested upon and about them, in their sufferings; for, so did
Christ their forerunner find in his sufferings. 4. Proofs of Gods power are to
be expected by sufferers, not so much to exempt them from suffering and
trouble; as (beside their being inwardly supported thereby) to convince
enemies, if possible, and to let see what he can do, if it were needful; for,
such was the proof Christ got here, in that they went backward, and fell to the
ground, whereby he convinced them of the evil of their way, and how ineffectual
he could make it, if he pleased, though he let the trial go on. 5. The Word of
Christ, how contemptible soever it seem to be, is full of Majesty, and
accompanied with divine power, and terror to his enemies, when he pleases to
let it out; for, As Soon as he said to them I am he, they went backward, etc.
And if his Lambs voice was so terrible, how dreadful will he be, when he roares
as a Lion? and if that sweet word, I am he, which comforted the disciples, John
6.20. be their terror, how terrible will it be, when he speaks to them as they
deserve?

Verse 7. Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of
Nazareth.

8. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: If therefore ye seek me, let
these go their way.

9. That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, Of them which thou
gave me, have I lost none.


In these verses is contained Christ's second conference with these men, his
scope in which is to exempt his disciples from the trial. In order to which,
they (as appears) rising and coming forward again, he propounds the former
question, and getting the same answer that formerly they gave, v. 7. he binds
them to their Commission, offering himself, and will have his disciples
exempted, v. 8. which is amplified from a commendation of his fidelity, in that
he would perform that word so lately spoken, chap. 17.12. v. 9. Whence learn,
1. Some of the sons of Adam, and especially persecutors, may be so far given up
to obduration, a feared conscience, and desperate wickedness, as even wonders
wrought upon them and against them in their evil course, will not avail to
reclaim them; but they will either be insensible of the Lords hand, or s^eing
it, they will harden themselves the more to go on; for, albeit by their former
fall, they might have been convinced of his Power and Godhead, yet they will
not quit their wicked course, but come again avowing that they seek him. 2.
Christ himself is the great Butt of persecutors malice; so long as he was in
the world the stream of their malice ran against him, and when they assault his
followers, it is because they cannot reach him. He is first hated of the world,
and they for his sake, and could the world reach him in heaven, they would not
much trouble themselves with his followers; for, so much may be gathered from
their Profession, we seek Jesus of Nazareth, being compared with what Christ
makes out of it, v. 8. that the disciples must be free, as not minded by them,
nor put in their Commission by these who sent them. 3. Christ in the throng of
his own trials, is yet mindful of his followers, to preserve and care for them;
for, when he is to enter the lists himself, he is solicitous for his disciples,
I am he, let these go away. 4. Christ in his lowest and suffering condition,
does set bounds to persecutors which they cannot transgress; for, his
reasoning, If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way, had been of small
force with these absurd men, for the exemp^ing of his disciples, if there had
not been a commanding power with it to bound them, as it did. 5. Christ's
offering of himself to undergo his bitter sufferings, does indeed exempt his
people from the like; and he goes betwixt them and all storms in so far as
they are destroying: for, so much may be gathered from his reasoning in this
particular, If ye seek me, let these go their way. Albeit he do not exempt his
followers from outward troubles, as he did the disciples at that time; yet his
offering himself unto, and underlying that cursed death, did exempt them, and
all his own, from that punishment due to sin, and satisfaction required by
justice for it. So that when justice challenges them, they may send it to
Christ who was taken for them all. And as for outward afflictions, all that
they meet with are but some few drops, sanctified and sweetened to them, by his
essaying of that lot before them. 6. Christ is so tender of his followers, that
he will not put them to any trial, till they be ripe and fitted for it; so that
when he sends a trial, we are to reckon that we will be enabled for it, if it
were but because he sends it, provided we do not cast away our strength, nor
sin it away from us; for, therefore would he have them let these go their way
for this time, because they were but yet weak, till after his resurrection,
that the Spirit was poured out upon them. 7. Christ is a faithful Keeper and
Performer of his Word, and they are not ill provided, who have but his naked
word to uphold and assure their hearts in greatest extremities; for, this was
also a reason why he would exempt them at this time, That the saying might be
fulfilled which he spoke, Of them which thou gave me, I have lost none. 8.
What Christ has done for his people, may be looked on as a pledge of what he
will still do, according as they need; for, that account which Christ makes of
his bypast diligence, chapter 17.12. is here looked on as a promise to be
fulfilled in their preservation at this time also. And that not only because in
that passage he gave an account of his whole care till his removal from them,
and so of this also, though not yet manifested, but also, that we may be
assured that he will never change his way with his people, so long as they need
it. 9. That sweet word, chap. 17.12. is here applied to bodily preservation
from an outward trouble, though it chiefly point at their souls preservation
from the evil, as he explains it, chap. 17.15. when he prays for the
continuance of that preservation from the Father; because that not only during
the time of his being with them, he did indeed hide them from outward troubles,
as here was verified. But further, in sparing them outwardly at this time, he
had also a respect to their souls, which might have been crushed, had they been
engaged in trial, as Peter's experience makes evident. And so it teaches, That
as to tender the body and outward man with prejudice to the soul, is great
cruelty: so where Christ undertakes the charge of men's soul, he will also have
a care of their body and outward condition, in subserviencie to their souls
welfare. He will respect their very bodies and outward man, and will not expose
them to hazards, save when it is for their souls good, and when he is to get
service thereby, And he will make it evident at last, that he is not prodigal
of their bodies, nor casts them away, when he exposes them to suffering.

Verse 10. Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the high Priests
servant, and cut off his right ear: the servants name was Malchus.

11. Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: the Cup
which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?


The third thing premitted to Christ's taking and binding, is, his reprehension
of Peter's rash behavior. Christ being a taking (as it is, Mark 14.46, 47.) the
disciples enquire if they should fight, and before Christ return an answer,
Peter, in his furious zeal, breaks forth, ( Luke 22.49, 50.) and cuts off the
right ear of one of the servants of the High Priest, whose name is here
recorded, for further confirmation of the truth of the History. This carriage
Christ reproves, bidding Peter put up his sword, not to be reserved for a
fitter time, to be employed in any Churchmans hands, but to teach him, that
these were not his weapons. And whereas the other Evangelists record several
reasons of this reproof and command; (Namely, that this fact was without the
bounds of his calling; That he needed not such poor shifts, having other help
enough, if it were needful; That he would not have the Scripture made a liar;
and, That he ought to suffer this far, being not yet hardly handled, or suffer
them to go so far as God has permitted them; all which are held out, Matthew.
26.52, 53, 54. Luke 22, 51.) The beloved disciple takes most notice of that
reason wherein love shined so conspicuously; That he would drink that cup of
affliction which the Father had given him to drink for the good of his people.

From v. 10. Learn, 1. Men may do things which seem to speak much zeal and
affection to Christ, which yet are full of dross, and reprovable before him;
for, albeit it was great stoutnesse in the disciples, to offer their service to
Christ against the whole band, with their two rusty blades, and in Peter, to
hazard his life among them; yet Christ's entertainment of this offered service
shows how unsavory it was. 2. It is a great fault in men, to run upon a
service to which they have no calling, did the service seem to speak never so
much zeal; for, it was Peter's fault, being a private man, to run to a sword to
fight for his Master. 3. It is a great blemish in men, not to be solid, but
full of flashes, and sudden violent resolutions and actings; which as they
ordinarily drive men to debord in going about that which is right, so they
oft-times end in as great an extremity of turning their back on what is right;
for, this was also Peter's fault: Others of them (no doubt) had as much love to
Christ, and as much valor as he, had they been called to show it; But he was a
rash and forward man, soon set on foot to what seemed good, but with much of
his own spirit and wrath, which works not the righteousness of God, and
as soon driven to an extremity of fear and fainting, as afterward we will find.
4. Men cannot go right (whatever their way, or zeal in it, seem to be) who wait
not upon direction, but either neglect to seek it, or having sought it, do
neglect to wait for his light, and run the way unto which their own spirits
incline; for, so also did Peter here, all of them having enquired at Christ, he
prevents an answer by following his own inclination, Luke 22. 5. It is a great
evidence of men's distempers, when they will not learn to overcome by suffering,
but would repel one injury with another: when all the out-gate of trials they
look for, is how to bear them down, or fall upon the inflicters of them, but
know not that to suffer and stoop is an out-gate, Romans 12.19, 20, 21. for, this
also was Peter's fault, that he could fight, but not suffer.

From v. 11. Learn, 1. It is a great sign of Christ's love, that he reproves
his people for their faults; for, he reproves not Judas and the band so
sharply, (though he give them a check, Luke 22.53) as he does Peter, Then said
Jesus unto Peter, put up thy sword into the sheath, etc. 2. Afflictions are
measured by God to his people, both for quantity and quality: Therefore, are
they called a Cup, which, as it is a comfort to the godly, that their lot is in
a friends hand, so it may terrify the wicked, whose lot is also carved out,
and who will not get so much affliction as they please; but so much as the
justice of God sees meet to measure out unto them, Psalm. 75 8. 3. It may
sweeten the lot of Christ and his followers, that even the bitterest potions
come not from God as a Judge, but as a Father: for, even all that Christ drank
(and it was very bitter) was the Cup which my Father has given me. 4.
Subjection unto God does well become his people, and to see them endure that
willingly, which he calls them unto; for, by this means the cross is made
sweet, whereas rebellion and want of subjection is the very curse of crosses;
Therefore does Christ appear so eminent in subjection; The Cup which my Father
has given me, shall I not drink it? See Matthew. 26 39, 45. 5. Love to God, and
faith in his love, will make any condition carved out by him, sweet to us, and
us submissive to undergo it; considering that nothing but good can be expected
from him, who is goodness and love it self; for, so does Christ argue, The
Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? His love to his
Father, and his seeing him a Father in it, made him stoop to it. 6. Christ did
so love his Father, and to suffer for his people, as he would not be hindered to
suffer, but drank that cup heartily, as minding to be often refreshed with his
peoples love to him again, who had so loved them; for, when Peter did what he
could to impede his sufferings, he says, Should I not drink that Cup? 7. Such
as would entertain submission in bearing hard lots, ought to repel all thoughts
of outgate and ease, and hold their eye still upon their trial, lest
squint-looks toward a possibility or probability of deliverance, do blunt their
resolutions; Therefore does Christ repel any thing that Peter, by his carriage,
might suggest of escaping that danger, Should I not drink the Cup? See also
Mat. 16.23.

Verse 12. Then the band, and the captain, and officers of the Jews took
Jesus, and bound him,

13. And led him away to Annas first, (for he was father in law to Caiaphas)
which was the High Priest that same year.

14. Now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient
that one man should die for the people.


In these verses is recorded how Christ was taken and bound in the garden, and
carried away to the High Priests, Annas and Caiaphas the last of which is
described from that coun^el which he gave before this time concerning Christ,
ch 11 50. to show that he was Christ's inveterate enemy, and would be very
earnest to have his own project take effect F^r clearing this purpose,
Consider, 1. As for that corruption, that this Priesthood is reckoned by
years, see what is said on chap. 11.49, 50. But the greater difficulty is,
which of the two, Annas, or Caiaphas, was the High Priest that year. The
Parenthesis in our Translation (which has no ground in the Original, and is
contrary to the way of placing it in our old Translation) would seem to imply
that Annas was he, who indeed before this time had this office, and was before
Caiaphas in dignity, Luke 3.2. And afterward we find him in office, Acts 4.6.
But for clearing of it; in general, it need not stumble us that we find in
Scripture both of them called High Priests at once. For in the Jewish Church
the High Priest, (called also the chief Priest) had his Sagan, or deputy, who
in case of his infirmity or pollution, did minister for him, and is called the
second Priest, 2 Kings 25.18. Jer. 52.24. and so both of them might be in place
at once. Now in particular, not only the Jewish history, but the Scripture it
self makes it apparent, that Caiaphas was the High or chief Priest at that
time; for, so he is called, chap. 11.49 and here also, the parenthesis being
laid aside, 1. Therefore also it is that Christ is sent by Annas to him, v. 24.
as to the High Priest, and it is before him, and the Council convened in his
house, (as the other Evangelists record) that Christ is examined and condemned,
whereas the Council might have been convened at Annas house, had he been in
chief office. So the meaning of v. 13. is only this, That Christ being taken is
brought first to Annas his house; partly, as being nearest to them, and partly,
out of respect to him, as having been sometime High Priest, and now father in
law to the High Priest; and to refresh him with a spectacle so grateful to him,
seeing (as may be gathered from v. 24.) he went not to the Council himself, but
sent Christ thither. Consider, 2. As for the place wherein Peter denied his
Master, and Christ was examined before the High Priest, Albeit John do insert
Peter's first fall, and part of Christ's examination, before he mention that he
was sent to Caiaphas, v. 24. and so should seem to pass over any thing he
endured in the hall of Caiaphas: And albeit it be all one, as to the truth of
the doctrine in it self, whether these things fell out in Annas or Caiaphas
hall: Yet the other Evangelists make it clear (see Matthew. 26.57, 58. etc.) that
these things were done before Caiaphas and in his hall. And we are to conceive
that Christ being brought to Annas, he sent him immediately to Caiaphas his
house where the Council was conveened, where Peter denied him, and he was
examined. And so that v. 24, is immediately to be subjoyned to v. 13. it being
subjoyned there to his examination, not as done after that, but only that John
may clear how Christ came to be examined before the high Priest, even because
Annas had sent him thither, though he had not mentioned it before. And for this
cause also it is, that, v. 14. Caiaphas is described, from his inveterate
malice, as supposing that Christ was now brought before him, as is also set
down in the Margent of our Bibles, out of some Original copies.

From this purpose Learn, 1. Albeit the Lord seem not to regard who wrong his
children and people; yet he does take notice of all of them, in due time to
requite it; for, here, he takes notice who took Christ, both of the band, and
their Captain, and of the officers of the Jews. See Isa. 47.6. 2. Christ being
taken and bound, does serve to teach; Partly, that every one of Adams
posterity, is by nature a bond-servant and slave to sin, and liable to justice;
for, he behooved to be bound, to expiate this slavery of his own. Partly, That
by Christ's being bound, such as are given to him, have a right purchased to be
free from this slavery and bondage, whereof they are made partakers by coming
to him; for, by his being bound, his own are freed. And they ought to be so
much the more strictly tied in the bonds of love to him, and should endeavor
to enjoy their privilege, and freedom from the slavery of sin and terrors of
the Law, and from a spirit of bondage. 3. As it is a sad judgment on men, when
they delight to see the bonds of Christ and his followers; So it may be their
lot to be made a grateful spectacle to their enemies, and this Christ has
sanctified in his own person; for, they led him away to Annas first, etc Which
was an evidence of his wicked disposition, that he longed for such a sight; And
is an instruction to Saints, informing them what their lot may be, since their
Head and Lord was carried from place to place, (even to Herod, as is marked by
the rest) to be a spectacle to his enemies. See 1 Cor. 4.9. 4 Let Churches or
persons glory never so much in their privileges; Yet all men are but liars,
and the most eminent of them may degenerate so far, as to corrupt the
Ordinances of God, and become most bitter enemies unto Jesus Christ and his
truth; for, albeit the Church of the Jews had as fair promises as any
particular Church; yet even there, the Ordinance of the Priesthood is
degenerate from the first institution, and become an annual or yearly office;
and the high Priest and his Father-in-law are they who take most pleasure in
beholding the sufferings of Christ; Yea, who have greatest hand in them. 5.
Christ, in his suffering, met with all extremities and disadvantages, that so
he might sanctify such lots unto his people, and might purchase to them (when
he saw it good for them) more tender usage in their sufferings; for, therefore
it is marked, v. 14. who this Caiaphas was, Not only to show that the malicious
designs and projects of persecutors are not forgotten by God, however he spare
them for a time; But that we might know, Christ had to do with an inveterate
and bitter enemy. And from this it flows, that sometime his followers find
bitter usage and extreme violence, very easy and sweet, and, (on the other
hand) that sometime they find even enemies and persecutors more mild and
compassionate. See Ps. 106.46. Jer. 15.11.

Ver 15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another Disciple: that
Disciple was known unto the high Priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace
of the high Priest.

16. But Peter stood at the door without, Then went out that other Disciple,
which was known to the high Priest, and spoke unto her that kept the door, and
brought in Peter.


Follows the second part of the Chapter, containing an account of what
occurred in the high Priests hall; It consists of three branches In the first
whereof (to v. 19.) Peter's first slip and denial of his Master is recorded. In
these verses is declared how Peter comes to get into the place of trial:
Namely, that (with another disciple known to the high Priest) following his
Master a far off, he is stopped at the door when the other got in, till that
other disciple, making use of his acquaintance in the house, removes that
stop. For clearing whereof, Consider, 1. As for that other Disciple known to
the high Priest (and, as appears by his dealing with the maid, to his family
also.) Albeit it may seem to have been John the beloved Disciple, who uses
thus to speak of himself in the third person, as chap. 20.2, 3, 4. and
elsewhere: Yet there is no sufficient ground to think that it was either he, or
any other of the eleven. For it is not very probable that obscure men, who for
three years and an half had been disciples to Christ, should yet (any of them)
be so familiar in the high Priests house, who was so cruel an enemy to Jesus.
And therefore it should seem he was one of Christ's hidden disciples (of whom
Chap. 12.42.) who hearing of the business, followed on with Peter (whom it
seems he met by the way) and got easy access by reason of his acquaintance
there. Consider, 2. As for this practice of Peter; (or of John either, if so be
that other was he) Albeit it was not unmeet Christ should have some witnesses
there, to mark all that was done, and an hidden disciple might act that part
well enough: Yet seeing all the eleven Disciples were dismissed at that time,
v. 8. and warned of their hazard, and the trysting place assigned after his
Resurrection, Matthew. 26.31, 32. and particularly, Peter being forewarned of his
fall, Matthew. 26.33, 34. and that he could not follow his Master now, John
13.36. It may be concluded that he did rashly, (however, it seem,
affectionatly) thus to hazard in such a place of trial: Especially, having no
other errand, (as is marked, Mat. 26.58.) but only to see the end, to applaud
and congratulate his Master, if he escaped, and to shift for himself, if it
fell out otherwise. Doctrine 1. The Lords people may draw themselves under many
selfe-created crosses and trials; Not only in so far as by sin they procure
they should be inflicted, Jer. 2.19. or by their bitterness and unbelief do
render their own condition grievous unto them, as Jonah did: But more
especially, when they run without a calling, and cast themselves upon
tentations, in ensnaring places and company; for, thus did Peter here, when he
followed Jesus into the high Priests hall; Whatever zeal or affection seem to
be in it. 2. We are bound to have charity, that even many who have much
acquaintance with greatest persecutors, may yet in their hearts be friends to
Christ, though their faintness and reservedness cannot be approved; for, there
is another disciple known to the high Priest, who went in (without
interruption) with Jesus into the palace of the high Priest. So there an
Ob^diah in Ahabs court, and a Rahab in Jericho. 3. Albeit Christ in his
suffering seem to be deserted of all, and his enemies may think they have
driven his followers from him, and now he is in the power of them and their
accomplices; Yet he wants not, even in such societies, some who are friends, and
witnesses of their injustice; for, here, one known to the high Priest, who went
in with Jesus, was a disciple, and was a witness to all their procedure. 4.
When the Lords people are running upon snares, it may please him to lay an
impediment by his providence in their way; whereof they ought to make use, to
examine their way better; for, so much did the Lord call Peter unto, when in
his providence the other got in, but he stood at the door without, the gate, it
seems, being strictly kept, so that no strangers got in, possibly out of fear
lest Christ be rescued. It is of general verity, that impediments laid in our
way; calls us to examine it, though it prove not always ill because impeded,
but the Lord thereby would only exercise our dependence and other graces. 5. As
when the voice of conscience is often slighted, it may be stricken dumb, that
it molest not the sinner; So when providential dispensations, crossing our way,
are not regarded, the Lord may take away these impediments, and let men go on
without difficulty, though little to their profit; for, he standing without
still, the other disciple interposeth and obtains access for him to the
place where he fell in the snare. 6. It is the duty of friends to take heed
lest, in seeking too much to pleasure their friends, they prove instruments of
their destruction, at least, of their real hurt; for, so this disciple, by his
kindness and care of Peter, helped him into the snare.

Verse 17. Then says the damosel that kept the door, unto Peter, Art not thou
also one of this man's Disciples? He says, I am not.
In this verse is recorded Peter's trial and fall when he is got in; Where at
the voice of a damsel who kept the door, he denies his Master, or that he was
one of his disciples. Whence learn, 1. In an hour of trial, Christ and his
followers may expect to be so contemptible, that even the weakest and basest
will insult over them; for, here, a weak damsel, (either knowing Peter by the
other disciples information who brought him in, or suspecting what he was by
his trembling, or feared-like carriage) does fall a cavilling with Peter as one
of Christ's disciples. 2. As the Lord ordinarily gives a dash to presumption,
by letting it succumb under weakest trials; So we ought to look on every trial
as above us without his strength; for, here, stout Peter meeting with a weak
damsel, and being encountered with soft words, art thou not also one of this
man's (not this seducers) disciples? yet he succumbs. Though it be here
propounded by way of question, and elsewhere absolutely asserted, thou wast
with Jesus, Mat. 26.69. all comes to one purpose, for this question is not
propounded by way of doubt, but as strongly asserting it. 3. In this
miscarriage of Peter, we may read, how the Lord will have conceit punished,
even in his own; how carnal resolutions to cleave to Christ will fail men in
an extremity; and, how small a great sin will seem to be, and how easily
digested, in an hour of fear and tentation; for, so much appears in Peter, who
notwithstanding his esteem of his Master, and his strong resolutions, does now
speak out that foul word, I am not one of his disciples.

Verse 18. And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of
coals, (for it was cold) and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with
them, and warmed himself.
The first branch of the first part of this Chapter, is here closed with an
account of Peter's carriage after this his slip: Namely, that he continued still
warming himself among the rest in a place so full of snares, which also did
occasion his repeated denials of his Master. He had been standing there at his
first denial, Mark. 14.67. but having withdrawn a little into the porch, where
he heard the cock crow the first time, Mark. 14.68. he return: back again and
continues with them, till he is assaulted of new, as we find here, v. 25.
Doct. 1. Such as are carnal persecutors of Christ, may yet be furnished with
store of outward accommodations, that so Saints may not dote upon these things
which are so frequently cast to dogs; for, the servants and officers (who had
taken Christ) had a fire of coals, to warm themselves, for it was cold. See
Joh 18.18. 2. One given up to a tentation of fear, may have large more vexation
and tossing with shifting of trouble, then a resolute sufferer with enduring
it; for, so appears in Peter's carriage, who sometime shifts himself from
among the crowd (as is marked by the rest) and again, fearing lest that might
render him suspect, he comes among them, and stands with them, either that he
might be hid in the throng, or might bear out his denial with his confident
carriage. 3. The conscience of 2 child of God may be strangly deaded and laid
by for a time, by a sin against light, and not become soon tender again; for,
though he had denied his Master, and the cock had crowed once (as is elsewhere
recorded) to give him warning, yet he stood with them, and went not out to
mourn. Thus was it with David in the matter of, Bethshabe and Uriah: And in
Peter it is especially to be observed, that his care and tossing about his own
preservation, hindered his conscience to do its duty, which testifies that that
care was a snare unto him. 4. The children of the Lords refreshments and
accomodations are, many time, so dear bought, that it were far better to want
them, then to go out of Gods way to find them; for, Peter stood and warmed
himself, but the high Priests fire was a snare to a disciple, and he was
forced to vomit up that morsal, when he left the fire, and went out and wept
bitterly.

Verse 19. The High Priest then asked Jesus of his Disciples, and of his
doctrine.
In the second branch of this part of the Chapter, John gives an account of a
conflict betwixt Christ and the high Priest, (omitting several other passages
recorded by the rest) v. 19, 20, 21. and with one of his servants, v. 22, 23,
24. In this verse is recorded the high Priests examination of Christ, and
putting him to give an account of his disciples and doctrine, as supposing him
guilty of sedition and schism in gathering disciples, and of heresy in his
doctrine whereby he gathered them. Whence learn, 1. Christ and his followers
may expect no fair procedure of law from persecutors, even when they seem to
observe some form of it; for, though it was the high Priests office to examine
such cases, yet there is much informality here; Not only in that they had taken
him before, and would have him now to answer before an armed guard, and in that
their mind was preoccupied not to let him go on any terms, Luke 22.67, 68.
But in that they have taken and arraigned him, before they have any articles of
accusation to lay to his charge, and to prove by witnesses, (as is also clear
from the rest) putting it upon himself to give an account, and accuse himself.
2. It is not unusual for the best of doctrines and practices to pass up and
down in the world under the most odious names and imputations; So that we
should not take notice of things according to the names usually given them;
for, so is Christ here in his practice supposed guilty of sedition and schism,
in gathering disciples and followers, and his doctrine insinuate to be unsound,
and such as could not abide the light, and therefore had been taught in
corners, as Christ in his answer understands his question, Thus also was the
Gospel and preachers thereof esteemed of, Act. 17.6. and 24.14. and 28.22.
though yet upon clear information, these imputations did easily evanish, Act.
26.28, 31, 32. 3. It pleased Christ to underly the imputation of sedition,
schism, and heresy, as a perturber both of Church and State; That so he might
not only sanctify such a lot to his followers, but might expiate our seditious
revoltings, and rentings from God, and one from another, and that false
doctrine and these corrupt principles which our first Parents hearkened unto,
and all of us by nature do entertain; for, so much may be gathered from his
being accused in the matter of his disciples, and of his doctrine. 4. Whatever
zeal to Religion and sound doctrine persecutors of Christ and his followers do
pretend, yet it is some other thing that pincheth them; And particularly,
corrupt Churchmen do oft-times make a great noise about Religion as wronged,
when yet the thing that troubles them most, is the decay of their own
reputation among people: for, Therefore does he enquire, first, of his
disciples, and then, of his doctrine, as being indeed not so much troubled with
the matter of his doctrine (had it been never so unsound, as it was indeed the
truth of God proceeding from truth it self) as that thereby disciples were
made, and so the reputation of him and his accomplices lessened among the people.

Verse 20. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in
the Sinagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in
secret have I said nothing:

21. Why ask thou me? Ask them which heard me what I have said unto them:
behold, they know what I said.


Christ, in his defense and answer, waveth the matter of his disciples, and
answers concerning his doctrine. And, 1. He gives a brief account of his way
and manner of preaching, v. 20. That he had not (as the accusation indirectly
employed) gone into corners with it, but had taught openly to the world, and
particularly, in the Temple and Synagogues, where the Jews were his ordinary
hearers, and so had not carried himself as if he durst not avow his doctrine.
2. From this he gathers an inference, v. 21. wherein he accuses their
illegal procedure, who would have him to accuse himself, and would not proceed
legally in examining witnesses in so public a matter, to whom he appeals. For
clearing this purpose, Consider, 1. While Christ says, I spoke openly, and
declines to have spoken any thing in secret, his meaning is not to condemn
men's preaching of truth secretly, in a time of violent persecution; Yea, and
that private teaching and exhortation be joined with public preaching, Act.
20.20. But his scope is only, in matter of fact, to show what his practice had
been, that so he may condemn the high Priests proceeding. And withal, by this
he would show, that however men may preach in secret in some cases, for the
preservation of their persons, yet they ought not so to do, as desiring to have
truth concealed, as if it were not justifiable, nor might be avowed in it
self. Consider, 2. This profession of Christ, does nothing contradict his
practice elsewhere, in teaching the disciples secretly, Mark. 4.34. for he
taught his disciples no other thing, for kind of doctrine, but what he taught
publicly, only he expounded it to them. And withal, he did so, not that it
might be concealed, but that they might proclaim it, Matthew. 10.27. Consider,
3. Christ's refusing to give an account of his doctrine, is no way a denying or
disavowing of his doctrine, but only a legal defense. For, albeit a man, after
he is legally convicted of a crime, may be dealt with to confess it, as Joshua
dealt with Achan; Yet there is no reason why men should expose themselves, when
they are under trial, to the fury of these who are lying in wait to ensnare and
ruin them.

From v. 20. Learn, 1. That Christ does not answer concerning his disciples,
which was the first part of the high Priests interrogatory; We may conceive the
reason to be, Not so much because, possibly, he intended it, after he had
answered first to the matter of his doctrine, but was impeded by the uncivil
carriage of the high Priests servant, v. 22. Nor yet only because he would not
ensnare and betray them, by giving an account of them: But chiefly, to show,
that his doctrine being well considered, that other question needed not be
answered, nor would he be found seditious in gathering disciples thereby; for,
not only had he in his doctrine taught these whom he healed to go unto the
Priests according to the law, and these who conversed with him, to give Caesar
his due, But his doctrine being the doctrine of the Messiah, there could be no
sedition or schism, though all Israel should embrace him and it. And so it
teaches, That a man's doctrine and grounds would be first considered, before
any effects or consequents following thereupon, be judged. For albeit,
sometime, a man may have truth on his side, which yet is not of that
importance, nor so relevant a ground, as to make an open schism and rent upon
it; Yet where weighty matters of truth are held out by a man in his station,
his cause is sufficient to ward off all imputations arising from odious-like
consequents following upon the publishing thereof. 2. Saints, in their
sufferings, ought to account of truth and their cause, as the precious
treasure, carefully to be owned and defended, that it suffer nothing by them;
Therefore, albeit Christ sometime would not answer their calumnies and
accusations, partly, as being frivolous, and, partly, to testify that being
considered as our surety, he had nothing to say, there being nothing charged on
him, but his people were guilty of it, or their sins deserved it: Yet here (as
at other times also) he answered, to testify, that however he yielded his
person, yet he would not yield his cause as unworthy to be owned. And hereby
gives his followers an example what to do in their sufferings. See Ephesians. 6.19,
20. 3. Such as have truth on their side, may speak it boldly and freely, as
that which may be avowed, and will bear them out who own it; And men ought thus
to speak it, as they have a calling; for, says Christ, I speak openly, or
confidently, both to the world in general, and particularly, in the Synagogue
and Temple, whither the Jews always resort. See Act. 4.29. 4. Whatever care
should be had that pearls be not cast before swine; Yet the truth of God ought
to be published by his servants indifferently to the world, in their stations,
as being debtors to all, and not knowing upon whom the Lord may make their
Ministry successeful; and however it succeed, a testimony is to be left against
the incorrigible; Therefore, says Christ, I spoke openly to the world, or to
all, indifferently and freely, to whom he had a commission. 5. It is a
commendable practice of members of the visible Church, to frequent the public
Ordinances and places appointed for that end; And herein, the diligence of men
who live in a degenerate and corrupt Church, may condemn the negligence of
others; for, it is here supposed, that in this time, the Jews did always
resort in the Synagogue, for their ordinary Sabbath services, and in the
Temple, where their more solemn and ceremonial wo^ship was performed. 6.
Christ's preaching not only openly to the world, but more especially, in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, where there were Jews of several tempers, and
many of them set to ensnare him, and jangle with him; May serve to teach, not
only, That his love was great, who sought them so earnestly, who yet were about
to crucify him, Matthew. 23.37. and, That the power accompanying his doctrine is
such, as there may be hopes of prevailing thereby, even among the most corrupt
societies of men. As he publishes his doctrine among his most cruel enemies,
where (no doubt) he prevailed with some, Joh. 12.42. But further, it teaches,
That truth must be preached, as men have a calling, where there are many
disadvantages, and strange humors of people, to encounter; And, That faithful
Ministers must not always expect such auditories as they would desire, for
tractablenesse and subjection: for, Christ, the Prince of Teachers, taught in
the Synagogue, and in the Temple. 7 Ministers of the Gospel, in their preaching
thereof, ought to renounce the hidden things of dishonesty; Either, in
conveighing lawful duties in a clandestine base way, which is apt to render
them suspected; Or, by their so ordering their way, as they may decline
contempt or hatred, or may compass some base by-ends; for, so much does
Christ's example teach, who in secret said nothing, as is before explained. See
2 Cor. 4.2. 1 These. 5.2^. 2 Timothy 3.6.

From v 21. Learn, 1. A man's public carriage (especially if he be one whose
carriage is, for most part, not our and known) being examined and found right,
it is full of hazard, and evidenceth great want of Charity, to suspect his
integrity or his carriage in other things, unless there be good ground for it.
Therefore, Christ carrying himself openly in his doctrine, he counts it very
informal to judge him as a heretic or seditious person, unless it could be
instructed by his hearers. And herein men sail exceedingly, by their envy and
secret whisperings, of which see Prove. 27.4. 2 Cor. 12.20. 2. A man being by
the law of nature obliged to selfe-defence, and against selfe-murther; ought
therefore not to accuse himself before a Judge; Therefore Christ declineth so
to do, why ask thou me? 3. Whatever liberty men have to decline such
witnesses as do profess their malicious and partial disposition, and that they
will not make conscience of lying, so they may condemn the innocent: Yet the
carriage of Christ's followers should be such, as they need not decline any
witnesses who will declare the truth: Therefore Christ appeals indifferently to
his hearers, be who they will, if they would tell what he said, Ask them which
heard me, what I have said unto them. 4. It is the duty of hearers to be able
to give an account of what they hear, as they are called to it; for, Christ
supposes this of them, Behold, they know what I said, though few of many
hearers attain to so much.

Ver. 22. And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by,
struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the high Priest
so?

23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but
if well, why smitest thou me?


In these verses is recorded Christ's conflict with one of the high Priests
officers, who smites Christ ignominiously, and challenges him for speaking in
such a manner to the high Priest, v. 22. The reason whereof is not to be taken
from this, that Christ appealing to his hearers, v. 21. (of which sort these
officers also had been, chap. 7.32, 46.) he, by this practice, will clear
himself of any respect to his doctrine. But the cause of it was his respect to
the high Priest his Master; And he thus deals with Christ, because he
answered not reverently, as he conceived, and because he carried himself so
confidently. Christ, in his answer, ( v. 23.) does tax this way of procedure,
urging, that if he had spoken wrong, the Court was now sitting legally to
examine him, and he might orderly accuse and bear witness, and not abuse him:
and if he had spoken right, it was a great injury so to use him, especially
before a Judicatory.

From v. 22. Learn, 1. Corrupt Masters have ordinarily corrupt servants; and as
sometime servants may corrupt their Masters, so it is as frequent that servants
are corrupted by their Masters, Prove. 29.12, for, here, the officers are such
as their Master was. 2. Men's greatness (though accompanied with no goodness)
does ordinarily so dazzle the eyes of others, that they think it intolerable
any should not dote on them as themselves do, were their courses never so evil;
for, that he was the high Priest, is enough to make this officer take it ill
that Christ did not (as he thought) give more reverence to him, and that
although he was unworthy and nothing like that office, and was even now
persecuting Christ. 3. Great ones, and their adherents, do think their
authority contemned, if they be not absolutely humoured and get all their will,
though to the prejudice and quitting of truth; for, albeit Christ, in his
answer, do only tax their illegal proceeding, and adhereth to truth and the
defense thereof in a legal way; Yet this officer cannot endure he should thus
stand to his point, and not yield to the high Priest: And therefore with a
buffet enquireth, answerest thou the high Priest so? 4. Christ did endure
buffeting and contemptible usage, even from enferiour servants, giving his
check to the nippers; to testify that shame and reproachful usage was our due;
yea, even to be buffeted with Satan's Messengers; and that such as flee to him,
have the curse of such a lot removed, and it sanctified unto them; for, to
teach and purchase this, was our surety stricken with the palm of this officers
hand.

From v. 23. Learn, 1. However men may think to drive Christ and his followers
from truth and duty by buffeting, yet that will not prevail, so long as they
cannot be convinced that God is against them; which would prevail with a
conscience that otherwise will not be beaten from truth: Therefore, Christ,
being thus abused, insists mainly on this, if he had spoken evil or well, as
the thing to be discussed, before he could alter his way. 2. Albeit Christ
require that his people resist not evil, yet his meaning is only to bind up
their hands from private revenge, and not to shut their mouths from
complaining to Authority; for, here his own practice expounds that precept,
Matthew. 5.39. in that, though he will not avenge himself; yet he complains of
the injury, before their Judicatory, and warrants the man, not to strike him
illegally, but to bear witness of the evil. 3. There is no cause that comes
before men, but (for the most part) it is like to have fairer justice then
Christ's cause, all men being unreasonable and absurd here, who have not faith,
2 Thessalonians. 3.2. for, so much does Christ's arguing import, where, by an argument
pinching on all hands, he intimates he got foul play, whether he had spoken
evil or well. 4. Christ in his own person has underlien unreasonable usage,
that he might expiate our desert hereof, and our absurd walking contrary to
God; and might sanctify such a lot to his followers, and assure them that he
(having drunk this cup for them) will see them righted and get fair play, one
way or other; for, so much may we gather for our use, from this usage whereof
he complains.

Verse 24. Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the High Priest.
Before that John proceed to the last branch of this part of the Chapter, he
does here subjoyn how Annas (to whom Christ was sent, v. 13.) had sent him
bound to Caiaphas. Not (as has been cleared on v. 12, 13, 14.) as if the
things formerly recorded had been acted upon him before he was brought thither;
But only, by way of conclusion to the former purpose. and by way of transition
to what follows, he declares that Christ before this had been brought to the
High Priests hall, where he was examined and injured by the High Priests
servant, and where Peter denied him, though he had not mentioned his bringing
thither before. From the purpose in this verse. Learn, 1. It pleased the Father
to expose his Son Christ to the malice of his enemies, who showed him no mercy,
but the uttermost of their rage; that so he might purchase a better lot for his
people: for, therefore it is marked, that as he came bound to Annas, v. 12, 13.
so he does not release him, but sent him bound to Caiaphas his mortal enemy. 2.
God will not only mark what cruelty people exercise against Christ and his
followers themselves, but how they contribute to, and are instrumental in their
ill usage from others; Therefore it is marked, to the perpetual infamy of
Annas, that when he had insulted a while over Christ, he sent him bound to
Caiaphas, where he might be yet more cruelly handled. 3. It pleased our Lord in
his sufferings, to condescend to come bound as a delinquent before an High
Priest, that so he might teach his people what delinquents they were before the
Tribunal of God, and might purchase for them a more comfortable and free
access to himself their High Priest, and to the Father through him; for, so
much may be gathered from his being sent bound to Caiaphas the High Priest. See
Heb. 4.14, 15, 16.

Verse 25. And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto
him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.

26. One of the servants of the high Priests (being his kinsman, whose ear
Peter cut off,) says, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?

27. Peter then denied again, and immediately the cock crew.


Follows in these verses, the third branch of this part of the chapter,
wherein Peter's second and third denial of his Master are recorded. John does in
brief declare, that Peter, after his first denial, staying still in the crowd,
and warming himself, (as is also formerly marked, v. 18.) was the second time
assaulted and challenged as one of Christ's disciples, and does again deny it:
And that after a while, (as is marked, Luke 22.59.) he is the third time
assaulted by one who had interest in the man whom Peter had hurt, and who had
seen him in the garden with Christ. But he persists in his denial, till the
cock crew the second time, which being accompanied with Christ's looking on him,
and his remembering what Christ had foretold, is a mean to draw him to
repentance, as is marked by the rest. For clearing this purpose, Consider, 1.
Whereas in his second assault, as is said in general, that they (to wit, who
were present) said to him, etc. and yet two of the rest assert this assault to
have been by a maid, Mark 14.69. Matthew. 26.71. and another, that it was by a
servant, Luke 22.58. This difficulty may be thus reconciled, that a maid and a
servant assaulting him, and he seeming to neglect them, the whole company, or
many of them, do charge him with it, which puts him on the snare of an open
denial. 2. As for the third assault, the differences betwixt the Evangelists
may be thus reconciled, That being challenged to be one of Christ's followers,
as being a Galilean, whose speech bewrayed him, Mat. 26.73. Mat. 14.70. Luke
22.59. this servant which saw him in the garden, (and belike, saw him also cut
off his kinsmans ear) confirms the challenge: All which importunity, and
possibly some intimation that it was known what he had done in the garden,
precipitates him upon a third denial. 3. As for the manner of his denial, there
is no great difficulty; for, it is the same thing in substance that he is said
to deny by all of them, to wit, that he was Christ's disciple, or with him. Only
while the rest observe that he denied to have known Christ, or to understand of
what they spoke when they challenged him, it points out to what an absurdity
his fear drove him, in that he professes his ignorance of him, of whose fame
and report almost none in the land were ignorant. And his swearing and cursing,
recorded by them to have accompanied his denial, does further point out what
the violence of the tentation was, and what stuff may lurk in the bosom of
Saints, ready to break out when there is a tentation.

From v. 25. Learn, 1. The Lord takes strict and constant notice of men's
deportment and walking upon snares, however they little heed it themselves; and
the longer they do so, he is the more offended: Therefore it is yet again
remarked, that all this while, Simon Peter yet stood and warmed himself in that
place, among such company. 2. Such as do cast themselves in unwarrantable
company, and continue among them, partaking of their accommodations, do not
readily escape without a foul trial and slip, and that more then one; for,
Peter standing and warming himself, his carriage casts him upon the snare of a
new denial. 3. Men are so much the nearer a fall, as they continue among snares
and tentations, when the Lord is eminently calling them to their duty, and to
mourn for their former failings; and so their carriage is nothing answerable to
what their condition, or the Lords dispensations calls them aloud unto; for,
this adds to his guilt, and ripens him for a new assault and fall, that he
stood and warmed himself, when he should have been mourning for his former
denial. 4. As Satan is always tempting believers, as he has opportunity; so
especially, when he has gained any ground upon them, he is an eager pursuer of
them by his fitted means and instruments, and their falling in any degree, is
but a preludie to greater tentations; for, Satan having prevailed by the voice
of a weak damosel, does now the second time assault him, by a maid, a servant,
and many together; They said therefore unto him, Art thou not also one of his
disciples? 5. As Satan is ready to tempt and assault sliding disciples; so they
being once entered in a course of defection, are ready to persist and go yet
further wrong, especially when they are not sensible of their former failings;
for, he again denied it, and said, I am not, and that with an oath, as is
recorded by the rest. 6. It is the great sin of Christ's disciples to deny their
Master, or themselves to be his disciples and followers; for, this was Peter's
fault, He said, I am not one of his disciples. And albeit it was his eminent
slip to renounce his Master by an avowed denial; yet others have need to look
to it, who though they profess him, yet their practice does refute their
Profession, Tit. 1.14. 2 Timothy 3.5. And namely, when they practice not such
duties as are required of disciples: such as, hearing and abiding in his Word,
John 10.27. and 8.31. self-denial and bearing of his cross, Mat. 16.24.
mortification, Gal. 5.24. walking after his Spirit, Romans 8.1. meekness, Matthew.
11.29. mutual love, John 13.35, and several other duties recorded in Scripture.

From v. 26, 27. Learn, 1. As Satan is incessant in pursuing, so he knows how
to fit tentations to every man's humor, that they may take; Therefore, Peter
being all this while possessed with fear, he hounds out his kinsman, whose ear
Peter cut off, (whereof, belike, he had some intimation) and one who saw him in
the garden, that these considerations working yet more upon his fear, might
drive him to a new and more gross denial. 2. As it is Satan's element to sin
and draw others to multiply sin after sin; so Saints, especially, may expect
that when they slip, they will be most, of any, incess^ntly pursued, to add
sin after sin. It being Satan's delight to engage them especially in sin against
God, and by the throng of tentations, to keep them from recovering their feet;
Therefore does he thus pursue Peter the third time. 3. It is the duty of the
Lords people, when they are tempted, to consider what impediments the Lord
lays in the course of their sinning, that so they may be ashamed to go on;
And it is their great sin, when they do otherwise; for, whatever was Satan's
aim in choosing this instrument to assault him the third time; yet the Lord
thereby would shame him from his denial, by bringing in so clear evidences
against him that he was a disciple, which he could not shift without much
impudence, and without open wronging of his Master as not worthy to be owned,
and that before them who certainly knew he had been one of his followers. All
which did contribute to make his sin of denial the more odious. 4. Saints
weakness is such, as being assaulted, they may fall again and again in the
same sin; as here Peter's threefold denial teaches us, Peter then denied again.
It is, indeed, more grievous, when men fall often again into the same sin, even
after they have repented for their former falling into it, (though the
Scripture declares not that to be inconsistent with the state of grace in a
person) but it may be more frequently incident to Saints, to relapse often
while they are still kept going under the power of tentations, without getting
liberty to draw their breath, or recollect themselves; which was Peter's case
here, and pleads for more pity. 5. A gap being once made in the conscience by
sin, it will easily grow wider, and one sin will prove a needle to draw in the
thread of another sin; as here Peter's experience does witness, who by one
denial is drawn to another, and who from simple denial, proceeds to denial with
an oath, and then with cursing, as the rest observe. 6. When Saints begin to
slip, and do not make conscience of repentance for it, God may let their
defection rise to a very great height, till they see cause to abhor
themselves indeed; for, so much also does this experience teach. He, not
heeding, nor being affected with his first denial, the Lord gives him up to me
denials, and that with swearing and cursing; that so his conscience may be
alarmed with the grossness of his way. And indeed, solid repentance in a
backsliding way is seldom attained, till the defection come to some height of
grossness. 7. Whatever be men's conceit of themselves, yet the event will
clear that Christ's verdict concerning man's frailty, is true, and that their
presumption is a liar; for, here, immediately the cock crew, to witness, that
before this time prefixed by Christ, Peter had denied him thrice, according to
his prediction, John 13.38. 8. Albeit the Lord suffer his own to slip through
tentation, that he may correct their proud conceit of themselves, and teach
them to abide more in him; yet he will not utterly lose, but will recover them;
for, the cock crew; to put Peter in mind of what past betwixt Christ and him:
which being accompanied with other means, draws him to repentance, as is
marked by the rest. 9. The same means which men have had, and yet have profited
nothing by them, may yet be much useful when God commands a blessing; for,
albeit Peter was alarmed by the cocks crowing first, after his first fall, Mark
14.68. yet he never remembers Christ's words, but goes on, and the same mean,
with Christ's look, is blessed. 10. The Lord is, oft-times, in mercy pleased to
recover his people by very speedy repentance, after their trial for discovering
of their weakness, is over; And particularly, such as through violence of
tentations are driven upon sin, do readily sooner recover by repentance, then
they who upon resolution, and with deliberation engage in a course of sin; for,
Peter being under a violent tentation in this his sinning, immediately the cock
crew, to give him warning to repent, which accordingly succeeds.

Verse 28. Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: And it
was early. and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they
should be defiled: but that they might eat the Passover.
Follows the third and last part of the chapter, containing a part of Christ's
trial, and the procedure about him, in Pilates judgement-hall. It may be taken
up in four branches. In the first whereof (in this verse) is recorded how they
led Jesus unto the hall of judgment, (or the place where the Roman Governors
used to sit in judgment) to have him sentenced and condemned by Pilate, and
executed accordingly. Before all which, we are to conceive, (as is marked by
the rest) that the chief Priests and their Council, had (beside their
examination of himself, v. 19.) examined false witnesses against him, and
adjured himself to declare what he was; and upon his confession condemned him
of blasphemy, and adjudged him to be worthy of death. And then, with all speed
they bring him to the Roman Governor, as is here marked. Unto which John
subjoyneth, that they themselves would not enter into the judgment hall, lest
being defiled they should be kept from the Passover, which they did not eat
till this day, as has been cleared on chap. 13.2. Doct. 1. It may shame the
Lords people in their negligence in going about his service, to see the
activity of wicked men in their ill courses, particularly, in their opposition
to Christ; for, here, having been at it all night, they do not yet weary, but
led him away, and it was early, and they go themselves, and do not send
officers only. 2. It pleased the Lord so to order, as Christ should he brought
before a pagan Judge, and be by him condemned; one reason whereof is given, v.
31, 32. which I remit to its proper place, And do add, 1. Christ would not be
slain tumultuously, as the Jews cut off Steven, Acts 7. but would be
judicially condemned, that so sin might be condemned in the flesh, Rom 8.3. and
he might fully satisfy for his people, and abide a full process in Law. 2. By
this lot he would expiate our being under the dominion of foreign powers of
sin; Satan, and the kingdom of darkness. 3. Christ by getting his innocence
asserted by Pilate, (which the Jews would never grant) and yet being by him
condemned, would have it cleared, that he suffered not for himself, but for
others. 4. By this means both Jews and Gentiles had an hand in his death, that
both might have an occasion to look to him whom they had pierced, to excite
them to repentance and mourning. 5. Hereby also he has sanctified unto his
people their being brought before judgement-seats, (even of unfriends or
strangers to Religion) for his sake: All these considerations may be read in
this, that they led Jesus from Gaiaphas, unto the hall of judgment. Doct. 3.
Men may pretend to very much zeal in external performances of Religion, who yet
are but naughty, yea, and cruel bloody persecutors; for, so appears in these
here; They themselves went not into the judgment-hall, lest they should be
defiled: but that they might eat the Passover. It is not needful to determine,
whether it was a Tradition of their own, or a determination by God, that
entering into the judgement-hall should defile them, that they might not eat the
Passover; or whether they apprehended pollution, from somewhat they might meet
with there, rather then from entering simply to the place; But this is clear in
it, that they pretend to respect the Passover, and are careful to avoid
pollution; when yet they are seeking the life of the Lord of glory. See Matthew.
23.23.

Verse 29. Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring you
against this man?

30. They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would
not have delivered him up unto thee.


Follows to v. 33. the second branch of this part of the chapter, containing
some debates betwixt Pilate and the Jews, about the entering of Christ's
process. It may be taken up in a twofold proposition of Pilate, and their
answer thereunto. In the first whereof (in these verses) Pilate will not stand
on terms with them, but goes out unto them, and desires they would produce
an accusation against Christ, upon which he might formally and legally proceed,
v. 29. The Jews in answering, suspecting that probation might succeed but ill,
as it had before themselves, Mark 14.55. -- 59. do interpose their own credit
and reputation with Pilate, in stead of an accusation, indirectly taking it as
an affront that he should require an accusation from them, or think that such
men as they, would bring any before him to be condemned, but an evil-doer, v.
30. From v. 29. Learn, 1. It is the duty of Rulers, not only to do justice, but
to be ready to do it timously, and with as great expedition as may be: for,
this is commendable in Pilate, that though it was early, when they came, v. 28.
yet he is ready to hear them. See Exodus 18.13. 2. It is also commendable in men
of power and eminency, not to stand on terms with their inferiors, nor carp
at their scruples and weaknesses; but to pass over all these, and do them
justice; for, this is also commendable in him, that when they scruple to enter
into the judgement-hall, v. 28. he stands not on that, but went out to them,
far contrary to the practice of many great ones, who, if their inferiors
cross any of their humors, will be sure to give them a meeting when they come
in their hands. See Job 31.13, 14. 3. It is agreeable to justice, that no man
be condemned without an accusation produced and proven against him, and that
men in power do not gratify a man to death (as the words will read, Acts
25.16.) nor make use of their Authority to pleasure friends, or satisfy their
own lusts, seeing judgment is not theirs, but the Lords; Therefore, Pilate, an
heathen, is clear to follow this order, What accusation bring you against this
man? From v. 30. Learn, 1. Albeit the Jews could lay nothing to Christ's charge
before Pilate; but either that he was against Caesar, which was a lie, or that
he called himself the Son of God, which was indeed a truth; yet here he is
presented as a malefactor, or a notorious and noxious evil-doer. Whereby he
would, partly, teach, what we indeed were in whose room he stood: even such
notorious delinquents, unworthy to live on the earth: And partly, he would
sanctify unto his people their lying under unjust imputations and calumnies,
which he essayed, being traduced as an enemy to Caesar; and would sanctify
unto them their living in times, wherein clearest truths are persecuted under
odious names; as his calling himself the Son of God was accounted blasphemy. 2.
Men may be very lavish in blasting the reputation of others, who yet would be
loath to be so dealt with by others; but ordinarily, they who make an idol of
their own credit, do regard least the credit of others; for, they stand not to
traduce Christ as a malefactor, who yet tak^ (...) that Pilate should seem to
rub on them by calling (...) accusation. 3. It is an old trick of corrupt
Churchmen and persecutors, to abuse civil powers, and to make use of any
respect they have from them, to give them bad impressions of the godly, and set
them on edge against them; as here these corrupt rulers do make use of any
respect Pilate had to them, to condemn Christ on their word; If he were not a
malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee. 4. Men ought to take
heed how they employ any credit God has given them with men, as being a talent
for the use whereof they will be called to an account; And it is an evidence
that men's credit, authority, or parts, are plagued to them, when they hang at
their wrong side, and they labor to turn men against Christ and his truth,
because such as they are against him; as here, notice is taken that they
employed their credit in this wicked way. See John 7.48, 49.

Verse 31. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to
your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death.

32. That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying
what death he should die.


Pilate, in his second proposition, remits the trial and censure of Christ to
themselves, to be gone about according to their law. But they, in their answer,
decline that they had power to put any man to death, v. 31. in which a special
providence is remarked, v 32. For clearing of this proposition and answer, and
the whole purpose, Consider, That it is asserted by many, that the Jews being
now under the power of the Romans, though they had not power to inflict capital
punishments for crimes condemned also by the Roman Laws; yet they had power
not only to judge of lesser faults, and to inflict punishments which were not
unto death, but might also put men to death for blasphemy against God and their
own Law, whereof they judge Christ to be guilty. Therefore they understand this
speech of the Jews, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, as
importing, not that they might not do it at all, nor yet only that they would
gratify Pilate, by renouncing their power, that they might engage him for
them; But that they might not do it at that time, in regard of the holiness of
the feast, for which cause also it seems that Herod delayed the intended
execution of Peter, till after Easter, Acts 12.4. And they strengthen this
assertion from this consideration, That suppose this power had been taken from
them, yet in this case they could not object want of power or liberty, unless
it had been because of the holiness of the time, seeing Pilate had granted
them liberty to judge him. But whatever be asserted to this purpose, yet upon
accurate search of the Jewish Records, and other passages, it will be found,
That they had indeed power of lesser censures, or punishments, as may be
gathered from Matthew. 10.17. 2 Cor. 11.24. That they had also power in capital
crimes against their own Religion, to examine the nature and quality of the
offense, and to determine what it deserved, as they did in Christ's case, John
19.7. and Matthew. 26.65, 66. and in doing whereof in the case of Paul, they
complain that they were interrupted by Lysias, Acts 24.5, 6, 7. Neither is it
to be denied also, that in their practice they somewhat went further, and in a
tumultuous way did cut off capital offenders, (as they conceived them to be) in
the matter of their Religion, without any legal process, or owning of the
Roman Governor. But as for matter of right or liberty granted then by the
Romans, they had no power at all to put any to death, till he were brought
before the Governor, who was to take cognition of the cause, and to give out
sentence, and see it executed. This appears all along here, in their bringing
Christ unto Pilate, after they had condemned him, in their very clear
profession of the want of power in this place, and in their prosecuting Christ
incessantly before Pilates judgment seat, till he pronounced sentence against
him. We do not find Pilate in the first entering of this process, give any
hint of any such power; nor is it to be doubted, but if they had any such
power, or had they looked upon Pilates speech, as giving them liberty to put
him to death themselves, they would greedily have embraced it, rather then put
the matter in hazard, wherein they think themselves so much concerned;
especially now when they find Pilate like to stand so much on points with
them; to say nothing that they were very tender in the matter of their liberty
and power, and therefore would not willingly quit any right they had, or slight
any liberty granted them. And if they who did persecute Christ to death in the
time of the feast, could not sentence him at that time, yet (no doubt) on the
former considerations, they would have kept him till the feast was over, for
which they might have a guard of Roman Soldiers, as well as they had one for
apprehending him.

These things being considered, I take the scope and meaning of these verses to
be this, That Pilate; partly, having no will to meddle with Christ, whom he
knew to be delivered to him for envy, and partly, being irritate by their
presumptuous and illegal answer to his proposition, v. 29, 30. does remit the
matter back to themselves, that if they judged him worthy only of some lesser
punishment, they might inflict the same according to the liberty yet continued
with them: Or if they meant that he deserved more, even death, when they called
him a malefactor, he, (in a bitter taunt) declares that if that were their way
according to their laws and Religion, to condemn a man upon trust, and put him
to death without an accusation and formal process, he he would let them do on;
But as for him, if he knew not the crime to cognosce upon it, he would never be
their executioner to pronounce sentence and execute it, such procedure being no
ways agreeable to the Roman custom, Act. 25.16. And so his speech is rather a
sharp reflection upon them and their laws, then any permission to them to
execute any such power. The Jews, in their reply, declare that they had no
power at all to put any man to death, and therefore had brought him to him.
Whereby they both intimate that they thought that he deserved more then they
had power to inflict, and withal, they would pacify Pilate, by acknowledging
his power, and declaring how they were content he should exerce it among them.
But in all this John observes a providence of God, Not that the Jews employed
not the power which they had, or was now permitted to them, to put him to
death. Nor yet only that they did it not tumultuously; But that they had no
such power at all; that so he might (according to his own prediction, Matthew.
20.19. Joh. 12.32.) die under a Pagan Ruler, and might dye a Roman death and be
crucified, which was more significant then stoning, the ordinary death
inflicted by the Jews for blasphemy, Lev. 24.16. which was the crime they
falsely charged on Christ, Joh. 9.7. Matthew. 26.65, 66. and would have stoned him
for it before, Joh. 10.33.

From these verses thus cleared. Learn, 1. Even Pagans may be more clear and
just in their proceedings with Christ and his followers, then corrupt men in
the Church, who have abused the offer of much grace; for, so does appear here
in Pilate and these Rulers of the Jews; He does not suppose Christ to be
guilty of so much as they intend, nor is he so forward and informal as they
are. 2. It is the great sin of many men, that having no true piety, they will
yet pretend to much of it; Whereby, and by their unanswerable walking, they
expose Religion to reproach, and render it detestable, even to Pagans: for,
their presumptuous commending of themselves, to commend an injust procedure
against Christ, v. 30. draws out from Pilate this ^art reflection upon their
law and Religion, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. 3. It is
also ordinary with God, to expose these justly to reproach, who hunt after the
idol of their own credit, in a sinful way; for, this also reflects upon
themselves, as well as upon their law. 4. It is no strange thing to see many
idols of men stoop and give place to greater idols, coming in competition
therewith; And, particularly, malice against Christ, his truth and followers,
is ordinarily so violent in persecutors, that they will renounce their credit
and pack up injuries very grievous to them, to get that satisfied: for this
speech, it is not lawful for us to put any man to death, is not only an
ingenuous acknowledgement, that they had no power to deal with Christ as they
thought he deserved, but points out also, how they startle not at this check
given them, but insinuate with him, as acquiescing in their want of power
(which yet was the thing they most affected) that so they might get him on
their side, to condemn Christ. 5. The Lord has a supreme hand and providence
in the least things which concern Christ and his followers, and especially in
their sufferings; for, that they want power, and he is left in Pilates hand,
there was a providence in it, That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, etc.
6. In this way of Christ's dying under a stranger, and by crucifying, omitting
what has been said on v. 28. and may be further spoken of his being crucified,
in its proper place. These passages of providence come to be observed. 1. That
Christ is a faithful keeper of his word, and will not fail to see that
performed which he speaks therein; for, so appears in the first place; all
these things were, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, and he might be
found true in his predictions. 2. That Christ is the true Messiah, as being
sent into the world, when now the Scepter was departed from Judah, according to
the prophecy, Genesis 49.10. for, he foretold this death, and his delivering to
the Gentiles to be crucified, when the Jews wanted power, as here they
confess, that this might contribute to the confirmation of this great truth.
3. Christ would be put to a most cursed, ignominious and painful death, that he
might testify his love to his own, and fully satisfy for them, and might lead
them to inherit a blessing; for, all these concurred in this death; A more
easy way of it being long ago pronounced accursed, Deuteronomy. 21.23. he would
choose the most accursed kind of it, which withal was most ignominious and
painful. 4. Christ also by his posture in this death, being lifted up with his
arms stretched out upon the cross, would invite all his people to look and
come to him, who stands with open arms ready to receive them, and make them
partakers of his purchase.

Verse 33. Then Pilate entered into the Judgement-hall again, and called Jesus,
and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?

34. Jesus answered him, Say thou this thing of thy self? or did others
tell it thee of me?


Follows, to v. 38. the third branch of this part of the Chapter, containing
Pilates examination of Christ, and his answers to his questions. Concerning
which, we are to conceive that Pilate following his own way, will have some
accusation against him before he proceed; And they to satisfy him, do accuse
Christ of affecting a Kingdom, as is recorded, Luke 23.2. Upon which Pilate
proceeds to the examination. It may be taken up in three discourses betwixt him
and Christ: In the first whereof (in these verses) Pilate enquireth if he was
the King of the Jews, and would grant that crime whereof they accused him;
Christ desires, in the first place, before he answer, whence that accusation
might flow, whither from his own apprehension, or from the Jews: Whereby he
would put Pilate to it, to consider, either his own simplicity, if he himself
did suspect him to be a King, such a one as he dreamt of, when yet he saw
nothing in him like such a state; or, his levity and credulity, if he did
receive such an improbable report and delation from others; or his injustice,
if to please malicious delators and accusers, he intended that process against
him Whence learn, 1. It is a plague upon the children of men, that all of them
by nature have still somewhat to make them jealous of Christ, and afraid of him
and his company; for, as the Pharisees feared the blasting of their reputation
by him, and others are afraid that he will not give liberty to their lusts, so
Pilate has his own prejudice, in that he is accused to be the King of the
Jews. Happy are they who are delivered from prejudices at him. 2. It is, in
particular, the great prejudice of Rulers and great men against Christ, that
they apprehend that his Kingdom and power in his Church is prejudicial to
their authority and power in the earth; for, that is the thing Pilate fears,
when he enquires, Art thou the King of the Jews? 3. It is exceeding
reproachful either lightly to take up, or lightly to receive and hearken unto
calumnies and reproaches, cast upon men, or yet to gratify these who are known
to pursue the innocent maliciously; for, so much does Christ's questions to
Pilate point at. 4. Men ought not to be born with, in their dallying with
conscience and justice, especially in matters which concern God and his truth,
but should be put to it, either altogether to disclaim conscience, and equity,
or else to walk according to the rules thereof; for, so much also do Christ's
questions drive Pilate unto, that he would not dally in this process, if in
his conscience he knew it but frivolous and invented by malice.

Ver. 35. Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? thine own nation, and the chief Priests
have delivered thee unto me: What have thou done?

36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence.


In the second discourse, Pilate being a little commoved, declines being the
author of this accusation, as being no Jew, nor acquaint with their
contraversies, nor caring for their Religion, or the King they expected; And
fathers this whole business on the Jews; Christ's own contrymen, and their
Church-Rulers, withal desiring to know what he had done which might so incense
them against him, v. 35. Christ, having reasoned with the man, does now come
expressly to answer to the accusation concerning his Kingdom, and speaks so
much of it, negatively, as might satisfy Pilate; that it might well enough
consist with the safety of the Roman state: Therefore he shows that his
Kingdom was not a worldly Kingdom, and for proof thereof, he instanceth how
far he was from aspiring to a Kingdom by force of arms, in that he would not
so much as permit his servants to fight in his defense, as they offered to do,
when the Jews came to take him. Whence learn, 1. Pilates commotion, evidenced
in his reply, Am I a Jew? did not only flow from his respect to his credit,
which he could not suffer that Christ should touch upon, how justly soever; but
also that his natural conscience was touched, and that he is not willing Christ
should put his conscience to it, seeing he could not follow it, and yet keep
his politic smooth way. It teaches, That they who not only are sinfully
tender of their credit, but they to whom a conscience (what they have of it) is
a vexation, and a cross to their designs, will readily meet with many
vexations by reason thereof, and in end make shipwreck of it; As it fared with
Pilate, who is here, irritate, knowing that Christ touched him in the quick,
and afterward gives up himself, to go over the belly of his conscience. 2.
Even moral civility in men will account it as great a reproach as may be, and a
matter of shame, to be the author and inventer of calumnies and reproaches
against others; for, Pilate declines this, and fastens it upon the Jews, thine
own nation, and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me. 3. Such is the
iniquity and corruption of time, that hardly shall the most injust aspersion
be cast on any, but it will leave some impression of guilt, at least with some;
Therefore, albeit Pilate knew the Jews accusation to be frivolous, and of
envy, yet it gives him occasion to suspect some quarrel, which causes to
enquire, What have thou done? 4. Not only has Christ, as God, an universal
Kingdom of power and providence, even over the highest of men, Dan. 2.21. 1 Timothy 6.15. Prove. 8.15, 16. But, as Mediator, he has a donative Kingdom in
and over his Church, to the preservation and propagation whereof, his Kingdom
of power is subservient, Matthew. 28.18, 19. for, so is here imported, that even
in his state of exinanition, he has a Kingdom, my Kingdom. 5. It is no
strange thing to see truth so misrepresented as may stumble many, which yet
being heard and cleared, will offend none; for, whereas this truth, that he is
a King, was so represented as might offend Pilate, Christ lets him see that
this needed not at all stumble him. 6. Albeit Christ's Kingdom be in the world,
yet it is not of the world; Not only in respect of the subjects, who ought not
to be of the world, but chiefly, in opposition to worldly Kingdoms; The
benefits thereof not being earthly, Romans 14.17. it being managed in a spiritual
way, and with spiritual weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4. and coming without external pomp
and observation, like unto the Kingdoms of the world, Luke 17.20, 21. for, so
much is imported in this assertion, my Kingdom is not of this world, whereby
he removes all cause of fear in Pilate. 7. It is the property of Christ's
subjects and servants, to be affectionate to their Lord and Master, and to be
ready to do whatsoever is lawful for the good of his Kingdom; for, so is
imported in that his servants would fight, if it had been warrantable. And
hereof all made offer, and Peter gave a rash proof, as we heard on v. 10. 8.
It is an evidence that Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, that it is carried on not
by force of arms, as worldly Kingdoms are, but by spiritual means; Therefore,
does Christ confirm his assertion (not by Scripture, which Pilate knew not,
but) by that known instance, If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. Whereas private
men aspiring to a worldly Kingdom, do use violence and force of arms, he had
prohibited his disciples to fight in his defense in the Garden. This is not to
be understood, as if Christ disallowed that they to whom he has given the
sword, should defend his Kingdom therewith; for, if Magistrates, even as
Magistrates, should be nursing Parents to the Church, and ought to kiss the
Son, as the Scriptures do record, then certainly they may and should employ
their power as Magistrates, for removing of Idolatry, and setting up the true
worship of God, and for defending thereof against violence. But Christ's purpose
and scope in this may be fully taken up in these. 1. Christ in his present
state of humiliation, came into the world, not to get visible powers on his
side, but to abase himself and suffer, Matthew. 20.28. And to this the words in
the text relate, while it is said, they did not fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews. But in his state of exaltation, he has given, and will
give more ample proofs of his power, even in crushing Kings and Potentates,
who oppose him and his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.9, 10, 12. and 110.5, 6. (which is
sometime brought to pass by war) and in employing the Kings of the earth to
hate the whore and burn her with fire, Rev. 17.16. 2. Christ by hindering his
servants to fight, who were but private men as to any civil power and officers
in his Church; has taught; That private men are not warranted to draw the
sword, were it even in defense of Religion, but they ought to maintain it by
suffering, when called to that extremity. And, That the sword is not the weapon
put in Churchmens hands for the defense of Religion. 3. By this inhibition
also, as it relates to Pilates apprehensions, we are taught, That it is not
lawful for professors of Religion to take up arms for this end, that they
may, under pretext of Religion, set up any such Kingdom as Pilate might
apprehend, to the prejudice of the lawful Magistrate; But it is the will of
Christ, That they enjoy their power and dignity (they allowing Christ the
exercise of his spiritual Kingdom) That Religion commend it self by loyalty
to authority, and by avoiding of sedition; and, That Religion or Saintship be
no sufficient ground to warrant men to entitle themselves to any power in the
State, to which they have no lawful calling; but rather, That it teach them to
keep and adorn their stations. 4. Whatever case may warrant fighting in
defense of Religion, yet the influence thereof is but very accidental, as to
this great end of promoting the spiritual Kingdom of Christ; for, not only did
the Gospel overspread much of the world, by the preaching and sufferings of
professors, before Magistrates did befriend it; but even their power, when it
is employed, can but reach to set up the outward exercise of Religion, and to
the repelling of external force, but can, its alone, do nothing to the
conscience, or to the keeping out of Satan, which is effectuate only by Christ's
Spirit accompanying and blessing his own spiritual weapons. Doct. 9. Men's
practice is the clearest proof of their way and inclinations, whereby men
ought in charity to judge of them, unless they have strong evidences to the
contrary: Therefore upon this, that his servants did not fight, Christ clearly
infers, But now is my Kingdom not from hence.

Ver. 37. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered,
Thou say that I am a King. To this end was I borne, and for this cause came
I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is
of the truth, hears my voice.
In the third discourse, Pilate, gathering from what Christ had said of his
Kingdom, that he held himself to be a King, desires a clear confession
thereof; and Christ gives him that good confession mentioned, 1 Timothy 6.13.
Adding, 1. That he came into the world to bear witness unto the truth, where,
without distinguishing curiously betwixt his being born, as being spoken in
relation to his person, or humane nature subsisting in it, and his coming into
the world, in relation to his office; (seeing both may be looked on, as one and
the same) we may look upon this, either generally, that his office at this time
was, in part, to preach truth and avow it, and to prove himself a King, by
making it successeful, and to confirm it by his suffering; O^, more
particularly, that he came into the world, to beat witness to this truth, that
he was a King, and so to publish that decree, Psalm. 2.6, 7. and avow it to the
death. 2. He adds, that every one that is of the truth hears his voice;
whereby he prevents an objection that might be moved against the truth of his
doctrine and witness, as being so ill entertained; and clears, that, however
few do receive it, either his doctrine in general, or this in particular, that
he is a King: Yet, this does not make void the truth thereof, seeing all who
are of the truth, or borne of God, and begotten by the Word of truth, and who
love the truth, and do not delight in lies, will hear him, and embrace his
doctrine and testimony. Doct. 1. Sufferers may expect they will have to do with
politic and quick sighted men, who will sift all their discourses, and draw
out their mind concerning these things wherein they think they may have most
advantage of them; for, so does Pilate, upon Christ's former discourse, urge him
to speak it out, Art thou a King then? Yet not so much (as appears from the
sequel, in that he troubled him not for it) because of any fear he had of his
Kingdom, as to try if he would adhere to such a ridiculous-like profession,
which in his judgment might expose him to mockery and contempt. 2. Truth ought
to be stoutly maintained and avowed, when we are called to it, how absurd so
ever it seem to be in it self, and how unpleasant so ever it seem to be unto
men; for, so does Christ here answer, Thou say that I am a King, or, it is
so, as thou say, and thou tightly gatherest it from my words. A stout
confession, as to the matter of it, and yet modest, as to the manner, in that
he does it not vauntingly, but simply, thou say it, and after clears that
he did it out of conscience and duty; to show that courage and modesty must go
together in owning of truth. 3. Christ is indeed King of his Church; And where
he gathers his Church, there he sets up his Kingdom, wherein his laws are to
be obeyed and acknowledged by his subjects, and which he will protect and
defend, in despite of all his enemies; for, this truth is clearly held out
here, for the Churches comfort, thou say that I am a King. 4. By persecution
the Lord gives occasion to his servants to publish truth, and make it known to
the greatest of men, who possibly otherwise would never hear so much of it, as
is then spoken in their own audience; for, by Christ's suffering, Pilate comes
to hear his doctrine, and that concerning his Kingdom. And beside this also,
their very sufferings invite men to enquire after their doctrine for which they
suffer; which probably otherwise they had not taken notice of, Phil. 1.12, 13.
5. Every man is sent into the world, and employed by God, for some end and
service, which they should much mind, and labor to be faithful in their
employment and trust, upon all hazards; Therefore does Christ, as man and
Mediator, look to the end for which he was born, and the cause for which he
came into the world; which being to bear witness unto the truth, therefore he
will here avow it on all hazards, even before Pilate. 6. As it is the eminent
employment put upon all professors of Religion, that they bear witness to the
truth, or give a testimony to the worth thereof; Partly, by their open avowing
of it and suffering for it, when they are called to it in times of hazard; and
partly, in their ordinary carriage, by publishing truth in their stations, by
subjecting their walking, thoughts, and reasonings to it, and by magnifying the
truth thereof, in opposition to their tentations and discouragements, which
when men neglect, they will never prove stout in suffering for it; And
particularly, they are bound to bear witness unto the Kingdom of Christ: So
Christ himself is the great Captain of these witnesses; He is the great
preacher of truth, whose powerful Scepter, as a King, is the Word of truth; who
stands for the maintenance of truth, and particularly this truth, that he is a
King over his own Church, to order the affairs thereof; and, who did seal this,
and the whole truths of God, by his blood: for, he declares this to be one of
his great ends and works in the world, to bear witness unto the truth, as a
pattern to all others in their stations, and an encouragement to all who follow
his pattern, that they have such a Champion of truth, who yet does maintain it,
though he come no more into the world in person, nor suffer any more. 7. Albeit
the most part of the world do little regard Christ's doctrine, yet it is the
very truth, and all the lovers and friends of truth will own it, and who so do
otherwise, they bewray their own estrangement from truth, and are indeed
delighters in lies; for, every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

Verse 38. Pilate says unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he
went out again unto the Jews, and says unto them, I find in him no fault at
all.
In the last branch of this part of the chapter is recorded Pilates carriage
and dealing with Christ's accusers, after his examination of him, and that in
two particulars: The first whereof is, that Pilate abruptly breaking off the
Conference with Christ, disdainfully enquiring what truth is, he goes forth to
the Jews, and absolveth Christ, declaring that he judged him innocent. Whence
learn, 1. Christ and his followers may seem oft-times great fools in their
sufferings, as suffering for things of no moment in the esteem of men, who (as
the Lord oft-times draws the controversy for which the godly suffer, to a
very small hair and point of truth; so they account it great folly for men to
suffer for any divine truth; for, so much does Pilates question, What is truth?
import. He propounds it, not so much for satisfaction, seeing he went out not
waiting for an answer, as testifying that he looked on truth, and particularly,
that which Christ now avowed, as a very trivial thing for him to hazard so much
upon. 2. Men's own wit and knowledge is so great an idol to them, that they can
hardly endure to be reputed ignorant, or to esteem of any truth as excellent,
wherewith they are not acquainted; for, this also occasioned Pilates disdainful
question, to which he will not stay for an answer. He could not endure to hear
that truth commended, the knowledge whereof (as he might gather from Christ's
last words) was wanting in him, and the Romans, who were reputed so wise a
people. 3. Christ was cleared, even by his enemies and persecutors, to be
innocent in his own person, that believers may be confirmed in the faith of his
suffering for them, and his standing in their room, and of his fitness for
that work, being a spotless sacrifice; Therefore, it is recorded, that he went
out again to the Jews, (who would not enter to him, v. 29.) and says unto
them, I find in him no fault at all. 4. Men's passions, and particular
prejudices and resentments against persons, ought not to blind their
judgments, nor byasse them in cognoscing upon causes; for, this is commendable
in Pilate, that though he had been somewhat commoved, v. 35. and not much taken
with what Christ said of truth, yet when he comes out, he says, I find in
him no fault at all. 5. The Lord can make use, not only of men's natural
conscience, but, even of their Atheistical disposition and contempt of truth
and Religion, to bring about the good of sufferers, when he pleases, in the
vindication of their innocence; Whereby he teaches them to eye him much, who
can make what use he pleases of every thing; for, it was Pilates contempt of
what Christ preached of his Kingdom and truth, in the beginning of the verse
which concurreth with his natural conscience, to make him think nothing of the
accusation, and absolve him. So also was Paul released, Acts 18.12.16.

Verse 39. But ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the
Passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?

40. Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now
Barabbas was a robber.


In the next place, Pilate having absolved Christ, endeavors also to release
him with the Jews good liking; And taking occasion of their custom of having
some one prisoner released to them at the feast of the Passover, he propounds
(as is marked, Matthew. 27.17.) Barabbas, a murderer, and Christ, to them,
insinuating his desire that they should choose Christ; but they generally (both
Rulers, and the people persuaded by them, Matthew. 27.20.) do refuse him, and
seek Barabbas to be set at liberty: As for this custom of the Jews, it
appears not to have been devised by the Roman Governors, for gratifying of the
Jews, but a custom of their own, invented in their declining times to honor
their feast of the Passover, and to be some memorial of their redemption from
Egypt, and of their so much desired liberty. And now having no power themselves
to release whom they would, they have recourse to the Governor, who was
necessitate to yield to their custom, Luke 23. 17. belike, to prevent tumults.
And as for the nature of this custom, as it was sinful of themselves, to devise
any thing relating to their sacred solemnities, and to dispense with the Law of
God, requiring that justice should be execute against malefactors; so in this
particular, they manage it most wickedly, in pre^^^ing a (...) malefactor to
innocent Christ. Do^t. 1. Long in^^terate customs do ordinarily prevail much
among people, were they never so sinful and abominable, (...) much the more, as
they have any spacious pretext: As here, their continues a wicked custom, of
releasing one at the Passover, gilded over with a pretext of respect to that
feast, which yet indeed made it the more abominable before God, that such a
course should pretend any relation to his Ordinance. 2. If we look on Pilates
part in this procedure, it may teach; partly, That humane policy, and carnal
friends, and their interposing, will readily do Christ and his followers little
successeful service in a strait; for, he does but deal for Christ in a politic
way; which did not avail. Partly, that whatever men have of a conscience of
duty, yet that does not avail before God, so long as they put not forth
themselves to the utmost, in their stations, to see that done which is right;
for, albeit Pilates endeavors serve indeed to clear Christ's innocence, and
that Pilate in conscience judged him so; yet all that is not enough in him,
seeing he did not employ his authority and power to rescue and defend the
innocent, but does only essay oratory and policy: and partly, that such as
would faithfully follow conscience and light, had need to hold a loose g^ip of
all other enjoyments and interests, and particularly, to avoid affectation of
popularity; for, this was Pilates snare, that though he judged Christ innocent,
and that he ought to be delivered, yet not being willing to lose the people; he
only uses insinuations and policies, will ye that I release unto you the King
of the Jews? 3. If we look on the Jews proceeding in this business, it may
teach, partly, That men obdured and hardened by Gods judicial stroke, will
neither regard civility, reason, nor common sense; light will not convince
them, nor equity persuade them to what is right; for, so appeared in these
obstinate Jews: albeit Pilates procedure was very effectual in its kind; for
he propounds to their choice with Christ, a man whom common civility might make
them ashamed to own, or seek to exempt from punishment, and prefer him to
Christ; He insinuates his own inclination, and that it should be a courtesy to
him, if they would seek Jesus to be released, Will ye that I release him unto
you? Withal, he names him the King of the Jews, insinuating that his death
would tend to the discredit of their Nation, being one bearing such a name,
(which they afterward resent, chapter 19. 21.) and accusing the multitude of
levity, who not long since had proclaimed him their King and now would have him
crucified; And yet all this prevails not with them, They cried all again,
(that is, in answer to him, or, again, after that former cry, that he would
observe their custom, in releasing some one, of which, Mat. 15 8.) saying, not
this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber; partly, it teaches, That no
persons, how vile soever, are so odious in the eyes of the enemies of God as
Christ and his followers and friends; for, so much did Christ find in his own
person, Barabbas a robber being preferred to him. 4 If we look to the hand of
God and Christ in all this (without which nothing was done in this business,
Acts 4.27, 28) it may teach, 1. Christ would have it evidently seen by us, that
he suffered by the appointment of God, and that he loved to do so, in that he
would not suffer any endeavor for his releasement to succeed. 2. He would also
not be released, but crucified, at the Passover, that he might prove himself
the true Passover sacrificed for us, and dying at such a time, the smell of
his death might spread far and near, by reason of the great concourse at this
time. 3. Christ has sanctified unto his people disappointments in the matter
of deliverance, when otherwise it might seem probable; hereby also encouraging
them to suffer, when by these disappointments it is clear they should suffer;
for, he in his own person is not released, albeit the Governor endeavored it.
4. While Barabbas a robber is preferred to Christ, it may serve to put us in
mind, that however in himself, and as to them who sought his life, he was most
innocent; yet considering him in his Suretiship, he had more to suffer for,
then ever Barabbas committed, and therefore is arrested by divine justice,
while the other is permitted to escape; And this should invite every one who
claims interest in his death, to lay to heart his share in these provocations
and crimes which were then charged upon Christ. 5. Christ has sanctified unto
the godly, their being worse esteemed of in the world then the worst of men,
and their being held unworthy to live on the earth, where many wicked men are
tolerate, (See 1 Cor. 4.9. -- 13. Acts 22.22.) and that even by corrupt
Churchmen; for, they preferred Barabbas a robber to himself.

CHAP. XIX.
IN this Chapter John prosecutes the Narration of the rest of Christ's
sufferings, before Pilate, and in the place where he was crucified; together
with his death and burial. It may be taken up in three parts. In the first part
is recorded some further sufferings of Christ, and Pilate further dealing with
him, and about him with the Jews, before he proceed to the sentence of death,
to v. 13. And namely, That Pilate having scourged and otherwise abused Christ,
v. 1, 2, 3. does yet declare him innocent before the Jews, and labors to move
them to pity, and to cease their further rage, by looking upon him in such a
case, v. 4, 5. But this not prevailing with them, and Pilate yet asserting his
innocence, and refusing to hearken to them, v. 6. they bring in a new
accusation of blasphemy against Christ* v. 7. which together with a new
conference with Christ upon that subject and the matter of his power over
Christ, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. makes him yet more desirous to release him, till they
bring an accusation against himself, as do friend to Caesar in this business,
v. 12.

In the second part of the Chapter is contained the sentence of death
pronounced against Christ, with the answerable execution, and what occurred
till he gave up the ghost, to v. 31. wherein these particulars are recorded, 1.
That Pilate, being terrified with their accusation, after some formalities in
procedure, (whereby he thought to transfer the guilt upon them) passes
sentence that he should be crucified, v. 13, 14, 15, 16. ^. 2. The execution of
this sentence, with an account who they were that suffered with him, v. -- 16.
17, 18. 3. The title put upon his Cross, with some debates about it. v. 19.
20, 21, 22. 4. His sufferings from the soldiers, being now upon the Cross,
and that according to the Scriptures, v. 23, 24. 5. His company who stayed
beside the Cross, and his care of his mother, being then present, v. 25, 26,
27. 6. His thirst immediately before ^is death, and their giving him vinegar to
drink, according to the Scriptures, v. 28, 29. 7. His Testament and death, v.
30.

In the third part of the Chapter, some consequents following upon his death
are recorded, And namely. 1. A confirmation of this truth, that he was reallie
dead: wherein is recorded the Jews desires to Pilate, that the death of these
who suffered might be hasteled by breaking of their legs, that so they might be
removed, because of their solemnity, v. 31. and that the soldiers did execute
this upon the other two, v. 32. but finding Christ ^lready dead, they do not
break his legs, v 33. but make his death sure by a new wound, v. 34. The
certainty whereof John confirms, as being an eyewitness, v. 35. and does
clear these passages, by comparing them with the Scriptures, v. 36, 37. 2 His
honorable burial by Joseph, who begged his body of Pilate, v. 38. and
Nicodemus, who provided ointment and spices, v. 39 and both together do
decently bury him in a new grave, v. 40, 41, 42*

Verse 1. THen Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.

2. And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and
they put on him a purple robe.

3. And said, Hail King of the Jews: and they smote him with their hands.


The first part of this Chapter may be summed up in these four branches: The
first whereof (in these verses) contains Pilates cruel usage of Christ, by
scourging of him, v. 1 by causing to crown him with thorns, and cloth him
with purple, v. 2. hereby punishing his affecting of a ridiculous Kingdom, as
he supposed, and affronting him with salutations as a mock-King, and by
injurious smiting, v. 3. If we look on Pilates scope in all this, it was mainly
to gratify the Jews by some lesser punishment, and to induce them to pity
Christ thus grievously afflicted for their pleasure, as will appear in the
following purpose. Hence it is subjoyned to the preceding purpose with a
Therefore, v 1. intimating that since Pilates design succeeded not to get him
released in stead of Barabbas, he essayed this as another mean, thinking to
spare his life by scourging of him; And albeit some of the other Evangelists
mention this scourging after his condemnation, yet John does set it down in its
own order, which they only recapitulate as a thing done before that. But if we
look upon this usage in it self, it was a part of Christ's suffering for us,
both painful, and loading him with contempt and ignominy. Whence learn, 1.
Great men in Gods account are guilty of the faults of their inferiors, when
they connive at them, and do not reprove and repress them, much more when they
command and enjoine them: Therefore it is said, Pilate took Jesus and scourged
him, because the soldiers did it; (as it is v. 2. and in the rest of the
Evangelists) at his command, and he, being present, (as is implied, v. 4.) gave
way to all their cruelty in it. See 2. Sam. 12.9. 2. As this scourging and
painful crowning of Christ, does not warrant any to think basely of him, as if
he were without any desirable form or beauty, (as it is, Isa. 53.2.) but does
rather point him out to his people, as white and ruddie, white in his
innocence, and ruddie in his sufferings, and therefore he should be accounted
the chief among ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. and fairer then the children of men,
Psalm 45.2. so in particular, his scourging, (which was a reproachful usage of
any ingenuous, and free man, Acts 16.37. and 22.25. and was no doubt painful,
and so much the more painful and violent, as Pilate thereby intended, to move
the Jews to pity) may point out, 1. The peace of rebel-man was not to be
purchased at an easy rate, nor could his wounds be healed, but by sharp
stripes and sore wounds on his Surety; for, so much did his scourging for our
sakes point out; Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet. 2.24. 2. Sin in fallen man has universally
spread it self through the whole man; so that as no faculty of the soul, so no
member of the body is free of it; so much may be gathered from this, that all
the parts of Christ's body, (many whereof smarted in this scourging, and the
rest by other means) behoved to suffer for expiating thereof. 3. Christ in his
own person has sanctified that method of proceeding with his followers, that
every one of them who are received by the Father, be also scourged by outward
trials and other exercises; for, he their Head and Lord, was scourged. Doct. 3.
His being crowned with thorns, beside what may be gathered from it with the
following particulars, serves to teach, 1. That he is the truth and substance
of that type of the ram caught in a thicket by the horns or head, who was
offered up instead of Isaac, Genesis 22.13. as he is in stead of his people. 2.
That his sufferings, however sharp, are indeed his crown and his glory, and he
accounted so of them, that we might learn to glory in his cross, Gal. 6.14. 3.
That his Kingdom on earth is but contemptible in outward appearance, and
managed and promoved by much thorny trouble. See Mat. 20.21, 22. 4. Thorns
being a curse following upon man's sin, Genesis 3.18. his bearing thereof in a
crown, would teach, that by his sufferings, he turns all the curses of his
people into crowns and blessings. 5. That (...) the rose grows out of the
thorns, so out of this thorny crown has sprung unto him a crown of glory and
honor, Heb. 2.9. and many crowns, Rev. 19.^2. and crowns unto his followers
also, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.8. Doct. 4. This thorny crown, being conjoined with
the purple robe, (used only by Kings and great men) together also with the
scepter of a reed mentioned by the rest, and their saluting him as King of the
Jews, all which was done in derision and contempt of his affected Royalty, as
they alleged; and in testimony that they did deride him, they in the mean
time, smite him with their hands; All these, I say, being conjoined together,
may teach, 1. The Kingdom of Christ, being spiritual, is accounted but folly
and matter of derision to the world; for, so much does their carriage toward
him, as a King, teach. 2. Christ in his person has sanctified unto his people,
their being made spectacles and a matter of derision to the world, 1 Cor. 4.9,
13. Psalm 123 4. for, he in his own person did endure this bitter scorn. 3.
Christ by suffering for alleged affecting of Royalty and a Kingdom, has
expiate the high presumption of his people, in affecting to be like God, Genesis
3.5, 4. His enduring of this mockage for his people, points out what contempt
and everlasting confusion abides them who are not in him; for, if this be done
in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry?

Verse 4. Pilate therefore went forth again, and says unto them, Behold, I
bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.

5. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe:
and Pilate says unto them, Behold the man.


In the second branch of this part of the chapter is recorded what was Pilates
scope in all this; to wit, not that he might revenge or punish any real fault
in Christ, but that having gratified them this far, by afflicting the innocent,
lest they should be accounted injust in accusing him, they would now in pity be
content, and crave no more to be done to him. For which end, having thus dealt
with Christ in the judgment-hall, he goes forth again, (after the former time,
chap. 18.28, 29.) to the Jews who stayed without, declaring how he had found
Christ innocent, and therefore could not condemn him, but would present him to
them, to see if they would be persuaded to let him go; and withal, he would let
them see what he he had done to him, to gratify them, and to move them to
pity. And accordingly, he is brought forth in that sad posture, and presented
as an object of pity and compassion. Whence learn, 1. The tenderness of men's
conscience cannot be known or tried so much by their propounding of a good end,
as by their choosing of cleanly and warrantable means, for attaining their end,
for, Pilates end was good in seeking to have Christ delivered, but he choosed
wrong means, in that he dealt so cruelly with the innocent, and cared not to
send him away with ignominy and great affliction, so he got him delivered. 1.
It is no new trial for innocents, to meet with many affronts and injuries in
their trials, if it were but to gratify their accusers, and salve their
credit; for, Christ is here found innocent, and yet he must not come off, nor
be brought out to be delivered by them, but when he is all pained and bloody,
and wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe, lest they should be
rubbed upon, as accusing him injustly. 3. Christ in his sufferings was innocent
of any personal crime, even in the consciences of his persecutors; whereby the
Lord made it clear, that his sufferings were for others; for, says Pilate, not
only here, but often, I find no fault in him; and he brought him forth that
they might know this, evidencing by bringing him forth, that he could not
condemn him, and that he desired they would rest satisfied with what he had
done. 4. Whatever men may have of a natural conscience, yet well-doing is above
the power thereof, it will only tend to further their own condemnation; for,
Pilate acquits him, I find no fault in him, and yet he abuses him, and
brings him out, wearing the crown of thorns, and purple robe, etc. 5. Carnal
policy in Gods ways will never do any good, but rather tend to greater
trouble; for, Pilates policy in scourging and abusing of Christ, and bringing
him out with the crown of thorns, and purple robe, is so far from delivering
him, that it augments his trouble, and he is both scourged and crucified,
whereas he might otherwise have been crucified only. 6. It is an evidence of
monstrous cruelty in men, when not only the innocence of sufferers, but their
bitter sufferings, though innocent, will not mollisie their hearts, and assuage
their fury; for, Pilate propounds Christ thus abused, as an object pleading for
pity, Behold the man. And whatever use they made of this sight, yet we should
behold the Son of God in that his deep exinanition, not carnally to pity him,
but in his example and lot, to learn condescendence and stooping, and obedience
and subjection to the Will of God, Phil. 25.6, 7, 8. Matthew. 26.39. to study the
desert of sin, that we may abhor it, and to read his love toward his peuple,
Romans 5.8.

Verse 6. When the chief Priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried
out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Take ye him,
and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

7. The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die,
because he made himself the Son of God.


In the third branch of this part of the chapter is recorded the success and
fruit of this policy of Pilate, to wit, that this sight of Christ did not move
them to pity, but awaked their cruelty, and made them importunately to cry out
that he might be put to death: and that Pilate declining to be their butcher in
executing of an innocent man, they bring a new accusation against Christ, that
he was a blasphemer, and therefore by their law ought to be put to death;
wherein, finding Pilate not much moved with the accusation concerning his
Kingdom, as seeing little hazard to the State in tolerating Christ, they bring
in this accusation from their law, wherein he behoved to credit them, as not
being able to judge it of himself, Whence learn, 1. Persecutors will not be
satisfied with any measure of affliction, so long as Christ, or his truth, or
cause have any life in them; for, when the chief Priests and officers saw
him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him, as thirsting for his
death, though he was already sore afflicted; and what they cannot obtain with
reason, they will endeavor to prevail in it by impudent importunity, and
tumultuous outcries. 2. Christ submitted to be denied all pity in his
sufferings, and to have men's face hid from him; not only that he might
sanctify such a lot to his followers, but that they might find bowels of pity
under their troubles, in so far as shall be for their good, Jer. 15.11. and
31.20. for, so much may be gathered from this part of his suffering, that he
found no compassion, but was cruelly pursued. 3. Divine justice, pursuing sin,
could not be satisfied, but only by the death of the Surety of sinners, nor
could that burning fire be quenched but by his blood, for, there was an
overruling hand of God, craving for complete satisfaction to justice, in his
being crucified. 4. A natural conscience may cleave long to truth and duty,
against much opposition, and yet at last quit it; for, so much appears in
Pilate, who notwithstanding all this vehemence, yet stands by his point, Take
ye him, says he, and crucify him, (of the meaning whereof, see chap. 18.31.)
for I find no fault in him. He declines for their pleasure to crucify an
innocent, and will rather let them do it, then put his hand to it. Only it is
to be marked, that however this permission point out chiefly a sad reflection on
their cruelty and injustice; yet it insinuates also that his chief scope was to
be rid of this process, since he could not get his will; but that succeeds
not, since he employed not his power to rescue the innocent. And indeed, when
men have any light or conscience in trying times and cases, they will not get
leave to lurk, but must either closely follow their light, and act by it in
their stations, or else they will be given up to go over the belly of light and
act against it, as Pilate did. 5. Persecutors are incessant and endless in
their machinations, plots and calumnies, against Christ and his followers; And
when one plot or accusation miscarrieth, they will be sure to find another;
for, so do they here, when the former challenge, that he made himself a King,
avails not, they bring another, and do not claim to any power upon Pilates
concession, but do take upon them only to point out the law. 6. Where Religion
keeps not the first place, it is an argument of no zeal, whatever men do
pretend; for, in this they bewray their unsoundnesse, that this accusation of
blasphemy comes in the second place, after that of his being an enemy to
Caesar, which they first propounded, as was cleared on Chap. 18.33. 7. Such as
are indeed blasphemers, and do arrogate to themselves what is proper to God
only, by the law of God they ought to be put to death; for, it was indeed
agreeable to the law, and may be taken in as a branch of that law against
blasphemy, Lev. 24.16. that he ought to die, who makes himself the Son of
God. But Christ was not guilty, who did not make himself, but was indeed, the
Son of God. 8. It is no strange thing to see corrupt and bloody men cry down
most necessary and saving truths as blasphemous errors, and to abuse and
misapply Scriptures for that end, and to deceive others; for, they reckon that
saving truth of Christ's Godhead to be blasphemy, and wrest the Scriptures to
draw Pilate to be of their mind, we have a law, and by our law he ought to
die, etc.

Ver. 8. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid,

9. And went again into the judgment hall, and says unto Jesus, Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.


In the last branch of this part of the Chapter, we have recorded some
consequents and effects following upon this last accusation, before Pilate is
persuaded to condemn him. And in the first place, (in these verses) is
declared, that Pilate hearing this, is so far from condescending to their
desire, that he is the more afraid, hearing tell of the divinity of him whom he
judged to be innocent, and of whose fame he (no doubt) heard much, v. 8. And,
that studying to inform himself concerning this matter, by conference with
Christ himself, he gets no answer, v. 9. Whence learn, 1. It is evident to
right discerners, that all the designs and well contrived plots of persecutors
would little avail, but rather turn to their prejudice and disappointment, if
the Lord see it sit to exempt his people from trial; for, albeit God would not
have Christ delivered, yet this new accusation does not make Pilate more
forward to persecute Christ, but more afraid to meddle with him. See Prove.
21.30. 2. Such as do but halt in following their duty, will have more fear and
trouble, then even sufferers who walk straightly; for, it is insinuate that
Pilate, who did not closely follow his light, had fear before, and now he was
more afraid upon this information, as having walked upon so unsafe grounds. 3.
Serious thoughts of a deity will strike terror, even in a natural heart and
conscience, especially when they are following a course which their own
conscience cannot approve; for, when he heard that saying, of his making
himself the Son of God, he was the more afraid, considering what he had done
to him, and that contrary to his light. And albeit it be not sufficient, that
men have a fear or horror only upon the thoughts of a Godhead, unless it be
seasoned with love; Yet they come far short of Pilate who have not so much. 4.
Impartial observers, and even the natural consciences of men, might have had
strong apprehensions of the divinity of Christ, notwithstanding the abject-like
condition of his person; for, albeit Christ was in the form of a servant, and
now in a low condition before Pilate, yet when he heard that saying, he was the
more afraid, as suspecting it might be true that he was the Son of God. And
this he might conjecture, not so much because Pagans did fancy that their idol
gods did descend in humane shape, Act. 14.11. as that his mind was illuminate
to consider what they said, and compare it with the same that went of Christ's
miracles. 5. Such as have any small beam of light concerning Christ, ought to
help and increase it by enquiry and search; for, so does Pilate enquire, whence
art thou? or, what is thy Original and parentage. 6. The best way to know
Christ, is, to learn it from himself, who only can reveal himself, and
declare what he is; for, so much may be gathered from Pilates practice, though
he saw not so far into it himself, He went again into the judgment hall, and
says unto Jesus, whence art thou? 7. That Jesus gave him no answer, may hold
out, 1. On Christ's part, He stood not there now to defend himself, or impede
his sufferings; and therefore he will not discover that which might deter
him; So willing was he to pay that ransom for his people. 2. For believers
cause, He was content to answer many questions and accusations with silence,
that he might purchase unto them the answer of a good conscience, and liberty
and boldness to speak unto God. 3. On Pilates part, it may not only be
conceived that Pilate was incapable of such a mystery; but further, 1. His
seeking of light in this particular flowed not from love; and such seeking has
no promise to come speed. 2. He had slighted truth when it had been revealed
to him before, Chap. 18.38. and such as do so, are justly deprived of further
information. 3. By this refusal of an answer, Christ would discover some
naughtiness in his heart, as appears from the following verse. And this is
Christ's usual way with those that converse with him, to try and cause them
discover what is in their bosom; And he does this very often by suspending the
satisfaction of their desires, at least for a time.

Ver. 10. Then says Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? Know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?

11. Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the
greater sin.


In the next place, Pilate being offended at Christ's silence, and that (as he
judged) he considered not whom he misregarded, and that he had power to dispose
of him at his pleasure; Christ, out of zeal to his Fathers honor, and in
opposition to Pilates pride, Answers, 1. Concerning his power, that he had no
power against him, unless it were given him of God: Whereby we are to
understand, in general, that he had no absolute power or authority (as no man
else) over him or any other, but he was subordinate to God in it, from whom it
was given. Hence in particular, it follows, partly, That he had no right or
authority over him who was an innocent, to do him wrong, since no such
authority was given him from above; Nor had he power to judge of him or his
cause, who was God also, without especial dispensation of God, but he might
have escaped their hands, as oft-times formerly he had done. And partly, That
however, notwithstanding he had no right, he would be at it, to act against
him; Yet it was not in his power to execute any such purpose, without the
permission of God. And so in sum, Christ refutes his proud boasting of his
power, by letting him see, that there was a power above him, to whom his power
and authority was subordinate and subject, that it was by a particular
dispensation he had any power over him; and, that he had no right to do wrong
as he pleased to any, (though he boasted of it) nor could he execute any such
purpose, without the permission of God. 2. Christ answers concerning Judas and
the Jews who had delivered him into his hands, and declares that however he
should sin in employing his power to crucify him, yet they had greater sin who
put him in his power, and had treacherously betrayed and given him up. This is
subjoyned to the former, by way of inference and conclusion, Therefore he has
the greater sin, And it concludes not only thus upon Pilates proud boast, that
the greater his power was, as he alleged, v. 10, the greater was their sin who
put him under the hazard of such a power; But more clearly upon Christ's former
speech, thus; If his power was of God, they sinned the more, who would have him
abuse that power, by crucifying of him, and especially they who knew more from
the Scriptures of the subordination of humane powers to God, and what Christ
was, then Pilate did. Doct. 1. Superficial tinctures of good in unrenewed men
will soon appear what they are, if they get a tentation; for, albeit Pilate had
even now been afraid, of what he had heard spoken of Christ, v. 8. yet now,
when he is irritate with his silence, he appears in his own colors, speak
thou not unto me, etc? 2. Men's pride and conceit of their own greatness and
power, if they be in any authority, will readily cause them miscarry, upon the
least appearance of provocation; for, this did mislead Pilate here, Speak
thou not unto me? know thou not that I have power, etc? 3. It is the great
sin and snare of men in power, that they think they may employ their power as
they please, and may dispose of these who are under them, according to their
own humor and will, without controulment or opposition; for, this was Pilates
reckoning here; Albeit in his conscience he had absolved Christ as innocent,
and therefore would have had him released as one whom he might not wrong, yet
when his pride is aloft, he thinks he may do what he pleases, know thou not
that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? 4. Men in
their proud fits, care not what snare they run upon, nor what inconvenience
they follow, so their pride get a vent, and they get leave to insult and boast;
for, Pilate, in this proud boasting, does not consider nor regard that his own
confession that he had power to release Christ, did condemn him if he did not
release him, but he must speak out his proud thoughts, whatever be the
consequents. 5. Proud and insolent boasting of men ^ill not find Christ
silent, but whatever else it be that he seem to take no notice of, he will be
sure to appear against pride, especially when it reflects upon God, and the
privileges and protection his suffering people enjoy in him; for, Christ, who
even now would not answer any thing, does in this case answer, and is not
silent. 6. Whatever men on earth boast of their power and authority, yet in
their highest state, they are subordinate and subject to God, and must be
accountable to him, and are overruled by him; for, so much is held out here,
Thou could have no power at all, except it were given thee from above. 7. As
no man can have any lawful authority, but what is warranted by God; So no
authority or power which men have, does warrant them to do any thing against
innocent men or justice; Nor should they reckon that they can do any thing, but
what they may warrantably and lawfully do; for, so much also is imported in
this, Men have no power (or authority or right) except what is given from
above, and so, as they may not usurp power, so they may not employ it as they
please, ( Mic. 2.1.) but as God approves. 8. That Christ was under the power
of any man, how eminent so ever, did slow from the peculiar dispensation of
God, who ordered it to be so for the Redemption of his people, and not because
he was obnoxious to their power, being the true God, and innocent in his own
person as man; for, this holds true of him in a peculiar way, Thou could
have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. 9. When
Christ or his followers are in the hands of men, they should so look on
themselves in their hands, as being first and chiefly in the hand of God,
without whose permission they can neither conclude nor execute any thing; But
either he will overrule and disappoint them, or what they do, his people ought
to see his hand in it: for, so much further may be gathered from this, for the
comfort or believers, that however great men, oft-times, will not respect what
is right or wrong, yet it may still be said, Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above. 10. Albeit all be guilty of
sin who have hand in persecuting of Christ; Yet the same sin may be more
heinous in one then another, and is capable of many aggravations, considering
the persons who act it, and other circumstances: for here. Judas and the Jews
have the greater sin; Albeit Pilate had sin in it, yet they had greater sin,
and their sin was the more odious, considering who they were, and what they
did, 11. Such as treacherously betray Christ and his followers, and do
instigate civil powers against them, may be more guilty, in Gods account, then
they who deal with open violence against them; for, this was a part of the
aggravation of their sin, that they betrayed and gave him up to the civil
power* He Judas, or the Jews, who are spoken of indefinitly and in the
singular number) that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin. 12. It is
a very great aggravation of the sin of persecutors, when they will not content
themselves to satisfy their rage by violence upon any terms; but will have
men's authority, which is the Ordinance of God, prostitute and abused to
satisfy their cruelty, and will have oppression and persecution acted under
the specious pretext of justice; Therefore (because thou have no power, except
it be given thee) he that delivered me unto thee, that thou may abuse that
power in crucifying me, has the greater sin. 13. As the greatest height of
impiety is readily to be found within the visible Church; So all the
aggravations of sin are yet further heightened, when it is committed by such,
and by men who, having knowledge of what is right, do yet out of malice go
wrong, and seek to draw others with them: for, Therefore, also, he that
delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin, because they were members of the
visible Church, and knew better whence men have their authority, and how far
Christ was above his reach (except by particular dispensation) then Pilate did:
and yet out of malice they persecuted him, and stirred up Pilate against him.

Verse 12. And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews
cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend:
whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar.
In the last place, Pilate, retaining still some of that former impression of
fear, v. 8. and being now calmed and further instructed by Christ's answer to
his proud boasting, he endeavors yet more to have Christ released; But is
assaulted and opposed by the Jews, who renewing their former challenge
concerning Christ's Kingdom, do accuse Pilate of treason against Caesar's
authority And this did at last crush all his resolutions, as the sequel
clears. Doct. 1. Men's moral principles and natural conscience may lead them
for a long time to cleave to what is good, notwithstanding any opposition or
irritations from without, or stirrings of corruption from within; for, albeit
Pilate in this endeavor, had been not only often opposed by the Jews before,
but his corruption had been stirred by Christ's carriage toward him, yet he
overcomes all that, and from thence forth sought to release him, though the
means he essayed be not expressed. 2. Natural men's moral principles will lead
them to own Christ but very ineffectually, and so as they may wrong no other
important interest; for, albeit he yet stood for Christ's releasment, yet he who
boasted of his power to release Christ at his pleasure, v. 10. will not employ
his power for that end, but only sought to release him, if it might be with
their good liking. 3. Such as be friend Christ (especially if they be but
natural men) will not be so instant, but his enemies will be as stubborn, and
with unwearied obstinacy will prosecute their malicious designs, till they be
satisfied; for, all these often renewed endeavors of Pilate do not out weary
the Jews, but they cried out, etc. 4. Christ's enemies are so malicious and
cruel, that they prefer his ruin to all interests and considerations
whatsoever; for, so much does this renewed challenge hold out, If thou let this
man go, thou art not Caesar's friend, etc. They regard not to be accounted
negligent and careless in matters of their own law, but do pass from their
accusation of blasphemy, v. 7. and return to that of his Kingdom, if so be it
will carry their point better; and they appear mighty zealous for Caesar, and
enraged that his Deputy did not regard his interest more (though indeed they
had no great liking to him) and all that they may get Christ crucified, and
Pilate excited to it. 5. It is no strange thing to see Christ and his followers
persecuted as enemies unto authority, though unjustly; for, he is not to be let
go upon this account, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend, for
whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar. 6. Such is the
malice of Christ's enemies, that they do not only pursue himself and his
followers, but they do hate and malign and (as they have opportunity) accuse
all these who are not so cruel as themselves, but would show any favor to him
or his people; for, so do they here accuse Pilate, If thou let this man go,
thou art not Caesar's friend.

Ver. 13. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and
sat down in the judgment seat, in a place that is called the Pavement, but in
the Hebrew, Gabbatha.

14. And it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour:
and he says unto the Jews, Behold your King.

15. But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate
says unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief Priests answered, We
have no King but Caesar.

16. Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified: --


Follows the second part of the Chapter. The first branch whereof (in these
verses) contains the sentence passed by Pilate, against Christ: Wherein we have
to consider. 1. What it was that drew Pilate, after so much reluctance and
opposition, to condescend at last unto it; to wit, that being affrighted with
that accusation against himself, v. 12. he dare stand it out no longer, but
brings forth Christ to the open view, and sits down as Judge to cognosce upon
the cause, in the judgment seat, a place getting its name from its being
paved, and that some what high above the place where spectatours were, as the
Hebrew or Syriak name signifies, v. 13. 2. The time is marked wherein Pilate
is persuaded to proceed in the process, v. 14. -- In general, it is recorded
that it was on the day of the preparation, wherein the Jews were to eat the
passover, as is cleared on Joh. 13.2. And in particular, that it was about the
sixth hour of the day; Yet Mark. 15.25. it is called the third hour, when they
crucified him, and Matthew. 27.45. it was the sixth hour when the darkness came
on, after he was crucified. For understanding and reconciling whereof, it is to
be remembered that the Jews did reckon twelve hours in every day, from
Sunrising to Sunsetting, John 11.9. And accordingly so many also in the night
And albeit these hours were, for the most part in equal, the hours of the day
being shortened in winter and lengthned in summer, and contrariwise, these of
the night; Yet at the time of Christ's passion (being near or at the Aequinox)
they were equal, the Sunrising about six a clock according to our account.
Again, as they divided the hours of the night in four watches, reckoning three
hours to a watch (of which see Lam. 2.19 Luke 12.38. Exodus 14.24. Matthew.
14.25.) So they also divided the hours of the day in four quadrants or great
hours, for ordering the time of their Sacrifices, and ordinary prayer, which
they went about thrice a day. Psalm. 55.17. Dan. 6.10. The first was called the
third hour, answering to our ninth, Matthew. 20.3. and was the time of morning
prayer, and sacrifice in the Temple. The second was called the sixth hour,
Matthew. 20.5. answering to our twelfth. And this also was an hour of prayer,
Psalm 55.17. Acts 10 9. The third was called the ninth hour, Matthew. 20.5.
Answering to our three afternoon, and this was the time of evening prayer and
sacrifice, Acts 3.1. and 10.3. And the last (answering to our sixth at night)
was called the twelfth, being the time of their retirement from labor, and
beginning of the first night-watch, and so they who wrought but one hour are
said to be hired at the eleventh hour, Matthew. 20.6, 12. Now these differences
among the Evangelists may easily be reconciled thus, That the time of his
crucifying was when the third (or ninth) hour was passed, and the time
interveening betwixt that and the sixth (or twelfth) hour was begun, or
possible much of it spent; and, That this time interveening is sometime named
from the third hour already passed, and sometime from the sixth or twelfth
current, which is the cause of the seeming difference; So Christ was condemned
and nailed to the cross sometime after the ninth hour, according to our
account, and before the twelfth, after which the darkness followed at or about
the sixth hour, or some short time after it. The difference also may be
reconciled by taking in the Roman way of reckoning the hours with that of the
Jews. They reckoned (as we do) from midnight to midday, and again from
midday to midnight, assigning to each of them twelve equal hours. And so we
may conceive that John reckons the time of Pilates sitting down in the
judgment seat to sentence Christ, according to the Roman account, that it was
about our six in the morning, and the Jewish first hour of the day, and that
Matthew and Mark reckon the time after the manner of the Jews. And as it needs
not seem strange, that John speaking of the action of a Roman, do design the
time thereof according to the Roman account; So this reckoning leaves
sufficient time for all that is related by any of the Evangelists to have been
done betwixt Pilates sitting down in the judgment seat, and their crucifying
of Christ. 3. We have to consider some previous proceedings of Pilate, after he
is set in judgment, before he give out the sentence, v. 14, 15 Wherein he
presents Christ to the Jews as their King, and they refusing him, and crying
out that he should be crucified, he again urges how unmeet it was they should
desire him to crucify their King; but they rejecting him, and acknowledging
Caesar only, he proceeds to judgment. In all which we are to conceive, that
Pilate, being resolved not to incur Caesar's displeasure, wherewith they
threatened him, is but seeking some shift to satisfy or quiet his own
conscience. And therefore he will offer him unto them as their King, being
willing to deliver him, if they will accept of him; but seeing they, who were
more concerned then he, do reject him, he thinks he is not bound to insist any
longer. To which, other considerations, blindfolding him, are to added, as they
are marked by the ^^st: Namely, that he washed his hands in testimony of his
innocence, and laid his blood upon them, and they took it on; and, that he
thought he could do no good by struggling, but rather occasion a tumult, Matthew.
27.24. and therefore (as natural men will not hazard on a duty unless they see
some probability of success, far less will they hazard where difficulties
occur) he thinks it better to let alone, then to lose the people, and run the
hazard of Caesar's displeasure. 4. Unto all this the sentence it self is
subjoyned, v. 16. -- that he delivered him to them to be crucified, or gave out
sentence, and delivered him over that it might be executed. He delivered him to
them, or, to the Jews, not that they were the executioners, for the Soldiers
acted that part; but in all this he gratified them, and he committed it to
them, to oversee and satisfy themselves in the execution, as it appears that
they went along with the Soldiers, to see that nothing was omitted.

From this purpose, thus cleared, Learn, 1. Men who seem to act for Christ, and
yet entertain an Idol, may expect that it will be touched ere all be done, to
try whether they respect Christ or it most; for, Pilate meets with a saying,
that touched the very Idol of his interest and credit with Caesar. 2. Men are
never thoroughly tried, till their duty come in competition with their Idol and
interest; And they who stand out very stoutly before, may then succumb and give
over, as all men who want saving grace will do; for, when Pilate therefore
heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat
etc. He could stand it out no longer, when avowing of Christ come in
competition with Caesar's favor. So that they lay snares for themselves who
entertain Idols. 3. Albeit natural men may oft-times, wish well to Christ and
his interest, yet they will not part with any thing for him, if the matter be
in their choice; And particularly, they will not incur the displeasure of
great ones for his sake; for, albeit he desired Christ might be released, yet
he will sit down in the judgment seat, and condemn Christ, before he hazard
the loss of Caesar's favor, and what might follow upon that. Natural men may
indeed be involved in the common calamities of a war with others, in defense of
Religion, and may lie under the necessity of losing much that way; but they
will not freely undergo any thing, in a way of suffering of personal and
particular persecution. 4. Albeit the hazard of men's interests and idols
withdraw them from duty to Christ, as thinking thereby to preserve them, yet
ordinarily such projects succeed not, but whatever it be that tempts men to
forsake and relinquish their duty to Christ, it does justly disappoint and
ruin them; for, the keeping of Caesar's favor, and to please the Jews also,
Mark 15.15. made Pilate condemn Christ, and yet (as Histories record) he lost
that peoples affections, and they by their complaints made him to lose Caesar's
favor, so that he cut off himself. 5. Malicious enemies of Christ are most
obstinate in their pursuit and violence against him, and this is to be expected
from them; Therefore is the time marked, that it was the preparation of the
Passover, and about the sixth hour, to point out the Jews obstinacy, that
albeit they had been at it all night, and now the day of their preparation is
come, yet they endure all this, and lay aside all other things till they be
satisfied in this. 6. Christ stooped to be kept long in pain and bonds, and to
have his sufferings lengthened by all the endeavors that were used for his
release; That so he might expiate our guilt, which deserves indeed eternal
sufferings, if it were laid on us; That he might, by his example, warn us to
prepare for trials of long continuance, and by his going before us, sanctify
them unto us; That he might be a meet High Priest for them who are ready to
weary and sink under the continuance of their trials: and, That he might
sanctify unto his people the lengthening of their afflictions, by any means
used for their deliverance; for these causes also it is marked, that after all
his toil in the preceding night, he is kept in bonds, wearied and pained with
scourging, crowning with thorns and smiting, till the sixth hour, and that
before he come to the extremity of his suffering. 7. The consciences, even of
natural men, after they have begun to point out duty, will not soon be
satisfied nor silenced, no, not when they meet with strong tentations; for,
albeit Pilate be so dashed with the fear of Caesar, that he sits down on the
Judgment Seat, yet his conscience will not let him proceed to sentence, till
he follow such a course as he thinks may satisfy it, as has been cleared: so
that men who have made defection from a good course, have certainly more
disquiet from their consciences then every one knows. And if conscience as a
Counselor and Informer be so difficult to satisfy, it will be much more so,
when it turns a tormentor and executioner. 8. When men are once broken, and
resolved to go contrary to conscience, they will find strange shifts, and
devise principles of light, to heal the wound of conscience, and that they may
not seem to cross it; for, so much do Pilates Propositions to them point at,
as has been explained. It is dangerous when men are once engaged in their
wicked resolutions, for then their wits are set on work, not to find out what
is right, but, what may make their way plausible to themselves or others, and
may stop the mouth of conscience. 9. It is but a poor shift for men to think to
satisfy their consciences with their good wishes, and weak endeavors about
their duty, when yet they suffer themselves to be carried away with the
importunity of others, and do not effectually set about what is right; for,
herein Pilate satisfies himself, that he offers their King to them, Behold
your King, and evidenceth an averseness from proceeding, Shall I crucify your
King? but is crossed with their importunity, Away with him, etc. 10. It will
not satisfy conscience, that men have others more concerned and knowing then
themselves, (upon whom they think they may lay the blame of any evil) so long
as they suffer any thing to be done contrary to their trust and power; for,
this is another shift of Pilate, that since the Jews, who were more concerned
in their King, and understood these things better then he, will have Christ
crucified, he thinks they should bear the blame. But it was his duty to have
employed his authority and power to hinder injustice. 11. When men begin to
faint in their duty, and to seek shifts, it is righteous with God they find
many, and that Satan and his instruments be let out to importune them, till
they be quite broken in all their resolutions; for, Pilate being in this
temper, justly meets with their importunate cries, Away with him, away with
him, crucify him, we have no King but Caesar, to drive him on into the snare.
12. It is the great and crying sin of the visible Church, that they contemn and
neglect the offer of salvation, and the messengers thereof; and particularly,
that they reject Christ from reigning over them; for, this was the great sin of
the Jews here, that they cried, Away with him, away with him, crucify him,
and in contempt of him profess, we have no King but Caesar. And this sin is
repeated by all these in the visible Church, who reject and despise his offer
of himself in the Gospel, and who crucify him afresh unto themselves, Heb.
6.6. 13. Malicious persecutors will not be mollified in their rage by any
consideration; nor will their political interests or discontents, (though
otherwise weighty in their eyes) engage them to Christ or his cause, but they
will rather sacrifice all their interests, and digest all their other
discontents, then not have Christ crucified; for, albeit they were exceedingly
averse from Caesar's power over them, and did affect liberty and a King of their
own: yet that they may get Christ crucified, they digest all this, and
profess, we have no King but Caesar. And albeit their being under the foreign
power of Caesar, was a clear proof that Shiloh, or the Messiah was come, yet
they are so violent as they regard not that. 14. No less was sufficient to
satisfy divine Justice for the sins of the Elect, then the death of their
Surety; and Christ having undertaken this work, justice did pursue him to the
death: Therefore was it so overruled, that they cried, crucify him, and
accordingly he is sentenced and delivered to be crucified, after all his former
sufferings. 15. Christ's followers should resolve, after they have suffered
much, to suffer yet more; And they should not decline to have all their other
sufferings crowned with a violent death, at last, if called to it: for, so much
also does the example of Christ their Head teach them. 16. When a man's
conscience, who seemed to befriend Christ, is once lulled asleep, he will be
ready to run as great a length in cruelty as any other: And who has once made
shipwreck of any kind of a good conscience, will come behind with no enemy,
if he turn not worse; for, Pilate, now overcome, satisfies all their desire in
this particular, he delivered him to be crucified. 17. It may be the lot of
Christ's followers, and an addition to their trial, to be given up to the power
of their most inveterate enemies, to execute all their spite upon them; for, so
fared it with Christ in his own person, he was delivered to them, (or, to the
Jews) to be crucified?

Verse 16. -- And they took Jesus, and led him away.

17. And he bearing his Cross, went forth into a place called the place of a
skull, which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha:

18. Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and
Jesus in the midst.


In the second branch of this part of the chapter is contained the execution of
the sentence; That he being condemned, they led him away to Mount Calvary,
bearing his own Cross, and there crucified him with two other with him, one on
either hand. Not to repeat what has been said of this way of Christ's suffering
on chap. 18.28. and on v. 31, 32. where a Providence is observed in it; we may
from this purpose, Learn, 1. Sufferers may expect not only to have cruel
resolutions taken, and cruel sentences given out against them, but to have them
cruelly execute; for, so was it with Christ, he being condemned, they took him
and led him away: And he met with this, not only to show that our sins deserved
not only threatened, but real inflicted punishment: or, to purchase to his
followers many a sweet disappointment in their sufferings; but that he might
sanctify such a lot to them, when sufferings are permitted to come to an
extremity. 2. As the Lord marks the activity of persecutors against Christ, and
propounds it to be marked by his people, to shame them when they are negligent
for him; (for, therefore does he record that after his condemnation, they,
immediately, took Jesus and led him away) so his eye is most upon them who are
most malicious against him: for, albeit the soldiers were actors in this
business, yet for this cause he marks specially, that they (or the Jews to
whom Pilate delivered him) took him and led him away. 3. Christ submitted to be
accounted an execrable person, and in an execrable condition, and one whom none
would own; that so we might inherit a blessing in him; Therefore went he forth,
bearing his Cross, as one accursed, whom none in all the company would help to
bear his Cross, till one was compelled to help him, as the rest observe. 4. It
may please the Lord to let trial and great weakness tryst together, and to lay
on crosses when we seem very unmeet for bearing of them; for, Christ after he
is wearied all night, and spent with former sufferings, is made to bear his
Cross, till he faint again. 5. Sufferers may get few sympathizers, even of
dearest friends; and Christ endured this lot, that he might be a tender friend
to us; for, he bare his Cross, without any of his followers to help him, but
another must be compelled when he needs it. 6. Whatever be our weakness and
discouragement under trial; yet it is our great victory voluntarily to submit
and bear it; for, notwithstanding this his low condition, yet he bearing his
Cross, went forth, and was not drawn, but bears on till he faint again. 7. The
place to which he is carried to be crucified, is called the place of a skull,
(which is the signification also of the Hebrew or Syriack name, Golgotha, to
which also the name Calvary, Luke 23.33. agrees) And it gets this name, not so
much because the form of that mountain resembled a skull, as because there
were many sculls of execute malefactors lying or buried there. He was brought
to this place to suffer, not only to show how loathsome we and our sins are
before God, in that our Surety must suffer in so loathsome a place; But further
it teaches, 1. Our Lord is the true substance of that sacrifice slain without
the camp, whose blood was brought into the Sanctuary, Heb. 13.11, 12. And
however he was esteemed of among men, in suffering here; yet his blood has
made way, and opened an entry into heaven. 2. By this he has sanctified the
contempt of his people in the world, and taught them to go out unto him,
bearing his reproach, who suffered without the gate, Heb. 13.12, 13, 14. 3. By
this he has showed how by his death he will be death's death, in that he
suffered and triumphed over death in the place of a skull, where there were
many monuments of deaths triumph over others. Doct. 8. Christ by his suffering
this death of being crucified, has taught us, 1. We by nature are under the
curse, and he has undergone that curse, that all who flee to him, may be freed
from it, and that all their conditions may be blessed, and their very crosses
turned into blessings; Therefore did he undergo this cursed death, Gal. 3.13.
2. By his pouring out of his blood, even unto death, which flowed abundantly
(as from other places, both before his being crucified, and after his death; so
also) from his hands and feet, He has pointed out to us, that as there is no
remission of sins without the shedding of blood, Heb. 9.22. so he has opened
up that fountain for all who come to him. 3. By this way of shedding his blood,
by piercing of his hands and feet, which were sensible parts, and his being
hanged up nailed to the Cross, to continue in pain for a long time, and his
wounds continually widening by the weight of his body till he died; we are
taught, what the bitter fruit of sin is, how great his love was that did submit
to endure this sharp and long continuing pain, and, how we are bound to look on
him whom we have pierced, till our hearts be pierced and bleed again. 4 His
being fastened and continuing there upon the Cross for a space, before he died,
may teach, how resolute he was to endure that assault till justice were
satisfied; That he kept and stood in the field there, to endure the uttermost
that enemies could do against the work of Redemption, and to grapple with all
of them, till they had no more to say against his people; and, That he would
give a proof how certainly he is to be found at his Cross, with stretched-out
arms ready to receive all them who seek for life in him, and through his
death. 5. His being lifted up thus nailed to the Cross, may teach, partly,
That we deserved no room, neither in heaven nor earth, and therefore our Surety
was lifted up betwixt both, and hence also was the Sun darkened, (as for other
causes, so) to show that we deserve not so much as that the Sun should shine
upon us: and partly, That his suffering was indeed his exaltation, he was
lifted up in it by triumphing over his enemies there, and he is exalted in the
world as crucified. Doct. 9. Albeit Christ in his own person was the spotless
Lamb of God; yet so heinous and so many were the sins of the Elect charged upon
him, that in divine Providence, he is not only reckoned among transgressors,
Isa. 53.12. but as the chief of them; Therefore it is so ordered, that he is
crucified, and other two with him, and Jesus in the midst, as the most notable
of them. And this may teach the Elect, not to mince or extenuate their own
sins, which were charged on Christ as so odious. 10. Christ was content to be
accounted, and undergo the lot of a malefactor; not only that he might free us
who were indeed evildoers, but that he might sanctify unto his people their
being looked upon, and entreated as evildoers; Therefore also was he crucified
in such company.

Verse 19. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the Cross, And the writing
was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.

20. This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was
crucified, was nigh to the City, and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and
Latin.

21. Then said the chief Priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of
the Jews: but that he said, I am King of the Jews.

22. Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.


The third branch of this part of the chapter, contains the title put by Pilate
upon Christ's Cross, and his declining to alter it at the Jews desire. In all
which we are not only to look upon Pilate, as following the Roman custom, in
publishing the faults of condemned and execute malefactors, and as affronting
the Jews who had so impudently urged him to crucify Christ; but we are to
look to God also, who by this title would have him proclaimed the true King of
Israel. Whence learn, 1. It is a good use to be made of the cutting off of
delinquents, that justice be cleared, and the guilty ashamed, and that others
be warned to fear; for, upon these grounds it was a commendable practice in it
self, that a title was put upon the Cross of malefactors, containing their
crime, and the cause of their death, and that it was written in Hebrew, and
Greek, and Latin, that all present, of different Nations and Languages, might
read and understand it. 2. Christ has sanctified his peoples being unjustly
condemned as traitors, by suffering upon that account, and by having this
title written over his head, The King of the Jews. 3. Christ's intended shame
does tend to the real manifestation of his glory; for, Pilate set up this title
to brand him as an affecter of a worldly Kingdom; but hereby God would have it
proclaimed that he is Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews; That he is a
King in the midst of his sufferings, That he did indeed triumph in them,
spoiling Satan, and converting one of them that was crucified with him; and,
That the glory of this suffering King should be conspicuous and acknowledged in
all Nations, of all Languages, as this title was written in the three principal
Languages. 4. Inveterate and violent enemies against Christ shall meet with
perpetual reproach never to be wiped off; for, therefore does Pilate write him
the King of the Jews, and that in three languages, that they reading it (as it
is v. 20.) might read their own reproach, in having one who was called King of
their Nation, crucified, and that in Gods holy Providence, it might be their
perpetual reproach to have crucified him who was indeed their King. 5. The Lord
leaves cruel persecutors to be ambitious and tender of their own credit, when
he is to affront them; that as they have served themselves of their lusts and
idols, so he also may serve himself of them, to make them the more sensible of
their affronts: therefore it is marked, that when they read this title, the
cross being near the City, v. 20. their ambition renders the affront of this
more grievous to them, and they desire to have it altered, Then said the chief
Priests of the Jews to Pilate, write not, the King of the Jews, but that he
said, I am the King of the Jews. 6. Such as are not tender of Gods honor, and
of Christ and his interest in the world, God in his justice will be little
tender of them, their idols and interests, when they come to be rubbed upon;
for, in this answer of Pilate, What I have written, I have written, we are not
only to look to Pilate, as cleaving to their Roman customs, which did not
admit that their public Programmes or Tables should be altered after they were
published; nor yet only as requiting them with inexotablenesse, who had been so
inexorable to his desire of releasing Christ: But we are chiefly to look to the
hand of God, who will not have their ambition satisfied, nor allow any
tenderness in the matter of their supposed credit, who had so cruelly pursued
Christ to death. 7. Gods decree, concerning the Kingdom of Christ, is
immutable, nor will he have the glory of it obscured or born down by any
opposition; for, so much also does this answer of Pilate point out, that as
Christ was the King of the Jews, however they fretted, so the Lord in his
Providence would not have the publication thereof on the Cross hindered by any
entreaty of theirs, and therefore Pilate is overruled to answer, What I have
written, I have written.

Verse 23. Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments, (and made four parts, to every soldier a part,) and also his coat;
Now the coat was without seame, woven from the top throughout.

24. They said therefore among themselves; Let not us rent it, but cast lots
for it, whose it shall be, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says,
they parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These
things therefore the soldiers did.


In the fourth branch of this part of the chapter, Christ's suffering from the
soldiers is recorded; That having stripped him of his garments when they
fastened him to the Cross, they do divide these garments which could be parted
among them, and cast lots for his woven coat which could not be divided. All
which was done according to that foregoing Prophecy, Psalm. 21.18. which
whatever accomplishment it had in David the type, yet it pointed ultimately at
Christ's sufferings. Not to seek any Allegory, we may from this purpose, Learn,
1. Instruments will not be wanting to crucify Christ, if it were but for his
old clothes, and these but little worth; for, these soldiers crucify him,
though they got but his garments for their reward. 2. Christ did submit not
only to be crucified, but to suffer naked, the soldiers dividing his garments
and coat among them, hereby to teach us, 1. That all flesh are really naked
before God by reason of sin, Exodus 32.25. 2 Chronicles. 28.19. and therefore our
Surety behoved to suffer naked. 2. That he offered himself a real captive in
his sufferings, that so he might fully satisfy justice, by being under the
power of his enemies, till he redeemed himself by the strong hand, having fully
paid the price; for, therefore did he submit to be stripped naked, as Conquerours
use to do with prisoners. 3. That by this suffering naked, he would expiate our
abuse of apparel, and purchase to us a liberty to make use of suitable ralment,
and such as becomes us in our station 4. That by this suffering naked, he
would purchase unto them who flee to him, to be covered with righteousness and
glory, and to walk with him in white for ever, and would point out the
nakedness of these, who not being found clothed with his righteousness,
shall not be clothed upon with immortality and glory, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3. 5. He
would also, by this, teach all his followers, to resolve on nakedness in their
following of him, as a part of their conformity with their Head, Job 1.21. Romans
8.35. Heb. 11.37. and that therefore they should not dote much on their apparel
when they have it. Doct. 3. A sight of God and his Will, in the trials of
Christ and his followers, will make them very sweet unto them, and should be a
mean to prevent stumbling; for this cause is it subjoyned, that it was done,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, etc. 4. God has a providence about the
smallest circumstances of the suffering of Christ and his followers; for,
Scripture had foretold, even concerning the parting of Christ's garments, and
casting lots for his vesture, to show there was a providence in these things,
though they were but very common. 5. When Christ and his people are very low,
yet the Scripture stands firm, and will not be broken, if it were but about
the matter of an old coat; And however Christ and his followers be put in the
hands of wicked men, led by their wicked principles, yet the least circumstance
of their sufferings are overruled by God, and men shall not transgress the
bounds set by him; for, this being foretold, These things therefore, (and no
more then had been foretold) the soldiers did. And albeit they did this, and
no more, freely, yet it was necessary, in regard of the prediction, that they
did it, and went no further.

Verse 25. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers
sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.

26. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom he
loved, he says unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son.

27. Then says he to the disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour that
disciple took her unto his own home.


In the fifth branch of this part of the chapter we have recorded, what was
Christ's care of his mother, who, with two other women, and John the beloved
disciple, (as is gathered from v 26. with chap 21, 20 24.) did stand beside his
Cross. Christ in the midst of his suffering, taking notice of her sorrowful
and desolate condition, (he being to die and depart from her, and Joseph being
dead, as would appear,) He recommends her to John as a Mother to her Son; who
accordingly takes her home with him, and cares for her. It is said Mark 15.40,
41. that these two wom^n, with many others, were looking afar off. But it seems
here, that they, with Christ's mother, had drawn nearer then the rest; and that
after his death, (which is the time wherein Mark observes that to have bee^)
they retired to the rest, Doct. 1. This their standing by the Cross of Jesus,
was not to be any ways assisting or helpful to him in that great work he was
now about; nor yet did it flow only from natural affection, no, not in his
mother, but from their faith seeing through his sufferings, and unto what they
did tend: nor yet does it only serve as a pattern of Christian practice,
teaching us to stand beside his Cross, and feed upon his sufferings and our
interest in them; But further, it may teach, 1. Christ's followers may have many
sad days about Christ and his interests; both for their own trial, and that
the thoughts of many hearts may be discovered; for, in this sight, Mary found
that accomplished which Christ had foretold, Luke 2.35. and so the rest also,
every particular of his suffering being a wound to their hearts. 2. Christians
are bound not to forsake nor desert such as suffer for truth, but they should
be comfortable to them by their sympathy and countenance, when they can do no
more; for, albeit they could not join with Christ in that great work, yet they
look upon him as a suffering man, and their standing by the Cross, and their
tender looks upon him, were, in their own measure, sweet to him, who had cruel
enemies round about him, and many a piercing and insolent look upon him in that
day, Ps. 22.17. And their practice toward him is a pattern of our duty toward
sufferers. See 2 Timothy 1.15, 16, 17. and 4.16, 17. Doct. 2. Albeit the
generality, even of Professors, may turn their back upon sufferers, and they
are to expect that as a part of their trial; yet they will not want some to
countenance them, when God sees it meet; for, here of all his followers a very
few did stand by the Cross of Jesus, and yet a few stood by it, his mother,
and his mothers sister, (or kinswoman) who was Mary of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalene, with the disciple whom he loved. 3. Such as seem but weak in respect
of others, may yet prove stronger then they in a trial; and these of the weaker
sex may be enabled to outstrip others; for, all these (except John) who stood
by him when the rest are gone, are weak women. And albeit we are not to ascribe
this courage to any thing in themselves, even of what they had received; yet it
may be considered, that as all of these were eminently gracious, and as grace
did excite his mother, and his mothe^s sister, to testify their natural
affection to him; so also in particular, John was much beloved of Christ, and
Mary Magdalen had seven devils cast out of her by him: And it may be expected
that such as enjoy the sense of Christ's love, and do entertain the sense of his
special kindness, will cleave to him as long as any. 4. Christ takes notice of
all who sincerely testify their affection toward him, and does indeed respect
them, though possibly they get not all alike expressions of his respect; for,
here all are recorded who stood by the Cross of Jesus, as a testimony that he
took notice of their affection, though he speak to none but to his mother and
John, and does take particular care of her only, and because of this it is
recorded that he saw them. 5. That Christ, in the midst of this his extreme
pain and agony, is at leisure to take notice of his mother and John, and to
express his care of her; it may teach, partly, How wisely the Lord does order
the trials of his own, and that he will give them such intermissions of the
extremity of exercise, as may be needful for them or their affairs; for,
hereof has he given proof in the suffering of his Son, who though he still
continued in bodily pain, yet he got some intermissions and case of that
overwhelming cloud of soul-trouble which pursued him because of our sins, so
that he can think of something beside. Partly, it may teach, That Christ, even
in his extreme suffering, began his triumph over it in part, and testified
himself a Conqueror; for, so much appears, not only in that he was always
free of any sinful perturbation which might confuse his thoughts; but in that
his sinlesse perplexities also are at his command as God, to moderate them when
his thoughts were otherwise to be employed. And partly, it may teach, That
Christ's heart is at all times upon his people, to perform all duties toward
them to which he is bound, either as a man under the Law, or as Mediator; for,
in the extremity of his pain, his free thoughts are upon his mother, to care
for her, and upon a beloved disciple, to give him a proof of his love in this
honorable emploiment. And if his thoughts were at this time thus employed, how
much more are they so in glory, when he has no exercise or suffering of his
own to take him off? 6. By Christ's care of his mother at this time,
recommending her to John, as a mother to a son to be cared for, he would teach,
1. That it is the Will of Christ, that children honor their Parents, and have
a care of them in their decayed and desolate condition; for, so much does he
teach in his own person, who was not only subject to his mother and his
supposed father in his life, but has a care of his mother at his death. See
Mat. 15.4, 5, 6. 2. No personal trouble or trial upon our selves, does exempt
us from the performance of duties toward others, in our relations, nor warrant
us to lay thoughts thereof aside; for, Christ in his extreme suffering,
accounts it his duty to provide for his mother at his death. 3. Christ is so
tender, as he will not fail to have a care of them who are little minding
their own condition and trials but are chiefly taken up with what concerns
him, for, while his mother stands by his Cross, afflicted and affected with
his sufferings, he is finding out a way how she may be provided and cared for.
4. The Lord never removes one comfort or mean of subsistence from his people,
but he will provide some other to put in the room thereof, in so far as is for
their good; for, now he is to be removed, who was not only her Redeemer, but
comfortable to her as her Son; and albeit none could fill his room, even in
that respect, yet he provides one who by taking her home, might supply her want
in some measure as a Son to her, Behold, thy Son! Behold thy mother! Doct. 7.
Christ calls her woman, and not mother, in this his care. Not because he would
reprehend any fault in her, as chap. 2.4. nor yet only because he would not
discover her to the soldiers, who were standing by to be his mother; but that
he might teach, That it is the duty of all, especially in their suffering, to
have the moderation of their affections toward their relations, mixed with the
conscientious discharge of duty toward them; that so their affections may not
blunt them in their great service, and yet they may not neglect any needful or
possible duty, which might b^ing scandal and reproach upon what they suffer
for, or their suffering for it, Therefore does he call her woman, to testify
how far he was above these relations in his suffering, which testified his
obedience to the Father, and his love to his people, and yet he neglects not to
provide for her. 8. That John gets this trust put upon him, and he takes it on,
it may teach, 1. Such as are beloved of Christ, and do dwell in the faith
thereof, may expect that peculiar advantages shall be cast in their way daily
by Christ; for, it is to the disciple whom he loved, that he says, Behold thy
mother, and puts him on this honorable service. 2. Such as do possess and
feed upon the love of Christ, will desire no greater benefit and advantage,
then to be honored to do service to any of his; for, this is John's advantage,
that Christ will say to him. Behold thy mother! and it so affects him, that
from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home, or looked upon her,
and took care of her, as his mother and one of his family.

Verse 28. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst.

29. Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: And they filled a sponge full
of vinegar, and put it upon hyssope, and put it to his mouth.


The sixth branch of this part of the Chapter, contains the accomplishment of a
Scripture-prophecy, in Christ's thirsting, and their giving him vinegar to
drink, immediately before his death. In recording whereof, it is insinuate,
that his thoughts, in his suffering, ran upon his work, and what was appointed
him to accomplish; And that, finding all was accomplished which he was to do
before his death, but only that passage, Psalm. 69. 21. He, for the
accomplishment thereof, intimates to them that he thirsted, and gets but
vinegar to drink, according to the prediction. It appears here, that it was
their custom to have vinegar at the place of execution; though it be not
needful to determine for what use they had it; whether, to sprinkle it in the
air, or for men to make use of it to prevent infection, or any evil smell by
reason of the dead bodies; or whether, to apply it to the wounds of the
condemned, either to hasten the effusion of blood and their death, or (as some
will) contrariwise to prolong their pain, and keep them from fainting. It
suffices us to know, that it was not so made use of here, but given him for
drink in their cruelty. It appears also from Mark 15.23. that before he was
crucified, they offered him wine mingled with myrrh, whereof it seems they
made use of to stupifie the senses of the sufferers, that they might feel no
pain; and that they mixed this with vinegar and gall when they offered it to
Christ, Mat. 27.34. But he refused it, and having tasted it would not drink of
it; yet now he received so much of it, as may be an accomplishment of the
prediction. Doct. 1. All that Christ was to endure and suffer, came not at
random, nor at the pleasure of men, but was fore-determined by God, and
accordingly recorded in Scripture; for, so is imported in that he was about the
accomplishing of all things, which were recorded in the Scripture, and to be
fulfilled. See Acts 4.27, 28. 2. Christ in his suffering did not respect his
own ease, but his great care was to fulfill all things that were enjoined and
appointed for Redemption of his people; that so he might testify his love to
them, which was not asleep in his trouble: and might by his example teach us,
to make it our great care in suffering, rather to do our duty, then how to get
ease and deliverance, Acts 20.24. Therefore, upon the Cross, his study was to
see that he did all things requisite, till he might know that all things were
now accomplished. 3. Christ is most faithful in fulfilling and making good
whatever he has spoken in his Word, and will not have that made void on any
terms; for, knowing that all things were now accomplished, which were to be
suffered before his death, only this one p^ediction remains, and therefore,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, be says, I thirst. He did not express
his need to them, as hoping or expecting to be refreshed by them, but only that
he might fulfill the Scriptures which foretold of this part of his suffering.
And when all other things are accomplished, he will continue in pain upon the
Cross, and endure this cruel usage, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. 4.
Christ's extreme thirst may serve, partly, to point out unto us the extreme
violence of his suffering, that he was so heated with inward agony, and
exhausted with watching, pain, and effusion of blood, as drew on a burning
thirst; In all which we should read his love and condescendence, and
acknowledge that it is from him we have the ease of our suffering and exercise;
partly, to point out, that as Christ suffered in all his members, to expiate
our sin, so particularly, he endured thirst, which was a stroke on his tongue,
Psalm. 22.15. that he might suffer for, and expiate the sins of our tongue;
And partly, to point out, that for expiating our sin in eating and drinking and
pleasing our palate and taste, and to purchase unto us the use of the creatures
with a blessing, he would suffer this thirst, which will be the eternal
punishment of gluttons, Luke 16.24, 25. and gets no refreshment, as after
follows. 5. Sufferers for righteousness may expect to meet with all ^he
cruelty, despite, and mockery, in their extremity, that malicious enemies can
invent; for so much does Christ's lot teach us: when he said I thirst, they
filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssope, and put it to his mouth,
that he might suck out the vinegar in stead of drink. We need not curiously
determine whether that re^d (upon which it is said the sponge was pu^. Matthew.
27.48. that so the sponge might reach his mouth on the cross) was of hyssope,
which was not the herb commonly so called, but in that country a sort of tree,
or whether both the hyssope and reed were joined together But this is certain,
that they did this out of cruelty and spite, and that the Lord so ordered it,
not only that he might expiate our abuse of refreshments (as has been said)
but that we might expect the like lo^ 6 It pleased Christ to undergo this sad
lot for our sakes that when he expressed his need of drink, he gets not so much
as a drink of water, but only vinegar, that so he might teach his people, That
their sins deserved they should be deprived of the least and most common
comforts, and that he has drunk all the bitter of what they do deserve; and,
That by his being insulted over when he expresses his need, he has purchased
unto them a right construction of, and a meet and comfortable answer unto their
prayers; for, so much also may we gather from this, that when he said, I
thirst, they put vinegar to his mouth. 7. It is the sweet way of reading the
cruel usage of enemies, to see them overruled by God in all they do, and that
they will not get their malice vented, further then he has appointed, and that
in all they do, they are but fulfilling his counsel, though they little mind
this: Therefore it is said of this their inhumane carriage in particular, that
they did it, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

Verse 30. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is
finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
In the last branch of this part of the Chapter, we have Christ's Testament and
death recorded. After he has received of the vinegar, he publicly proclaims
that by what he had suffered and was even now to undergo, he had finished all
that was committed to him, and so voluntarily and submissively yielded up the
ghost. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Christ refused the wine mingled with mirthe, (as
was marked on the former verses) because he would not be stupefied in
suffering, but would be active and voluntary in it; that so he might commend
his love, and teach us to avoid unsensiblenesse under trials: Yet now he
receives the vinegar, and (at least) tastes of it, in testimony of his
subjection to God who had foreprophecied of this lot, and to teach us
subjection to what God appoints for us in all things. 2. Christ closed not his
sufferings till all was finished he had to do; He not only endured the utmost
extremities of enemies malice, and bare them all, but, He fulfilled all
Scripture-prophecies, and the substance of all the types were accomplished in
him. He fulfilled all that God determined to be paid for expiating of sin, so
that no more ransom is to be paid; And so did finish the work of our
Redemption, and purchased that whereby we are perfected for ever: for, says
he, It is finished, whereby he not only gives an account that he had finished
what was hitherto required or fore prophesied, but by this testament he gives a
comfortable account of his immediately ensuing death also. See Joh. 17.2. 3.
Death, and no less then death, is the wages of sin: Therefore, after the
former sufferings, our surety behooved also to give up the ghost, to finish his
work. 4 Christ, by undergoing bodily death for his people, has hereby
purchased that however they must die, yet death is no punishment of sin to
them; for, his suffering of death has taken that sting out of it ^. Christ did
not die by constraint, but voluntarily, and of his own accord, yielded himself
deaths prisoner; for, whereas the bowing of the head is naturally a sign of
death, Christ before he died, bowed his head, in testimony that he died
voluntarily, and went to meet death, and gave up the ghost, by a real
separation of soul and body, which could not have been if his body had been
every where 6. Whatever desertions Christ endured as our Surety, yet it tends
to our great comfort, that he died at peace and reconciled to his Father; So
much is imported in that he gave up, or rendered the ghost, or his Spirit, into
the hands of his Father, as is further cleared from his last prayer, Luke 23.46.

Ver. 31. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies
should not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day (for that Sabbath day was
an high day) besought Pilate, that their legs might be broken, and that they
might be taken away.
Follows the third part of the Chapter, containing two consequents following
upon his death. The first whereof (to v. 38.) contains some passages tending to
the confirmation of this truth, that he was really dead, and to clear the
accomplishment of some further prophecies concerning him; In which, the Jews,
the Soldiers, and John, do each of them act their part.

In this verse we have the Jews part in clearing up this truth, and making way
for the accomplishment of these predictions. They desire Pilate (who had power
of the bodies of condemned men) to have the bodies of these now crucified taken
away from the cross and buried; and lest, by this desire, they should seem to
incline to the sparing of their lives, they propound that their legs may be
broken to hasten their death, that so they might be removed. The reason of
which desire, was, that, seeing according to the law, the land was defiled with
these who were hanged, (especially if not timeously buried) Deuteronomy 21.22, 23.
They judged more especially, that their continuance on the cross on that high
Sabbath, (when the ordinary Sabbath, and the first day of the feast of
unleavened bread, did concur together, as is mar^ed on John 13.2.) might
pollute them and their feast: And therefore, and because of their preparations
and eating the passover that night, they would have it speedily done. And this
desire, and the granting thereof by Pilate, did make way for that which
follows. Whence learn. 1. Christ our Lord was content to be made a curse for
us, Gal. 3.13. and to bear the curse, that it might not be ours. He was looked
upon as one who would defile all things, that he might expiate our pestiferous
and infectious dispositions: And, he submitted to be accounted a polluter of
their solemn feasts in his suffering, that so he might expiate our being spots
in the feasts of charity, Jude v. 12. So much may we gather from his condition
here, and the Jews esteem of him, that his body (among the rest) might not
remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day. 2. It is a commendable care in all
the members of the visible Church, to endeavor that curses or accursed things
abide not upon their land, or, that it be not defiled by others; for, so much
does the common equity of this law, upon which they found their desire, point
out in the general; And though the ceremony be ceased, yet the substance
remains, providing it be rightly applied in particular cases. See 1 Cor. 5.2,
6, 7. 3. The Lord can make use, even of bloody enemies, to do service to his
suffering people as they need, whatever their intentions and designs be; for,
Christ now hanging on the cross, with ignominy, and as a curse, his very
enemies are consulting and careful to have him taken out of that condition, and
that the bodies should not remain upon the cross, though they intend him no
courtesy in so doing, but do it only upon other grounds; yea, they devise to
put him to further pain, and that his legs might be broken. 4. God orders so
by his providence, as he will prevent any cruel purposes of his enemies, which
might make void his purposes concerning his own; Therefore, it is said,
Therefore the Jews besought Pilate, etc. which does not import any connection
with the former purpose concerning his death, as if they had known of it, but
that God keept them off from any such purpose, till the time that he was dead,
and so prevented the breaking of his bones, which would have made void a
prediction. 5. Men, through formality and custom, may be strictly bound to
perform the duties of ceremonial or external worship, whose consciences,
notwithstanding, never scruple to violate the most weighty precepts of the law;
for, they observe the ceremonial precept, that the bodies should not remain
upon the cross, and therefore, besought Pilate that they might be taken away,
and yet they scruple not to crucify the Son of God, yea, and to use him with
all rigor, and besought that their legs might be broken. See Prove. 7.14, 18.
6. It is agreeable to the will of God, that special respect be had to the
observation of the Sabbath, and that it be remembered and thought of aforehand,
that we may prepare for it; for, this in general and in it self was
commendable, that they so respect the ceremonial precept concerning these who
were hanged, as they account it a special pollution that their bodies should
remain upon the cross on the Sabbath: And their ceremonial observance of the
preparation, (not only to the feast of the passover, but to the ordinary
Sabbath) may put us in mind that we ought to remember the Sabbath Day, that we
may keep it holy. 7. The more solemnities, or considerations exciting us to
serve God, do, in his providence, concur at one time, the greater should our
care be to improve that time, and to observe it according to the rule; for, so
much may we learn from their care of the Sabbath, upon this consideration, that
that Sabbath Day was an high day, for the reason formerly given. And albeit it
was but from a tradition of their own (as has been observed on John 13.2.)
that two solemnities concurred at this time, yet when ever, in following Gods
institution, the Sabbath and some extraordinary feast fell to be on one day,
they did observe it the more solemnly, as their practice in this case makes
evident; and this should point out our duty unto us.

Ver. 32. Then came the Soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other, which was crucified with him.

33. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake
not his legs.

34. But one of the Soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith
came there out blood and water.


In these verses we have the Soldiers part, contributing to clear this truth
and accomplish prophecies; They (upon Pilates granting this desire, and
commanding of them, both which are to be supposed here) do execute what the
Jews desired, upon the other two, v. 32. But finding Christ already dead, they
do not break his bones, v. 33. but one of them will make all sure, by thrusting
a spear into his side, and searching for life at the wellhead thereof, and
accordingly, there came out blood out of his heart, and water from about it,
proving that he was really dead, v. 34. In all which the Lord had an
overruling hand, to see to the accomplishment of prophecies, as is after
cleared. Whence learn, 1. All things outward may come alike to all, and however
men may be in different conditions before God, yet he may let their outward lot
be equal; for, here, albeit (as the rest observe) there was great difference
betwixt these two, the one being penitent, and the other not, yet they are
alike handled, they came and brake the legs of the first, and of the other
which was crucified with him. 2. Albeit where the Lord pardons sin, there
remains no satisfactory punishment, to be paid by the sinner to justice; yet
the Lord may see it fit to pursue pardoned men with rods, for their own
exercise, and the instruction of others; for, albeit the one was pardoned, yet
he not only suffered death, but his legs were broken. 3. Christ our Lord was
not only nailed to the cross, but did really die and give up the ghost, to
satisfy divine justice; for, of this the Soldiers were witnesses, who when
they came to Jesus, they saw that he was dead already. And that he was so soon
dead, before the other two, does not only evidence that he, having death at his
command, might die when he listed, and when he had done his work; But also,
that he had more upon him then any of them, and therefore was the sooner
dispatched by death, and taken away as a prisoner. 4. No opposition will make
void the purposes of God, but opposition and difficulties in the way of what he
has purposed, are let forth for this very end, that he may manifest the
immutability of his counsel; for, albeit the Jews desire, Pilates command, and
the Soldiers intentions, concurred to break his bones; And albeit there was
great hazard that they should execute it, having broken the legs of these on
every side of him; nor was there any great ground to expect that these bloody
soldiers would not exerce their cruelty upon him, though dead, (as they did in
piercing of his side;) Yet seeing God had determined the contrary, they are
impeded, they brake not his legs. 5. The Lord needs not miraculous ways and
actings, whereby to fulfill his purposes; But he may bring about his especial
providence and purposes in a very common way, and in the ordinary actions of
men; for, this purpose of God is fulfilled of their own free accord, upon a
clear and rational ground; when they saw that he was dead already, they brake
not his legs. 6. Albeit Christ overruled his enemies, that they should not
make void his purposes; Yet no cruelty was omitted toward Christ, dead or
alive, which might testify the great desert of our sins; nor was there any
needful evidence wanting, which might make clear the truth of his death; for,
But one of the Soldiers with a spear pierced his side, etc. Albeit they were
overruled that they should not break his legs, yet they cease not to exercise
cruelty upon his dead body, and they put the truth of his death out of
contraversie. 7. That Christ's side was thus pierced, may point out unto us, how
deeply he was wounded for our sins; and that, as his side was pierced, and a
passage opened to his heart, so by his suffering we may look into his heart
wounded with love to us, and pouring out it self for us; and, That as an hole
was made in Adams side, to take out a wife, so a hole was made in his side, to
take in his beloved bride to his heart. All this may we gather from this, that
one of the Soldiers with a spear pierced his side. 8. That water and blood
came out at this wound, it serves not only to confirm that he was really
dead, the spear piercing his heart, and drawing out the blood thereof, and the
water that was about his heart to refresh it: But it may further point out that
it is he who came by water and blood, 1 John 5.6. and that from the merit and
efficacy of his death, there flows out water, to regenerate and wash us from
our uncleanness, and blood, for obtaining remission, and for sprinkling and
quieting of the conscience.

Verse 35. And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true, and he
knows that he says true, that ye might believe.

36. For these things were done, that the Scripture should be fulfilled, A bone
of him should not be broken.

37. And again another Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they
pierced.


In these verses, we have John's part in this business, who, 1. Bears witness
of the certainty of his death, and of the truth of these proceedings confirming
the same, for confirmation of the faith of others, v. 35. 2. He clears these
proceedings of the Soldiers, by comparing the same with Scripture, showing how
they were accomplished thereby. And particularly, that their not breaking his
bones, was an accomplishment of the truth of that type of the passover, Exodus
12.46. Number. 9.12. and that the promise made to all the godly, Psalm. 34.20. was
eminently accomplished in him. And that their piercing of his side was
agreeable to that prediction, Zecb. 12.10. wherein it is foretold that the
Messiah was to be pierced, which is all that John points at here; though there
it be further intimate, that they (or, the Jews, of whom the Prophet is
speaking) pierced him, their malice and cruelty being the chief wheel that
moved in this matter, and set Pilate, and the soldiers on work; and therefore
the Jews are said to crucify him by the Soldiers hands, as Act. 2.36 There
is also further intimate in that prediction, a promise of the conversion of
these who thus pierced him, the full accomplishment whereof is yet to come; and
this imports further, that he was not only pierced by their cruel persecuting
of him, but by and for their sins also, as has been cleared in its proper
place.

From v. 35. Learn, 1. John is so careful to add his testimony concerning
these things, and particularly his death; Not only to stop the mouths of
cavillers, who might be ready to allege that he was taken away before he was
dead: But further, yet again to teach us, that it is a point about which faith
ought to be much employed, that Christ truly died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15.3.
that so we may see that divine justice is truly satisfied for sin, and may
employ faith to get sin truly slain and subdued, by the virtue of his death.
2. It is also firmly to be believed, that Christ and his followers are not in
the hands of enemies, to be disposed of as they please, but that God
over-ruleth all of them, to bring about his purposes by them; for, this also
was a part of John's remark and testimony, not only that Christ died, but that
the Soldiers did omit or exercise cruelty toward him (in not breaking his
legs, and yet piercing his side) according as had been purposed by God, and
foretold in Scripture; as is after cleared. 3. The doctrine of the Gospel,
concerning Christ, is a doctrine of faith; And it is to be assented to by
faith, whoever there be to say to the contrary; for, his scope in publishing of
this, as of other Gospel truths, is, that ye might believe. 4. As faith loves
not to walk on slippery and unsure grounds; So, the Word affords sufficient
ground of certainty for faith to fasten upon; for, John here declares the
certainty of this truth, that ye might believe. 5. It is a great confirmation
of the certainty of the doctrine of the Gospel, that the Penmen thereof were
eye and ear witnesses of what they publish; for, he that saw, bare record, etc.
See 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. 6. Such as are made witnesses of any thing concerning
Christ, it is their duty, and will be their care (if they be affected
therewith) to publish the same in their stations, to the edification of others;
for, so did John in his station, And he that saw it, bare record, that ye might
believe. 7. Whatever exceptions unbeleevers have against the doctrine of the
Gospel; Yet is sufficient to condemn them, and to encourage believers, That
the doctrine is true in it self, That the publishers were assured of the truth
thereof, both by sight and by faith; and, That they were so guided by God, as
they would have been loath to publish any thing for a ground of faith, which
was not a truth: All these are imported here, His record is true, in it self,
and he knows that he says true, not only in respect of his seeing what he
says, but by the Spirit of faith comparing what he saw, with the Scriptures,
(as after follows) and he knows that he says true, and publishes only
such things as he is so persuaded of, that ye might believe.

From v. 36. Learn, 1. The only best way of reading and being edified by the
passages of providence about Christ and his followers, is, to compare the same
with Scripture; for, so does John clear these passages, for these things were
done, that the Scripture should be fulfilled. 2. Such is our weakness and
inadvertency, that we need help to take up these Scriptures, which point out
Christ in the Old Testament, and which serve to expound the lots he met with,
and to confirm our faith concerning him and his sufferings; Therefore does
John help the Church in all ages, by pointing at the Scripture, which should be
fulfilled. 3. Christ is the truth and substance of that type of the Paschal
Lamb, and the true passover sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. in whom, and in his
sufferings, all that is really to be found which is pointed out and typified by
that shadow; Therefore, what was ordained concerning the Paschal lamb, is
applied here to him, as the substance of that type, A bone of him shall not be
broken. 4. Christ was not crushed by or under his sufferings, but did subsist
under all of it, till he triumphed over it; for, whatever was the reason of not
breaking the bones of the lamb, (as, their great have in going out of Egypt,
that they might not stay to break the bones and eat the marrow) yet in the
substance it pointed at this, that he was not broken under his suffering, but
his bones were kept whole, as being shortly to rise again and triumph over
it. And to this also may that passage, Psalm. 34.20. be applied, which proves
true of believers under their trials, that they are not quite crushed by them,
because it was true of him first. 5. Christ and his followers are in the hand
of God in their sufferings, who carveth out the measure, weight, and every
circumstance of their trouble, and leaves it not to the will of adversaries;
for, so much also does that passage, Psalm. 34. hold out, that God so keeps them
as not so much as a bone is broken when he will have it otherwise; And this is
true of Christ first, and of others through him. 6. Albeit Christ endured so
much from men, as might put him to death; Yet he would have it seen that he
died voluntarily, and that he was not violently compelled to die; for, so much
further does the truth and substance of that type point out, A bone of him
shall not be broken, He voluntarily prevented their cruelty, by yielding up the
Ghost, so that they needed not violent him, nor hasten his death, as they did
with the rest.

From v. 37. Learn, 1. Christ is pointed out, not in one only, but in many of
the writings of the Old Testament; And they need to study much in all the
writings thereof, who would understand what is foretold of him, and compare the
same with the accomplishment, for their own edification: Therefore does John
make use yet of more Scripture, to clear these proceedings, And again another
Scripture says. 2. All the Scriptures are divine and of alike infallible
verity, so that one of them will prove true and be accomplished, no less then
another; for, in these proceedings, as one, so another Scripture is fulfilled
and gets accomplishment. 3. God in his providence has determined and appointed
the least circumstance and manner of the sufferings of his people; for, so
appears particularly in the sufferings of Christ, concerning whom it was
foreprophesied that he should be pierced, as the Soldiers did. 4. The
Scripture is the true and infallible determiner, who are most guilty of
persecution in Gods account; And according to this Rule, it will be found, that
malicious upstirrers unto cruelty, are more guilty then the ignorant executors
thereof: Therefore does the Scripture ascribe this act to the Jews, they
pierced him, by the hand of the Soldiers, as either giving a particular
command for this deed, or being generally guilty of all that followed upon
their malicious persecuting of him, and by their interposing with Pilate, v.
31. occasioning this cruelty. 5. The Lord may be so gracious to persecutors, as
to give them a sight of their cruelty, in mercy, and a sight of mercy together
with it; for, so is this prediction held out in a promise of their conversion,
as is cleared on Zech. 12. They shall look on him whom they have pierced.

Ver. 38. And after this, Joseph of Arimathea (being a Disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might take away the
body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him leave: he came therefore, and took the body
of Jesus.

39. And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night,
and brought a mixture of mirrhe and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.

40. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen cloths, with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.

41. Now in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the
garden a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid.

42. There laid they Jesus, therefore, because of the Jews preparation day,
for the sepulcher was nigh at hand.


The second consequent following upon Christ's death, is his honorable burial,
performed by Joseph of Arimathea (who belonged to that place Arimathea, the
same with Ramah, or Ramathaim, but dwelt at Jerusalem, as appears by his Garden
and grave in it, Matthew. 27.59, 60.) and Nicodemus; the first whereof begged his
body of Pilate, and, (as the other Evangelist Mark) provided fine linen, and
the second brought fine spices; and they jointly wound and embalmed his body
after the Jewish manner, and do bury him in a new grave near the City, where
they lay him with some have because of the Jews preparation.

In all this procedure, we may consider, first, that it behooved Christ not
only to die, but to be buried, and lie a while in the grave, as the lowest
state of his humiliation: Whereby, 1. He would have all yet further confirmed
of the truth and certainty of his death, which is so necessary to be believed;
Therefore is all this solemnity used, and Pilates doubting of his death, Mark.
15.44. with other circumstances, are so narrowly marked. 2. He would teach us,
that sin does not only deserve death, but that the sinner also should remain
deaths prisoner; As he continued under the power thereof for a season. 3. He
would accomplish what was foretold in the type of Jonah, Matthew. 12.39, 40. and
would point out that by his death and burial he has appeased the wrath of God
which was burning against his people, as upon Jonahs casting into the sea, it
was calmed and ceased from raging against others. 4. He would publish his
entire conquest over death, in that lie pursued it into its place, and there
triumphed over it, by his Resurrection, Act. 2.24. and would assure us that the
grave can retain none of his followers longer then he pleases, seeing he has
loosed and broken the bands thereof. See 1 Cor. 15.55. 5. He would sanctify
and persume believers graves, and make that cold bed sweet unto them, by his
lying down there. 6. As his lowest step of his humiliation was his passage
toward his glorious resurrection; So he has purchased unto his people, that
their low abasements should tend to their higher exaltation. 7. He would also
by this point out that virtue and efficacy which is in his death, extending to
the very burial of sin, as he himself was not only dead, but buried. See
Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12.

Secondly, we are to consider the persons employed in this action, the one
being described by the other Evangelists to be a rich man, and an honorable
counselor, and (as here also) a secret disciple, or one of these, Joh. 12.42.
And the other being a Master and Teacher of Israel, and described here rather
from that timorous act, chapter 22. then from his more bold (though not yet full)
pleading on Christ's behalf, Joh. 7.50, 51. This consideration, and their
owning Christ, in the general, may teach us. 1. A suffering Christ is nothing
the less precious in the eyes of a right discerner; for, here, he is thought
worthy to be owned by these eminent men, and they run much hazard, and bestow
much cost upon his burial. 2. Such as are taught to live contentedly under
want, and are ready to suffer, and to be forsaken of all, when God calls them
to it, may expect Gods remarkable care of them when they need it, and to get
needful proofs thereof, after their trial is over; for, so is verified in
Christ's experience, who being content to become poor, and being now in his
suffering left, even by his disciples, yet he wants not honorable persons
(perfumed with the smell of his death) who bestow expense upon his burial,
These who resolve, on these terms, to follow God, may expect all things to be
theirs, as they need them. 3. The Lord may have special favors to bring about
for his people, not only when they are asleep, (as Adam was when the Lord
prepared him a wife) but even when they are dead, and so altogether without
them; As here also Christ's experience does teach, who when he died, had neither
windingsheet nor a place of burial provided; and yet both are provided for him
in an honorable way. And though this was singular in Christ, that he lived
still as God, to provide what was needful for him; Yet in this also has Gods
love kithed toward many of his people, in his care of their posterity after
they were dead and gone. 4. There may be many friends to Christ, who for a long
time may lurk through fear and weakness; and yet they may (through Gods mercy
to them) become more bold afterward; for, here, Joseph of Arimathea being a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, and Nicodemus which at
the first came to Jesus by night, do now at last openly avow and own him. 5.
Such may be the Lords mercy toward his own, as they may become more courageous
in a time of great trial, then they have been in times of less hazard; for,
they who before were timorous and fearful to own Christ, do now in this great
hazard, openly appear for him, the one going to Pilate, (and that boldly, as it
is, Mark 15.43) and both of them openly concurring to bury him: Such courage
did then spring up out of the ashes of Christ's death. And indeed, when God
loses the bonds of faint-hearted friends, how easy will it be for them to
come over all their former fears?

Thirdly, we are to consider the particulars of their preparation before his
burial, here mentioned, Namely, That Joseph craves liberty of Pilate to take
away his body, and obtains it, and takes down his body; That Nicodemus brought
abundance of fine spices; and, That both together wound his body in linen
cloth, applying the spices after the Jewish custom, which was not to unbowed
the dead, and then to enbalme them, but only to apply the spices outwardly, and
it is like that being in have here, they took not such leisure as otherwise was
usual. These particulars may teach us, 1. It is the will of God that zeal and
affection run in a right channel, and keep his way, being (as pure, so)
peaceable and orderly; for, Joseph goes first and sought Pilates leave, who
had power of the dead bodies, v. 31. and obtains it, before he do any thing. 2.
It is the will of God, and very commendable, that the living do perform due
honor to the dead bodies of Saints; And such as have received mercy from
Christ, will think no expense too much, were it even bestowed on his dead body;
for, a mixture of mirrhe and aloes, about an hundred pound weight, is employed
this way, together also with fine linen, as it is Mark 15.46. See 2 Chronicles.
16.14. Jer. 22.18, 19. Psalm. 79.2. 3. It was believed, even in the Church of
the Jews, that there should be a resurrection of the same bodies which were
dead; for, so much also did this practice of embalming among the Jews, point
at, (though the Heathen also borrowed it from the Patriarchs, albeit they were
ignorant of the resurrection) they wound his body with linen clothes, with the
spices, in expectation of the resurrection thereof, though, it may be, not
believing that he should rise on the third day. Only seeing Christ has now
given a clear pledge of our Resurrection, by his own rising from the dead,
there is no cause why that custom should be continued for that end.

Fourthly, Their burying of him in a new grave in a garden, (which was Joseph's
own, Matthew. 27.60.) may teach, Not only that he would be buried in a garden, to
expiate Adams sin in the garden, and that he was buried in another man's
grave, who suffered for the sins of others. But further. 1. It is men's duty to
acquaint themselves with the thoughts of mortality in time, that so they may be
the more ready when death comes; Therefore had Joseph his sepulcher ready in
the garden, daily before his eyes. 2. Selfe-denying affection unto Christ, will
quit any thing to him, that he calls for or needs; for, Joseph quits his grave
to Christ. 3. All suspicion of any others rising in stead of Christ, or of his
rising by the virtue of any other, was prevented by his being buried in a new
sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid: And so none could rise out of it,
but he, nor could be raised by any virtue from any other buried there before
him, as a man was raised at the touch of Elisha's bones, 2 Kings 13.21.

Fifthly, a reason is given why he was buried there; Namely, That being the
preparation day, wherein they could not attend long, therefore they hastily
laid him there, as being near at hand, and, belike also, they did not, by
reason of this, attend upon all the particular circumstances required in
embalming of him. This may teach, 1. Albeit ceremonial performances give place
unto moral duties, and men may lawfully omit the one, when they come in
competition with the other; Yet men ought so to follow the one, as they strive
(so far as is possible) to overtake all: Therefore, they so go about the
burying of Christ, as they make all the have they can, to observe the Jews
preparation day. 2. When the Lord does not let things frame with his people as
they would, it does oft-times prove to be so, because they shall not need what
he is not pleased to give; for, they got not leisure to wait upon this
business, but hastily laid him in that sepulcher, for it was nigh at hand,
because he was not to need a grave long, nor to need that way of embalming
which they would have used toward him. 3. The Lord also did so order, that
every passage about Christ's burial, and even these which his friends would have
had done otherwise, did contribute to his great scope of glorifying Christ;
for, therefore also was it ordered, that they being hastened, laid him in the
sepulcher, which was nigh at hand, that so he might rise in the view of all his
enemies, where they had the stone sealed, and a guard to keep him in; whereas,
had he been carried further off, the matter had been more obscure, and might
have seemed more doubtful. And thus also does he bring about his glory, by that
wherein his people could little expect it should be so.

CHAP. XX.
THis and the following Chapter contain Christ's exaltation and begun triumph
over all his enemies, by his rising again from the dead; which being done
without witnesses, all the Evangelists do confirm the truth of it, by
recording the several steps and degrees of the manifestation thereof; And
namely, by the empty grave, which did more obscurely put it out, as the dawning
of that bright day; by the testimony of Angels, which was yet a clearer light;
and by his own apparitions, which were the full shining of that Sun of
righteousness, in that morning of his Resurrection.

In handling this begun exaltation of Christ, I shall (as formerly) speak only
to what is recorded by John, save in so far as may be needful for clearing the
greatest contrarieties which seem to be betwixt him and the rest. And in this
Chapter, First, Christ's Resurrection is evidenced and confirmed by the empty
grave. And that first, unto Mary Magdalene, v. 1. Next, unto Peter and John,
who being informed by Mary of what she had found, v 2. do run unto the grave,
v, 3, 4. and find it empty, and do observe such circumstances as persuade John
to believe, v. 5, 6, 7, 8. (though they had not considered or believed the
Scriptures before, which spoke of this matter, v. 9.) and so they return back
again, v. 10.

Secondly, Christ's Resurrection is further evidenced and confirmed, by three
apparitions and manifestations of himself. First, to Mary, who staying weeping
and looking into the grave, v. 11. gets a vision of two Angels, who confer
with her, v. 12, 13. Then, she meets and conferreth with Christ, as yet unknown
to her, v. 14, 15. who afterward makes himself known unto her, v. 16. and
gives her directions and a Commission, v. 17. which she obeys, v. 18.
Secondly, To all the disciples, (except Thomas) to whom he appears that night
at their meeting, confirming them in the faith of his Resurrection, by his
usual salutation, v. 19. and by ocular demonstration to their comfort, v. 20.
And renews and confirms their calling to the Ministry, v. 21. endowing them
with furniture for that office, v. 22. and asserting their authority in the
discharge thereof, v. 23. Thirdly, to all the disciples, and Thomas with them,
who being absent the former time, and refusing to believe upon their report,
unless he himself got sensible satisfaction of his own prescribing, v. 24, 25.
Christ, after a week, appears to them again, after the former manner, v. 26.
offering satisfaction to Thomas doubtfulnesse, v. 27. which drawing out a fair
confession from him, v. 28. it is entertained with a reproof and caution, v. 29.

Thirdly, John being about to close his Narration, professes his passing over
many other such passages, in regard these which are marked are sufficient to
faith and salvation, v. 30, 31.

Verse 1. THe first day of the week, comes Mary Magdalene early, when it was
yet dark, unto the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the
sepulcher.
In this verse is recorded how Mary Magdalene, coming early to the sepulcher,
on the first day of the week, purposing to see the sepulcher, and anoint the
body of Jesus, (as is observed by the rest) she finds the stone rolled away,
and (as appears from her report, v. 2. and is recorded, Luke 24.2, 3.) finds
also the grave empty. Albeit the other Evangelists do declare that there were
other women beside, who went to the grave, (whether in one or two companies, I
will not determine) yet she is only named here, as being most famous in this
History; for her affection, zeal and activity, and one who acts an eminent part
in the subsequent passages. And as for Christ's mother who stayed so stoutly by
the Cross, chap. 19.25. albeit John had taken charge of her, chap. 19.27. we
are not to suppose that she was yet retired from Jerusalem, but she was still
there as well as John, v. 2. with Acts 1.14. and yet we do not find her
stirring with this, or any other company, about his grave. I shall forbear to
determine, whether she came not to anoint him, as believing his Resurrection,
(as faith will hold out in much needless anxiety and toil, though yet Christ
made good use of their weakness;) or, whether her great grief did so far
surpass that of the rest, as she could not be so active as they: as the
greatness of grief or love will readily obstruct the expressions thereof: But
it is greatest sobriety to leave the enqui^y of these things which God has
concealed. Doct. 1. Affection may shine very eminently in weak instruments, and
greatest services are ordinarily done by weak things, or these things wherein
we most abase our selves; for, here weak women, and Mary Magdalene among them,
are on foot early, and ready to perform such service as they thought most
suitable unto Christ, when the disciples have not yet appeared. 2. Great things
received in mercy from Christ, will shine forth in great activity for him in
men's stations, and according to the measure of light they have received; for,
therefore is Mary Magdalene only named here, because of her activity and
eminency, being eminently engaged to Christ who had cast seven devils out of
her. And albeit she was weak in her undertakings, yet that ought not to obscure
her affection. 3. True affection toward Christ will not cool through length of
time, nor will it be quenched by impediments cast in the way. But will wait on
and burn the brighter, when it gets opportunity; for, her affection being kept
up from showing it self, by reason of the Jewish Sabbath, Luke 23.56. it does
not extinguish; but on the third day appears, and that early, when it was yet
dark. They set out at that time, though it was toward Sunrising when they came
to the sepulcher, Mark 16.2. 4. As it is most agreeable to Scripture-Rules to
begin the Sabbath in the morning; so it does begin early, and we ought to
consider upon this, that we may begin early to the work of sanctifying thereof;
for, this time of their coming out is called, the end of the Sabbath, as it
began to dawn toward the first day of the week, Mat. 28.1. to intimate, that
then the Jewish Sabbath ended, and the first day of the week, or Christian
Sabbath, began; and albeit they set out the first day of the week early, when
it was yet dark, yet Christ (who rose upon that, being the third day,) was
risen before they came, and so the Christian Sabbath was begun. To which, if we
add the long continuance of Sabbath service, (as has been the practice of
affection at some times, Act. 20.7. we may gather useful directions for our
sanctifying thereof. 5. Christ is oft-times sought where he is not to be found,
even by those who have much affection to him; for, she comes to find him in
his grave, and anoint him there, and she sees the stone taken away from the
sepulcher, (the Angel having rolled it away, Mat. 28.2. not because Christ
needed that help, but to testify Angels attendance upon our exalted Lord) and
finds that he is not in the grave. Her unbelief, though joined with
affection, did speak but poorly of Christ, in that she came to seek him in his
grave, who was among the living; And thus not only do they miss him who seek
him in dead and unapproven Ceremonies and Ordinances, and in a dead formal way;
but even his own, when they seek him in a dead discouraged way under
difficulties, as if he were dead and would not do for them. 6. That this is in
particular marked, that she sees the stone taken away, etc. which was the
great difficulty they were thinking upon by the way, Mark 16.3, 4, it may serve
to teach; partly, that difficulties may appear very great, which yet the Lords
Providence may make very easy, as appears in the matter of removing this
stone to their hand; and partly, that so long as we continue in unbelief, and
in our mistakes of Christ, the change of our condition, or removal of
apprehended difficulties, will not serve our turn, but will rather beget new
sorrows and doubts; for, their thought was, that if the stone were taken away,
they should find Christ, and now it is taken away, to discover that they are
further from finding him in their way. 7. Whatever disappointments affectionate
Saints meet with, by reason of their weakness, they will find in end that all
of these tend to their advantage; for, such was the issue of her disappointment
here, though it bred present solicitude, yet in the end she found that she was
disappointed of a dead Christ, that she might find him living. 8. In this
Narration, this great Article of our faith is here supposed, that Christ is
risen from the dead; which believers ought to feed upon, approving him to be
true God, who rose again by his own power, Rom 1.4. as proving the
Justification of all these who flee to him, (seeing as in his death he laid
down the price, so in his Resurrection he got a discharge in our name, Romans
4.25. and so will appear the second time as our discharged Surety, without sin,
to our salvation, Heb. 9.28) as affording matter of gloriation to Saints,
against all the challenges of sin and the Law, Romans 8.34. as confirming and
assuring the renovation and sanctification of all these who seek to be
partakers of his Resurrection, as to be partakers of mortification by the
efficacy of his death, Romans 6.4, 5. Ephesians. 2 6. Phil 3.10. And, as assuring
believers of their Resurrection and future glory, seeing our Head will draw all
his members after him, 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 15.20, 55, 56, 57. This great truth
is here preached unto Mary, by the stone taken away from the sepulcher, though
as yet she saw not so much in it. 9. As this great truth of the Resurrection it
self, so also the way and circumstances thereof are to be studied and pondered
for our use; Therefore here and elsewhere are these so narrowly marked: And in
particular, we may remark here, 1. That he rose without observation and
witnesses; for, albeit several felt that earthquake, and the watch and the
women saw that Angel which descended at his Resurrection, Mat. 28.2, 3, 4, 5.
yet it appears not that any of the watch saw him rise, and those women who came
first, find the sepulcher empty; nor afterward did he appear openly to all,
whereby he might have prevented that report which was spread abroad, Mat.
28.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. but only to his disciples and brethren, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6,
7. And did leave this truth to be believed from the Word, holding out these
evidences and apparitions, 1 Cor. 15.4. hereby teaching, That however Christ
did undeniably witness the truth of his glory and exaltation, yet he will
rather have it the object of our faith then of our sense, while we are within
time. 2. That he rose on the third day, and that very early, having lien only
one whole day and night, (which was their Sabbath) and but a part of the first
day, which was their preparation; and now on the third, being the first day of
the week early, when it was yet dark he rises again. Hereby not only did he
fulfill the type of Jonah, Mat 12.40. but did also prove both that he was really
dead, and yet that he felt no corruption (according to the Scriptures, Ps.
16.10. with Act. 2.31. and 13.35, 36, 37.) having lien so short while in the
grave: and more particularly, he hasted through his sufferings to his glory,
that he might make way for, and give a pledge of our speedy outgates, as we
need them, Hos. 6.2. 3. That he rose on the first day of the week, that he
might perfect the work of Redemption, and the new Creation, on the day when the
first Creation began, and might sanctify and set apart that day to be the
Christian Sabbath, which therefore is called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. and was
the day of some of his solemn appearings to his disciples, v. 19. and 26. of
this Chapter, and the day observed by the Church for solemn meetings and
worship, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Acts 20.7. 4. That the first evidences of his
Resurrection were more obscure, and such as at first did increase their fears
and perplexities, or, at most, but beget astonishment; for, all that Mary sees
is but the stone taken away and the empty sepulcher, which augments her sorrow;
The disciples do not believe the women's report, Luke 24.11. and what Peter
himself saw, did produce only wondering at first, Luke 24.12. hereby not only
did he prepare their weak spirits for the full comfort of this mercy, in his
clear apparitions, by sending more dark evidences of it before ^^^d; But we may
also learn from it, how much per^^^^y Saints may have, about their real mercies
and comforts, even while they are amongst their hands so long as they are in
the dark, and cannot discern them.

Verse 2. Then she runs and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple
whom Jesus loved, and says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the
sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid him.
Follows the evidencing of Christ's Resurrection, by the same proof of the
empty grave, unto Peter and to John, who is here again described (as frequently
before) by his Masters love to him. The Narration of this manifestation may be
taken up in four particulars; The first whereof (in this verse) is the
occasion of their going to seek this proof: Namely, that Mary comes unto them
(...) a report of what she had found, representing the matter in such sad and
disadvantageous terms, ^s her unbelief and discouragement could invent. For
creating of this purpose, Consider, 1. Albeit all the disciples were present
when Mary with the rest of the women made their report, Luke 24.9, 10. yet it
is said here only, that she ^an to Peter and John, because they only made any
use of her report. For the rest accounted them but idle tales, and believed
not, Luke 24.11. and albeit neither Peter nor John believed as yet (as
appears from v. 8, 9. with Luke 24.12,) yet they will go and be further
informed. Consider, 2. The greater difficulty here is, How Mary is said to
report only that Christ was taken out of the grave, and yet it appears from,
Matthew. 28.5, 6, 7. and Luke 24.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. that Angels had told them he was
risen, and it is said expressly, Luke 24.9, 10. that Mary Magdalene was amongst
these who told the Angels tidings: This difficulty may be cleared two ways. 1
That Mary coming with the first to see the sepulcher, Matthew. 28.1. and finding
it empty, she ran away with the sad news, before the Angels told these tidings
to the rest, and where it is said, she with the rest, told these things, Luke
24.10. it may be thus expounded, that every one of them told their own part,
Mary told of the empty sepulcher, and the rest of the women, (who came after
her, and before Peter and John ran to the sepulcher) told that they had seen
Angels, and what they had heard from them. 2 It may, with as little violence to
the text, be cleared thus, That indeed they told the Angels message, Luke
24.22, 23. but so as they did not believe it, and they told also what is here
recorded as their own sense of the matter, whatever Angels said to the
contrary. Doct. 1. It is a commendable duty of Saints, when they are in any
distress, especially concerning Christ, to repair unto the society of his
disciples, and communicate their case with them, whatever be the success; for,
whatever was Mary's weakness, yet it is commendable that she goes and
acquainteth the disciples with her sad case. 2. Affection unto Christ, will
make such as miss him, very active in communicating their losses, though
oft-times such haste, joined with unbelief, does cause them promove but little;
for, therefore is it marked, that she runs and comes to the disciples, out
of her affection, though her unbelief made it be to little purpose. 3. Albeit,
all who get any tidings concerning Christ, are bound to make use thereof; and
it will be marked as their fault when they do not so, yet in some respect,
these only may be said to be present and spoken to, who make use of any such
tidings; and for others, what is spoken, may be said to be in vain to them,
Jer. 8.8. For this cause it is said here only, that she comes to Simon Peter,
and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, because they made some use of her
news, as has been cleared. It is said, Luke 24.24 that certain of them which
were with the disciples, went to the sepulcher, not that they were sent, by
common consent, but they went of their own accord. 4. Such as do slide in an
hour of tentation, ought not to lie still, but recover themselves by
repentance, Jer. 8.4, 5. and being recovered, they ought to return to the
society of the Lords people, to keep communion with them, and to run one hazard
with them; therefore we find Simon Peter, who had repented before, returned
unto the disciples again. 5. As back-sliders should be encouraged to return,
considering that they have the Churches affection ready to receive them again,
and confirm their love toward them, 2 Cor. 2.8. (as here Simon Peter is
admitted amongst them) so, the more any have tasted themselves of the love of
Christ, they will be the more ready, with tenderness, to welcome back-sliders,
and such as do come in: Therefore it is specially marked, that Simon Peter, and
the other disciple whom Jesus loved, were together, and afterward they keep
together. A man so qualified as John, was a fit man to receive and welcome a
penitent Peter. And thus also Barnabas, the Son of consolation, did entertain
Paul, Act. 9.26, 27, 28. and 11.25, 26. And thus will these, who are indeed
spiritual, deal with such as have fallen, Gal. 6.1. 6. Unbelief, though joined
with affection, may mistake Gods dealing so far, as not only to look upon real
mercies as trials, but to point out supposed trials in the blackest colors,
(enough to discourage a whole meeting of disciples) and as sadder then their
real afflictions; yea, the more affection there be, unbelief may abuse it, to
render their apprehensions yet sadder; for, affectionate Mary represents this
great mercy of Christ's Resurrection, as sadder then the death and burial of
Christ; for then, though he was dead and buried, yet she knew where to find
him, to tender her respects to his dead body; but now, says she, They (either
some friends out of their respects, or his foes, or some others. See v. 15.)
have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we (I, nor any of the women
who were with me) know not where they have laid him. 7. It is sad to
affectionate souls, when Christ is away from them, but much sadder, when they
know not where to seek or find him; and this does usually follow on the other;
for, both these concurred in Mary's trial, in this particular way of finding
Christ here: They have taken away the Lord, etc. and we know not where they
have laid him. And this also is the lot of deserted souls, Job 23.3, 8, 9.
Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. and 5.6, 8. which may teach them who enjoy Christ to entertain
him well, lest they not only want him, but involve themselves in a perplexed
labyrinth. And may point out their tolerable condition unto them, who though
they want, yet they know what to do, and how to come speed. 8. Such is the
power of unbelief and tentation, that even real encouragements will beget and
feed discouragement and fear; for, the empty grave, which should have comforted
her, occasions all this mistake and sorrow; They have taken away the Lord out
of the sepulcher. 9 Unbelief also is so powerful, and Gods wonderful actings do
oft-times so overcome our weak faith, that even an Angel from heaven will not
prevail to persuade us of them, till the Lord come; for, albeit (as has been
cleared) Angels had told her, and the rest, of Christ's Resurrection, yet she
insists on this as her real thought of the business, They have taken away the
Lord, etc. A lie is far more easily believed then truth, in an hour of
tentation; and she credits her own heart and sense better then an Angels
testistimony. 10. Whoever look upon Gods dealing, and the passages they meet
with, without the Word, they will readily mistake, and feed their own
tentations; for, whereas the Angels had remitted them to Christ's doctrine, to
clear this passage, Luke 24.6, 7. the looks only to the empty grave, and
judges according to her sense: They have taken away the Lord out of the
sepulcher. 11. In all this regrate, she calls him the Lord, a title proper to
him in a peculiar sense, and which she uttered in another sense here; then when
she gave that title to him, when she supposed him to be the Gardener, v. 15. It
does not only point out her great respect to him, when dead and gone, as she
supposed; and that indeed he was the Lord still, even when dead, as she
supposes him now to be. But further, this title, as it is proper to him in a
peculiar sense, (and she intends it so) does contain a refutation of all her
mistakes; for, his being the Lord, and that even when dead in her account, does
evince that he was not to be detained a prisoner by death, but was now risen,
the time prefixed by him, for his continuance in the grave, being expired; And
so it may teach, 1. Even in the greatest fits of Saints unbelief, a right
discerner may yet read some faith; as may be gathered to be in Mary from this
compellation. So in the Churches complaint, Isa. 49.14. my Lord, is not only
the language of affection, regrating that such a one had forgotten her, but the
language of faith also, cleaving to an interest in him, though she discern it
not, being over-powred with sense, which says he had forgotten her. 2. What
Saints do sometime believe in the midst of their tentations, if it were
enlarged as it ought, would refute all their unbelief; for, as her
acknowledging him the Lord, does refute her present diffidence and mistake; so
when Saints believe an interest in God, and that he is theirs, when yet they
are plunged in perplexities about many particulars; His being their God is
sufficient to give them comfortable ground of hope in all these.

Verse 3. Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the
sepulcher.

4. So they ran both together, and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and
came first to the sepulcher.


The second particular in this Narration, is, the use which Peter and John make
of this information, and that they went to the sepulcher to see. Which being
generally propounded, v 3. is more particularly spoken of, v. 4. that they both
ran toward the sepulcher, and that John being more young and vigorous then
Peter, did outstrip him in running. Whence learn, 1. When Saints find any
intimation that Christ is a missing, they should take with the alarm, and it
is their duty to be stir themselves to seek a good account of that
dispensation; for, albeit there was much unbelief here, yet it was commendable,
that when they heard the news, they went forth, and came to the sepulcher, to
see what news they could get. 2. Such as have fresh sense of their own
frailty, and of Christ's love, will be most active to enquire after an absent
and missed Christ; for, it is Peter new recovered, and that other disciple, who
went forth, etc. 3. Such as have fallen foully, ought not only to recover by
repentance, and join themselves with the society of Saints; but they ought to
evidence their recovery, by their activity, and being with the first in
testimonies of affection; for, so appears in Peter, who now being recovered,
is with the first of the disciples, who go to search after Christ. And it may
be that therefore Peter only is named in this undertaking, Luke 24.12. because
the fallen man's diligence and recovery was specially remarkable. 4. Diligence
is required, and is a commendable testimony of affection, in disciples enquiry,
and making search after Christ; for, they ran both together. 5. Albeit
affection will put believers to all the diligence they can, yet every one is
not to be tried by another measure of expressing his affection; for, one may
be as affectionate as another, who yet may be retarded, and come short in
expression of what that other attaineth unto; for, so appears in Peter and
John, they ran both together, but the other disciple did outrun Peter, and
came first to the sepulcher: John being young, and of a nimble body, did
outrun Peter, who yet loved Christ as well as he, and was running as fast as
he could. And thus also may many be borne down in their activity in respect of
others, by reason of their infirmity of body, tentations of mind, or other
infirmities, whose affections, notwithstanding, are as fervent toward Christ.

Verse 5. And he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying,
yet went he not in.

6. Then comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulcher, and
sees the linen clothes lie.

7. And the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes,
but wrapped together in a place by it self.

8. Then went in also that other disciple which came first to the sepulcher,
and, he saw and believed.

9. For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the
dead.


The third particular in this Narration is, their success and observation when
they came to the sepulcher, v. 5.6, 7, 8. -- with the effect it had upon John,
v 8. and his remark and account thereupon, v. 9. In general, it is supposed
here, that they found the sepulcher empty, and Christ not in it. But more
particularly, John records their progress and particular observations there:
and namely, That he coming first, contented himself to look in and see the
linen clothes lying, wherein they had wound Christ's body, but went not in, as
contenting himself with the sight, or possibly, being afraid to enter, because
he had heard that Angels were there, v. 5. That Peter coming after, went into
the grave, and observed more distinctly the order how these linnens lay, v. 6,
7. and, that he following Peter's example, went also in, and saw and observed
the same more distinctly also, v. 8. -- Unto this John subjoynes an account of
the effect this sight had upon him, that it persuaded him to believe, v. -- 8.
which he amplifieth from an acknowledgement of their common evil of not taking
up and believing the Scriptures, which spoke of the Resurrection of Christ.
Concerning this believing of John, and his acknowledgement thereupon, of their
ignorance and unbelief of the Scriptures. Consider, 1. Albeit by some it be
conceived that he believed no more then what the women had told, that Christ's
body was taken away, and that because they knew not the Scriptures as yet,
therefore he could believe no more; and albeit so much only be recorded as the
general account of their diligence, when they returned from the grave, or, at
least the hearers understood it so, Luke 24.24. yet this being recorded
particularly of John, it seems more probable, that upon this sight he did
believe his Resurrection, and that it was true which the Angels had said to the
women, though it was but in some weak measure, and it may be he was as easily
shaken again. Nor is it needful to debate, whether their not believing upon
Mary's report that she had seen Christ, Mark 16 9.10, 11. (which was after
this, as appears, v. 18.) was true only of the body of them, John being
excepted, or whether he staggered again. Only this is beyond all contraversie,
that both Peter and Mary, (who went also with them, as appears, v. 11) did
believe so much as that his body was taken away: and therefore it needed not be
remarked as any thing singular in him, that he believed so much. And withal,
this interpretation helps us to put a difference among all these three who were
now at the sepulcher; Mary she believes no more then she did, and therefore
stays still about the grave, till she got a sight of Christ to comfort her,
v. 11, 12, etc. Peter, though it seems he goes a further length; yet he does
not believe, but only wondereth, and is astonished at these things, Luke 24.12.
and gets a sight of Christ before the rest of the disciples, to clear and
confirm him, Luke 24.34. 1 Cor. 15.5. But John does here believe, and
therefore needs no such particular confirmation, till afterward that he gets
it with the rest. Consider, 2. This amplification and reason subjoined, v. 9.
albeit, being applied generally to all, or the most part of them who were
there, (as it is generally expressed) it is true, they did not believe his
Resurrection, but only that he was taken away, or did wonder and were
confounded with what they saw, and that because they did not, even then,
consider nor believe the Scriptures. But applying it particularly to John, it
holds thus true of him, that he did believe only when he saw, and not before,
because he had not heeded nor believed the Scripture, speaking of Christ's
Resurrection, till he saw this accomplishment. Whereas had he believed the
Scripture, he might have been assured of this before he saw these things. And
so John, when he gets faith, acknowledges his fault, recording it in this
Narration, and acknowledges it was a common fault among them. Doct. 1. There
were such clear evidences to be seen about Christ's grave, as made it apparent
that he was indeed risen from the dead, and was not conveyed away, neither by
friends nor foes, nor any other for their own ends; for, the lying of the
linen clothes, ob^^^ved by both of them, did clearly witness this. Beside,
that it would have been a terror to have handled a naked dead man; what could
be the end of any party to carry away his body, and leave these? It is not to
be supposed that any friends, (could they have had access to him through the
guards) would have so handled his blessed body, as to carry it away naked; nor
could it have agreed with their design, to carry him away by stealth, to take
leisure to strip him. And as for his foes, or others, it is to be supposed they
would rather have had the fine linen and the spices then his body; and so
would never have left these behind, when they carried it away; yea, the orderly
lying of the linnens, and that not so much as a napkin was away, but orderly
wrapped and laid up, (as is remarked by Peter, v. 7.) does evidence that this
was not done in haste nor confusion. 2. That Christ rising from the dead, left
his grave-cloathes behind him, (which yet were all the clothes he had, the
soldiers having parted his garments) whereas Lazarus came out with his
grave-cloathes, John 11.44. It may serve to teach us, not only what he has
purchased to us by his death and Resurrection, even a restitution to that
blessed estate through him wherein Adam was in innocence, (when he needed no
garments) though the complete enjoyment thereof be suspended till eternity,
wherein we shall be perfected, and shall not only need nothing to cover our
outward nakedness, but shall leave that infirmity and corruption, which
accompanies us to the grave, behind us, as he left his grave-cloathes. But
further, it teaches, That Christ rose again not to live any more in this
world, nor to die any more, but to live and reign for ever: and therefore he
left his grave-cloathes, whereas with Lazarus it was otherwise, he being to
live in the world for a space, and then to die again. 3. A little stand in any
good course may put a man behind even those who otherwise were behind him;
for, John out-ran Peter in coming to the grave, v. 4. and yet standing a little
at the grave, Peter, who was behind, does get before him, and gets a more
distinct sight. 4. A sincere and constant follower of his duty, though slow,
may at last attain to cast a copy to these who are more forward; for, Peter,
though slow, yet holding on, attains to cast John a copy who came before him.
5. A sincerely forward man is so humble, as to be content to learn a lesson,
even from one who has sometime fallen foully, and who even now was behind
him; for, John learns this lesson from Peter's example, and went in also and
saw. 6. The Lords way of working with his own is diverse, and he may gift faith
to one of his own, when yet another, having the same means, is left under the
power of unbelief for a time; for, he saw, and believed, which Peter and Mary
as yet did not. 7. Faith is so far above the reach of nature, that it is hard
to endure, even Saints, to believe, when they want satisfaction to their sense;
for, he saw and believed, and not till he saw. 8. It is our great fault, and
the fruit of much ignorance, peevishness, and averseness from the way of
faith, that plain Scriptures, which might comfort us, lie beside us unobserved,
or not believed and trusted; for, so much does John's acknowledgement import,
when he saw and believed, and so got insight in, and gave credit to the
Scriptures, he acknowledges that as yet, or before this, he had not known the
Scripture; Not that he could be simply ignorant, of what Christ had so often
told, and the Angel had even now sent them word of by the woman, but that he
had not heeded, or pondered and believed it. 9. When the Lord condescends to
give us sensible satisfaction, for the help of our faith, it is our duty not to
rest upon such a way, and always to suspend our believing, till we get the
like again; But we ought rather to look on it as a reproof for our not
studying or heeding, and not believing naked truth, and accordingly should
humhle our selves, and acknowledge our fault: Therefore John, getting this
sight, acknowledges his fault, that he did not before believe, for as yet they
knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. They did not
heed and ponder these things which were revealed in the Word, so as to feed
upon them by faith. 10. Any evil, and particularly, the evil of ignorance or
not believing the Scripture, is the more odious and grievous to a godly man,
the more it be common and frequent; Therefore does John bring out this reason
and acknowledgement in general, they knew not the Scripture, not so much to
give reason why the other two believed not as yet, far less to extenuate the
matter, but to aggravate this fault which he found in himself, when he
perceives it so common, and so sad fruits of it yet in the rest. 11. The
children of God may be much in the dark, and much overpowered with unbelief,
by reason of their ignorance and in an hour of tentation, who yet are not to
be cast off, nor is it to be despaired but they will recover themselves;
Therefore John only says, as yet they knew not the Scripture, which yet
afterward they did, and it seems he himself now attained to know it in part.

Verse 10. Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.
The last particular in this Narration is, the return of these two disciples
after their sight and observation. It is not here determined whether they
returned together, or rather (as may be gathered from Luke 24.12.) each of them
there alone, and that Peter got a sight of Christ by the way, Luke 24.34. This
is certain, that (partly, through fear lest they might be surprised by any who
should be stirring thereabout, and partly, through irresolution what to do
next) they return to their own home, not to the places of their abode and
habitation, (for they stay yet at Jerusalem, as is recorded, v 19. and
elsewhere,) but to the rest of the company from whence they came. Whence learn,
1. It may be the lot of Christ's disciples at some times, to run much hazard in
their enquiries after Christ, which should teach us to esteem highly of liberty
and freedom; for, therefore is it marked here, that the disciples went away
again, as not daring to stay about the grave. 2. When disciples have got some
clearing in dark cases, they may yet be kept under great irresolutioo and
incertainty, by reason of their ignorance, and for their trial and exercise,
till Christ do clear and confirm them yet more: As here, John believing in
some measure upon what he saw, and Peter wondering in himself, they know not
what to do next, but went away again to their own home.

Verse 11. But Mary stood without at the sepulcher, weeping, and as she wept,
she stooped down, and looked into the sepulcher.
Follows to v. 19. Christ's evidencing of the truth of his Resurrection, by
his appearing unto Mary, who was the first that got a sight of him, as
appears from Mark 16.9. This Narration may be taken up in six particulars.
The first whereof (in this verse) is her carriage and exercise about the
sepulcher; and that after the disciples were gone, she continued there weeping
and looking into it. Whence learn, 1. Albeit there are, oft-times, many errors
in the way of affectionate Saints, yet those whom Christ is to manifest himself
most and first unto, are such as cannot want him, but must incessantly wait on
till they get him; for, in opposition to the disciples practice, v 10. it is
subjoyned, But Mary stood without at the sepulcher. Not only might she stay
there with less hazard then the men; but when their irresolution and fear sent
them away, her affection (though overpowered with more unbelief then any of
them had) keeps her still waiting on, and so, though her failings were many,
she gets the first sight of Christ. 2. Albeit affectionate Saints may have much
causeless sorrow about Christ; yet want, (whether real, or apprehended only,
which yet is real to the apprehender) should be evidenced by some expressions
of affection, witnessing their respect to what they want: for, it was in it
self commendable, that she stood weeping, for a supposed dead and lost Christ,
though it was her mistake to think so. 3. There may be much affection expressed
toward Christ and a sight of him, when yet we look the wrong way to find him;
for, as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulcher, not only to
feed her eyes and sorrow with the sight of the empty sepulcher, but also to try
if, possibly, he might be found there, though it was found empty before, and it
may be some stir made by the two Angels (of whom v 12.) drew her to look what
she might yet find there: However, as it was commendable that her excessive
sorrow did not drive her from the use of such means as she thought most
probable; So it is certain she sought him where he was not to be found.

Verse 12. And sees two Angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the
other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen:

13. And they say unto her, woman why weepest thou? She says unto them,
Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.


The second particular in this Narration, is, her seeing of two Angels in the
sepulcher, and their conference with her. These appearing in splendent white
raiment, do question her concerning the cause of her sorrow, and she returns an
account of her case in the same terms, as she had done to the disciples, v. 2.
Whence learn, 1. Such is the Lords respect toward affectionate mourners after
Christ, as they shall not want needful comfort, albeit Angels should be sent
with the message; for, distressed Mary sees two Angels, sent with an useful
message to her. 2. Their appearing in white served to point out their spotless
purity who are Gods constant attenders, and to hold out what they should aim
at, who look to dwell with God for ever, Heb. 12, 14. and what in end they will
be, Rev. 7.13. 3. Their posture, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at
the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen, served not only to confirm that
he was not taken away, but had indeed risen, seeing they appear in and at his
grave, and so he could not be still dead whom they serve: But further, it
pointed out, That it is through Christ alone, and by virtue of his death and
sufferings, that God is reconciled to sinners, and they have access unto him
upon a Mercy-seat: for, therefore do they fit at the head and feet, where the
body of Jesus had layen, as the Cherubims, sat upon either end of the
Mercy-seat, to evidence what his death and burial had procured unto sinners. 4.
The case of such as are indeed seeking Christ, is so sweet and sure, that their
heartlesse and dejected sorrow is causeless (even themselves, when they are in
their right wits, being Judges) and worthy of reprehension and challenge;
Therefore are they sent with this commission unto her, Woman why weepest thou?
which is a speech full of comfort, intimating that she had no cause to weep,
yet seasoned with a reproof that she should weep so heartlessely; and her
self is put to judge (when she is in a right frame) of the truth and justness
of this challenge. And indeed, it is but our low stature who cannot see a far
off, which is the great cause of our anxiety; whereas their question imports,
that were she elevate as they were, to see the truth of the matter, she would
not be diffidently anxious. 5. The want of Christ is matter of sorrow indeed to
a lover of him. The sorrow and joy of an affectionate Saint are chiefly taken
up about the enjoying or wanting of Christ; and when he is away (either really,
or to their sense) they will not easily be convinced of any excess in sorrow
and anxiety: for, she justifies her challenged weeping from this, Because they
have taken away my Lord, as pleading that she could not sorrow enough, or too
much, because of this. 6. Unbelief and mistakes, once taking place in an
affectionate heart, are not easily rooted out; and do prove real obstructions,
hindering the mind from adverting to any thing which might cure them: for,
albeit, since she first vented this her mistake to Peter and John, v. 2. she
had met with much which might have cleared her, (as her repeated sight of the
empty grave with Peter and John, and her sight of Angels there, and her
reproof from them,) Yet she heeds none of these, but persists in her
apprehension, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him. 7. Whatever be the m^stakes of Saints concerning Christ, through ignorance
and unbelief; yet it is a blessed sense of absence of Christ, and of the
continuance thereof, when it causes affection toward him to grow: As here it
does in Mary; Before he was the Lord, now, my Lord.

Ver. 14. And when she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

15. Jesus says unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She
supposing him to be the Gardener, says unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him
hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away.


The third particular in this narration, is, Mary's meeting with Christ, and
conferring with him, before she knew him: She turning about from the Angels,
sees Christ, but knew him not, v. 24. and he enquiring concerning her sorrow,
and whom she was seeking after: She, supposing him to be the gardner, makes
offer, that if he had removed his body, and would show her where he had laid
it, she would carry him away, not to trouble him any more, v. 15. Whence learn,
1. No company will satisfy nor refresh such as love and are seeking Christ,
when they find not him, nor satisfactory news concerning him, among them:
Therefore, albeit Mary enjoy the company of Angels, yet since she saw not
Christ there, and what they said (whatever it was in it self, yet) did not
satisfy her, therefore, when she had thus said, she turned her self back. It
is not needful to determine, whether she did this of her own proper motion, or
whether some noise of one behind her, or some motion of the Angels upon Christ's
appearing, occasioned it; But this is certain, that not finding satisfaction
there, she stays not with them, but takes hold of all other occasions of
finding him. See Cant. 3.3, 4. 2. When means do not afford present satisfaction
to seekers of Christ, it is not because they shall not be satisfied; but
because Christ will be more immediately (though never without the use, or in the
neglect of means) soon in comforting them; for, therefore is it, that Angels
did not satisfy her to her sense, because Christ himself was to give her
satisfaction; and Christ stops their further conference, by his appearing and
causing her turn back, as delighting to comfort her himself. 3. Christ is not
so far often as readily affectionate Saints do apprehend; but is near at hand to
manifest himself and be found, when their hopes are lowest, and all probable
means do fail; for, now when she knows not where they have laid Christ, and
no mean had yet given her the comfort she desired, Christ is yet at her hand,
she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing, and not dead, as she
supposed. 4. Christ is so condescending to his affectionate people, as when
they fail exceedingly in their way of seeking him, yet he will seek them in
their way, and will give them, not what they desire, but, what they need: for,
albeit she fail in seeking a dead Christ, at or in his grave, yet, considering
her affection and need, he comes unto her, she saw Jesus standing. 5. Christ
may be very present and near unto his people, when yet he is not discerned, by
reason of their weakness and short-coming in expectation; for, she saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus, not because he took on a strange
shape, but because she was not only withheld, for a time, from knowing him as
Luke 24.16, 31. but her weakness and not expecting a living Christ, made her
not to discern him. 6. When Christ appears, even to give sensible
satisfaction to his own, he will own and approve what any sent from him have
said in his name, as sufficient to encourage them, and as a ground of reproof
that they made not use thereof accordingly; Therefore, does he at first speak
the same thing in substance which the Angels had said, woman why weepest thou,
etc? that when she came to know him she might consider, that, that message had
been sent by him for her encouragement, and that there was more in it then she
saw. 7. Christ may, for a time, seem to carry himself strangely, even toward
those whom he loves dearly; That so he may bring out more of their affection,
and more of their weakness also, both which are useful for them; Therefore,
does he, at first speak like a stranger. woman why weepest thou? whom seek
thou? which though it import much, yet it is not so homely nor so clear, as he
speaks afterward. 8. Whatever be Saints apprehensions concerning Christ, or
their enjoying of him; yet he is in such a case, and their condition so good,
as may justly condemn all excessive sorrow; for, so much does this question
and challenge, why weepest thou? import, That however she mourned for him as
dead, and for her own want of him; yet he was alive and near her, and therefore
she had no cause so to weep. 9. People ought to take good heed how they set and
employ their precious affections, and upon what, and for what, they pour them
out liberally; for, so much also do these questions, why weepest thou? whom
seek thou? import; that she should look whom she sought so affectionatly;
And we all ought to examine whether our affections be let out upon things,
according as they are of worth in themselves. 10. As Saints considering whom
they seek, when they are seeking Christ, may help to beget affection in the
pursuit; so also it may hinder affection from being heartlesse and dejected in
making inquiry; for, so mmch further do these questions import, that however
her seeking Christ might kindle her affection toward so desirable an object;
her very seeking of him portended so much, as might drive away all excessive or
desperate sorrow. 11. As our own false and weak conceptions breed our mistakes
of Christ, (for, she supposed him to be gardner, because she thought none other
could be there so early;) So our mistakes of him do lead us to improve
opportunities of his presence but very poorly; for, this mistake causes the
force and importance of his questions sink nothing in her mind, and draws out
so poor and diffident (though affectionate) an answer. 12. Love to Christ will
make us stoop low, even to the meanest, if thereby we may get a fight of him,
or be furthered to do him service; Therefore does she, with so much respect,
petition the supposed gardner in this matter, Sir, says he, if thou have bourn
him hence, etc. 13. Love to Christ will set him so high in Saints esteem, as
they will think he should be so also in every bodies eyes; Therefore, says she
only, if thou have born him hence, not naming him: and this she did, not only,
because she might suppose he had heard what past betwixt the Angels and her, or
might know whom she meant, if he had removed his body; But because Christ was
the only One in her mind, therefore she thinks every one should know and
esteem of him. Thus also does the spouse design him to others Him whom my soul
loves, Cant. 3.3. 14. Unbelief and mistakes are so prevalent with Saints, in
the hour of their tentation, that they are not soon removed, and they will
sooner apprehend any thing, then the truth concerning Christ; for, after all
her doubts concerning the empty grave, and the taking away of Christ, v. 2. she
now supposes it might have been done by the gardner, if thou have borne him
hence, not to bury him in a more sitting place, but as troubling the garden;
and that albeit Joseph had allowed him the grave. And so she supposes him to
be dead still. 15. Affection toward Christ will not stand to consult with
ability, but with it self and its desires, and accordingly, will undertake and
endeavor to do him service, though never so far above its strength; Therefore
does a weak woman all alone, offer to bear away the body of Christ, to see it
more conveniently buried, Tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him
away.

Ver. 16. Jesus says unto her, Mary, She turned her self, and says unto him,
Rabboni, which is to say, Master.
The fourth particular in this Narration, is, Christ's making himself known to
Mary, which he does with a word, to her satisfaction. Whence learn, 1. Such is
the power of mistake, that Saints may turn their back even upon a present
Christ, while he is not discerned, as expecting no satisfaction nor comfort
from him; and Saints may be brought very low, in their disappointments on all
hands, who yet will get satisfaction: for, that she turned her self, when he
spoke again to her, it imports she was looking away, even from him, toward the
grave, as formerly she had turned from the Angels, v. 14. 2. Love in Christ
cannot long conceal it self, nor him, from affectionate needy Saints, but will
come over, even their failings to afford them comfort; for, notwithstanding her
failings, in her mistakes of his presence, and concerning his resurrection, he
speedily makes himself known. 3. A little thing, yea, even one word, when
Christ blesses it, will bring comfort to needy souls, and will open their
eyes, and cure their distempers for, Jesus, but says unto her, Mary: and she
turns her self, etc. as one now satisfied. 4. Christ has a particular
knowledge of his own, and there is a mutual knowledge betwixt Christ and his
sheep, that they (when their senses are exercised,) will discern and know his
voice, when he speaks but a little, and that after they have mistaken him
before in their distempers; for, he says unto her, Mary, as knowing her
particularly, and though she heard him speak before and knew him not, yet now
this word brings her to know him, and discern his voice. 5. As a sight, and the
discerning, of Christ is very ravishing to such as love him; (for, so much is
imported that she can say no more, but Rabboni) So when ever he appears to his
own, they will evidence their respect to him, as to a Master and Teacher, who
must guide and instruct them; Therefore does she make use of this warm
compellation, Rabboni, which is to say Master, as evidencing how sad it was to
her to be left Masterlesse, and how sweet it was to get a Master and Teacher
again.

Ver. 17. Jesus says unto her, touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my
Father, but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and
your Father, and to my God, and your God.
The fifth particular in this Narration, is, Christ's direction and commission
to Mary, now when she knows him. It does appear that she was about to touch
and embrace Christ, but he prohibits her, and sends her with a commission to
acquaint his disciples with his begun exaltation; and that having now risen
from the dead, he was to ascend unto the Father, for their comfort, and the
further clearing of their interest in God through him. As for this prohibition
to touch him; The reason subjoyned, and the matter given her in commission to
the disciples concerning his ascension, may seem to import a reproof of her
carnal disposition, who doated on his bodily presence, and delighted to be
touching him; and to teach her, that (now he being risen from the dead) he
would not be trysted with, nor enjoyed in a carnal corporal manner, as
formerly, but she is to expect and wait till his ascension, and then she and
the rest might tryst with him and touch him, not bodily, but spiritually and by
faith. And it is indeed true, That even the most affectionate Saints may be
exceeding carnal in their way of, and desires after, enjoying of Christ, and,
That, Christ being now exalted, it requires much spiritual converse with him,
and that we do not expect a carnal or bodily presence: It being the woeful fruit
of carnal dispositions, that because men cannot ascend up to Christ by faith,
therefore they fancy a carnal and bodily presence of Christ on earth with them.
Yet I take not this as the only, nor chief scope of this speech; for, however,
after Christ's ascension, it is the gross mistake of men to fancy or dote upon
his bodily presence (as that interpretation bears well, agreeably to the
Scriptures.) And it was Mary's fault, if she looked on this as the highest
degree of his exaltation, and did not expect that he was to ascend into heaven,
but to stay among them, as formerly: Yet we find that many were admitted to
touch him, in expression of their affection, and for confirmation of their own
faith, Matthew. 28.9. and Christ invites them to it, Luke 24 39. And Thomas is
reprehended, not simply for desiring of this, but, because he would not
otherwise believe. Therefore I take up Christ's scope to be, as in part, to put
her in mind that he was to ascend, and therefore she was not to feed her self
with any expectation of his bodily presence to be continued with them, as
formerly; So chiefly to excite her to make have with the good news to his
disciples, seeing there was yet time enough before his ascension, wherein she
might converse with him and touch him, so far as was needful for the
confirmation of her faith. Doctrine, 1. Seldom do affectionate souls met with
Christ, but they fall into some miscarriage, and do need caution or reproof;
for, Mary needs this prohibition, Touch me not, being ready to miscarry through
her carnal disposition running in affections channel, or through selfishnesse,
and forgetting the needy disciples. 2. Whatever Christ withold from any of
his, in their doing service to him, he knows how to make it up, in so far as is
for their good; for, so much does this reason import, for I am not yet ascended
to my Father, and therefore Mary may get time enough, after this service is
over, to satisfy her self with touching of him. 3. It is the will of Christ,
that such as have any good news of Christ, do publish it in their station, to
the edification of others, especially of these who are in distress and sorrow;
And that they do not selfishly please themselves only; for, says he, touch me
not, which might satisfy thy self; but go to my brethren, etc. who are in
deep sorrow, and know not so much as thou do. 4. Whatever we may think of our
conditions, yet in Christ's account, it is more acceptable to be about service
for Christ, and doing good to others in our station and generation, then to be
enjoying and reaping our own particular content and satisfaction; for, Christ
propounds it as better to Mary to be the messenger of these good news, then to
stay with him satisfying her own senses. 5. Christ's glory and exaltation does
not diminish his affections toward his people, but rather the expressions
thereof are enlarged: Therefore, after his resurrection, his thoughts run
earnestly upon the sorrow of the disciples, to have it eased, and that under
the name of Brethren ( go unto my brethren, and say unto them, etc.) whereas
before, servants, little children, and friends, were their usual designations.
Yea, Peter, the fallen man, is not forgotten by name, Mark 16.7. 6. Christ's
most satisfactory manifestations within time, are not fitted to our carnal
desires and dispositions, but are usefully seasoned with such a degree of
distance, as may disappoint these, and teach us to be more spiritual, and may
train us on to long after the full enjoyment of him in heaven; Therefore does
Christ, both in his speech to Mary, and in his commission to the disciples, put
them in mind of his ascending to the Father, that their carnal hearts might
not look on his resurrection as the highest pitch of his glory, and so dream
that there was no more to do, but enjoy him as formerly; But that they might be
prepared shortly to want his bodily presence, that so they may seek to enjoy
him by faith. 7. Christ does very far exceed the weak desires of his people, in
affording them ground of comfort; for, whereas she and the disciples would even
now have been content of a dead Christ, much more of a Christ living and risen
again, Christ allows them greater news of a Christ glorified in heaven, I
ascend, etc. 8. Whatever carnal hearts do think of a bodily presence of Christ;
yet his removal and exaltation in heaven is believers great advantage, and the
ground of their comfort; As proving their surety to stand in right terms with
the Father, after he has had the price to Justice; That it is his Father and
God with whom he is to deal on their behalf; and, That he being thus exalted,
is able to do for them, and save them to the u^most, Heb. 7.25. for, however
the disciples doated on his bod^^y p^esence, yet he sends these as good news,
I ascend, and that, to my Father and to my God, and so he is accepted having
satisfied justice, and stands on good terms of acceptance, because of these
relations. 9. Christ's exaltation, and interest in the Father, as Mediator, is
also comfortable unto believers in this e^pect, that they share with him in his
interests, and what he is, he makes them to be through him, in their own
proportion and measure; for, so are the news sent, I ascend to my Father and
to your Father, and to my God and your God. He is his Father and God in a
peculiar way, and ours through him, and because he is so to him. 10. God has
dignified believers with that near and warm relation of his being a Father to
them in his Son; So that, as they ought to carry themselves as children to him,
by subjection, Heb. 12.7, 9. and obedience, Mal. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.14.15. So, they
may expect that in all his ^e^ling, he will retain a fatherly affection toward
them, will allow them humble confidence in prayer, Gal. 4.6. will spare and
pity them, Mal 3.17. Psalm. 103.13. will provide for them, Mat. 6.25, 32. will
protect and preserve them, 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. and, will give them a King. ^^e, Luke
12.32. as being Sons and joint Sons with Christ, and so joint heirs with him,
Romans 8.17. and being begotten to that hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Therefore is this
held out for their encouragement, that God is my Father and your Father; And
this is premitted to the other, because of the warmness of the relation, and
that we may look upon his Godhead through this perspective. 11. He who is the
Father of believers, is true God also, and does gift himself unto them in that
relation of being their God through his Son; That as they should make him their
God indeed, and depend upon him only; so they may expect all the fullness that
is in God to be theirs, as they need it; Therefore also is it added, my God and
your God; A privilege and interest, whereof all the particular promises are
but a Commentary, and which contains in it more then we can ask or think, or
conceive, Ephesians. 3.20. 1 Cor. 2.9. and more then every believer can see at first,
as Christ instanceth in the matter of the resurrection, Matthew. 22.31, 32.

Verse 18. Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the
Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.
The last particular in this Narration, is, Mary's obedience to this command of
Christ. W^ence learn, 1. Obedience unto Christ's command will be sweet, and
readily gone about by affectionate Saints; And will be preferred to their own
particular satisfaction, when they are in a right frame; for, whatever Mary
thought of Christ's company, yet at his command, she came and told the Disciples
that she had seen the Lord. 2. Whatever Saints do meet with in and from Christ;
yet his Word and speeches are not to be neglected, as being most sure, and of
constant use; Therefore she tells in particular, that he had spoken these things
unto her.

Ver. 19. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when
the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews,
came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you.
Follows unto v. 24. Christ's appearing unto all his Disciples, except Thomas,
as is clear from v 24. etc. In this Narration we have recorded, the time and
way of his appearing and his scope in it. The time of it was that same day on
which he arose, and that in the evening, when the disciples were met together,
and conferring upon what evidences they had formerly received of his
resurrection, as may be gathered from Luke 24.33, 34, 35. with 36 and the
manner of his appearing was, that when they are thus closely met, and had shut
the doors for fear of the Jews, he, on a sudden appears in the midst of
them. Which is not to be understood, as if he had come in through the door by
penetrating thereof, and yet his body and the door retaining still their true
quantities and dimensions; nor yet as if his body were invisibly every where,
and did but become visible when and where he pleased: for Christ does often
argue the truth of his resurrection from his having the properties of a true
body, amongst which properties the having of dimensions and extended quantity,
and being circumscribed in one place at one time, are not the least
considerable, but most essentially requisite to a body; And it expressly said,
He came and stood in the midst, and consequently, he was not there before.
Beside, it is here marked, that the doors were shut, not to point out his
miraculous coming through the door, but the time when he came, that it was
unexpected by them. And it is to be conceived, that he did insensibly, as to
them, open the doors, and so came in, and after that shut them, rather then
that he came through the door: For so we find the Lord has done in other
cases, Acts 5 19. and 12.10. His scope in appearing, is, partly, to confirm
them in the faith of the resurrection, v. -- 19, 20. and partly, to renew and
confirm their calling to the Ministry, v. 21, 22, 23. for assuring them of the
truth of his resurrection, he gives two evidences that it was he who appeared
to them: whereof the first (in this verse) is his usual salutation and
allowance of peace unto them. Whence learn, 1. Christ by his appearing that
same day at evening, being the first day of the week, did not only begin to
honor and sanctify that day, by his appearing and presence, which he had
appointed for the Christian Sabbath; But does further teach us, That he is not
slack concerning his promise, but his love will come and will not tarry, and he
will rather prevent then prorogate his terms: And by this rule are we to
correct our thoughts concerning his dealing; for, albeit he had set the tryst
after his resurrection, to be in Galilee, Matthew. 26.32. and the Angels had
repeated the same to the women, Mark. 16.7. yet his love will not stay so long,
but he will come unto them the same day at evening. 2. It is the duty of
scattered Saints, to gather together in times of straits, and to make use of
the fellowship one of another, as conveniently they may; for, now the scattered
Disciples were assembled, and conferring one with another, and communicating
what light any of them had received, as has been cleared. See Mal. 3.16. Acts
1.14. 3. It has been no strange thing in the Church, that Saints have been put
to frequent their assemblies with great fear, and have been forced to meet in
the dark-night, and with great caution, because of danger from persecutors;
for, they were met at evening, and the doors were shut, where the Disciples
were assembled for fear of the Jews. And this may teach us to bless the Lord
for our liberty. 4. The danger and hazard wherein Disciples are, will not hold
Christ from their company; And he can come, even when he is little expected,
and many impediments are in his way: for, when they are in this case, and when
the doors are shut, and they little expect him, Jesus came and stood in the
midst, which posture also points at the manner of his presence among his
people, as Matthew. 18.20. Namely, that he is very near to every one of them, and
they all round about him, and that he takes not a weak list, nor has a remote
influence upon their way and society. 5. Peace is Christ's company and allowance
to his people where he comes; And as it is he who can command and speak peace,
so he allows it upon them, whatever his dealing be, or he speak unto them
beside; for, by this he evidenced his presence, that he says unto them, peace
be unto you, which was his allowance and legacy before his suffering, Chap.
14.27. And this he allows upon them, however he upbraided them at the same
time, as it is Mark 16.14. and in opposition also to any terror they might
have, by reason of his so sudden and unexpected appearing among them.

Verse 20. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands, and his
side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.
The next (and a more clear) evidence of his resurrection, is, by showing them
his pierced hands and side, and the scars and wounds which he yet retained
after his resurrection, (though it be needless to determine, whether he keep
them to all eternity, or not.) Which does fully confirm, and affect them with
much joy. Whence learn, 1. Christ after his resurrection, had still the same
body, for substance and essential properties, which he had before his
suffering; for, by showing his hands and his side, as they had been pierced, he
makes it evident to them, that it was the same body, and consequently, that it
was truly he who appeared now to them. 2. Christ, even in his exaltation,
looks upon his sufferings for his people, as his crown and glory; Therefore did
he rise again with his pierced hands and side, (as is clear from this, compared
with v. 25, 27.) and retained these prints (at least for a time) in his state
of exaltation. 3. Christ will not forget how dearly his people (though
worthless) cost him, that so, he may see the better to his purchase; Therefore
also did he retain the print of these wounds (at least for a time) in his begun
exaltation. 4. It is the Churches great comfort, not simply that Christ is
alive, but that he had been dead, and was now alive, having overcome all their
enemies; for, this also may be gathered from his showing them his hands and
side, whe^eby he would point out unto them, that he was returned unto them a
Conqueror over death and all his sufferings. See Rev. 1.8. 5. Whatever sight
believers get of Christ, yet it is still needful to look upon him as pierced by
their sins, that this may season their other exercise with useful tenderness
and sorrow; for, this fu^^^^e may be pointed at in his showing them his hands
and side, that he would keep them in mind, even in his exaltation, how he had
been pierced for their sakes. 6. Christ is the most joyful sight to Disciples,
of any that ever they see; And whatever their condition be, yet a sight of him
will make them glad, especially after they have had sad apprehensions about the
want of him: for, of this sad company it is said, Then were the Disciples glad
when they saw the Lord.

Ver. 21. Then said Jesus to them again; Peace be unto you? As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you.
The second part of Christ's scope and errand in appearing, is, to confirm and
renew their calling to the Apostleship and work of the Ministry, who had just
cause to be much shaken with the remembrance of their faint-heartednesse in his
late sufferings. It contains three particulars; In the first whereof, (in
this verse) after a preface, wherein he renews his allowance of peace unto
them, He does in general commissionate and send them to the work of the
Ministry, as the Father sent him. Whence learn, 1. Disciples are so often
essayed and opposed in their enjoying of Christ's allowed peace, that they need
to have the sense thereof, and their right thereunto, often renewed and
repeated unto them by Christ; Therefore he said unto them again, (after that v.
19.) peace be unto you. 2. The sum of the employment of the Ministers of the
Gospel, is peace, as being sent to publish the glad tidings of the Gospel of
peace, and the scope of their work being to bring people to enjoy sound and
solid peace in the due order: Therefore also does he say, Peace be unto you, in
reference to their Commission and emploiment. 3. Preachers of the Gospel of
peace have much need of Christ's peace, both to support them under the
tribulation they will meet with, in discharge of their trust, and to enable
them experimentally to preach that peace unto others; Therefore, further does
he say, Peace be unto you, to qualify and encourage them for this work, and
that they, having received this peace, might be fit preachers of it. 4. It
pleased the Father to send his own Son into the world, clothed with a
Commission, that hereby he might give a proof of his great love unto lost man;
for, my Father has sent me, says he. 5. Christ did not leave his Church
destitute when his own Ministry was ended, but has substituted a Ministry in
his Name, till the end of the world; for, says he, I send you, which was true
of them and their successors to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20. 6.
Ministers are of Christ's sending and employing by his sovereign authority, as
his Courts and Ministers, do, ministerially in his Name, send them out; they
must not run unsent; they who want them, and would have them blessed to them,
should seek them of him; They who are lawfully called are to act in his Name
and Authority, which is to be acknowledged by people in their discharge of
their trust; and such messengers are to be looked on as a great and special
gift bestowed on the Church by her exalted Lord. All this is imported in this,
I send you, now when he is risen from the dead, in his begun exaltation. See
Ephesians. 4.8. -- 11. 7. This proportion and comparison institute betwixt Christ's
sending and theirs, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you, is not to be
understood universally, as to all the works and ends for which Christ was sent,
for he was sent to satisfy divine justice, and to do the work of Redemption,
which they were not: But it is to be understood of the work of the Ministry and
preaching of the Gospel. Nor yet is there an equality to be urged here, but the
proportion and distance is still to be observed and kept betwixt the Lord and
his servants, and the Bridegroom and his friends. Nor is the resemblance only
in this, that as Christ was immediately sent by the Father, so were they (as
Apostles) immediately sent by him. But Christ's being sent by his Father, and
their being sent by him, do agree, 1. In the strictness of the Commission,
that as Christ did always the Will of the Father, so they must not dispense
with what is committed to their trust, nor be the servants of men. 2. They
agree in having the same promise of success and blessing in their labors, as
the Apostles richly found. 3. They do agree in the matter of their authority,
so far as, however he be the Lord, and they servants, yet they come clothed
with the same authority, being in Christ's stead to the people of God, 2 Cor.
5.20. and Christ, and God in Christ, being despised in the affronts put upon
them in the exercise of their Ministry, Matthew. 10.42.

Verse 22. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost.
In the next place, Christ who sends them, does also furnish them with the
gifts of the Spirit for that office; some fruits whereof, before that full
measure was let out upon them, Acts 2. does appear in what is recorded of them,
Acts 1.15, etc. Whence, learn, 1. Where Christ does employ and send out any
about his work, their call from him, (being embraced and followed in obedience
thereunto, and with dependence upon him, who has sent them) does assure them
of furniture for their calling also; for, they are conjoined here, I send you,
v. 21. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, etc. 2. The furniture of
Ministers for discharge of their calling, must be the Spirit of God communicate
unto them by Christ, in his gifts and qualifications suitable and requisite to
their work, and who must be daily sought for quickening and keeping fresh that
furniture which flows from him, and for making the exercise of these gifts
effectual; for, it is the Holy Ghost, who furnishes the Apostles in their
measure and station, and so also other Ministers. They were indeed
extraordinarily gifted without any previous study, and acquired abilities; and
other Ministers, albeit they ought to make conscience of ordinary means for
enabling them to that work, 1 Timothy 4.13. yet it is from the Spirit of God, that
they must be gifted with the Spirit of that emploiment, and with common and
ordinary gifts for it, and it is he who must accompany them in that work, and
make it lively and effectual. 3. The Holy Ghost comes upon every Professor,
and particularly Ministers, by free donation and gift from Christ; He is the
acquiter of that furniture unto them, and their great work is to receive it of
his liberality; for, says he, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. 4. This breathing on
them, when he communicate this furniture, being an extraordinary sign of his
communicating this extraordinary furniture, it is therefore not to be imitate
by any in ordinary, who have not the dispensing of these endowments. Only,
Christ's making use thereof, may serve, partly, to point out some resemblance
betwixt this sign of breathing, and the inspirations and refreshful breathings
of this Spirit upon them, and their gifts who receive it; and as the Spirits
descending at the sign of fiery cloven tongues, Acts 2.3. served to point out
their being furnished to speak diverse languages; so his being communicate by
the sign of breathing, holds out, that where he comes, he quickens and puts
life in men's spirits, (as by Gods breathing, the first man was made a living
soul, Genesis 2.7.) and does refresh and make them fruitful, as Caut. 4.16.
partly, it serves to point out Christ's Godhead, who has the gifting of the
Spirit in his hand, and who can easily, as by a breathing, furnish the most
rude and unlearned, and make them extraordinarily able; according as the soul
of the first man was easily created.

Verse 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained.
In the last place, Christ asserts their authority in the discharge of their
Commission, and in governing his house, and remitting or retaining of sins,
whether by the Key of knowledge or doctrine, in preaching; or of order and
discipline; and he declares, that what they act this way ministerially,
according to their Commission, is ratified in heaven, as being but the
declaration and intimation of the sentence already passed there. This power is
elsewhere called the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 16.19. and the
power of binding and ^loosing, Matthew. 18.18. Doct. 1. Christ's house is not a
den of confusion, but an house of order, wherein he has a Camp of doctrine,
whereby he does doctrinally declare his mind concerning his subjects, and
their duty, and a rod of discipline, whereby he judicially deals with them as
their case requires; for, so is here imported, that there is a power of
remitting and retaining sins, both doctrinally and by judicial procedure. 2.
This power in the house of God, is committed to Christ's own Officers and
Ministers sent by him unto his Church; so that, however private persons may
declare the mind of God concerning the sin of others; yea, and reprove, exhort
or comfort out of charity; yet his Ministers are to do it by office, and with
authority; for, it is, ye (whom I send, v. 21.) who are to remit and retain
sins. 3. This power in the house of God is committed equally and in common to
all Ministers; so that one does not share in it more then another; for, here it
is given to the apostles in common, whose soever sins ye remit, etc. And thus
the Keys of the Kingdom are not given to Peter only, but here expressly to
all. 4. All the members of the Church are subject to the order established by
Christ in his house, and none ought to free themselves from his yoke; all are
bound to submit to his doctrine in the mouths of his servants, and all also are
under his rod of Government; for, their authority is universal, over whosoever
need the exercise thereof. 5. The exercise of this Ministerial Authority over
Church Members, is committed unto Christ's servants, not in reference to the
good which is in any crush it, but in reference to their sin, to deal with them
because of it, according as their condition requires; Their power in doctrine
is exercised about all sin, as sin, were it never so secret and inward, and
their power in discipline, about sin only as it is scandalous and infectious;
for, their power here is about sins, and over persons because of this. 6. The
exercise of Ministerial Authority about the sins of Church Members, consists in
the remitting and retaining thereof, according to the due Order and Rules of
the Word; And particularly, that such as are penitent, and feel the bonds of
their sin, they do declaratively, and by Authority from Christ, absolve and
lose them, and do also take off any censure judicially inflicted for their
scandalous behavior; And such as are impenitent, that they do by doctrine in
Christ's Name, declare their sins not to be remitted, but bound upon them, and
that as need requires, they do by a judicial sentence tie them straiter, that
so they may feel the bonds, and seek to be loosed; for, so is held out here,
that they are ministerially to remit and retain sins. 7. This exercise of
Ministerial Authority, however carnal hearts may contemn and slight it, either
in doctrine or discipline; yet being gone about according to the Rules of the
Word, it is so effectual, as it is ratified in heaven, and the penitent or
obstinate sinner will find Gods mind toward them, to be according as is
declared in his Name on earth; for, upon these terms is their authority
asserted, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained. See Matthew. 18.18, 20. And this may be
matter of terror to the obstinate, and of encouragement to the penitent, who
are meet objects of the comfortable exercise of ministerial authority.

Verse 24. But Thomas one of the twelve called Dydimus, was not with them when
Jesus came.

25. The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord, But he
said unto them, Except I shall see in his hand the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe.


Follows unto v. 30 Christ's appearing to all the Disciples, when Thomas was
with them, occasioned chiefly, (as is clear from the sequel) by Thomas his
diffidence. The Narration of this appearing may be taken up in five
particulars. The first whereof (in these verses) is, the occasion of his
appearing at this time; and this is either more remote, That Thomas (of whom we
have already heard, chap. 11.16. and 14.5.) was not with them at their last
meeting with Christ, being not as yet returned from his lurking place, v. 24.
O^ more near, That when the rest of the disciples acquaint him, (either having
sought him out, or he coming unto them) that they had seen the Lord, he
wilfully professes he will not believe, unless he get the sensible
satisfaction prescribed by himself, v. 25. for clearing whereof we are to
consider, that it was not his sin simply that he desired a sight of Christ; nor
yet that he sought that evidence of his pierced, hands and of the hole of his
side (which it appears was now known to all the disciples, though John only
record that he saw it, chap. 19 34, 35.) seeing that was the same evidence
which Christ himself had given, v. 20. and his desire of this did evidence his
affection unto a crucified Christ: But it was his fault, not to believe the
truth of Christ's Resurrection, till he not only saw this, but thrust his hand
also into his side, for further satisfaction. Neither was it his sin, that
simply he would not hearken to their report, as men, in this matter, seeing
that is no sure ground of faith: But it was his sin, that he did not believe
the Scriptures, which spoke of Christ's Resurrection, and so did not believe
them as Gods witnesses, unless he got sensible satisfaction. Doct. 1. They may
be truly gracious, who yet are very timorous in a trial, and will not recover
from their fears so soon as others; for, Thomas, a godly man, was not with
them, nor had returned to the society as yet, when the rest had recollected
themselves, 2. Negligence in frequenting the society and Assemblies of the
people of God, casts men far behind, and prejudgeth them much; for, But Thomas
one of the twelve, called Didymus, (of the signification whereof, see on chap.
11.16.) was not with them when Jesus came, and so he was deprived not only of
the good news which Mary and others brought them, but of that comfortable
sight of him also, which they got, and he is left in many snares and doubtings,
from which they are delivered. 3. Disciples ought to be communicative in their
station, of what they have received; and when their hearts are refreshed with a
sweet sight of Christ, they cannot but make it known, as they have a calling
and opportunity; for, The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen
the Lord, which no doubt they told with all the circumstances of it, whereof
this was the sum, and that which most affected them, and sluck with them. 4.
Christ should be very great in his disciples estimation, and their respects to
him should be upon the growing hand; for, now he is still the Lord, v. 2. 13,
18, 20, 28 and chapter 21. 7, 12, 15, 16, etc. which was a style more rarely given
him before. 5. Unbelief is strangely rooted in the hearts of all men, yea, even
of godly men and disciples: so that they may frequently fall into that sin, and
be very pertinacious in it; for, so much does Thomas his example teach us, I
will not believe, says he. 6. Our carnal hearts know no way, not will admit of
any cure of unbelief, unless they get all the objects of says under the view
of their senses; for, so is it with Thomas here, he will see, and lest his
sight should be deluded, he will touch also, and thrust his hand into his side.
7. It is the great sin and weakness of men, when they do not believe, unless
they get satisfaction to their senses, seeing faith is the evidence of things
not seen, Heb. 11.1. But it is yet a greater sin, and an height of presumption,
to be wilful in unbelief, and to be so bold as to say they will not believe,
upon grounds revealed and afforded by him, unless they get their will; which
is a limiting of the Holy One of Israel; for, this was Thomas his fault, Except
I shall see, etc. I will not believe.

Verse 26. And after eight days, again his Disciples were within, and Thomas
with them: Then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, Peace be unto you.
The second particular in this Narration is, Christ's appearing to them again
after a week, when Thomas is met with them, and that after the former manner,
and with the former salutation. Whence learn, 1. This appearing of Christ among
them is said to be, after eight days, not eight days after Thomas his
professed unbelief, (though it is like the disciples had told him the good
news speedily) but after his former appearing, v. 19. and upon the first day
of the next week. And he did then appear unto them, not only because it was
their usual meeting-day, or to try the faith of the rest, by Thomas his
continuing in doubting and unbelief. But chiefly, to teach us, That however the
Lord will help and cure the unbelief of his own, yet when they are wilful and
peremptory in it, it is righteous with him, to let them lie under it for a
time, till they feel the evil and bitterness of it, and till they see their
deserving to be given up to it, that so they may magnify his mercy who comes
over it; Therefore does Thomas meet with this correction, that he sees not
Christ till after eight days, and so had a sad week of it. 2. The people of
God ought not to forsake their mutual societies and assembling of themselves
together, but they should continue therein, as they expect the renewed presence
of Christ with them; for, it is, when again his disciples were within, that
Jesus came, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst. 3. Whatever be the
failings or unbelief of Saints: yet it is commendable in them to be amending
their other known faults and neglects: And there is still hope of their case,
so long as they use the means whereby they may be cured of their unbelief, and
do not, with their unbelief, quit the use of means also; for, it is here
marked, that in this meeting, Thomas was with them, though yet doubting:
wherein appears, that being sensible of his former loss, he keeps the society
and meetings of the disciples, to see what clearing he might find; And so not
only amended his former fault, (which yet is most rare to see) but waits on in
the use of appointed means. 4. It is the duty of Christ's followers, not to lose
or cast off any, though weak and unbelieving, so long as they can get them
along with them in any duty, and so long as there is any hope of their
amendment, and being reclaimed; for, so it was commendable on the disciples
part, that Thomas was with them, and they had not cast him off. Where this
condescendence is wanting, many may be lost who otherwise would be recovered.
5. Christ will not be wanting to come over the infirmities of his own to do
them good; and he can make good use of their worst things, and is so willing to
manifest himself, that he will let no opportunity of it slip; for, he makes
use, even of Thomas doubting, as an occasion of appearing over again, as is
clear from the whole tenor of this Narration, both what precedes, and what
follows. 6. Christ is not changeable in his love and allowance of peace to
his people, but is yesterday, and to day, the same for ever; Therefore, over
again does he repeat his salutation, and said, Peace be unto you.

Verse 27. Then said he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing.
The third particular in this Narration is, his dealing with Thomas, indirectly
reproving him for his faithlesnesse, and offering unto him the satisfaction he
desired, to cure this evil. Whence learn, 1. Christ perfectly knows, and is
acquainted with the cases and distempers of his people, and can tell them what
aileth them, albeit they do not tell him; for, his discourse with Thomas
intimates, that without any information, he knew Thomas doubtings and
unbelief. 2. Albeit Christ's followers do provoke him by their unbelief, yet he
will not quit them, but will deal with them so much the more beyond others, as
their need and weakness is greater: Therefore, when he appears here, he
deals only with Thomas, though most faulty and weak, Then says he to Thomas,
etc. 3. Christ has a great quarrel at unbelief in his people, (either when
they do not believe and ponder the truth of what he reveals, or, make not due
application thereof to themselves) as being exceeding injurious to him, and
obscuring his glory, and as obstructing their own good; for, this Christ
reproves, and would have amended in Thomas, be not faithless, but believing.
4. Such as have publicly sinned to the offending of others, should be
publicly dealt with, to take with and amend their fault; That so their
recovery may strengthen those whom their failings were ready to weaken:
Therefore does Christ deal with, and seek to reclaim Thomas, in presence of all
the disciples, to whom he had professed his wilful unbelief. 5. Christ's
offering this satisfaction to Thomas, prescribed by himself, is not a warrant
to every unbeliever and tempter of him, to seek and expect this or the like
signs of their own prescribing, for helping of their faith, For Christ's
reproof, insinuate with his offer, and expressed after Thomas confession, v.
29. does point it out as a sin, and should teach all believers their duty, that
they be warned by his example to be humbled that any such presumption should
enter their hearts, and to reject the first motions of it. And indeed, such
signs not being promised by God, it is a limiting of him, and an high
presumption, to prescribe them unto him; and it speaks their proud despising
and contemning of the means appointed by God, so to do; And whatever effect
this offer had upon Thomas, yet there is no promise that any of these signs
prescribed should work faith, when we believe not the Word, Luke 16.29, 30, 31.
and therefore it were to no purpose to grant them. Yet this procedure with
Thomas may teach us, 1. Unbelief is so hateful to Christ in his people, and he
is so sensible of the prejudice they sustain thereby, that he is very careful
and earnest to have it removed and cured; for, so much does his offering him,
even his will, to amend his fault, teach us. 2. Christ is very condescending to
his people in their infirmities, and does oft-times yield very much to their
weakness and peevishness, which yet it is their fault to seek, and of others
to imitate them in it; for, so much also does this instance of his
condescendence to Thomas, teach us. 3. Christ may deny that to a believer,
which he will grant to a weak believer; and yet the believer is more approven,
though kept at distance, then the unbeleever who is so dealt with; for,
believing Mary gets not so much as leave to touch him, v. 17. when unbelieving
Thomas gets an offer both to see and touch, but with a check. 4. Unbelievers
can limit Christ to no proof of his love, which implies not a contradiction,
but, if he saw it fitting, he could give it; so that it is not for want of
power, that such tempters are not satisfied, but because he will not learn
them to slight his Word, on which they ought to build; for, here, by offering
unto Thomas all he desired, he gives proof how easy it were for him, to
satisfy the like unreasonable desires.

Verse 28. And Thomas answered, and said unto him, My Lord, and my God.
The fourth particular in this Narration, is, the use which Thomas makes of
this offer. It seems he did not presume to touch Christ, or thrust his hand
into his side, but contented himself with seeing Christ, v. 29. as abhorring
his own folly in so prescribing. But, upon what he saw, and upon the
consideration of Christ's condescendence and his weakness, he gives a fair
confession concerning Christ's Deity, and closes with him. Whence learn, 1.
Great mountains of unbelief, which seem insuperable unto Saints, will easily
flow down and evanish at Christ's presence; for, Thomas his wilfulness is now
cured without making use (as appears) of all that he required. 2. It is the
duty of such as have offended others by their failings, to be eminent and
exemplary in their recovering of themselves; And God may, oft-times, make the
last to be first, in their out-stripping others who were before them; for, here
Thomas who had miscarried so far, gives a fairer confession then any of the
rest had done. 3. When Christ is well seen, and the way of his Resurrection,
and his condescendence to his people are well considered, he will be undeniably
seen to be God; for, Thomas, now persuaded of his Resurrection, and considering
his dealing with him, cries out that he is God, seeing no man could rise so as
he did, but he who is God also, which his tender kindness to himself did
further confirm. 4. Christ being looked upon in his glory, and as God, it may
and should allure hearts to close with and embrace him: and they who indeed
consider him to be such a one, cannot but claim to an interest in him:
Therefore Thomas calls him my God. 5. Such as find the sweetness of an
interest in Christ as their God, it will persuade their hearts to allow unto
him a dominion and Lordship over them, to guide and dispose of them at his
pleasure; for, Thomas here conjoyneth these, My Lord, and my God.

Verse 29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.
The last particular in this Narration, is, Christ's reproving of Thomas, now
when he is recovered; wherein he extenuates his believing now, and not till
now, and commends and blesses all these who shall believe, though they see
not. As all they do, who embrace and close with Christ crucified and risen
again, as he is held out in the Gospel, as all these also who believed before
his Incarnation, though they were not eyewitnesses thereof. Doct. 1. Though
Christ be tender and condescending to cure the unbelief of his people, and
though they may recover out of their fits, and give a fair Profession of their
faith; yet he would not have them forgetting the evil of their unbelief, to
reprove and judge themselves for it; Therefore, now when Thomas is believing,
yet he will rebuke him for his weakness. 1. Christ is a skilful and tender
Physician, who allows not, nor intends that we should be put away, or our faith
weakened, by his reproofs; Therefore, he will not reprove, except in an indirect
way, v. 27. till first he believe and be strengthened. 3. To suspend our
believing upon our sight is reproof-worthy, and in some sort extenuates that
faith, in Christ's account: And such as get satisfaction to their sense to cure
their unbelief, ought yet to consider that Christ has a quarrel at them,
whereof they ought to be sensible and humbled for it; Therefore, says Christ,
by way of extenuation, Thomas, because thou have seen me thou have believed.
Where he does not condemn the rest of the disciples, who both believed and saw,
but only his suspending his faith on his seeing. 4. It is a great blessedness
and mercy to believe and get faith, as putting them who get it, in a blessed
and sweet estate of calmnesse and assurance, and furnishing them with a shield,
whereby to ward off many fiery darts, and being a pledge and forerunner of
sweet manifestations and performances from the Lord; for, blessed are they that
have believed. See Luke 1.45. And this holds true of all believers, even of
Thomas his own faith, though some share more in it then others. 5. The less
sensible evidence there be of the object of faith, (provided it be revealed in
the Word) there is the greater blessedness in believing thereof; and such
faith will be the more excellent and commendable in Christ's sight, as
participating more of the nature of faith, and giving more glory to him; for,
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. See Romans 4.19, 20.
Matthew. 15.22. -- 28. 1 Pet 1.8.

Verse 30. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book.

31. But these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the
Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his Name.


In the last part of this Chapter, John being about to close this Evangel, and
many other things coming into his mind which Christ had done after his
Resurrection, he (so to say) draws pen from paper, confessing there were many
such like, which he was not directed to write, (not only because some of them
were recorded by the rest, but) in regard what he had written, was sufficient
to faith and salvation, and to clear what Christ was, and confirm that
salvation is to be had through faith in him. For clearing of this purpose,
Consider, 1. That these things which John confesses to have omitted here, are
particularly such things as were done by Christ after his Resurrection; for,
these were done in the presence of his disciples, whereas these things he did
before his death, were done generally before all; Though it be also true of
these his other acts, that they were not all recorded by him nor by the rest,
chap. 21.25. 2. What John propounds v. 31. as his end in writing these things,
is indeed the scope of all this History of the Gospel written by him, and so
does relate to all he has formerly written. But it does particularly relate to
these signs formerly mentioned, which in their own kind, and in the way of
miracles influence, were sufficient, (without adding any more) to confirm the
doctrine all along delivered, concerning the person of the Messiah, and the way
of obtaining salvation through him. 3. John does omit the writing of these
signs, and tells of it, not to give occasion of slandering the Scriptures as
imperfect, nor to curious men to enquire after them, and obtrude them upon the
Church. For what he omits, is not points of doctrine, but only particular
signs of the same nature and kind with these recorded; and what he records,
is sufficient to salvation, in so far as miracles are props to faith, as he
clears, v. 31. Beside, How shall any know infallibly that the miracles they
allege to be Christ's, are truly such, seeing the Word does not point them out
particularly? And if any think Scripture is imperfect, because it has not all
these signs, how can they assert they have indeed marked all, seeing they are
many and innumerable, chap, 21.25. and so, by their own principles, the Church
shall be at a loss still. 4. Albeit these recorded by John, be sufficient for
the ends recorded by him, yet we are not to think that Christ's doing of these
he omitted, was useless, though it was not needful he should write them; for
not only was it necessary for the time, that they should be multiplied, to
confirm the doubting disciples in the faith of his Resurrection, but it is
needful for us to know he did so many, though we know not in particular what
they were. Doct. 1. It speaks out Christ's great praise and glory, that beside
the many glorious acts recorded to be done by him, particularly after his
Resurrection, we may be persuaded that he did many more, and that he is one,
whose glorious acts it were an endless task to publish; for, this end, and
that we may have high thoughts of Christ does John record, that, many other
signs truly did Jesus in presence of his disciples, which are not written in
this book. And this speaks his praise more, then if John had recorded many more
particulars. 2. The Lord would have his people not doting too much on signs
and miracles, which are only extraordinary and remote props of faith; but would
have them acquiescing in what he works or records of these: Therefore does John
omit the Narration of many particulars, which the disciples saw, to the Church,
in after-ages, that they might learn not to rest much on these, but to fasten
upon the Word, which is sufficiently confirmed by what is recorded. 3. The
Scriptures are not intended mainly for recording multitudes of signs and
miracles, for the satisfaction of curiosity, or which might induce idle men to
read them for recreation or putting often time. But the great scope of the
Scriptures is, to direct men how to know Christ, and save their own soul;
Therefore John does omit these signs enough, being recorded in subserviency to
the great end of the Scriptures, that ye might believe, etc. And this should be
the trial, how we read Scriptures, and how we profit thereby. 4. No
imperfection can be fastened upon Scripture, in matters of faith or necessary
to salvation, nay, nor in affording sufficient signs for confirming the
doctrine held out therein; even albeit it be clear, that particular things done
by Christ, are not recorded therein? for, John grants this, and yet asserts the
perfection of the Scriptures, But these are written, that ye might believe,
etc. See 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 5. The great scope of the Scripture is, in the first
place to direct us to know and take up Christ rightly, who is the kernel and
marrow of all the Scriptures, to whom the law and all the Prophets bear
witness, and who is the great subject of the Gospel; for, so is here held out,
These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, etc.
6. Christ is only savingly known and taken up by faith; there is no coming to
the treasures of the Scriptures, nor to study him in them, but by faith, and no
respective beside will be transparent; for, These things are written, that ye
might believe, etc. 7. The great point concerning Christ, to be known and
believed from the Scriptures, is; That Jesus the Son of Mary, is the only
promised Messiah, and anointed of the Father, He in whom all the law types and
shaddows are accomplished, and in whom the promises are Yea, and Amen: And,
That the same Jesus is also, in unity of person, the Son of God by eternal
generation, one in essence, and equal in power and glory with the Father; for,
this is the great point to b beeleeved, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God; which is a large and needful study 8. The Scriptures are also written to
point out that there is an eternal life, only worthy of the name of life, and
which otherwise, is hid from the world, 2 Timothy 1.10. And to point out how this
life may be attained; for, so is held out in the next place, as his end of
writing, that ye might have life. 9. The Scriptures do point out no way of
attaining salvation but only through faith in Christ, and that in his name, or
as he has revealed himself; And it does hold out the way and due order
wherein sinners ought to flee to him, and how they ought to abide in him, and
does promise eternal life to all who do so; for, the subject and doctrine of
the Scriptures, is, that believing ye might have life through his name. See
Acts 4.12. 10. As it is a part of our way to heaven, to be found in the faith
and knowledge of Christ; So a right knowledge of him, as he is revealed in the
Scriptures, and has confirmed and evidenced the same by his miracles, is a
special mean to excite men to seek after him, and salvation through him, and to
encourage them to rely on him for attaining of salvation; Therefore is the one
subjoyned as following on the other, that believing Jesus to be Christ the Son
of God, as the Word holds out, and he has made good by these signs, they
will seek life with him, and through him, and will be encouraged to believe,
that they shall have life through his name.

CHAP. XXI.
THis Chapter contains (beside the conclusion of the whole Book) a Narration of
a new appearing and manifestation of Christ unto seven Disciples, with what
followed thereupon. Which being summarily propounded, ver. 1. is prosecute at
large, in the rest of the Chapter. And namely; That they going a fishing, but
without success, v. 2, 3. Christ appears to them in the morning, and
conferreth with them, unknown, v. 4, 5. That he afterward makes himself known,
by a miraculous draught of fishes afforded them, v. 6, 7. -- Upon which, they
come to land to him, v -- 7, 8. where they see his preparation for their
dinner, v. 9. are led to take notice of the greatness of the miracle wrought
for them, v. 10, 11. and dine with him, exceedingly reverencing him, v. 12, 13.
(and this is marked to be the third time he had appeared to them, v. 14) And
that he conferreth with Peter particularly; Whom he restores to his former
dignity, upon the profession of his love to him, v. 15, 16, 17. and warns him
concerning his future sufferings; commanding him to follow him, v. 18, 19. And
checks his curious enquiry concerning John, v. 20, 21, 22. in a speech which
occasioned a mistake among the disciples, but causlesly, as John clears, v.
23. Who here takes occasion to close this history, asserting that he was the
penman thereof, and was persuaded of the certainty of it, v. 24. and
acknowledges that many things done by Christ, are omitted in his Narration, it
being impossible to record them all, v. 25.

Ver. 1. AFter these things, Jesus showed himself again to his disciples at the
sea of Tiberias: and on this wise showed he himself.
John, in the close of the former Chapter having showed that Christ, after his
resurrection, did many signs in presence of his Disciples which he had not
written; He does in this Chapter give a notable proof thereof, by recording
one notable appearing of Christ, wherein many signs concurred. This he
propounds generally, in this verse undertaking to describe it in its
circumstances, and mentioning the place where it was done; Namely, at and
beside some part of the Lake Genezareth, which here gets the name from the City
Tiberias, (which was built upon the side of that Lake) and is elsewhere called
the sea of Galilee, Joh. 6.1. Christ had wrought some miracles before in this
lake, and in the Towns of Galilee about it he had preached and wrought many
miracles, and now he does appear there after his resurrection (as his solemn
meeting with the Disciples was in Galilee also, Matthew. 28.16, 17.) that he may
bring to their remembrance what had past there formerly. Doct. 1. It is needful
we be much confirmed in the faith of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, as being
a truth not easily believed indeed, and being believed, is full of rich
comfort, and a sure pledge that all Christ's and his peoples sufferings, though
even unto death, will end in glory; Therefore, after these things, (and Christ's
showing himself so often in the former chapter) Jesus showed himself again,
to confirm their faith, who had yet some scruples, as may be gathered from v.
12. 2. Such as are to publish the truths of Christ unto others, ought to be
solidly persuaded of them themselves, and do need much from Christ for that
effect, that so they may publish them from a sure persuasion, 2 Cor. 4.13.
Therefore did he show himself again to the Disciples, who were, most part (if
not all) of them, to publish these glad tidings throughout the world. 3.
Christ's presence, and manifestations of himself, are not restricted to any one
place; but where ever his people are, there he will manifest himself as they
need; for, Jesus showed himself to the Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, as
well as at Jerusalem, from whence they were now returned, for reasons to be
after mentioned. 4. The particular passages and circumstances of Christ's
manifesting of himself to his people ought to be narrowly observed and taken
notice of, as being full of rich use and instruction; Therefore does John, who
was an eyewitness, undertake here to describe them, and on this wise showed
he himself.

Verse 2. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and
Nathaneel of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his
Disciples.

3. Simon Peter says unto them, I go a fishing, They say unto him, We also go
with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately, and that night
they caught nothing.


The particular Narration of this appearing and manifestation may be branched
out in these heads. 1. The antecedents thereof, v. 2, 3. 2. His appearing unto
them though unknown, and his conference with them, v. 4, 5. 3. The way how he
manifests and makes himself known unto them, v, 6, 7. -- 4. Some particular
effects and consequents of this manifestation, before his conference with
Peter, v. -- 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 5. His conference with Peter, v. 15.
-- 23.

In these verses, the antecedents of his showing himself are recorded, That
these seven Disciples being together, they do upon Peter's motion, go a fishing,
wherein they labor all night without any success. As for these seven, four of
them were called to be Apostles, and so it may be, were the two, who are not
named; As for Nathaneel, (of whom chap. 1. 45, etc.) we do not find him to be
one of them, unless under another name, (as some suppose he was called
Bartholomew) but only a Disciple and follower of Christ. And as for their
society and being together at this time, rather then others of the Apostles, we
need not curiously enquire concerning it. It is sufficient to know that these
named were contrymen of Galilee, and so may we judge of the other two, and
so they had occasion to be more frequently together, and are now met at this
time, and that, as would appear at Peter's house, who makes the motion of
following his trade. It is also to be marked, that this overture, propounded by
Peter, and embraced by the rest, of returning to their former calling, did not
proceed from their distrust and quitting of their ministerial calling, for we
are not so to conceive of them who were already endowed with the Holy Ghost in
some measure, chap. 20.22. But the true cause was, that being only designed,
not yet actually employed, nor fully endowed for that calling, till the Spirit
was more fully poured forth upon them, and these forty days after the
resurrection of Christ, being set apart for their confirmation in the faith of
his resurrection, by his frequent appearing unto them, and for their further
instruction by Christ, in the matters of the Kingdom of God, which they were
afterward to publish, Acts 1.3. And they, at this time being returned from
Jerusalem to Galilee, to keep that meeting which Christ had appointed in
Galilee, of which Matthew. 28.7, 16, 17. they did lawfully go about their
ordinary employment, till the day of the meeting came. However, Christ took
occasion of this to manifest himself. Doctrine 1. The most special and
remarkable manifestations of Christ to his people, are given them when they are
together; for, There were together, Simon Peter, etc. And albeit Peter made a
motion for himself, I go a fishing, which might have separated them, yet
providence keeps and sends them along together, till this manifestation come.
2. It is a commendable duty, in these who are made sensible of their loss by
being absent from the societies of Saints, to attend them more constantly
afterward; for, here we find Thomas constantly continuing in the company of
the rest of the Disciples. 3. Christ does not esteem of men, nor deal with
them, according as they are of note among others, providing they be honest and
Disciples indeed; for, it is marked to the commendation of two other of his
Disciples, that they were together with the rest, and Christ shows himself
to them as to the rest, though their names be not expressed, as the rests are.
4. It is the will of Christ, that his followers do not neglect their lawful
calling, (though never so base) as they may overtake it; And in going about
their lawful callings, they may expect special manifestations of Christ; for,
it is commendable in them, that they cast not off their mean calling, but Peter
says, I go a fishing, and they say unto him, we also go with thee, and they
went forth, and entered into a ship immediately. And it is while they are about
this employment, that Christ shows himself to them. 5. The children of the
Lord are subject to the same difficulties, of earning their daily bread, and of
hazard, toil and difficulties in their calling, with others; That so they may
know they are by nature of Adams stock as well as others, and may not expect
singular lots in outward things: for, his Disciples are put to earn their bread
by fishing, and they are put to work at it all night, not for fear, but because
it was the fittest season; and they work so hard, as they must strip themselves
almost naked (as appears v. 7.) through heat; And all this for their
livelihood, and oft-time with little profit, as after follows. 6. It may
please the Lord, oft-times, to deny his people success in their lawful
employments; And that either, when their hearts are too eager and keen upon the
world, he does justly cross them, to teach them mortification and sobriety:
Or, because if success were constant, God would not be so clearly seen in his
bounty, and therefore he crosses, that we may acknowledge him more; Or,
because he is to appear eminently for his people, therefore he makes way for
his appearing, by denying success upon their endeavors: As here, skilled
fishers, well acquaint with this lake, and the way of speeding in it, do that
night catch nothing. And this makes way for his after prospering of them in a
miraculous manner.

Ver. 4. But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the
Disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

5. Then Jesus says unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him,
No.


The second branch of this Narration, contains Christ's showing himself unto
them upon the shore in the morning, though they do not know him, v. 4. Together
with his conference with them before they knew him; Wherein, dealing with them
as a stranger, and one coming to buy fishes, he draws out a confession of
their bad success, v. 5. And as this his appearing, though unknown, made way
for his manifesting of himself, So this conference makes way for the miracle
whereby he discovered himself. Doct. 1. It is usual for Christ, to make use of
his peoples difficulties, as a preparation to some special manifestations of
himself; for, so find they here, that night they caught nothing, v. 3. But
when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore. 1. As for not knowing
of him, I will not determine, whether it was because of the darkness, (it
being but yet morning) together with their distance from Christ, being about
two hundred cubits, v. 8. or by reason of some extraordinary restraining of
their sight and discerning for a time: But it may teach us, that Christ is not
always discerned when he is present, and it is one mercy to enjoy his company,
and another to know indeed that it is he: for, Jesus stood on the shore: but
the disciples knew not that it was Jesus, and they after confer with him as
with a stranger. 3. When Christ is about to manifest himself for his people,
he will not only have them empty, but will have the sense of it renewed; for,
says he, Children have ye any meat? The word signifies what is eaten with
bread, as fish, flesh, etc. and here it is taken for fishes; And here, he
propounds this question not enquiring as one caring for their eating, but he
deals as a stranger coming to buy, that so he may draw out a sensible
confession of their want, to make way for the following miracle, They answered
him, no. 4. It is commendable in neighbors, or these who have occasion to
converse and traffic together, that they entertain a good correspondence, by
courteous, familiar, and discreet expressions one to another; Therefore, says
Christ, Children, have ye any meat? And he uses this compellation here, not as
one made known to them, to point out his familiar respects unto, and care of
them, as a Father has of his little children; but as the courteous and
familiar expressions of neighbors in these places.

Ver. 6. And he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the ship, and
ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for
the multitude of fishes.

7. Therefore that Disciple whom Jesus loved, says unto Peter, It is the Lord.
--


The third branch of this Narration contains the way how he came to make
himself known unto them. He, having drawn out a confession of their want and
ill success, advises them where to cast out the net, promising them success:
which they obey (not because they knew him as yet, but because they are not
willing to neglect any opportunity or counsel, or possibly because they have
supposed him to have skill) and get a great draught, v. 6. And by this he is
first discerned by John, and by him Peter is informed, v 7. -- which is not to
be understood as secluding the rest, (for they come also, v. 8.) but he speak
it in audience of all to Peter as being nearest him, or Peter is only marked to
be spoken to, because of his singular fact upon this information. Doctrine 1.
Christ our Mediator is true God, and has a providence over all the creatures;
even the fish of the sea are under his feet, and he knows where they swim,
and can command and bring them to his peoples hands, when he pleases; for, he
knows where the fishes are to be found, as having brought them (as appears)
from some other part of the lake, to the place where they so long sought and
found none. Cast the net on the right side of the ship and ye shall find. 2.
When Christ is about to do great things for his people, yet he will not have
them neglecting means and endeavors; for, though he bring the fish to their
hand, yet he will not cast them into the ship, but commands them to cast the
net. 3. These to whom the bad success of their toil is blessed, they will
become tractable thereby, and will be ready to hearken to counsel; for, the
Disciples, toiled with labor and bad success all night, do hearken to the
counsel of a supposed stranger, They cast therefore. 4. Christ suffered no
decay of his power by his sufferings and death, but is as able to work wonders,
and do for his people, as ever; for, as before he had wrought such a wonder as
this, Luke 5.5, 6. so here again, after his resurrection, and now they were not
able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. 5 Christ is not only a God near
hand, but a God a far off also, and can do as much for his people at a
distance, as when he is nearer hand them; for, Luke 5. he wrought the like
miracle when he was with them, now he works this when he is upon the shore, and
they in the ship. 6. Christ did afford this miraculous success, beyond any
thing they not only met with, but could expect in their ordinary diligence; Not
to give his people any ground of expecting constantly such allowances in
outward things; but, as to confirm by this (as by other proofs) that he is
true God, and to persuade them that his allowances and workings are liberal,
like himself; So also, to teach his people, by this and the like instances,
that he could wonderfully provide outward things for them, if it were for their
good. As here, the Disciples find, they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes. And this should teach believers to rest contented with the
ordinary allowances which their wise and all-sufficient Lord carveth out unto
them. 7. As Christ will not always keep himself as a stranger, but will be
known to his people; So he takes pleasure to make himself known unto his
people by a good turn done for them; for, at last he makes himself known, and
it is by this miraculous allowance, compared with the like miracle, Luke 5.
that John knew him. 8. Christ's working will speak for it self; and a right
discerner will know him by his working, though he should never speak one word,
to tell what he is; for, Therefore that disciple said, it is the Lord, though
he had not told so much. 9. Love to Christ and feeding on the sense of his
love, will help a Disciple to discern and know him, as soon as any; for, it is
that disciple whom Jesus loved, who first knew, it is the Lord. 10. What ever
singular excellency there be in any disciples, it flows not from any thing in
themselves, but from Christ's love to them; for, it was because he was that
disciple whom Jesus loved, that it is given him to love, and know the Lord. 11.
Such as are dignified with any ability to discern Christ, ought to be
communicative thereof, for the good of others; for, that disciple said unto
Peter, it is the Lord.

Ver. 7. -- Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his
fishers coat unto him, (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the Sea.

8. And the other disciples came in a little ship (for they were not far from
land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with fishes.


In the fourth branch of this Narration, some particular effects and
consequents following upon this manifestation of Christ, before his conference
with Peter, are recorded, to v. 14. together with John's account of the number
and order of this manifestation, v. 14. The first effect of Christ's
manifestation, is their coming to land to him, after they knew it was he,
Peter, waiting for nothing but that he come not naked, does cast himself into
the sea, to come to Christ, v. -- 7. The rest come so fast as they can, without
neglecting the benefit conferred upon them by Christ. Therefore, they make have
to come in a little ship, (which it seems stood beside the other,) seeing it
would come sooner then the greater vessel, and do drag the net with fishes
after them, v. 8. As for Peter's coming, we are not to conceive that he came
walking miraculously on the sea, for we are not to multiply miracles needlessly:
Nor yet that he could wade, seeing they were at some distance from the shore,
and the sea so deep as to carry a ship with all those men and their fishing
instruments: But that he cast himself into the Sea, to come swimming. Doctrine,
1. A sight of Christ is inviting and alluring, and will make these who know
him, come to him; As here, they all come when they know him. 2. In the Church
of Christ, and even among Disciples and Apostles, there is great variety of
tempers and dispositions and endowments; Every one has not alike perfectione
in the same degree, nor is it to be expected that all will be alike, though all
may be sincere and approved; for, here, John is most eminent in discerning
Christ, Peter is most forward in zeal, and yet all do willingly come to Christ.
3. One Disciple may outstrip another in expressions of forwardness and zeal,
who yet comes not behind him, either in knowledge or solid love; for, here
John is eminent in knowledge, and was a true lover of Christ, and yet Peter
outstrips him in this expression of affection; which flowed, partly, from his
natural disposition, and, partly, from the sense of his late fall. 4. The
shortest cut will seem far about, if a nearer could be had, to a soul filled
with zeal and desire to be at Christ; for, so did appear in Peter, who could
not stay on a ship, though he could come but little sooner by swimming. 5. Zeal
will make a man, when he sees Christ, forget and quit all, to be at him; for,
Peter waits not upon the draught of fishes, but when he heard that it was the
Lord, he girt his fishers coat to him (for he was naked) and did cast himself
into the sea. He only stayed that he might not come naked, and girt his coat to
him that it might not hinder him, nor he lose it, in swimming. 6. To swim
through deep seas (if it were of blood) to be at Christ, is a sweet way to a
zealous man, if it should bring him a moment sooner then another mean; for,
therefore did Peter willingly cast himself into the sea. 7. Affection unto
Christ does not warrant men needlessly to cast away his benefits, or neglect his
bountiful providence in outward things, providing, they omit no diligence to
come to Christ; for, so much does the practice of the rest of the Disciples
teach, who indeed came, but dragging the net with the fishes. And this their
carriage is justified both by Christ's command, v. 10. and Peter's own practice,
v. 11. and albeit both he be commendable in his way, and they in theirs, and
yet in some circumstances they are contrary to other: Yet these may be very
consistent, if we mark these particulars. 1. Christ does approve of all who
sincerely endeavor to come to him, and who lay no impediments in their own
way, nor follow their lawful employments for a by-end, albeit all be not alike
speedy and forward; for, both are approved that they come, and they also though
they come not so soon as Peter, because they make no wilf^ll delay, but take a
little ship that they might come the sooner, seeing they might hazard in it,
being not far from land, etc. And their aim in bringing the net with them, was
not so much to enrich themselves, as that they might not lose what providence
had brought unto them. 2. The sincerity, and desire of Saints to be at Christ,
is not to be measured, by what at some-time themselves or others attain unto;
for, this was an extraordinary gale of affection in Peter, not at all times
attained by himself, and therefore it does not defame them, who follow the
ordinary way of expressing affection unto Christ in such cases. 3. Some may the
more warrantably express their affection to Christ, by neglecting at some time
all other affairs, that they have others to do them for them, and so they do
not miscarry through their laying them by; for, Peter might the more safely
leave all and come to Christ, that there were others sufficient to bring the
draught to land. Otherwise it had not been commendable in him to leave them,
and it had been their sin, if all had done as Peter did. Though this also must
be added, that however men have others to do affairs for them, yet that will
not warrant them always to neglect a worldly calling, (if that be their
station) though at sometimes it may. 4. It were safe for us to conjoyne both
these practices, as pointing out our duty, in relation to several times, and to
make Peter's practice of leaving all, our rule in extraordinary cases and times,
and when we are called to forsake all: As Peter had some reason to be forward
now above the rest, because of his foul fall. And to make their practice our
rule in ordinary cases, and so to follow duty and have a care of worldly
affairs, as they do not sinfully retard us from coming unto Christ. 5. In our
ordinary walking also the conjoyning of these practices would make complete
Christians; to be like Peter in our affections, above, (as no doubt they also
were) and undervaluing these temporary things about which we must
(notwithstanding) be necessarily taken up, and being ready to abandon and
forsake them when called so to do, as he did. And to be like them in our
outward carriage, conscientiously following duty in obedience to a command.

Verse 9. As Soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals
there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.
The next consequent recorded here, is, his preparation for their dineing with
him, which they observed, when they came to land, and which it seems he did by
miracle. Whence learn, 1. Christ can afford wonders on all hands, where he is,
to his people; And it is no strange thing, where he comes, to see wonders and
mercies heaped one upon another: for, here, after a miracle at sea, they meet
another mercy miraculously provided at land: As Soon then as they were come to
land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread. 2.
Christ delights to prove and manifest his Godhead and power, in showing
kindness, and letting out needful favors upon his people; for, being to
prove his Godhead, he chooses to give a proof of it, by giving them food,
which now they needed, rather then by any other extraordinary work. 3. Christ
has a very tender respect to the meanest necessities of his people, to see to
the supply thereof; Therefore has he fish and bread ready for them, who had
been at hard labor all night. 4. Albeit Christ bind us to the use of lawful
means; Yet he has given abundant proof that he needs none of our diligence to
provide for us, but can do it without us; that so we may not cease to trust
him, when either we are debarred from the use of means, or they do not succeed
with us: Therefore, albeit he tied them to fishing, yet when they come to land,
he lets them see he can feed them without any of their provision, They saw a
fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.

Ver. 10. Jesus says unto them, bring of the fish which we have now caught.

11. Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an
hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the
net broken.


The third consequent recorded, is, the discovery of the reality and greatness
of the miracle wrought for them: Christ, before he dine with them, will have
the Disciples (who had come to him, and left net and all so soon as they got it
so near the shore, as the sea could not take it away) to bring of the fishes
they had caught, which they obeying, do find there were a great many fishes,
and yet the net not broken, as formerly it had been in the like case, Luke 5.6.
Christ's end in bidding bring of the fishes, was not chiefly for their present
eating, (seeing he had already provided for them, v. 9.) though it may be,
also, he allowed this, that their taste of the fish, as well as the sight of the
multitude thereof, might confirm and assure them it was a real miracle, and
the original Word, here rendered fish, is not against that sense. But his chief
end was to feed their minds with a sight of the greatness and reality of the
miracle, before he fed their bodies; for so much does their observation, v. 11.
point out to us. And while this going up (to wit, into the ship, that he might
come at the net) and drawing the net to land, is ascribed unto Peter only, it
is not to be understood, as if he alone did it, but he only is mentioned,
because of his forwardness to give obedience, as he had been formerly forward
to come to Christ. Doct. 1. Christ will not be wanting to give evidence how
well he approves of his peoples following of a lawful calling, and that they
have a care of their outward enjoyments, in their own place; for, here, his
command justifies them who brought the net along with them, v. 8. in that when
all have left it, as well as Peter, he bids them bring of the fish; And Peter,
by his obedience to the command, does also clear, that he accounted it no cause
of reproach, that they left it out formerly, as he did. 2. Christ is a great
esteemer of peoples diligence and using of means, and of his goodness will
ascribe all that he does for them to their diligence; that so they may be
encouraged (not to conceit of it, but) to continue in it; for, albeit he gave
them these fish by miracle, yet in regard of their casting out the net, and
dragging it to land, he ascribes it all to them, Bring of the fish, which ye
have now caught. 3. When Disciples have seen much of Christ in his working,
they need yet a more particular observation thereof, that they may see and
consider his glory more distinctly, and they may be affected of new with it,
and it may take more deep impression in their minds: Therefore, albeit they
had seen and known Christ already by this miracle, v. 6, 7. yet for these
causes will he have them bring of the fish, that they may look again, and more
distinctly and narrowly upon the miracle. 4. To be taken up with the serious
and distinct observation of Christ's working, is more useful and refreshful to
right discerners, then to enjoy his bodily presence, and then bodily
refreshment to hungry men; Therefore, now, when they are in Christ's company,
and are going to dine who (it seems) had fasted long, yet Christ sent them away
for a time, from himself, and from their meat, to go observe the miracle,
Bring of the fish, which ye have now caught. 5. True love, which draws
disciples to hasten to be at Christ, will also make them prompt and nimble in
obeying his commands; for, as Peter was eminent in his have to be at Christ; so
now he is noted as eminent in going about what is enjoined: and therefore he is
only named, Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land. 6. As affection to
Christ will elevate disciples minds above the world and the things of it; so
in their following of a calling, the chief and greatest beauty that they will
see in it, is that Christ has commanded it, and therefore they will follow it,
but with their heart above it; for, so much may we learn from this practice of
Peter, conjoined with his former practice, v. 7. In the first, he gave proof,
how far his heart was above these things, and here he gives proof how beautiful
that service is when commanded by Christ. 7. Most strict observation and
enquiry about Christ's working, will never diminish his glory, but will
contribute to set out more distinctly the greatness of his power and
liberality; for, before they only found the net full, so that they could not
draw it, v 6. now they find distinctly that it was full of great fishes, and
not of other trash, which might have fallen into the net; and particularly,
that there were an hundred and fifty and three. 8. The more distinctly men do
consider Christ's works, they will only find them the more wonderful, but they
will find a wonder in a wonder in them; for, beside the great number of fish,
it is marked as a new wonder, and for all there were so many, yet was not the
net broken, as it had been in the like case formerly, Luke 5.6. though the
Original word, being the same here and there, does evidence that it was a net
of the same kind. Only it is to be marked, that as there the greatness of the
miracle is pointed out by the breaking of the net; so here it is amplified from
this new wonder, that the net brake not; to teach us, that Christ manifests his
power, sometime one way, and sometime another, as he pleases, and that he will
not be limited by us in the way of his working.

Verse 12. Jesus says unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples
durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.

13. Jesus then comes, and takes bread, and gives them, and fish likewise.


The fourth Consequent recorded, is, his inviting them to dine, with their
going about it; betwixt which there is interlaced, the Disciples reverencing of
him, who, albeit they had yet some scruples concering all this his showing of
himself, which his speaking to them, and assuring them that it was he, would
easily have removed; Yet, being persuaded they were but groundless scruples,
and that indeed it was the Lord; they do so reverence him, as they are ashamed
to trouble him with such questions. Whence learn 1. Christ is very tender even
of the bodies of his people, and allows, (not pampering, but) that they
should have a sober and moderate care of them, as being the Tabernacles of his
own Spirit; Therefore is he the first motioner of their refreshing their
bodies, Jesus says unto them, Come and dine; and albeit he suspended their
dinner, till they had secured their purchase, and had observed their miracle,
v. 14, 11. yet now he will confer none with them, till they had dined, v. 15.
2. Albeit it be not expressly said here, that Christ did eat with them, as it
is, Luke 24.42, 43. yet it is implied in this invitation, not go, but Come and
dine; not that he needed meat now, but thereby he would confirm the truth of
his Resurrection; And, as by the former miracle, he proved himself true God; so
by this he would prove that he was true man still, and so does teach us; That
our exalted High Priest continues our Kinsman, and bone of our bone, and flesh
of our flesh, still; and that he was going in our nature to take possession for
us in heaven. 3. Albeit also it be not expressed that he blessed the meat, or
gave thanks, yet it is to be understood, as his ordinary practice, not only
before, chap. 6.11. but even since his Resurrection, Luke 24.30, 35. Only it is
clear here, that he gives it still, to teach us that our daily bread, and the
blessing thereof comes from him, and is to be sought from him continually. 4.
Weak believers will not get their doubts and scruples soon overcome, even when
they know they are wrong; for, they knew, it was the Lord, and yet they had
some doubts which would have put them to enquire, who art thou? 5. Christ is so
condescending, as to judge of his people by their better part, and to account
them knowers and believers, who yet have some ignorance and doubtings,
providing they approve not thereof; for, so does John record them, as knowing
that it was the Lord, though they had these doubts. 6. Albeit the best way to
refute and remove the meanest doubt be, to lay it before Christ; yet it is a
commendable duty, and a testimony of reverence to Christ, when these who get
many proofs of his love, are ashamed to own their unbelief, or to bring it out
as a real doubt, when it assaults them; but do either suppress it, or complain
of it as unreasonable; for, knowing that it was the Lord, none of the disciples
durst ask him, Who art thou? They are ashamed to own it as a real doubt, but do
suppress it; And indeed, however they might have complained of it, as their
weakness unto Christ, yet it had been their sin, to have given any consent or
way unto it, as this question would import they had.

Verse 14. This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his
disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.
Unto this breach of the Narration, John subjoynes a remark of the number and
order, of this appearing of Christ unto them, and that it was the third in
order, since his Resurrection, the other two being recorded, chap. 19.20, 26.
Only it is to be understood, that John is here speaking of his more public
appearings, to all or many of his disciples together. Otherwise, before this he
had appeared oftener, to Mary, to Peter, the disciples going to Emmans, and the
women. Doct. 1. Christ has abundantly proven the truth of his Resurrection,
his showing himself frequently to his disciples, being as so many witnesses
confirming the same; for, here is the third time, or witness proving this.
After which he confirmed it further, on the Mount of Galilee, Matthew. 28.18. and
at Jerusalem, in the time of his Ascension, Acts 1. 2. Christ's tender
condescendence again and again, to remove and cure his peoples unbelief, is
much and seriously to be studied and taken notice of; Therefore also is it
marked, that now the third time he showed himself to his disciples, etc. to
cure their unbelief in this matter, 3. Christ's present favors should be a mean
to bring his former mercies to remembrance, that use may be made of all
together; Therefore also does John upon this occasion, thankfully remember the
former, and record that this is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to
his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.

Verse 15 So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of
Jonas, love thou me more then these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou
know that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my lambs.

16. He says unto him again the second time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou
me? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou knowost that I love thee. He says unto
him, Feed my sheep.

17. He said unto him the third time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And
he said unto him, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.
Jesus says unto him, Feed my sheep.


In the fifth branch of this Narration, Christ's conference with Peter is
recorded, and that both concerning himself, to v. 20. and concerning John, v.
20, 21, 22, 23. That which concerns Peter himself, seems to have been his
special end in showing himself at this time, (as his general end was, to
confirm the truth of his Resurrection;) but that which concerns John, was
only occasionally drawn out by Peter's curiosity. Christ's conference concerning
Peter, consists of two parts. In the first whereof, (in these verses) Peter,
upon Profession of his love unto Christ, is restored unto, and confirmed in his
Apostolic office and former dignity, which he had forfeited by his foul and
gross fall. Christ's threefold question concerning Peter's love, tends only to
draw out a threefold answer from Peter, and that his professed repentance might
be as frequent as his denial. And consequently, we are not to look upon Christ's
threefold injunction to Peter, to feed his lambs and sheep, as three distinct
commands, enjoining diverse things, but only as one command thrice repeated,
upon occasion of his threefold answer. And therefore I shall take them together
in drawing observations from them.

And first, this whole purpose, with the dependence thereof upon what precedes,
may teach in general, 1. Apostacy and denial of Christ, though even out of
weakness in a time of strait, is a matter full of hazard, and brings disciples
to a loss not easily recovered; for, Peter, by reason of his fall, needs a
kind of restitution, and a confirmation of new in his office and dignity. And
albeit not only he had wept bitterly immediately after his fall, but Christ;
after his Resurrection, and before this time, had caused remember him in
particular, in that message to the disciples, Mark 16.7. and had appeared to
him alone, Luke 24.34. yea, and had confirmed him in his office with the rest,
when he appeared to all of them, John 20.21, 22. yet here again he is brought
publicly on a stage, to testify his repentance before them all. 2. When
Christ does put his people on service, and calls for evidences of their love to
him, he first prevents them with proofs of himself, his power, love and care
to engage them to their duty; for, this enquiry after Peter's love, and his
engaging him to service, was not till after he had given proof of himself by
the miracle, and when they had dined, and after their bodies were refreshed by
him.

Secondly, Christ's question unto Peter, and the thrice repeating, and way of
propounding it, may teach, 1. Love to Christ is the Christians badge, and he is
a Runaway who deserts that Standard; for, by this Christ tries Peter, Simon,
son of Jonas, love thou me? 2. Ministers who are called to take charge of
Christ's children and stock, had need of much love to him; no service about them
being approven, if it flow not from this, but be undertaken for by-respects;
and there being no possibility without this love, to endure the many blasts
they will meet with from without in their calling, nor the much toil they will
have, even with, and from the flock themselves; Therefore is the enquiry
concerning this premitted, love thou me? as a needful qualification for
discharge of the trust committed to him. 3. Whatever love men may warrantably
profess they have unto Christ, yet it does not allow them to swell in their
own eyes because of it, or because of any dignity conferred upon them as lovers
of Christ; And, Saints in their repenting for their failings, should look back
to the low estate from whence Christ raised them, that they may see their
ingratitude the more, in backsliding or forsaking him; Therefore does he guard
all these questions with this designation, Simon, not Peter, which was the name
he gave him, chap. 1.42, and, son of Jonas, a poor fisherman, that now he
might, in professingt his repentance and renewed love, affect his hear with
thoughts of his low estate from whence he was exalted, and to which Christ
might justly debase him again, and leave him as he found him, Simon son of
Jonas: And that in professing his love, and embracing this charge, he might
still remember his Original. 4. The sense of the Lords peoples backslidings
should be a whet-stone to sharpen their love to Christ, and to make them not
content to return to a formal way of profession after their foul sl^ps, unless
there be a new edge upon them, to recover their losses, and prevent the like
failing in time to come; therefore, does he enquire particularly at Peter,
love thou me? as one, who, if he were truly recovered, ought to be eminent in
love, and have it more deeply rooted in his heart, that he slide not again, and
in testimony of his sense of Christ's kindness, who looked upon him after his
fall. 5. True repentance ought, and will, not only be sincere and real, but as
eminent in the effects thereof, as sinners fall has been; Therefore does he
pose him thrice concerning his love, to try if he was real in his Profession,
and might indeed stand to it, and that his threefold profession of love might
be answerable to his threefold denial. 6. Such as have fallen grossly in an
hour of tentation, and have through mercy recovered again, ought yet still to
be jealous and suspicious of themselves, as having grossly given the lie to
their former professions; for, so much also does the repetition of these
questions teach, that he would have Peter not easily trust himself in the like
profession, considering how well he had said before, when yet he he had done so
ill. And so Peter takes it, being grieved that it is the third time propounded,
v. 17. and that he was now become a suspected man, 7. Christ at last propounds
this question with a comparative qualification, love thou me more then these?
(that is more then any of the rest do love me,) not so much pointing out, that
a fallen and restored man (as also every Saint) should strive to outstrip
another in this grace; as reflecting upon his former conceit of himself, and
his singular undertaking, Matthew. 26.33. and it may be, also, reflecting upon
his late forwardness, in coming out of the ship, v. 7. and trying if, because
of that, he would boast of any singular love to him. And so, with the offer of
accepting his sincere love, and his calling for it, he rips up his former
conceit of himself: and so it teaches, partly, That the evil of Saints
apostasies and defections will never be thoroughly cured, by any returning out
of some particular evil course, unless the fountain, cause and root of their
evils be cured, and continually abhorred and watched over; Therefore Christ
presents that to him which had occasioned his former fall to see what he thinks
of it, and if it did continue with him; and partly. That Christ allows his
people to season their bitter thoughts of their own evils, with the offer of
his love and acceptance of what is good and sincere in them; for, he so
propounds this indirect challenge, as he guards it with an ofter of his present
acceptance of his love, which is implied in the question. 8. In the second and
third questions, Peter, having in his answer modestly declined to make any
comparisons, Christ omits this qualification, and propounds the question
simply, love thou me? To teach, that he covers and passes by infirmities,
when he sees us convinced of them

Thirdly, as for Peter's threefold answer to these questions, we need not
curiously distinguish betwixt the word in the question whereby Christ
expresses love to himself, as signifying a greater degree of love, and the
word used by Peter in his answer, as signifying a lesser degree, and that as he
would not compare with others, so he would not boast of the measure of his own
love, but professes sincere love, though weak. For Christ in his third
question uses that same word, wherein Peter answers. And if any distinction
ought to be made betwixt the expressions, Christ by using both in his enquiries
would teach us, That he takes notice of, and is willing to accept of lesser
degrees of sincere love, as well as of greater; for, he interrogates concerning
both, implying his acceptance of either; and, that even such as are sober and
dare not profess an eminent measure of love to Christ, but only some weak
degree of it, had yet need to examine if they be sincere and real, even in that
they profess; and therefore Christ, after Peter has changed the word he had
used into another, in the two former Answers, will the third time pose him, if
he dare avow the sincerity and reality of what he professes. And upon this, it
seems, Peter was grieved, v. 17. that not only he had enquired the third time,
but had also called in question that weak measure of love he had professed.
However it be, as to the force and signification of these words; yet we may
from his Answers, Learn, 1. It is very possible for fallen Saints to recover
their feet, and attain to love again; as here Peter's experience does testify.
2. A lover of Christ indeed may humbly avow his love before him, as often as he
enquireth concerning it; as here Peter does thrice, Yea, Lord, I love thee. 3.
A sincere lover of Christ will, by his falling, be taught sobriety, and not to
boast of himself above others: for, Peter makes no comparisons in answer to
Christ's first question, but simply ranks himself among lovers of him, Lord, I
love thee. 4. They who would prove themselves lovers of Christ indeed, must not
only satisfy and please themselves in the matter, but should appeal to his
knowledge, and be sure that he knows and approves of them as such; for, says
he, Lord, thou know that I love thee. 5. Such as would approve themselves
unto Christ, ought to look upon him as knowing all things, and that therefore
he will not be deceived with any shows; for, so much does Peter express in
his third Answer, Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. 6.
Our sight of the grace of God in us, after our backslidings, should be joined
with the sense of out falling; for, the third time, Peter was grieved, whereby
(not to speak of any failing in him, by grieving at what Christ did) Christ
would put him in mind how his former sliding had justly rendered him suspected,
that his profession of love might be joined with sensible thoughts thereof.

Fourthly, Christ's charge put upon Peter, and thrice repeated, may teach, 1.
Christ may make good use of Saints who fall foully in an hour of tentation,
and may raise them up again, to do him eminent service in their generation;
for, fallen Peter is again entrusted with the charge of his sheep and lambs.
2. Saints love to Christ cannot extend to him, but he assigns it all to his
people, that who so love him, may show kindness to them in their station; for,
upon Peter's profession of love to him, he enjoynes him, feed my lambs, as the
notable proof of it, and as reckoning that it should be a great evidence of
love to him, to have a care of them. 3. Ministers ought to look upon Christ's
people, as very seriously recommended to them, and therefore should very
seriously mind their work about them; for, therefore is this charge thrice laid
on Peter, that he may mind it much. 4. Such as would be faithful in a
Ministerial charge, ought to look upon the people of their charge, as Christ's
in a near relation, loved of him, committed to their charge by him, and to be
gained to him; Therefore does he in this Commission call them, my lambs, my
sheep. 5. Ministers ought also to look upon the variety of tempers, and degrees
of strength, which are in the people committed to their charge, that so they
may deal with them, and have a care of them accordingly; Therefore does he
design them by the name of weaker lambs, and stronger sheep. See Isa. 40 10. 6.
It is a great part of Ministers work, to feed Christ's people with sound and
wholesome doctrine; and so to dispense it, as to condescend to the capacity of
the weakest; for, in the first command he is to feed, or afford food, and that
even to the lambs. 7. It is not sufficient that Ministers be able to feed,
unless they also govern and rule the people committed to their charge, and do
every other duty of a a good shepherd unto them; And even the strongest ought
to subject themselves unto this Government; for, in the second repetition of
the charge it is, feed, or govern, and play the shepherd (for the word is
different from the former) and that even to the sheep. 8. The strongest of
professors will not, within time, attain that height of perfection and
sanctity, as to out-grow Ordinances or a Ministry, or not to need them; and
Ministers are bound to deal with them accordingly; Therefore, in the third
repetition of the charge, he uses the word first used, feed, or provide and
afford food, and that even to my sheep, as well as to lambs.

Verse 18. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst
thy self, and walkedst whither thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou
shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not.

19. This spoke he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when
he had spoken this, he says unto him Follow me.


In the next part of Christ's conference with Peter, he warnes him of his future
sufferings, promising that he should prove more stout then in his former trial.
This he propounds more darkly, v. 18. and alluding to the custom of these
Eastern people, who, wearing long garments, did gird them up by binding their
loins when they went to a journey; and to the custom of binding malefactors,
when they were carried from place to place, or to the place of execution) He
shows a great difference that should be betwixt his case in youth and in old
age. In his youth, he girded up his loins, and walked at his own pleasure, but
in his old age, others should bind him, and carry him, whether his natural
inclination did not lead him. And in v. 19. he explains this, showing that he
spoke of his violent death, sweetning it with this consideration, that hereby
he should glorify God, and commanding him presently to follow him. Whence
learn, 1. Love to Christ must be evidenced, not only by active doing of duty,
but by suffering also unto death, if we be called unto it; And Ministers
especially, when they undertake the charge of Christ's flock, ought to lay their
account for such a lot: Therefore is this prediction joined with the former
injunction, as another proof of Peter's love to Christ. 2. The matter of
suffering would not be lightly thought upon, but we should have grave and
serious thoughts of it, that afflictions in some measure abide us, that it is
our duty to resolve for the worst, and that suffering will indeed try us, and
therefore we should be laying up for such a strait; for these causes does he
begin this doctrine with a grave asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
etc. 3. There will be great difference betwixt a Saint trusting in his own
strength, and the same Saint leaning upon, and supported by God; he who before
durst not look a damosel in the face, will in the other case, dare to look
death in the face; for, so appeared in Peter, of whom Christ foretells this,
when he is minding him of his former failing. 4. As it is the duty of Saints
always to look on suffering for Christ as their great honor, Acts 5.41. so in
particular, when a Saint is indeed penitent for his shifting of suffering, and
sliding in a time of trial, it will be his great comfort to know that he shall
have the honor to suffer, and be born through in it; that (so to say) he may
be avenged on trial for his two eyes; for, here it is held out for Peter's
encouragement, that Christ will employ him, who had proven so weak, yet to
suffer unto death for his Name; as a soldier who is shamefully beaten, desires
nothing so much as another day, wherein he may show his valor and repair his
credit. 5. As nature has an antipathy at death, and particularly, a violent
death; so Saints have not an inclination to suffering, ready to let out at
their pleasure, till God give them victory and resolution; Therefore is his
suffering called another girding, him, and carrying him whither he would not;
not only showing that naturally he would be averse from it, or, that he would
have no hand in his own suffering and death, but that, take him in his own
resolutions and inclinations, and he would decline such a lot, though grace
made him submit, and stretch out his hands, that they might gird him, and this
shows, how needful it is that the most resolute of men do seek willingness
from Christ, lest their natural inclinations prevail; And, that even where
there is a natural antipathy and fear of death and suffering, yet Christ may
make eminent and resolute Martyrs of them, they depending on him, as many
Martyrs who have been long exercised with the fear of death, have found in
experience. 6. The thing which nature, especially while men are young and in
vigor would still be at; is to be their own Masters, not subject to the Law of
God, nor to the tossing Providence about the world: for, this was Peter's way,
and what he delighted in then, when thou wast young, thou girded thy self, and
walkedst whither thou would: He was his own man, and delighted to walk as he
pleased, and at random and liberty. 7. Men may expect strange changes in their
lots and exercises, in the several turns of their life, before they go off the
world; and particularly, when men engage themselves in Christ's service, they
may expect a strange change to follow on it; Not only will their consciences
within them curb their extravigant and lawless walking, but whereas there were
none before to trouble them, now there must be nothing but bonds and death for
them. So much does this opposition betwixt Peter's lot, in his youth, and old
age, teach us. When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, etc. But when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy bands, etc. 8. That Christ
promisseth he shall not suffer till he be old; He teaches, partly, that the
timing of his peoples suffering is in his hand, and he can, when he pleases,
give them a fair time, wherein to serve him, before he call them to seal the
truth by their sufferings; for, Peter is old before they gird him, etc. See
Luke 13.31, 32. and partly, That Christ may call his people to suffer, when
their visible ability is least, that so the power carrying them through may be
seen to be of him: Therefore also does he suffer when he is old, when albeit
old age might quench many lusts in him, and experience and time might settle
him, yet his natural vigor was decayed; and fears, usually accompanying old
age, might retard him. 9. Christ would have his doctrine distinctly taken up
and understood by hearers; therefore, as Peter understood this well enough, so
John explains it for our use, showing that Christ spoke of Peter's death, in
these terms. 10. The sufferings of Saints do contribute to set out the glory
of God; the glory of the truth of the Word, when they are ready to seal it with
their blood, and to stand to the defense thereof unto death; The glory of the
truth, and riches of his promises, and of eternal life held out therein, when
they hazard on the enmity and opposition of all, and on death it self, in the
faith and hope thereof, and do look on eternal life as sufficient to compense
all their losses; and, The glory of his excellency and alsufficiency, when they
count all things but vanity and loss, that they may please him, and so they
proclaim their faith to be richly made up in him; therefore, says he, that by
his death he should glorify God. 11. The consideration that God is glorified
by any lot, should put a lovely face upon it, were it even suffering a violent
death to Saints; Therefore is this propounded as the lovely sight of his
suffering, that hereby he should glorify God. See John 12.28. 12. Saints ought
to give proof of their sincere resolutions for sufferings, by their close
following of Christ in their present service; Therefore does Christ subjoyne,
And when he had spoken this, he says unto him, Follow me. Where it appears
from v. 20. that Christ rose from the rest of the company, and went away, when
he gave this command. And this he did, not so much for any present journey, as
by calling him to obey this present command, to leave all his enjoyments and
company, and follow him wherever he goes, he takes proof of his sincerity,
and whether he is resolved indeed to follow Christ in suffering, when he shall
be called to it, and would have him begin to practice that lesson in time, that
he might be the more fit for it, when it came to a push: and so we will find
it made use of, v. 20. 13. It is the duty of such as would either serve or
suffer for Christ, to make him their pattern and copy in what is imitable; and
it is their encouragement, and may sweeten their way, that he has gone before
them: Therefore also bids he him, follow me, to point out, not so much his duty
of present going after him, as thereby to signify his duty to imitate Christ
in all his actions, particularly, in his care of his sheep, and resolution for
suffering; and to hold out this encouragement, and how it might be sweet to
follow him.

Verse 20. Then Peter turning about, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved,
following, which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is
he that betrayeth thee?

21. Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

22. Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me.


In these verses we have Christ's conference with Peter, concerning John the
beloved disciple: wherein is recorded, that after Christ and Peter had left the
rest of the company, John of his own accord did follow on; which Peter turning
back and observing, he enquires at Christ, (who had foretold of his own
sufferings) what should become of John. For which he is checked by Christ, as
meddling with that which concerned him not, and he shows him, that although it
should please him, not only to exempt John from suffering death, but to
continue him alive till his own second coming, it ought not at all to retard
him in his resolutions, and therefore he commands him to follow him, and cleave
to his duty, which by this means he had neglected. Whence learn, 1. Much love
to Christ, and much of the sense of his love, will make a man an earnest
pursuer after Christ, and to cleave to him, even when Christ seems to take no
notice of him; Therefore John followed, when Christ had bidden only Peter
follow him, and when it seems the rest did not stir; and in this he is
described to be the disciple whom Jesus loved, one who had been very familiar
with Christ, and leaned on his breast at supper, and very inquisitive
concerning Christ's safety, and said, Lord, Lord, which is he that betrayeth
thee? (of all which, see chap. 13.23.) and therefore he could not stay behind.
2. The children of the Lord are subject to many distractions and interruptions
in following their Christian coursse, and do often look, or turn aside, and
intermit their earnest eyeing of their mark and prize; for, when Peter is
bidden follow Christ at this time, hereby to teach him, closely to follow his
calling, and set his heart and eye upon it, and what he was to meet with, (as
the check and repetition of that command in this verse does teach us) he turned
about, to look to somewhat behind him, and that either merely of his own
accord, or because he had heard some noise of one following. See Luke 9.62. 3.
Albeit the intermissions of the children of God in their duty may seem very
little and small; yet oft-times it casts them upon snares and tentations, which
are ready to catch and detain them more, and so draw out reproofs from Christ;
for, Peter, but turning about, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved, following,
and this occasions his curious question, and draws out a reproof, not only
for his looking back, but for his curiosity. 4. Christ abhors curiosity in
his people, and that when they have so much needful exercise among their hands,
yet they should meddle more with what concerns them not so much; for, when
Peter propounds this question, and what shall this man do? or, and what this
man? that is, what shall become of him, (as Christ's answer makes it clear) he
gets this answer, what is that to thee? follow thou me, Not that Christ
condemns solicitude for our brethren, which flows from charity, but that he
is ill pleased with his idle curiosity, when now he had received a strict
command to follow him. 5. It is a sin to be anxious, or too much careful about
what Christ will do with his beloved people; for, so much also does Christ's
reproof of his enquiry concerning the beloved disciple, import, that it was
weakness in Peter to be any way troubled concerning him. 6. Christ has
sovereign authority to dispose of his own, and to keep them longer or shorter
time in the world, and give them ease or trouble, as he pleases, without
giving an account of his dealing to any; for, says he, If I will that he tarry
till I come, what is that to thee? Wherein there is no hint given that John
should not suffer, and that he should live long, and till Christ should come by
his judgments against the Nation of the Jews (though these proved true in the
event) but it is only an absolute supposition, that if Christ pleased to
preserve him alive, even till his second coming, or otherwise disposed of him
at his pleasure, Neither Peter, nor any other, had any thing to say to it. 7.
As Christ will come again, so the sweet notion under which Saints should take
up the last and dreadful day, is, that Christ will then come again unto them;
for, so does Christ here point out that day, I come, See 1 These. 4.16, 17. 8.
It is the duty of Saints, not to compare the Lords dealing with themselves and
others, so as to be thereby withdrawn from, or discouraged in, their own duty
and lot; for, whereas Peter might think it strange if he only were called to
suffering, Christ takes him off looking to his dealing with John, and bids him
mind his own work, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
follow thou me. Such comparisons (however sometime they may sharpen us, and
afford matter of praise, yet) do oft-times breed many inconveniences. For we
are naturally inclined to be discontent with our own condition, and to think
that best which we want, and so will more readily be grieved if we got a harder
lot then others; whereas Christ has variety of services, and may lay them on
as he pleases: And beside, Such comparisons may, oft-times, tempt men to sit
up from duty, when they see the security of others. 9. Such as would avoid
curiosity, and much needless and vain exercise, ought closely to follow their
own work and calling; Therefore, does Christ withdraw him from all these
enquiries, by bidding him again, follow thou me.

Ver, 23. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple
should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die: but, If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
In this verse John clears a mistake that continued in the Church, occasioned
by their misunderstanding of Christ's speech. They imagined, upon Christ's
speech, that John should not die (and it is like they were confirmed in their
mistake, by John's living so long after the rest of the Apostles,) whereas
Christ said no such thing; but only, by way of supposition, asserted, that
suppose he should keep him never so long alive, Peter had nothing to do with
it. Whence learn, 1. The people of God are brethren, and ought to entert^in and
cherish mutual affection, and live in concord, as brethren; Therefore had they
this designation in the primitive times, The brethren. 2. Even Christ's own
speeches were mistaken by the Saints in purest times, much more may others be
mistaken, and their words wrested contrary to their sense and meaning; for,
here a mistake arises upon what he said. 3. It may commend unto us the wisdom
of God, in leaving with us, and astricting us unto, the written Word, when we
see erroneous Traditions so soon on foot in the Church concerning Christ's words
which were not written, and the mistake growing by going from hand to hand,
till the writers of Scripture refute it; for, here we see an unwritten and
erroneous tradition going abroad among the brethren, till John clear the
mistake and ^^u^e it, when he wrote this Gospel. 4. Such as would rightly
understand Christ's speeches, must take good heed to every word and particle in
his expression; to the form of speech, whether it be absolute, or by way of
supposition; and, to Christ's scope in it, according to which we must take up
his meaning; for, hence rise their mistake, they took Christ's way of speech as
absolute, that that Disciple should not dye, whereas he sp^ke only by way of
supposition; for, Jesus said not, he shall not die, but if I will that he tarry
till I come, etc. And they look upon his speech as tending to give a promise
concerning John's life, whereas Christ's scope was only to show Peter, that he
had nothing to do with the matter, albeit he should continue him, If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

Verse 24. This is the Disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote
these things, and we know that his testimony is true.

25. And there are also many other things, which Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
contain the books that should be written. Amen.


John takes occasion of this mistake and the clearing thereof, to close this
Evangel. And, 1. He asserts that he was the penman thereof, and sets his seal
to the truth and certainty thereof, v 24. 2. L^st any should think that his
love to Christ, being the beloved Disciple, should move him to forge any thing
in this Narration; and lest they might wonder how he got so much to write,
especially after the other three had written: Therefore as Chap. 20.30. he
subjoyned a particular conclusion to the signs done by Christ after his
resurrection; So here ( v. 25.) he subjoynes a general conclusion to this
Gospel, professing that he gave not over for want of matter, it being
impossible to write all fully and particularly that Jesus did, but because it
pleased the Lord not to overcharge the Church with an infinite Narration, which
he expresses in an hyperbolicke term, which imports this much, that the
books which might be written of this subject would burden and overcharge the
world, and men's judgments and memories could not overtake or retain the
Narration of all particular passages. This acknowledgement of John, that there
are many other things which Jesus did, and yet are not written, being extended
generally to passages in his whole ministry, is to be understood with the
Rules, and according to the caveats, mentioned on Chap. 20.30, 31. and as
nothing derogatory to the perfection of Scriptures in the matters of faith and
manners, which is there asserted, notwithstanding these things are omitted. For
albeit a great many of Christ's miracles in the course of his ministry (which
properly are to be understood by things that Jesus did) be not recorded; yet
neither will that argue that any point of doctrine is omitted, nor yet that the
doctrine is not sufficiently confirmed to us by the miracles that are recorded,
and by their declaring that there were yet many more. Yea, suppose it be granted
that many particular conferences and Sermons which Christ had in the course of
his Ministry, are not written, yet it will not follow that the sum of these,
and of all his doctrine, is not recorded in what is written. But on the
contrary, the wisdom of God choosed to comprehend all that was needful, in a
brief sum, (even of the Sermons that are recorded) for the ease and benefit
of the Church. And as for them, who upon these expressions would gather that
many things needful to salvation are not to be found in Scriptures, but to be
sought out of unwritten Traditions; I would have them, before they assert such
a thing, resolve these questions, for the satisfaction of the Church, in this
great article so nearly concerning her. 1. If the penmen of the Spirit of God
have taken pen from paper, accounting that sufficient which they have written,
how dare they undertake that task which those have given over? 2. If these
things not written be alike necessary with what is written, what reason can be
given to any unbyassed person, why the Lord should cause write the one, and yet
leave the other to uncertain Tradition, and the frail and corrupt memories of
men? 3. If the Lord was not pleased to write them, but transmit them by
Tradition, (as they do not only assert, but pretend grave and weighty reasons
why the Lord did so) Upon what ground do they presume at all to stuff their
writings with them, and do not leave them as he left them? 4. If all these be
necessary to salvation, and yet the world could not contain the books that
should be written of them, were they written, how shall they instruct that they
have marked them all? and how will they satisfy the Church that she has yet a
perfect rule, of Scripture and all the Traditions they have recorded, being put
together? 5. With what face can they, upon this pretext, obtrude Traditions
upon the Church which are not only beside, but clearly contrary unto the
written Word of God, as if the Spirit of God did contradict himself? The truth
is, John closes with this, because what he had written was sufficient, and the
rest not possible to be overtaken, nor yet necessary to be recorded for the use
of the Church in all ages, though they were necessary for the time, and it be
useful for us to know there were many such things, though they be not
particularly recorded; as is marked on chap. 20.31, 32.

From this purpose, Learn, 1. This Gospel was written by John the beloved
Disciple, who being employed by Christ as a meet penman of such sublime
doctrine, did out of love and duty write so sweetly of Christ; and hereby gives
us occasion to try what love, such a message, by such a penman, does produce;
for, This is the Disciple which testifies of these things. 2. All this
Narration is of divine truth, whatever we think of it, and whatever many do
esteem of it and other Scriptures, Yet it wants not witnesses who were eye and
ear witnesses, and fully persuaded, to assert the truth of it; for, says he,
we know, (speaking of himself in the plural number, or of himself with the
rest of the Apostles) that his testimony is true. 3. It is the duty of
Ministers to assert the truth of their doctrine, and to set to (as it were)
their Messengers seal to Christ's truth which they publish, for their own
exoneration, and for the encouragement of believers, and as a witness against
all who receive it not; Therefore, does John call all his doctrine, his
testimony, and asserts that we know that his testimony is true. 4. It is
impossible to get all said which might be said of Christ, and to his
commendation; for, so does John assert, that if the things which Jesus did,
should be written, every one, even the world it self could not contain the
books which should be written. And this may not only point out his excellency
and the weakness of our judgments and memories, but whereas our curiosity is
still desirous to hear and know more, this breaking off may call us back rather
to see how we practice what it has pleased him to record. 5. The Lord, in
writing Scripture, has been pleased only to give us a short sum of the
doctrine preached by Christ, and his servants, and an account of a part only of
the miracles wrought by Christ; That so he might show his respect to our
infirmity and weakness, and might take away all excuse from the lazy and
negligent, by comprising his mind and will in so little bulk; for, therefore
is John directed only to record this much, and to omit the rest which could not
be overtaken. 6. This whole Gospel is divine truth, worthy to be embraced and
received by faith, and that we set our seal to the truth of it, and feed upon
it accordingly; Therefore does John close all, setting his Amen to this
doctrine. Unto him that loved us, and washed us, from our sins in his blood and
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. 1.5, 6,

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader.
Thou will find several Errata in this Piece, which by reason of my distance,
could not be prevented at the Press. Some of them, of less importance, are
remitted to thy own care: As namely, mistakes in printing the verses of the
Text Ex. gr. chapter 7. v 2, 3, 4. with which the fifth verse should also be
printed: Also, the not printing the words of the Text in a different letter,
when they are repeated for confirmation of the Doctrines. Mistakes also in
pointing. Ex. gr. chapter 2. v. 18, 19. Doct. 6. line 9. Word; foretelling, r.
words foretelling. Chapter 3.34. Doct. 6. line 9. them. They. r. them, They. Chapter 6
62. l. 12. him likewise, r. him. Likewise. Also, frequent mistakes in citations
of Scriptures. Ex. gr. chapter 5, 40. Doct. 4. l. 14. 33. r. 35. chapter 6.30, etc. D.
3. l. 5. 19. r. 14. chapter 18.18. D. 1. l. 6, 7. John 18.18. r. Job 24.12. v. 39,
40. p. 373. l. 27. Mat. r. Mark. chapter 19.38, etc. p. 390. l. 1. chapter 22. r. chapter
3.2. Likewise, lesser escapes in words or sentences, through the defect,
redundancy, transposition or change of letters or syllables, and through
addition or want of words; Ex. gr. geace for grace, loaf for loose, Sephas for
Cephas, Janna for Anna, as servant for as a servant, itll morrow for till to
morrow; Christ for Christ's, does for do, has for have, simple for simply,
discernably for discernable, visible for visibly, implied for implies,
prosecuting for persecuting, of for off, lay for li^. These, and many such, are
passed, because the sense will easily clear them. I only desire thee to correct
with thy pen those that follow.

Chap. I. v. 1. Doct. 1. l. 4, 5. r. the great Promise. v. 2. l. last, dele
ver. 3. v. 12, 13. D. 2. l. 2. right r. rightly. v. 15. l. 4. ver. 37. r. to
ver. 37. l. 5. 14. r. 19. Doct. 5. l. last. outgeings r. outgates. D. 7. l. 1.
A r. As. v. 16. D. 2. l. last. this r. his. v. 24. etc. D. 4. l. 4, 5. glory
and, r. glory of the. v. 40, etc. D. 5. l. 4. r. have found the. v. 45, 46. D.
3. l. 13. point r. pointing. Chapter II. v. 3, 4. D. 2. l. 3. great r. greater. v.
5. D. 1. l. 4. dele of. v. 18, 19. D. 6. l. 11. given r. even. Chapter III. v. 13.
D. 4. l. 9. r. others who have. v. 16. D. 3. l. 9. word r. world. v. 20, 21. D.
10. l. 12. To live r. so to live. v. 22, etc. D. 8. l. 3. mainest r. maniest.
v. 27. p. 43. l. last, this r. at his. Chapter IV. v. 1, etc. D. 2. l. 6. t. did
bear. D. 8. l. 6, etc. r. or, v. 19, 20. D. 6. l. 6. the r. her. v. 46, 47. l.
1. r. the miracle wrought upon. v. 48. D. 4. l. 3. might r. may. v. 51, etc. D.
3. l. 5. r. this man finds. Chapter V. v. 5. etc. D. 11. l. 1. one r. our. v 17.
D. 3. l. 1. Christ is God r. Christ as God. v. 21. the last word, will r.
weal. v. 24. D. 3. l. 6. is Mediator r. as Mediator. v. 28, 29. D. 15. l.
20. and their r. as their. v. 43. l. 4. r. perversity. D. 7. l. 13. as r. and.
Ch 6. v. 5, etc. l. 12. by r. l^ty. D. 1. l. 4. another r. another. v. 15. D.
2. Branch 3. l. 9, 10. r beware of dreaming. v. 19, 20. D. 6. l. 3. denied r.
denuded. v. 25. D. 3. l. 3. do it dele it. v. 26. D. 4. l. 6. r. be so much. v.
27. D. 1. l. 3. sinners seekers r. sincere seekers. v 37 D 3 l 2 dele the
first, to all, v 38 D 3 l 6 after do it add 4. v 39 D l 4, 5 concerning 1.
lost man. r. concerning lost man. v 44 D 1 l 2 murmures r. murmurers. D 2 l 13.
r. which it is not v 52. D 3 l 7 own r. one. v 55 l 4 4 r ^ v 58, 5^. l 6 his
r this, v 70, 71 p. 124 l last Reioth r Kerioth. Chapter VII v 10 D 4 l 12
undoubted r undaunted, v 31 l 22 effect r affect. v 37 D l l 12 Jacob r Joab, v
38 D 9 l 13 r So the graces of the Spirit. Chapter VIII. v 13 14 D 8 l 2 vouch on r
reckon, v 19 D 2 l 6 yet r get v 30 etc. D 15 l 21 being r lying, v 33 D 2 l 3
dele one of the so's; D 5 l 4 deed r need D 6 l 18 thus r this v 37 D 2 l 4 his
r this v 39 etc. D 2 l 9 sins r sons v 44 l 3 r which is even. v 46 D 4 l 3
away r way l 4 r yet it v 54 55 D 10 l 3 resisting r resting. Chapter IX. v 1 D 3 l
3 Christ r thrift, v 45 D 5 l 6 after day add 6. v 18 19 D 6 l 1 palm r
policy, v 20 21 D 3 l 5 r well if they v 31 D 6 l 9 after prayers add 7. D 3 l
7 print r point. Chapter X. v ^0 D 7 Branch 1 l 3 Son r Sun, v 2 13 D 2 l 5 gain
r gain, v 17 18 D 2 l 8 are r were. v 26 D 2 l 7 could r would, v 39 40 D 3 l
1 maine r many. Chapter XI. v 9 10 l 6 for truth r far truth, v 27 D 4 l 10 after
Christ, etc. add 5 and after that l 7 Mediators r Mediator v 35 D 1 l 8
conduct r conduit; v 45 46 D 2 l 1 they generally r the generality. D 10 l 4 r
that they may. Chapter XII. near the end, after 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. for Doctaine 1
r Doct. 3 v 16 l 3 not only r only D 7 l 5 there; r thereby v 27 p 243 col. 1 l
last save 9 after man add 4 v 31 D 9 l 6 after explication) add 1 v 34 D 10 l
8 though r thou v 43 D 3 l 3 if r of v 44 l 28 be r ^e. Chapter XIII. v 1 D 3 l 2
carried r carved D 9 l 4 dele the first, for, so did Christ v 2 p 260 col. 2 l
30 objection r objected v 3 D 7 l 10 would r could v 45 l 45 r layetth aside
his v 14 l 13 r it includes v 20 D 3 l 6 7 r is this doctrine, which guardeth v
27 D 9 l 2 wrestlesse r restless v 33 D 15 l 3 excused r exercised v 34 l 35
36 enjoying r enjoining v 36 l 3 conceiving r conceiting. Chapter XIV v 5 l 14 dele
one that v 9 D 5 l 1 of r of his v 13 14 D 3 l last work r mock v 16 17 l 31
word r world v 19 D 1 l 2 unto r unto them v 23 D 6 l 2 make r keep v 24 D 3 l
4 in me r mine. Chapter XV. v 3 l 14 any r was v 9 D 3 l 6 compares r compare
Chap. v 11 D 11 l 4 have been r have, be v 23 D 2 l last is r as v 25 D 1 last,
age r ago D 6 l 6 of r to Ch, XVI, v 2 D 2 l 6 r does he v 8 p 320 col. 2 l 16
mockery r mock-King. Chapter XVII. v 8 D 8 l 4 obedience r evidence v 14 D 2 l 2 r
they be v 18 l 17 but they were r they but mere v 21 D 2 l 1 adversity r
diversity D 9 l 7 r this is v 24 D 12 l 3 their r the v 25 26 D 15 l 3 be r we
Chapter XVIII. v 12 etc. l 30 dele 1 v 15 16 D 2 l 7 so r so was D 4 l 8 r Christ
should v 18 l 1 the first r this D 1 l 1 carnal r cruel v 25 etc. l 17 as is r
it is here v 33 34 after answer add to know. Chapter XIX. v 13 etc. D 16 l 4 And r
And he v 28 29 l 25 use of dele of v 38 etc. l 7 Evangelist Mark r Evangelists
Mark p 390 col. 2 after Fourthly, D 3 l 6 could r old he. Chapter XX. v 1 l 21
held out dele out D 8 l 4 approving r as proving v 5 etc. D 7 l 2 endure r
induce D 10 l 6 r give a reasov v 14, 15 D 2 l 5 soon r seen v 17 D 3 l 2
Christ r Him v 19 D 4 l 11 list r lift v 23 D 1 l 2 Camp r lamp D 5 l 4 crush r
to crush D 6 l 7 lose r loose v 30, 31 D 6 l 4 respective r perspective.

If thou find any Errata in some sheets of the 16. and beginning of the 17.
and the end of 21. Chapters, which have not come to my hands, I entreat thou will pardon and correct them.

Books Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill.
THe works of that Learned and laborious Divine John Weemse, in four Volumes,
4. Mr. Byfield on the Collossians, fol. Mr. Thomas Edwards Gangraena four
volumes in 4. Ainsworths works, fol. -- And his communion of Saints, 12. Dr.
Stonghtons heavenly conversation, 12. Bp. Downam on the Covenant of grace, 12.
Robinsons Essays, 12. Mr. Dicksons Exposition on Matthew. Mr. Brinsley, a
learned treatise of Christ's Mediatourship, and the souls implantion, 8. Mr.
Brinsley Brazen Serpent, and Christ's membership -- Mr. Dicksons Exposition on
the whole book of the Psalms, one volume, 8. second edition. Mr. Watsons
works, viz. 1. The Art of Divine Contentment, the fourth edition. 2. The
Christians Charter, showing the privileges of believers in this life, and the
life to come, the fifth edition. Mr. Ashes Sermon, at Mr. Whitakers funeral --
Dr. Spurstow on the Promise. Retorford on the Covenant of grace -- Mr. Cottons
Exposition on the book of Ecclesiastes and Canticles, second edition. A learned
Treatise, proving the Deity of the Holy Ghost by Mr. Estwick. Mr. Gurnals
Christian Armor, second edition.
Books now Printing.
Mr. Hutcheson on all the twelve small Prophets in fol. second edition. -- Mr.
Garnal Christians Armor the second part --

