THE ARGVMENTS OF Sir RICHARD HUTTON Knight, One of the Judges of the Common
Pleas: AND Sir GEORGE CROKE Knight, One of the Judges of the Kings Bench:
TOGETHER WITH THE CERTIFICATE OF Sir JOHN DENHAM Knight, One of the Barons of
the Exchequer: Upon a Scire facias brought by the Kings Majesty, in the Court
of Exchequer, against John Hampden Esquire

AS ALSO The several Votes of the Commons and (...) PARLIAMENT; and the Orders
of the Lords for (...) vacating of the Judgment given against the said (...)
Hampden, and the vacating of the several Rolls in each several Court, wherein
the Judges extrajudiciall Opinions in the Cases made touching SHIP MONEY, are
entered.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher and R. Young, the Assigns of I. More Esquire.
1641.

THE ARGUMENT OF Mr. Justice HUTTON. 28. Aprilis Anno. 14. Car. Regis Annoque
Do. 1638.

A Scire facias brought by the Kings Majesty in the Exchequer against John
Hampden. Buck. ss.

The case upon the pleading appears to be this.
THE Kings Majesty, by his writ under the great Seal of England, bearing date
the fourth day of August, in the eleventh year of his reign, directed to the
Sheriff of the County of Buck and to the Bailiffe, and Burgesses, of the
Borough, and parish of Buckingham, and to the Mayors of diverse particular
Towns, in the said County of Buckingham; and to all honest men in the same,
and in all the Towns, Villages, and places in the said County, sends
greeting: reciting that where he is given to understand, that certain
Robbers, Pirates, and spoilers by Sea, as well enemies to the name of
Christians, as Mahumetans, and others being assembled together, not only to
take and spoil our Ships, and the goods and merchandises; but also the goods
and merchandises of the Subjects of our friends upon the Sea, (and which had of
old been used to be defended) at their pleasures, and to take and carry the
men in those ships into most miserable captivity, and there keep them.

And the King does see that they daily provide ships to vex our Merchants, and
grieve our Kingdom, unless speedy remedy be provided therein: And
considering the perils which in these times of war are every where imminent.

The King for the defense of the Sea, the security of his Subjects, the safe
conduct of the Ships, and merchandises, being willing (by Gods assistance) to
provide, the rather for that he and his progenitors, Kings of England, have
been Lords of the Sea.

And where this charge of public defense which concerns all, ought to be
supported by all, as by the Laws and Customs of this Realm of England it had
been done.

Therefore the King by his Writ commanded, that a Ship of war of the burden
of four hundred and fifty Tons, fitted and furnished with all things
necessary for war, and one hundred and eighty men able and sufficient
victualled, and this to be done before the first of March: And then at that
time to come, so prepared, furnished, and victualled, for the space of twenty
six weeks then next following, and with wages for so many men of war for
that time, to Portchmouth into the company of such other ships of our
Subjects, and our own as shall be there, under the government of such a man,
to whom before that day we shall commit the custody of the Seas; and to go
from thence with the Kings ships, and the ships of other our faithful
Subjects, for the defense of the Sea, and the repulsing and overcomming of any
whosoever, which shall molest and hinder the coming in, or going out of our
Merchants, or others upon the Seas.

A power is given by the writ to the Sheriff, and to the Mayors, and any two
of them for Corporate towns, whereof the Sheriff to be one, to assesse what
sums the Mayors and Corporations shall pay toward this charge; if they do
not, then to be done by the Sheriff alone.

A general power to the Sheriff, to assesse all the inhabitants of all other
Towns, Villages, Hamlets and places, and the Tertenants, other then such as
shall have a part of the said ship, or shall serve in the said ship, to
contribute toward the necessary expense for the provision of the premises,
upon every man according to his estate and faculty: And such portions so to be
assessed upon them, to levy by distress or other due means.

A power to name Collectors.
And a power to commit to prison all such as the Sheriff shall find
rebellious, or contradicting the premises; There to remain until the Kings
Majesty shall think fit to give order for their enlargement.

And by virtue of this writ, Sir Peter Temple, then Sheriff of the said
County, did assesse upon the Defendant twenty shillings, toward this charge,
which was after allowed by the succeeding Sheriff, Sir Henry Proby, and the
Defendant was required to pay it, but refused.

And then by a Certiorare out of the Chancery, This Writ is dated 9. Martii An.
12. Car.
directed to those Sheriffs, which had been Sheriffs betwixt the fourth day
of August, in the eleventh year, and the first of March, then following, to
certify what sum of money had been assessed upon the Defendant for
contribution.

They certified the said sum of twenty shillings.
Then by Writ of Mittimus, The Writ of Mittimus bears date the 5. of May^ Anno
13. Car. Regis.
out of the Chancery, bearing date the fifth day of May, in the thirteenth year
of the Kings Majesty's reign, the writ of 4. Augusti, Anno undecimo Car. and
the Schedule returned into the Chancery, whereby the Defendant was so assessed,
are sent into the Exchequer, to proceed against the Defendant, for the levying
of the sum of twenty shillings, which he has not paid, and proceed there to
do that which of right, and according to the custom, ought to be done for the
levying thereof.

In this Writ of Mittimus it is contained, that the writ bearing date the
fourth of August, Anno 11. Car. was granted for the defense of the Realm, the
safeguard of the Sea, the security of the Subjects, and for that the safety of
the Kingdom of England was in danger.

But these causes are not expressed in the Writ; but other particular causes.

And upon the tenours of these Writs, depending in the Chancery, thus sent into
the Exchequer; this Writ of ( Scire fac'.) is awarded, bearing date the
twentieth day of May, in the thirteenth year of the Kings Majesty's reign,
against the said John Hampden, to show what he has to say for himself, why
the said sum so assessed upon him and not paid, ought not by him to be
satisfied, and to do further what that Court should think fit to order.

To which writ the Defendant appeared in Trinity Term, and prayed the sight
of the writ of the fourth of August, and the Certiorare, and the Mittimus, and
they are all entered ( in haec verba.)

Whereupon the Defendant did demurre generally.
And Master Attorney general joined in demurrer, and the Record being read
there and opened, the Court did adjourne it into the Exchequer Chamber, before
any argument there at the Bar.

The sole Question is, Whether this Scire fac. does lie or not.
And I am of opinion that it does not lie, but that judgment ought to be given
for the Defendant, both for the matter, and for the manner of this proceeding.

And to the intent that whatsoever I shall say, may the better be understood; I
will observe this order in my Argument.

First, I will prove by several Acts of Parliaments, and by some Authorities
in books, and by some reasons, that the Kings Majesty cannot at this day,
impose any such charge in general upon all his Subjects as this is, without
their consent in Parliament. Henry the fourth, which is almost two hundred and
fifty years since: And many other courses and kinds of attempts, for levying
of moneys: And this way not attempted till of late. 4. Augusti Anno 11. Car.
That the matter therein comprised, does not contain sufficient warrant, for
the levying of such contribution: And that the matter which is added in the
Mittimus, cannot supply or make the Writ of 4. Augusti sufficient: And that
the Scire fac' it self is insufficient. Lastly, I will give some answer to
that
My Brother Jones has been long, and I will observe my own method, and
answer him by my argument; And I will contract that which I have to say, in as
short a manner as I can.

And for the first point and reason, which I

An. 9. H^n. 3. Magna Charta cap. 29.
First, by the Statute of Magna Charta it is enacted, that no Freeman shall be
taken or imprisoned or disseised of his Freehold, or of his liberties, or
Free-customes, or outlawed, or exiled, nor by any means destroyed; neither
will we come upon him, or send him to prison, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

This Statute, as appears by the Inspeximus of King Edward the first, son of
King Henry the third, was made of the free good will of the King, for the good
of the Church, and for the amendment of the Kingdom.

See the l^st chapter of Magna Charta cap. 38.
And if you look upon the last Chapter of Magna Charta cap. 38. the King
grants, that he and his heirs will for what concerns him well observe and keep
the same in his Kingdom, and will that as well Clerks, as Laymen shall observe
the same: And this was not done for naught, for the Clergy, and the
Communalty, did give to the King for these liberties, the fifteenth part omnium
mobilium, as appears in the same Chapter.

And further in the said Chapter it is contained, that the said King, for him
and his heirs did grant that neither he, nor his heirs should do any thing,
nor procure to be done any thing whereby these liberties thus granted might be
infringed or diminished: And that if any thing were done by any other to the
contrary, it should be void and held of no force: See the Statute.

And then King Edward the first his Son in the five and twentieth year of his
reign, Statute of 25. Edw. 1.
The very first Chapter of that Parliament, confirmed the Charter of Magna
Charta, for the honor of God, and of the holy Church, and profit of the Realm,
with writs to all Justices, Sheriffs and others, That they cause the said
Charter of liberties to be published: And to declare to the people, that we
have confirmed them in all points; And that our Justices, Sheriffs, and other
Ministers, which under us have the Laws of our land to guide, shall allow the
same. That is to wit, the great Charter, as the Common Law, and the Charter of
the Forest, for the wealth of our Realm.

And where my brother Berkley did say in his Argument, that the words of the
Statute of Magna Charta were quod habeant libertates suas, but that there were
no particular liberties mentioned which were libertates suas: To that the
answer is easy, for it is in the Preamble and the first Chapter, Habeant
libertates subscriptas tenendas in Regno nostro Angliae tenend. eis and
haeredibus suis imperpetuum. And it cannot be denied, but that the clauses of
the writ of 4. Augusti which gives not only power to distraine, but if any be
rebellious or contrariant to the premises, to commit them to prison, there to
remain until the Kings Majesty shall for their deliverance think fit to
order otherwise, are directly contrary to the express letter of this Statute
of Magna Charta, and so consequently against the law of the Land: for this
Statute is made by the said Statute of the five and twentieth of King Edward
the first, the law of this Land.

This Statute of Magna Charta has been ever since, and now is put in use for
the great privilege of the trial of the Peers of this Realm for Treason or
Felony: For there [ Peers,] is grounded upon the words of this Statute ( viz.)
per legale judicium parium suorum, as you may see in Stamford in his book of
the Pleas of the Crown, Stamford. fol. 152.
fol. 152.

Then by the Statute of 25. Edw. 1. cap. 5. 25. E. 1. ca. 5.
It is enacted, And for as much as diverse people of our Realm are in fear,
That the aides and taxes, that they have given to us before-time toward our
wars and other business, of their own grant and good will, howsoever they
were made, might turn to a bondage to them and their heirs, because they
might be at any other time found in the Rolls: And likewise the prizes taken by
our Ministers through the Realm, we have granted for us and our heirs, that
we shall not draw any such aides, taxes or prizes, into a custom for any thing
that has been done before, be it by Roll or any other Precedent that may be
found.

And in the same Parliament in the sixth Chapter it is thus, We have granted for
us and our heirs as well to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, The Stat. of 25. Edw.
1. cap. 6.
Priors, and other folk of holy Church, as also to Earls, Barons, and to all
other the communalty of the land, That for no business from henceforth, we
shall take such manner of aides, taxes, or prizes but by the common consent of
the Realm, and for the common profit thereof: Saving the ancient aides and
prizes due and accustomed.

Observe the words in this Statute, that for no business he shall take any
manner of aides, taxes or prizes, but by the common consent of the Realm.

The words of this Statute are so plain (for no business,) as they include
all, and admit any exposition.

34. Edw. 1. cap. 1.
Then in 34. Edw. 1. cap. 1. It is enacted, No tallage nor aid shall be taken
or levied by us or our heirs in our Realm without the good will and assent of
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of
the land.

14. Edw. 3. cap. 1.
Then by a Statute made in the fourteenth year of King Edward the third, it is
in this manner; That whereas the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons of our
Realm of England in our Parliament holden at Westminster upon Wednesday in
Mid-lent in the fourteenth year of our Reign over England, and the first over
France, have granted to us of their free and good will in aid of the speed of
our great business which we have to do, as well on this side the Sea, as
beyond, The ninth sheafe, the ninth fleece, and the ninth Lamb, to be taken by
two years next coming after the making of the same; And the Citizens, and
Burgesses, of Cities, and Boroughs, the very ninth part of all their goods; And
the foraine merchants and others which live not of grain nor of flock of
sheep, the fifteenth part of their goods to the value, We willing to provide
for the indempnitie of the said Prelates, Earls, and other of the Communalty,
and also of the Citizens, Burgesses, and Merchants aforesaid, will and grant
for us, and our heirs to the same Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons,
Citizens, Burgesses, and Merchants, that the said grant which is so chargeable,
shall not another time be had forth in example, nor fall to their prejudice in
time to come, nor that they be from henceforth charged nor grieved to make any
aid or to sustain the charge, if it be not by common consent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and other great men, and Commons of our said Realm of England,
and that in Parliament.

25. Edw. 3. cap. 8.
Then by the Statute made in the five and twentieth year of King Edward the
third cap. 8. it is enacted, That no man shall be compelled to find men of
arms, holberts, or archers, other then such as hold by such services, if it
be not by common consent and grant in Parliament, for that is against the
common right of the Realm. Which last words, [for that is against the common
right of the Realme] are in the Parliament Roll, but left out of the printed
books of the Statutes.

Confirmed by an act of Parliament in 4. Hen. 4.
And this Act of Parliament is recited by an Act of Parliament, made in the
fourth year of the reign of King Henry the fourth the 13. Chapter, and
enacted and observed in all things.

1. Rich. 3. cap. 2.
Then in the first year of King Richard the third, and the second chapter it is
recited, That the Commons of this Realm, by new and unlawful inventions, have
been put to importune charge, especially by a new imposition called A
benevolence; It is enacted, That the Subjects and Communalty of this Realm,
from henceforth in no wise be charged by any such charge or imposition called a
Benevolence, nor by any other such charge.

Then comes the Act of Parliament, Anno 3. Car.
made in the third year of the Kings Majesty's own reign, called The
Petition of right, whereby the Statute made in the time of King Edward the
first, commonly called the Statute De tallagio non concedendo, is mentioned,
and many particular encroachments recited to be made upon the liberties of the
Subject; And many particulars being recited, it is required to be enacted That
no loan of money against the will and good liking of the Subjects, Billeting
of Soldiers, and Mariners in men's houses, there to sojourne against their
wills, Commissions of Martial laws in times of peace. They do therefore
humbly pray you, that no man be hereafter compelled to yield or make any gift,
loan, benevolence, tax, or such like charge, without common consent by act of
Parliament, whereunto his Majesty consented with this subscription, Soit Droit
fait come est Desire.

And these are the Statutes whereupon I rely that this charge cannot be laid
upon the Subject by this Writ only without the aid of some act of Parliament.

Now for authorities of Book cases, and other authorities concurring herewith.
13. H. 4. fo. 14.15.16.
First, by the Case of 13. Hen. 4. fol. 14, 15, and 16. which were long debated,
It appears that the King had granted an office, for the measuring of Cloth in
London, and a power to take so much for his labor.

There was a Writ under the great Seal directed to the Mayor of London,
commanding him to put the Patentee in possession; and the Patentee had put it
in practice, and diverse had paid money to the Patentee: And yet after upon a
return, that there was no such office, it is adjudged a good return; And it
is there agreed, That the King cannot by his Patent create or erect a new
office, in charge of his people, without the special assent of the Commons:
And the King cannot grant to any, that he shall take of every Carriage that
shall come over such a bridge such a sum; And it is said there in the sixteenth
leaf, that a common charge, though it sound to the profit of the people,
cannot be granted out of Parliament: And this in my opinion is a strong case in
the point.

Then see 37. Hen. 8. Broke in Patents, 37. H. 1. Broke Paten^s Pla. 100.
placito. 100. The Kings Majesty may erect Markets and Faires with tolls
incident: For that concerns only such as will buy: but the King cannot grant
toll Travert, 14. H. 4. fo. 9. 37. H. 6. fo. 27. 8. H. 6. fo. 19. concurring.
nor a Through toll, nor alter or change Laws or Customs of the Realm, nor
make land deviseable or gavel-kinde or Borough English, or change gavel-kinde
or Borough English to be descendable to the heir; which is so agreed in diverse
Books.

Then in the book of Fortescue of his commendation of the Laws of England;
Fortescue in his book de Laud legum Angliae fo. 25. cap. 9. He was made Lord
chief Justice of the Kings bench, Anno 19. Hen. 6. and made Chancellor of
England as is said in the Book.
it is thus written in the ninth chapter the five and twentieth leaf, The King
of England cannot alter or change the Laws of his Realm at his pleasure; For
why, he governs his people by power, not only Royal, but also politic: If
his power over them were only Royal, the^ he might change the Laws of his
Realm, and charge his Subjects with tallage and other burdens without their
consent; And such is the dominion which the Civil law purports, when they say
that the will of a Prince has the force of a Law: But from this much differs
the power of a King, whose government over his people is politic; for he can
neither change Laws without the consent of his Subjects, nor yet charge them
with strange impositions against their wills. Rejoice therefore, O Sovereign
Prince, and be glad that the Laws of your Realm, wherein you shall succeed,
are such; For it shall exhibit to you and your people, no small security, and
comfort.

The same author. cap. 36. fo. 84.
And the same Author, fo. 84. cap. 36. says thus; That the King by his Officers
(though the owners would say nay) may take necessaries for his house at a
reasonable price to be assessed by the Constable; Nevertheless he is bound by
the Law to pay therefore, either presently or at a day to be limited by the
higher Officers of the house: For by the Laws he may take away none of his
Subjects goods, without due satisfaction for the same; neither does the King
there either by himself, or his servants and officers, levy upon his Subjects
Tallages, Subsidies, or any other burdens, or alter their Laws, or make new
Laws without the express consent and agreement of his whole Realm in his
Parliament.

And thus I have done with the positive part of my argument, and I will
endeavor to be shorter in the rest.

THE SECOND PART.
NOw in the second place, I will give an answer to all such objections that
have been made by the Counsel of the King at the Bar; and by some of my
Brothers in their arguments against these Statutes.

Object. 1.
First, it has been objected, that the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo was
not a Statute. And this was insisted upon by Mr. Solicitor, and not without
many probabilities of the Kings not then being in England, and many other
things by him alleged; Resp. 1.
Yet because it has been generally agreed by all that have argued since, that
it was and is an Act of Parliament, and is so recited in the Petition of right,
I will say no more to that; But thereby and by his insisting so much upon that
to be no Statute, I do conceive that he understood that Statute to be (as
indeed it is) a forceable Statute against this imposition of a charge by Writ,
without the consent of the Parliament.

Object. 2.
The second objection was; That the words, Aides, Tax, and Tallages, do not
extend to this provision of Ships of War, and men for defense, and that there
is no exception of the aides which are due to the Kings Majesty, for making his
eldest son Knight, nor aides for marriage, nor other aids by tenures.

The answer is easy: Resp. 2.
for the words of the Statute of the fourteenth year of King Edward the third,
are, That they shall not from henceforth be charged or grieved, to make any
aid or to sustain any charge.

These are words so general, that all is comprehended which charges all; And
for the aides of making the eldest son Knight, and the other aides, they are
not general to charge all, but particular, such as are charged by tenure, and
need no exception.

And yet in the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 8. there is an exception (of other
then those which hold by such tenure) which exception was needless, because no
charge of any in particular is within any of the acts of Parliament; but such
as are general, and extend to charge all the Subjects of the Realm, as this
does.

There has been another objection made Object. 3.
against the Statute of 14. Edw. 3. that it should be but temporary, for the
time of the continuance of those wars; And my Brother Berkley did except to
this Statute, because it is not mentioned in The petition of right.

Resp. 3.
To this there needs no other answer, then the Statute it self, First the
preamble, and then the body of the Act, ( viz.) That from henceforth, they
shall not be compelled to make any aid or sustain any charge but by the
common consent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great men and Commons of our
Realm of England, and that in Parliament; This is an absolute Statute.

It is true, that the latter clause whereby the King was pleased, that the
profits to be made of his Wards, Marriages, Escheats, and other profits should
be disposed of for the maintenance of the Realm of England, and of his wars in
Scotland, France, and Gascoy, and elsewhere, during the said wars, This was a
matter of the Kings bounty and Grace, and was to continue no longer; And to
say, that because it was not particularly mentioned amongst other in The
petition of right, therefore it should be of no force, does not stand with any
reason to impeach the Statute, nor many others that are not there enumerated.

The last and greatest Objection that has been made, Object. 4.
first by my Brother Crawley, and after by others, and insisted upon by my
Brother Jones, is; That this is a Prerogative, or power Royal, so incident to
the Kings Majesty, that it cannot be taken away by any act of Parliament; And,
as it was said, it is proprium quarto modo: And in proof thereof it was
affirmed, that when there was in the beginning of King James his reign a
purpose to have taken away all tenures by an act of Parliament, and to have
shut up the Court of Wards; It was resolved by the Judges, that such a Statute
had been void.

First, I do agree, that there are many things so incident in power to a King,
as are not in the power of any Parliament to take away, as appears by the case
of 1. H. 7. of the disposing of the right of the Kingdom, power of making
War and Leagues, The power of the coin, and the value of coins, and many
other Monarchical powers and prerogatives, which to be taken away, were
against natural reason, and are incidents so inseparable that they cannot be
taken away by Parliament.

And yet I will show you, and prove, that Acts of Parliament have bounded,
limited, and qualified the Kings ancient and inherent Prerogatives of like
nature, and of as great importance as this is.

Ploy. fo. 332. The Case of Mines.
It it said in Ploydon, in the case of Mines, f. 332. That every Prerogative
that the King has, contains in it self a matter of Prescription, and as it
is there said; That before the Statute of, 2. Edw. 3. cap. 12. if one held his
Land by Knights service of the King in Capite, and had aliened that land in
fee, without the Kings license, the land was forfeited to the King; And the
King should have had the land to him and his Successors for ever; The King
wills and grants, that the King shall not hold them as forfeit: But shall
take a reasonable fine, to be assessed in the Chancery by due Process.

fo. 322.
And in the same book, fo. 322. The Kings Majesty might by Prerogative have
taken woods in any man's wood, for the repair of his Castles: but by the
Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 21. he is excluded of that; The words are
[Neither We nor our Bailiffe, nor any other for us] shall take wood of any
other man's, to repair our Castles, nor to do any other thing with them, but
by good will of him whose wood it is.

And by the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 1. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 1. 11. H. 4. fo.
7.8.
It is enacted that from thenceforth, neither he nor any of his heirs, shall
take title to present to any benefice of the right of another, of any time of
his predecessors.

And the King brought a Quare impedit, and made title to an avoidance in the
time of King Edward the first Son of King Henry the third; And the Defendant
pleaded this Statute, and upon debate and argument, although it was alleged,
that this Statute had not been put in use, It was adjudged, that being a
Statute in force, it might be put in use: And so it was judged against the King.

And this is a strong proof, that in one of the most ancient Prerogatives
incident to the King, of Nullum tempus occurrat Regi, which is grounded upon
many reasons, yet by an Act of Parliament, this Prerogative was taken away.

The Statute of 7. H. cap. 3.
See the Statute of 7. H. 8. cap 3. The informer is limited to begin his suit
within a year, and the King within two years and not after, hereby the Kings
Prerogative of Nullum tempus is taken away and limited to two years.

21. Iac. cap. 2.
The Statute of 21. Iac. cap. 2. whereby our late King James of famous memory,
was content to exclude himself, to make any title to lands, whereof he has
not been in possession, or which have not lawfully been put in charge within
sixty years: But enacted, that such persons as do hold those lands, shall
hold them still without trouble: And that Patent of concealment, or defective
title, shall not be a putting in charge, or standing in super within that
Statute.

I might be infinite in this, but I will conclude with the Statute of 21. Iac.
cap. 14. 21. Iac. cap. 14.
That where the Kings Majesty by his Royal Prerogative, may enforce the
Subject in informations of intrusions, to plead specially, and to show his
title, or to lose the possession: The Kings Majesty out of his gracious
disposition toward his loving Subjects, and at their humble suit (being
willing to remit a part of his ancient Regal power) is well pleased that it be
enacted: And be it enacted; That where the Kings Majesty has been, or shall
be out of possession, for the space of twenty years; or shall not have taken
the profits of any lands, or tenements, within the space of twenty years; That
in such case the Defendant may plead the general issue, if they think fit:
And shall not be pressed to plead specially; And shall retain the possession,
till the title be tried and found for the King. And that no Scire facias, shall
be brought to put the party to a special pleading, where an information may be
fitly brought.

By these and many other of the like nature; It must be agreed, that ancient,
Regal, and inseparable Prerogatives, and powers, may be, and have been
qualified, bounded, and limited for the ease and benefit of the Subjects.

And give me leave to say this of Parliaments, 36. Edw. 3. cap. 10.
that they have been esteemed by the wisdom of former times, to be so
necessary, as there were acts of Parliament heretofore made in the time of King
Edward the third; which you may see, Anno 36. Edw. 3. cap. 10. That for the
maintenance of Articles, and Statutes, and for the redress of diverse
mischiefs, and grievances, which daily happen, it was enacted that a
Parliament should be holden every year.

Bracton fo. 1.
Another reason is, that they have been esteemed necessary for determining of
difficult matters: And therefore Bracton, who wrote in the time of King Henry
the third, fo. 1 Leges Anglicanae and consuetudines approbatae consensu
utentium, and sacramento Regis confirmatae, mutari non poterunt nec destrui,
sine consensu and consilio eorum, quorum consensu and consilio fuerunt
promulgatae: sin autem aliqua nova and inconsueta emerserint, quae prius
usitata non fuerunt in Regno, et obscurum sit eorum judicium, tunc ponentur
judicia in respectu usque ad magnani curiam, ubi per consensum curiae
terminentur.

The Stat. of Winchester. 13. Edw 1. Libr. 2. Edw. 3. fol 7.
See to this purpose, an excellent case in 2. Edw. 3. fo. 7. upon the Statute of
Winchester, where a robbery was done, and a recovery against the hundred next
adjoining, and a levy made of the Bishop of Coventries tenements, of the
Hundredth in Staffordshire, The Bishop came into Court and pleaded a Charter of
exemption made by King Richard the first, and a confirmation thereof by King
Edw. the first: And for the difficluty upon the Charters, and upon the
exposition of the words of the Statute, there came a Writ to remove the record
into the Parliament, Quindecim Pasch. and the Sheriff was appointed to attend
there with the money levied.

See the Register, Vide ^e Register. fo. 27 ^.
where it appears, that certain Messengers had from the Pope served Process
upon an Officer of the Court of Chancery, then held at York, to command him by
those Bulls to appear at Rome; And for this contempt, the party who served the
said Process, was committed to the Castle at York: And at length the Kings
Majesty by the entreaty of diverse of the Great men of the Realm, was content,
upon taking bond, that he should answer the said contempt, ad proximum
Parliamentum nostrum, ubicunque illud summoniri contigerit, to deliver him out
of prison.

The Statute Winch. 2. cap. 28.
Then the Statute of Winchester 2. the twenty eighth chapter of Concordent
Clerici in Cancel. de novo brevi, vel attendent in prox. Parliamentum.

The further necessity and estimation, which have been taken to be of
Parliaments, is the number and frequencie of them; For you may see by the
commentaries upon Littleton, fo. 100. that before the Conquest, and in the
Conquerors time, and after till the end of King Henry the third his time, there
were two hundred eighty Sessions of Parliament; And since almost two hundred.

Dr. and Student. fo. 12.
Another reason, as I conceive, to be collected out of the oath, which the Kings
of this Realm take at their Coronation, which is Printed in Magna Charta,
whereby the King agrees to give consent to such Laws, as shall be propounded
for the profit and good of the Kingdom.

And that I conceive is the cause, that when Bills come up, being agreed by
both the Houses; the Kings Majesty, to those he does not allow, or not like of,
does make no direct denial, but Le Roy le avisera. For nothing can be done
without the Kings consent, who has sole power to call, to prorogue and to
dissolve Parliaments at his pleasure. And I know not, whether the last meeting
in Parliament, either by ill choice of the members of that House, or by the
great increase of the number, or by the ambitious humors of some members of
that house^ who aimed more at their own ends, and designs, then the general
good of the Commonwealth; Things were so carried, not as was used in ancient
time, but so disasterously, that it has wrought such a distaste of this course
of Parliaments, as we, and all that truly love the Commonwealth have just cause
to be sorry for it.

NOw I come to my third head, The third part.
that is, to give answer to such precedents as have been showed, and insisted
upon, to prove that the Kings of this Realm, have made such impositions, even
in the matter of Shipping.

And herein first they have insisted upon a tribute, The first Precedent.
or imposition called Danegelt, which was begun in Etheldreds time, which as
it was said, was double, ad placandos Danos, vel ad coercendum Danos, which was
very grievous and of long continuance; For as it was said by my Brother Croke,
it was first ten thousand pounds yearly, then increased to sixteen thousand,
then to twenty four thousand, then to thirty six thousand yearly: And from
twelve pence for every hide of Land, to twelve shillings for every hide of land.

This Tribute continued after the Danes, for in the time of the Normans, it
became to be called a tallage, or tax; King Henry the first granted to the
Citizens of London to be quit, and free from Danegelt: And the same King about
the thirtieth year of his reign, in redemption of his sin, did grant that
Danicum Tributum should be totally released for seven years, Spelman. fo. 200.
as it appears in Sr. Henry Spelmans book entitled Glossarium, fol. 200.

Resp. 1.
To this I give this answer, that by the Statute of 34. Edw. 1. De tallagio non
concedendo but by Parliament, this was taken away: And thereupon insues a
strong argument, that if such a thing as the Danegelt, which had so long
continued, were not taken away by these acts of Parliament, it might have been
put in use: For no man will maintain, that this tribute of Danegelt, can now
be imposed at this day by the Kings Writ, under the great Seal, which it might
be if these Statutes had not taken it away.

And for this purpose, 34. Ed. 1. cap. 8.
in the Statutes made in the four and thirtieth year of King Edw. 1. cap. 8.
The King grants to Clerks and Laymen, that they shall have their laws,
liberties, and free customs, as they have used the same at any time when they
had them best; And if any Statutes have been made, or any customs brought in
by us; or our Ancestors to the contrary, that they shall be void and frustrate
for evermore.

And concerning the generality of precedents, which have been made use of on
the one side, and on the other, out of Membrana's, Patents, and Commissions,
and answers to petitions in the Rolls of Parliament (to Petitions;) I am very
sorry that such obsolete and ancient things, have been mentioned, many of
which, in my judgment, had been better to have slept in silence, then to have
been spoken of in these times.

But for a general answer to all such as have been showed before, the
Statutes de Tallagio non concedendo, And the Statute of 14. Ed. 3. may be
given, And that is that they are of no force being now expressly taken away by
the said Statutes; And to such as have been showed since, some in the time of
Edward the third, they are but very few, and being directly contrary to the
Statute then in force, they are not available to prove the lawfulness of this
Taxation: besides, King Edward the third acknowledged that he had charged his
people with great burdens, and desired that they might be forgotten; And that
he was urged to it by necessity, and not for any ill end of his own, as
appeared upon the reading thereof in Court.

The commission bearing date the 20. of November An. 27. Edw. 1.
And lastly, there were many effectual precedents showed, that for imbarging of
Ships, and for building of Galleys at Bristow, specially set down in number,
and the content, and so in diverse Port Towns: And they are enjoined, in fide
quanobis tenemini, et sicut honorem nostram diligitis, and exhereditationem
nostram vitare, and sicut nos ipsos indempnos servare volueritis; herein is a
strong command, and as great necessity; And yet there was a Clause in these
Commissions, ( viz.) Et vestrum quod ad illud posueritis, cum illud sciverimus
in exitibus Balivat' allocari faciemus.

And in 2. Hen. 4. Parliament recites that 2 Hen. 4. Number. 22.
where diverse Commissions were made to diverse Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, to
command the making of certain Barges, and Billingers without the assent of
Parliament, and in another manner then had been done before; The Commons did
pray the King, that the said commissions might be repealed, and that they
should be of no force, or effect; And the King answered, that the said
commissions should be repealed for ever.

But for the great necessity of such Vessels, for the defense of the Realm in
case that the Wars do come, the King will commune of this matter with the
Lords, and after he will show it to the Commons to have their consent.

And so I leave those precedents, which together with some other Objections,
have been fully answered by my brother Croke, and proceed to my further point.

The fourth part.
THat is that since the time of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, there
have been no such thing attempted, and that this disuse is a sufficient matter
to prove the unlawfulness; For since that time, though there have been in the
reigns of many Kings, occasion of employments, both of ships for the defense
of the Sea, and service of the Land, yet the course and order of defense has
been by several other ways: As by commissions to provide men for to serve for
wages; And by Indentures of covenants, which were very frequent to be made
between the Captain, and the King, that he should covenant to serve with so
many men, for such particular times, and for such wages as were comprised
therein, and the precedents of modern times have been this way all for wages.

This is proved by an Indenture made in the fifteenth year of Edward the
fourth, and Sr. William Pirton Knight, reciting that the King had disposed of
an Army of four thousand men for the narrow Seas, and the keeping of them; And
that he should have constantly four hundred sixty men under him, for four
months, The Kings Majesty was to find the ships furnished with Guns, Powder,
Artillery, and Victual, and that the said William Pirton, should take wages
for every of his Company, ( viz.) two shillings a week, and the times
appointed for the payment thereof.

And the eight and twentieth of King Henry the eight it appears, by a letter
under the privy Signet then, when by command men were raised in the County of
Lancaster, and by command coming toward the county of Lincoln, to aid the
suppression of rebels, The rebels having submitted before they came, they
were commanded to return, and for their charges in their entertainment, and
conveying of the^ a reasonable bil should be made, and sent to the King by a
trusty messenger, and he would cause a convenient recompense to be delivered
accordingly.

And for that which has been insisted upon, that there has been Commissions
of Array, and provision for Arms, and for preparing Armor from time to time;
It is not to be denied, That first by several Statutes, as that of Winchester
and diverse since; The Armor, and Weapons, wherewith the Subjects of this
Realm have been charged, are several, and changed according to the variety
of times, as things have grown out of use; And other manner of provision more
serviceable and necessary, for which there have been directions for views, and
for trayning, and disciplining of Soldiers, to be prepared for defense; that
this has been in use no man can or ever could deny; or affirm the contrary:
But the Arms wherewith they were charged were their own proper goods; And in
all the Prerogatives which have been before by Mr. Attorney general urged,
that the King has interest in men's goods, and to execute his writs by his
Sheriffs upon men's persons, and in their lands, for giving possession, and for
levying amerciaments, and fines, and power to put some of his Subjects out of
their possessions, and to deliver the possession thereof to others, as it
appears in Ploydon in Manxells case which was vouched by Mr. Attorney general.

This is very true, for this is a thing which the King is bound to do for the
good of his Subjects.

For as it is agreed in 34. H. 6. fo. 14. 34. H. 6. fo. 14.
The Kings Majesty is bound to keep his Courts of Chancery, and all his other
Courts at his own charge; And 39. H. 6. fo. 40. The King is bound to do Law
and right to all his Subjects; which without these powers and prerogatives
could not be performed.

Out of these and the like of murage and pontage, there can no sound argument
be drawn, to warrant this provision of Ships, and men, and furniture for
war, when the King will so appoint.

But I conceive that it has been generally agreed by all the Judges ( nullo
contradicente) that if this Writ of 4. Augusti, which is for provision of a
Ship, and furniture, and men, had been for to have authorized the Sheriffs to
have levied moneys of the Subjects for that purpose; That then the Writ could
not have given power to have done it, because that would have been expressly
against the Statutes; And if that be granted, then considering that these Writs
to the Sheriffs, are accompanied with instructions, commanding and directing
the levying of money, and proportioning what sum is to be raised in every
County for that service; As in the County of York, and in the County of the
City of York, the sum of twelve thousand pounds, and the sum of eight
thousand pounds for the County of Lincoln: And so a proportion of money for
every County for that purpose: The consequence thereof may be this, that this
levy, which has obtained the name of Ship Money, and wherein no endeavor has
ever been made for preparing any such Ship, or furniture, or men, as the Writ
in it self purports, is not pursued, or warranted by this general levy of
ship, money: for it is a rule, Id quod non fieri potest direct, ex obliquo
fieri non debet.

I confess that diverse of the Kings of this Realm, have upon some pretended
occasions, taken upon them by persuasion of some Great men in their time, and
assumed a Royal and Monarchical power, to levy moneys by Commissions, and
have extended that power very far, whereof you may read, That in the
seaventeenth year of King Henry the eight; 17. H. 8. Anno Dom. 1525.
Cardinal Woolsie was charged to have been the cause of directing Commissions
into all Countries, for the levying of the sixth part of all men's goods, and the
sixth part of their Plate, for that the King was then determined to make war
with France, and to pass the Sea himself: This being attempted by enforcing
some, and sending others to prison, it grew to be so generally misliked, that
the people rose up in diverse Countries, and the^ the King disclaimed that it
was done without his Privity: The Cardinal charged it to be done; first by the
consent of the Counsel; which they denied; then he charged the Judges to be
consenting, which being untrue, the Cardinal took it to himself; And all the
Commissions were recalled, you may see it at large set down in diverse
Chronicles: And in the latter times of our gracious Queen Elizabeth, upon
pretense of want, for expeditions in Ireland, There was a general Benevolence
required, and it went on for a time, and so far as it came to be voluntarily
levied in the Innes of Court; And I can speak it of my own knowledge, I paid a
sum, I think but twenty shillings, The attempt to have a Benevolence for Queen
Elizabeth.
and others paid likewise: But not long after (as it was said) when the Queen
was informed, that this Benevolence was expressly against the Statute of Richard
the third, and against the Laws, and distasteful; All the moneys levied was
commanded to be restored and repaied, and mine was, and the rest was so to
others, as I heard, and do verily believe; and this was attempted by so
gracious a Queen.

And to speak nothing of the Commission dated the thirteenth day of October, in
the second year of our gracious Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, for the
Loan and levying of the five Subsidies, which was effected, and acknowledged
after not to be warranted by the Laws and Statutes: This point is apparent,
That in time of necessities these Legal or Monarchical Powers have been
assumed in the times of other Kings.

And hereupon I conclude these points, That the Statutes have taken away this
power of charging the Subjects of this Realm with any general and public
Charge, Aid or Tallages, or burdens for any business, but only by their
consent in Parliament, and no Usage, Precedent, or Custom, if any such have
been, can by Law take away the force of these Acts of Parliament, so long as
they stand in force.

And I do absolutely believe, that if the Kings Majesty had not been persuaded
by some opinions, that this course was warranted by Law, and Custom of the
Realm, that he would not have attempted the same.

NOw I proceed to the fifth part; The fifth part.
That the matter which is contained in the Writ of 4. Augusti, Anno 11. Car.
does not contain sufficient matter to warrant this levy.

First, the words of the Writ are not any affirmance directly of any danger,
for they are but Quia datum est nobis intelligi; this is but of information,
and not ex certa scientia, which are of more force: The other words are but of
information or suggestion.

Then for the matter; It contains only these points, That there are many
Pirates and Sea-robbers, congregated upon the Sea, to take away some of our
Subjects into miserable Captivity, and to hinder our Merchants to bring in
their merchandises and goods, and the goods and Merchandises of the Subjects of
our friends coming and traffiquing hither; and spoiling of our Merchants: And
for that the Sea has bin, and ought to be defended by Gentem Anglicanam, And
they inttending to trouble the Kingdom;

And we considering the danger every where now imminent, and desiring the
defense of the Realm, the safe-gard of the Sea, the security of our Subjects,
the safe conducting of the ships of our Merchants, and of their merchandises,
to come into our Realm, and to go forth of the Realm, and willing to provide
for their aid, do therefore direct this Writ.

Here is no matter of any public danger to all the Subjects, no intended
coming upon the Land, but to rob and spoil as Pirates by Sea, and
conspirators to molest Merchants, to hinder traffic, to take some prisoners,
as have bin done heretofore, sometimes by the Dunkirks, and many times by the
Pirates to Argiers.

All this is but such a defense as does require but the ordinary defense, to
the which the Kings Majesty is solely bound for to see performed, for the
ordinary benefits, that he has of Customs, and Subsidies of Wines, and other
profits, besides the Tunnage and Poundage; And the Ships which are provided by
the Cinque ports, for which they have many privileges.

This matter contained in the Writ, by all the particulars, does not comprize
any general assault or attempt to be made for taking any Towns, as has been
beforetime.

Another reason to prove that the Writ does not contain sufficient matter to
induce a general charge (is to be collected,) That this being perceived, it is
contained more amply, and labored to be aided and supplied by the words put
into the Mittimus, which are of more efficacy; For therein is contained, which
is not in the Writ of 4. Augusti: Quod pro defensione Regni, and tuitione
maris; And for that, Salus Regni nostri Angliae and populi nostri
periclitabatur: And the recital of [ Datum est nobis intelligi] is omitted,
but hereby affirmed positively.

And where my Brother Berkley insisted; That the matter contained in the
Mittimus was sufficient to supply the Writ of 4. Augusti, if it were not so
fully expressed as it should have been.

Thereunto I make this answer, Quod in initio non valet, tractatu temporis non
convalescet: Besides the date of the Writ of Mittimus is the fifth of May Anno
13. Car. Regis, which is almost two years after the Writ of 4. Augusti did
issue; And this is a very late supply: And therefore that Case was vouched by
my Brother Berkley which was Dowmans Case An. 25. and 26. Eliz. and reported by
my Lord Cook in his ninth book, 25. and 26. Eliz. Cook l. 9. f. 1. in Dowmans
Case.
wherein it is adjudged that when a Fine or Recovery is suffered and no uses
declared, That an Indenture subsequent declaring that the fine or recovery was
to such uses, shall be sufficient in Law, to lead to the uses of those
proceeding assurances; Which I agree to be good Law. But that does not resemble
this case, for this must be good in the foundation, or no subsequent
declaration can make that good which at the first was not. And that I prove by
two Cases directly adjudged.

The first is Vernons Case Anno 14. Eliz. adjudged Coke li. 4. Vernons case.
and reported by my Lord Coke in his fourth book upon the Statute of joynture^
A man intending to make a jointure to his Wife to bar her of her Dower,
makes a Feoffement of his land to the use of himself for his life, and then
to the use of a friend for his life, and then to the use of his wife for a
jointure; Although by success of time it happens that the friend dye in the
life of the feoffor, and so the wives estate becomes immediate to begin upon
her husbands death, and might have been a good jointure, if it had been so
made at the first, yet this case is adjudged to be no jointure, for it was not
good in the foundation, and that which was defective in the Original, is no^
good by any accident subsequent.

And in the Lord Chenyes Case reported by my Lord Coke in his fifth Book, Coke.
l. 5. f. 68. le Signior Chenyes case.
fo. 62. in the four and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, It is resolved
upon the Statute of Wills, that the estate contained in a Will in writing,
which is the foundation and ground, must be such as is expressed in the written
original Will, and that no averment or subsequent proof of intention, or
explanation can add or supply any thing to that Original.

And as in these cases the original foundation cannot be supplied by
subsequent addition; So the Writ of 4. Augusti being the Original, cannot be
supplied by subsequent explanation.

Excep. 2.
Another Exception is, that by the Writ, all the Kings Majesty's Subjects are to
be rated and taxed to contribution, other then such as have part in the Ship,
or else do serve therein. 8. H. 6.19.18. H. 3.9. Eliz.
And hereby the Sheriff of every County, must either not be taxed or not
contribute, for it is inconvenient nor can be done, that every Sheriff should
tax himself.

Next for the Writ of Certiorare, that is very unusual to be directed to two
several Sheriffs being then no Sheriffs, to certify what taxations they had
made upon that Writ; They were then no Officers: but it should either have come
by Inquisition, or by the return of the then present Sheriff, to have
certified what his predecessors had done in their times, and not this way which
was never before heard of.

And then touching the Scire facias it self, The Scire fac.
I am of opinion that it does not lie, for many causes: First, Reason 1.
the sum so assessed does not appertain to the King; And for the Kings
Majesty to have a Scire facias, for to enforce him to do or pay that which
belongs to another, is not usual. Secondly, 2.
it is not showed that any Ship, or provision of men, or munition, was prepared
or provided, which is a contempt in the Sheriff. Thirdly, 3.
the direction by the Writ is to distrain, or to commit to Prison such as shall
refuse; and no other course appointed by the said Writ, for the levying
thereof. Fourthly, 4.
the Scire facias ought to be awarded out of a Presentment, or Inquisition,
whereby the matter may be found, whereby the King is entitled, or upon some
Presentiments which concern the Commonwealth, as presentiments that a common
bridge is in decay, and that either a particular man is bound to repair it, or
that it is in default of the County, or of the inhabitants of such a Hundred;
And the like for repair of highwaies: there I agree as was said by my Brother
Trevor, A Scire facias is usually awarded out of the Exchequer; But I conceive
these prove, that without a presentment or inquisition that no Scire facias
does properly lie or ought to be awarded.


And therefore I will conclude this with the Case of 2. Edw. 3. fo. 2. the King
by his Writ directed to the Sheriff of Lancaster, reciting, That where Sr.
John Langton had delivered diverse sums of money to one Robert his Companion,
to come to the King in aid of his wars in Scotland. And the said Robert did
not come, but did spoil and take the Goods and Chattels of diverse of our
Subjects in the said County, and did rob, and spoil, and wast the goods of our
Subjects to the Value of two thousand li. ut accepimus le Roy command to the
Sheriff, De attach the body of the said Robert, and he was attached, and did
appear: And by his Counsel alleged, that upon this suggestion the King being
not otherwise apprised by indictment or otherwise, this suit did not lie for
the King, and the parties grieved may have their suits.

And thereupon the Court was advised, and took time to speak with the
Chancellor, to see if he had any matter, out of which the said Writ was
awarded: And afterward, because this Writ was grounded upon a suggestion
against the Common Law, therefore the said Robert was discharged, which is a
stronger Case then ours. And for these reasons I conclude this Part, that no
Scire facias ought to be awarded in this case.

NOw it remains to give answer to that which has been before objected and
spoken of only by Mr Solicitor, The sixth part.
that the Judges had before given their opinions to warrant the legality of
this charge, and subscribed their names.

First, I do affirm, and it does appear by my Argument, that this Case now in
question does not concern nor contradict the matter of the Subscription; for
the matter whereunto the Subscription was made, is, That when the good and
safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in
danger, That then for the defense of the Kingdom from such danger, the King
may by Writ impose the provision of Ships with furniture and men.

But if only there be Pirates and Robbers of the Sea assembled together by Sea
to rob, spoil, and take the goods and marchandises that are to be brought into
the Kingdom, and safe conducting of the Merchants from spoil, as no other
particular thing is alleged in the Writ of 4. Augusti, I think it will be
granted that this does not by our opinions enable the King to make such a
general charge upon that occasion.

But if there were an intended Invasion, and that known to the Kings Majesty
whom it concerns most, and upon such an intention, in such a case of
necessity, which is and may be termed a time of such danger, as it may be ^it
to prepare for (...) of the Realm, Then I am of opinion that in such a case,
all that has been said, that Necessitas est Lex temporis, and Salus
Reipublicae est summa lex, and then Silent inter arma leges, might be just
causes for that time only to make a preparation of Ships. And in this case
here does not appear that there was not any one Ship provided or prepared by
any Sheriff.

The King is the sole owner and Lord of the Sea, Mich. 4. Iac. Bates his case.
and has power thereof: And as it was agreed in a notable Case that was
adjudged in the Exchequer, Mich. the fourth year of King James, against one
Bates, wherein I was then of Council, the King may lay an Imposition upon
foreign commodities to be brought into this Realm, for there was 5. s. laid
upon every hundred weight of Currants, over and besides the 2. s. 6. d. for
poundage: And Bates having notice of this Imposition, brought in a Ship
fraighted with Currants, and paid the 2. s. 6. d. for poundage, but refused to
pay the 5. s. for every hundred weight: And upon information, the Case was
argued at the Bar, and at the Bench; and it wa^ ^djudg^d, that the Imposi^ion
was lawful, and that the King in his prerogative had totum dominium maris, and
that all the Ports were the Kings, and that the King had sole power to
restrain or forbid the going beyond the sea; the sole appointment into what
Countries the Merchants should or might trade, and to appoint into what
countries they should not trade. And for these respects, the King was to
maintain the Ports, to provide for the safety of the Merchants, and to clear
and scowre the narrow Seas from Pirates and Robbers, for the doing whereof was
added the tonnage and poundage by grant in Parliament.

The Letter r^quiring answer was dated 2. F^b.

The answer 7. F^b.


Lastly, these sudden opinions, when Judges hear no Arguments, are of no such
force as to bind them to continue the same opinion: But that when they shall
have heard Arguments, and be better informed, they may alter and change, which
has usually happened. Besides, as it is very well known, we were not all of
opinion, but the greater number then concurring, the Subscription was for
conformity, as sometimes is used in such cases.

Lastly, Obj. upon the Def. general Demurrer.
it has been objected, that the Defendant by his general Demurrer has
confessed all the matters to be true which are surmised in the Scire facias.

To this it is answered, Resp.
that a Demurrer confesses the matters of fact which are sufficiently
alleged; but such matters in fact as are not sufficiently alleged, those are
not confessed, but left to the judgment of the Court.

See these Cases so adjudged and resolved in these Books, Lib. 4. fo. 43. in
Hudsons Case.
Coke Lib. 4. fo. 43. in Hudsons Case, Et fol. 71. Hindes Case.
matter sufficiently alleged est confess: And according to this it is agreed
in Hindes Case, in the same Book, fol. 71.

The very express Case is that of Birton upon Usury, which was, Anno 33. and
34. Eliz. where it is adjudged that a Demurrer confesses nothing that is
insufficiently alleged; as where a matter of usury is alleged, and is not so
sufficiently alleged, that it appears to be Usurie, the Demurrer does not
confess that to be Usurie, as is pretended.

So likewise in this case, the Demurrer general does not nor can supply the
defect of the matter which should have been comprised in the Writ of 4.
Augusti. The Demurrer confesses that there was such a Writ, but does neither
confess the lawfulness thereof, nor the defect of the insufficient alleging
of any matter which should have been contained therein.

And thus with as much brevity and perspicuity as want of memory and other
infirmities which attend upon my age would suffer me, and without either
preamble or protestation, I conclude with that, which my brother Berkley used
in the beginning of his speech, That the people of this Realm are Subjects,
and not slaves; Freemen, and not villeins; and therefore not to be taxed De
alto and basso, and at will, but according to the Laws of this Kingdom.

And therefore I conclude, that neither for the matter, nor for the manner,
this Writ of Scire facias brought in this Court of Exchequer, upon the tenor
thereof, can be maintained. And therefore in my opinion I advise the Barons to
give judgment accordingly for the Defendant.

This is the same which I did deliver in my Argument in the same manner that I
did argue.

FINIS.
THE CERTIFICATE OF Sir JOHN DENHAM, Knight, One of the Barons of the
Exchequer, concerning SHIP MONEY. 26. Maii, Anno Do. 1638.
MAy it please your Lordships, I had provided my self to have made a short
Argument, and to have delivered my Opinion, with the Reasons; but by reason of
want of rest this last night, (my old disease being upon me) my sickness and
weakness are greatly increased, insomuch that I cannot attend the business as
I desire: And if my Opinion be required, it is for the Plaintiff.

JO: DENHAM.
Serjeants-Inne in Fleetstreet, 26. Maii; 1638.
His second Certificate directed to the Lo: Chief Justice Bramston, 28. Maii,
1638.
My Lo:
Understanding that some misconstruction was taken by some in the declaration
of mine opinion, which I desired your Lordship the last Saturday to deliver in
my name; for farther satisfaction therein, although I was most desirous to have
passed my Vote in silence in this work of w^igh^, by reason I heard not the
last four Arguments, yet I delivered my opinion for the Plaintiff, which I
took to be Hampden, by reason it appeared by the Record, that he coming in
upon Process, Queritur se color praemissorum graviter vexari, and hoc minus
just, etc. which satisfied me that he was Plaintiff. And therefore I now
declare my opinion for Mr Hampden, who did demur.

I shall only deliver these two Reasons for maintaining of my Argument.

THe first is, That His Majesty is Sola and: And the rule of the Law is, and
has always been, That his Majesty can do no wrong. And thereupon arises
another Rule in our Law, (which I give for my second Reason) That the Kings
Majesty goods are not to be recovered to the use of the King, as forfeited.

Upon consideration whereof, and comparing the same with His Majesty's Royal
Writ, I find no Judgment thereupon had or given, which were the chiefest
reasons of my opinion for Mr Hampden.

28. Maii, 1638.
FINIS.
The Argument of Sir George Crook, Knight, one of the Judges of the Kings
Bench, upon the case of the Scire facias out of the Exchequer, against John
Hampden, Esquire, decimo quarto Aprilis, Anno Domini, 1638.
The Case is this upon the Record,

THe King, by Writ under his great Seal, dated 4to Augusti anno 110 of his
reign, directed to the Sheriff of the County of Bucks, and to all the men of
that County, commands them in these words:

Quia datum est nobis intelligi, The motives of the Writ, which are five.
Quod Praedones quidam Pirati, ac maris Grassatores, tam nominis Christianae
hosts Mahumetani, quam alii congregati, nostrorum, verum etiam Subditorum
amicorum nostrorum in mari, Quod per gentem Anglicanam ob olim defendi
consuevit, nefarie diripientes and spoliantes ad libitum suum, deportavere
hominesque in eisdem in captivitatem miserrimam mancipantes.

Cumque ipsos conspicimus navigium indies praeparantes ad Mercatores nostros
ulterius molestand', Et ad regnum gravand', nisi citius remedium apponatur,
eorumque conatum virilius obvietur.

Consideratis etiam periculis quae undique his guerrinis temporibus imminent;
Ita quod Nobis and Subditis nostris defensionem maris and regni omni
festinatione qua poterimus accellerare convenit.

Nos volentes defensione regni, tuitione maris, securitate Subditorum
nostrorum, salva conductione navium and merchandizarum ad regnum nostrum
Angliae venientium, and de eodem regno ad parts exteras transeuntium
(auxiliante Deo) providere; Maxim cum Nos and Progenitores nostri Reges
Angliae, Domini maris praedicti, semper hactenus extiter, and plurimum nos
laeder', si honor iste Regius nostris temporibus depereat, aut in aliquo
minuatur.

Cumque onus istud defensionis quod omnes tangit, per omnes debeat supportari,
prout per legem and consuetudinem regni Angliae fieri consuevit.

Vobis praefatis Vicecomitibus, The charges in this Writ are three.
Ballivis, Burgens. Maioribus, probis hominibus, and omnibus aliis quibuscunque
supramencionat' in Burgis, Villis, Villatis, Hamlettis, and locis supradictis,
eorumque membris in fide and ligeancia, quibus nobis tenemini, and sicut nos
and honorem nostrum diligitis: Necnon sub forisfactur' omnia quae nobis
forisfacere poteritis firmiter injungemus.

Mandamus quod unam navem de guerra, The commands of this Writ, which are five.
portagii 450. dolior' cum hominibus, tam magistris peritis, quam marinariis
valentior and expertis centum and octoginta ad minus, Ac tormentis tam
majoribus quam minoribus, pul^^^ tormentario, ac hastis, and telis, aliisque
armatoriis necessariis pro guerra sufficien': Et cum duplici Escippamento,
necnon victualibus usque ad primum diem Martii tunc proxime sequentem, ad tot
homines competen'; and ab inde i^ viginti and sex septiman' ad custagia vestra
tam in victualibus, quam homin' salariis, and aliis ad guerram necessariis per
tempus (...) super defensionem maris in obsequio nostro in Comit' custodis
maris, cui custodiam maris ante praedict' primum diem Martii committemus, and
prout ipse ex part nostra dictaverit moratur parari; Et ad portum de
Portsmouth citra dictum primum diem Martii duci faciatis. The end, for which
this ship is to be prepared.
Ita quod sint ibidem eodem die ad ultimum ad proficiscend exinde cum navibus
nostris, and navibus aliorum fidelium Subditorum nostrorum pro tuitione maris,
and defensione vestrum and vestrorum, repulsioneque, debellationeque
quorumcunque Mercatorum nostrorum, and alios Subditos and fideles praedictos in
Dominia nostra ex causa Mercatur' se divertentes, vel abinde ad propr'
declinantes super mare gravare, seu molestare satagent': assignavimus autem te
praefatum Vic' Bucks ad assidend' omnes homines in villis de Agmundesham, The
clause of the ass^ssement for the expenses.
Wendov', and Marloe magna, and in omnib^s aliis Villis, Villatis, Burgis,
Hamlettis, and aliis ^ocis-in Com' Bucks, and terrae tenentes in eisdem navem
vel partem navis praed' non habentes^ vel in eadem non deservientes, ad
contribuend' expens. erga provisionem praemiss. necessar.

Et super praedictas Villas, Villatas, Burgos, Hamlettas, and locos cum membris
eorundem, sic ut praefertur, assidend ^ ponend' viz. Quemlibet eorum super
statum suum, and facultates suas, and portiones super ipsos assessat' per
districtiones, aliosve modos debitos levand' and Collectores in hac part
nominand' and constituend', Ac omnes eos quos rebels et contrarios inveneris
in praemissis, in carcere mancipand' in eodem moratur, quousque pro eorum
deliberatione ulterius duxerimus ordinand.

Et ulterius mandamus quod citra praemiss. The purclose of the Writ.
diligenter intendatis, et faciatis, et exequamini cum effectu sub periculo
incumbente: Nolumus autem, quod color praedicti mandati nostri, plus de eisdem
hominibus levari faciat, quam ad praemiss. sufficiat expens. necessar. Et quod
quisquam qui pecuniam de contributionibus ad praedict' custag' faciend'
levaverit, eam, vel partem inde aliquam penes se detineat, vel ad alios usus,
quovis^quae sito color appropriare praesumat, volentes quod si plus quam
sufficiat collectum fuerit, hoc inter solventes pro rata portionis ipsis
contingen' exsolvat'.

By virtue of this Writ, Master Hampden is assessed to twenty shillings for his
lands in Stoke Mandivill in that County, which not being paid, is certified
(amongst others) into the Chancery upon a Writ of Certiorari, dated 9. Martii,
anno 12. Car. by a Schedule thereunto annexed: And by a Writ of mittimus Test,
5. Maii, 13. Car. this Writ of quarto Augusti anno 11. Car. and the Writ of
Certiorari, and the Schedule annexed is sent unto the Exchequer, with a command
there to do for the levying of the sums so assessed and unpaid ( Prout de
jure, et secundum legem regni nostri Angliae fuerit faciend.) Whereupon a Scire
facias issued out of the Exchequer, reciting the said Writs, to warn Master
Hampden amongst others, to show cause why he should not be charged with this
money. Upon this, he being summoned, appears, and demands the hearing of
those Writs and Schedule, which being entered, thereupon he demurreth in law.

And whether judgment upon this whole Record be to be given against John
Hampden, that he is to be charged or no, that is the question: for he is the
only party in this Case: And there is no cause, why any man should say, that
the question is, Whether judgment should be given for the King, or for the
Defendant; for, as this case is, the King is no party to the Record, but only
it is a judicial process out of the Exchequer, grounded upon those former
Records for the Defendant, to show cause why he should not be charged, which
has been very elaborately argued by the Defendants Council (who demurred)
that he should not be charged; and by the Kings Council very learnedly and
elaborately argued, that he should be charged.

This Case is a Case of great weight, and the greatest Case of weight that ever
we read argued by Judges in this place; and therefore adjourned into this
place, for advice of all the Judges: For of the one side it is alleged, that
it concerns the King in his Prerogative and power Royal: And on the other
side, that it concerns all the Kings Subjects in their liberties, their
persons, and their estates: For which cause, it has made some of us to wish
and move among our selves, that it might have been (by his Majesty's favor)
heard and determined in another place by his Majesty, and his great Council of
his Realm: Where all conveniences and inconveniences might have been
considered of, provided for, and prevented for present and future times, and
not to be argued only by us, who are accounted his Majesty's Council at law;
wherein if any thing be done amiss, the fault must light upon us, as
mis-advising the King therein: But seeing that it has pleased his Majesty,
that the same should be argued and determined in this place, whose pleasure we
must obey, I must give my best advice upon my oath to the best of my skill;
wherein, I hope not to trench upon his Highness Prerogative, which we are all
bound by our oaths to the best of our skills to maintain, and not to suffer to
be diminished; nor upon his Royal power: but truly to deliver what I conceive
the law to be concerning the Case in question.

Wherein I must confess, I have been much distracted, having heard so learned
Arguments on both sides at the Bar; and so many Records and Presidents cited
on either side: But they did not so much move me; for the Council have of
either side pressed such reasons and arguments, and cited such Records, as they
thought convenient for the maintaining of their opinions; and perhaps with a
prejudicate opinion, as I my self, by mine own experience, when I was at the
Bar, have argued confidently: And as I then thought the law to be of that
side for whom I argued; but after, being at the Bench, weighing indifferently
all reasons and authorities, have been of a contrary opinion: And so the law
has been adjudged contrary to that opinion, which I first confidently
conceived; but that which has moved me most, and makes me most mistrust mine
own judgment in this Case, is, That all my Brothers (who have all argued upon
their oaths, and I presume, have seen the Records and Presidents cited on
either side) have all argued one way, with whose opinions I should willingly
have concurred, if I could have satisfied mine own judgment with their
reasons; but not being satisfied, I have learned, that I must not run with a
multitude against mine own conscience: for, I must stand or fall unto mine
own Master; and therefore I shall show mine own reasons, and leave my self
to the judgments of my Lords, and others my Brethren: And whatsoever shall be
adjudged, I must submit unto, and so do wish all others; and do now declare
mine opinion to be, That, as this Case is, judgment ought to be given for the
Defendant.

But before I proceed to the Argument, I desire to remove two difficulties:
First, that by the Demurrer the danger of the Kingdom is confessed, and so to
be a Case of necessity.

To this I answer, that the Demurrer confesses not matters in fact, but where
the matter is legally set down; but if it be not a legal proceeding, then the
Demurrer is no confessing of the matter in fact.

This appears in the Book Case of 5. Hen. 7. fol. 1. and Cook, lib. 5. fol.
69. in Burtons Case, that a Demurrer is no confessing in matters of fact; but
where the matter precedent is sufficiently pleaded and laid down, and so it is
holden in all our Books.

The second difficulty is, that this Case is so resolved by all our opinions
under our hands, That this Writ was legal, which was much pressed by Master
Solicitor.

To this I answer, that it is true I have set down mine opinion under mine
hand unto a Case in February 1636. which is, that when the good and safety of
the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, his
Majesty may, by Writ under the great Seal of England, command all his Subjects
of this Kingdom, at their charges to provide and furnish such number of ships
with men, victuals, and munition; and for such time as his Majesty shall
think fit for the defense and safeguard of the Kingdom from such danger: And
that his Majesty may compel the doing thereof (in case of refusal and
refractorinesse) and that in such case his Majesty is the sole Judge of the
danger, and when, and how the same is to be prevented and avoided.

To this opinion, I confess, I then with the rest of the Judges subscribed my
hand: But I then dis-assented to that opinion, and then signified mine opinion
to be, that such a charge could not be laid by any such Writ, but by
Parliament; and so absolutely in that point one other did agree with me, and
dissent from that opinion which was after subscribed, and some others in some
other particulars from that which was subscribed: But, the greater part seeming
to be absolutely resolved upon that opinion, some of them affirming, that they
had seen diverse Records and Presidents of such Writs, satisfying them to be of
that judgment, I was pressed to subscribe with them: for that the greater
opinion must involve the rest, as it was said to be usual in Cases of
references. And that the lesser number must submit to the opinion of the more,
although they varied in opinion; as it is in our Courts, if three Judges agree
in opinion against one or two, where there is five Judges, judgment is to be
entered per Curiam, if the major part agree, and the others are to submit unto
it.

So in Cases of conference and certificate of their opinions, if the greater
part did agree and subscribe, the rest were to submit their opinions: And this
(by more ancient Judges then my self) was affirmed to be the continual
practice; and that it was not fit, especially in a Case of this nature so much
concerning the service of the King, for some to subscribe, and some to forbear
their subscription. And that although we did subscribe, yet it did not bind
any, but that in point of judgment, if the Case came in question judicially
before us, we should give our judgments, as we should see cause, after the
hearing of Arguments on both sides, and not to be bound by this sudden
resolution.

Hereupon I consented to subscribe; but I then said, in the mean time the King
might be misinformed by our Certificate under our hands, conceiving us all to
agree together, and give him this advice under our hands, and not know that
there was any that dissented, or was doubtful: But it was then said, the King
should be truly informed thereof. And thereupon, we that did dissent, did
subscribe our hands with such protestations as aforesaid, only for conformity,
although contrary to the opinion I then conceived.

But this being before Arguments heard of either side, or any Presidents seen,
I hold that none is bound by that opinion: And if I had been of that opinion as
was subscribed, yet now having heard all the Arguments of both sides, and the
Reasons of the Kings Council to maintain this Writ, and why the Defendant is
to be charged, and the Arguments of the Defendants Council against the Writ,
and their Reasons why the Defendant should not be charged to pay the money
assessed upon them: And having duly considered of the Records and Presidents
cited and showed unto me, especially those of the Kings side, I am now of an
absolute opinion, that this Writ is illegal, and declare my opinion contrary to
that which is subscribed by us all. And if I had been of the same opinion as
was subscribed, yet upon better advisement, being absolutely settled in my
judgment and conscience, in a contrary opinion I think it no shame to
declare, that I do retract that opinion: for, Humanum est errare, rather then
to argue against mine own conscience: And therefore now having (as I
conceived) removed these difficulties, I proceed to my Argument, and shall show
the Reasons of mine opinion, and leave the same, as I have said, to my Lords
and Brethren.

My reasons and grounds that I shall insist upon are these:

That the command, by this Writ of 4. Augusti, Caroli, to make ships at the
charge of the inhabitants of the County (being the ground of this suit, and
cause of this charge) is illegal, and contrary to the Common law, not being by
authority of Parliament.

That if at the Common law it had been

That it is not to be maintained by any

That admitting it were legal, to lay such a

I shall examine the Presidents and Records all the principal grounds of the
Arguments to maintain the same. And I conceive, there is not one President nor
Record in any precedent time, that has been produced and showed unto me,
that does maintain any Writ to lay such a charge upon any County, Inland, or
Maritine.











contrary to diverse Statutes, and not warranted by the Presidents.

That the perclose of the Writ, and the practice oppositu^ in objecto.

If this Writ were legal, yet the manner of

That the Certiorari, and Scire facias, issued

For the first point, that this Writ of 4. Augusti, 11. Car. is against the
Common law, my Reasons are these:

Because, that this is the first Writ, since the Littleton, fol. 23. the Law is
not conceived to bear any such Writ. And Sir Edward Coke, in his Commentary
upon Littleton, fol. 81. says, that where there is no example, it is a great
intendment, that the law will not bear it.

So I conceive here, there never having bin a President before of any such Writ
to the Sheriff and Inhabitants of a County, to prepare a ship with men and
munition, upon any occasion whatsoever, that it is against the Common law to
award such Writs.

proved by these authorities:

Coke in his Reports, lib. 8. fol. 92. in Francis Case, sets down this
Rule, Quod no^trum est, sine facto seu defectu nostro amitti, seu in ali^num
transferri non potest.

Master Lambert, fol. 24. setting down the laws of England, which were
confirmed by William the Conqueror, has these words: Inter alia, volumus and
concedimus, quod omnes liberi homines Monarchiae Regni sui praedict', habeant
and teneant terras suas been and in pace liberas ab omni exactione injusta, and
ab omni Tallagio (not mentioning there injusta) Ita quod nihil ab eis exigatur
praeter servitium just debitum: Hereby it appears, there is an absolute
freedom from all Tallage. 17. King John in Matt. Paris, fol. 246. The King
does grant and confirm unto his Barons and Commons inter alia, these liberties
following: Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium ponamus in Regno nostro, nisi per
Commune Concilium Regni nostri, nisi ad redimendum corpus nostrum, filium
nostrum primogenitum mill' faciend', vel ad primogenitam filiam nostram
maritand'. By this it appears, what was then conceived to be, amongst others,
their liberties, and then confirmed, which was, that no aid should be put
upon them, but by Parliament; for the Parliament was then called Commune
Concilium.

That the law is so, appears by the Treatise written by Fortescue, who had
been chief Justice of England, and then Chancellor of England in King Henry
the sixth his time, when he wrote the book entitled, De laudibus Legum
Angliae: For, fol. 25. cap. 9. he says thus, That the King of England cannot
alter nor change the Laws of England at his pleasure.

For, principatu non Regali, sed et politico ipse p^pulo suo dominatur: If his
power were Royal only, then he might change the Laws, Tallagia quoque and
caetera onera eis imponere, ipsis inconsultis; but adds, That the King of
England sine Subditorum assensu Leges mutare non potest, nec subjectum populum
renitentem onerare impositionibus peregrinis: And in his 13. chap. fol. 31. he
compares the King and Subjects of England to the head and body natural, Ut non
p^test caput corporis Physici nervos suos commutare, neque membris suis
proprias vires, and propria sanguinis alimenta denegare: sic nec Rex, qui caput
corporis politici est, mutare potest Leges corporis illius, nec ejusdem populi
substantias proprias subtrahere reclamantibus eis, aut invitis: Thus he in
this place; but in fol. 84. cap. 36. he seems to say, In hoc individuo Rex
Angliae nec per se, nec ministros suos, tallagia, subsidia, aut quaevis onera
alia imponit Legiis suis, aut Leges eorum mutat, aut nova condit, sine
concessione vel assensu totius Regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso: which
words seem so general, that in no case he may do it.

So it appears by the Book case, 13. H. 4. fol. 14. that the grant of the
King which tends to the charge and prejudice of his people in general, is
not good, unless by Parliament: But it is agreed there, that grants of Tolls,
of Faires, of Pontage, of Pikage, Murage, Ferrying, or such like, which are for
the profit, good, and ease of them that will take benefit thereof, and not
compulsory to any to pay, but to them that will take the benefit of such
Faires, etc. and being very small and reasonable sums, the Law does give
allowance unto them: but if they were great sums, that tend to the charge of
the people, the Law will judge them void.

This appears in Sir Edw. Cokes Reports, lib. 5. fol. 63. in the Case of the
Chamberlain of London, That an ordinance made by the Common Council of London,
where they have a custom by the said Common Council, to make reasonable
ordinances to bind all within the City concerning Clothes to be brought to
Blackwell Hall, there always to be viewed, and measured, and searched before
they were sold, and a penny appointed for the Officer that did that service;
That such a charge was reasonable, for that it was for the public benefit of
the City and Commonwealth: And a pecuniary penalty laid for not performance of
that ordinance was allowed. Ibid. fol. 64. in Clerks Case is resolved, That an
ordinance made by the assent of the Plaintiff himself, and other Burgesses
for the Town of Saint Albons, of a small tax upon the inhabitants of the
Town, toward the erection of the Courts, and other necessaries for the Term
to be kept there, It was allowed to be good, and did bind the Plaintiff,
being by the Plaintiffes own consent, and for the public good of the Town.

Also Coke, lib. 11. fol. 86. in Darcies Case, cites this out of Fitzherberts
nature. brev. fol. 122. That every grant of the King has this condition in it,
tacit or express, Quod patria per donationes illas magis solito non oneretur,
seu gravetur.

And as by grant the King cannot charge his people, so neither can he by Writ
lay any charge upon his people, but by their consent, or where they have
apparent benefit thereby: And that is the reason of the Writ in the Register,
fol. 127. Fitzh. not. brev. fol. 113. where, by breach of the Sea walls, any
inundation is of the Country, the King, who is Pater patriae, and takes care
for the good and safety of his people, sends out his Commissioners to enquire
by whose default any such breach happened, and to cause all that had lands and
commons near adjoining, which may have benefit of enclosed marshes, or loss
by such inundation, to be contributory to the making up of the Sea walls; and
this is done by a Jury: But this charge cannot be laid upon a County or Town
in general, but particular men that have benefit or loss, or may have loss
or benefit thereby: And this is done upon inquiry of a Jury before the Sheriff
or Commissioners appointed.

So it is at this day upon the Commission of Sewers, as appears by Coke, lib.
10. fol. 142. in the Case of the Isle of Ely, That the Taxation by the
Commissioners of Sewers must be upon every particular man that has or may
have loss or benefit by such inundations, and making up the walls, and cannot
be laid upon any remote parts, which are out of the level of such loss or
benefit: And it must be certain and particular upon persons certain, by
reason of land or profit, and cannot be laid in general; but in these Cases
there is a particular loss or benefit, and in particular places, and but in
petty charges; and then where the Law allows that which in reason is to be
done, that may be done, without a special Statute; for, De minimis non curat
Lex: but in this case there is a general charge through the Kingdom, which
the Law does not permit without common consent in Parliament.

Object.
But it has been alleged, that this charge has been imposed for the provision
of the public safety and defense of the Kingdom; And may not this be done,
when every one has advantage by it?

To this I say, Sol.
When eminent danger and cause of defense is, there must be defense made by
every man (when the King shall command) with his person; and in such a case
every man, as it is said in the Presidents, is bound per se and sua to defend
the Kingdom: And I think no man will be so unwise, but that he will exponere
se and sua for the defense of the Kingdom, when there is danger; for otherwise
he is in danger to lose se and sua: But to lay a charge in general upon a
Kingdom, either for making or preparing of ships, or money in lieu thereof, is
not to be done but by Parliament, when the charge is to be borne in general
of all the Subjects.

To prove further, that no man may have his goods taken from him but by his
consent, appears by a Record in Mich. 14. Edw. 2. Rot. 60. in the Kings Bench
in a Writ of error, brought upon a Judgment given in Durham, where, in an
action of trespass by William Heyborne against William Keylow, for entering his
house, and breaking his Chest, and taking away 70. pounds in money, the
Defendant pleading not guilty, the Jury found a special verdict, That the
Scots having entered the Bishopric with an Army into Durham, and making great
burning and spoils, the Comminalty of Durham met together at Durham, whereof
the Plaintiff was one, and agreed to send some to compound with them for money
to depart, and were all sworn to perform what composition should be made, and
to perform what ordinance they should make in that behalf: And thereupon they
compounded with the Scots for 1600. Marks. But because that was to be paid
immediately, they all consented, that William K^ylow the Defendant, and others,
should go into every man's house to search what ready money was there, and to
take it for the making of that sum, and that it should be repaid by the
Comminalty of Durham: And thereupon the Defendant did enter into the
Plaintiffes house, and did break open the Chest, and took the 70. pounds,
which was paid accordingly toward that fine. The Jury were demanded whether
the Plaintiff was present, and did consent to the taking of the money; they
said, No: Whereupon the Plaintiff had judgment to recover the said 70.
pounds, and damages; for that otherwise he had no remedy for his money so
taken, and the Defendant committed in execution for the same: And thereupon the
Defendant Keylow brought a Writ of error in the Kings Bench, and assigned his
errors in point of judgment, and there the judgment was reversed:

Because the Plaintiff Heyborne had his sufficient

Because he himself had agreed to this ordinance, consented, his goods were
lawfully taken: By which it appears, that if he had not particularly
consented, such an ordinance could not have been good to bind him, although
this was in a case of great danger, and for defense.

2. R. 2. pars 12. the Parliament Roll proved this directly: although it be no
Act of Parliament, yet the Record is much to be regarded; for it shows what
the Law was then conceived to be: For, Scroope the Lord Chancellor then showed
to all the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that all the Lords and
Sages had met together since the last Parliament, and having considered of the
great danger the Kingdom was in, and how money might be raised in a case of
eminent danger, which could not stay the delay of a Parliament, and the Kings
Coffers had not sufficient therein; the Record is, That they all agreed, that
money sufficient could not be had without laying a charge upon the Comminalty;
which (say they) cannot be done without a Parliament: And the Lords themselves
for the time did supply the said necessity with money they lent: which Record
proved directly, that this charge, without an Act of Parliament, is illegal.

So upon this reason I conclude, That this Writ compulsarily to charge the
Subjects against their wills, is not warranted by any Books, and therefore
illegal.

If this Writ should be allowed, great inconveniences

That if such a charge may be laid upon the

That this inconvenience may be, it appears by the Dane-geld, first appointed
in time of necessity to redeem them from the cruelty of the Danes, which often
changed, and still increased: for in Anno Dom. 991. when it began, it was
10000. pounds, Anno Domini 994. it was increased to 16000. pounds; and Anno
Domini 1002. it was increased to 24000. pounds; and Anno Domini 1007. it was
increased to 36000. pounds; and Anno Domini 1012. it was increased to 48000.
pounds: So if this Writ be well awarded, it may be at pleasure what bounds it
shall have.

Also there were never but one single Subsidy, and two Fifteenes used to be
granted in Parliament, until 31. Elis. and then a double Subsidy and four
Fifteenes were granted, Sir Walter Mildmay then Chancellor of the Exchequer
moving for it, and saying, his heart did quake to move it, not knowing the
inconveniences that should grow upon it; but showed great reasons for so moving
of it, being immediately after the Spanish invasion: and so it was granted.
Afterward in 35. Elis. treble Subsidies, and six Fifteenes were granted: and
in 43. Elis. four Subsidies and eight Fifteenes; and yet these were not
accounted grievous, neither would it have been, if it had been 10. Subsidies,
because in Parliament, and convenient times and means appointed for the
levying of them.

Tonnage and Poundage were granted to this end, 13. R. 2. (and have continued
ever since by several grants) that the King might have moneys in his purse
against time of need for extraordinary occasions; especially for the defense of
the Realm, and for guarding the Seas, as it is especially declared by the
Statute of 1. Iac. and former Statutes.

But it is said, Object.
that Tonnage and Poundage is not granted now to the King; Therefore the King
is enforced to take these extraordinary courses.

Though it be not granted, Sol.
yet I think it is taken; and I doubt not but to the same intent, and for the
same purpose for which it was first granted, which was for the defense of the
Kingdom, and the guard of the Seas.

Therefore in case of danger and necessity, every Subject, for defense of the
Kingdom, is bound Ligeanciae debito, as some Records say; and Ligeanciae suae
vinculo astricti, as others speak: Se and sua totis viribus et potestate
exponere, etc. And in such a case the King may command the persons of his
Subjects, and arrest their ships to wait on his, to defend the Sea; Yet this
also (when they go out of their Counties) at the Kings charges; But to command
the Subjects by Writ to build new ships, or to prepare ships at their charges,
or to lay a common charge on the Subjects in general, for matter of defense or
avoidance of danger, is not warrantable by the Common Law.



So for these reasons I conclude this Writ is against the Common law, and so
illegal.

For the second point, I conceive, if the

The Statute of 25. Edw. 1. 25. Edw. 1.
which is in these words:

Forasmuch as diverse people of our Realm are in fear, that the aides and taxes
which they have given us before time toward our wars and other business of
their own grant and good will (howsoever they were made) might turn to a
bondage to them and their heirs, because they might be at another time found
in the Rolls; and likewise for the prizes taken throughout our Realm by our
ministers, we have granted for us and our heirs, that we shall not draw any
such aides, taxes, or prizes into a custom for any thing that has been done
heretofore by any Roll, or any other President that may be found.

Ibid. cap. 6.
Ibidem, cap. 6. Moreover, we have granted for us and our heirs, as well to
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other folk of holy Church; as also
to Earls, Barons, and to all the Comminalty of the land, that for no business
from henceforth we shall take such aides, ^axes, ^or prizes, but by the common
assent of the Realm, and for the common profit thereof, saving the ancient
aides and prizes due and accustomed; Which are the express words of that
Statute.

Now what those ancient aides were, is well known, viz. that they were ad
redimendu^ c^rpu^, ad f^lium pri^og^^it^^ militem faciend^ Et ad filiam
pri^ogenitam miritandam; which aides concern not the Subjects in general, but
particular men were liable thereunto by their ^enures ^o this saving ^eeded not
to have been; for the body of the Act extended not to them, but (...) gener^ll
aide^ of the Kingdom.

However, if this Salvo, as it has been objected, would preserve this aid
now in question; yet the Statute made afterward de Tallagio non concedendo,
being without any Salvo, takes it away: which sta^ute Ras^al^ in his
Abridgement, fol. 441. in his title of Taxes, abridgeth in this manner:

Anno 25. Edw. 1. It is ordained, That the taxes taken shall not be taken in
custom, no^ (...) by the assent of this Realm, except the ancient aides and
taxes.

And there the taxes of Wool of forty shillings a sack is released.

Ibidem 20. That no tallage by us or our heirs in our Realm be pu^ or levied,
without the assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights^
Burgesses, and other free Commons of our Realm, That nothing be taken from
henceforth in the name, or by reason of Male tout of a sack of Wool, Statutum
de Tallagio non concedendo.

Master Solicitor labored much to prove^ Object.
that there was no such Statute de Tallagio non concedendo.

First, for that it is not to be found in the Rolls of Parliament.

Secondly, for that it is not set down when it was made.

Thirdly, that it was but an abstract out of Confirmatio Chartae libertatum.

Master Attorney said, he would not deny it to be a Statute, neither would he
affirm it; but yet it did not extend to take away the aid demanded by
Prerogative, or power Royal, for defense of the Kingdom.

S^l.
To this I answer, That it was never doubted to be a Statute, until this
Argument; and that it is a Statute, appears,



anno tertio Car. to be a Statute.

Magna Charta is not.

And as touching the time, I conceive it to be made in 34. Edw. 1. cap. 1. for
so it is set down in the great printed book of Statutes anno 1618. to be the
first chapter of the Statutes therein made, viz. in these words:

No tallage or aid shall be taken or levied by us or our heirs in our Realm,
without the good will and assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the land.

And that it is a Statute, all my brethren the Judges have agreed.

The only doubt then is, Whether this Statute extends to aides for defense
of the Kingdom: which I think it does; for it is the precise words, That no
tallage or aid shall be taken or levied, but by consent in Parliament: which
extends to all manner of aides.

Bodin says, Bod. fol. 97. Edw. 1.
fol. 97. by a Law made in the time of Edw. 1. that it was provided and
enacted, That no tax, tallage, nor aid shall be imposed, but by grant in
Parliament; and by this Law the Subjects of England have defended themselves
ever since, as with a buckler: whereby it appears, that notice was taken of
this Law in foreign parts, and so held still to be a Statute in force.

14. Ed. 3. ca. 1.
The next Statute is 14. Edw. 3. cap. 1. which recites the grant of the great
Subsidy of the ninth fleece of the ninth Lamb, etc. (formerly granted) and
thereupon these words follow:

We, willing to provide for the indemnity of the said Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other the Comminalty of the Realm; and also of the Citizens,
Burgesses, and Merchants aforesaid, will and grant for us and our heirs, to
the same Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commons, Citizens, Burgesses and
Merchants, that the same grant shall not be had forth in example, nor fall to
their prejudice in time to come: Nor that they be from henceforth charged nor
grieved to make any aid, nor sustain charge, if it be not by the common
assent of the said Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and Commons
of the said Realm of England, and that in the Parliament: And that all the
profits arising of the said aid, and of Wards marriages, Customs, and
Escheats, and other profits arising of our said Realm of England, shall be set
and dispended upon the maintenance of the safeguard of this Realm of England,
and of our wars of Scotland, France, and Gascoin, and in no place elsewhere
during our said wars.

By this statute it appears, that it is expressly provided, That the subjects
should not be from thenceforth charged nor grieved to make any aid, nor
sustain any charge, but by common assent, and that in Parliament; which is as
express as may be, and exclusive to any charge otherwise; which I conceive was
made against the appointment of making, or preparing, and sending of ships at
the charges of the Towns whence they were, or sending men out of their
Counties at the charges of the County.

Now, where it is alleged by my brother Weston, and my brother Berkley, that
this was but a temporary statute, and ended when his wars ended, which
appears by the last clause, for employment of those profits of his Wards,
etc. toward those wars: I conceive it appears to be an absolute and
perpetual statute; for, it is granted for him and his heirs, which is in
perpetuity: And also it appears by Plowd. his Commentaries, fol. 457. in Sir
Thomas Wroth's Case, where a grant is by the name of the King, which is in his
politic capacity; this extended against him, his heirs and successors,
although they be not named.

Also the intendment of this Law appears to be for the security of the
subjects from thenceforth for all future ages; and then the office of Judges
is, as appears by Sir Edward Cokes Reports, lib. 3. fol. 7. and Plowdens
Commentaries in Byston and Studs Case, to construe statutes according to the
true intent of the makers thereof, which was in this Case, That it should be a
perpetual security for them: and to little purpose it had been to make a
statute to continue but during the time of the wars.

Ob.
Also where it is alleged, that the statute of 14. Edw. 3. is not mentioned in
the Petition of right, which is some Argument that it was not conceived to be a
continuing statute.

Sol.
To that I answer, that in that Petition of right it is said, That by the
statutes there recited, and other the good Statutes of this Realm, the
Subjects shall not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, nor
other like charge not set by Parliament, in which this Statute is as well
intended, as other Statutes, and as far, as if it had been expressly recited.

Also it appears by all the books of Statutes, that this Statute is printed
as a Statute continuing, whereas others expired, are so set down as expired.

21. Edw. 3. pars 2. m. 11. 21. Edw. 3. p. 2. m. 11.
A Subsidy being granted by Parliament, viz. forty shillings of every sack of
Wool transported before Michaelmas following; and six pence of every twenty
shillings of merchandise, for the safe guarding of the Merchants, defense of
the Coasts, etc.

After Michaelmas, viz. 31. October. 21. Edw. 3. by Writ the Collectors were
commanded to continue the collection of those Subsidies until Easter. But 26.
November. 21. Edw. 3. the King by Writ commanded the stay of the collection of
the six pence in the 20 shillings, and to continue the collection of the
Subsidies upon the sackes of Wool until Easter.

22. Ed. 3. m. 16.
22. Edw. 3. Parliament, mem. 16. the Parliament being holden in Lent, the
Commons complained of this continuance of the collection of the Subsidy upon
the sacks of Wool longer then the Parliament had granted it; and provided,
that it should not be continued longer then Easter by the procurement of no
person.

By this it appears, that the Parliament being careful, that the time for
levying of a Subsidy granted, should not be enlarged by any power, much less
would they admit of a Writ, to lay a charge without grant by Parliament.

^5. Ed. 3. m. 8.
25. Edw. 3. m. 8. it was enacted, That no man should be compelled to find men
at arms, other then such as hold by such services, except it be by common
assent in Parliament.

By this it appears, that if men be not compellable to find a man at arms,
unless it be by common assent in Parliament, much less is any bound to be
contributory to the preparing of a ship with 180. men at arms, and victuals,
and wages of the soldiers for a time, unless it be by common assent in
Parliament.

Rot. Parliamenti, 2. Hen. 4. nu. 22. (an Act of Parliament, as I account in
the very point) is in these words: For that of late diverse Commissions were
made to diverse Cities and Buroughs within the Realm, to make Barges and
Barringers, without assent in Parliament, and otherwise then has been done
before these hours; The Commons do pray the King, that those Commissions may
be repealed, and that they may not be of any force or effect, to which it is
answered: That the King wills, that the said Commissions be repealed in all
points, which is an absolute and perfect Statute; but then there is added these
words: But for the great necessity that he has of such vessels for defense of
the Realm, in case that the wars shall happen, he will treat with his Lords
of this matter, and afterward will show it unto the Commons, to have their
counsel and advice in this point: So by this Record it appears, that the
Commons did conceive, That no Cities, Burroughes, nor Towns, without assent in
Parliament, were to be charged with the making of such vessels, to which the
King agrees: And from that day to this very day, (until the making of these
Writs) in no age (although the Kingdom has been many times in danger of
invasion, and has been invaded) there do appear any Records that ever I
have seen, or any Writs directed to any Towns or Cities, at their charges to
make or prepare any ships or vessels whatsoever.

Ob.
And whereas it has been objected, and especially insisted upon by my brother
Berkley, That this latter part (that the King will treat with his Lords
concerning them, and after confer with the Commons) is a gentle denial of
that Act, as the experience is at this day: Roy se avisera, is a denial of an
Act.

Sol.
Hereunto I answer, That it is an absolute Act; for it is an absolute assent
unto the Petition, and that which came after, was but a plausible excuse; for
that such Commissions had gone out, and this further consultation never
appeared to be made, nor ever any such Writ or Commission for such vessels to
be made, went out ever since until this Writ.

13. Hen. 4. nu. 10. 13. H. 4. nu. 10.
A grant is of a Subsidy of Woolls, Woolfels, Hides, and other things there
mentioned, and of Tonnage and Poundage for one year, for the defense of the
Marches of Callice, etc. and for the defense of the Realm, and safeguard of
the Sea: And therein is this express proviso, viz. Provided always, that this
grant of a Subsidy of Wools, etc. and of Tonnage and Poundage in time to come,
shall not be taken in example, to charge the Lords or Commons of this Realm
with any manner of Subsidy, for the safeguard of Callice, etc. nor for the
defense of the Realm, nor for the safeguard of the Seas, unless it be by the
wills of the Lords and Commons of this Realm; and that by a new grant to be
made, and that in full Parliament to come. By this it appears, that it was
then provided, That no charge should be laid upon the Lords or Commons, no not
for the defense of the Realm, but by grant in full Parliament.

13. Hen. 4. nu. 43. 13. H. 4. nu. 33.
A Petition was in Parliament, reciting, that there was an office granted of
Alnager within London, and the Suburbs of the same, with fees to that
appertaining, where any such office never was, nor any such fees appertaining
thereunto; and that by color thereof they levy upon the sale of every Broad
cloth, an half penny of the buyer, and an half penny of the seller; and upon
sale of every hundred Else of Canvas, a penny of the seller, and a penny of the
buyer, wrongfully against the Statute in the time of your Highness Progenitors
made to the contrary; by which it is ordained, That no tallage nor aid shall
be granted nor levied, without assent and consent of the Lords and Commons of
your Realm, as by the said Statute fully is declared: Wherefore they pray,
that such Letters Patents thereof made shall be void, and holden for none: And
this was granted; whereby it appears, that it is declared then in Parliament,
that these Statutes were and did continue, that no tallage or aid shall be
levied without grant in Parliament.

1. Ric. 3. cap. 2. It is enacted in these words: Our Sovereign Lord the King
remembering how the Commons of this Realm by new and unlawful inventions, and
inordinate covetice against the Laws of this Realm, have been put to great
servitude, and importune charges and exactions; and especially by a new
imposition, called a Benevolence, whereby diverse subjects of this land against
their wills and liberties have paid great sums of money, etc.

It is enacted and ordained, That the Subjects and Commons of this Realm from
henceforth shall in no wise be charged by such charges or imposition, called a
Benevolence, or by such like charge: and that such exactions, called a
Benevolence, before that time taken, shall be taken for no example, to make any
such, or any like charge of any his Subjects of this Realm hereafter; but
shall be damned and adnulled for ever.

By this it appears, that it is expressly provided, That the Subjects shall
not be charged by way of Benevolence, which is in nature of a free gift, nor
such like charge, that is, no charge of money shall be upon the Subject for
any pretense whatsoever, be it for defense in time of danger, or the guarding
of the Seas.

The last and concluding statute is the Petition of right, made in the third
year of his Majesty's reign, where reciting, that it was enacted by a statute
made in the time of Edward the first, commonly called, Statutum de Tallagio non
concedendo, that no tallage or aid shall be laid or levied by the King or his
heirs in this Realm, without the good will and assent of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, and other the Freemen of the Comminalty of
this Realm: And by a statute of 25. Edw. 3. That none shall be compelled to
make any loanes to the King, because such loanes were against reason, and the
franchise of the land: And by another statute, That none shall be charged by
any impositions, called a Benevolence: By which statutes, and other the
statutes of this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this freedom, That they
shall not be compelled to contribute to any tax, tallage, aid, nor other
like charge not set by Parliament: And then they pray, that none hereafter be
compelled to make or yield any gift, loan, benevolence, tax, or such like
charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament.

And after five other things there mentioned, the conclusion is, All which they
pray as their rights and liberties: unto which the King answers, Let right be
done, as is desired, which is a full and perfect statute, showing in this point
the liberties of the Kingdom prayed and allowed, which was not done without
the advice of the Judges then being, whereof I was one; whose opinions were
then demanded, and resolved, that the same did not give any new liberty, but
declared what the liberty of the subject was in this amongst others, that they
should not be compelled to be contributory to any tax, tallage, aid, nor any
like charge not set by Parliament.

By reason of all which statutes, especially of those of 25. Edw. 1. 34. Edw.
1. and 14. Edw. 3. being in the negative and in force, I conceive that those
Writs, to lay such a charge, is against the Law, and so the assessement by
color thereof not lawful.

Now, Object.
whereas the precedent Arguments have been, that the Kingdom being in danger,
therefore these Writs went forth for the making of ships, because there could
not be so suddenly any Parliament called: And the Parliament is a slow body;
and the Kingdom may be lost, whilst there is consultation: And the danger is
conceived to be very great, because the first Writ of 4. Augusti so
mentions, that the Pirates provide a great Navy to infest the Kingdom, and
it is fit with speed to provide a remedy; and that the Writ of mittimus
mentions, that Salus Reipublicae periclitabatur: And we must believe these
suggestions to be true; for the Kings Certificate by this Writ is, Recordum
superlativum, as Master Solicitor and my brother Berkley termed it; and we
must leave it upon the Kings conscience (if it be not true) to lay such a
charge upon an untrue suggestion: and the Defendant also by his Demurrer has
confessed all the suggestions in the Writ to be true; therefore it must be
conceived, that the Kingdom was in great danger, and present remedy must be
had by making these ships, and may be commanded by those Writs, and not to stay
for a Parliament: And my brother Crawley said, It may be, that if a Parliament
were called, they will not yield to the going forth of such Writs, although the
Kingdom were never so much in danger: And this charge, in respect of the
making of defense, is not within the intention of these statutes; and if it had
bin expressly mentioned within a statute, that such a charge should not be
imposed, it had been a void statute, and contrary to the Law, that the Kingdom
should not be defended.

To all these I answer, Sol. 1.
That the matter now in question is upon the Writ of 4. Augusti, whether that
be legal, or not; and the suggestions therein be sufficient or not for the
Writ of Mittimus, mentioning, that Salve Reipublicae periclitabatur, at the day
of issuing forth of the Writ of 4. Augusti (which is a year and a half after
the first Writ) does not help it. And this is not notified to the Sheriff and
Inhabitants of the County, to make them the more careful, and in the greater
contempt, if a ship were not provided: but it is only a notification to the
Barons of the Exchequer, that the same was the reason why the same Writ issued
forth.

Quia datum est nobis intelligi, that the Pirates had done such mischief, etc.





charge must not be laid in general upon the Subjects, without their consent
in Parliament; for either the danger is near, and then present provision must
be made by men's persons, and the present ships of the Kingdom, which the King
may command from all parts of his Kingdom, as need shall require; but cannot
command money out of men's purses, by distraining their goods, or imprisoning
their persons: But if the danger be further off, by reason of any foreign
combinations (as it is conceived it may be here) then provision must be made
of ships by all the Kingdom for defense; then (as Philip de Comines says,
fol. 179.) that cloud is seen afar off, before that the tempest fall,
especially by a foreign war; and such invasions cannot fall so soon, but that
the King may call his Sages together, and by consent make provision for such
defense.

So I say here, if there be time to make ships, or prepare ships at the charges
of the Counties; then is there time enough for his Majesty (if he please) to
call his Parliament, to charge his Commons by consent in Parliament to have a
subsidiary aid, as always has been done in such cases; and they are not so
long coming or meeting, when they come but to make provision for defense, being
for all their safeties.

Cok. lib 9. fo. 1
For it appears by Coke, lib. 9. fol. 1. in his Epistle, that King Alfred made
a Law, that the Parliament should be held twice every year; and oftener, if
need require, in time of peace: so that it was then conceived, it was necessary
to have Parliaments often to redress inconveniences.

4. Ed. 3. ca. 14.
Also by a statute made 4. Edw. 3. cap. 14. It is enacted, that a Parliament
shall be held once every year, and oftener, if need be: Also by a statute made
36. Edw. 3. cap. 10. 36. Ed. 3. c. 10.
It is enacted, for redress of mischiefs and grievances that daily happen, a
Parliament shall be holden every year; as another time was ordained by a
statute, which I think refers to 4. Edw. 3. 4. Edw. 3.
Also it appears by the speed that was in the Parliament held in the third
year of his Majesty's reign, five Subsidies were granted, two of them to be
paid within few days after the Session of Parliament ended; and therefore
might (as this case is) been ordered and provided for by Parliament, within
seven months, as the time was between the Test of the Writ, and the time
prefixed for ships to be prepared and sent.

Where it is objected, that the Parliament

It is answered, That it is not to be pre^umed, that the Parliament would deny
to do that which is fit for the safety and defense of the Kingdom, their own
estates and lives being in danger if the Kingdom were not sufficiently
defended; for it is a Rule, Nihil iniqu^^m es^ praesumendum in Leg^: so of the
high Court of Parliament, that they would not deny that which is fitting: But I
confess I do think, if it had been moved in a Parliament, they would never
have consented to these Writs, they never having been awarded before since the
Conquest; and if they had consented, they would have taken a course how the
same should have been made with most conveniencie, and not to leave it to the
Sheriff to tax them when and how he would.

many; but would say, as it is said in the statute made in the 25. Edw. 3. de
provisoribus, reciting the statute of Carlyes, made 35. Edw. 1. That the Pope
should not be permitted to present to Benefices, That he was bound by his Oath
to see that and other Laws in force and not repealed, to be performed, That
he would not suffer such charges to be laid, contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of his Realm, and would do as the late famous Queen Elisabeth did,
having required a charge upon diverse her Subjects by particular letters from
the Lords of her Council of several sums of money, for present help
toward her wars in Ireland, Id est, Walmesley, and come Hutton, Gla^vill
a^xi.
hearing that one of her Judges being convented before her Lords for not
payment of it, thereby discouraging others to pay it, answered, that it was
against the Law that the same should be imposed, there being an express
statute against it, which he being a Judge, was bound by his Oath to signify;
he being, as much as in him was to be, a conservatour of the Queens Oath in
that behalf: The Queen, I say, was very angry, that such an imposition had
been made against Law, and commanded, that it should be stopped from further
gathering, and to some that had paid their moneys, the same were restored: and
therefore the principal and only fault in the charging of his Subjects by
these Writs (if they be unlawful, as I conceive they are) is in those that
devised them, and informed him that they were lawful, and such as his
Progenitors had from time to time used to send out; and in his Judges, who
have affirmed it to be lawful: Therefore upon this point I conclude, That
this charge by this Writ is illegal, and is no sufficient cause to charge the
Defendant.

Ob.
Where it has been much urged and argued by Master Solicitor and Master
Attorney, that this Writ is warranted by the Kings Prerogative and power
Royal, to send forth such Wri^s for defense and safety of the Kingdom in time
of danger;

Sol.
To this I answer, That I do not conceive, that there is any such Prerogative;
for if it were a Prerogative, I should not offer to speak against it: for it
is part of our Oaths that are Judges, to maintain the Kings Prerogative to
the best of our skills, and not to suffer the same to be diminished; but if it
be (as I have argued it is) against the Common Law, and against so many
Statutes, that the Subjects should be enforced to sustain, or to contribute to
any charge, without their especial assent, and common assent in Parliament,
then there is no such Prerogative: For whatsoever is done to the hurt or wrong
of the Subjects, and against the Laws of the Land, the Law imputes that
Honor and Justice to the King (whose Throne is established by Justice) that it
is not done by the King, but it is done by some untrue and unjust Informations;
and therefore void, and not done by Prerogative.

This appears by the authorities of our Books; Bract. lib. 3. fol. 1^^.
for Bracton, who is an ancient Writer in our Law, says, Nihil aliud potest
Rex in terris, cum sit minister Dei, and ejus Vicarius, quam de jure potest:
And there a little after, Itaque potestas sua juris est, and non injuriae; cum
sit author juris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci occasio unde jura nascuntur.
Sir Edward Coke in the eleventh book of his Reports, in the Case of Magdalen
College, where the question was, Whether Queen Elisabeth, having taken a long
Lease of a College, being conceived to be against the statute of 13. Elis.
was sought to be maintained by her Prerogative; but resolved it could not,
being against a statute, by which she was bound, although not named; and there
fol. 72. it is said, Hoc solum Rex non potest facere, quod non potest just
agere.

Plowd. com. fo. 246, 247.
Plowdens Comment. fol. 246. and 247. in the Lord Berkley's Case it is said,
that the Prerogative of the King cannot do wrong, and his Prerogative cannot
be any warrant to do any wrong to any.

Plowd. com. fol. 487.
Plowdens Comment. fol. 487. in Nichols Case, it is said by Justice Harper,
Although the common law does allow many prerogatives to the King, yet it does
not allow any that he shall wrong or hurt any by his Prerogative.

21. Ed. 3. fo. 47.
21. Edw. 3. fol. 47. in the Earl of Kents Case it is said, That if the King
under his great Seal do make any grant to the hurt of any other, he shall
repeal and avoid it Iure Regio; for the King is accounted to be abused by
untrue suggestions, when he is drawn to do any wrong to the hurt of any
other, much more, I say, when he is drawn to do any thing to the hurt of his
Subjects in general.

Sir Edward Coke, Cok. l. 11. f. 86.
lib. 11. fol. 86. in Darcies Case it is said, That every grant of the King
has this condition unto it, Tacit or express: Ita quod Patria per donationem
illam magis solito non oneretur seu gravetur.

The Book called Doctor and Student, Doct. and Stud. fol. 8.
fol. 8. setting down, that the Law does vest the absolute property of every
man's goods in himself, and that they cannot be taken from him, but by his
consent, says, That is the reason, if they be taken from him, the party shall
answer the full value thereof in damages: And sure I conceive, that the party
that does this wrong to another, shall, besides the damages to the party, be
imprisoned, and pay a fine to the King, which in the Kings Bench is the tenth
part of as much as he pays to the party: So then, if the King will punish
the wrong of taking of goods without consent between party and party, much
more will he not by any Prerogative take away any man's goods without his
assent, particular or general.

So I conclude, that I conceive there is not any such Prerogative, to award
such Writs, to command men to sustain such charge, or to be contributory to
it, and to be distrained or imprisoned for not payment thereof.

Also I conceive, that this is not an Act of Royal power; for if it be
illegal to impose such a charge, then is it not accounted as a matter of
Royal power, but as a matter done upon an untrue suggestion, and a matter of
wrong done; and wrong is not imputed to the King, for he can do no wrong, but
it is imputed unto them who advised him to this course.

Royal power, I account, is to be used in cases of necessity and imminent
danger, when ordinary courses will not avail; for it is a Rule, Non
recurrendum est ad extraordinaria, quando fieri potest per ordinaria; as in
cases of Rebellion, sudden Invasion, and in some other case, where Martial Law
may be used, and may not stay for legal proceedings; but in a time of peace
and no extreme necessity legal courses must be used, and not Royal power.

Therefore, where by the Statute of 31. H. 8. 31. H. 8. c. 8.
cap. 8. which was made upon suppression of Abbeys, when Rebellions were begun
to be stirred, it is recited, That sudden occasions happen which do require
speedy remedies, and for lack of a Statute the King was enforced to use Royal
power; It was enacted for the reasons therein mentioned, That the King, by the
advice of his Council therein named, two Bishops, two chief Justices, and
diverse others, and the more part of them, by his Proclamation might make
ordinances for punishment of offenses, and lay penalties^ which should have the
force of a Law (with a Proviso, that thereby no man's life, lands, or goods
should be touched or impeached) so that therein Royal power was fortified by
a Statute; yet that Statute took care, that no man's lands or goods should be
taken or prejudiced: but yet that Statute was thought inconvenient, and
therefore by a Statute of 1. E. 6. 1. E. 6.
the same was repealed.

Bract. l. 2. c. 24. fol. 55.
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 24. fol. 55. and the same is cited in Coke, Cok. l. 7.
fol. 11
lib. 7. fol. 11. in Calvin's Case, Regis Corona est facere justitiam and
judicium, and tenere pacem, sine quibu^ Corona consistere non potest, nec
teneri.

Cok. l. 7. fol. 5.
Coke, lib. 7. fol. 5. in Calvin's Case, cited out of Fortescue, Rex ad tutelam
Legis, corporum, and bonorum erectus est; which being so, he cannot take any
man's goods, or charge them without his assent, by any Prerogative or power
Royal.

Also there can be no such necessity or danger conceived, that may cause these
Writs to be awarded to all Counties of England, to prepare ships at such
charge, and with such men and munition, without consent in Parliament.

For the Laws have provided means for defense in time of danger without
taking this course, for that the King has power to command all, or any persons
of his Kingdom, to attend with Arms at the Sea coasts, or any other parts of
the Kingdom; and also by his officers to make stay or arrest all or any the
ships of Merchants, and others having ships, or as many as he pleases, to go
with his Navy to any parts of his Kingdom for defense thereof, and to attend
those to whom he appointed the guard of the Seas or Sea coasts, at such times
and places as they should appoint: and this has been always taken and
conceived to be sufficient for defense against any Prince whatsoever; and yet
the same was in times when the Navy of England was not so strong, as now by
the blessing of God, and good providence of his Majesty it is: That this course
was then so taken, it appears by diverse Records, viz.

23. Ed. 1. m. 4. 23. Ed. 1. m. 4.
The Record recites, that the French King had prepared a great Navy upon the
Sea, and purposed to invade the Kingdom, Et linguam Anglicanam de terra
delere; and thereupon the King commanded all his ships and men with Arms to be
in a readiness to defend the Kingdom.

Scot. 10. Edw. 3. m. 16. 10. Ed. 3. m. 16.
recites, that certain Galleys in the parts beyond the Seas were prepared
with provision of men and arms, and other necessaries of war, and ready to
invade the Land; command was, that diverse ships should be in a readiness to
defend, and the ships of the Ports of Ireland to be sent to England to help to
defend the Kingdom.

10. Ed. 3. m. 22.
Scot. 10. Edw. 3. m. 22. A Writ was to the Bayliffe of Southwales, reciting,
that the Scots and diverse others confederating together, prepare themselves to
arms and ships in a great number, and intend to invade the Kingdom; command
to them was, to have one ship ready upon the Sea to defend their coasts.

12. Ed. 3. m. 10.
Alman. 12. Edw. 3. m. 10. A Writ to the Mayor of London, Quia hosts nostri in
Galleis, cum multitudine non modica congregati, in diversis partibus regni
hostiliter ingressi sunt, and civitatem praedict' celeriter si possunt invadere
proponunt, the King commands them to shut up the City toward the water, and
to put all their men in Arms ready to defend, etc.

12. Ed. 3. m. 13.
Alman. 12. Edw. 3. m. 13. A Writ to the Bailiffes of great Yarmouth, Quia pro
certo didicimus, quod hosts nostri Franciae, and adhaerentes eisdem, Gallias
and Naves guerrin^s in copiosa multitudine in partibus exteris congregarunt,
and eis hominibus ad arma, and alia arma parare faciunt, and proponunt se
movere versus regnum nostrum, and navigium regni nostri, and portus prope mare
scituat' pro viribus destruere, and idem regnum invadere, etc. command to the
said Town to prepare four ships, with two hundred and forty men, etc. At the
same time like Writs went out to twenty other Towns upon the Sea coasts.

Franc. 26. Edw. 3. m. 5. 26. Ed. 3. m. 5.
A Writ to the Earl of Hunt. and others, Quia adversarii nostri Franciae, Nos
and Regnum nostrum invadere machinantes, magnum navigium parari fecer' and
armari, nedum ad Regnum nostrum Angliae subito attrahend', ad nos and domin'
nostr', and totam nationem Anglicanam pro viribus subvertend', etc. commanding
them to guard all the coasts of Kent, and to array all able men with arms to
be ready to defend the Sea coasts.

5. Henr. 4. m. 28. 5. H. 4. m. 28.
A Commission is to Thomas Morley and others, Quod cum inimici nostri Franciae,
Britan. Scotiae, and alii sibi adhaerentes, inter se obligat magna potentia
armat' super mare in aestate proxim' futur' ordinaverunt, and intendunt Regnum
nostrum Angliae invadere, etc. commanding them to array men with arms to
defend, etc.

4 Henr. 8. pars 2. 4. Hen. 8. p. 2.
the King by Proclamation into the County of Kent shows, that it is come to
his knowledge of certain, that his ancient enemy the French King has prepared
and put in readiness a great and strong Navy furnished with men of war, to
invade the Kingdom of England, the King appointed the Lord of Alburgeny and
others to put men in array, and to be ready to defend that County.

Anno 1588. when the great invasion was by the Navy termed the Invincible
Navy, which was foreseen long before, this course of preparing ships by
every County of the Kingdom was not taken or appointed; yet in all these
times, when there appeared such danger of invasions, there never went any such
Writs into any the Counties of England to provide ships, but the Navy of
England, and the Army of England was always accounted sufficient for the
defense of the Kingdom: So I conclude this point, that I conceive this course
cannot be taken by any Prerogative or Royal power, nor any allegation of
necessity or danger.

were legal to lay such a charge upon maritine parts, yet to charge any Inland
County with making of ships, and furnishing them with Masters, Mariners, and
Soldiers at their charge, which are far remote from the Seas, is not legal,
nor warranted by any former President; for it commands an unreasonable and
impossible thing: and then the Writ commanding such a thing as is unreasonable
and not possible for the parties commanded of themselves to perform, without
help of other Counties, is always illegal; for it is a Rule, That Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia; therefore if one by Covenant bind himself to do a
thing impossible, the Covenant is void. This appears by the Book case in 40.
Ed. 3. fo. 6. where the Case is expressly, That if a man do covenant to do a
thing that is impossible, the Covenant is void, and the deed is void in that
respect: Also the Book in 2. Ed. 4. fol. 2. If a feoffment be made upon
condition to be void if the feoffee do not a thing which is impossible, this
feoffment is good and the condition void, for it was the fault of the feoffor
to annexe such a condition; and this appears by the case of an Arbitrament,
If the Arbitrator award that one shall enter into bond with such a one as his
surety to pay a sum of money, or to do any other act, it is void as to the
finding of a surety at the least; for it is not in his power to compel him to
be his surety, therefore the Law accounts it unreasonable, and so void; and
this appears by the Book Case, 17. Ed. 4. fol. 5. wherein it is so resolved.

So this Writ commanding the Sheriff and Inhabitants of an Inland County to
find a ship furnished with Masters and Mariners, whereas there is not any
Shipwright that has skill to make ships, nor any Masters or Mariners ever
there inhabiting to guide a ship; (for they are still conversant about matters
of the Plough, and feeding Cattle, and Husbandry, and are trained up by
musters for skill of Arms to defend the Countries, and not with Sea affairs;
for most of the County never saw a ship, nor know what belongs to Masters or
Mariners of ships; and the Country is not bound to seek men out of the County
for such men, and perhaps if they should, they cannot know where to hire them:)
Therefore when such Writs to Inland Counties have been awarded to find a ship
with Masters and Mariners, it being conceived by misinformation that they were
maritine Towns, and had Ships and Mariners dwelling with them, the truth
thereof being made to appear to the contrary, they have been discharged, as
appears by a Record in 13. Edw. 3. pars 2. m. 14. where a Writ went to the
Admiral of the Fleet, Those parts upon complaint to the King, by the men of
Bodmin in the County of Cornwall, that they were unjustly charged to find a
ship with Masters and Mariners, whereas that Town was no Port Town, nor
adjoining to the Sea, but far within the Land, nor ever had ships lying
there, nor Mariners, nor Seamen, nor ever used to find any such for Sea
service; and that their Mayor and Officers were imprisoned for not finding such
a ship; Thereupon the King appointed to have it enquired, whether their
allegations were true, and if it were true, signified that he would not have
them so unjustly charged, but that they should be discharged thereof: which
shows, that it was then accounted unjust to lay such a charge upon a Town
that was an Inland Town, and had no Mariners inhabiting in it, much more when
such a charge is upon an Inland County, which is much further remote from the
Sea, and cannot perform by themselves that which the Writ commands.

Ob.
But this Record being objected by the Defendants Council, Master Solicitor
gave answer, that the same was because the Admiral of his own authority had
charged them, which was not according to his Commission, for he was only to
charge the Ports and Sea Towns; but that the same may not be done by the
Kings Writ, the Record does not prove.

Sol.
But to this I answer, That I conceive it is all one when such a charge is laid
upon a Town by Writ, which is an Inland Town; for so it appears by another
Record of the same year, viz. 13. Edw. 3. pars 1. m. 14. where a Writ was
directed to the Admiral of the Fleet, Ab ore Thamesiae versus parts
Occidentales, reciting where the King by his Writ to the Town of Chichester
had commanded the Mayor and Comminalty there, that they should make unam Navem,
and duos Escularios de guerra parari, with Mariners and men at arms to be at
Portsmouth such a day, to go with the Kings ships; and that they had
complained that they had not, nor ever had any ships arriving in that Town,
nor had any Seamen or Mariners dwelling there; and that it appeared unto the
King by Inquisition of a Jury returned into his Chancery, this allegation to
be true; therefore because the King would not have them indebite praegravari
(for so be the words of the Record) the King commands the Admiral, that
they shall not be troubled nor distrained for not performance of such service;
whereby it appears, that if they, being within few miles of the Sea, should
not be charged to find such a ship, much more Inland Counties, which are much
further remote from the Seas, are not justly to be charged with finding any
Ships and Mariners: Therefore I conclude this point, That I conceive this Writ,
in that respect, is not legal not warranted by any former President.

The fifth and great point has been (and indeed the chief Argument has been
a multitude of Records and Presidents which have been cited, that should
warrant these Writs, and) that the King has done nothing, but what his former
Progenitors have done, and have lawfully done; and that he does now but more
Majorum, and that which always in ancient times has been done and allowed:
and therefore ought now to be allowed.

I confess this allegation much troubled me, when I heard those Records
cited, and so learnedly and earnestly pressed by Master Solicitor, and after
by Master Attorney, to be so clear, that they might not be gainsaid, but
that they proved a clear Prerogative, or at least a Royal power, that the
King might do so, especially when my brother Weston and my brother Berkley, who
had seen the Records, pressed them, and relied upon them for the reasons of
their judgments, I say, I was much doubtful thereupon, until I had perused
all those Records sent me by the Kings Council, and satisfied my judgment
therein.

But now I answer, That if there were any such Presidents (as I shall show that
there is not one showed to me to prove this Writ to be usual) yet it were not
material, for now we are not to argue what has been done de facto, for many
things have been done which were never allowed; but our question is, What has
been done and may be done de jure: And then, as it is said in Cok. lib. 4.
fol. 33. in Mittons Case, Iudicand' est legibus, non exemplis: and lib. 11.
fol. 75. in Magdalen College Case it is said, Multitudo errantium non parit
errori patrocinium: and lib. 4. fol. 94. in Slades Case, Multitude of
Presidents, unless they be confirmed by Judicial proceedings in Courts of
Record are not to be regarded; and none of these were ever confirmed by
Judicial Record, but complained of.

But to give a more clear answer unto them, I say, That in my opinion, upon
view and serious reading of all the Records that have been sent me on the
Kings part (for I have read them all over verbatim) and I presume they sent all
that were conceived to be material, and I having taken notes of every one of
them, and diligently considered of them, I conceive there is not any President
or Record of any Writ which maintains this Case; for there is not any
President or Record of any such Writ sent to any Sheriff of any Inland County,
or Maritine County, to command the making of ships at the charge of the County,
but this is the first President that ever was since the Conquest that is
produced in this kind; but it is true, that before 25. Ed. 1. there have been
some Writs to Maritine Towns and Ports, and other Towns, as London, etc.

Where they have had ships, and Mariners to provide and prepare ships, and to
send them to places where the King pleased to appoint upon any just cause of
fear of any danger, for defense; and great reason that they having ships, and
Masters of ships, and Mariners, should be at the Kings command to bring all,
or as many as he pleases, for defense of the Sea and Kingdom, being those
that had the most benefit of the Seas, and likely to have the loss, if the
Seas and Coasts were not duly guarded, and those were most commonly appointed
to be at the Kings charge; but sometimes, upon some necessity, they were
appointed to be at the charge of the towns and parts adjoining, which I think
was the true cause of the complaint in Parliament, in 25. E. 1. and the making
of that statute for staying that course; for there is no Record afterward of
any such Writ in King Edw. 1. his time, after that statute to Maritine towns,
to prepare or send ships at the charge of the towns, and none after, until
the time of Edward the third, and then the wars being between him and the
French King, in Annis 10, 11, 12, 13. of Edw. 3. were the most Writs awarded to
the Maritine towns, to send ships at their charge sufficiently furnished; and
those I think were the principal cause of the making of the statute of 14.
Edw. 3. cap. 1. and after that statute no such Writs, nor any Commissions for
that purpose were awarded to make any ships at the charge of Maritine towns,
until 1. Ric. 2. m. 18. when Writs were awarded to many Maritine towns, and
Inland towns, for the making of ships, which Record was much pressed by Mr.
Atturny, and afterward by my brother Weston, and my brother Berkley to prove
that this course was and might be practiced after the stat. of 14. Ed. 3. for
sending forth such Writs, and allowed; but that Record is fully satisfied: for
it was grounded upon an ordinance in Parliament, in 1. Ric. 2. m. 52. that all
ancient Cities, Burroughes, and Towns, that would have their liberties
confirmed, should have them confirmed, without any charge of fine, save only
to make a ship of war for defense of the Realm; so this was not compulsary
to any, but voluntary to those that would have their liberties confirmed: And
afterward in 1. H. 4. Commissions were awarded for the making of such Vessels
for war; but those issuing forth, without any ordinance in Parliament, were
complained of in Parliament, 2. H. 4. m. 22. as to be against the liberty of
the Subject, as appears by the Statute before recited, and the Commissions
expressly repealed: And since that time of 2. Henr. 4. no such Writs issued
forth in any age to any Maritine Town, to cause ships, or prepare ships at
their own charge for the Kings service, until these late Writs.

And now I shall take a short view of all the Records that have been cited, and
sent unto me; and leave them to the judgment of my Lords and others, if any
of them prove these Writs to be usual and legal.

The Records in the time of King John.
THree of these are to arrest and make stay of all ships that they should not
go out of the Kingdom, 6. Joh. m. 11. 9. Joh. m. 3. 14. Joh. m. 2. 17. Joh.
m. 7.
but to be ready for the Kings service; and the other was to bring ships of
particular Towns to the mouth of the Thames for the Kings service.

A Commission to guard the Seas to John de Marshall, 15. Joh. m. 4.
and to the Sheriff of the County of Lincoln, and all others to attend his
commands.

Writs to the Barons of the Cinque Ports, 15. Joh. m. 6.
and diverse other Towns, to have their ships ready for the Kings service.

In the time of King Henry the third.
14. H. 3. m. 14.
A Writ to the Bailiffe of Portsmouth to prepare one Gally.

14. H. 3. m. 5.
A Commission to the Bishop of Rochester and others, and to the Sheriff of
Kent, to cause all men at arms in that County to be sworn, and to assesse
them what arms they should find.

48. H. 3. m. 4.
A Writ to the Sheriff of Norfolk, commanding him to cause them which were
appointed to attend at the Sea coasts in that County, and having served forty
days intended to depart, that they should stay eight days longer by reason of
the danger, and longer, if need require.

The like was sent to the Sheriff of Suff. and Essex.

48. H. 3. m. 2.
A Writ to the Mayor of Bedford, commanding him to provide for the expenses of
them that were sent from thence for the guarding of the Seas, yet it is but for
eight days more after the date of the Writ.

48. H. 3. m. 3.
A Writ to the men of Essex, Norff. and Suff. appointed to attend for the
guarding of the Sea coasts, reciting that the King had appointed T. de M.
Custodem maris, and partium maritinarum within their Counties, commanding them
to assist him, and to perform therein what he required.

A Writ to the Sheriff of Cambridge and Huntington, 48. H. 3. m. 7.
to command all men of those Counties able to bear arms, to come to the King
to London.

In the time of King Edward the first.
A Writ to those of Essex, 23. Ed. 1. m. 5.
Norff. and Suff. reciting that such persons were appointed ad custod' Maritin'
in those Counties, commanding them to attend them.

Another Writ to the Sheriff of Norff. and Ibid.
Suff. reciting that certain Constables of those Counties were appointed to
assesse men at arms, sufficient for the guarding of the Sea coasts, commanding
him to distraine, and compel them so assessed for to go.

Writs to the Sheriff of Lincoln, 24. Ed. 1. m. 17.
York, and Northumberland, reciting that he had commanded A. de B. ad
congregand' and capiend' centum Naves between Ley and Barwicke, and ad homines
potentes in eifdem navibus pon^^d', commanding them to assist him there.

24. Edw. 1. Rot. 62.
A Writ out of the Exchequer to Adam de Guerdon and aliis, Guardians of the Sea
coasts in the county of Southt. to distraine the Abbot of Reading for to find
nine horses, which he was assessed at for that service.

24. Ed. 1. m. 16.
Writs to all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, etc. in the counties of Somerset,
Devonshire, and Cornwall, to attend with their horsemen and footmen for defense
of the sea coasts in those parts, when they shall be required by the Guardian
of those coasts.

24. Edw. 1. ^ot. 78.
A Writ out of the Exchequer directed to all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, etc.
in the county of Norff. and to the Sheriff of Norff. reciting that Peter de
Rutlin was appointed ad custodiam partium maritinarum illarum, commanding them
to assist him.

Ibid.
A Writ out of the Exchequ^r directed to the Sheriff of Berks, reciting that
the King was informed by Adam de Guerdon, Guardian of the s^a coasts in the
County of Southt', that those men of the County of Berks that were come ^o the
d^fending of the sea coasts in those parts, came not as they were warned,
commanded to distraine them and compel them, etc.

The like Writs were awarded to the Sheriff of Wiltshire, Southt' etc.

A Writ to the Bayliffes of great Yarmouth, 24. Edw. 1. Rot. 81.
reciting that the King was informed that certain of Flanders and French in a
great multitude, apparelled like Fishermen, intending to invade their Town,
warning them to gather their ships together, and all their arms to defend
themselves against such attempt.

A Writ to all Sheriffs and Bayliffes, 24. Edw. 1. int. Com.
etc. reciting that he had appointed some therein named, Ad congregand'
numerum Navium, and Galliar' major' etc. commanding the Sheriffs in their
several Counties to be assisting unto them therein.

Note, Nota.
all these Records are for arrayes and congregating of ships, but none to make
or prepare ships at the charges of the Counties.

A Writ of Supersedeas to the Guardian of the 24. Ed. 1. m. 9.
seas in the County of Southt' to distraine Hugh Plessis to find arms for his
lands in that County for the guarding of the seas, because he was in service
with the King.

24. Ed. 1. m. 26.
A Writ to the Sheriff of Essex to discharge for the Winter time those that lay
at the sea coasts with their arms to defend their coasts, but commanding them
to be in a readiness when they should be again commanded.

The like Writs were then awarded to diverse Sheriffs of Maritine Counties to
the same purpose.

25. E. 1. m. 12.
A Writ to the Sheriff of Lancaster, reciting that whereas the King had
formerly commanded him to go to all the Ports and Towns where ships were,
commanding the Bayliffe of the Ports to have all the ships of the burden of
400. tuns at Winchester by such a day, now commands the Sheriff to see them
made ready and sent.

Ibid. 13.
The like Writs directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, York, Northumberland, and
Cumberland.

Ibid. 14.
The like Writs directed to 19. other Ports and Towns in other Counties.

21. Ed. 1. m. 20.
A Commission to send to array men at arms in the County of Westmerland.

In the Exchequer (showed by the Defendants Council) Writs were to several
Maritine Towns, 23. Edw. 1. Rot. 77.
and other Towns upon the sea coasts where ships were usually made, to make
ships and galleys, and that the King will allow and pay for them when he
knows the charge thereof.

In the time of King Edward the second.
A Writ to all the men in the towns upon the sea coasts and Ports of the sea
between Southt' and Falmouth, Pat. 9. Ed. 2. part 2.
reciting that the King had appointed John de Norton to make provision of a
Navy in the said towns and ports at their charges, commanding them to perform
what he in that behalf shall require.

A Writ to the Bayliffes of Yarmouth, Claus. 20. E. 2. m. 8.
reciting that where the King had commanded all the ships of the burden of 50.
tuns, from the Thames mouth toward the West part, to be at Portsmouth such a
day, etc. and they had sent two ships, that the Masters and Mariners complained
that they could not serve without wages, and therefore appointed them to send
them wages.

20. Ed. 2. m. 10
A Writ to the Bayliffes of Yarmouth, commanding them to send all their ships of
the burden of 30. tuns and above, to Orewell in Suff. with double tackling,
victuals, and other things necessary for one month.

The like Writs at the same time to other towns, to the number of 34.

20. Ed. 2. m. 7.
A Writ to the Mayor of London to provide 3. ships with men and munition, to go
with 9. ships of Kent to guard the sea coasts.

15. Ed. 2. m. 15
A writ to the Sheriff of Norff. commanding him to warn all Barons, Bannerets,
Knights, and Esquires, which were commanded to attend the King at Coventry at
such a day, and to go with the King.

15. Ed. 2. m. 15.
A writ to the Sheriff of Norff. and Suff. commanding him to arrest all Barons,
Bannerets, Knights, and Esquires, which were commanded to attend the King at
Coventry, at such a day therein named, and came not, to be before the King and
his Council at London to answer.

The Record says, like Writs were then awarded to diverse other sheriffs of
other counties.

A Commission to array all persons between the ages of 16. and 60. with arms
convenient, 16. Ed. 2. m. 13.
to come to the King when they shall be required.

A writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, 19. Ed. 2. m. 6.
commanding him to array all his servants and family to be ready to defend the
Kingdom, if any invasion should be; the like writs at that time to all the
Bishops.

In the time of Edward the third.
A writ to the Mayor and Bayliffe of Southhampton, 2. Ed. 3. m. 92.
commanding them to cause all their ships of the burden of 40. tuns and above,
to be furnished with men at arms and victuals, ready to defend the Land, if
any invasion should happen.

A commission to Hugh Courtney to guard the seas in the counties of Devonshire
and Cornwall, Scot. 7. Ed. 3. m. 19.
and commanding all others to assist him.

The like commission to Hugh Courtney, 10. Ed. 3. m. 25.
for guarding the seas in the same county.

A writ is to Bartholomew de Insul^, Ibid.
for custody of the sea coasts in the county of Southhampt. and therein is a
command to John Tichborn and others for the county of Southhamp. and to William
de Pershiore and others for the county of Berks, and to John Mandit and others
for the county of Wilts. to array men with arms, and to have them in
readiness to defend the coasts of the county of Southhampt.

Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 2.
A writ to William Clinton guardian of the Cinque Ports and others, to survey
all the ships of the Cinque Ports and other Ports from the mouth of the Thames
unto Portsmouth, and to cause them to be furnished with arms and victuals for
13. weeks from the time they shall go from Portsmouth.

Scot. 10. Ed. 3. m. 2.
A Writ to the Mayor of Winchester, to cause the ships appointed for that town
to be furnished with men at arms and victuals, and other necessaries for 13.
weeks.

Scot. 10. Ed. 3. m. 16.
A writ to the Admiral of the Fleet from the mouth of Thames unto the West
parts, to keep upon the seas the ships of the Cinque Ports, and other ships
arrested to defend the Kingdom against any attempt of invasion.

The like writ was then to the Admiral of the Fleet from the mouth of the
Thames unto the North parts, with like command to hold the ships together upon
the sea.

A writ commanding the ships of the Ports of Ireland to be sent hither to
guard the seas here. Scot. 10. Ed. 3. m. 16.


A writ to the Bayliffes of Yarmouth, 10. Edw. 3. m. 12.
to cause the men of that town to contribute to the charges of the ships, and
men and victuals sent from thence for the defense of the Kingdom.

A writ to all the Liberties and men of South Wales, Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 22.
to have one ship riding upon the seas for the defense of those parts.

The like unto the men of North Wales. Ibid.


A writ to the arrayers of men for the county of Berks, Scot. 10. Ed. 3. m. 21.
to compel them of that county assigned and assessed for the keeping of the
sea coasts in the county of Southt. to go to Portsmouth by a day therein
appointed.

A Commission, Alm. 12. Ed. 3. m. 12.
reciting that the King had appointed all the ships from the mouth of the
Thames Northward to be arrested, and to cause them to be furnished with
munition, men, and victuals, and to be brought to Yarmouth; and that the men
of Lin refused to contribute to the expenses of the charge of the men sent in
the ship from that town, and the furnishing of that ship; and therefore
commanded the comers therein named to assesse them that refuse so to
contribute, and to distraine them for it.

Alm. 12. Ed. 3. m. 13.
The like to compel the men of Bard^ey^ to contribute for the expenses of the
men of that town.

Claus. 12. Ed. 3 m. 16.
The like to compel the men of Surrey and Sussex, to contribute to the expenses
of the men of those counties, that attended for the guarding of the sea coasts
there.

12. Ed. 3. m. 8.
A writ to all Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and to the Sheriff of Kent, and to
the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and all others in that county, commanding them
to be assisting to I. de Cobham, to whom the custody of the seas in those
parts is committed, and to defend those coasts against foreign invasion.

Alm. 12. Ed. 3. m. 10.
A writ to the Mayor of London, reciting the danger of invasion, etc. commanding
to shut up the gates toward the water, if the enemies approach.

Alm. 13. Ed. 3. m. 12.
A writ to the Bayliffes of Yarmouth, reciting by his writ he had commanded 4.
ships of war of that town to be made ready with men, munition, and victuals
for three months, at the charges of the town, to be brought to Orewell, and
that they failed to come at their day, to the great peril of the Land;
therefore commands the Bayliffes to compel them at another day therein
prefixed to be at the same place. There it is set down that the like Writs were
awarded to the Bayliffes of 17. other towns, for the sending their ships,
being charged some for 1. ship, and some for 2. ships.

A Supersedeas for the Abbot of Gwaverra to find a ship as he was appointed,
Claus. 13. Ed. 3 m. 35.
because he found diverse men at arms in the Isle of Wight.

A Supersedeas for the Abbot of Ramsey for Claus. 13. Ed. 3 m. 38.
being charged with arms for the guarding of the coasts of Norff. for his
lands in Norff. because he was by command attending with all his forces in the
county of Huntington, for the safety of those parts.

A writ of Supersedeas to the arrayers of arms in the county of Oxon', Claus.
13. Ed. 3 m. 14.
to discharge John Mandit to serve there, because he attended in Wilts.

A writ, Claus. 13. Ed. 3 m. 14.
etc. to the arrayers of arms in the county of Wilts. which is only
concerning the payment of soldiers wages, who attended to guard the sea coasts.

These being all the Records showed, it ^^peareth that there were no writs
issuing out in those times to any Sheriffs of Inland counties, or Maritine
counties, to make or prepare ships for any occasion whatsoever, but only to
Maritine towns, to send their ships, or to prepare ships at their own charges.

The Records since 14. E. 3. showed me, do not show any writs to be awarded
to any Maritine towns, to prepare ships at the charge of the towns.

But those Records of 1. Ric. 2. and 1. Hen. 4. which I have before answered,
and the Records since that time showed unto me (except such as I have formerly
mentioned in my argument) are these:

Scot. 20. Ed. 3. m. 14.
A commission to Nicholas de Cartlape, to array men to resist the Scots.

Ibid.
A writ to the Mayor of York, to array all their men to be ready when they
shall be required.

20. Ed. 3. m. 15.
A commission concerning arrayes of men in the counties of Derby and Nottingham,
and to punish such as came not when they were appointed.

A writ to the arrayers of men in the county of South-hampt. to discharge the
Abbot of Bettaile to find arms for the sea coasts there. Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3.
m. 31.


A commission to John de Bodingham for the custody of the Ports and Maritine
parts in Cornwall, Franc. 25. E. 3. m. 20.
and to array all the men to be in a readiness.

Note, Nota.
all these Records are only for arrayes of men, and none for preparing ships.

There it is set down, that the like Commissions are to others in several
counties.

A commission to the Earl of Huntington, Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 5.
to have the custody of the Ports in Kent, and to array men, and to set up
beacons, etc. which is the first I observe in that kind.

The like commissions were then to several other persons, to array men in
several counties, as Warwick, Oxon. Berks, Bucks, etc.

A writ to the Archbishop of Cant. reciting the danger of invasion by the
French to hurt the Church and Kingdom, Franc. 46. E. 3. m. 34.
to array all his Clergy in his Diocese, etc. to be ready to go with the
Kings forces to defend, etc.

The like writs to all other Bishops in the Kingdom.

Franc. 50. E. 3. m. 47.
A writ to the arrayers of men in the county of Norff. and to the Sheriff of
Norff. commanding them to command all great men and others, that had mansions
upon or near the sea coasts, to resort with all their families for defense of
those coasts.

The like to the arrayers, and to the Sheriffs often other Maritine counties.

Scot. 29. Ed. 3. m. 13.
A commission to the Bishop of Durham and others, to array men in Durham,
Cumberland, and Northumb. to resist the Scots.

Franc. 40. E. 3. m. 31.
A writ to William Hench and others, to remove with all their families to their
houses upon the sea coasts.

In the time of Richard the second.
1. R. 2. m. 7.
A writ to the Bayliffe of Scardeburgh, because the town was upon the coasts of
the sea, and in danger by invasion, carefully to look to the custody thereof,
etc.

Eod. Rot. m. 12
A writ to the Mayor and Bayliffes of Oxon. to repair the walls of the town,
and to compel those that had lands there to contribute to the expenses thereof.

This Record has been much urged by Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Attorney, that if
the King have such a power to command the walls of a town to be repaired,
much more to command ships to be made, which are the walls of the sea, and
consequently the walls of the Kingdom. But this is clearly answered, for that
it is but a private charge of a private town, and that had been formerly so
walled, and for defense and safety of the town, and none charged but those that
have benefit thereby, and so proves nothing to the Case in question.

One writ to the Sheriff of Kent, Eod. Rot. m. 42
and another to the Sheriff of Essex, commanding an ordinance made, etc. by
the King and his Council, for setting up of Beacons, and keeping watch about
them.

A writ to the Archbish. of Cant. to command all his Clergy between 16. and
60. to be arrayed and put in arms, Scot. 7. R. 2. m. 8.
both horse and foot, according to their qualities, to be ready to defend the
Kingdom.

Franc. 11. R. 2. m. 13.
A writ to a Sergeant at arms, to array all ships of war in the Ports of
Plymouth and Dartmouth, and other parts in the county of Cornwall, and to bring
them to Hanks hook to go with the Kings Majesty's ships.

In the same Roll are diverse other writs to diverse other Sergeants at arms, to
arrest the ships in diverse other ports.

Scot. 21. R. 2. m. 3.
A commission to the Duke Albernale, to array men in the West Marches toward
Scotland to resist the Scots.

Rot. Vierg. 1. H. 4. m. 11.
A writ to the Sheriff of Derby and Nottingham, reciting that the King
certainly understood, that the Scots intended with a great power to invade the
Kingdom, commands him to proclaim in all parts of his counties, that all men
between 16. and 60. should put themselves in arms competent, according to
their degrees, to be ready upon two days warning to defend the Kingdom.

Claus. 1. H. 4. m. 12.
The like writs were then directed to the Sheriffs of Lincoln, York, and
Lancaster.

A writ to the Archbish. of Cant. reciting Satis informati estis qualit.
inimici nostri Franc. and alii sibi adhaerentes, cum magna class navium, cum
magna multitudine armator' super mare congregat', Note, that although this
great danger be mentioned, yet no command to any county to prepare ships.
diversas villas per Costeram regni nostri invadere, and nos and regnum nostrum
destruere, and Ecclesiam Anglicanam subvertere intendunt and proponunt:
Thereupon commands, that the Clergy in that Diocese be arrayed and armed,
and to be ready at the Kings command to go against the enemy.

The like Writs were then awarded to every Bishop in England.

A commission to Thomas de Morley and others, Pat. 5. H. 4. pars 2. m. 28.
and to the sheriffs of Norff. and Suff. and to the Bayliffes of great
Yarmouth, reciting, Quod cum inimici Franc. Brittan. Scot. and alii sibi
adhaerentes, inter se obligat. magna armat. super mare in aestate proxim.
futur. ordinaverunt and intendunt regnum invadere, etc. commands to survey
that town of Yarmouth, and to fortify it.

Note here also, notwithstanding such great danger mentioned, and such distance
of time, yet that no Writs issued to any counties to prepare ships.

A commission to array all men at arms in the West Riding in Yorkshire, Pat.
3. H. 5. pars 2. m. 37.
to be ready to defend those parts.

The like Commissions to others in nineteen several counties. Pat. 13. H. 6.
m. 10.


Pat. 39. H. 6. m
Commissions for arraying men for defense of the Kingdom, Pat. 39. H. 6. m. 12.
if invasion shall be, and for repressing of Rebels. Pat. 39. H. 6. m. 1.


Pat. 10. Ed. 4. m. 12.
Commissions unto George Duke of Clarence and others, to array men for defense.

Pat. 10. Ed. 4. m. 13.
A Commission to John Lord Howard, to be Captain of all the Forces.

Pat. 49. H. 6. m. 22.
A Commission to Marquess Mountague, to array and put in arms all men beyond
Trent.

Pat. 1 H. 7. pars 1.
A Commission to Rich. Fitzhugh, etc. and to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, to
array and cause to be armed all able persons, Abbots, and others, to be ready
to defend the Kingdom.

1. H. 7. pars 3.
A Writ to the Sheriff of Norff. and Suff. to proclaim in all parts of those
counties, for that there was like to be open wars between Charles of France,
and the King of Romans, and great Navies are prepared of either side,
commands that watch and ward be kept, and beacons kept, to give warning that
every man be ready if need be, to come and defend the Kingdom.

4. H. 8. pars 2.
A Writ to the Sheriff of Kent, commanding him to proclaim in his county that
the King be certainly informed, that the French King has prepared and put in
readiness a great and strong Navy, furnished with men of war, to invade
this his Kingdom; therefore commands all men, between the age of 16. and
60. to put themselves in arms, and to be ready to defend the Kingdom at an
hours warning.

Commisioners went to take view of all the horses of England for service, 11.
Elis.
and to survey all the arms, to have them all put in readiness, as necessity
should require.

Now it appears upon view and examination of all these Records, most of them
being cited by Mr. Solicitor and M. Attorney in their several arguments, that
there are none to prove the sending of any such Writs to Inland or Maritine
counties to prepare such ships, although there has been many times great
danger; nor yet any Writs to Maritine towns after the Stat. of 14. E. 3. to
charge them to find any ships at their charges: So then I conclude this point,
that I conceive this Writ is not warranted by any former President.

Now I come to examine the points of this Writ, whether the same be legal,
and warranted by any former Presidents, and I conceive it is not: For

Quia datum est nobis intelligi, which is no certain information, quod quidam
praedones and maris grassatores, did take the Kings subjects, Merchants and
others, and carried them into miserable captivity.

Cumque ipsos conspicimus navigium indies praeparantes ad mercator' nostros
molestand', and regnum nostrum gravand'. All these and those following I
conceive are not sufficient motives, and were never in any President before to
have a royal Navy prepared, for the former Presidents are, that great Princes
in open times of hostility had provided great Navies with munition and
soldiers, with intent to invade the Kingdom, as appears by the former
Presidents: and against such provision it was necessary to provide a royal
Navy, the Kings ships and all the ships of the Kingdom to be gathered to
withstand them; but to make such preparation against Pirates, it was never put
in any Writ before: for when Pirates infested the seas, they came as it were by
stealth to rob and to do mischief, and they never dare appear, but when they
may do mischief, and escape away by their lightness; but against them the
usual course has been, that the Admiral or his Deputy with some few ships
have scoured the coasts, and not to employ a whole Navy, and this appears by
the Record of 25. E. 1. m. 9. where Will. Leyborne the Admiral was appointed
upon such an occasion with ten ships to lie upon the seas; and the usual
practice has been, when they hover upon the seas, by sending a few ships of
war to scatter them, and to make them absolutely to fly away: and there is no
doubt of loss of the dominion of the seas by any act that Pirates can do,
neither convenient that every county of the Kingdom should prepare ships
against them.

The command of this Writ to provide a

The command of the Writ to find wages for the soldiers for 26. weeks after
they come to Portsmouth, when they are out of their counties, and in the Kings
service, is illegal, being against the course of Presidents in diverse times,
and against diverse express statutes: and this appears by diverse Records. 15.
Ioh. In the Writs of Summons of the Tenants by Knights service, it is expressly
mentioned, that after their 40. days service (for so many days they were to
do service by their tenures) they should be satisfied ad denarios Regis.

Pasch. 26. E. 1. amongst the Writs of the Exchequer it is there set down, that
the footmen of Cheshire being 1000. which were appointed to go to the defense
of the borders upon Scotland, would not stir out of the county without their
wages; and there is set down, that one therein named was sent down with money
to pay the said footmen.

Mich. 26. E. 1. Inter Brevia irretornab. in the Exchequer, by reason of the
invasion of the Scots, many thousands of soldiers were taken from diverse parts
of the Kingdom, ad vadia Regi^, and there mentioned, that Clerks were sent
down with money to pay the soldiers of several counties their wages.

In the Exchequer in account the wages of land soldiers for several counties,
30. Edw. 1.
and the wages of Mariners, are set down what the wages that was paid came to
by day, both by sea and land.

Inter Brevia in the Exchequer, Trin. 31. E. 1.
the Wardens of the Marches of Scotland signified unto the Barons, that the men
of Cumberland and Westmerland, appointed for the defense of the Marches, would
not stir out of their counties without wages, whereupon order was given for
wages for them.

Commissions went out to pay the soldiers, 19. Ed. 2.
which served out of several counties for defense against Scotland.

In the Exchequer it was ordered in Parliament, Hill. 2. Ed. 3. Rot. 16.
that where some soldiers had received of some of the Kings officers moneys
for their wages, were fain to give bond for repayment, that those bonds should
all be redelivered.

But to clear all doubts, the express statute of 18. E. 3. c. 7. is, That men
of arms, Hoblers and Archers, chosen to go in the Kings s^rvice out of
England, shall be at the Kings wages from the time they go out of their
counties where they were chosen, until the time they come home again.

19. H. 7. cap. 1. 11. H. 7. cap. 1.
Those that had any grant of lands from the King, and those that had any offices
of the grant of the King, are to serve the King in his wars, but in both it is
appointed, they shall have wages from the time they come from their houses,
until they shall return.

2. and 3. E. 6. c. 2.
It is enacted, That no Captain receiving soldiers serving by sea or by land,
shall receive any wages for more soldiers or more time then they serve, and
shall enter the days of their entering into wages upon pain, etc.

All which Records and Statutes do prove, that the soldiers should be at the
Kings wages; therefore this command for soldiers wages for 26. weeks when
they go from Portsmouth, is illegal, and expressly against the said Statutes:
and so the assessment being entire, as well for the wages as the other charges,
I hold to be clearly illegal, and not to be demanded.

Sheriff to assesse men at his own discretion, is not legal, nor warranted
by the Presidents; for the Presidents are commonly that assessements for
contribution for making or setting out of ships, have been by Commissioners,
which by presumption had knowledge of such matters as commonly Sheriffs have
not. Also this leaves to the Sheriff too great a power to value men's estates,
as to inhaunce whom he will, and to favor whom he will.

That the power to the Sheriffs and Majors non-payment of the money, is
illegal, and expressly against diverse Statutes; for it is provided by Magna
Charta, c. 29. Quod nullus capiatur vel imprisonetur, nec super eum ibimus nisi
per judicium Parium suor' vel per legem terrae.

Also in 5. Ed. 3. cap. 9. that none shall be attached, or his goods seized
contrary to the form of the great Charter.

Also by the statute made Mich. 37. E. 3. cap. 18. it is recited, that by that
great Charter none should be taken or imprisoned but by due process of law,
yet by color of this Writ the Sheriff may imprison any person, yea any Peer
of the Realm; for although Peers are not to be arrested upon ordinary process
between party and party, as it was resolved in the Countess of Rutlands case,
in Cok. l. 6. fol. 32. yet for a contempt, and upon process of contempt, which
is always for the King, any Peer may be imprisoned, as it is resolved by all
the Lords and all the Judges in the Star Chamber in the Earl of Lincolnes
case: and so the Sheriff by color of this Writ may arrest any Peer, as for a
contempt in not paying; but by the Book case, 2. E.. 3. fo. 2. it is resolved,
that a Writ to imprison one upon suggestion before he be indicted, and without
due process of law, was illegal; so for the case I hold this Writ to be
illegal.

These are reasonable clauses; but as the course is taken, it is not to be
performed: for no ship, nor tackling, nor munition, nor men, nor wages, nor
victuals being provided, it is not to be known whether more be gathered or
less then would suffice; and there being money gathered, it is of necessity
either detained with the Collector or Sheriff, or employed to other uses then
are appointed by the Writ, so the writ is not performed; and the money assessed
and collected, is not duly made nor collected, and the money assessed and
unpaid, cannot be duly demanded.

Admitting that the Writ were legal, and the thing to be done before a
certain time, if the thing be not performed according to the time, none can
be charged for not being contributory to it after the time is past; for it is
in nature of a condition precedent, to have a duty or sum of money to be paid
after the condition performed, and there he that will have the duty, must show
that the condition is performed: This appears in the case of 15. H. 7.1. and
Cok l. 7. fo. 9. Ughtrees case. And if the ship be not prepared according to
the Writ, nor money employed for preparing a ship, for and in the name of the
county, then every one that paid any money, either voluntarily, as in obedience
to the Writ, or compulsorily upon distress, may demand their money again of the
Sheriff, or of them that received it; for as they paid their money, so it must
be disposed of, and cannot be disposed of otherwise by any command whatsoever,
although it be under the great Seal; for the command being under the great
S^ale to prepare and furnish a ship to such purpose as in the Writ is
mentioned, and they paying it to that purpose, it cannot be otherwise
disposed, although it be more for their advantage: for private men having
interest therein, that cannot be taken from them, no^ dispensed withal;
therefore in Cok li. 7. fol. 27. in the case of penal laws it is resolved,
That if the penalty appointed to be forfeited upon a penal statute be given to
the poor of the Parish where the offense is committed, the King cannot
dispense with the penalty for that offense, because the poor have an interest
therein; but if the penalty be given, part to the King, and part to the poor,
the King may dispense with his own part, but not with the part of the poor.

And where it is said, Object.
that this is by way of accommodation, because the country cannot well know how
to provide to content, and perhaps with more charge. Sol.
To this is answered, they must do it at their peril, if the Writ be legal,
and then if it be done, they shall have the benefit thereof; for as my brother
Weston and my brother Berkley have both agreed, if the ship were made when the
service is done, the county for which it was made shall have the benefit of the
ship and the munition, and of the service of the men, being made more expert
against another time, and the ship may with some easy charge serve again, and
nothing lost but the expenses of the victuals, and the Kingdom shall be so
much the more strengthened by having so many ships made or prepared; and they
may have account of their money how it was bestowed, and if any surplusage be
gathered, to have it restored; And that the law is so, that if money be received
of the county, and not employed accordingly, the party so receiving it is
accountable to pay a fine for the same to the King, and to the county for the
money, appears by two Records, the one in Hill. 16. E. 3. rot. 23. in the
Kings Bench, where two soldiers were indicted, for that they 8. E. 3. taking
3. li. a piece toward their armor, and to the bringing them to the place
where they were appointed to serve the King in England in wars, went not, but
tarried still in their houses, and retained the armor and the money they had
received for that purpose: They thereupon being convented, pleaded not guilty;
and the one was found to go in service according to the appointment, so he was
discharged: and the other was found that he received the money, and went not to
do the service, nor restored the arms nor money; thereupon he was committed to
the prison, and paid to the King a fine, and found sureties to pay the money to
the Hundred again, from whom he had received it.

The other was Hill. 20. Ed. 3. rot. 57. in the Kings Bench, where two high
Constables were indicted for that they 8. E. 3. had received 6. Marks of the
towns in their Hundreds to set forth soldiers, and had not set them forth,
but retained the money, which they denying, it was found that they had received
the money for that purpose, and disbursed 41.s. 6.d. thereof toward the setting
forth of soldiers, but had retained 38.s. 6.d. and not disbursed it; thereupon
they were fined and imprisoned, and after enlarged upon sureties to pay the
money they had retained undisbursed at the next time when the King commanded
soldiers for those parts; By both which Records, being for offenses done so
long before, it appears that those that have received money of the country to
prepare ships, they are answerable unto the King or his Successors to pay a
fine for their employment of it otherwise, and are chargeable to those of the
county of whom they received it, for repayment thereof.

Certiorari directed to the two that were late Sheriffs at the time of the
assessment, and not to the Sheriff that was at the time of the Certiorari
awarded, who is the only and immediate officer to return the Writs, is not
legal; for it is the first that has been seen of that kind^ for all Writs
are directed to some immediate Sheriff, requiring him to demand of the former
Sheriffs what they did upon the former Writ, and they are to return to him
what has been done, and he to return the same to the Court, whereunto he is
the immediate officer, and the former are not any officers.

So the Scire fac' thereupon grounded I conceive is not good, also the Scire
fac' to warn Mr. Hampden ad ostend ^i quid pro se habeat, etc. quare de
praedict viginti solid. onerare non debet, not showing to whom, is uncertain
and insufficient.

Thereupon I conclude upon the whole ma^er, That no judgment can be given to
charge the Defendant.

FINIS.
Judgment was given against Mr Hampden by the greater part of the Judges: And
when the Judges had delivered their opinions, the Barons gave Judgment Quod
oneret^r, etc.
Afterward in this present Parliament begun at Westminster, 3. Novembris, Anno
Dom. 1640. the Commons took into their considerations the extrajudiciall
opinions of the Judges, the Ship-writs, and this Judgment against Mr Hampden;
and being read openly in the House, after long debate, Die Lunae, septimo die
December. 1640. these four several Votes passed upon them, without so much as
one negative Voice to any of them: (viz.)
THat the charge imposed upon the Subjects Spip-money, are against the Laws of
the Realm, the Subjects right of Property, and contrary to former resolutions
in Parliament, and to The Petition of Right.

in haec verba;

THE CASE.
Charles Rex.

When the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in danger, whether may not the King by Writ under the Great Seal
of England command all the Subjects in this Kingdom at their charge to provide
and furnish such number of Ships, with men, victual, and munition, and for
such a time as he shall think fit, for the defense and safeguard of the
Kingdom from such danger and peril, and by Law compel the doing thereof, in
case of refusal or refractorinesse; And whether in such case is not the King
the sole Judge both of the danger, and when and how the same is to be prevented
and avoided.

C. R.

THEIR OPINIONS.
MAy it please Your most excellent Majesty, We have, according to Your
Majesty's command, severally, and every man by himself, and all of us together,
taken into serious consideration the Case and questions signed by Your
Majesty, and enclosed in Your Letter: And we are of opinion, That when the
good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole
Kingdom in danger, Your Majesty may by Writ under the Great Seal of England
command all the Subjects of this Your Kingdom at their charge to provide and
furnish such number of Ships with men, victual, and munition, and for such
time as Your Majesty shall think fit for the defense and safeguard of the
Kingdom from such danger and peril; and that by Law Your Majesty may compel
the doing thereof in case of refusal or refractorinesse. And we are also of
opinion, that in such case Your Majesty is the sole Judge both of the danger,
and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided.

In the whole, and in every part of them are against the Laws of the Realm,
the Right of Property, and the liberty of the Subjects, and contrary to former
Resolutions in Parliament, and to The Petition of Right.

in hae^ verba: viz.

Memora^d. quod xxvii. dic ^eb. 1640. anno regni Dom. Regis Car. 16. istud
irrotul. and omnia and sing. in eode^ contenta and express. vacant. per judic.
Domi^. spu^^liu^ and temporal. in Cur. Parliamenti. Per Ioh. Brown Cleric.
Parliam.
CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our right trusty and welbeloved Councellor,
Thomas Lord Coventry, Keeper of Our great Seal of England, greeting. These are
to will and require you, that for the safeguard of the Seas, and defense of the
Realm, you issue forth or cause to be issued forth of our high Court of
Chancery these ensuing Writs in the form following, with Duplicats of them,
under Our Great Seal of England, unto the Counties, Cities, Towns and places
hereafter ensuing, and for so doing this shall be your warrant.

REx, etc. Vic. Com. nostri Buck. Ballivis and Burgensibus Burgi and paroch. de
Buckingham: Maiori, Ballivis, and Burgensibus Burgi de Chepping Wicombe, alias
Wicombe: Ballivis, Aldermannis, and Burgensibus Burgi de Aylesbury, ac probis
hominibus in eisdem Burgis and parochiis, and membris eorundem, and in Villis
de Agmondisham, Wendover, and Marlowe magna, ac in omnibus aliis Villis,
Burgis, Villat. Hamlet. and aliis locis in dicto Com. Buck. salutem. Quia datum
est nobis intelligi quod praedones quidam, Piratae and maris Grassatores tam
nominis Christiani hosts, Mahumetani, quam alii congregat. Naves and bona ac
mercimonia non solum Subditorum nostrorum, verumetiam Subditorum Amicorum
nostrorum in mari, quod per gentem Anglicanam ab olim defendi consuevit,
nefarie diripientes and spoliantes ea, ad libitum suum deportavere, hominesque
in eisdem in captivitatem miserrimam mancipantes. Cumque ipsos conspicimus,
Navigium indies praeparantes ad Mercatores nostros ulterius molestand. and
regnum gravand. nisi citius remedium apponatur, eorumque conatui virilius
obvietur: consideratis etiam periculis quae undique his guerrinis temporibus
imminent, ita quod nobis and Subditis nostris defensionem maris and regni, omni
festinatione qua poterimus accelerare convenit: Nos volentes defensioni regni,
tuitioni maris, securitati Subditorum nostrorum salvae conductioni Navium and
Merchandizarum ad regnum nostrum Angliae venient'. and de eodem regno ad parts
exteras transeunt'. (auxiliante Deo) providere; maxim cum nos and Progenitores
nostri Reges Angliae Domini maris praedict. semper hactenus extiterint, and
plurimum nos taederet, si honor iste regnis nostris temporibus depereat, aut in
aliquo imminuatur. Cumque onus istud defensionis quod omnes tangit, per omnes
debeat supportari, prout per legem and consuetudinem regni nostri fieri
consueverit. Vobis praefat. Vicecom. Mayor. Ballivis, Aldermannis, Burgensibus,
probis hominibus, and omnibus aliis quibuscunque supramentionat. Villis,
Burgis, Vill. Hamlet. and locis suprad. eorumque membris in fide and ligeantia
quibus nobis tenemini, and sicut Nos and honore^ nostr. diligitis, necnon sub
forisfactur. omniumque quae nobis forisfacere poteritis firmiter injungend.
Mandamus, quod unam Navem de guerra portagii quadringent. and quinquagint.
doliorum cum hominibus tam Magistris peritis quam Marinariis valentioribus and
expertis, centum and octoginta ad minus, ac etiam tormentis tam majoribus quam
minoribus pulvere tormentario ac hastis and telis, aliisque armatur. necessar.
pro guerra sufficien. and cum duplici eskippamento, necnon cum victual. usque
ad primum diem Marcii jam proxime sequentem ad tot. homines competent. and ab
inde in viginti sex septimanas ad custagia vestra tam in victual. quam hominum
salariis and aliis ad guerram necessariis per tempus illud super defensionem
maris in obsequio nostro in Co^mitiva custodis maris cui custodiam maris ante
praedictum primum die^ Martii committimus, and prout ipse ex part nostra
dictaver. moratur. praeparari, and ad Portum de Portesmouth citra dictum primum
diem Marcii, duci faciatis: Ita quod sint ibidem eodem die ad ultimum ad
proficiscend. exinde cum Navibus nostris and Navibus aliorum fidelium
Subditorum nostrorum pro tuitione maris and defensione vestrum and vestrorum,
repulsioneque and debell^tione quorumcunque quae Mercatores nostros and alios
subditos and fideles praedictos in Dominia nostra ex causa Mercatur. se
diverten. vel ab inde ad propria declinan' super mare gravare seu molestare
satagentium. Assignavimus autem vos praefat. Vicecom. com. nostri Buck. Maiores
and Ballivos Villarum and Burgorum praedict. aut aliquos sex vel plures
vestrum, quorum te praefat. Vic. Com. nostri Buck. unum esse volumus, infra
triginta dies post receptionem hujus Brevis ad assidend. quantum de custagiis
praedictis super praedict. Burg. and paroch. de Buckingham ac praedict. Burg.
de Chepping Wicombe, alias Wicombe, and praedict. Burgi de Aylesbury, cum
membris eorundem, and Vill. de Agmondisham, Wendover, and Marlowe magna, cum
membr. eorundem, separatim poni aut assideri debeat. Et si hujusmodi
Assessamenta infra praedict. triginta dies per vos sex vel plures vestrum fieri
non contigerint, tunc assignavimus te praefat. Vic. Com. nostri Buck. ad
assidend. hujusmodi super praedict. vill. and burgos and membr. eorundem
faciend. prout rationabiliter videris faciend. Et volumus quod de toto facto
tuo tu praefat. Vic. Buck. sub sigillo tuo praedictos Mayor. and Ballivos
reddas certiores. Assignavimus etiam vos praefat. Ballivos and Burgenses Burgi
and paroch. de Buckingham ad assidend. omnes homines in praedicto Burgo and
paroch. and membris eorundem, and terr. tenen. in eisdem (Navem vel partem
Navis praedict. non habentes, vel in eadem non deservientes) ad contribuend.
expens. circa provisionem praemissorum necessar. and super praedictum Burgum
and paroch. cum membr. eorundem sic ut praefertur assidend. and ponend. viz.
quemlibet eorum juxta statum suum and facultates suas and portiones super ipsos
assessas per districtiones aliosve modos debit. levand. Et Collectores in hac
part nominand. and constituend. and omnes eos quos rebels and contrarios
inveneritis in praemissis, carceri mancipand. in eod. moratur. quousque pro
eorum deliberatione ulterius duxerimus ordinand. Assignavimus etiam te praefat.
Maiorem Villae and Burgi de Chepping Wicombe ad assidend. omnes homines in
praed. Vill. and Burgo, and membr. ejusdem, and terr. tenen. in eisdem Navem
vel partem Navis non habentes, vel in eadem non deservientes ad contribuend.
expensis circa provisionem praemisssor. necessar. Et super praedictum Burgum
cum membris ejusdem sic ut praefertur assidend. and ponend. videl. quemlibet
eorum juxta statum suum and facultates suas and portiones super ipsos assessas
per districtiones aliosve modos debitos levand. Et Collectores in hac part
nominand. and constituend. and omnes eos quos rebels and contrarios inveneris
in praemissis, carceri mancipand. in eod. moratur. quousque pro eorum
deliberatione ulterius duxerimus ordinand. Assignavimus etiam vos praefat.
Ballivos, Aldermannos, and Burgenses Burgi de Aylesbury praedict. ad assidend.
omnes homines in eodem Burgo and membris ejusdem and terr. tenen. in eisdem
(Navem vel partem Navis praedict. non habentes, vel in eadem non deservientes)
ad contribuend. expensis circa provisionem praemissorum necessar. et super
praedict. Burgum et membr. ejusdem sic ut praefertur assidend. et ponend.
videl. quemlibet eorum juxta statum suum et facultates suas et portiones super
ipsos assessas per districtiones aliosve modos debitos levand. Et collectores
in hac part nominand. et constituend. et omnes eos quos rebels et contrarios
inveneritis in praemissis, carceri mancipand. in eod. moratur. quousque pro
eorum deliberatione ulterius duxerimus ordinand. Et ulterius assignavimus te
praefat. Vic. Com. nostri Buck. ad assidend. omnes homines in praedictis villis
de Agmondisham, Wendover, et Marlowe magna, et in membris eorundem, ac in
omnibus aliis Villis, Burgis, Villat. Hamlet. et aliis locis in dicto Com.
Buck. et terr. tenen. in eisdem (Navem vel partem Navis praedict. non habentes,
vel in eadem non deservientes) ad contribuend. expensis circa provisionem
praemissorum necessar. Et super praed. Villas, Burg. Villat. Hamlet. et locos
cum membris eorundem sic ut praefertur assidend. et ponend. videl. quemlibet
eorum juxta statum suum, et facultates suas, et portiones super ipsos assessas
per districtiones aliosve modos debitos levand. Et collectores in hac part
nominand. et constituend. et omnes eos quos rebels et contrarios inveneris in
praemissis, carceri mancipand. in eod. moratur. quousque pro eorum
deliberatione ulterius duxerimus ordinand. Et ulterius vobis mandamus quod
circa praemissa diligent. intendatis, et ea faciatis, et exequamini cum effectu
sub periculo incumb. Nolumus autem quod color praedicti mandati nostri plus de
eisdem hominibus levari fac. quam ad praemissa sufficient expensas necessar. aut
quod quisquam qui pecuniam de contributionibus ad praed. custag. faciend.
levaverit, eam vel partem inde aliquam penes se detineat, vel ad alios usus
quovis quaesito color appropriare praesumat, volentes quod si plus quam
sufficiat collectum fuerit, hoc inter solventes pro rata portionis ipsis
contingen. exsolvatur. T. etc.

Convenit cum Recordo and exam. Per me JOH. CASSE.

And the other Writs, commonly called the Ship-writs, are against the Laws of
the Realm, the Right of Property, and the liberty of the Subjects, and
contrary to former resolutions in Parliament, and to the Petition of Right.

Hampdens Case, a Transcript whereof follows in haec verba: (viz. Quod
separalia brevia praedicta and retorna eorundem, ac schedul. praedict. eisdem
annexat. ac materia in eisdem content. sufficien. in lege exist. ad praef. Ioh.
Hampden de praedictis viginti solidis super ipsum in forma and ex causa
praedict. assessis, onerand. Ideo consideratum est per eosdem Barons, quod
praedictus Johannes Hampden de eisdem viginti solidis oneretur, and inde
satisfaciat.) In the matter and substance thereof, and in that it was conceived
that Mr Hampden was any way chargeable, is against the Laws of the Realm, the
right of Property, the liberty of the Subjects, and contrary to former
Resolutions in Parliament, and to the Petition of Right.

These Votes were afterward transmitted by the House of Commons to the Lords,
and delivered by Mr St John now his Majesty's Solicitor general, at a
conference of both Houses of Parliament, held 16. Car. 1640.

Die Mercur. 20. die Ian. 1640.
It was resolved by the Lords upon the question, Nemine contradicente:

Hampdens Case, and the proceedings thereupon in the Exchequer Chamber, are all
illegal, and contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, contrary to
the Rights and Proprieties of the Subjects of this Realm, contrary to former
Judgments in Parliaments, and contrary to the Petition of Right.

Likewise resolved upon the Question, Nemine contradicente:

and in whole, and contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, contrary to
the rights and proprieties of the Subjects of this Realm, and contrary to
former Judgments in Parliaments, and contrary to the Petition of Right.

Die Veneris, 26. die Februarii, 1640.
Upon the report of the Right Honorable the Lords Committees appointed to
consider of the way of vacating of the Judgment in the Exchequer concerning
Ship Money, It was ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the high
Court of Parliament assembled, That the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the
Rolls, the two Lo: Chief Justices, and the Lo: Chief Baron, and likewise the
Chief Clerk of the Star Chamber, shall bring into the Upper House of
Parliament the Record in the Exchequer of the Judgment in Mr Hampdens Case
concerning Ship-mony; and also the several Rols in each several Court of K.
Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Star Chamber, and Chancery, wherein the Judges
extrajudiciall opinions in the Cases made touching Ship Money be entered, and
that a Vacat shall be made in the Upper House of Parliament of the said
several Records. And likewise the Judgment of Parliament touching the
illegality of the said Judgments in the Exchequer, and the proceedings
thereupon, and touching the illegality of the extrajudiciall opinions of the
Judges in the said several Courts concerning Ship Money, be annexed and
apostiled unto the same: And that a Copy of the judgment of the Parliament
concerning the illegality of the said Judgment in the Exchequer, and the said
extrajudiciall opinions of the said Judges concerning Ship Money, be delivered
to the several Judges of Assize; And that they be required to publish the same
at the Assizes in each several County within their Circuits, and to take care
that the same be entered and enrolled by the several Clerks of Assizes; And if
any entry be made by any Custos Rotulorum, or Clerk of Assize, of the said
Judgment in the Exchequer, or of the said extrajudiciall opinions of the
Judges, that several Vacats be made thereof, per judicium in Parliamento: And
that an Act of Parliament be prepared against the said Judgment and
extrajudiciall opinions, and against the proceedings touching Ship Money.

Memorandum quod vicesimo septimo die Febr. 1640. Annoque regni Regis Dn^i
nostri Caroli Angliae decimo sexto:

VAcatur istud Recordum et Iudicium inde habitum per consideratione^ et
judicium Dn^orum Spiritual. et Temporal. in Curia Parliam. et irrotulamentum
ejusdem cancelatur.

Memorand. quod vicesimo septimo die Feb. prae^.

IStud Irrot. et omnia et singula in eode^ contenta et expressa vacantur per
judicium Dn^orum Spiritualium et Temporal. in Curia Parliam.

ANd that all the Rolls be rased cross with a pen, and subscribed with the
Clerk of the Parliaments hand. All which was accordingly done in open Court.

After this it was resolved upon the Question, Nemine contradicente:

THat the resolutions of the Judges touching the Shipping-money, and the
Judgment given against Mr Hampden in the Exchequer, and all the proceedings
thereupon, are against the Great Charter, and therefore void in Law.

Resolved upon the Question, Nemine contradicente:

THat Vacats and Cancellations shall be made of the Resolutions of the Judges
touching the Shipping-money; And of the inrolments thereof in the several
Court^, and of the Warrants for Ship-writs, and proceedings therein; And the
Judgment given against Mr Hampden, and proceedings thereupon; And that entries
be made of those Vacats upon the several Rolls, according to the form read in
the House.

Eodem die,

ORdered, that these resolutions be added to the former Judgments of this
House concerning Shipping-money, which the Judges are to publish at the Assizes
in their several Counties, and to be entered and enrolled in the several
Counties by the Clerk of the Assizes.

FINIS.
In Judge CROOKES Argument correct,
PAge 3. l. 13. read valentioribus. l. 15. r. pulvere. p. 19. l. 13. r.
injusto. p. 21. l. 17. r. piccage. p. 23. l. 16. r. Commissions. p. 28. l. 7.
r. proves. p. 29. l. 2. r. proves. p. 30. l. 2. r. Dane-guilt. p. 35. l. 6.
r. 394. a. p. 57. l. 3. r. Carlisle. ibid. for 35. r. 30. p. 70. l. penult. r.
seek for such men, and l. ult. dele, for such men. p. 74. l. 7. dele, and.) p.
76. l. 14. continue the line. p. 101. in marg. for 2. put 3. p. 106. l. 15. r.
so for that cause.

In Judge HUTTONS Argument:
Page 14. l. 10, 11. read, and can admit no other. p. 16. l. 17. r. to be
observed. p. 17. l. 19. r. humbly pray your Majesty. p. 19. l. 10. r. toll
Traverse. p. 24. l. 20. r. Gasconie. l. ult. other Statutes. p 35. l. 21. dele
(to Petitions) p. 36. l. 1. dele for. l. 16. r. the record in Court. p. 37. l.
6. r. The Parliament roll recites. l. ult. r. fourth point. p. 44. l. 20. r.
these illegal. p. 46. l. 9. r. per Gent^m. p. 47. l. 2. r. of Argiers. l. 12.
r. with all the other particulars. 48. l. 23. r. to lead the uses of those
preceding. p. 49. l. 24. r. fol. 68. p. 50. l. 22. r. it is very. p. 55. l. 9.
dele, not. p. 57. l. 17. r. Burton.


