Vera Effigies Reverendi Doni. Iosephi Hall Norwici nuper Episcopi



HOLY RAPTURES: OR, PATHETICALL MEDITATIONS OF THE LOVE of CHRIST.

TOGETHER, With a TREATISE OF CHRIST MYSTICAL, OR, The blessed UNION of CHRIST
And his MEMBERS.

ALSO, The CHRISTIAN laid forth in his whole Disposition and Carriage.

By Jos. HALL, D. D. B. N.

London, Printed by E. C. for John Sweeting at the Angel in Popeshead-alley,
1652.

TO The only Honor and Glory of his blessed SAVIOR and REDEEMER: AND To the
comfort and benefit of all those members of his Mystical Body, which are still
laboring and warfaring upon EARTH; Jos. Hall their unworthiest Servant, humbly
dedicates this fruit of his old age.

I Have with much comfort and contentment perused these divine and holy
Meditations, entitled Christ Mystical, An holy Rapture, and The Christian,
laid forth, or characterized in his whole disposition and carriage; and
relishing in them much profitable sweetness and heavenly raptures of
spiritual devotion, I do license them to be Printed and published.

JOHN DOWNHAM.

The CONTENTS of the first PART.
1. HOw to be happy in the apprehending of Christ. 2. The honor and happiness
of being united to Christ. 3. The kind and manner of our union with Christ. 4.
The resemblance of this union by the head and members of the body. 5. This
union set forth by the resemblance of the husband and wife. 6. This union
resembled by the nourishment and the body. 7. The resemblance of this union by
the branch, and the st^ck; the foundation, and the building. 8. The certainty
and indissolublenesse of this union. 9. The privileges and benefits of this
union: The first of them life. 10. A complaint of our insensiblenesse of this
mercy, and an excitation to a cheerful recognition of it. ^ 11. An incitement
to a joy and thankfulness for Christ our life. 12. The duties we owe to God
for his mercy to us in this life, which we have from Christ. 13. The
improvement of this life; in that Christ is made our Wisdom. 14. Christ made
our Righteousness. 15. Christ made our Sanctification. 16. Christ made our
Redemption. 17. The external privileges of this union, (...) right to the
blessings of earth and of heaven. 18. The means by which this union is wrought
19. The union of Christ's members with themselves. First those in heaven. 20.
The union of Christ's members upon earth First, in matter of judgment. 21. The
union of Christians in matter o^ affection. 22. A complaint of Divisions, and
notwithstanding them, an assertion of unity. 23. The necessary effects and
fruits of the union of Christian hearts. 24. The union of the Saints on earth
wi^^ those in heaven. 25. A recapitulation and sum of the wh^^^ Treatise.
CHRIST MYSTICAL; OR, The blessed UNION of CHRIST and his Members.
SECT. 1.
How to be happy in the apprehending of Christ.
THere is not so much need of Learning, as of Grace, to apprehend those things
which concern our everlasting peace; neither is it our brain that must be set
on work here, but our heart; for true happiness does not consist in a mere
speculation, but a fruition of good: However therefore there is excellent use
of Scholar-ship in all the sacred employments of Divinity, yet in the main act
which imports salvation, skill must give place to affection. Happy is the soul
that is possessed of Christ, how poor so ever in all inferior endowments: Ye
are wide, Oye great wits, whiles you spend your selves in curious questions,
and learned extravagancies; ye shall find one touch of Christ more worth to
your souls, then all your deep, and laboursome disquisitions; one dram of faith
more precious then a pound of knowledge: In vain shall ye seek for this in your
books, if you miss it in your bosoms: If you know all things, and cannot truly
say, I know whom I have believed, (2 Timothy 1. 12.) you have but knowledge enough
to know you^ selves truly miserable. Would tho^ therefore, my son, find true
and sol^d comfort in the hour of temptation, in the agony of death? make sure
work for thy soul, in the days of thy peace; Find Christ thine; and in
despite of hell, thou art both safe, and blessed; Look not so much to an
absolute Deity, infinitely and incomprehensibly glorious: alas, that Majesty
(because perfectly, and essentially good) is, out of Christ, no other then an
enemy to thee; thy sin has offended his justice, which is himself; what have
thou to do with that dreadful power, which thou have provoked? Look to that
merciful, and all-sufficient Mediator betwixt God and man, who is both God and
man, Jesus Christ the righteous: (1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 John 2. 1.) It is his charge,
and our duty, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. (Joh. 14. 1.) Yet look not
merely to the Lord Jesus, as considered in the notion of his own eternal
being, as the Son of God, co-equall and co-essentiall to God the Father, but
look upon him, as he stands in reference to the sons of men: and herein also
look not to him so much, Luther in Gal.
as a Lawgiver and a Judge, (there is terror in such apprehension) but look
upon him, as a gracious Savior and Advocate; and lastly, look not upon him, as
in the generality of his mercy, the common Savior of mankind, (what comfort
were it to thee, that all the world except thy self were saved?) but look upon
him, as the dear Redeemer of thy soul, as thine Advocate at the right hand of
Majesty; as one, with whom thou art through his wonderful mercy, inseparably
united: Thus, look upon him firmly and fixedly; so as he may never be out of
thine eyes; and what ever secular objects interpose themselves betwixt thee and
him, look through them, as some slight mists, and terminate thy sight still in
this blessed prospect: Let neither earth, nor heaven hide them from thee in
whatsoever condition.

SECT. 2.
The honor and happiness of being united in Christ.
ANd whiles thou art thus taken up; see if thou can without wonder and a
kind of ecstatica^l amazement, behold the infinite goodness of thy God, that
has exalted thy wretchedness to no less then a blessed and indivisible Union
with the Lord of glory, so as thou, who in the sense of thy miserable
mortality, may say to corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worm, Thou
art my mother and my sister, (Job 17. 14.) can now through the privilege of
thy faith, bear the Son of God say unto thee, Thou art bone of my bone, and
flesh of my flesh (Genesis 2. 23. Ephesians. 5. 30.) Surely, as we are too much subject
to pride our selves in these earthly glories, so we are too apt, through
ignorance, or pusillanimity, to undervalue our selves in respect of our
spiritual condition; we are far more noble and excellent then we account our
selves. It is our faith that must raise our thoughts to a due estimation of our
greatness; and must show us how highly we are descended, how royally we are
allied, how gloriously estated: that only is it, that must advance us to
heaven, and bring heaven down to us: Through the want of the exercise whereof,
it comes to pass, that, to the great prejudice of our souls, we are ready to
think of Christ Jesus as a stranger to us: as one aloof off in another world;
apprehended only by fits, in a kind of ineffectuall speculation, without any
lively feeling of our own interesse in him; whereas we ought by the powerful
operation of this grace in our hearts, to fidne so heavenly an appropriation of
Christ to our souls, as that every believer may truly say, I am one with
Christ, Christ is one with me. Had we not good warrant for so high a challenge,
it could be no less then a blasphemous arrogance to lay claim to the royal
blood of heaven; but since it has pleased the God of heaven so far to dignifie
our unworthiness, as in the multitudes of his mercies to admit and allow us to
be partakers of the divine nature, (2 Pet. 1. 4.) it were no other then an
unthankful stupidity not to lay hold on so glorious a privilege, and to go
for less then God has made us.

SECT. 3.
The kind and manner of this union with Christ.
KNow now, my son, that thou art upon the ground of all consolation to thy
soul, which consists in this beatificall union with thy God and Savior, think
not therefore to pass over this important mystery with some transient, and
perfunctory glances; but, let thy heart dwell upon it, as that which must stick
by thee in all extremities, and cheer thee up, when thou art forsaken of all
worldly comforts: Do not then conceive of this union, as some imaginary thing,
that has no other being but in the brain; whose faculties have power to
apprehend, and bring home to it self, far remote substances; possessing it self
in a sort of whatsoever it conceives: Do not think it an union merely virtuall,
by the participation of those spiritual gifts and graces which God works in
the soul; as the comfortable effects of our happy conjunction with Christ; Do
not think it an accidental union in respect of some circumstances and
qualities wherein we communicate with him who is God and man; nor yet a
metaphorical union by way of figurative resemblance; but know that this is a
true, real, essential, substantial union, whereby the person of the believer
is indissolubly united to the glorious person of the Son of God; know, that
this union is not more mystical then certain; that in natural unions there
may be more evidence, there cannot be more truth; neither is there so firm and
close an union betwixt the soul and body, as there is betwixt Christ and the
believing soul: for as much as that may be severed by death, but this, never
Away yet with all gross carnality of conceit; this union is true, and really
existent, but yet spiritual, and if some of the Ancients have termed it
natural and bodily, it has been in respect of the subject united, our
humanity, to the two blessed natures of the Son of God met in one most glorious
person; not in respect of the manner of the uniting: Neither is it the less
real, because spiritual. Spiritual agents neither have, nor put forth any
whit less virtue, because sense cannot discern their manner of working; Even
the Loadstone though an earthen substance, yet, when it is out of sight,
whether under the Table, or behind a solid partition, stirs the needle as
effectually, as if it were within view: shall not he contradict his senses,
that will say, it cannot work because I see it not? Oh Savior, thou art more
mine, then my body is mine, my sense feels that present, but so as that I must
lose it; my faith sees and feels thee so present with me, that I shall never be
parted from thee.

SECT. 4.
The resemblance of this union by the head and body.
THere is no resemblance, whereby the Spirit of God more delights to set forth
the heavenly union betwixt Christ and the believer, then that of the head and
the body: The head gives sense and motion to all the members of the body; And
the body is one; not only by the continuity of all the parts held together with
the same natural ligaments, and covered with one and the same skin; but much
more by the animation of the same soul quickening that whole frame; in the
acting whereof, it is not the large extent of the stature, and distance of the
lims from each other, that can make any difference; The body of a child that
is but a span long cannot be said to be more united, then the vast body of a
giantly son of Anak, whose height is as the Cedars; and if we could suppose
such a body as high as heaven it self, that one soul which dwells in it, and is
diffused through all the parts of it, would make it but one entire body: Right
so, it is with Christ and his Church; That one Spirit of his which dwells in,
and enlives every believer, unites all those far-distant members, both to each
other, and to their head; and makes them up into one true mystical body: so as
now every true believer may, without presumption, but with all holy reverence,
and all humble thankfulness, say to his God and Savior; Behold, Lord, I am
(how unworthy soever) one of the lims of thy body; and therefore have a right
to all that thou have, to all that thou do; Thine eye sees for me; thine ear
hears for me; thine hand acts for me; Thy life, thy grace, thy happiness is
mine: Oh the wonder of the two blessed unions! In the personal union, it
pleased God to assume and unite our humane nature to the Deity; In the
spiritual and mystical, it pleases God to unite the person of every believer
to the person of the Son of God: our souls are too narrow to bless God enough
for these incomprehensible mercies: Mercies wherein he has preferred us (be it
spoken with all godly lowliness) to the blessed Angels of heaven; Forverily he
took not upon him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham;
( Heb. 2. 16.) Neither has he made those glorious spirits members of his
mystical body, but his Saints; whom he has (as it were) so incorporated, that
they are become his body, and he theirs; according to that of the divine
Apostle; For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of
that one body being many, are one body, so also is Christ. (1 Cor. 12. 12.)

SECT. 5.
This union set forth by the resemblance of the husband and wife.
NExt hereunto, there is no resemblance of this mystery either more frequent,
or more full of lively expression, then that of the conjugall union betwixt the
husband and wife; Christ is, as the head, so the husband of the Church; The
Church and every believing soul is the Spouse of this heavenly Bridegroom; whom
he marries unto himself for ever in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies; ( Esai. 62. 5. Hos. 2. 9.) and this match
thus made up, fulfils that decretive word of the Almighty, They twain shall be
one flesh: (Ephesians. 5. 31. Genesis 2. 24.) O happy conjunction of the second Adam,
with her which was taken out of his most precious side; Oh heavenly and
complete marriage, wherein God the Father brings, and gives the Bride; ( Genesis
2. 22.) ( All that the Father gives me shall come to me, says Christ ( Joh. 6.
37.) wherein God the Son receives the Bride, as mutually partaking of the same
nature; and can say, This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; (Joh.
1. 14. Genesis 2. 23.) wherein God the holy Ghost knits our wills in a full and
glad consent, to the full consummation of this blessed wedlock: And those whom
God has thus joined together, let no man (no Devil can) put asunder: What is
there then, which an affectionate husband can withhold from a dear wife? He
that has given himself to her; what can he deny to impart? He that has made
himself one with her, how can he be divided from his other-self? Some wild
fancies there are that have framed the links of marriage of so brittle stuff,
as that they may be knapt in sunder upon every slight occasion, but he that
ordained it in Paradise, for an earthly representation of this heavenly union
betwixt Christ and his Church, has made that, and his own indissoluble. Here
is no contract in the future, which upon some intervenient accidents may be
remitted; but, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine, (Cant. 6. 3.
Cant. 2. 16.) And therefore each is so others, that neither of them is their
own; Oh the comfortable mystery of our uniting to the Son of God! The wife has
not the power of her own body, but the husband. (1 Cor. 7. 4.) We are at thy
disposing, O Savior, we are not our own; Neither art thou so absolutely thine,
as that we may not (through thine infinite mercy) claim an interesse in thee.
Thou have given us such a right in thy self, as that we are bold to lay
challenge to all that is thine; to thy love, to thy merits, to thy blessings,
to thy glory: It was wont of old, to be the plea of the Roman wives to their
husbands, Where thou art Caius, I am Caia; and now, in our present marriages,
we have not stuck to say, With all my worldly goods I thee endow; And if it be
thus in our imperfect conjunctions here upon earth, how much more in that
exquisite oneness which is betwixt thee, O blessed Savior, and thy dearest
Spouse, the Church? What is it then that can hinder us from a sweet and
heavenly fruition of thee? Is it the loathsome condition of our nature? Thou
sawst this before, and yet could say, when when we were yet in our blood,
Live: (Ezekiel. 16. 6.) Had we not been so vile, thy mercy had not been so
glorious: thy free grace did all for us; Thou washedst us with water, and
anointedst us with oil, and cloathedst us with broidered work, and girdedst us
about with fine linen, and coveredst us with silk, and deckedst us with
ornaments; and did put bracelets upon our hands, and a chain on our neck and
jewels on our foreheads, and earrings on our ears, a beautiful crown on our
own heads; (Ezekiel. 16. 9, 10, 11, 12.) What we had not, thou gave; what thou
did not find, thou made; that we might be a not-unmeet match for the Lord
of life: Is it want of beauty? Behold, I am black but comely: (Cant. 1. 5.)
what ever our hiew be in our own, or others eyes; it is enough that we are
lovely in thine. ( Cant. 1. 16.) Behold thou art fair, my beloved; behold, thou
art fair, yea pleasant; (Cant. 1. 16.) Thou art beautiful, O my love, as
Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for
delights! (Cant. 6 3. and 7. 6.) But, oh Savior, if thou take contentment in
this poor unperfect beauty of thy Spouse the Church, how infinite pleasure
should thy Spouse take in that absolute perfection that is in thee, who art all
loveliness and glory! And if she have ravished thy heart with one of her eyes,
( Cant. 5. 16. and 4. 9.) how much more reason has her heart to be wholly
ravished with both thine, which are so full of grace and amiablenesse? and in
this mutual fruition, what can there be other then perfect blessedness?

SECT. 6.
The resemblance of this union by the nourishment and the body.
THe Spirit of God, well knowing how much it imports us both to know and feel
this blessed union whereof himself is the only worker, labors to set it forth
to us by the representations of many of our familiar concernments which we
daily find in our meats and drinks, in our houses, in our gardens and
orchards; That which is nearest to us is our nourishment; what can be more
evident, then that the bread, the meat, the drink that we receive, is
incorporated into us, and becomes part of the substance whereof we consist? so
as, after perfect digestion, there can be no distinction betwixt what we are,
and what we took: Whiles that bread was in the bing, and that meat in the
shambles, and that drink in the vessel, it had no relatian to us, nor we to
it; yea, whiles all these were on the Table, yea, in our mouths; yea, newly
let down into our stomachs, they are not fully ours; for upon some nauseating
dislike of nature, they may yet go the same way they came; but if the
concoction be once fully finished; now they are so turned into our blood, and
flesh, that they can be no more distinguished from our former substance, then
that could be divided from it self; now they are dispersed into the veins, and
concorporated to the flesh; and no part of our flesh and blood is more ours,
then that which was lately the blood of the grapes, and the flesh of this fowl,
or that beast: Oh Savior, thou who art truth it self have said, ( Joh. 6. 51.)
I am the living bread, that came down from heaven. (v. 55.) My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; and thereupon have most justly inferred;
( v. 56.) He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him: and, as a necessary consequent of this spiritual manducation, ( v.
54.) whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: Lo, thou
art bread indeed; not the common bread, but Manna; not the Israelitish Manna;
alas, that fell from no higher then the region of clouds; and they that are it
died with it in their mouths; but thou art the living bread that came down
from the heaven of heavens, of whom whosoever eats lives for ever: Thy flesh is
meat, not for our stomachs, but for our souls; our faith receives and digests
thee, and makes thee ours, and us thine: our material food in these
corruptible bodies runs into corruption; thy spiritual food nourishes purely,
and strengthens us to a blessed immortality; As for this material food, many a
one longs for it that cannot get it; many a one has it, that cannot eat it;
many eat it, that cannot digest it; many digest it into noxious and corrupt
humors; all that receive it, do but maintain a perishing life, if not a
languishing death: but this flesh of thine, as it was never withheld from any
true apperite, so it never yields but wholesome and comfortable sustenance to
the soul, never has any other issue then an everlasting life and happiness. O
Savior, whenever I sit at mine own Table, let me think of thine; whenever
I feed on the bread and meat that is set before me, and feel my self nourished
by that repast, let me mind that better sustenance, which my soul receives
from thee, and find thee more one with me, then that bodily food.

SECT. 7.
This union resembled by the branch and the stock; the foundation and the
building.
LOok but into thy Garden, or Orchard; and see the Vine, or any other
fruit-bearing tree how it grows, and fructifies; The branches are laden with
increase; whence is this, but that they are one with the stock; and the stock
one with the root? were either of these severed, the plant were barren and
dead: The branch has not sap enough to maintain life in it self, unless it
receive it from the body of the tree; nor that, unless it derived it from the
root; nor that, unless it were cherished by the earth: Lo; ( Joh. 15. 5, 6.) I
am the Vine, (says our Savior) Ye are the branches; He that abides in me,
and I in him; the same brings forth much fruit; If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; were the branch and the body of the
tree, of different substances, and only closed together in some artificial
contiguity, no fruit could be expected from it; it is only the abiding in the
tree as a living lim of that plant, which yields it the benefit and issue of
vegetation. No otherwise is it betwixt Christ and his Church; the bow and the
tree are not more of one piece, then we are of one substance with our Savior;
and branching out from him, and receiving the sap of heavenly virtue from his
precious root, we cannot but be acceptably fruitful: But if the Analogy seem
not to be so full, for that the branch issues naturally from the tree, and the
fruit from the branch, whereas we by nature have no part in the Son of God;
take that clearer resemblance, which the Apostle fetches from the stock and the
griffe, or cion: The branches of the wild olive ( Romans 11.) are cut off; and
are graffed with choice cions of the good olive; those imps grow, and are now,
by this insition, no less embodyed in that stock then if they had sprouted out
by a natural propagation: neither can be any more separated from it then the
strongest bough that nature puts forth: In the mean time that cion alters the
nature of that stock; and whiles the root gives fatness to the stock, and the
stock yields juice to the cion, the cion gives goodness to the plant, and a
specification to the fruit: so as whiles the impe is now the same thing with
the stock, the tree is different from what it was; so it is betwixt Christ and
the believing soul: Old Adam is our wild stock, what could that have yielded
but either none, or sour fruit? we are imped with the new man, Christ; that is
now incorporated into us, we are become one with him; our nature is not more
ours, then he is ours by grace; now we bear his fruit, and not our own; our old
stock is forgotten, all things are become new; our natural life we receive
from Adam; our spiritual life and growth from Christ, from whom after the
improvement of this blessed incision we can be no more severed, then he can be
severed from himself.

Look but upon thy house (that from vegetative creatures, thou may turn thine
eyes to those things which have no life) if that be uniform, the foundation is
not of a different matter from the walls; both those are but one piece; the
superstructure is so raised upon the foundation, as if all were but one stone;
Behold Christ is the chief corner stone, (1 Pet. 2. 6.) elect and precious;
neither can there be any other foundation laid then that which is laid on him;
(1 Cor. 3. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 5.) we are lively stones built up to a spiritual
house, on that sure and firm foundation; some loose stones perhaps that lie
unmortered upon the battlements, may be easily shaken down, but whoever saw a
squared marble laid by line and level in a strong wall upon a well-grounded
base, fly out of his place by whatsoever violence; since both the strength of
the foundation below, and the weight of the fabric above, have settled it in a
posture utterly unmovable? Such is our spiritual condition, O Savior; thou
art our foundation, we are laid upon thee, and are therein one with thee; we
can no more be disjoined from thy foundation, then the stones of thy foundation
can be disunited from themselves: So then, to sum up all; as the head and
members are but one body, as the husband and wife are but one flesh, as our
meat and drink becomes part of our selves, as the tree and branches are but one
plant, as the foundation and walls are but one fabric; so Christ and the
believing soul are indivisibly one with each other.

SECT. 8.
The certainty and indissolublenesse of this union.
WHere are those then that go about to divide Christ from himself; Christ
real from Christ mystical; yielding Christ one with himself, but not one with
his Church: making the true believer no less separable from his Savior, then
from the entirenesse of his own obedience; dreaming of the uncomfortable, and
self-contradicting paradoxes of the total and final Apostasy of Saints:
Certainly, these men have never thoroughly digested the meditation of this
blessed union whereof we treat: Can they hold the believing soul a lim of that
body whereof Christ is the head; and yet imagine a possibility of dissolution?
Can they affain to the Son of God a body that is unperfect? Can they think that
body perfect that has lost his lims? Even in this mystical body the best
joints may be subject to strains, yea, perhaps to some painful and perilous
luxation; but, as it was in the natural body of Christ, when it was in death,
most exposed to the cruelty of all enemies, that (upon an overruling
providence) not a bone of it, could be broken; so it is still and ever with the
spiritual; some scourgings and blows it may suffer, yea, perhaps some
bruises, and gashes, but no bone can be shattered in pieces, much less
dissevered from the rest of the body: Were we left to our selves, or could we
be so much as in conceit, sundred from the body whereof we are, alas we are but
as other men, subject to the same sinful infirmities, to the same dangerous
and deadly miscarriages: but since it has pleased the God of heaven to unite
us to himself, now it concerns him to maintain the honor of his own body by
preserving us entire.

Can they acknowledge the faithful soul married in truth and righteousness to
that celestial husband; and made up into one flesh withthe Lord of glory; and
can they think of any Bills of divorce written in heaven? can they suppose that
which by way of type was done in the earthly Paradise, to be really undone in
the heavenly? What an infinite power has put together, can they imagine that a
limited power can disjoyn? Can they think sin can be of more prevalence then
mercy? Can they think the unchangeable God subject to after thoughts? Even the
Jewish repudiations never found favor in heaven: They were permitted, as a
lesser evil to avoid a greater, never allowed as good; neither had so much as
that toleration ever been, if the hardheartednesse, and cruelty of that people
had not enforced it upon Moses, in a prevention of further mischief: what place
can this find with a God, in whom there is an infinite tenderness of love and
mercy? No time can be any check to his gracious choice; the inconstant minds of
us men may alter upon slight dislikes; our God is ever himself; Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; ( Heb. 13. 8.) with him there is
no variableness, nor shadow of turning; ( Jam. 1. 17.) Divorces were ever
grounded upon hatred; ( Mal. 2. 16.) No man (says the Apostle Ephesians. 5. 29.)
ever yet hated his own flesh: much less shall God do so, who is love it self:
(1 John 3. 16.) His love and our union, is like himself, everlasting: Having
loved his own (says the Disciple of Love, Joh. 13. 1.) which were in the
world, he loved them to the end. He that hates putting away, ( Mal. 2. 16.) can
never act it; so as in this relation we are indissoluble.

Can they have received that bread which came down from heaven, and flesh which
is meat indeed, and that blood which is drink indeed, can their souls have
digested it by a lively faith, and converted themselves into it, and it into
themselves, and can they now think it can be severed from their own substance?

Can they find themselves truly ingraffed in the tree of life, and grown into
one body with that heavenly plant, and as a living branch of that tree, bearing
pleasant, and wholesome fruit, acceptable to God, ( Rev. 22. 2.) and
beneficial to men; and can they look upon themselves, as some withered bough
fit only for the fire?

Can they find themselves living stones surely laid upon the foundation Jesus
Christ, to the making up of an heavenly Temple for the eternal inhabitation of
God, and can they think they can be shaken out with every storm of Temptation?

Have these men ever taken into their serious thoughts that divine prayer and
meditation which our blessed Redeemer now at the point of his death left for an
happy farewell to his Church, in every word whereof, there is an heaven of
comfort, ( Joh. 17. 20, 21, 22.) Neither pray I for these alone; but for them
also which shall believe in me through their word* That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one with us; And
the glory that thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as
we are one; I in them, and thou in me. Oh heavenly consolation! oh indefeasible
assurance! what room can there be now here for onr diffidence? Can the Son of
God pray and not be heard? For himself he needs not pray, as being eternally
one with the Father, God blessed for ever; he prays for his; and his prayer
is, That they may be one with the Father and him; even as they are one. They
cannot therefore but be partakers of this blessed union; and being partakers of
it they cannot be dissevered: And to make sure work, that glory which the
Father gave to the Son of his Love, they are already (through his gracious
participation) prepossessed of; here they have begun to enter upon that heaven,
from which none of the powers of hell can possibly eject them: Oh the
unspeakably happy condition of believers! Oh that all the Saints of God, in a
comfortable sense of their inchoate blessedness, could sing for joy, and here
beforehand begin to take up those Hallelujahs, which they shall ere long
continue (and never end) in the Chore of the highest Heaven.

SECT. 9.
The privileges and benefits of this union: The first of them Life.
HAving now taken a view of this blessed union, in the nature and resemblances
of it; it will be time to bend thine eyes upon those most advantageous
consequents, and high privileges, which do necessarily follow upon, and attend
this heavenly conjunction. Whereof the first is that, which we are wont to
account sweetest, Life: Not this natural life, which is maintained by the
breath of our nostrils; Alas, what is that but a bubble, a vapor; a shadow, a
dream, nothing? as it is the gift of a good God, worthy to be esteemed
precious; but as it is considered in its own transitorynesse, and appendent
miseries, and in comparison of a better life, not worthy to take up our hearts.
This life of nature is that which arises from the union of the body with the
soul, many times enjoyed upon hard terms; the spiritual life which we now
speak of, arising from the union betwixt God and the soul, is that wherein
there can be nothing but perfect contentment, and joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Yea, this is that life which Christ not only gives, but is: he that gave
himself for us, gives himself to us, and is that life that he gives us; When
Christ, which is our life, shall appear; says the Apostle ( Col. 3. 4.) And
Christ is to me, to live: (Phil. 2. 21.) and most emphatically, ( Gal. 2. 20.)
I am crucified with Christ; Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives
in me; Lo, it is a common favor, that in him we live, but it is an especial
favor to his own, that he lives in us: Know you your own selves, (says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 13. 5.) how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? and wheresoever he is, there he lives; we have not a dead Savior,
but a living, and where he lives, he animates: It is not therefore Saint Paul's
case alone; it is every believers; who may truly say, I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me: now, how these lives, and the authors of them are
distinguished, is worth thy carefullest consideration.

Know then, my son, that every faithful man's bosom is a Rebeceaes womb, ( Gen
25. 22.) wherein there are twins: a rough Esau, and the seed of promise; the
old man, and the new; the flesh, and the spirit; and these have their lives
distinct from each other; the new man lives not the life of the old, neither
can the old man live the life of the new; it is not one life that could
maintain the opposite struglings of both these: corrupt nature is it that gives
and continues the life of the old man, It is Christ that gives life to the new;
we cannot say but the old man, or flesh is the man too: For I know (says the
chosen Vessel Romans 7. 18.) that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good
thing: but the spiritual part may yet better challenge the title. For I delight
in the Law of God after the inward man: (Romans 7. 22.) That old man of ours is
derived from the first Adam: as we sinned in him, so he lives in us; The
second Adam both gives, and is the life of our regeneration, like as he is also
the life of our glory; the life that follows our second resurrection: I am
(says he) the resurrection and the life. What is it then whereby the new
creature lives? surely no other then the Spirit of Christ, that alone is it,
that gives being and life to the renewed soul. Life is no stranger to us, there
is nothing wherewith we are so well acquainted; yea, we feel continually what
it is, and what it produces; It is that, from whence all sense, action; motion
flows, it is that, which gives us to be what we are: All this is Christ to
the regenerate man: It is one thing what he is, or does as a man; another thing
what he is, or does as a Christian: As a man, he has eyes, ears, motions,
affections, understanding, naturally as his own: as a Christian he has all
these from him with whom he is spiritually one, the Lord Jesus; and the objects
of all these vary accordingly: His natural eyes behold bodily and material
things; his spiritual eyes see things invisible; his outward ears hear the
sound of the voice; his inward ears hear the voice of Gods Spirit, speaking to
his soul; his bodily feet move in his own secular ways; his spiritual walk
with God in all the ways of his Commandments. His natural affections are set
upon those things which are agreeable thereunto; he loves beauty, fears pain
and loss, rejoices in outward prosperity, hates an enemy; his renewed
affections are otherwise, and more happily bestowed; now he loves goodness for
its own sake; hates nothing but sin, fears only the displeasure of a good God,
rejoices in Gods favor, which is better then life: his former thoughts were
altogether taken up with vanity, and earthed in the world; now he seeks the
things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; ( Col. 3. 1.)
Finally, he is such, as that a beholder sees nothing but man in him, but God
and his soul find Christ in him, both in his renewed person and actions; in all
the degrees both of his life, and growth of his sufferings, and glory: My
little children (says Saint Paul, Gal. 4. 19.) of whom I travel in birth
again until Christ be formed in you. Lo, here Christ both conceived and born
in the faithful heart; Formation follows conception, and travel implies a
birth: Now the believer is a newborn babe in Christ, (1 Cor. 3. 1. 2 Pet. 2.
2.) and so mutually Christ in him; from thence he grows up to (1 John 2. 14.)
strength of youth; and at last to perfection, even toward the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ; ( Ephesians. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 13. 9. Heb. 1. 6.)
And in this condition he is dead with Christ; ( Romans 6. 8.) He is buried with
Christ; ( Romans 6. 11.) He is alive again unto God through Christ; ( Col. 3. 1.)
he is risen with Christ, ( Romans 8. 17.) and with Christ he is glorified; Yea,
yet more then so, his ( Col. 1. 24.) sufferings are Christ's, Christ's sufferings
are his; ( Romans 8. 17.) He is in Christ an heir of glory, ( Col. 1. 27.) and
Christ is in him, the hope of glory.

SECT. 10.
A complaint of our insensiblenesse of this mercy, and an excitation to a
cheerful recognition of it.
Do thou not now find cause (my son) to complain of thy self (as, I
confess, I daily do) that thou art so miserably apt to forget these intimate
respects between thy Christ and thee? art thou not ashamed to think, how little
sense thou have had of thy great happiness? Lo, Christ is in thy bosom, and
thou feel him not; It is not thy soul that animates thee in thy renewed
estate, it is thy God and Savior, and thou have not hitherto perceived it; It
is no otherwise with thee in this case; then with the members of thine own
body; there is the same life in thy fingers and toes, that there is in the
head, or heart, yea, in the whole man, and yet those lims know not that they
have such a life. Had those members reason as well as sense, they would
perceive that, wherewith they are enlived, thou have more then reason, faith;
and therefore may well know whence thou have this spiritual life, and
thereupon art much wanting to thy self, if thou do not enjoy so useful and
comfortable an apprehension: Resolve therefore with thy self that no secular
occasion shall ever set off thy heart from this blessed object; and that thou will as soon forget thy natural life, as this spiritual: and raise up thy
thoughts from this dust, to the heaven of heavens: Shake off this natural
pusillanimity, and mean conceit of thy self as if thou were all earth, and know
thy self advanced to a celestial condition, that thou art united to the Son of
God, and animated by the holy Spirit of God; so is the life which thou now
live in the flesh, thou live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved thee
and gave himself for thee ( Gal. 2. 20.)

See then and confess how just cause we have to condemn the deadheartednesse
wherewith we are subject to be possessed: and how many worthy Christians are
there in the world who bear a part with us in this just blame; who have yielded
over themselves to a disconsolate heartlesnesse, and a sad dejection of spirit;
partly through a natural disposition inclining to dumpishnesse, and partly
through the prevalence of temptation: For Satan well knowing how much it makes
for our happiness cheerfully to reflect upon our interest in Christ, and to
live in the joyful sense of it, labors by all means to withdraw our hearts
from this so comfortable object, and to clog us with a pensive kind of
spiritual sullenness: accounting it no small mastery if he can prevail with
us so far as to bereave us of this habitual joy in the holy Ghost, arising
from the inanimation of Christ living, and breathing within us: So much the
more therefore must we bend all the powers of our souls against this dangerous
and deadly machination of our spiritual enemy; labor, as for life, to
maintain this Fort of our joy against all the powers of darkness; and, if at
any time we find our selves beaten off, through the violence of temptation; we
must chide our selves into our renewed valor: and expostulate the matter with
our shrinking courage, (with the man after Gods own heart) Why art thou cast
down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God; for I
shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. (Psalm.
42. 11. 43. 5.)

SECT. 11.
An incitement to joy and thankfulness for Christ our life.
NEither is here more place for an heavenly joy, then for height of spirit, and
raptures of admiration at that infinite goodness and mercy of our God, who has
vouchsafed so far to grace his elect, as to honor them with a special
inhabitation of his ever-blessed Deity: Yea, to live in them, and to make them
live mutually in, and to himself; What capacity is there in the narrow heart of
man to conceive of this incomprehensible favor to his poor creature? Oh
Savior, this is no small part of that great mystery wherinto the Angels desire
to look, (1 Pet. 1. 12.) and can never look to the bottom of it! how shall the
weak eyes of sinful flesh ever be able to reach unto it? When thou in the
estate of thine humane infirmity offeredst to go down to the Centurions house,
that humble commander could say; Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come
under my roof: What shall we then say, that thou in the state of thine heavenly
glory, should vouchsafe to come down and dwell with us in these houses of
clay; and to make our breasts the Temples of thy holy Ghost? (1 Cor. 6. 19.)
When thine holy mother came to visit the partner of her joy, thy forerunner
then in the womb of his mother, sprang for the joy of thy presence, ( Luke 1.
44.) though distermined by a second womb; how should we be affected with a
ravishment of spirit, whom thou have pleased to visit in so much mercy, as to
come down into us, and to be spiritually conceived in the womb of our hearts,
and thereby to give a new and spiritual life to our poor souls; a life of
thine own, yet made ours; a life begun in grace, and ending in eternal glory?

SECT. 12.
The duties we owe to God for his mercy to us, in this life which we have from
Christ.
NEver did the holy God give a privilege where he did not expect a duty: he
has more respect to his glory, then to throw away his favors; The life that
arises from this blessed union of our souls with Christ, as it is the height
of all his mercies, so it calls for our most zealous affections, and most
effectual improvement. Art thou then thus happily united to Christ, and thus
enlived by Christ? how entire must thou needs be with him, how dear must thy
valuations be of him, how heartily must thou be devoted to him? The spirit of
man (says wise Solomon, Prove. 20. 27.) is the candle of the Lord searching all
the inward parts of the belly; and therefore cannot but be acquainted with his
own inmates; and finding so heavenly a guest as the Spirit of Christ in the
secret lodgings of his soul, applies it self to him in all things: so as these
two spirits agree in all their spiritual concernments; The spirit it self
(says the holy Apostle, Romans 8. 16.) bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God; and not in this case only, but upon whatsoever
occasion the faithful man has this Urim in his breast, and may consult with
this inward Oracle of his God for direction, and resolution in all his doubts:
neither can he, according to the counsel of the Psalmist, (Psalm. 4. 4.)
commune with his own heart, but that Christ who lives there, is ready to give
him an answer. Shortly, our souls and we are one; and the soul and life are so
near one, that the one is commonly taken for the other; Christ therefore, who
is the life and soul of our souls, is and needs must be so intrinsecall to us,
that we cannot so much as conceive of our spiritual being without him.

Thou need not be told, my son, how much thou valuest life; Besides thi^e
own sense, Satan himself can tell thee, (and in this case thou may believe
him) Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life; (Job 2.
4.) What ransom can be set upon it, that a man would stick to give? though
mountains of gold; ( Psalm. 49. 7.) though thousands of rams, or ten thousand
rivers of oil? ( Micah 6. 7.) Yea, how readily do we expose our dear lims, not
to hazard only, but to loss for the preservation of it? Now alas, what is our
life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away: (Jam. 4. 14.) And if we do thus value a perishing life, that is going out
every moment, what p^ice shall we set upon eternity? If Christ be our life, how
precious is that life, which neither inward distempers, nor outward violences
can bereave us of; which neither can be decayed by time, nor altered with
cross events* Hear the chosen Vessel; ( Phil. 3. 7, 8.) What things were gain
to me, those I counted loss for Christ; Yea doubtless I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
win Christ; and, as one that did not esteem his own life dear to him, in
respect of that better; always (says he Act. 20. 24) bearing about in the
body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus, might be made
manifest in our body: (2 Cor. 4. 10.) How cheerfully have the noble and
conquering armies of holy Martyrs given away these momentany lives, that they
might hold fast their Jesus, the life of their souls? and who can be otherwise
affected that knows and feels the infinite happiness that offers it self to
be enjoyed by him in the Lord Jesus?

Lastly, if Christ be thy life, then thou art so devoted to him that thou
live, as in him, and by him, so to him also; aiming only at his service and
glory, and framing thy self wholly to his will and directions: Thou can not
so much as eat or drink but with respect to him; (1. Cor. 10. 31.) Oh the
gracious resolution of him that was rapt into the third heaven, worthy to be
the pattern of all faithful hearts; According to my earnest expectation and my
hope that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so new also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life or by death: For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. (Phil. 1.
20, 21.) Our natural life is not worthy to be its own scope; we do not live
merely that we may live: our spiritual life, Christ, is the utmost and most
perfect end of all our living; without the intuition whereof, we would not
live, or if we should, our natural life were no other then a spiritual death:
Oh Savior, let me not live longer then I shall be enlived by thee, or then
thou shall be glorified by me: And what rule should I follow in all the
carriage of my life but thine? thy precepts, thine examples, that so I may live
thee, as well as preach thee? and in both may find thee, as thou have truly
laid forth thy self, the way, the truth, and the life; (Joh. 14. 6.) the way
wherein I shall walk, the truth which I shall believe and profess, and the
life which I shall enjoy: In all my moral actions therefore teach me to square
my self by thee; what ever I am about to do, or speak, or affect; let me
think: If my Savior were now upon earth, would he do this that I am now
putting my hand unto? would he speak these words that I am now uttering? would
he be thus disposed as I now feel my self? Let me not yield my self to any
thought, word, or action which my Savior would be ashamed to own: Let him be
pleased so to manage his own life in me, that all the interesse he has given
me in my self may be wholly surrendered to him; that I may be as it were dead in
my self, whiles he lives and moves in me.

SECT. 13.
The improvement of this life; in that Christ is made our wisdom.
BY virtue, of this blessed union, as Christ is become our life; so (that which
is the highest improvement not only of the ra^ionall, but the supernatural and
spiritual life) is thereby also made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. (1 Cor. 1. 30.) Not that he only works these
great things in and for us, (this were too cold a construction of the divine
bounty) but that he really become; all these to us, who are true partakers of
him.

Even of the wisest men that ever nature could boast of, is verified that
character which-the divine Apostle gave of them long ago, ( Romans 1. 21, 22.)
Their foolish heart was darkened; professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools; and still the best of us (if we be but our selves) may take up that
complaint of Asaph: (Psalm. 73. 22.) So foolish was I and ignorant; I was as a
beast before thee; and of Agur the son of Jake; (Prove. 30. 2, 3.) Surely I am
more brutish then man; and have not the understanding of a man; I neither
learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy: and if any man will be
challenging more to himself, he must at last take up, with Solomon; (Eccl. 7.
23.) I said I will be wise, but it was far from me; But how defective soever we
are in our selves, there is wisdom enough in our head, Christ, to supply all
our wants: He that is the wisdom of the Father, is by the Father made our
wisdom: In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, says the
Apostle: ( Col. 2. 3.) So hid, that they are both revealed, and communicated to
his own: For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ: (2 Cor. 4. 6.) In and by him has it pleased the Father
to impart himself unto us; He is the image of the invisible God, (Col. 1. 15.)
even the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person. (Heb.
1. 3.) It was a just check that he gave to Philip in the Gospel; ( Joh. 14 9.)
Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? he
that has seen me, has seen the Father: And this point of wisdom is so high
and excellent, that all humane skill, and all the so much admired depths of
Philosophy are but mere ignorance and foolishness, in comparison of it; Alas,
what can these profound wits reach unto, but the very outside of these visible
and transitory things? as for the inward forms of the meanest creatures, they
are so altogether hid from them, as if they had no being; and as for
spiritual and divine things, the most knowing Naturalists are either
stone-blinde, that they cannot see them, or grope after them in an Egyptian
darkness: For the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God;
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; (1 Cor. 2.
14.) How much less can they know the God of Spirits, who (besides his
invisibility) is infinite, and incomprehensible? only he, who is made our
wisdom enlightneth our eyes with this divine knowledge; No man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. (Mat. 11. 27.)

Neither is Christ made our wisdom only in respect of heavenly wisdom
imparted to us; but in respect of his perfect wisdom imputed unto us: Alas,
our ignorances and sinful misprisions are many and great, where should we
appear, if our faith did not fetch succor from our all-wise, and
all-sufficient Mediator? Oh Savior, we are wise in thee our head, how weak
soever we are of our selves: Thine infinite wisdom and goodness both covers
and makes up all our defects; The wife cannot be poor, whiles the husband is
rich; thou have vouchsafed to give us a right to thy store; we have no reason
to be disheartened with our own spiritual wants, whiles thou art made our
wisdom.

SECT. 14.
Christ made our righteousness.
IT is not mere wisdom that can make us acceptable to God; if the serpents
were not in their kind wiser then we, we should not have been advised to be
wise as serpents: That God, who is essential Justice, as well as Wisdom,
requires all his to be not more wise, then exquisitely righteous: Such, in
themselves they cannot be; For in many things we sin all; such therefore they
are, and must be in Christ, their head, who is made unto us of God, together
with Wisdom, Righteousness; Oh, incomprehensible mercy! He has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him; (2 Cor. 5. 21.) what a mavelous and happy exchange is here? we are
nothing but sin; Christ is perfect righteousness; He is made our sin, that we
might be made his righteousness; He that knew no sin, is made sin for us; that
we who are all sin, might be made Gods righteousness in him; In our selves we
are not only sinful, but sin; In him we are not righteous only, but
righteousness it self; Of our selves, we are not righteous, we are made so; In
our selves, we are not righteous, but in him; we made not our selves so, but
the same God in his infinite mercy who made him sin for us, has made us his
righteousness: No otherwise are we made his righteousness, then he is made
our sin: Our sin is made his by Gods imputation; so is his righteousness made
ours; How fully does the second Adam answer, and transcend the first; By the
offense of the first, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; by the
righteousness of the second, the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life. (Romans 5. 18.) As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; (Romans 5. 19.)
righteous not in themselves, ( so death passed upon all, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5. 12.) but in him that made them so, by whom we have received the
atonement: (Romans 5. 11.) How free then, and how perfect is our justification?
What quarrel may the pure and holy God have against righteousness? against
his own righteousness? and such are we made in, and by him: what can now stand
between us and blessedness? Not our sins; for this is the praise of his mercy,
that he justifies the ungodly; (Romans 4. 5.) Yea were we not sinful, how were
we capable of his justification? sinful, as in the term from whence this act
of his mercy moves, not, as in the term wherein it rests; his grace finds
us sinful, it does not leave us so: Far be it from the righteous, Judge of the
world to absolve a wicked soul continuing such: He that justifies the wicked,
and he that condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord:
(Prove. 17. 15.) No but he kills sin in us whiles he remits it; and, at once
cleanses, and accepts our persons: Repentance and remission do not lag one
after another; both of them meet at once in the penitent soul: at once does the
hand of our faith lay hold on Christ, and the hand of Christ lay hold on the
soul to justification: so as the sins that are done away, can be no bar to our
happiness: And what but sins can pretend to an hindrance? All our other
weaknesses are no eyesore to God, no rub in our way to heaven; What matters it
then how unworthy we are of our selves? It is Christ's obedience that is our
righteousness: and that obedience cannot but be exquisitely perfect, cannot
but be both justly accepted as his, and mercifully accepted as for us. There is
a great deal of difference betwixt being righteous, and being made
righteousness; every regenerate soul has an inherent justice, or
righteousness in it self; He that is righteous, let him be righteous still,
says the Angel: ( Rev. 22. 11.) But at the best this righteousness of ours,
is like our selves, full of imperfection; If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? (Psalm. 130. 3.) Behold we are before thee
in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this; (Ezra 9.
15.) How should a man be just with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand. (Job 9. 2, 3.) So then, he that does
righteousness is righteous, (1 John 3. 7.) but by pardon and indulgence,
Because the righteousness he does is weak and imperfect; he that is made
righteousness, is perfectly righteous by a gracious acceptance, by a free
imputation of absolute obedience. Woe were us, if we were put over to our own
accomplishments; for, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them; (Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27.
16.) and, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us; (1 John 1. 8.) Lo, if there be truth in us, we must confess own
have sin in us; and if we have sin, we violate the Law; and if we violate the
Law, we lie open to a curse. But here is our comfort, that our surety has paid
our debt: It is true, we say forfeited to death; Justice had said, The soul
that sins shall die: (Ezekiel. 18. 4.) Mercy interposeth, and satisfies; The
Son of God (whose every drop of blood was worth a world) pays this death for
us: And now, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea, rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. (Romans 8. 33. 34.) Our sin, our death is laid upon him, and
undertaken by him; He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities; the chastisements of our peace were upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed; (Esa. 53. 5.) His death, his obedience is made over to
us; So then, the sin that we have committed, and the death that we have
deserved is not ours; but the death which he has endured, and the obedience
that he has performed, is so ours, as he is ours, who is thereupon made of God
our righteousness. Where now are those enemies of grace that scoff at
imputation; making it a ridiculous paradox, that a man should become just by
another man's righteousness? How dare they stand out against the word of truth,
which tells us expressly that Christ is made our righteousness? What strangers
are they to that grace they oppugn? How little do they consider that Christ is
ours? his righteousness therefore by which we are justified, is in him our
own; He that has borne the iniquity of us all (Esa. 53. 6.) has taught us to
call our sins our debts; (Mat. 6. 12.) those debts can be but once paid; if the
bounty of our Redeemer has staked down the sums required, and cancelled the
bonds; and this payment is (through mercy) fully accepted as from our own
hands, what danger, what scruple can remain? What do we then, weak souls
tremble to think of appearing before the dreadful tribunal of the Almighty?
we know him indeed to be infinitely, and inflexibly just; we know his most pure
eyes cannot abide to behold sin; we know we have nothing else bnt sin for him
to behold in us: Certainly, were we to appear before him in the mere shape of
our own sinful selves, we had reason to shake and shiver at the apprehension
of that terrible appearance; but now that our faith assures us, we shall no
otherwise be presented to that awful Judge then as clothed with the robes of
Christ's righteousness, how confident should we be, thus decked with the
garments of our elder brother, to carry away a blessing? whiles therefore we
are dejected with the conscience of our own vileness, we have reason to lift
up our heads in the confidence of that perfect righteousness which Christ is
made unto us, and we are made in him.

SECT. 15.
Christ made our Sanctification.
AT the bar of men many a one is pronounced just who remains inwardly foul and
guilty; for the best of men can but judge of things as they appear, not as they
are; but the righteous Arbiter of the world declares none just whom he makes
not holy. The same mercy therefore that makes Christ our righteousness, makes
him also our sanctification; of our selves, wretched men, what are we other at
our best, then unholy creatures, full of pollution and spiritual uncleanness?
It is his most holy Spirit that must cleanse us from all the filthiness of our
flesh and spirit, (2. Cor. 7. 1.) and work us daily to further degrees of
sanctification, ( He that is holy, let him be holy still* Rev. 22. 11.) neither
can there be any thing more abhorring from his infinite justice and holiness,
then to justify those souls which lie still in the loathsome ordure of their
corruptions. Certainly, they never truly learnt Christ, who would draw over
Christ's righteousness, as a case of their close wickednesses; that sever
holiness from justice, and give no place to sanctification, in the evidence of
their justifying: Never man was justified without faith; and wheresoever faith
is, there it purifieth and cleanses; ( Act. 15. 9.) But besides that the
Spirit of Christ works thus powerfully (though gradually) within us, That he
may sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water, by the word, his
holiness is mercifully imputed to us, That he may present us to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that we
should be holy and without blemish: (Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.) so as that inchoate
holiness, which by his gracious inoperation grows up daily in us toward a
full perfection, as abundantly supplied by his absolute holiness, made no
less by imputation, ours, then it is personally his: when therefore we look
into our bosoms, we find just cause to be ashamed of our impurity, and to
loath those dregs of corruption, that yet remain in our sinful nature; but
when we cast up our eyes to heaven, and behold the infinite holiness of that
Christ, to whom we are united, which by faith is made ours, we have reason to
bear up against all the discouragements that may arise from the conscience of
our own vileness, and to look God in the face with an awful boldness, as
those whom he is pleased to present holy, and unblameable, and unreprovable in
his sight: (Col. 1. 22.) as knowing that he that sanctifies, and they than are
sanctified are all of one. (Heb. 2. 11.)

SECT. 16.
Christ made our Redemption.
REdemption was the great errand for which the Son of God came down into the
world; and the work which he did whiles he was in the world; and that, which
(in way of application of it) he shall be ever accomplishing, till he shall
deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom into the hands of his Father; in this he
begins, in this he finishes the great business of our salvation: For those who
in this life are enlightened by his wisdom, justified by his merits, sanctified
by his grace, are yet conflicting with manifold temptations, and struggling with
varieties of miseries and dangers, till upon their happy death, and glorious
resurrection, they shall be fully freed, by their ever-blessed and victorious
Redeemer: He therefore, who by virtue of that heavenly union, is made unto us
of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification; is also upon the same ground
made unto us our full Redemption. Redemption implies a captivity; We are
naturally under the woeful bondage of the Law, of sin, of miseries, of death:
The Law is a cruel exactor; for it requires of us what we cannot now do; and
whips us for not doing it; for the Law works wrath; (Romans 4. 15.) and, as
many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse. (Gal. 3. 10.) Sin
is a worse tyrant then he, and takes advantage to exercise his cruelty by the
Law; For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the Law,
did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death; (Romans 7. 5.) Upon sin
necessarily follows misery, the forerunner of death; and death the upshot of
all miseries; By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. (Romans 5. 12.) From all
these is Christ our Redemption; from the Law; for Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: (Gal. 3. 13.) From sin; for we
are dead to sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord; (Romans 6.
11.) Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace. (Romans 6. 14.) From death, and therein from all miseries: O death
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin;
and the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be to God which gives us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. (1. Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.) Now then let
the Law do his worst, we are not under the Law, but under Grace. (Romans 6. 14.)
The case therefore is altered betwixt the law and us. It is not now a cruel
Taskmaster, to beat us to, and for our work; it is our Schoolmaster, to
direct, and to whip us unto Christ: It is not a severe Judge, to condemn us, it
is a friendly guide to set us the way toward heaven. Let sin join his
forces together with the Law, they cannot prevail to our hurt; For what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin, in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit. (Romans 8. 3, 4.) Let death join his forces with them
both, we are yet safe; For the Law of the spirit of life, has freed us from
the Law of sin, and of death; (Romans 8. 2.) What can we therefore fear, what can
we suffer, while Christ is made our Redemption?

Finally, as thus Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; so whatsoever else he either is, or has or
does, by virtue of this blessed union, becomes ours; he is our riches, ( Ephesians.
1. 7.) our strength, ( Psalm. 27. 1. 28. 7.) our glory, ( Ephesians. 1. 18.) our
salvation, (1 These. 5. 9. Esa. 12. 2.) our all: ( Col. 3. 11.) he is all to us;
and all is ours in him.

SECT. 17.
The external privileges of this union, a right to the blessings of earth and
heaven.
FRom these primary and intrinsecal privileges therefore, flow all those
secondary and external, wherewith we are blessed; and therein a right to all
the blessings of God, both of the right hand and of the left; an interesse in
all the good things both of earth and heaven: Hereupon it is that the glorious
Angels of Heaven become our Guardians, keeping us in all our ways, and working
secretly for our good upon all occasions; that all Gods creatures are at our
service; that we have a true spiritual title to them; All things are yours
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23) and ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods.

But take heed, my son, of mislaying thy claim to what, and in what manner thou
ought not. There is a civil right, that must regulate our propriety to
these earthly things; our spiritual right neither gives us possession of them,
nor takes away the right and propriety of others; Every man has and must have
what by the just Laws of purchase, gift, or inheritance is derived to him;
otherwise there would follow an infinite confusion in the world; we could
neither enjoy nor give our own; and only will, and might must be the arbiters
of all men's estates; which how unequal it would be, both reason and experience
can sufficiently evince. This right is not for the direption or usurpation of
that which civil titles have legally put over to others; there were no theft,
no robbery, no oppression in the world, if any man's goods might be every man's:
But for the warrantable and comfortable enjoying of those earthly commodities
in regard of God their original owner, which are by humane conveyances justly
become ours; The earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it; in his right what
ever parcels do lawfully descend unto us, we may justly possess, as we have
them legally made over to us from the secondary and immediate owners. There is
a generation of men who have vainly fansied the founding of Temporal dominion
in Grace; and have upon this mistaking outed the true heirs as intruders, and
feoffed the just and godly in the possession of wicked inheritors; which
whether they be worse Common-wealthsmen, or Christians is to me utterly
uncertain; sure I am they are enemies to both; whiles on the one side, they
destroy all civil propriety, and commerce; and on the other, reach the extent
of the power of Christianity so far, as to render it injurious, and destructive
both to reason and to the Laws of all well-ordered humanity. Nothing is ours
by injury and injustice, all things are so ours, that we may with a good
conscience enjoy them as from the hand of a munificent God, when they are
rightfully estated upon us by the lawful convention or bequest of men. In this
regard it is that a Christian man is the Lord of the whole Universe; and has a
right to the whole creation of God: how can he challenge less? he is a son;
and in that an heir; and (according to the high expression of the Holy Ghost) a
coheir with Christ; As therefore we may not be high-minded, but fear; so we
may not be too low-hearted in the under-valuing of our condition; In God we are
great, how mean soever in our selves: In his right the world is ours, what ever
pittance we enjoy in our own; how can we go less when we are one with him who
is the possessour of heaven and earth?

It were but a poor comfort to us, if by virtue of this union we could only lay
claim to all earthly things: alas, how vain and transitory are the best of
these? perishing under our hand in the very use of them, and in the mean while
how unsatisfying in the fruition? All this were nothing, if we had not hereby
an interesse in the best of all Gods favors, in the heaven of heavens and the
eternity of that glory which is there laid up for his Saints; far above the
reach of all humane expressions, or conceits; It was the word of him who is the
eternal word of his Father; Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me; (Joh. 17. 24.) and not only to be mere spectators, but even partners of all
this celestial bliss together with himself; The glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one. (Joh. 17. 22.) Oh
the transcendent and incomprehensible blessedness of the believers, which even
when they enjoy they cannot be able to utter, for measure infinite, for
duration eternal! Oh the inexplicable joy of the fun and everlasting
accomplishment of the happy union of Christ and the believing soul, more fit
for thankful wonder and ravishment of spirit, then for any finite apprehension*

SECT. 18.
The means by which this union is wrought.
NOw that we may look a little further into the means by which this union is
wrought; Know, my Son, that as there are two persons betwixt whom this union is
made, Christ and the believer; so each of them concurs to the happy effecting
of it; Christ, by his spirit diffused through the hearts of all the regenerate,
giving life and activity to them: the believer, laying hold by faith upon
Christ so working in him; and these do so re-act upon each other, that from
their mutual operation results this gracious union whereof we treat. Here is a
spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and the soul: The liking of one part does
not make up the match, but the consent of both. To this purpose Christ gives
his Spirit; the soul plights her faith: What interesse have we in Christ but by
his Spirit? what interesse has Christ in us but by our faith?

On the one part; He hath-given us his holy Spirit, says the Apostle; (1 These.
4. 8.) and (in a way of correlation) we have received not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God; (1 Cor. 2. 12.) And this spirit we have
so received, as that he dwells in us; (Romans 8. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 2. Gal. 2. 20.) and
so dwells in us, as that we are joined to the Lord; and he that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit.

On the other part, we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God, so as now the life that we live in the
flesh, we live by the faith of the Son of God; who dwells in our hearts by
faith. (Ephesians. 3. 17.) O the grace of faith (according to Saint Peter's style, 2
Pet. 1. 1.) truly precious; justly recommended to us by Saint Paul ( Ephesians. 6.
16.) above all other graces incident into the soul; as that, which if not alone
yet chiefly transacts all the main affairs tending to salvation: for faith is
the quickening grace, ( Gal. 2. 20. Romans 1. 17.) the directing grace, (2 Cor. 5.
7.) the protecting grace, ( Ephesians. 6. 16.) the establishing grace, ( Romans 11.
20. 2 Cor. 1. 24.) the justifying grace, ( Romans 5. 1.) the sanctifying and
purifying grace; ( Act. 15. 9.) faith is the grace that assents to, apprehends,
applies, appropriates Christ, ( Heb. 11. 1.) and here upon the uniting grace,
and (which comprehends all) the saving grace. If ever therefore we look for any
consolation in Christ, or to have any part in this beatificall union, it must
be the main care of our hearts to make sure of a lively faith in the Lord
Jesus, to lay fast hold upon him, to clasp him close to us, yea to receive him
inwardly into our bosoms; and so to make him ours, and our selves his, that we
may be joined to him as our head, espoused to him as our husband, incorporated
into him as our nourishment, engraffed in him as our stock, and laid upon him
as a sure foundation.

SECT. 19.
The union of Christ's members with themselves; First, those in heaven.
HItherto we have treated of this blessed union as in relation to Christ the
head; It remains that we now consider of it, as it stands in relation to the
members of his mystical body, one toward another; For as the body is united
to the head, so must the members be united to themselves to make the body truly
complete: Thus the holy Ghost by his Apostle: (1 Cor. 12. 12.) As the body is
one and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are
one body, so is Christ. From this entire conjunction of the members with each
other, arises that happy communion of Saints, which we profess both to believe
and to partake of; This mystical body of Christ is a large one, extending it
self both to heaven and earth; there is a real union betwixt all those
farre-spred lims: between the Saints in heaven; between the Saints on earth;
between the Saints in heaven and earth.

We have reason to begin at heaven, thence is the original of our union and
blessedness; There was never place for discord in that region of glory, since
the rebellious Angels were cast out thence; the spirits of just men made
perfect (Heb. 12.) must needs agree in a perfect unity; neither can it be
otherwise, for there is but one will in heaven; one scope of the desires of
blessed souls, which is the glory of their God; all the whole chore sing one
song, and in that one harmonious tune of Allelujah. We poor parcellsainted
souls here on earth profess to bend our eyes directly upon the same holy end,
the honor of our Maker and Redeemer, but, alas, at our best, we are drawn to
look asquint at our own aims of profit, or pleasure; We profess to sing loud
praises unto God, but it is with many harsh and jarring notes; above, there is
a perfect accordance in an unanimous glorifying of him that sits upon the
throne for ever; Oh, how ye love the Lord, all ye his Saints, (Psalm. 31. 23.)
Oh how joyful ye are in glory! (Psalm. 149. 5.) The heavens shall praise thy
wonders, O Lord; thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the Saints:
(Psalm. 89. 5.) O what a blessed Commonwealth is that above! The City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem (ever at unity within it self, Psalm. 122.
3.) and therein the innumerable company of Angels, and the general Assembly
and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven; the spirits of just
men made perfect, and (whom they all adore) God the judge of all; and Jesus the
Mediator of the New Testament: (Heb. 12. 22.) All these as one, as holy: Those
twenty thousand chariots of heaven ( Psalm. 68. 17.) move all one way; When
those four beasts full of eyes, round about the throne give glory, and honor,
and thanks to him that sits upon the throne, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; then the four and twenty Elders
fall down before him, and cast their crowns before the throne; (Rev. 4. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10.) No one wears his crown whiles the rest cast down theirs, all accord
in one act of giving glory to the Highest. After the sealing of the Tribes, A
great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues stood before the throne, and before the Lamb clothed with
white robes and palms in their hands, And cried with a loud voice, Salvation
to our God, which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb; And all the
Angels stood about the throne, and about the Elders, and the four beasts, and
fell before the throne on their faces and worshipped God, saying, Amen;
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and
might be unto God for ever and ever. (Revel. 7. 4, 9, 10, 11, 12.) Lo, those
spirits which here below were habited with several bodies, different in
shapes, statures, ages, complexions, are now above as one spirit rather
distinguished, then divided; all united in one perpetual adoration and
fruition of the God o^ spirits; and mutually happy in God in themselves, in
each other.

SECT. 20.
The union of Christ's members upon earth: First, in matter of judgment.
OUr copy is set us above; we labor to take it out here on earth; What do we
but daily pray that the blessed union of souls, which is eminent in that
empyreall heaven, may be exemplified by us in this region of mortality? For,
having through Christ an access by one spirit unto God the Father, being no
more strangers and forainers, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, (Ephesians. 2. 18, 19.) we cease not to pray, Thy will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven: (Mat. 6. 10.) Yea, O Savior, ^hou, who can not
but be heard, have prayed to thy Father for the accomplishment of this union;
That they ^^^y be one even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me; that they
may be perfect in one. (Joh. 17. 22, 23,) What then is this union of the
members of Christ here on earth, but a spiritual oneness arising from an
happy conspiration of their thoughts and affections? For whereas there are two
main principles of all humane actions and dispositions, the brain and the
heart, the conjuncture of these two cannot but produce a perfect union; from
the one our thoughts take their rise; our affections from the other; in both,
the soul puts it self forth upon all matter of accord, or difference. The union
of thoughts is, when we mind the same things, when we agree in the same
truths: This is the charge which the Apostle of the Gentiles lays upon his
Corinthians, (1 Cor. 1. 10.) and in their persons, upon (...) Christians; Now I
beseech you, brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak
the same thing; a^^ that there be no divisions among yo^ but that ye be
perfectly joined togeth^^ in the same mind and in the sa^^ judgment: And this
is no other th^^ that one faith, ( Ephesians. 4. 5.) which make up the one Church of
Christ upon earth; One, both in respect of tim^ and places. Of times: so as the
Fathers of the first world, and the Patriarchs of the next, and all Gods people
in their ages, that looked (togeth^^ with them) for the redemption of Isra^^ are
united with us Christians of the la^^ days in the same belief, and make (...)
one entire body of Christ's Catholi^ Church: ( Luke 2. 23.) Of places* (...) as
all those that truly profess the name of Christ (though scattered into the
farthest remote regions of the earth) even those that walk with the^^ feet
opposite to ours, yet meet with us in the same center of Christian faith, and
make up one household of God.

Not that we can hope it possible that all Christians should agree in all
truths; whiles we are here, our minds cannot but be more unlike to each others,
then our faces: yea, it is a rare thing for a man to hold constant to his own
apprehensions. Lord God! what a world do we meet with of those, who mis-call
themselves several Religions, indeed several professions of one and the same
Christianity? Melchites, Georgians, Maronites, Jacobites, Armenians, Abysines,
Cophti, Nestorians, Russians, Mengrellians; and the rest that fill up the large
Map of Christianography; all which, as whiles they hold the head Christ, they
cannot be denied the privilege of his members; so being such, they are, or
should be indissolubly joined together in the unity of spirit, and maintenance
of the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints. ( Jude 3.) It is not the
variety of by-opinions that should or can exclude them from having their part
in that one Catholic Church; and their just claim to the communion of Saints:
whiles they hold the solid and precious foundation, it is not the hay, or
stubble, (1 Cor. 3. 12.) which they lay upon it, that can set them off from
God, or his Church: But in the mean time, it must be granted, that they have
much to answer for to the God of peace and unity, who are so much addicted to
their own conceits, and so indulgent to their own interesse, as to raise and
maintain new Doctrines, and to set up new Sects in the Church of Christ,
varying from the common and received truths; laboring to draw Disciples after
them, to the great distraction of souls, and scandal of Christianity: With
which sort of disturbers, I must needs say, this age into which we are fallen,
has been, and is above all that have gone before us, most miserably pestered.
What good soul can be other then confounded to hear of, and see more then an
hundred and fourscore new, (and some of them dangerous and blasphemous)
opinions broached, and defended in one (once famous and unanimous) Church of
Christ? Who can say other, upon the view of these wild thoughts, then Gerson
said long since, that the world now grown old, is full of doting fancies; if
not rather that the world now near his end, raves, and talks nothing but
fancies, and frenzies? How arbitrary soever these self-willed fanatics may
think it, to take to themselves this liberty of thinking what they list; and
venting what they think, the blessed Apostle has long since branded them with
an heavy sentence; ( Romans 16. 17.) Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which you have learned,
and avoid them; For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly; and by good words, and by fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple.

But notwithstanding all this hideous variety of vain and heterodoxall
conceptions; he who is the truth of God, and the Bridegroom of his Spouse the
Church, has said, ( Cant. 6. 9.) My Dove, my undefiled is one. One, in the
main, essential fundamental verities necessary to salvation; though differing
in diverse mis-raised Corollaries, inconsequent inferences, unnecessary
additions, feigned traditions, unwarrantahle practices: the body is one, though
the garments differ; yea, rather (for most of these) the garment is one, but
differs in the dressing; handsomely and comely set out by one, disguised by
another; Neither is it, nor ever shall be in the power of all the fiends of
hell, the professed make-bates of the world, to make Gods Church other then
one; which were indeed utterly to extinguish, and reduce it to nothing: for the
unity, and entity of the Church, can no more be divided then it self. It were
no less then blasphemy to fasten upon the chaste and most holy husband of the
Church any other then one Spouse; In the Institution of Marriage did he not
make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit; and wherefore one* that he
might seek a goodly seed: (Mal. 2. 15.) That which he ordained for us, shall
not the holy God much more observe in his own heavenly match with his Church?
Here is then one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; One Baptism, by which we enter
into the Church, one Faith, which we profess in the Church, and one Lord whom
we serve, and who is the head, and husband of the Church.

SECT. 21.
The union of Christians in matter of affection.
HOw much therefore does it concern us, that we who are united in one common
belief, should be much more united in affection; that where there is one way,
there should be much more one heart? (Jer. 32. 39.) This is so justly supposed,
that the Prophet ( Amos 3. 3.) questions, Can two walk together, except they be
agreed? if we walk together in our judgments, we cannot but accord in our wills:
This was the praise of the Primitive Christians, and the pattern of their
successors; The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of the
soul; (Acts 4. 32.) Yea, this is the Livery which our Lord and Savior made
choice of, whereby his meniall servants should be known and distinguished; By
this shall all men know that ye be my Disciples, if ye have love to one
another: (Joh. 13. 35.) In vain shall any man pretend to a Discipleship, if he
do not make it good by his love to all the family of Christ. The whole Church
is the spiritull Temple of God; every believer is a living stone laid in those
sacred walls; what is our Christian love but the mortar or cement whereby these
stones are fast joined together to make up this heavenly building? without
which that precious fabric could not hold long together, but would be subject
to dis-joynting by those violent tempests of opposition, wherewith it is
commonly beaten upon: There is no place for any loose stone in Gods edifice;
the whole Church is one entire body, all the lims must be held together by the
ligaments of Christian love; if any one will be severed, and affect to subsist
of it self, it has lost his place in the body; Thus the Apostle, ( Ephesians. 4. 15,
16.) That we being sincere in love may grow up into him in all things, which is
the head, even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth; according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the
edifying of it self in love.

But in case there happen to be differences in opinion, concerning points not
essential, not necessary to salvation, this diversity may not breed an
alienation of affection. That charity which can cover a multitude of sins, may
much more cover many small dissensions of judgment: We cannot hope to be all,
and at all times equally enlightened; at how many and great weaknesses of
judgment did it please our merciful Savior to connive, in his domestic
Disciples? They that had so long sat at the sacred feet of him that spoke as
never man spoke, were yet to seek of those Scriptures, which had so clearly
foretold his resurrection; ( Joh. 20. 9.) and after that were at a fault for
the manner of his kingdom; ( Acts 1. 6.) yet he that breaks not the bruised
reed, nor quenches the smoking flax, falls not harshly upon them for so foul
an error, and ignorance, but entertains them with all loving respect, not as
followers only, but as friends: ( Joh. 15. 15.) And his great Apostle, after he
had spent himself in his unweariable endeavors upon Gods Church; and had sown
the seeds of wholesome, and saving doctrine every where, what rank and noisome
weeds of erroneous opinions rose up under his hand, in the Churches of Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse, Philippi, and Thessalonica? These he labors to root
out, with much zeal, with no bitterness; so opposing the errors, as not
alienating his affection from the Churches; These, these must be our
precedents, pursuing that charge of the prime Apostle, (1 Pet. 3. 8.) Finally,
be ye all of one mind; having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous: and that passionate and adjuring obtestation of the
Apostle ( Phil. 2. 1, 2.) of the Gentiles; If there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels
and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind.

This is it that gives beauty, strength, glory to the Church of God upon earth;
and brings it nearest to the resemblance of that triumphant part above, where
there is all perfection of love and concord; in imitation whereof, the Psalmist
sweetly; Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to dwell together
in unity! (Psalm. 133. 1.)

SECT. 22.
A complaint of divisions, and, notwithstanding them, an assertion of unity.
SO much the more justly lamentable it is to see the manifold and grievous
distractions of the Church of Christ, both in judgment and affection. Woe is
me, into how many thousand pieces is the seamlesse coat of our Savior rent?
Yea, into what numberless atoms is the precious body of Christ torn and
minced? There are more Religions, then Nations upon earth; and in each Religion
as many different conceits, as men. If Saint Paul, when his Corinthians did but
say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, could ask, Is Christ
divided? (1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.) when there was only an emulatory magnifying of
their own teachers, (though agreeing and orthodox) what (think we) would he now
say, if he saw hundred of Sectmasters and Heresiarchs (some of them opposite to
other, all to the Truth) applauded by their credulous and divided followers?
all of them claiming Christ for theirs, and denying him to their gainsayers;
would he not ask, Is Christ multiplied? Is Christ sub-divided? Is Christ shred
into infinites? O God! what is become of Christianity? How do evil spirits and
men labor to destroy that Creed which we have always constantly professed?
For, if we set up more Christ's, where is that one? and if we give way to these
infinite distractions, where is the communion of Saints? But be not too much
dismayed, my son; notwithstanding all these cold disheartnings, take courage to
thy self: He that is truth it self has said, The Gates of hell shall not
prevail against his Church: (Mat. 16. 18.) In spite of all Devils, there shall
be Saints, and those are, and shall be as the scales of the Leviathan, whose
strong pieces of shields are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal;
one is so near to another, that no air can come betwixt them; They are joined
one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundred: (Job 41. 15,
16, 17.) In all the main principles of Religion, there is an universal and
unanimous consent of all Christians, and these are they that constitute a
Church: Those that agree in these, Christ is pleased to admit (for matter of
doctrine) as members of that body whereof he is the head: and if they admit not
of each other as such, the fault is in the uncharitableness of the refusers,
no less then in the error of the refused: And if any vain and loose straglers
will needs sever themselves, and wilfully choose to go ways of their own; let
them know that the union of Christ's Church shall consist entire without them;
this great Ocean will be one collection of waters, when these drops are lost in
the dust: In the mean time it highly concerns all that wish well to the sacred
name of Christ, to labor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace;
(Ephesians. 4. 3.) and to renew and continue the prayer of the Apostle for all the
professors of Christianity; Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you
to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; That ye may
with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. (Romans 15. 5, 6.)

SECT. 23.
The necessary effects and fruits of this union of Christian hearts.
FAr be it from us to think this union of the hearts of Gods Saints upon earth
can be idle and ineffectuall; but where ever it is, it puts forth it self in a
like-affectednesse of disposition, into an improvement of gifts, into a
communication of outward blessings, to the benefit of that happy consociation.

We cannot be single in our affections, if we be lims of a Christian community;
What member of the body can complain, so as the rest shall not feel it? Even
the head and heart are in pain, when a joint of the least toe suffers; no
Christian can be afflicted alone; It is not Saint Paul's case only; Who is weak,
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? (2 Cor. 11. 29.) Our
shoulders are not our own, we must bear one another burdens: ( Gal. 6. 2.)
There is a better kind of spiritual good fellowship in all the Saints of God:
They hate a propriety of passions, Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep. (Romans 12. 15.) Their affections are not more communicative
then their gifts and graces; those, as they are bestowed with an intuition of
the common good, so they are improved; Wherefore has this man quickness of
wit, that man depth of judgment; this, heat of zeal, that, power of elocution;
this, skill, that, experience; this, authority, that strength; but that all
should be laid together for the raising of the common stock? How rich therefore
is every Christian soul; that is not only furnished with its own graces, but
has a special interest in all the excellent gifts of all the most eminent
servants of God through the the whole world? Surely he cannot be poor, whiles
there is any spiritual wealth in the Church of God upon earth.

Neither are or can these gifts be in the danger of concealment; they are still
put forth for the public advantage: As therefore no true Christian is his own
man; so he freely lays out himself, by example, by admonition, by exhortation,
by consolation, by prayer, for the universal benefit of all his fellow
members; By example, which is not a a little winning and prevalent; Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven; says our Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount; (
Mat. 5. 16.) and his great Apostle seconds his charge to his Philippians;
(Phil. 2. 15, 16.) That ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked, and perverse nation, among whom ye
shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life; Lo, the world
sits in darkness, and either stirs not, or moves with danger; good example is
a light to their feet, which directs them to walk in the ways of God, without
erring, without stumbling: so as the good man's actions are so many copies for
novices to take out; no less instructive then the wisest men's precepts. By
admonition; the sinner is in danger of drowning; Seasonable admonition is an
hand reached out, that lays hold on him now sinking, and draws him up to the
shore. The sinner is already in the fire, seasonable admonition snatches him
out from the everlasting burnings, ( Jude v. 23.) The charitable Christian may
not forbear this (often times thanklesse, but) always necessary and profitable
duty: Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. (Lev. 19. 17.

By exhortation; The fire of Gods Spirit within us, is subject to many damps,
and dangers of quenching; seasonable exhortation blows it up, and quickens
those sparks of good motions to a perfect flame; Even the best of us lies open
to a certain deadness and obdurednesse of heart, seasonable exhortation shakes
off this peril, and keeps the heart in an holy tenderness; and whether
awful, or cheerful disposition; Exhort one another daily, whiles it is
called, to day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
(Heb. 3. 13.)

By consolation; We are all naturally subject to droop under the pressure of
afflictions; seasonable comforts lift, and stay us up: It is a sad complaint
that the Church makes in the Lamentations; (Lament. 1. 21.) They have heard
that I sigh; there is none to comfort me; and David, (Psalm. 69. 20.) sets the
same mournful ditty upon his Shoshannim; Reproach has broken my heart, and I
am full of heaviness; and I looked for some to take pity, and there was none,
and for comforters, but I found none. Wherefore has God given to men the
tongue of the learned, but that they might know to speak a word in season to
him that is weary? (Esa. 50. 3.) That they may strengthen the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees; and say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong, fear not. (Esa. 35. 3.) The charge that our Savior gives to Peter,
(Luke 22. 32.) holds universally; Thou when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren.

By prayer: so as each member of Christ's Church sues for all; neither can any
one be shut out from partaking the benefit of the devotions of all Gods Saints
upon earth: There is a certain spiritual traffic of piety betwixt all Gods
children, wherein they exchange prayers with each other; not regarding number,
so much as weight: Am I weak in spirit, and faint in my supplications? I have
no less share in the most fervent prayers of the holiest suppliants, then in
my own; All the vigor that is in the most ardent hearts supplies my defects;
whiles there is life in their faithful devotions, I cannot go away unblessed.

Lastly, where there is a communion of inward graces, and spiritual services,
there must needs be much more be a communication of outward, and temporal good
things as just occasion requires; Away with those dotages of Platonicall, or
Anabaptisticall communities; Let proprieties be, as they ought, constantly
fixed where the laws, and civil right have placed them; But let the use of
these outward blessings be managed, and commanded by the necessities of our
brethren; Withhold not thy goods from the owners thereof, when it is in the
power of thy hand to do it: Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come again
tomorrow, and I will give it, when thou have it by thee, (Prove. 3. 27, 28.)
These temporal things were given us not to engrosse, and hoard up
superfluously, but to distribute and dispense; As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good untoall men, especially them who are of the
household of faith. (Gal. 6. 10.)

Such then is the union of Gods children here on earth, both in matter of
judgment, and affection; and the beneficial improvement of that affection,
whether in spiritual gifts, or good offices, or communicating of our earthly
substance; where the heart is one, none of these can be wanting, and where they
all are, there is an happy communion of Saints.

SECT. 24.
The union of the Saints on earth with those in heaven.
AS there is a perfect union (betwixt the glorious Saints in heaven; and a
union (though imperfect) betwixt the Saints on earth: So there is an union
partly perfect, and partly imperfect, between the Saints in heaven, and the
Saints below upon earth: perfect, in respect of those glorified Saints above;
imperfect, in respect of the weak returns we are able to make to them again.
Let no man think that because those blessed souls are out of sight far distant
in another world, and we are here toyling in a vale of tears, we have therefore
lost all mutual regard to each other: no, there is still, and ever will be a
secret, but unfailing correspondence between heaven and earth. The present
happiness of those heavenly Citizens cannot have abated ought of their
knowledge, and charity, but must needs have raised them to an higher pitch of
both: They therefore, who are now glorious comprehensors, cannot but in a
generality, retain the notice of the sad condition of us poor travelers here
below, panting toward our rest together with them, and in common, wish for the
happy consummation of this our weary pilgrimage, in the fruition of their
glory; That they have any Perspective whereby they can see down into our
particular wants, is that which we find no ground to believe: it is enough
that they have an universal apprehension of the estate of Christ's warfaring
Church upon the face of the earth; ( Rev. 6. 10.) and as fellowmembers of the
same mystical body, long for a perfect glorification of the whole.

As for us wretched pilgrims, that are yet left here below to tug with many
difficulties, we cannot forget that better half of us that is now triumphing in
glory; O ye blessed Saints above, we honor your memories so far as we ought;
we do with praise recount your virtues, we magnify your victories, we bless
God for your happy exemption from the miseries of this world, and for your
estating in that blessed immortality; We imitate your holy examples, we long
and pray for an happy consociation with you; we dare not raise Temples,
dedicate Altars, direct prayers to you; we dare not finally, offer any thing to
you which you are unwilling to receive, nor put any thing upon you, which you
would disclaim as prejudicial to your Creator, and Redeemer. It is abundant
comfort to us, that some part of us is in the fruition of that glory; whereto
we (the other poor laboring part) desire, and strive to aspire: that our head
and shoulders are above water, whiles the other lims are yet wading through the
stream.

SECT. 25.
A recapitulation and sum of the whole Treatise.
TO wind up all; my son if ever thou look for sound comfort on earth, and
salvation in heaven; unglue thy self from the world and the vanities of it; put
thy self upon thy Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Leave not till thou find
thy self firmly united to him, so as thou art become a limb of that body
whereof he is head, a Spouse of that husband, a branch of that stem, a stone
laid upon that foundation; Look not therefore for any blessing out of him; and
in, and by, and from him look for all blessings; Let him be thy life, and wish
not to live longer then thou art quickened by him; find him thy wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, redemption; thy riches, thy strength, thy
glory: Apply unto thy self all that thy Savior is, or has done; Hier. Zanch.
loc. com. 8. de Symbolo Apost.
Would thou have the graces of Gods Spirit? fetch them from his anointing;
Would thou have power against spiritual enemies? fetch it from his
Sovereignty; Would thou have redemption? fetch it from his passion; Would
thou have absolution? fetch it from his perfect innocence? Freedom from the
curse? fetch it from his cross? Satisfaction? fetch it from his sacrifice;
Cleansing from sin? fetch it from his blood; Mortification? fetch it from his
grave; Newness of life? fetch it from his resurrection; Right to heaven? fetch
it from his purchase; Audience in all thy suits? fetch it from his
intercession; Would thou have salvation? fetch it from his session at the
right hand of Majesty: Would thou have all? fetch it from him who is one
Lord, one God and Father of all, who is above all, through all, and in all:
(Ephesians. 4. 5, 6.) And as thy faith shall thus interesse thee in Christ thy head:
so let thy charity unite thee to his body the Church, both in earth, and
heaven; hold ever an inviolable communion with that holy and blessed
fraternity. Sever not thy self from it either in judgment, or affection; Make
account there is not one of Gods Saints upon earth, but has a propriety in
thee: and thou may challenge the same in each of them: so as thou can not
but be sensible of their passions: and be freely communicative of all thy
graces, and all serviceable offices, by example, admonition, exhortation,
consolation, prayer, beneficence, for the good of that sacred community.

And when thou raisest up thine eyes to heaven, think of that glorious society
of blessed Saints, who are gone before thee, and are now there triumphing, and
reigning in eternal and incomprehensible glory; bless God for them, and wish
thy self with them, tread in their holy steps, and be ambitious of that crown
of glory and immortality which thou see shining upon their heads.

AN HOLY RAPTURE: OR, A PATHETICALL MEDITATION OF THE LOVE OF CHRIST.

By J. H. B. N.

The Contents.
. 1. THe love of Christ, how passing knowledge; how free; of us, before we
were.. 2. How free; of us that had made our selves vile and miserable. 3. How
yet free; of us that were professed enemies. 4. The wonderful effects of the
love of Christ; 1. His Incarnation. 5. 2. His love in his sufferings. 6. 3. His
love in what he has done for us; and 1. in preparing heaven for us from
eternity. 7. His love in our redemption from death, and hell. 8. His love in
giving us the guard of his Angels. 9. His love in giving us his holy Spirit.
10. Our sense and improvement of Christ's love in all the former particulars;
and first in respect of the inequality of our persons. 11. A further
improvement of our love to Christ in respect of our unworthiness, and of his
sufferings and glory prepared for us. 12. The improvement of our love to Christ
for the mercy of his deliverance, of the tuition of his Angels, of the
powerful working of his good Spirit for the accomplishment of our salvation.
AN HOLYRAPTURE: OR, A Patheticall Meditation of the love of CHRIST.
SECT. 1.
The love of Christ how passing knowledge; how free; of us before we were.
WHat is it, O blessed Apostle, what is it, for which thou do so earnestly
bow thy knees (in the behalf of thine Ephesians) unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ? Even this, that they may know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge. ( Ephesians. 3. 14. 19.) Give me leave first to wonder at thy suit; and
then, much more, at what thou suest for: Were thine affections raised so high
to thine Ephesians, that thou should crave for them impossible favors? Did
thy love so far over-shoot thy reason, as to pray they might attain to the
knowledge of that which cannot be known? It is the love of Christ which thou
wishest they may know, and it is that love which thou say is past all
knowledge; What shall we say to this? Is it for that there may be holy
ambitions of those heights of grace, which we can never hope actually to
attain? Or is it, rather, that thou supposest, and prayest they may reach to
the knowledge of that love, the measure whereof they could never aspire to
know: Surely, so it is, O blessed Jesu; that thou have loved us, we know; but,
how much thou have loved us, is past the comprehension of Angels: Those
glorious spirits, as they desire to look into the deep mystery of our
redemption, so they wonder to behold that divine love whereby it is wrought,
but they can no more reach to the bottom of it, then they can affect to be
infinite. For surely, no less then an endless line can serve to fadome a
bottomless depth: Such, O Savior, is the abyss of thylove to miserable man:
Alas, what dowe poor, wrethed dust of the earth go about to measure it by the
spans, and inches of our shallow thoughts? Far, far, be such presumption from
us; Only admit us, O blessed Lord, to look at, to admire, and ad ore that
which we give up for incomprehensible; What shall we then say to this love, Oh
dear Jesu, both as thine, and as cast upon us; All earthly love supposes some
kind of equality, (or proportion at least) betwixt the person that loves, and
is loved; Here is none at all; so as (which is past wonder) extremes meet
without a mean: For, lo, thou, who art the eternal and absolute Being, God
blessed for ever, lovedst me that had no being at all; thou lovedst me both
when I was not, and could never have been, but by thee: It was from thy love
that I had any being at all: much more that when thou had given me a being,
thou should follow me with succeeding mercies? who but thou (who art infinite
in goodness) would love that which is not? Our poor sensual love is drawn
from us by the sight of a face, or a picture; neither is ever raised but upon
some pleasing motive: thou would make that which thou would love, and
would love that which thou had made; O God* was there ever love so free, so
gracious, as this of thine? Who can be capable to love us but men or Angels?
Men love us because they see something in us which they think amiable; Angels
love us because thou do so: But why do thou (O blessed Lord) love us, but
because thou would? There can be no cause of thy will, which is the cause of
all things; Even, so Lord, since this love did rise only from thee; let the
praise and glory of it rest only in thee.

SECT. 2.
How free; of us that had made our selves vile and miserable.
YEt more, Lord; we had lost our selves before we were, and having forfeited
what we should be, had made our selves perfectly miserable; even when we were
worse then nothing, thou would love us; was there ever any eye enamoured of
deformity? Can there by any bodily deformity comparable to that of sin? yet,
Lord, when sin had made us abominably loathsome, did thou cast thy love upon
us: A little scurf of leprosy, or some few nasty spots of morphew, or, but,
some unsavory sent sets us off, and turns our love into detestation.

But for thee, (O God) when we were become as foul, and ugly as sin could make
us, even then was thy love inflamed toward us; Even when we were weltring in
our blood, thou said, Live, and washedst us, and anointedst us, and
cloathedst us with a broidered work, and deckedst us with ornaments, and
graciously espousedst us to thy self, and receivedst us into thine own bosom:
Lord, what is man that thou art thus mindful of him, and the son of man that
thou thus visitest him? Oh what are we in comparison of thine once glorious
Angels? They sinned and fell, never to b^ ^^covered never to be loosed from
those everlasting chains, wherein they are reserved to the judgment of the
great day: Whence is it then, O Savior, whence is it that thou have shut up
thy mercy from those thy more excellent creatures, and have extended it to us,
vile sinful dust? whence? but that thou would love man, because thou
would? Alas, it is discouragement enough to our feeble friendship, that he to
whom we wished well, is miserable: Our love does gladly attend upon, and enjoy
his prosperity; but when his estate is utterly sunk, and his person exposed to
contempt and ignominy, yea, to torture and death; who is there that will then
put forth himself to own a forlorn, and perishing friend? But for thee, O
blessed Jesu, so ardent was thy love to us, that it was not in the power of our
extreme misery to abate it; yea so, as that the deplorednesse of our condition
did but heighten that holy flame; What speak I of shame or sufferings? Hell it
self could not keep thee off from us; Even from that pit of eternal perdition
did thou fetch our condemned souls, and have contrarily vouchsafed to put us
into a state of everlasting blessedness.

SECT. 3.
How yet free; of us that were professed enemies.
THe common disposition of men pretends to a kind of justice in giving men
their own; so as they will repay love for love; and think they may for hatred
return enmity; nature it self then teaches us to love our friends, it is only
grace that can love an enemy: But, as of injuries, so of enmities thereupon
grounded, there are certain degrees; some are slight and trivial, some main
and capital; If a man do but scratch my face, or give some light dash to my
fame, it is no great Mastery upon submission to receive such an offender to
favor; but if he have endeavored to ruin my estate, to wound my reputation,
to cut my throat, not only to pardon this man, but to hug him in my arms, to
lodge him in my bosom as my entire friend, this would be no other then an high
improvement of my charity. O Lord Jesu, what was I but the worst of enemies,
when thou vouchsafedst to embrace me with thy loving mercy; how had I
shamefully rebelled against thee, and yielded up all my members as instruments
of unrighteousness unto sin? how had I crucified thee the Lord of life? how
had I done little other then trod under foot thee the blessed Son of God, and
counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; how had I in some sort done
despite unto the spirit of grace? yet even then, in despite of all my most
odious unworthiness; did thou spread abroad thine arms to receive me, yea,
thou openedst thine heart to let me in: O love passing not knowledge only, but
wonder also! O mercy, not incident into any thing less then infinite; nor, by
any thing less, comprehensible!

SECT. 4.
The wonderful effects of the love of Christ: His Incarnation.
BUt, oh dear Lord, when from the object of thy mercy, I cast mine eyes upon
the effects and improvement of thy divine favors; and see what thy love has
drawn from thee toward the sons of men, how am I lost in a just amazement? It
is that which fetched thee down from the glory of the highest heavens, from the
bosom of thine eternal Father to this lower world, the region of sorrow and
death: It is that which (to the wonder of Angels) clothed thee with this flesh
of ours, and brought thee (who thoughtst it no robbery to be equal with God)
to an estate lower then thine own creatures. Oh mercy transcending the
admiration of all the glorious spirits of heaven, that God would be incarnate!
Surely, that all those celestial powers should be redacted to either worms, or
nothing; that all this goodly frame of creation should run back into its first
confusion, or be reduced to one single atome; it is not so high a wonder as for
God to become man those changes (though the highest that nature is capable of)
are yet but of things finite; this is of an infinite subject, with which the
most excellent of finite things can hold no proportion: Oh the great mystery of
godliness; God manifested in the flesh, and seen of Angels! Those heavenly
spirits had ever since they were made, seen his most glorious Deity, and adored
him as their omnipotent Creator; but to see that God of spirits invested with
flesh, was such a wonder, as had been enough (if their nature could have been
capable of it) to have astonished even glory it self; And whether to see him
that was their God so humbled below themselves, or to see humanity thus
advanced above themselves, were the greater wonder to them, they only know: It
was your foolish misprision, O ye ignorant Lystrians, that you took the
servants for the Master; here only is it verified which you supposed) that God
is come down to us in the likeness of man; and as man conversed with men: what
a disparagement do we think it was for the great Monarch of Babylon, for seven
years together, as a beast to converse with the beasts of the field? Yet alas,
beasts and men are fellowcreatures; made of one earth, drawing in the same
air, returning (for their bodily part to the same dust; symbolizing in many
qualities; and in some, mutually transcending each others: so as here may seem
to be some terms of a tolerable proportion; since many men are in disposition
too like un to beasts, and some beasts are in outward shape somewhat like unto
men: But for him that was, and is, God, blessed for ever, eternal, infinite,
incomprehensible, to put on flesh, and become a man amongst men, was to stoop
below all possible disparities that heaven and earth can afford; Oh Savior,
the lower thine abasement was for us, the higher was the pitch of thy divine
love to us.

SECT. 5.
His love in his sufferings.
YEt in this our humane condition there are degrees; One rules and glitters in
all earthly glory; another sits despised in the dust; one passes the time of
his life in much jollity and pleasure; another wears out his days in sorrow
and coffeehouse; Blessed Jesu, since thou would be a man, why would thou
not be the King of men? since thou would come down to our earth, why would
thou not enjoy the best entertainment that the earth could yield thee? Yea,
since thou who art the eternal Son of God, would be the son of man, why
did thou not appear in a state like to the King of heaven, attended with the
glorious retinue of blessed Angels? O yet greater wonder of mercies; The same
infinite love that brought thee down to the form of man, would al so bring thee
down, being man, to the form of a servant. So did thou love man that thou
would take part with him of his misery, that he might take partwith thee of
thy blessedness: thou would be poor to enrich us, thou would be burdened
for our ease, tempted for our victory, despised for our glory.

With what less then ravishment of spirit can I behold thee, who were from
everlasting clothed with glory and Majesty, wrapped in rags: thee, who fillest
heaven and earth with the majesty of thy glory, cradled in a manger; thee, who
art the God of power, fleeing in thy mothers arms from the rage of a weak man;
thee, who art the God of Israel, driven to be nursed out of the bosom of thy
Church; thee, who made the heaven of heavens, busily working in the homely
trade of a foster-father; thee, who command the Devils to their chains,
transported and tempted by that foul spirit; thee, who art God all-sufficient,
exposed to hunger, thirst, weariness, danger, contempt, poverty, revilings,
scourgings, persecution; thee, who art the just Judge of all the world, accused
and condemned; thee, who art the Lord of life, dying upon the tree of shame and
curse; thee, who art the eternal Son of God, struggling with thy Fathers wrath;
thee, who had said, I and my Father are one, sweating drops of blood in thine
agony, and crying out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
thee, who have the keys of hell, and of death, lying sealed up in another man's
grave: Oh Savior, whither has thy love to mankind carried thee? what sighs,
and groans, and tears and blood, have thou spent upon us wretched men? How dear
a price have thou paid for our ransom? What raptures of spirit can be
sufficient for the admiration of thy so infinite mercy? Be thou swallowed up, O
my soul, in this depth of divine love; and hate to spend thy thoughts any more
upon the base objects of this wretched world, when thou have such a Savior to
take them up.

SECT. 6.
His love in preparing heaven for us.
BUt O blessed Jesu, if from what thou have suffered for me, I shall cast mine
eyes upon what thou have done for my soul, how is my heart divided betwixt the
wonders of both; and may as soon tell how great either of them is, as whether
of them is the greatest. It is in thee that I was elected from all eternity;
and ordained to a glorious inheritance before there was a world: we are wont (O
God) to marvel at, and bless thy provident beneficence to the first man, that
before thou would bring him forth into the world, thou were pleased to
furnish such a world for him, so goodly an house over his head, so pleasant a
Paradise under his feet, such variety of creatures round about him for his
subjection, and attendance; But how should I magnify thy mercy, who before
that man, or that world had any being, have so far loved me as to pre-ordain
me to a place of blessedness in that heaven which should be, and to make me a
coheir with my Christ of thy glory: And oh, what an heaven is this that thou
have laid out for me: how resplendent, how transcendently glorious? Even that
lower Paradise which thou providedst for the harbor of innocence and
holiness, was full of admirable beauty, pleasure, magnificence, but if it be
compared with this Paradise above, which thou have prepared for the everlasting
entertainment of restored souls, how mean and beggarly it was? Oh match too
unequal, of the best piece of earth, with the highest state of the heaven of
heavens. In the earthly Paradise I find thine Angels, the Cherubim; but it was
to keep man off from that Garden of Delight, and from the tree of life in the
midst of it; but in this heavenly one I find millions of thy Cherubim, and
Seraphim rejoicing at man's blessedness, and welcomming the glorified souls to
their heaven: There I find but the shadow of that, whereof the substance is
here; There we were so possessed of life that yet we might forfeit it; here is
life without all possibility of death: Temptation could find access thither,
here is nothing but a free and complete fruition of blessedness: There were
delights fit for earthly bodies; here is glory more then can be enjoyed of
blessed souls: That was watered with four streams, muddy, and impetuous; in
this is the pure river of the water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of God, and of the Lamb: There I find thee only walking in in
the cool of the day; here manifesting thy Majesty continually: There I see only
a most pleasant Orchard, set with all manner of varieties of flourishing and
fruitful plants; here I find also the City of God infinitely rich, and
magnificent; the building of the wall of it, of Jasper; and the City it self
pure gold, like unto clear glass; and the foundations of the wall garnished
with all manner of precious stones: All that I can here attain to see, is the
pavement of thy celestial habitation: and, Lord, how glorious it is; how be
spangled with glittering stars; for number, for magnitude equally admirable?
What is the least of them, but a world of light? and what are all of them, but
a confluence of so many thousand worlds of beauty and brightness met in one
firmament? And if this floor of thine heavenly Palace be thus richly set forth,
oh, how infinite glory and magnificence must there needs be within? Thy chosen
Vessel, that had the privilege to be caught up thither, and to see that
divine state, (whether with bodily, or mental eyes) can express it no
otherwise, then that it cannot possibly be expressed: No, Lord, it were not
infinite if it could be uttered; Thoughts go beyond words; yet even these come
far short also; He that saw it, says; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him.

SECT. 7.
His love in our redemption from death and hell.
YEt is thy love, O Savior, so much more to be magnified of me, in this
purchased glory; when I cast down mine eyes, and look into that horrible gulf
of torment, and eternal death, whence thou have rescued my poor soul: Even out
of the greatest contentment which this world is capable to afford unto
mankind, to be preferred to the joys of heaven, is an unconceivable
advantage; but from the depth of misery to be raised up unto the highest pitch
of felicity, adds so much more to the blessing, as the evil from which we are
delivered is more intolerable: Oh blessed Jesu, what an hell is this out of
which thou have freed me? what dreadful horror is here? what darkness? what
confusion? what anguish of souls that would, and cannot die? what howling, and
yelling, and shrieking, and gnashing? what everlasting burnings? what never
slaking tortures? what merciless fury of unweariable tormentors? what utter
despair of any possibility of release? what exquisiteness, what infiniteness
of pains that cannot, yet must be endured? Oh God, if the impotent displeasure
of weak men have devised so subtle engines of revenge upon their fellowmortals,
for but petty offenses; how can we but think thine infinite justice and wisdom
must have ordained such forms and ways of punishment for heinous sins done
against thee, as may be answerable to the violation of thy divine Majesty? Oh
therefore the most fearful and deplored condition of damned spirits, never to
be ended, never to be abated; Oh those unquenchable flames* Oh that burning
Tophet, deep and large; and those streams of brimstone wherewith it is kindled;
Oh that worm ever gnawing and tearing the heart, never dying, never sated: Oh
ever-living death, oh ever renewing torments; oh never pitied, never intermitted
damnation; From hence O Savior, from hence it is that thou have fetched up my
condemned soul; This is the place, this is the state out of which thou have
snatched me up into thy heaven: Oh love and mercy more deep then those depths
from which thou have saved me; more high then that heaven to which thou have
advanced me!

SECT. 8.
Christ's love in giving us the guard of his Angels.
NOw whereas in my passage from this state of death toward the fruition of
immortal glory, I am waylaid by a world of dangers; partly, through my own
sinful aptness to miscarriages, and partly, through the assaults of my
spiritual enemies, how has thy tender love and compassion, O blessed Jesu,
undertaken to secure my soul, from all these deadly perils; both without out,
and within: without, by the guardance of thy blessed Angels: within, by the
powerful inoperation of thy good Spirit which thou have given me? Oh that mine
eyes could be opened with Elishaes servant, that I might see those troops of
heavenly soldiers, those horses and chariots of fire, wherewith thou have
encompassed me! every one of which is able to chase away a whole host of the
powers of darkness: Who am I, Lord, who am I, that, upon thy gracious
appointment, these glorious spirits should still watch over me in mine
uprising, and down lying; in my going out, and coming in? that they should bear
me in their arms, that they should shield me with their protection? Behold,
such is their majesty and glory, that some of thy holiest servants have hardly
been restrained from worshipping them; yet so great is thy love to man, as that
thou have ordained them to be ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation. Surely they are in nature far more
excellent then man; as being spiritual substances, pure intelligences, meet to
stand before the throne of thee the King of glory; What a mercy then is this,
that thou, who would humble thy self to be lower then they, in the susception
of our nature; art pleased to humble them in their offices to the guardianship
of man, so far, as to call them the Angels of thy little ones upon earth? How
have thou blessed us, and how should we bless thee in so mighty, and glorious
attendants?

SECT. 9.
His love in giving us his holy Spirit.
NEither have thou, O God, merely turned us over to the protection of those
tutelary spirits; but have held us still in thine own hand; having not so
strongly defenced us without; as thou have done within; Since that, is wrought
by thine Angels, this, by thy Spirit; Oh the Sovereign and powerful influences
of thy holy Ghost; whereby we are furnished with all saving graces, strengthened
against all temptations, heartned against all our doubts and fears; enabled
both to resist, and overcome; and upon our victories, crowned. Oh divine
bounty, far beyond the reach of wonder! So God (the Father) loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: So God the Son loved the world of his elect,
that he gave unto them the holy Spirit of promise, whereby they are sealed unto
the day of redemption, whereby according to the riches of his glory they are
strengthened with might in the inner man; by the virtue whereof shed abroad in
their hearts, they are enabled to cry, Abba, Father. Oh gifts; either of which
are more worth then many worlds; yet through thy goodness, O Lord, both of
them mine* how rich is my soul through thy divine munificence, how over-laid
with mercies? How safe in thine Almighty tuition? How happy in thy blessed
possession? Now therefore I dare in the might of my God, bid defiance to all
the gates of hell; Do your worst, O all ye principalities and powers, and
rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual wickednesses in high
places; do your worst; God is mine, and I am his; I am above your malice in
the right of him whose I am; It is true, I am weak, but he is omnipotent; I am
sinful, but he is infinite holiness; that power, that holiness in his
gracious application is mine; It is my Saviors love that ^ath made this happy
exchange of his righteousness for my sin; of his power for my infirmity; Who
then shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Nay, in all these things we are more then conquerours through him that loved
us: So as, neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Lo, where this love is placed; were it our love of God, how
easily might the power of a prevalent temptation separate us from it, or it
from us; for, alas, what hold is to be taken of our affections, which, like
unto water, are so much more apt to freez because they have been heated; but it
is the love of God to us in Christ Jesus, which is ever as himself constant and
eternal: He can no more cease to love us, then to be himself; he cannot but be
unchangeable, we cannot but be happy.

SECT. 10.
Our sense and improvement of Christ's love in all the former particulars: and
first, in respect of the inequality of the persons.
ALL this, O dear Jesu, have thou done, all this have thou suffered for men;
And oh now for an heart that might be some ways answerable to thy mercies!
Surely, even good natures hate to be in debt for love; and are ready to repay
favors with interest; Oh for a soul sick of love, yea sick unto death! why
should I, how can I be any otherwise, any whit less affected, O Savior? this
only sickness is my health, this death is my life, and not to be thus sick, is
to be dead in sins and trespasses. I am rock and not flesh, if I be not wounded
with these heavenly darts: Ardent affection is apt to attract love even where
is little or no beauty; and excellent beauty is no less apt to inflame the
heart where there is no answer of affection; but when these two meet together,
what breast can hold against them? and here they are both in an eminent degree.
Thou can say even of thy poor Church (though laboring under many
imperfections) Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my Spouse, thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck; how fair
is thy love, my sister, my Spouse? And can thou, O blessed Savior be so
taken with the incurious and homely features of thy faithful ones; and shall
not we much more be altogether enamoured of thine absolute and divine beauty?
of whom every believing soul can say; my beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand; his head is as the most fine gold; his eyes are as
the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, his cheeks are as a bed of spices,
as sweet flowers; his lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh, etc.
It has pleased thee, O Lord, out of the sweet ravishments of thy heavenly
love, to say to thy poor Church, Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have
overcome me; but oh let me say unto thee; Turn thine eyes to me, that they may
overcome me; I would be thus ravished, thus overcome; I would be thus ravish,
thus overcome, I would be thus out of my self, that I might be all in thee.

Thou lovedst me before I had being; Let me now that I have a being be wholly
taken up with thy love; Let me set all my soul upon thee that gave me being;
upon thee who art the eternal, and absolute Self-being; who have said, and
only could say, I am that I am; Alas, Lord, we are nothing but what thou will
have us; and cease to be when thou call in that breath of life which thou
have lent us; thou art that incomprehensibly glorious, and infinite
self-existing Spirit, from eternity, in eternity, to eternity, in, and from
whom all things are: It is thy wonderful mercy that thou would condescend so
low, as to vouchsafe to be loved of my wretchedness, of whom thou might
justly require and expect nothing but terror and trembling. It is my
happiness that I may be allowed to love a Majesty so infinitely glorious: Oh
let me not be so far wanting to my own felicity, as to be less then ravished
with thy love.

SECT. 11.
A further inforcement of our love to Christ in respect of our unworthiness and
his sufferings, and prepared glory.
THou lovedst me when I was deformed, loathly, forlorn, and miserable; shall I
not now love thee when thou have freed me, and decked me with the ornaments of
thy Graces? Lord Jesu, who should enjoy the fruit of thine own favors but thy
self? How shamefully injurious were it, that when thou have trimmed up my soul,
it should prostitute it self to the love of the world? Oh take my heart to thee
alone; possess thy self of that which none can claim but thy self.

Thou lovedst me when I was a professed rebel against thee, and receivedst me
not to mercy only, but to the indearment of a subject, a servant, a son; where
should I place the improvement of the thankful affections of my loyalty and
duty but upon thee?

Thou, O God, have so loved us, that thou would become the Son of man for our
sakes, that we who are the sons of men might become the sons of God; Oh that we
could put off the man, to put on Christ; that we could neglect and hate our
selves for thee that have so dearly loved us as to lay aside thine heavenly
glory for us!

How shall I be vile enough, O Savior, for thee, who for my sake (being the
Lord of life and glory) would take upon thee the shape of a servant: How
should I welcome that poverty which thy choice has sanctified? How resolutely
shall I grapple with the temptations of that enemy, whom thou have foiled for
me? How ^hearfully should I pass through those miseries and that death, which
^hou have sweetened? With what comfortable assurance shall I look upon the face
of that merciful Justice which thou have satisfied? But oh what a blessed
inheritance have thou in ^ine infinite love provided for me? (...) inheritance
incorruptible, and un^^filed, and that fades not away, re^erved in heaven for
me; so as when ^^y earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, I have
a building of God, an house not made with ^ands, eternal in the heavens: An
^ouse? Yea, a Palace of heavenly ^^ate and magnificence; neither is it ^esse
then a kingdom that abides there ^or me: a kingdom so much more ^bove these
worldly Monarchies, as ^eaven is above this clod of earth: Now, Lord, what
conceits, what affections of mine can be in the least sort answerable to so
transcendent mercy?

If some friend shall have been pleased to bestow some mean Legacy upon me; or
shall have feoffed me in some few acres of his Land; how deeply do I find my
self obliged to the love and memory of so kind a Benefactor? O then, Lord, how
can my soul be capable of those thoughts and dispositions, which may reach to
the least proportion of thine infinite bounty, who of a poor worm on earth,
have made me an heir of the kingdom of heaven? Woe is me, how subject are these
earthly principalities to hazard, and mutability, whether through death, or
insurrection; but this Crown which thou have laid up for me is immarcescible;
and shall sit immovably fast upon my head, not for years, not for millions of
ages, but for all eternity; Oh let it be my heaven here below, in the mean
while, to live in a perpetual fruition of thee, and to begin those Alelujahs
to thee here, which shall be as endless as thy mercy, and my blessedness.

SECT. 1.
The improvement of our love to Christ for the mercy of his deliverance, of the
tuition of his Angels, of the powerful working of his good Spirit.
Had thou been pleased to have translated me from thy former Paradise, the
most delightful seat of man's original integrity and happiness, to the glory
of the highest heaven, the preferment had been infinitely gracious; but to
bring my soul from the nether most hell and to place it among the Chore of
Angels, doubles the thank of thy mercy, and the measure of my obligation: How
thankful was thy Prophet but to an Ebedmelech, that by a cord and rags let
down into that dark dungeon, helped him out of that uncomfortable pit wherein he
was lodged; yet, what was there but a little cold, hunger, stench, closeness,
obscurity? Lord, how should I bless thee, that have fetched my soul from that
pit of eternal horror, from that lake of fire and brimstone, from the
everlasting torments of the damned, wherein I had deserved to perish for ever?
I will sing of thy power; unto thee, O my strength, will I sing; for God is my
deliverer, and the God of my mercy.

But, O Lord, if yet thou should leave me in my own hands, where were I? how
easily should I be robbed of thee with every temptation? how should I be made
the scorn and insultation of men and devils? It is thy wonderful mercy that
thou have given thine Angels charge over me; Those Angels great in power, and
glorious in Majesty are my sure (though invisible) guard: O blessed Jesu, what
an honor, what a safety is this, that those heavenly spirits which attend thy
throne should be my champions; Those that ministered to thee after thy
temptation, are ready to assist and relieve me in mine; they can neither
neglect their charge, because they are perfectly holy, nor fail of their
victory, because they are (under thee) the most powerful. I see you, O ye
blessed Guardians, I see you by the eye of my faith, no less truly, then the
eye of my sense sees my bodily attendants; I do truly (though spiritually) feel
your presence by you gracious operations, in, upon, and for me; and I do
heartily bless my God and yours, for you, and for those saving offices that
(through his merciful appointment) you ever do for my soul.

But as it was with thine Israelies of old, that it would not content them that
thou promisedst, and would send thine Angel before them, to bring them into
the Land flowing with milk and honey, unless thy presence, O Lord, should also
go along with them; so is it still with me and all thine, were not thou with,
and in us, what could thine Angels do for us? In thee it is that they move and
are; The same infinite Spirit which works in, and by them, works also in me:
From thee it is, O thou blessed and eternal Spirit, that I have any stirrings
of holy motions, any breathings of good desires, any life of grace, any will to
resist, any power to overcome evil; It is thou, O God, that girdest me with
strength unto battle; thou have given me the shield of thy salvation; thy
right hand has holden me up; thou have also given me the necks of mine
enemies. Glory and praise be to thee, O Lord, which always causest us to
triumph in Christ; who crownest us with loving kindness, and tender mercies;
and have not held us short of the best of thy favors.

Truly, Lord, had thou given us but a mere being, as thou have done to the
lowest rank of thy creatures, it had been more then thou owe us: more then
ever we could be able to requite to thy divine bounty; for every being is
good, and the least degree of good is far above our worthiness; But, that to
our being thou have added life, it is yet an higher measure of thy mercy; for
certainly, of thy common favors, life is the most precious; yet this is such a
benefit as may be had and not perceived; for even the plants of the earth live
and feel it not; that to our life therefore thou have made a further accession
of sense, it is yet a larger improvement of thy beneficence: for this faculty
has some power to manage life; and makes it capable to affect those means
which may tend to the preservation of it, and to decline the contrary; but this
is no other then the brute creatures enjoy equally with us, and some of them
beyond us: that therefore to our sense thou have blessed us with a further
addition of reason, it is yet an higher pitch of munificence; for hereby we are
men; and, as such, are able to attain some knowledge of thee our Creator, to
observe the motions of the heavens, to search into the natures of our
fellow creatures, to pass judgment upon actions, and events, and to transact
these earthly affairs to our own best advantage. But when all this is done, woe
were to us if we were but men; for our corrupted reason renders us of all
creatures the most miserable: that therefore to our reason thou have superadded
faith; to our nature grace; and of men have made us Christians; and to us, as
such, have given thy Christ, thy Spirit; and thereby made us of enemies, sons,
and heirs; coheirs with Christ of thine eternal and most glorious kingdom of
heaven; yea, have incorporated us into thy self, and made us one spirit with
thee our God; Lord, what room can there be possibly in these strait and narrow
hearts of ours for a due admiration of thy transcendent love and mercy? I am
swallowed up, O God, I am willingly swallowed up in this bottomless abyss of
thine infinite love; and there let me dwell in a perpetual ravishment of
spirit, till being freed from this clog of earth, and filled with the fullness
of Christ, I shall be admitted to enjoy that, which I cannot now reach to
wonder at, thine incomprehensible bliss, and glory which thou laid up in the
highest heavens for them that love thee, in the blessed communion of all thy
Saints, and Angels, thy Cherubim, and Seraphim, Thrones, Dominions, and
Principalities, and Powers; in the beatificall presence of thee the ever-living
God, the eternal Father of Spirits, Father, Son, holy Ghost, one infinite
Deity, in three, co-essentially, co-eternally, co-equally glorious persons; To
whom be blessing, honor, glory, and power for ever and ever. Amen, Allelujah.

THE CHRISTIAN, LAID Forth in his whole DISPOSITION AND CARRIAGE.

By J. H. D. D. B. N.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Sweeting, at the Angel in Pope's Head
Alley, 1652.

The Contents.
The Exhortatory Preface.
. 1. THe Christians disposition.. 2. His expense of the day.. 3. His
recreations.. 4. His meals.. 5. His nights rest.. 6. His carriage.. 7. His
resolution in matter of religion.. 8. His discourse.. 9. His devotion.. 10. His
sufferings.. 11. His conflicts.. 12. His death.
An Exhortary Preface to the Christian Reader.
OVt of infallible rules and long experience have I gathered up this true
character of a Christian: A labor (some will think) might have been well
spared: Every man professes both to know and act this part; Who is there that
would not be angry, if but a question should be made either of his skill, or
interest? Surely, since the first name given at Antioch, all the believing
world has been ambitious of the honor of it; how happy were it, if all that
are willing to wear the livery, were as ready to do the service. But it falls
out here, as in the case of all things that are at once honorable, and
difficult, every one affects the title, few labor for the truth of the
achievement. Having therefore leisure enough to look about me, and finding the
world too prone to this worst kind of hypocrisy, I have made this true
draught, not more for direction, then for trial. Let no man view these lines
as a stranger, but when he looks in this glass, let him ask his heart whether
this be his own face; yea, rather when he sees this, face, let him examine his
heart whether both of them agree with their pattern. And where he finds his
failings, (as who shall not?) let him strive to amend them; and never give
over, whiles he is any way less fair then his copy.

In the mean time, I would it were less easy, by these rules, to judge even of
others besides our selves; or, that it were uncharitable to say, there are many
Professors, few Christians; If words and forms might carry it, Christ would
have Clients enough: but if holiness of disposition, and uprightness of
carriage must be the proof, woe is me, In the midst of the Land, among the
people, there is as the shaking of an Olive tree, and as the gleaning Grapes
where the Vintage is done. (Esai. 24. 13.) For where is the man has obtained
the mastery of his corrupt affections, and to be the Lord of his unruly
appetite? that has his heart in heaven, whiles his living carcass is stirring
here upon earth? that can see the invisible, and secretly enjoy that Savior,
to whom he is spiritually united? That has subdued his will and reason to his
belief; that fears nothing but God; loves nothing but goodness; hates nothing
but sin; rejoices in none but true blessings? Whose faith triumphs over the
world; whose hope is anchored in heaven: whose charity knows no less bounds
then God, and men: whose humility represents him as vile to himself, as he is
honorable in the reputation of God; who is wise heaven ward; however he passes
with the world; who dares be no other then just whether he win or l^se; who is
frugally liberal, discreetly couragous, holily temperate a^ who is even a
thrifty manager of his hours, so dividing the day betwixt his God, and his
Vocation, that neither shall find fault with a just neglect, or an unjust
partiality: whose recreations are harmless, honest, warrantable, such as may
refresh nature, not debauch it: whose diet is regulated by health, not by
pleasure, as one whose table shall be no altar to his belly, nor snare to his
soul: who in his seasonable repose lies down, and awakes with God, caring only
to relieve his spirits; not to cherish sloth. Whose carriage is meek, gentle,
compliant, beneficial in whatsoever station; in Magistracy unpartially just;
in the Ministry conscionably faithful; in the rule of his family wisely
provident, and religiously exemplary; Shortly, who is a discreet and loving
yoke fellow, a tender and pious parent, a dutious and awful son: an humble
and obsequious servant, an obedient and loyal subject. Whose heart is
constantly settled in the main truths of Christian Religion, so as he cannot be
removed; in litigious points, neither too credulous, nor too peremptory: whose
discourse is such as may be meet for the expressions of a tongue that belongs
to a sound, godly, and charitable heart; whose breast continually burns with
the heavenly fire of an holy devotion; whose painful sufferings are overcome
with patience, and cheerful resolutions; whose conflicts are attended with
undaunted courage, and crowned with an happy victory: Lastly, whose death is
not so full of fear and anguish, as of strong consolations in that Savior, who
has overcome and sweetened it; nor of so much dreadfulnesse in it self, as of
joy in the present expectation of that blessed issue of a glorious immortality,
which instantly succeeds it. Such is the Christian whom we do here
characterize, and commend to the world both for trial, and imitation; neither
know I which of these many qualifications can be missing in that soul, who
lays a just claim to Christ, his Redeemer. Take your hearts to task, therefore
my dear brethren, into whose hands soever these lines shall come: and, as you
desire to have peace at the last, ransack them thoroughly; not contenting your
selves with a perfunctory, and fashionable oversight (which will one day leave
you irremediably miserable) but so search, as those that resolve not to give
over till you find these gracious dispositions in your bosoms, which I have
here described to you: so shall we be, and make each other happy in the
success of our holy labors; which the God of heaven bless in both our hands,
to his own glory; and our mutual comfort in the day of the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

THE CHRISTIAN.
SECT. 1.
His Disposition.
THE Christian is a man and more; an earthly Saint, an Angel clothed in
flesh; the only lawful Image of his Maker, and Redeemer; the abstract of Gods
Church on earth: a model of heaven made up in clay; the living Temple of the
holy Ghost. For his disposition, it has in it as much of heaven, as his earth
may make room for; He were not a man, if he were quite free from corrupt
affections; but these he masters, and keeps in with a strait hand; and if at
any time they grow test^y and headstrong, he breaks them with a severe
discipline, and will rather punish himself, then not tame them; He checks his
appetite with discreet, but strong denials, and forbears to pamper nature, lest
it grow wanton, and impetuous; He walks on earth, but converses in heaven;
having his eyes fixed on the invisible, and enjoying a sweet communion with h^s
God, and Savior; Whiles all the rest of the world sits in darkness, he lives
in a perpetual light; the heaven of heavens is open to none but him; thither
his eye pierces, and beholds those beams of inaccessible glory, which shine in
no face but his: The deep mysteries of godliness which to the great Clerks of
the world are as a book clasped and sealed up, lie open before him fair and
legible; and whiles those book-men know whom they have heard of, he knows whom
he has believed: He will not suffer his Savior to be ever out of his eye; and
if through some worldly interceptions, he lose the fight of that blessed object
for a time, he zealously retrives him, not without an angry theck of his own
mis-carriage; and is now so much the more fixed by his former flackning; so as
he will hence forth sooner part with his soul, then his Redeemer. The terms of
entirenesse wherein he stands with the Lord of life, are such as he can feel;
but cannot express, though he should borrow the language of Angels: it is
enough that they two are one spirit: His reason is willingly captivated to his
faith; his will to his reason; and his affections to both: He fears nothing
that he sees in comparison of that which he sees not; and displeasure is more
dreadful to him then smart: Good is the adequate object of his love; which he
duly proportions according to the degrees of its eminence; affecting the chief
good, not without a certain ravishment of spirit; the lesser with a wise and
holy moderation. Whether he do more hate sin, or the evil spirit that suggests
it, is a question; Earthly contents are too mean grounds whereon to raise his
joy; these, as he baulks not when they meet him in his way, so he does not too
eagerly pursue; he may taste of them, but so, as he had rather fast then
surfeit. He is not insensible of those losses which casualty, or enmity may
inflict; but that which lies most heavily upon his heart, is his sin: This
makes his sleep short and troublesome, his meals stomachlesse, his recreations
listlesse; his every thing, tedious; till he find his soul acquitted by his
great Surety in heaven: which done, he feels more peace and pleasure in his
calm, then he found horror in the tempest. His heart is the storehouse of
most precious graces: That faith whereby his soul is established, triumphs over
the world, whether it allure, or threaten; and bids defiance to all the powers
of darkness; not fearing to be foiled by any opposition: His hope cannot be
discouraged with the greatest difficulties; but bears up against natural
impossiblities; and knows how to reconcile contradictions; His charity is both
extensive, and servent; barring out no one that bears the face of a man; but
pouring out it self upon the household of faith; that studies good constructions
of men, and actions; and keeps it self free both from suspicion, and censure:
Grace does not more exalt him, then his humility depresses him: Were it not for
that Christ who dwells in him, he could think himself the meanest of all
creatures; now, he knows he may not disparage the Deity of him, by whom he is
so gloriously inhabited; in whose only right he can be as great in his own
thoughts, as he is despicable in the eyes of the world. He is wise to Godward,
however it be with him for the world; and well knowing he cannot serve two
masters, he cleaves to the better; making choice of that good part which can
never be taken from him; not so much regarding to get that which he cannot
keep, as to possess himself of that good which he cannot lose. He is just in
all his dealings with men; hating to thrive by injury, and oppression; and will
rather leave behind something of his own, then filch from another heap. He is
not close fisted, where there is just occasion of his distribution; willingly
parting with those metals which he regards only for use; not caring for either
their color, or substance; earth is to him no other then it self, in what
^hiew so ever it appears. In every good cause he is bold as a Lion; and can
neither fear faces, nor shrink at dangers: and is rather heartned with
opposition, pressing so much the more where he finds a large door open, and
many adversaries; and when he must suffer, does as resolutely stoop, as he did
before valiantly resist. He is holily temperate in the use of all Gods
blessings, as knowing by whom they are given, and to what end; neither dares
either to mis-lay them, or to mis-spend them lavishly: as duly weighing upon
what terms he receives them; and fore-expecting an account. Such an hand does
he carry upon his pleasures and delights, that they run not away with him; he
knows how to slacken the reins without a debauched kind of dissoluteness, and
how to straiten them without a sullen rigor.

SECT. 2.
His expense of the day.
HE lives as a man that has borrowed his time, and challenges not to be an
owner of it; caring to spend the day in a gracious and wellgoverned thrift; His
first mornings task, after he has lifted up his heart to that God who gives
his beloved sleep, shall be to put himself into a due posture, wherein to
entertain himself, and the whole day: which shall be done, if he shall
effectually work his thoughts to a right apprehension of his God, of himself,
of all that may concern him. The true posture of a Christian then, is this; He
sees still heaven open to him, and beholds and admires the light inaccessible;
he sees the all-glorious God ever before him; the Angels of God about him; the
evil spirits aloof off enviously groyning, and repining at him; the world
under his feet, willing to rebel, but forced to be subject; the good creatures
ready to tender their service to him; and is accordingly affected to all these;
he sees heaven open with joy and desire of fruition; he sees God with an
adoring awfulnesse; he sees the Angels with a thankful acknowledgement, and
care not to offend them; he sees the evil spirits with hatred and watchful
indignation; he sees the world with an holy imperiousness, commanding it for
use, and scorning to stoop to it for observance; Lastly, he sees the good
creatures, with gratulation, and care to improve them to the advantage of him
that lent them.

Having thus gathered up his thoughts, and found where he is, he may now be fit
for his constant devotion; which he falls upon, not without a trembling
veneration of that infinite and incomprehensible Majesty, before whom he is
prostrate; now he climes up into that heaven, which he before did but behold;
and solemnly pours out his soul in hearty thanksgivings, and humble
supplications into the bosom of the Almighty; wherein his awe is so tempered
with his faith, that whiles he labors under the sense of his own vileness, he
is raised up in the confidence of an infinite mercy; now he renues his feeling
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ his blessed Redeemer; and labors to get in
every breath new pledges of his gracious entirenesse; so seasoning his heart
with these early thoughts of piety, as that they stick by him all the day
after.

Having thus begun with his God, and begged his blessing: he now finds time to
address himself to the works of his calling; To live without any vocation, to
live in an unwarrantable vocation, not to labor in the vocation wherein he
lives, are things which his soul hates: These businesses of his calling
therefore, he follows with a willing and contented industry; not as forced to
it by the necessity of humane Laws, or as urged by the Law of necessity, out of
the sense or fear of want: nor yet contrarily, out of an eager desire of
enriching himself in his estate, but in a conscionable obedience to that God
who has made man to labor as the sparks to fly upward; and has laid it upon
him both as a punishment, and charge: In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat
thy bread. In an humble alacrity he walks on in the way, wherein his God has
set him; yet not, the while, so intent upon his hands, as not to tend his
heart; which he lifts up in frequent ejaculations to that God, to whom he
desires to be approved in all his endeavors; ascribing all the thanks both of
his ability, and success to that omnipotent hand: If he meet with any rubs of
difficulty in his way, he knows who sent them, and who can remove them; not
leglecting any prudentiall means of remedy, he is not to seek for an higher
redress.

If he have occasion of trading with others; his will may not be the rule of
his gain, but his conscience; neither dares he strive for what he can get, but
what he ought: Equity is here the Clerk of the Market; and the measure which he
would have others mete out to himself, is the standard whereby he desires to be
tried in his mensurations to all other. He hates to hoise prices upon occasion
of his neighbors need; and to take the advantage of forfaits by the clock. He
is not such a slave to his trade, as not to spare an hour to his soul; neither
dares he so lavish as utterly to neglect his charge upon whatever pretense of
pleasure, or devotion. Shortly, he takes his work at the hand of God, and
leaves it with him: humbly offering up his services to his great Master in
heaven; and after al his labor fits comfortably down in the conscience of
having faithfully done his task, though not without the intervention of many
infirmities.

SECT. 3.
His Recreations.
HIs recreations (for even these humane frailty will sometimes call for) are
such, as may be meet relaxatio^s to a mind over-bent, and a body tired with
honest and holy employments; safe, inoffensive, and for time and measure fitly
proportioned to the occasion; like unto soft music betwixt two long and
stirring Acts; like unto some quick and savory sauce to a listlesse, and cloyed
stomach; like unto a sweet nap after an over-watching. He is far from those
delights that may effeminate, or corrupt the mind; abhorring to sit by those
pleasures, from which he shall not rise better: He hates to turn pastime into
trade; not abiding to spend more time in whetting, then till his edge be sharp;
In the height of his delectations he knows to enjoy God; from whom as he
fetches his allowance, so he craves and expects a gracious acceptance, even
when he lets himself most loose. And if at any time he have gone beyond his
measure, he chides himself for the excess, and is so much the more careful
ever after to keep within compass. He can only make a kind of use of those
contentments, wherewith light minds are transported: and can manage his
disports without passion; and leave a loser without regret. A smile to him is
as much as a loud laughter to the worldling; neither does he entertain mirth as
his ordinary attendant, but as his retainer to wait upon his serious occasions:
and finally, so rejoices, as if he rejoiced not.

SECT. 4.
His meals.
HIs meals are such as nature requires, and grace moderates; not pinching
himself with a penurious niggardliness, nor pampering himself with a wanton
excess: His palate is the least part of his care; so as his fare may be
wholesome, he stands not upon delicacy. He dares not put his hand to the dish
till he have looked up to the owner; and hates to put one morsel into his
mouth, unblessed; and knows it his duty to give thanks for what he has paid
for; as well considering, that neither the meat that he eats, nor the hand and
mouth that receives it, nor the mawe that digests it, nor the metal that buies
it, is of his own making: And now having fed his belly, not his eye, he rises
from his board, satisfied, not glutted; and so be stirs himself upon his
calling, as a man not more unwieldy by his repast, but more cheerful; and as
one that would be loath his gut should be any hindrance to his brain, or to his
hand.

If he shall have occasion to entertain himself and his friends more liberally,
he dares not lose himself in his feast; he can be soberly merry, and wisely
free; only in this he is willing not to be his own man, in that he gives
himself for the time to his guests. His Cator is friendly thrift; and
Temperance keeps the boards end, and carves to every one the best measure of
enough: As for his own diet, when he is invited to a tempting variety, he puts
his knife to his throat; neither dares he feed without fear, as knowing who
overlooks him: Obscenity, detraction, scurrility; are barred from his table;
neither do any words sound there that are less savoury then the dishes.
Lastly, he so feeds, as if he sought for health in those viands, and not
pleasure; as if he did eat to live; and rises not more replenished with food,
then with thankfulness.

SECT. 12.
His nights rest.
IN a due season he betakes himself to his rest, he presumes not to alter the
Ordinance of day, and night, nor dares confound, where distinction is made by
his Maker; It is not with him as with the brute creatures, that have nothing to
look after but the mere oobedience of nature; he does not therefore lay himself
down as the swine in the stye, or a dog in the kennell, without any further
preface to his desired sleep, but improves those faculties which he is now
closing up, to a meet preparation for an holy repose; for which purpose, he
first casts back his eye to the now-expired day; and seriously considers how he
has spent it; and will be sure to make his reckonings even with his God,
before he part. Then he lifts up his eyes and his heart to that God, who has
made the night for man to rest in; and recommends himself earnestly to his
blessed protection: and then closes his eyes in peace, not without a serious
meditation of his last rest; his bed represents to him, his grave; his linen,
his winding sheet; his sleep, death; the night, the many days of darkness: and
shortly, he so composeth his soul, as if he looked not to wake till the morning
of the resurrection: After which if he sleep, he is thankfully cheerful; if
he sleep not, his reins chasten, and instruct him in the night season: and if
sleep be out of his eyes, yet God and his Angels are not: Whenever he awakes,
in those hands he finds himself, and therefore rests sweetly, even when he
sleeps not. His very dreams however vain, or troublesome, are not to him
altogether unprofitable, for they serve to bewray not only his bodily temper,
but his spiritual weaknesses, which his waking resolutions shall endeavor to
correct.

He so applies himself to his pillow, as a man that meant not to be drowned in
sleep, but refreshed; not limiting his rest by the insatiable lust of a
sluggish and drowzie stupidnesse, but by the exigence of his health, and
abilitation to his calling; and rises from it (not too late) with more appetite
to his work, then to a second slumber; cheerfully devoting the strength renewed
by his late rest, to the honor and service of the giver.

SECT. 11.
His carriage.
HIs carriage is not strange, insolent, surly, and overly contemptuous, but
familiarly meek, humble, courteous: as knowing what mold he is made of; and not
knowing any worse man then himself; He has an hand ready upon every occasion
to be helpful to his neighbor; as if he thought himself made to do good; He
hates to sell his breath to his friend, where his advice may be useful;
neither is more ambitious of any thing under heaven, then of doing good
offices; It is his happiness if he can reconcile quarrels, and make peace
between dissenting friends. When he is chosen an Umpire, he will be sure to cut
even betwixt both parties; and commonly displeases both, that he may wrong
neither; if he be called forth to Magistracy, he puts off all private
interests, and commands friendship to give place to justice; Now he knows no
cousens, no enemies; neither cousens for favor, nor enemies for revenge; but
looks right forward to the cause, without squinting aside to the persons. No
flattery can keep him from brow-beating of vice; no fear can work him to
discourage virtue: Where severity is requisite, he hates to enjoy another
punishment; and where mercy may be more prevalent, he hates to use severity:
Power does not render him imperious and oppressive, but rather humbles him in
the awful expectation of his account.

If he be called to the honor of Gods Embassy to his people, he dares not but
be faithful in delivering that sacred Message, he cannot now either fear
faces, or respect persons; it is equally odious to him to hide and smother any
of Gods counsel, and to foist in any of his own to suppress truth and to
adulterate it; He speaks not himself, but Christ, and labors not to tickle the
ear, but to save souls: So does he go before his flock as one that means to
feed them no less by his example, then by his doctrine; and would condemn
himself, if he did not live the Gospel, as well as preach it; He is neither too
austere in his retiredness, nor too good-cheap in his sociablenesse; but
carries so eaven an hand that his discreet affablenesse may be free from
contempt, and that he may win his people with a loving conversation; If any of
his charge be miscarried into an error of opinion, he labors to reclaim him
by the spirit of meekness; so as the mis-guided may read nothing but love in
his zealous conviction; if any be drawn into a vicious course of life, he
fetches him back with a gentle, yet powerful hand; by an holy importunity,
working the offender to a sense of his own danger, and to a saving penitence.

Is he the master of a family? he dares not be a Lion in his own house; cruelly
tyrannizing over his meanest drudge: but so moderately exercises his power, as
knowing himself to be his apprentices fellow servants; He is the mouth of his
meiny to God, in his daily devotions; offering up for them the calves of his
lips, in his morning and evening sacrifice and the mouth of God unto them in
his wholesome instructions, and al godly admonitions: he goes before them in
good examples of piety, and holy conversation, and so governs, as one that
hathmore then mere bodies committed to his charge.

Is he the husband of a wife? He carries his yoke even; not laying too much
weight upon the weaker neck, His helper argues him the principal; and he so
knows it; that he makes a wise use of his just inequality: so remembering
himself to be the superior, as that he can be no other then one flesh: He
maintains therefore his moderate authority with a conjugall love, so holding up
the right of his sex, that in the mean time he does not violently clash with
the britler vessel: As his choice was not made by weight, or by the voice, or
by the hiew of the hide, but for pure affection grounded upon virtue; so the
same regards hold him close to a constant continuance of his chaste love; which
can never yield either to change or intermission.

Is he a father of children? he looks upon them as more Gods then his own; and
governs them accordingly: He knows it is only their worse part which they have
received from his loins, their diviner half is from the father of lights, and
is now become the main part of his charge. As God gave them to him, and to the
world by him: so his chief care is, that they may be begotten again to God;
that they may put off that corrupt nature which they took from him, and be made
partakers of that divine nature which is given them in their regeneration. For
this cause he trains them up in all virtuous and religious education: he sets
them in their way, corrects their exorbitances, restraines their wild desires
and labors to frame them to all holy dispositions; and so bestows his fatherly
care upon, and for them, as one that had rather they should be good then rich,
and would wish them rather dead, then debaucht: he neglects not al honest means
of their provision, but the highest point he aims at, is to leave God their
patrimony. In the choice of their calling, or match, he propounds, but forces
not, as knowing they have also wills of their own, which it is fitter for him to
bow, then to break. Is he a son? he is such as may be fit to proceed from such
loins.

Is he a servant? he cannot but be officious: for he must please two masters,
though one under, not against the other; when his visible master sees him not,
he knows he cannot be out of the eye of the invisible; and therefore dares not
be either negligent, or unfaithful. The work that he undertakes, he goes
through, not out of fear, but out of conscience, and would do his business no
otherwise then well, though he served a blind master; He is no blab of the
defects at home, and where he cannot defend, is ready to excuse: He yields
patiently to a just reproof, and answers with an humble silence: and is more
careful not to deserve, then to avoid stripes.

Is he a subject? He is awfully affected to Sovereignty, as knowing by whom the
powers are ordained; He dares not curse the King, no not in his thought; nor
revile the Ruler of his people, though justly faulty: much less dare be
sclander the footsteps of Gods anointed. He submits not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake, to every Ordinance of God, yea, to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; not daring to disobey in regard of the oath of God; If
he have reached forth his hand to cut off but the skirt of the Royal robe, his
heart smites him: He is a true paymaster, and willingly renders tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, honor to whom honor is due; and justly
divides his duties betwixt God and Caesar.

Finally, in what ever relation he stands, he is diligent, faithful,
conscionable, observant of his rule, and careful to be approved such, both to
God and men.

SECT. 7.
His resolution in matter of Religion.
HE has fully informed himself of all the necessary points of religigion; and
is so firmly grounded in those fundamental and saving truths, that he cannot
be carried about with every wind of doctrine; as for collateral and
unmateriall verities, he neither despises, nor yet does too eagerly pursue
them; He lists not to take opinions upon trust; neither dares absolutely follow
any guide, but those who he knows could not err; He is ever suspicious of new
faces of Theological truths; and cannot think it safe to walk in untroden
paths: Matters of speculation are not unwelcome to him; but his chief care is
to reduce his knowledge to practice, and therefore he holds nothing his own,
but what his heart has appropriated, and his life acted: He dares not be too
much wedded to his own conceit; and has so much humility, as to think the
whole Church of Christ upon earth wiser then himself; However he be a great
lover of constancy, yet upon better reason he can change his mind in some
litigious, and un-importing truths, and can be silent where he must dissent.

SECT. 8.
His discourse.
HIs discourse is grave, discreet, pertinent, free from vanity, free from
offense; In secular occasions nothing falls from him but seasonable and
well-advised truths; In spiritual, his speech is such, as both argues grace,
and works it: No foul and unsavory breath proceeds out of his lips; which he
abides not to be tainted with any rotten communication, with any slanderous
detraction: If in a friendly merriment he let his tongue loose to an harmless
urbanity, that is the furthest he dares go; scorning to come within the verge
of a base scurrility.

He is not apt to spend himself in censures, but as for revilings, and cursed
speakings against God, or men, those his soul abhors. He knows to reserve
his thoughts by locking them up in his bosom under a safe silence, and when he
must speak, dares not be too free of his tongue, as well knowing that in the
multitude of words there wants not sin. His speeches are no other then
seasonable, and well fitted both to the person, and occasion; Jigges at a
funeral, Lamentations at a feast, holy counsel to scorners, discouragements
to the dejected, and applauses to the profane, are hateful to him; He meddles
not with other men's matters, much less with affairs of State but keeps himself
wisely within his own compass: Not thinking his breath well spent, where he
does not either teach, or learn.

SECT. 9.
His devotion.
HE is so perpetually resident in heaven, that he is often in every day before
the throne of Grace; and he never comes there without supplication in his hand;
wherein also he loves to be importunate; and he speeds accordingly, for he
never departs empty; whiles other cold suitors that come thither but in some
good fits of devotion, obtain nothing but denials; He dares not press to Gods
footstool in his own name, (he is conscious enough of his own unworthiness)
but he comes in the gracious and powerful name of his righteous Mediator, in
whom he knows he cannot but be accepted; and in an humble boldness for his
only sake craves mercy; no man is either more awful, or more confident; When
he has put up his petition to the King of heaven, he presumes not to stint the
time, or manner of Gods condescent; but patiently and faithfully waits for the
good hour, and ^eaves himself upon that infinite wisdom and goodness. He does
not affect length so much as fervor; neither so much minds his tongue as his
heart.

His prayers are suited according to the degrees of the benefits sued for; He
therefore begs grace absolutely; temporal blessings with limitation; and is
accordingly affected in the grant: Neither is he more earnest in craving
mercies, then he is zealously desirous to be retributory to God, when he has
received them: not more heartily suing to be rich in grace, then to improve his
graces to the honor and advantage of the bestower: With an awful and broken
heart does he make his addresses to that infinite Majesty, from whose presence
he returns with comfort and joy: His soul is constantly fixed there whither he
powers it out; distraction and distrust are shut out from his closet; and he is
so taken up with his devotio^, as one that makes it his work to pray: And when
he has offered up his sacrifices unto God, his faith listens and looks in at
the door of heaven to know how they are taken.

SECT. 10.
His sufferings.
EVery man shows fair in prosperity; but the main trial of the Christian is in
suffering; any man may steer in a good gale, and clear sea, but the Mariners
skill will be seen in a tempest: Herein the Christian goes beyond the Pagans,
not practice only, but admiration; We rejoice in tribulation, says the chosen
Vessel; Lo here a point transcending all the affectation of Heathenism.
Perhaps some resolute spirit, whether out of a natural fortitude, or out of an
ambition of fame or earthly glory, may set a face upon a patient enduring of
loss, or pain, but never any of those heroic Gentiles durst pretend to a joy
in suffering; Hither can Christian courage reach; knowing that tribulation
works patience, and patience, experience, and experience, hope, and hope
makes not ashamed.

Is he bereaved of his goods and worldly estate? he comforts himself in the
conscience of a better treasure that can never be lost; Is he afflicted with
sickness? his comfort is that the inward man is so much more renewed daily, as
the outward perishes: Is he slandered and unjustly disgraced? his comfort is
that there is a blessing, which will more then make him amends; Is he banished?
he knows he is on his way home-ward; Is he imprisoned? his spirit cannot be
locked in; God and his Angels cannot be locked out; Is he dying? To him to live
is Christ, and to dye is gain; Is he dead? He rests from his labors, and is
crowned with glory: Shortly, he is perfect gold that comes more pure out of the
fire then it went in; neither had ever been so great a Saint in heaven, if he
had not passed through the flames of his trial here upon earth.

SECT. 11.
His conflicts.
HE knows himself never out of danger; and therefore stands ever upon his
guard; neither of his hands are empty; the one holds out the shield of faith;
the other manageth the sword of the spirit; both of them are employed in his
perpetual conflict. He cannot be weary of resisting, but resolves to dye
fighting: He has a ward for every blow; and as his eye is quick to discern
temptations, so is his hand and foot nimble to avoid them: He cannot be
discouraged with either the number or power of his enemies, knowing that his
strength is out of himself, in him in whom he can do all things; and that there
can be no match to the Almighty; He is careful not to give advantage to his
vigilant adversary; and therefore warily avoids the occasions of sin: and if
at any time he be overtaken with the suddenness, or subtilty of a temptation,
he speedily recovers himself by a serious repentance; and fights so much the
harder because of his foil. He hates to take quarter of the spiritual powers;
nothing less then death can put an and to to this quarrel; nor nothing below
victory.

SECT. 12.
His death.
HE is not so careful to keep his soul within his teeth, as to send it forth
well addressed for happiness: as knowing therefore the last brunt to be most
violent, he rouzeth up his holy fortitude to encounter that King of fear, his
last enemy, Death; And now after a painful sickness, and a resolute
expectation of the fiercest assault, it falls out with him as in the meeting of
the two hostile brothers, Jacob and Esau, in stead of grapling he finds a
courteous salutation, for stabs, kisses; for height of enmity, offices of love;
Life could never befriend him so much, as Death offers to do: That tenders him
(perhaps a rough, but) a sure hand to lead him to glory; and receives a welcome
accordingly: Neither is there any cause to marvel at the change; The Lord of
life has wrought it; he having by dying subdued death, has reconciled it to
his own; and has (as it were) beaten it into these fair terms with all the
members of his mystical body: so as whiles unto the enemies of God, Death is
still no other then a terrible executioner of divine vengeance, he is to all
that are in Christ, a plausible and sure convoy unto blessedness; The
Christian therefore now laid upon his last bed, when this grim messenger comes
to fetch him to heaven, looks not so much at his dreadful visage, as at his
happy errand: and is willing not to remember what death is in it self, but what
it is to us in Christ; by whom it is made so useful and beneficial, that we
could not be happy without it; Here then comes in the last act, and employment
of faith; (for after this brunt passed, there is no more use of faith, but of
vision) that heartens the soul in a lively apprehension of that blessed
Savior, who both led him the way of suffering, and is making way for him to
everlasting glory: That shows him Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God; That clings
close unto him, and lays unremoveable hold upon his person, his merits, his
blessedness; upon the wings of this faith is the soul ready to mount up toward
that heaven, which is open to receive it; and in that act of evolation puts it
self into the hands of those blessed Angels who are ready to carry it up to the
throne of Glory.

Sic, O, sic juvat vivere, sic perire.
FINIS.

