A DISCOVERY OF The treacherous Attempts of the Cavaliers, To have procured THE
BETRAYING OF Nottingham Castle Into their hands.

And how Colonel Hutchinson the Governor thereof was promised to be made the
best Lord in Nottingham shire, and to have ten thousand pounds, and the Command
of the said Castle confirmed to him and his heirs, if he would deliver it unto
them: And their large offers to his Brother, and diverse other Commanders.

With their constant Resolution never to betray the Trust the Parliament has
reposed in them* nor desert the so just and lawful Cause they have engaged
themselves in.

Expressed in a Letter sent to Mr Millington a Member of the House of Commons,
and four more that came with it.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop* 1643.

SIR,
I Have thrice been tempted upon the offers of great rewards and honors, to
betray this Castle. The first was by Sir Richard Biron, another by M. Sutton,
both which I acquainted the Committee withal, and returned scornful refusals
unto: but now being this third time solicited unto it, I thought it my duty to
acquaint those that have here entrusted me, both for their satisfaction and my
own discharge, if any thing should happen to my prejudice hereafter; for I
expect that now they see their attempts in this kind fruitless, they will as
basely endeavor to blemish with false aspersions that honesty which with
bribes they cannot corrupt; be pleased therefore to understand the whole
proceeding of this last offer and the occasion of it, which was this.

Colonel Dacre, one that was formerly in the North, a familiar friend and
acquaintance of my brothers, sent to me to desire that he might have the
liberty to see him, to which, with the knowledge of the Committee, I gave
consent; and then being in his company, desired some words in private with my
brother, pretending a desire to be satisfied in some doubts of his concerning
this war; but some accidents then falling out, he was prevented of that
private conference, and therefore desired that my brother some two days after
would come to his quarters; but he, to prevent all suspicions, would not go
but writ him a denial: after which Colonel Dacre writ very earnestly to him
to come again, and invited Captain Poulton to come with him; but my brother
would not, only with the leave of the Committee sent Captain Poulton to excuse
it, of whose going we intended to make such use, as if we could, to discover
how the enemy lay, and what their intentions were: so soon as he came thither,
he was most kindly entertained, and Colonel Dacre taking him aside, told him,
that now the Governor of Nottingham and his brother had an occasion offered to
gain themselves great honor, to do the King very good service, and to receive
a great recompense for so doing; which he demanding how that was, the Colonel
told him, that if I would deliver up the Castle, the command of it should be
confirmed to me and my heirs* I should receive ten thousand pound and be well
assured of it before ever I delivered the Castle, and that I should be made
the best Lord in Nottingham shire, that my brother should have three thousand
pound to deliver the Bridges, and that Cap. Poulton should have two thousand
pound to get this effected; to which Capt. Poulton answered, that he thought it
was an impossible thing, for the Governor had formerly been tempted with such
like offers, and had refused them, that we all scorned so base an act, and that
for his own part he would starve and rot before he would betray his trust: the
Colonel was further importunate with him, to move it to me, and that you may,
says he, be better assured I do not this without Commission, and then pulled
out of his pocket a paper written with these words, or to this effect; These
are to authorize Colonel Dacre to treat with Colonel Hutchinson and
Lieutenant Colonel Hutchinson for the surrendering up of the Castle and Bridges
of Nottingham for the service of his Majesty, and to make them large promises
which shall be performed: and this paper signed with W. Newcastle at the
bottom: and he further desired, that he might but come to the Castle to speak
with me, when Captain Poulton told him there was no hope of obtaining that, he
entreated him that he would but deliver the message to me, which he told him he
would do; and the Colonel told him, that if I would not deliver the Castle,
yet if he himself would but leave us, and come away, he should immediately
have a Regiment of Horse delivered into his command; and earnestly pressed that
I would send him an answer: which presently a (...) both my brother and I did,
the Copies whereof I have here sent you. There were also two Officers of
Captain Whites Troup, whom we sent along with Captain Poulton, whom Colonel
Dacre also took aside, and made large The offers to Cap. White was 10000
pounds, and 3000. to his Officers to procu^e ^.
offers, both to Capt. White, and them, if they would procure him to turn to
their Side; But Capt. White has so often scorned and refused such unworthy
offers, that this did but increase his contempt of them, whose faith and
hon^sty has been apparently great in this cause. I confess, had it not been
for drawing a scandal or jealousy on my self, I would have gone so far as
to have gotten the Propositions under Coll. Dacre his hand, if not under the
Marquess his hand; but this I durst not do, lest my own honest intentions
should in the mean time have been mistaken: I therefore thought it sufficient
to make it presently known to the Committee, and so to acquaint you with it,
and withal to assure you, that were I certain we should utter^ly be deferted
and left (as for any relief I yet hear of we are like to be) (our soldiers
being 30. weeks behind with pay, and the whole Country now possessed by the
enemy) yet I would maintain my faithfulness to the Parliament, so long as I
have one drop of blood left in me; and when I am ^o^eed to the last extremity,
I am confident God will give me strength to maintain this Christian resolution,
that I have by Covenant both with God and man bound my self unto; which is,
that I will rather choose to die ten thousand deaths with a clear conscience to
God, and an honest heart to my Country, then to fell my soul for the purchase
of my life, and all the wealth and honors this world can bestow upon me. Your
sons are both well here in the Castle, and I hear your wife is so in the
Country; only I hear your goods and corn are wholly plundered. What service I
am able to do for you here, if you please you may command

Your friend and servant, John Hutchinson.
Not: Castle, December. 18. 1643. Postscript.
Sir, ^ust as my Letters were going to Colonel Dacre, there came one from him
to Captain Poulton; the copy of which, with Captain Poultons answer, I have
here also sent you, the original I preserve by me as a testimony of their
unworthie profers.




To Colonel Dacre.
Sir,
YOur propositions sent to me on Wednesday last by Captain Poulton (for which
you showed him my Lord Newcastles Commission) were so unworthy of a Gentleman,
so wicked, and base, that once I thought in contempt and scorn to have
forgotten them; yet lest my silence may receive too favorable an
interpretation from you, know and tell your General, that set you on this
brave employment, that I abhor the thought of Treason to my Country, though
I might thereby grow as great for wickedness as he; tell him I Will wear no title
but what my faith and virtue purchases, and I Will leave my children an honest,
though a small inheritance, to whom my spotless name, not tainted with the
foul blot of Treason, shall be an ornament, when the remembrance of all
treacherous Apostates shall rot with infamy; and I doubt not but my gracious
Prince, once cured of his mistake, will reward my loyal constant faithfulness
to his Regal Power, and Parliament, with a larger recompense then he propounds
for my corruption: if he do not, virtue is its own reward. Tell your most
Excellent General, his threats and promises are both a like contemptible to
me; I fear not those, and I hate these. I fight not to repair a broken
fortune, but to maintain a just quarrel; in which may that man perish, and
fall low as the depth of hell, that can be hired to prove unfaithful; tell
him, if you dare, that it had been an employment more beseeming you, or any
Gentleman, had he sent you with ten thousand armed men, to assault our well
defended walls; then with so many pieces of contemned gold, to lay your siege
against an honest heart. I could honor an enemy for performing brave and
gallant things; but such attempts as these will render your persons as odious
to all honest men, as your rebellion: and I am sorry you should undertake so
base a service, as to deserve the just neglect and scorn of

Not: Castle, December. 16. 1643. John Hutchinson.
Postscript.
Pray Sir send me word what you should have had for the procuring this, that I
may know at what rate the enemy valueth this Castle.



To Colonel Dacre.
Sir,
YOu have now convinced me of an error, I once thought it possible that some
rash misled young men might still among the Cavaliers have retained a sense of
Gallantry and Honor, though no Religion; and have been enriched with those
moral virtues which made the Heathen famous; such a one I believed you to be;
but since you can attempt to buy me to so great a villainy, as you did in your
late propositions by Captain Poulton, I must needs be persuaded, you would
never offer me what you your self would not have done: It Is I confess strange
to me you could imagine, that a Christian, a Gentleman, or a Commonwealths-man
would ever prove such a Villain, as for a little gaudie di^t to sell his soul,
his honor, and his Country; perish that most contemned gain, with all that
can accept or offer it: Dacre, 'twas base in you to think so of me, I am sure
you cannot so mis-interpret any act of mine, as to receive from it the least
ground of encouragement to such an opinion; and had you known my Brother, you
would have thought it easier for you your self alone to have conquered all the
men now fighting in the kingdom, than to corrupt that guard of virtues which
protect his constant soul from treacherous thoughts. Did you think men of
sense will part with real Honor for a Title? you are not capable of a
religious consideration; or I could tell you, That our souls (redeemed with an
unvaluable price) are by you most unequally valued at a poor inconsiderable
sum of money; but your thoughts cannot reach heaven: look upon earth, and
give me an example where ever any Traitor preserved his foul name from an
horrid blot of infamy on him and on his house for ever? How can you think, He
that by you will be corrupted to betray another trust, will not by another be
again corrupted to betray yours? Keep your despised Coin to tempt some frail
waiting woman, it may work with her to procure such honest things as you
affect; but desist these base attempts on men of nobler spirits, with whom they
will but render you as contemptible as your offers. Consider the unworthy
message you sent, and blush at the remembrance of your guilt in it, and if yet
you have so much worth left in you, repent the injury you did to him that was
your Friend. Farewell that name for evermore between us.

Trent Bridges, Dec. 16. 1643. GEORGE HUTCHINSON.

To hi^ truly noble friend Captain Poulton.
Noble Sir,
I Was in hopes to have waited on you this day, but indeed I received an
Express last night from my Lord General, wherein I am commanded to wait on
his Excellency near Chesterfield this day. Sir, I hope you remember the
business I spoke to you of when you were at my quarter; I will engage my self
upon my life, that what I promised shall be really performed; if you please
but to consider and truly value the business, I make no question but I may
obtain my desires: which I will assure you is not for any particular ends, but
in the first place to serve my gracious King, and th^^ my friends, which I will
assure you I shall ever esteem your Lieutenant Colonel and your self to be;
desiring very much to hear from you by this bearer; wishing us all to agree,
for upon my word it troubles me to think, that all honest men should not be of
one side. Which the Lord grant that we may all be, I remaining always, Sir,

Wattnell, Friday morning the 15. of December. Your most humble servant, Richard
Dacre.
My humble service to my truly noble friend your Lieutenant Colonel, and tell
him I wish him as my own soul.



To Colonel Dacre.
SIr, had the Cavalliers since found out a way to perform their promises
better then they did at Bristow, Gainsborough, etc. you might have had some
hopes of a young man whose best fortune is his sword: but so unworthie have
their dealings ever been, so little faith and honor do you give testimony
of, in tempting me to act such things as gallant men would not accept, if
offered; that I must tell you these unworthy ways you take to advance your
cause, are but so many confirmations to me in this I do maintain against you.
He that fights for honor, not for plunder, to which the Dutch Prince has well
trained all your armies, would scorn to receive his enemies Fort on any
conditions, but such as were purchased by his prevailing valor, not
undermining treachery: to which, Sir, I am as unflexible, as you to worth and
goodness. The Governor I believe and his brother have returned you their
answers; and you may in this receive the negative resolution of

Not: Castle, December. the 16. 1634. Thomas Poulton.

FINIS.

