PErlegi Concionem ^anc, nec quid in ea uspiam deprehendi, quod Pietati
promovendae plurimum non inserviat; proindeque dignam censui, quae Imprimatur.

Edm. Diggle S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino
Richardo Archiepiscopo Eboracensi a sacris domesticis.

Datum Episcopo-Thorpae Jan. 22. ^665.
THE DREADFULNESS OF THE PLAGVE.

OR A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. John the Evangelist, December
6th. being a day of public fasting.

By Jos. Hunter M. A. and Minister in YORK.

Et quamvis jam animadvertunt hominum genus in terra magis magisque indies ad
tunc modum attenuatum, absumptumque, nullo tamen timore horrescunt; quin neque
cum illorum omnium omnine interitus crescat and latiu^ quotidie ^an^t ^^
fundatur, ulla ex par^e reformidant.

Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. ca. 16. YORK, Printed by Stephen B^lkley, and are
to be sold by Francis Mawbarne, 1666.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE MANKLINS Lord Mayor, And to the Worshipful the
Aldermen, with the Common^lty of the faithful and famous City of York.
I Have been encouraged to expose this Sermon to public view, by the
persuasion of some, that it might at this time conduce to public good, which
if I can promote (though with the hazard of mine own credit) I regard not. The
great judgment wherewith God has scourged our Nation this year, and the little
sense which we express of it, would provoke a man (otherwise not forward) to
adventure on the censure of the world, if he had but the least hope to do any
good against the sottishness and stupidity of it; which seems to exceed that of
the Old World, even so much as the execution of Divine Wrath does the mere
menacing and threatening of it. We used formerly to startle at the report of the
Plague, but now we are become so brutish, ^ob. 39. 22.
that we mock at fear and are not affrighted: My desire is (whatever my hopes
are) to remove some from off the Lees of this most presumptuous and
ill-presaging sencelesness.

Now after I was persuaded to publish this Sermon, I concluded (if it had any
thing of worth in it) it was due to your Lordship and Brethren in the first
place, an^ under you to the whole City, from and amongst whom I have a
comfortable subsistence with so much respect and affection, as obliges me more
than I think meet here to express. You may read here what a dreadful punishment
the Plague is, and consider, if it do not concern you to use your greatest
diligence and circumspection to prevent a danger and to secure your City, which
the Sword has brought to poverty, and the Plague would quickly bring to
beggary. When you read what a sore judgment the Plague is, and remember how God
has visited other places with it, this will be powerful to quicken you unto a
thankeful acknowledgment of Gods gracious and miraculous preservation of this
City, so much beyond (not only our deserts) but even our expectations. Having
so frequent occasions to speak to you, I forbear to enlarge my self in an
Epistle: Blessed be God, the Father 2 Cor. 1. 3. 10
of mercys and the God of all comfort, who has delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us: so rests

Your Lordships, etc. most affectionate servant and well-wisher JOSIAH HUNTER.

D^^emb 6th 1665.
Numb. 16. 46. There is wrath gone out from the Lord, the Plague is begun.
IN these Words I have formerly observed three Parts: 1. Irae Dei, the wrath of
God. 2. Eruptio irae, the breaking forth of this wrath, wrath is gone out. 3.
Indicium and effectus utriusque, the token and effect of both, the Plague is
begun. Concerning the two first of these, the Wrath of God, and the breaking
forth of that Wrath, I have already spoken upon two of these occasions. I come
now to the third, The token and effect of both, The Plague is begun.

If you observe the Scripture, you shall find, that Plague is used for any
notable judgment of God; The bloody Issue is called a Plague, Mark 5. 29. We
read of a Plague of Nail, Rev. 16. 21. the judgments which God sent upon
Pharaoh for his stubbornness, are called Plagues, Exodus 9. 14. When God does
punish a Person, or a People, (especially if it be in a notable manner) then
(...) ^e said to plague them, Genesis 12. 17. The Lord plagued Pharaoh and his
House, Exodus 32. 35. The Lord plagued the People; and so in other places: but
Plague in the Text is taken for a certain malignant and infectious disease,
distinguished by that name from other diseases: every judgment is a plague, but
this in the Text is The Plague: as all sin may be said to be ((...))
Wickedness, but malice is especially in Scripture called ((...)) because it is
one of the greatest Wickednesses: so every disease, every punishment may be
called a Plague, but there is a pestilent, burning, contagious distemper, unto
which the name of Plague is appropriated, because it is one of the greatest
punishments incident unto a People: the very first breaking out of it is
terrible, it is wont to be so Pestilent and Des^ructiv^, for so Moses speaks as
startled himself, and to stir up Aaron to make the more have: Go quickly and
make an Atonement for them, for there (...) wrath gone out from the Lord, the
Plague is begun. The Proposition I will give you from hence, is this;

That the Plague is a dreadful judgment, a sign of Gods great wrath.

After I have p oved this, I will answer three Questions, subjoine a Cau^ion,
and so come to Application.

That the Plague is a featful judgment, and token of Gods wrath, is easy to
demonstrate: when things are more than ordinarily dreadful, it renders the very
name dreadful too: the dreadfulness of Damnation makes the very sound of the
word terrible: and m^thinks the word Plague has something of horror in it,
and is apt to bege^ a startling and shrinking, in such especially as are
naturally more inclined to fear: the Scripture never speaks of it, but always
one Epithete or other is given to it, as the no^e of a dreadful judgment: when
Moses sets himself to threaten Israel with curses for their disobedience, he
places this in the front, Deuteronomy. 28. 21. The Lord shall make the Pestilence
cleave unto thee, until he ^ath consumed thee from off the Land: here are two
things attributed to the P^stilence which render it hugely dreadful, cleaving
and consuming: in the Psalm. 91. 3. it is called the noisome Pe^tilence, it is
called one of Gods sore Judgments: Ezekiel. 14. 21. and ver. 19. it is made a
token of Gods bloody fury, if ^ send a pestilence into the Land, and pour out
my f^ry upon i^ in Blood. When our Savior speaks of those perplexed and
calamitous time^, that should befall the Jews a little before the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the world no^ long before its desolution, he puts in this for
one aggravation, Mat. 24. 7. there shall be Famines, and Pestilences, these are
the beginnings of sorrows: the description which the Psalmist gives of the
Plague, has much of terror in it, Psalm. 78. 49, 50. He cast upon them the
fierceness of hi^ anger, wrath, indignation and trouble, by sending evil Angels
among^t them: he made a way to his anger, he spared not their Soul from death,
but gave their life over to the Pe^^ilence. I read even of Hypoera^es, that he
was wont to call the Plague ((...)) a special Divine judgment, a stroke of Gods
own bare hand, as it were: these and such like instances joined with the
experience of all Ages, are enough to prove the Proposition: For the farther
explication of it, I will answer these three Questions,

1. Why the Plague (...) so dreadful?

2. What is it that provokes God to inflict it upon ^ people?

3. If it be such a token of Gods wrath, whether it does befall good men, I
mean Believers, and those that are in the state of justification?

1. Why the Plague (...) so dreadful a taken of Gods wrath?

I answer, 1. Because it is so destructive, you shall seldom (if at all) read
of the Pestilence in Scripture, but Consume is joined with it: we may say of
every man infected with it, as David said 1 ^am. 2^* 3.
once to Jonathan concerning himself, there is but a step between death and
him: in that Family or City where the Plagve is ve^ement and raging, we may say
of them, as God threatened it should be with the Jews, Deuteronomy. 28. 66, 67. Their
lives hang in doubt before them, and they fear day and night, and have no
assurance of their life: in the morning they say, would to God it was Even, and
at even, would God it was morning* for the fear of their hearts wherewith they
fear, and for the sight of their eyes which they do see. What havocks has this
made in the earth! we may m^re truly say of the Plague, than Samson of the jaw
bone (wherewith he killed so many Philistims) 1 Samuel 18. 8*
Heaps upon Heaps: Judge. 15. 16. after David had sl^in Goli^h, they sa^g in
Dances; Saul ^ath ^lain h^^ thousands, but David his ten thousands: so it may
be said here, other diseases have slain their thousands, but the Plague has
slain its ten thousands: it is so destructive, that it is called in the
abstract, Destruction, Psalm. 91. 6. Nor for the Pestilen^e that walkesh in
darkness, nor for the Destruction that ^a^leth at noon day. What the Apostle
affirms of wicked men, may be likewise said of this Pestilential disease,
misery and destruction is in its way, Romans 3. 16. All Histories both Sacred,
Ecclesiastical and Profane tell of the great Desolations that the Plague has
made: we read how it swept away 14000. one time, Numb. 16. 49. another time
24000. Number. 25. 8. another time 70000. 2 Samuel 24. 15. and yet these sums
(though questionless thought very great in those times) fall far short of what
has been since. Those that have dyed in London of this present Plague (I fear)
amount to more (...), etc. lib. 7, ca. 17.
than the three fore*mentioned sums put together. Eusebius speaking of a great
plague in Alexandria, has words to this effect out of Dionysius* Now all
things are full of lamentation, all men mo^rn, sadness and complaining fills
the whole City, partly for those that are dead, and partly for those that are
dying daeyly: for it is with us now ^s it was with the Egyptians, Exo^. 12. 30.
when God slew their firstborn, there was a great ^ry among them, because not
an house, where there was not one dead. So Evagri^s speaks of a plague that
Neque quisque mortalium, q^^ ejus ^ffugerit contagion^m, etc. lib. 3. ca* 28
continued two and fifty years; it spread (he says) over the whole world, nor
any mortal man then that did escape the Con^agion; and some Cities (he reports)
it invaded so vehemently, that it left not in Inhabitant i^ them. The Prophet
bemoaning the deplorable estate of Jerusalem (amongst other) has these words,
Lam. 1. 4. The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn Feasts,
all her Gates are desolate: her Priests sigh, her Virgins are afflicted, and
she is in bitterness: and it has been known (not only in other Countries) but
also in our own Nation, when there has been such a morrality by the Plague,
that the Churches, the Schools, the Markets, the Streets, the Highways have
all mourned, and some of them laid so desolate, that beasts might have grazed
where men were wont to trade.

2. That which renders the Plague yet more dreadful, is the suddenness of that
Destruction which it makes; the dispatch of the destruction, as I may call it:
the suddenness of an evil helps to add much to the terror of it: this is not
hard to prove from Scripture, I will give you but a touch, and then apply them,
Prove. 6. 15. His calamity shall come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken
without remedy: Eccles. 9. 11. The Sons of men are snared in an evil ^^me, when
it falls suddenly upon them: Isa. 29. 18. this iniquity shall be to you as a
breach ready to fall, swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking comes
suddenly at an instant. This is that which God threatens to Babylon, Isa. 47.
11. Evil shall come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises; and
mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off, and
desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know: well, this
is of the nature of the plague to slay suddenly, it surprizeth men whilst they
are eating and drinking, walking and trafficking, and sends them speedily from
a state of health and soundness, to take their portion among them who have laid
long silent in the dust. If you observe the Text with what follows, you shall
find how quickly the Plague swept away 14000. it is very likely in less than an
hour; in the 2 Samuel 24. we read of 70000. that dyed of it in three days: where
the plagus comes it does not only make great, but sudden breaches: how quickly
it makes a sad change, not only in a Family, and lesser societies, but even in
Cities and greater Corporations, insomuch that sometimes places of the greatest
concourse, have had cause to bewail themselves in the language of the Prophet,
Lam. 1. 1. How does the City sit solitarily that was full of people, how is she
become as a widow? to day (it may be you have children rejoicing under the wing
of their Parents, taking care for nothing, but even to drive away care; and
before to morrow (perhaps) vou shall hear them crying out lamentably (as Elisha
when the Prophet Elijah was taken from him) My Father, my Father: to day
(perhaps) Parents are 2 King. 2. 12.
rejoicing in their Children, delighting to behold them stand like Olive-plants
round about their table, Psalm. 128. 3.
promising unto themselves (I know not what) felicity in their well-doing; and
before to morrow (it may be) you shall have them (like Rachel) weeping for
their children, and resusing to be comforted, because Jer. 31. 15.
they are not. I read of Xerxes, that (having gathered an huge Army) he went
upon the top of an hill to view them, and while he was doing this, he fell a
weeping, to think that within an Age not one of those men would be left alive:
did he weep to think that an (...) men (perhaps not so many) would be all (...)
Age, what cause of mourning have we (...) we consider that the Plague, has
even i^ our (...) Country, taken away so huge a number, in less than the
Revolution of one year? so quick is the dispatch that it makes.

3. That which makes the plague yet more dreadful, is, because it is so
spreading, it is called the pestilence that walks in darkness, Psalm. 91. 6.
first, it is said to walk, it stands not still, but makes progress, spreads it
self* And then secondly, it is said to walk in darkness, it diffuseth it self
invisibly, it spreads one knows not how. It has been questioned by some
whether the Plague be infectious; yea, by some it bath been strongly denied:
The main arguments which they produce, are these three; First, that God has
appointed unto every man, not only to dye, but also at what time, and of what
kind of death, and therefore there is no great heed to be given to the
contagiousness of any disease. Their second argument is this, if the Plague be
Contagious, how comes it that some men take infection, and others escape it,
being both in the same place, and so to outward appearance in the same danger.
They urge in the third place, that the Plague comes by the immission of evil
Angels, and therefore how can it be infectious? these are the chief Arguments
that ever I met with against the Plagues infection, and yet they are so
inconsiderabie, that I think it but wast time to answor them. One calls the
opinion (that the Plague is not infectious) worse than the Plague it self:
another calls it a bloody error, and none maintain it but such as cannot abide
to be Gods Prisoners; it is a death ^o them to be out of company, and they had
rather endanger a thousand lives, than want any part of their pleasure or
profit.

But experience is enough to contradict this opinion; unto which we may add
that concerning the Leper, who was to be shut up and none to accompany with
him, which shows that there was some Contagion in the Leprosy: and yet the
Leprosy is nothing so deadly as the Plague, for some have lived having the
Leprosy many years, but such an instance cannot be given of the Plague.
Evagrius (speaking of the great Plague at Antioch, and the manner of its
spreading) s^ith* that some got it by living and conversing together: others
got it by only touching them that were infected, or entering into the house:
some received it in the Streets, and many that fled out of Cities which were
infected (though they remained sound themselves) yet they imparted the disease
to those, that before were free and helthful. But I leave the proving of the
Plagues infection to the Physician; he will tell you that living birds laid to
the feet of one infected will quickly dye; he will tell you, how it may be
diffused by Garments, by bre^thing, and many such like: this cannot be denied,
but that it is spreading, and so spreading, that where it once breaks forth, a
man cannot be too careful, because he can never be too secure, if secure
enough. For to say that the Plague b^falls none but such as want faith to rely
upon and trust in the Providence of God* is a^ error more bloody than to say,
that it is not infe^^ious.

4. And lastly, that which renders the Plague yet more dreadful is the
uncomfortableness of it: is it not a sad thing, when a man's house becomes his
prison? next to our lives we value our liberty, and yet this the Plague
deprives a man of: I might be large here, but I will confine my self within
these three heads: First, the liberty of Gods house, how precious is that! How
amiable are thy Tabernaeles, O Lord (says David) Psalm. 84. ^.
he envied even the birds that might fi^ and sing near the Sanctuary, when he
was banished from it: and in Psalm. 42. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God: my Soul thirste^h for God,
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? and he professes
ver. 4. how he poured out his Soul in him, when he remembered, how he had gone
with the multitude to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise; but
this liberty is a man debared from by the plague; though the doors of the
Sanctuary are open, yet his own doors are shut up: he cannot be admitted to
hear the voice of those that bring glad tidings of peace: he cannot be admitted
any longer to come and participate of those comfortable representations of
Christ's Body and Blood: he cannot be allowed any longer to come and join with
the Congregation in lifting up a Prayer to Heaven. I read that the Protestants
in France had a Church (though ^l^^d.
now demolished) which they called Paradise; it is very likely, they thought
the Church the only Paradise on earth: in this Paradise I would compare the
preaching of the Word, to the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil; and the
Sacrament of the Lords S^pper to the Tree of Life; but where the Plague is, a
man is excluded from this Paradise, he has not the liberty to taste of the
fruit of it, this is one great discomfort.

2. The liberty of Friends, that is comfortable* next to communion with God,
communion with friends is deemed the greatest happiness on earth. Pythag^ra^
has a dark Riddle (cor ^e edit^) eat not thy heart: my Lord Bacon sets this
gloss upon it, he that lacks friends to converse with, and lay open his grief
to, must needs be a Cannibal and eat his own heart: well, this liberty likewise
does the Plague deprive a man of; it was David's Complaint, Psalm. 38. 11. My
Lovers and my Friends stand aloof from my sore, and my Kinsmen stand afar off:
Thus it is with a man whom God has visited, his Lovers and Friends stand afar
of, they dare not come near him in point of security to themselves, they dare
not in point of conscience, lest they might disperse the Contagion among
others; those are sad expressions in Psalm. 88. 18. Lover and Friend have thou
put far from me: and in Psalm. 102. 6, 7. I am like a pelicon in the Wilderness,
I am like an Owl of the Desert, I watch and am as a Sparrow alone: yet these
are the true complaints of such as are shut up under the Plague.

3. The liberty of Commerce is very necessary: hereby it is that men get a
subsistence and livelihood for R^m. 82. 17.
their Families, without this they cannot provide things honest in the sight of
all men: but this Liberty likewise the Plague debars a man from, none dare
Traffic with him, and this helps to add yet more to his discomfort: for the
Merchant will tell you, that upon the ceasing of Trade, there is not only
(l^^rum cesfans) gain ceasing, but there is likewise (damn^^ emergens) loss
arising, because now a man is forced to take from his stock for necessary uses,
so that grant a man do escape with his life that is visited with the Plague; I
say, suppose he has his life for a prey, what can he do without a livelihood?
and toward the procuring of this he is much disabled by the Plague.

So much in answer to the first Question, Why the Plague (...) so dreadful a
judgment? 1. Because it is so destructive. 2. Because the destruction, which it
make^, is so quick and sudden. 3. Because it is so spreading. And lastly,
because it is so uncomfortable, for hereby a man i^ deprived of the liberty of
Gods house, the liberty of Friends, the liberty of Commerce.

The second question is, what is it that provokes God to inflict this dreadful
judgment of the Plague upon a people?

This is somewhat harder to determine; what I purpose to say concerning it,
take in these three Conclusions,

1. For certain, God has just cause given him, before he do thus manifest his
displeasure, many of his ways are unsearchable, but none are unrighteous; he
can as soon cease to be, as to be just: if therefore at any time we cannot
discern what should be the cause, let us charge our selves with ignorance, but
take heed of charging God with injustice: after God had threatened the Jews with
the Sword, the Famine, the noisomebeast, and the Pestilence in Ezekiel. 14. he
adds ver. 23. Ye shall know, that I have not done without cause all that I have
done in it says the Lord: and he expresses himself yet more offended with
them for standing upon their justification, Jer. 2. 35. Thou say, because I
am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me; behold, I will plead with
thee* because thou say, I have not sinned.

2. This we may likewise safely affirm in the general, that sin is the
meritorious cause (as of all other judgments) so likewise this of the Plague:
The wrath of God i^ revealed from Heaven (says the Apostle) against what? all
^nrighteousness and ungodliness of man, Rom, 1. 18. and it is the observation
of a good man, that as vapors ascend invisibly, but come down again in storms
and showers, which we both see and feel; so sometimes secret sins are the
procuring cause of open and notorio^^ punishments: this of the Plague is
threatened unto Disobedience, Deuteronomy. 18.

3. What sins in particular may be the provoking cause of the Plague now, or
any other time, is not so easy to conclude. I think the safest way is one of
these three,

1. Either to attribute judgments that are general, unto sins that are most
general: and what sin has been of late years and is still most reigning in
this Nation, would require one better acquainted with the manners of it than I
am: whether Atheism, or Dissension, or a mutinous inclination against all
Authority, or violation of Oaths, or what else I will not say, but whether
these or others are the National sins at present, they are hugely aggravated,
because God has not honored any Nation with more mercy and means of Grace
than ours; and therefore we could expect no other, than that he should deal
with us, as he threatened he would do with his peculiar People, Amos 2. 2. You
only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I will punish you
for your iniquities. Or,

2. If we know of any notorious National sin (though committed several years
since) not yet so universally acknowledged and repented of, we may think that
is a great provocation unto God to scourge us with the Plagu^: for this we have
that famous instance of Readiness breaking Covenant with, and s^aying the
Gibeonites, for which God punished the Land in the time of King David) with
three years Fami^e, and would not be appeased, till several of Readiness Sons were
pu^ to death, 2. Sam. 23.

3. This is likewise a safe course, to observe out of the Records of Sacred
Writ, for what sins God has heretofore sent the Plague; and look how far we
are guilty of them, so far may we attribute our visitati^n to them: now in
searching the Scripture, I find that for six, yea for seven transgressions God
has either threatened or sent the Plague. I will but name them, and leave them
to your consideration.

1. Despising of plenty, and immoderate lusting after dainties, so we read how
the Israelites despised Manna (whereof they had abundance) and called it light
bread, but they lusted exceedingly after Quails, for which God smote them with
a very great Plague, Numb. 11. 33, 34.

2. We read how they that brought up an evil report upon the Land of promise,
to the discouragement of the people, and the dishono^r of God, dyed of the
Plague, Numb. 14. 37.

3. Seditious insurrections against Authority, have drawn down the Plague: this
was the cause of that Plague in the Text.

4. Creature* confidence, boasting of or trusting in an Arm of flesh; this is
generally thought to be the cause of that Plague in the 2 Samuel 24.

5. Idolatry, for this God wa^ so incensed, that he ^lew of the people at once
24000. with the Plague, Numb, 25.

6. Detaining and withholding from God his due, unto this he threatens the
Plague Exodus 30. 12. When thou take the sum of the Children of Israel, they
shall give every man a Ransom for his Soul unto the Lord, that there be no
plague among them.

Lastly, to all these, I may add the contempt and abuse of the Lords Supper:
for when Saint Paul faith, that many of the Corinthians were ^^ck and weak, and
many dy^d, 1 Cor. 11. 30. it is not improbable, that God sent amongst them some
pestilential and contagious disease. I have done with the second question, What
it is that provokes God to inflict this dreadful punishment of the Plague upon
a people? I hasten to the third.

The plague being such a token of Gods wrath, whether does it befall good men,
believers, such as are in the state of justification? for our satisfaction in
this, we may have recourse to that of Solomon, Eccles. 9. 1. 2. No man knows
either love or hatred by all that (...) before them, all things come alike to
all, there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the clean, and
to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices 1. Kings*
22. 2. Chro* 35.
not, as is the good so is the sinner, and be that swears as he that fears
an Oath. Ahab and Josiah's death concurred in the very circumstances: and Saul
and 2. Sam. 1* 23.
Jonathan (though different in their deportments) yet in their deaths they were
not divided. Here we shall do well to consider three things,

1. That good men are subject to, and guilty of many sins and enormities, and
their sins admit of those aggravations which the sins of other men do not; and
therefore why should we think that they should be privileged from those
temporal punishments, which God is went to inflict for such sins.

2. Consider, that good men, even by their sins do help to draw down a judgment
and common calamity Jer. 5. 4.
upon a Nation; indeed God takes most notice of their sins: concerning the
common sort of prophans persons he says, These are foolish, they have not
known the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God; but when his own
People in Covenant with him, when these shall break the bands, then he bursts
out, How shall I pardon thee for this * now if good men by their sins be
instrumental in drawing down a Pest upon a Nation, why should they expect any
other but to be involved in it?

3. Consider this, as you cannot tell me any sin (be it never so gross) into
which a Believer may not fall, except it be the sin against the Holy Ghost* so
you cannot assign any judgment (be it never so great) whereunto a Believer is
not obnoxious, unless it be Everlasting damnation. There is no condemnation
indeed Romans ^.* 1
to those that are in Christ Jesus, but for temporal Math. 16. 24.
calamities they are so incident to good men, that the Acts 14. 21.
Scripture seems to make them their Portion, and it may be truly said of Gods
Servants (as Augustus said once, when he sat between Virgil and Horace, whereof
the one was bleer-eyed, and the other much given to sighing) they sit (inter
suspiria and lachrymas) between sighing and weeping: I am plagued all the day
long and chastened every morning, says David, Psalm. 73. 14. That is a pretty
saying of Clemens Alexandrinus (...) He that is near to God is always under the
^^sb.

It is a *Pestilent Doctrine therefore to a^^irm, that none who believe in God,
and love him sincerely, can dye of the Plague: it is very t^u^, the dying of
the pl gu^ shall be no more prejudicial to them, in respect of their salvation,
than the dying of any other d^^th; All things (and therefore the Plague) work
together for Romans 8. 28.
good to them that love God: but the sentence of j^s^ification, Gods
acceptance of them into favor, gives not Believers an immunity from any
disease, but their persons are still subject unto those diseases which the
nature is: and it is very soundly observed by one Mr. ^^mford (who writ a
little T^e^^ise the la^^ great Plague, but this, at London) that God by
suffering good men to dye of the Plague, glorifies both his justice and his
wisd^me; his justice among the wicked, in giving them cause to say, If God
spare not the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? his wisdom among the
godly, lest they should say, for our own Righteousness ^e are Luke 23. 31* Dan.
9. 4.
delivered. Thus I have answered the three Questions, Why the Plague is so
dreadful a judgment? what it is that provokes God to send it? Whether it be
incident to good me^? I have now only a Cau^ion to subjoyn, and then I shall
come to Application.

The Cauti^^ is this, though the plague be a dreadful judgment, yet the
Scripture speaks of another plague, which is far wor^e: and yet whilst we do
what we can to ^lie the le^^er plague, we do what we can to pursue the greater:
but what Plague i that? Solomon will tell you, 1 King. 8. 38. The plague of the
heart: sin in general is the pl^gue of the heart; every man's own Rss*
iniquity, his peccatum in delici^^, his darling lust, that is, the particular
plague of h^^ own heart: now this plague of the heart is worse than the other
plague in several respects. I will name them, t^ough I cannot insist on them.

1. As in good things the cause is be^t^r, so in evil things the cause is worse
than the effect; bu the plague of the heart is the cause of the other plague:
sin brought in misery at first, and m^sery has ever since pursued sin.

2. We are more sensible of the pl^gue of the body, than that of the heart, and
therefore the plague of the heart is more d^ngerou^: the first st^p to ^ealth
is to have a feeling of our disease, therefore there is less hope of c^re,
where there is less feeling of the Distemper.

3. Nature does not only feel the Plague of the body, but is may by Gods
blessing upon means, be of force to work out the malignity of it, that it shall
not prove mortal* for else none that have the plague should escape death, b^^
by a miracle: but corrupt nature (as it is not sensible of the Plague of the
heart) so neither has it power to work it cut: if the great Physician of Souls
cure i^ not, it is not all the strength of Nature, the art of man* the power of
Medicines that can avail any thing, but the soul is inf^cted and will be
destroyed.

4. Though the plague of the body be infectious, yet Prove. 18. 14.
the plague of the heart add^ ven^^e and malignity to it: The spirit of a man
will hear his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can hear? sin em^itters and
poisons any affliction: the sting of every p^nal evil is sin, this is the
plague of the plague: an affliction consists not in the bulk of it, but the
burden; what is a Serpent without a sting, or a great bulk if it has no
weight? where the plague of the heart is cured, the other plague is more easily
born^: though the cross continue, yet the curs^ is taken away.

5. The plague of the heart is worse than the other plague, because it sei^eth
upon, and infects the better part of man, his Soul; that which is more worth
than a world, and could be Redeemed by no less than Mat. 16. 2^* 1 Pet. 1* 1^.
the precious blood of Christ: look how much better the Soul is than the Body,
by so much worse is the plague of the heart, than that of the body.

Lastly, as Christ said concerning men, so may I say concerning the plague, the
utmos^ it can do, is but to kill the body, and that for a time; but the Plague
of the Luke 12. 4*
hears will destroy both body and Soul everlastingly: that death which consists
only in a separation of the Soul from the Body, is nothing so terrible as that
which consists in an everlasting separation of the Soul from God. But some men
will never be convinced what a plague the Plague of the heart is, till they
come to feel the plagues of the damned, then they shall wish for Rev. 9. 6.
death, but it shall flee from them. I come now to Application.

1. If the plague be such a token of Gods wrath, what cause have we of this
Nation to think that God i^ wroth and displeased with us, since he has visited
us with such a Plague, as cannot be parallelled since the Sweating sickness,
and that in such a juncture of time, when it could not have been more
prejudicial to the affairs of the Nation: it is hard to say, whether we have
more cause to tremble at Gods judgment in this plague, or to admire at his
goodness in the abat^ment of it, when it once threatened the whole Nation, as
though the Lord had purposed to make a full end, Nahu. 1. 9.
that affliction should not rise up the second time.

Now mark what the Prophet says, The Lion has roared, who will not fear* Amos
3. 8. when Gods hand Is. 26* 9* 10, 11
is lifted up, he expects that we should see it, and express a sense of it: the
People of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloath,
Jon. 3. 5. and did we verily believe, that God is wroth with us, we should busy
and bestir our selves toward the appe^sing of it: This day would be observed
with more solemnity, our Prayers sent up to Heaven with more devotion, the Word
listened unto with more attention, Alm^ given with more freeness and abundance.

All tokens and testimonies of Humiliation are little enough, when God shows
such tokens of his wrath as the plague is: this is not a time to addict our
selves to pride, or d^lliance, or luxury. The Romans punished one severely,
that in a time of common calamity was seen looking out at a window with a Crown
of Roses on his head. God delights to see a People show themselves affected
with his displeasure: m^rk what he said once to the Isr^elites after they had
made the Golden Calf, Exodus ^3. 5. I will come into the ^^ast of thee in a
moment and consume thee (it is not an absolu^e determination but a conditional
co^^ina^ion) therefore now put off thy Ornaments from thee, that I may know
what to do unto the^: that is, humble thy self, give some testimony of the awe
that thou stande^^ in of my Wrath, of thy sorrow for the sin that has incensed
it, tha^ though I be highly provoked, yet I may be ^^ved to have pity on, and
show some favor to the^.

2. If the Plague be so dreadful a judgment, what cause have we of this City to
bless God for our preservation from it? especially considering how many dangers
we have been exposed to, some through the necessity of State, others through
our own improvidence, and some through the corrupt and covert dealings of
Passengers and Traders: to be preserved from danger is a mercy at any time, but
especially then, when we see others overtaken, and our selves encompossed with
it: What may we attribute this our preservation to? shall we impute it to our
own diligence and care? no certainly, for if our watchfulness had been ten
times more, yet we read in Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord keep the City, the
Watchm^n ^aketh but in vain: shall we ascribe it to any merit or desert of
ours? nay, that would be far worse, as Job says, Job 9. 20. Our own mouths
would condemn us and prove us perverse. I would it might not be said of us, as
it was once of Ahaz, that in this 2 Chr. 28. 2^*
time of distress we have trespassed yet more and more: sure it is, vice and
profaneness are grown to that height of impudence, as has not been known in
former years: Ephesians. 5. 3.
those vices, which heretofore were scarce once named amongst us, are become
common: what said God once concerning Judah, Jer. ^. 8. When she saw that God
had given back sliding Israel a ^ill of Divorce, and put her away for her
adul^eries, yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played
the Harlot also: it is easy to apply it here, though we saw what God had do^^
to London, ^et we have not feared, but gone on to corrupt our sel^es and do so
wickedly, as if we intended to justific them, or as if we thought, that the
sins of the Nation could not be soon enough filled up, unless we added more
measure to them. Our preservation therefore can be attributed ^o nothing, but
the merciful and gratio^ protection of Almighty God; And therefore let us
magnify the Lord, and let us exalt his name together: Psalm. ^4. ^, 2* 3, 4.
let us bless him at all times, and let ^i^ praise be continually in our
months: for he i^ (...) that has held our souls in life, and not suffered our
feet to be moved: he Psalm. 66. 9.
has hitherto delivered us from all our fears, and put a new song into our
month, eve^ praise unto our God. Only Psalm. 40. 3.
let us fear the Lord and serve him in truth and with all 1 ^a^. 12. ^4.
our hearts, for consider how great things he has done for us, but if we shall
still do wickedly, sin lies at the door, Ge^. 4. 7. Number. 32. 23.
and judgment will find us out.

3. And lastly, if the Plague be so dreadful a judgment, then it calls upon us
loudly to pity those, whom God has been pleased to exercise with so heavy a
visitation: think that you hear the great City of the Land thus bewailing her
misery, and begging your commiseration, as the City Jerusalem once; I am the
man that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath, surely against me is
(...) turned, he turns his hand against me all the day, be has bent his ^^w
and set me as a mark for the arrow: Lament. 3.
I envy not your immunity, only desire you to commiserate my Calamity: Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has
touched me, Job 19. 21. We have no hasty and fearful fleeing out of our City,
whole families made desolate, miserere d^u^ upon our doors, we hear not that
doleful voice, bring out your dead.

Eusebins faith, that in the Plague at Alexandria the Christians were as
careful of one another, visited those that were infected, provided for them,
converted with them, buried them as at other times; but the Heathen regarded
not their Neighbors and friends, but fled from them, suffered them to starve,
and afterward to lie unburied. I acknowledge there is much difference between
the spirits of Christians now, from what was in those Ages, for then they were
willing upon all occasions to hazard, yea to lay ^ Joh. 3. 16.
down their lives for the Brethren. I blame not the Christians at Alexandria
for what they did, because I know not what Heroic principle they might have to
induce them to it: perhaps they did it for to set a pattern and example to the
Heathen, among whom they lived; to let them see, that they were not afraid of
death, and that their love to each other was so great, that nothing could
separate them. But it is not safe to tempt God and run our selves upon hazards,
Mat. 4. 7.
where we have no warrant* we cannot, we may not in a time of infection
converse so freely with, and do those offices to the infected, as we would at
another time: yet it behooves us however to do all we can safely: there is no
danger sure in pitying them, in praying for them, in contributing toward their
necessities: these we may safely do, we cannot salva conscientia omit them.

And now that I have mentioned Contribution, I cannot, but I must tell you,
that there is no reality in our commiseration without it. St. James declares
against such, as say to one that is in wan^, Be ye filled, and be ye warmed,
but give them not those things that are needful for the body* J^^^ 2. 16. St*
John is yet sharper, 1 John 3. 17. whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his
Brother have need, and ^h^tt^th up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? Giving of Alms is one of the man ingredients
into an acceptable Fast. The Fast that God has chosen is ^o deal our bread to
the hungry, ^loath the naked, and not to hide our selves from our own flesh,
Isa. 58. ^, 7. we cannot ^ell, whether it may please God to visit us; but if he
should, happy that man then who has not been defective in his duty to the
infected, whose bowels have melted and turned within him for their Calamity,
whose Prayers have been daily poured ou^ for their redre^^, P^^l. 50. 23.
whose hands have been stretched out wide, and without grudging for their
Relief, and lastly whose conversation has been ordered aright, that they and
the whole Land might see the salvation of God.

FINIS.

