HIS HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector-protected:

In his accepting, or (if you will have it so) in his assuming the
Protectorship, as is here cautioned, and all the clamors, cavils, exceptions,
and objections against either, as unlawful, or King-like (as some please to
call it) fully refuted, and answered, or satisfied, etc.

Written in Honor of his Highness, so of all our other present Powers, whether
Creators, or Createds, to quit them of the aspersions of Usurpers, or unlawful
Powers, and to quell or qualify their Opposers, and render the said Powers
aright, as they are in point of Power; as for execution of their said Powers,
it concerns them to see to themselves, as it does us all to allow them their
grains of weight, which the weightiest must be allowed, even the Exceptors own
self.

Likewise the Peoples Rights and Liberties are fully maintained, as either side
are capable of maintaining them.

Lastly, all exceptions against the Ordinance about TREASON answered, and it is
conceived, that it were Treason not to make such an ORDINANCE.

And the eyes of all Israel were on the son of Jesse, or David, as wiser and
abler in his in and outgoings, then any of all Saul's servants, so that Saul
himself was afraid of him, for that he saw the Lord was with him,

1 Samuel 18. Read all, or nothing at all; also judge judiciously, and
ingenuously, or not at all; for it is against the Law of Romans, Heathens, and
Pagans, to judge of any one, or any thing, before thoroughly understood.

S. H. Senior.

London: Printed for William Ley at Pauls-Chain, 1654.

To his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR.
May it please your Highness,
NEw occasions do necessarily invite to this second Dedication, as relating to
the first, to wait on you also; your servant does humbly entreat your Highness
pardon of this his necessitated presumption, by reason of the aforesaid reason;
also your acceptance and fairest construction of his upright intentions, and he
will not be further offensive by prolix enlargement, seeing the insuings will
in their due places, say what more is to be said, only he makes bold to
subscribe himself

Your Highness most humble Samuel Hunton.

Courteous Reader,
I Am in a manner by our sudden alterations called to alter some things, and
add also, to second my first man, least he be over-man'd by new clamors, etc.
for sure I cannot now escape branding for a Time-server, a flatterer, and what
not? be it as it will, though I will otherwise, for such thou shall not find
me, though I should find thee such. In short, no Sanballats neither ought, nor
shall deviate me from my duties of any nature; more I have not to say, for that
the followings will say it.

So I rest thy servant, as thou art judicious and ingenuous (else do what thou
can, thou art mine.) S. H.
REad the Margent I pray thee also, that so thou may not come short of my
intentions; and if then thou be not fully satisfied, see our Army-Armed sold
by Mr. William Ley at Pauls-Chain.



The Lord Protector protected, etc.
OUr former Tract of the Army-Armed, were it well minded, might have spared
this second; but most Readers are incomprehensive, and the comprehensive
inconsiderate; it is a hard task then, to make things (though good) good to
incapable, wilful, or bad men, for we hear already, and that not only by an
Idea'd Prosopopoeia of all sorts of wills, minds, humors, parties, and
factions, what they are apt to say, but personally also what diverse in part
have and do say, viz. these or the like sayings, clamors, and exclamations
following; So, Now we are absolute Slaves, farewell then our Laws, and
Liberties, and ad placitum, our lives also, for the Soldiery will and may as
they list, and we as we can; we see plainly that the Sword domineers, rules,
and revels it, and plays reaks circularly, for it selfly dissolves, and then
creates, and then dissolves again our Parliaments, ad placitum, and so
recreates it self with such pastimes, it turned from, and would none of
Monarchy, nor Kinghood, but As our Parliaments proved, by reason of confused
aims, ends, judgments, and opinions.
Anarchy only, that so it might turn to them the better, to serve its own turn,
for it did but outface them, and then face about, and so turned to both again,
and Anarchy also; so we are where, and as we were, only Divisions b. Sects, as
called, which now are remedied with justice and safety, by the 37. Article, for
an in forced consent with a knowing people, would canfound all
Anarchy is added to substract, divide, and confound us. Names, Persons, and
some Presentiments are changed, but natures are the same; why then all this ado,
except to undo all? If Kinghood was intended again, as it was pretended
against, why kept we not him we had? or why have we not him we should have? and
last of all, why have we him we should not have? why, say others, any King at
all? why not rather Parliaments, or Councels of State? are not Hogen-Mogens,
high and mighty States and Powers, stately Governments and titles? why also the
Army dissolve the first Parliament? and then create and unstate the second,
without the said Parliaments or peoples consent, and then selfly resolve and
dissolve all things, ad placitum? why the Protectorship assumed? or if
conferred, why by a party only? why not the whole Parliament invest the
invested? or is it not rather a formal investure, as fearing force? or choose
they not cunningly to be chosen? also to countenance the chosen, as if of
Free-choice, and so Authentic to color and hide Usurpation? For sure the
Sword, like the Sworded Angel, which with his Trenchunt anh threatening Blade,
awed Adam from returning to his Kingdom and Kinghood again, and reserved it for
his own Cjed.
King; so our Sword awes all Adams and Eves too, from returning to invade this
reserved Kingdom, this Edon, this Paradise, and place of bliss and pleasure,
and has made this Angel its Guardian, whose brandisht blade must keep them at
an awful distance, from accessing, till he By death.
recess, least they approach to their reproach, the Golden Scepter without its
Till chosen.
extention, or holding out, etc.

2. I have purposely rendered it as high as it can well be, that so answering
all those exceptions, which seem almost unanswerable, we shall silence all
insolent Excepters: For had I not for'd so high, I should have been overtopt,
and outbrav'd as not answered, nor answerable, much to the dishonor of our
present and future Powers, yet what is already done, has done it, but cause not
rendered in their taunting Dialect, though yet dialectically, they either
cannot, or will not see it, nor it may be can many of our Readers read our
meaning in our other answer, to answer these, so it falls to our share to
comply, to give circular satisfaction, which we will do the best we can, What
will thou say then, if I prove, that thou, so each Individual in the whole
Nation that excepts, have done their shares, in what they except against: Sure
I shall go near, (if rational thou be) to compress thee for future, but if
irrational, thou deservest suppression, for why should Beasts rank, or Rival it
with men?

3. Know then weaklings, that the first Parliament was chosen by each
individual in the whole Nation, and so by thee that exceptest, yea by those
incapable of choosing, as by Wives, Children, and Servants, who yet chose
inclusively by their Husbands, Parents and pay-Masters; and as for any others
that parsonally choose not, they yet choose also inclusively in the choosers
capable of choosing, by Laws, Consent, or Custom, that such so landed,
qualified and degreed shall choose; thus the child in the Mothers lap chooses
also, though it vocally chose not,

4. To the Parliament so chosen, all refer themselves, by way of betrust, for
all things apparently conduceing, and for doubtfuls to the hopefulest and most
promisings; and if then errors be, to bear them as they must their own in the
like case, Note, all done by any Parliament, is the Act of the People, each
Individual, but plain appearances against the common good. So thou will find
all thou objectest against, done by thy self, except such.
but what is apparently against the common good; that's not the peoples act, for
it is besides, or against the end of betrust, so the people are not bound to it
in right, yet might will bind them, and each individual is in right bound also,
rather then wrong one another, or endanger the general.

5. Well, thus by thee, so each individual, a Parliament is created, and
referred to as before; and this Parliament so created, creates an Army for
universal defense, as of themselves and thee, so of the three Nations, and
Heads his Highness, head thereof, impowring him to supply with, or supplant,
empower or dispower Soldiery of all sorts as conduces; thus this General and
Soldiery also are chosen, and empowered by thoe, as by thy choosers, thy
Parliament, for defenders of the three Nations as before; and the chief
Commanders place intitles him Lord, and thy Parliament, and so thy self has so
entitled him also; and Defender is in nature Protector, for sure Defenders are
Protectors, and Protectors are Defenders and in nature no more: These titles
then were his by virtue of his power and place before he thus had them, and are
only now articulated, and not conferred, sure then an assumption of them, had
not been presumption: The King was called the Faiths Defender, might he not
then call himself its Protector? sure he might, what is the discrimen? what is
the crimen to call so?

6. Highness also was his due before, if to be highest in point of just power
and trust will allow thereof, which Protectors and Defenders must be; sure
highest the superlative, will allow of highness a positive or near it: suppose
the first Parliament highest in a deputative right, yet highest in just might
will and justly may dispute it, yea with Kings as called, to make sure work for
his own, his Soldery, and his Countries right, welfares and safeties, over
which as a Protector he was put and betrusted, and answerably may empower,
dispower and overpower any power whatsoever, else he cannot circularly defend
and protect; if he cannot, as occasion is, prostrate also the very protected,
if they offensively oppose the Protector, or any protecteds: If this Power then
be not capable of all I have said, I know not what is, so not what to say, nor
what I have said: I say not, that he may in right ad libitum, do as he list,
(though by Might he may, yet I hope will not) for he is bound by his oath and
betrust, to all universal conducings, and to individuals, not clashing there
with, nor with individual Justice, etc.

7. Besides the aforesaid choice of him, as the highest and chiefest Power by
the whole Nation, and so each individual, and so thy self by thy first
Parliament, I have proved in the Army-Armed, at page 9. Sect. 1. to the end,
that the whole Nation, and so thy self, and each individual, chose, empowered,
and entitled him, as before, the second time also.

Lastly, I say, and prove, that his own, so the whole Nations necessities of
peace, These three ways of choice quit from usurpation.
welfare, and safety, might choose him the third time, and empower and entitle
him, as before. I say then, that this last choice alone may justify all, if the
The common good and safety.
end of all be made good in the end. Sure then this threefold cord will
fortify, if used accordingly:

8. But thou say, that this Power is in nature, (though not in name)
Kinghood and Monarchy; be it so to please thee, why yet exceptest thou at what
by all our arguments and his threefold cord is, as before, thy own act, and what
(it may be) necessitated conducings make his also, for the better, quicker, and
safer conduct of all things, then by Parliaments alone, of which thou can not
judge, yet wilt; and they better can, so may, and will.

9. Thou say also, that he has Honors, Titles, and Revenues; likewise, a
Retinue or Train of Attendance and State, and an estate King-like; this I know
not, so will not dispute; but be it so, it matters not, for I have already
satisfied thee that it is thine own act, or however thou shall be satisfied
before I have done with thee.

10. Thou go on, why except against Kinghood, yet now King it? so it was
only to unking, to King it.

Answ. Truly no wisdom can foresee what experience and time may show in their
season; if our wisers now by experience and a further insight, find that this
our now Kinghood, as thou call'st it, and as it now is, or may be qualified, is
as, or more hopeful and promising, though yet hazardable, as are all
Governments; also more suiting to the glory and the bravery of our Nation,
Vain. glory, as called, may not be in vain.
and the constitution of the people, whom in general no other Government seems
so well to content; also considering Parliaments alone hitherto have not
answered their expectations almost in any degree, by reason of factions and
divisions, so of delays, or not doing at all, besides many other objections
and exceptions as are made against them, of which I judge not, nor can, but
leave it to my Judges, who seem to judge so: I say then, seeing we must venture
on some Government, and that now our Governors, as before, find by experience
this of the Protectorship as qualified, is as hopeful and promising as any,
and in some things (as they conceive) before them; by their preferring it before
them: Can the wise blame the wise, if seeing their errors of ruining, for
righting; they now being better informed, reform; the wisest have their
weaknesses, and the best some wickedness; the wise must needs fail, where
wisdom is only had by experience, so they were ignorant before, yet not fools,
though not so wise; for nothing is blind (though it see not) till capable of
sight, but when we see, shall we not give each color its due, 'cause when
blind, we judged them all black?

11. Thou see then that there might be good reasons why Kinghood was
declined, and yet now (as qualified) inclined to, Logic then, nor the Laws of
Love allow thee to conclude absolutely, or certainly from uncertainties; nor to
censure where thou ought to respite or remiss it, till certain; How then
is it, thou ababsolutely say, They did unking, to King it, as thou please
to call the Protectorship, seeing they might unking to State it, though now
again with some cautions and considerations they unstate to King it, as thou
call'st it? Thou yet go on, Why then not keep our first King, etc. but ruin
him, for righting him, or why not inright our second, his first Son, etc?

12. Answ. Certainly did thou mind what thou read, thou would not thus
query things out of question. I tell thee once more, we could not foresee what
we now see of Parliaments, by reason of their own, their friends, and choosers
ends and aims; nor could we foresee, nor had we power (had we seen) to set
right that King who had wronged all, and so over-king'd it, for Majesty will
not be easily over-mastered, only will cunningly comply, to gather strength to
re-master it, nor was it fit in Justice to let one so unjust go free, for so
all future Powers might presume, who now are forewarned what to trust to; and
for his Son, he is justly punishable, as well as his Father, for siding with
his Father against both: Their Fathers the people, As the people are their
Fathers, etc.
in treacheries, murders, and paracides, rapes, and rapines, etc. and the
whole stock is justly stock up, least any of its shoots or branches
(bramble-like) taking root, should root us out, and bring in the Scot to top
us, and then overtop us.

13. But once more to answer and silence thee fully by thy self in these
particulars also, as in the rest; its thou, I say, each individual that
exceptest, have by thy Parliaments and Powers, as before, done what thou
exceptest against, its thou then by them have executed the first King and outed
the second King, his Son, and with him the whole Seed; its thou that created,
and then uncreated thy first Parliament, by Petitioning against them, and then
created a second Parliament, by thy Powers left in the first Parliaments
places, and then dissolved them again by the said Powers, and now last of all
advanced, and heightened the said Powers, in Power, Titles, State, and Estate,
or Revenue, and Retinue, etc. against all which thou so objectest, and
exceptest. See the Army-Armed page 4. Sect. 7. so page 9. to the end.

14. Well, we have not yet done, for it is objected, that his Choosers chose
him, to be chosen of or by him, and of fear, least enforced. I answer, this is
surmize, not knowledge; so is it, as before, against the Laws of Love and Logic,
so also of Romans, Heathens, and Pagans, to judge the Till tried.
unjudgable, etc. I answer, yet further, admit both crew, yet both are false,
in respect of thy invention, for they advantage not the Objecter, but are
against him, and for the objected against; for if they choose him, they could
not but choose, it was wisely done to make a virtue of necessity, and with a
wise and wary fear to provent force, which not thou provest not, and if thou
do, its of no force, as thou sholt find, seeing also experience of his
wisdom, faithfulness, and fortitude, chose him to their hands, how then can
they do otherwise then choose the so chosen, seeing some Governors, or
Governor, and Government must be chosen and ventured on? All arguments then,
both from God and man, bid them choose and venture on the Son of Jesse, rather
then on any of the Sons of Kish, as not on any of Saul's Sons, or on any of all
his Princes; people, or servants, 'cause the Son of Jesse was wiser in his in
and outgoings with Saul's servants, then them all, so that the eyes of all
Israel observed it, and that so, as Saul himself was afraid thereof, and his
beloved Jonathan know, and acknowledged as much to David his lover, and beloved.

15. Ob. They chose him to color and hide Usurpation.

Answ. As for Usurpation, I have answered it in diverse places, that it is not,
and were it, yet with our cautions, it answers for it self: But I say further,
it is wisdom to give as good a countenance as may be, even to things lawful,
which selfly needs them not, yet needs them to relieve against
discountenancing, by depraveds, and discontenteds.

16. Ob. Yet again, our Liberties are lost, and we are absolute Slaves.

Answ. For lost Liberties, see the loosers who, and why, and how they will, for
any thing I can see, yet loose them, See page 3. to the end of the Army-Armed
so may they know whom to blame; but if more be taken then are lost, or the
lost not restored, as the loosers find themselves, or are found by their
Keepers, blame their Keepers also, for they are the Of the Peoples rights.
loosers, so far as they are Ravishers of Rights.

17. We are absolute Slaves, etc. the answer before answers this, but I will
complete it: You say, but show not how, or in what, or why, for as yet in Esse
you are not, though in Posse and Potentia you seemingly are, and will be so,
for ought I see; and when were you otherwise? were you not so in Posse and
Potentia to all your Kings and Governors, so also to your most choice and
picked Parliaments? What could you do, if they would venture their own undoings
to undo you, but undo one another? Nay, you alone had in Esse been undone, had
not the Army by their Potentia done for you, and relieved you: It Is your selves
then beslave your selves, and so forfeit ye your Liberties, by your
licentiateness, as by your factions, divisions, and several self ends, which
hostile you one against another, yea against your own Mother your Native
Country that bare and brought you up, etc. Surely the so divided, are soon
sub-divided, and so subdued, could you forsake your selves, it were the only
way to find your selves; for would you concentrize all your particular ends in
the Or Public.
generals Center, you would there meet, whereas now you are bemet with, and it
would render you powerfully defensive and offensive, so it is factions that
fractions you, and self ends that divide and undo you.

18. For let us suppose no common Governor at all to defend any of us, or right
the wronged, what would become of us all to right our selves, but a
continuation and addition of wrongs? for what is it that Power and Pravity would
not do, and undo? what is it, that lust, pleasures, need, and necessities would
not perpetrate? no Castles, Towers, nor houses would hold us, in points of
offense, or defense, for clandestines, and treacheries, and Power of one kind
or other, would overpower, both circularly, and individually.

19. To remedy which, we are fore't by our follies to disarm our selves of
offensive and defensive Power, for wronging others, of righting our own wrongs,
and to venture our selves on one or more common Governors (yet trusty and
hopeful) Defenders and Protectors, whom we arm with the Sword and Law over us,
yet for us, to see to, and secure us all, both in our rights, and from ruin.

Now thus disarmed, and such Governors armed, we are as good as naked in point
of power, for defense against the said Governors, if they would contrary to
their Trust offend us, for their defensive Power enables (but inrights them
not) to offend us; but this know, that it is our own doings, as before, that undo
us, and renders us slaves in Posse and Potentia to these Powers, and it is the
wickedness of these Powers that renders us slaves in Esse, if beyond our doings.

20. Ob. But sure, this entertaining Kinghood again, is against vows, oaths,
promises, and protests, etc.

Answ. Still thou will have it Kinghood, be it so then, for we will not
displease thee, so not dispute it. I answer, I know not of any such Covenants,
or protests against; etc. but grant all, see in part our answer in the
Army-Armed, page 15. Sect. 22. to which we add to make all unanswerable, that
in our own self-concernments, we are bound to suffering Covenants, etc. but not
to sinfuls, as are destructives, but to another unjust or injurious suffering
we may not make, or if made, not keep, except we can make satisfaction: Its a
sin to make unlawful, injurious, or suffering Covenants against any one, and
its a greater sin to keep them: Sins single are sufficient, they cannot be
lessened by addition, or inlargeing; so such Covenants are best kept by
breaking, for their keeping breaks their Keeper, and their careless making,
mars him.

Saul was justly punished; for unjustly punishing the Gibeonites; contrary to
Covenant, for they brake not with him, nor was the said Covenant dangerous or
destructive to him nor his, for they were his slaves and servile servants, and
so very serviceable to him and his people, but had they any way invaded or
endangered his rights, he had served them rightly to ruin them.

No. 30. The wife could not, nor can in reason make any vow at all, no not a
pious or holy one, as might the Widow, a self-power, 'cause it invaded her
husbands rights, though she wronged him not, and though made, it was breakable
by her husband, Sufferingly, yet it was usurpation and so unjust.
and so by her, and God did forgive her, only he taught her to be more wise and
obedient next time, as not to presume to usurp authority over her man, for it
was not woman-like; so all our Powers, as relating to the public, are not
self-Powers, for they are but wifes to their husbands, the Publiques good and
safety, so may they not make, or if made, not keep, suffering, injurious,
indangering, or destructive Covenants made amongst our selves, against their
Husband and Head; but if made with a justly offended enemy, who being wronged,
is forced by force to right himself, and has gained power to ruiue his
wrongers: I conceive suffering, yea indangering Covenants are there to be kept,
because they are short of present ruin, As we over the Scots.
which attends, if the just Conqueror be not attended in his demands; so a
suffering Covenant that saves, is to be saved harmless: But this asks more
dispute then this place will allow of, so I am not dogmatical, but doubting,
and yet, it may be, I am more afraid then hurt.

And whereas last of all, thou sportest thy self with thy gay and taunting
language of the Angels guarding, this reserved Eden, this Paradise, this place
of bliss and pleasure, as thou art pleased to call it: I answer thee, that thou
can not make good what thou say, why then say thou it? how make thou
it appear to be such a Paradise, or place of pleasure, whereas, when all things
are considered, it will appear otherwise? how can thou say its accepted or
assumed, (if so thou wise have it assumed) as such a place, seeing there may be
other reasons for its acceptance, or assuming?

How is it then thou still wilt certain it from uncertainties, as to conclude it
of self-end, of Sovereignty, etc.? seeing it may as well be from contrary ends,
Things that forbid one to venture on.
as from the countermands of necessitated public conducings viz. the peace,
welfare, and safety of the public, which seem hazardable by delays and
divisions in Parliament, for shame then humanize and rationalize it, for the
Laws of Love and Logic are still against thee, as in doubtfuls to be
dogmatical, reserve then, or remiss it in judging, till apparent grounds be,
and then appear with judgment, or appear not, for if well weighed, what
invitations are there for Kinghood, as thou call'st it? Surely, surprizals do
continually attend the most attended, so that they have not the liberty,
freedom, or serenity of spirit, as have the lower in condition and conditions,
but are ever and anon clouded with black and swarthy fears of clandestines: in
their Sun-shines, they are Sunburned, and in the shade, they are Too much.
over-shadowed, with the darkness of cares and fears which eclipse them, and so
render their mid-dayes, mid-nights: they cannot sort with their consorts so
sweetly as can thou, and their sleep is but wakeful slumberings, for if
found, its not secure, 'cause secure, for repose, arrest them with unquietness:
Sure, thou have no sense, only thy senses, so can not see invisibles, for the
As mere nothings.
invisibles of shades and sur-faces, but could thou penetrate their
intrinsiques, they would penetrate thee, and render thee a Penicent; for
besides what is before. Is It nothing to be continually dogged and hunted by a
brace of deep and fowl-mouth'd Bloud-hounds, viz. envy and revenge, the one
always snarling at greatness and goodness, as a bitter enemy to both, the
other raving against great and small that cross them in their ways, ends,
suits, or Petitions, which it may be cannot be granted them; Is It nothing to
keep in peace an unpeaceable, factious, divided, and discontented people, and
to civilize uncivil war amongst them, and so render their country In that point
refined? Is It nothing to bandy it in arms; and mate the unmatchable? and
wisely correspond it with all Foreign Princes, Powers, and States, and to
prevent or supplant their wiles, by Wisdom and policy.
wiles? is it nothing to be environed and over-laid with a world of difficulties
past resolving what to do, or not do, even to destraction? is not the peace,
freedom, and quictness of mind, and a secure enjoyment of liberty, far before
these admired and opinionated glories, which sure were it not for the public
good, it were a glory to be without them? I dare not say all I could say, and I
am afraid I have already said too much; for I will assure thee I cannot find,
why any one (all things considered) should covet for their self ends, to
wreath, or begirt their Temples with a Crown of Thorns, 'cause of gold, or
gilded, seeing it draws blood as well from the heart, as the head, and from
the brain as from both? but the public good, welfare, peace, and safety, must
be undertaken by some, else both it and all Privates will suffer, and we ought
by the Laws of Love and charity judge it to be the chief ground of its
undertaking, till we foe plainly to the contrary, which when thou do,
contrary me, etc.

But its time I draw to an end, and yet it behooves me before I end humbly to
hint and memorandum, all Governors of some useful concernments, relating to
themselves and the people, also to do as much by the people in relation to
their Governors, in points of judging and censuring, etc. and so retaliate
each side rightly.

Sure, its a hard task on both sides, as first for the wronged people, as they
conceive of themselves, to suffer with a slavish fear and silence, or to find
no redress after a right information, according to the end of Governors and
Government, but contrary to both, to be confined or comprest, against both
which I except, except the common good enjoin, which if it do, I join with it,
for its own sake (as necessitated) will justify any necessicated individual
injustice for just.

It Is as hard also for Governors, though never so wise and just, yet to be
just to all, or if they be, yet to satisfy the unjust, or just, in their
wicked or weak exceptions and judgments, nor can the Governor always do
Justice if he would, for that by-ends and pretenses, or false witness, and
fallacious arguments deceive, so deviate the best of men, and ablest of
judgment, for the ablest are not absolute, nor can contrary suits and Petitions
be complied to, nor ought, but only the appearing just, etc. but then the crossed
fall Exclaiming.
a cursing.

The wise Solomon saw this, yet was seemingly over-seen, so he was forced to
pretend As in the Harlots cases.
treachery, to find out truth, etc.

Nay, God himself, (with reverence be it spoken) is not wise enough (though
wisdom it self) to deal with some wilfuls and conceiteds, except he will
reverse or alter nature, or their natures, for is he not plied daily and
hourly with infinites of contrary and clashing Petitions; some Petition for
fair weather for their weddings, walks and journeys, or other pleasures, others
for a sober shower to water their gardens, a third sort for a found one for
their grain and grass; What shall the wise and just God do with these
weaklings, who for self ends oppose nature, and the God of nature, so one
another, and the General, and petition and importune God to alter or reverse
nature, only to grace them.

Winds contrary almost all, for they can content but from one Coast at once,
but God is petitioned from all Coasts, parts, and points of the world, by
infinite contrary and dissenting Petitioners; how shall he do, except he undo
all, as before, and so he shall have enough to do, for if he hearken to one, the
rest will not hearken to him, 'cause it contraries them; and if he hearken to
all he cannot hear any at all, for all of them oppose one another, and him
also; so to please them all, he must displease them all, and bring winds from
each part or point of the compass or circumference to meet in the Center-point,
and there to abide and oppose each other, till these weaklings learn more wit,
and agree, that the winds shall return to their places again, and they will
hence-forward take their turns and places. Thus we may see that there is a
world of foolish Zebedean and giddy-brain'd Phaeton Petitioners and Suitors,
that know not what they would or should have, and only here and there a A wise
man.
Phoebus, that knows what to ask and forego, and why, and why not, etc.

Some set the Beacon on fire, others quench it, fire and water fall out and
oppose, Two books that opposed about books.
and in revenge (to right themselves, or to overcome by might) Petition against
each other, both would be complied to, and yet it may be reither can, but a
third must; how shall the wisest and best of Governors do to keep the Beacon
burning, and yet quench it?

The Laity would no Tithes, the Clergy would, eager Petitionings and arguments
are on each sides, and it may be fallacious also; the fallacious are true to
the abused Governor, and the true false; til he be fully informed, he must
then of necessity (right or wrong) comply to the most appearing right; for the
wise Solomon, as before, in doubtfuls, was almost to seek what to do, so was
fore'd to dissemble As to kill the living child.
treachery, to find out the Traitor.

Henceforward then compress, silence, or remiss it, in judging absolutely of
Governors actions, so of their granting or denying of Suits and Petitions,
except plain and apparent, and then I will not appear for them, nor against
thee, nor yet I will, if they make not inquisition for truth, and a
disquisition of falsehood, but perfunctorily pass over both, as willing to be
deceived, that so they may deceive; blame also thy Adversary that would deceive
the Governors, and so thee, so blame thy self, if thou would the same, for
thy self ends, and know, that the cross may justly expect to be crossed, yet are
too often blessed, and complied to, and the complying crossed.

And now oh you Governors of all sorts, as I have done you all the right I
can, so it next concerns me to do the people right also, what should I say to
you more then I have said, and you already know? you are betrusted to the
height of betrust, for they have King'd you, or rather Goded you in point of
power, and so God himself faith, I have said ye are Gods, etc. but yet remember
you are but men, and must die like them; have they not put into your hands all
that is near and dear to them? as their Laws, Lives, and Livelihood,
Liberties, and Religion, and have accommodated you with Honors and Revenues
accordingly; and lastly, oathed you in their behalfes; Need I say how these
engage? sure I need not, for make it but your own cases, and the case is
altered, do then as you would be done to, more is not required, nor less can,
yet less will and shall; for we know you cannot do all you should or would for
what you cannot: Set before you a Deaths Head, as Kings have done, or let some
of the servants mind you in your pleasures and pastimes, so at your repasts,
festivals, and bunquetings, as did a King with this Memento, Remember, ob King,
that then art but a man, etc. you cannot presume of a moment (though Gods) so
momentary are you; therefore this instant endeavor to make good the peoples
betrust and hopes all you can, that when you are gone, your names may live
honorably famous to eternity, you may be suddenly surpised by sickness or
death, or a thousand casualties, oh cast to prevent casting, by prudently
providing for the people, and your own posterities and kindred (which in
infinity of time may be infinite) to leave them as free as you can; though not
free, which in this world will never be, leave them not slaves to any Powers
when you are gone, more then will prevent their slaveries, for there is no
bondage like a licentiate liberty, nor any freedom like a wise restraint, that
so by the observance of the aforesaids, men (what they may) may be
distinguished from beasts. But it is time I end, for I fear I have been
over-bold, and so tiresome in matter, manner, and extent, but we hope our fair
intentions will be looked on, and not over-look't.

FINIS.
Postscript.
A Word or two about the Ordinance, what shall be Treason. Truly we conceived,
that by our aforesaid lines, all clamors would have been hushed and laid, but
our Prosepopaeia finds that the Ordinance has by the wickedness of some, and
weakness of other-some, heightened them, in that they dare it yet higher, and
march it like furious Ichn, in their movings and onsets: For, now (say they) it
appears plainly to be usurpation, in that fear attends guilt, and force and
fraud attend fear, and so must fortify for it: So these have brought forth
this aforesaid The Ordinance.
Monster (against truth) which Powers make by the Ordinance: thus to support
Unlawful usurpation, as called.
treachery, all true men must Be made traitors, that speak, write, preach or
act so and so.

Answ. That it is not usurpation, I have already cleared it; and were it
usurpation (with our cautions) I yet have or, will clear it from the injustice
of their clamors. And were it usurpation absolute, yet as qualified it is
clearable from their clamors, as we shall show. However (if usurpation) yet we
clear it (by our following arguments) from being so, from their arguments of
fortifying by an Ordinance, etc. Place then, if thou please, justice and
innocence on the Throne, yet there antagonists, envy, malice, and revenge will
endeavor their dethroning. Needs it not then that they provide for themselves?
Nay would God himself personally inthrone it, there is that would discepter and
unthrone him: truly Samuel they have deposed me, for they have outed me as well
as thee; they are a simple, a wilful and rebellious people Samuel, for they
neither know not care what they say or do.

Again, have not all the best, and most innocent Princes, Powers and Potentates
been enforced to secure their safety? Nay, were it not treachery, not selfly to
secure it? And were it not treachery to the public (as its peace and safety are
concerned) not to secure the so His Highness.
concerned, can either the Protector or protected be secure, without good
security? is not supinenesse in either treason to both? How can any protector
protect except protected?

Had it not then been made treason by an Ordinance, yet Religion, Reason,
Nature and necessity ordain it so, so then thou had been no less a traitor
then now thou art, though thou had By a Wr^ Law.
not been one. Sure there is a transgression where is no Writ.
law, 'cause there is a In nature.
law to hamper the lawless. Might each one kill, murder, rob and rape it,
till trembling mount Sinai with astonishing, thunder and lightning proclaimed
an Ordinance against them? This is enough to prove that thou usurpest on thy
argument, to infer usurpation from what is no argument.

I have hinted on my Title, to allow the people their uttermost liberties in
choosing their Governors, etc. which I will do for this once, though this once
be once too much. Suppose then, all the capable of choosing, according to former
Laws and Customs are met on Salisbury plain, to choose their governor or
governors and government, certainly you shall there see represented the Chaos
again, or Babels confusion; for few or none of them knows what they should
have, nor well what they would. And did any know what they should or would, yet
infinite of ignorants and wilful ones so oppose them, that they are posed or
deposed: Oh what a confused noise of contradictions and clamors that is among
them, like the jangling of bells rung backward I so that if Cushi should bring
us the tidings, what could he say but that he saw 2 great multitude, but could
not tell what to make thereof, as they could not of themselves.

Here Is a Party for his Highness that now is, there is another for the King of
Scots that now is not, here is several others for diverse individuals, their
friends, to King or Protector them: Some again are not for any Individual
Governor at all, but are all for a Parliament, or Council of State, etc. Those
for Individuals fall out amongst themselves, each for his man, and with
Parliaments, etc. about their men; those for Parliaments, etc. fall out with
those who are for any individual Governor whatsoever, so with themselves about
their own individuals of Parliament; suppose the vote for a Parliament carry
it, then the Parliament so chosen, may in likelihood faction it for their
choosers, so themselves and theirs. Thus by-ends turn by the right end, as the
Publiques peace, safety, and welfare, and the crossed fall a cursing and rage it,
high affrontings and darings are, and revenge revels it, and arrives to
hand-contests, out-flies the flaming Semiters on all sides, so that each
brother like Ioabs and Abners gallants, is ready to thrill his brother. Suppose
his Highness, whilst Lord General, seeing this, should with his Soldiery
suddenly surround and surprise them all, and make them his Prisoners, and so
Freemen, by delivering them from themselves, and so from one another, and by
disarming, arm them, and then send them home in safety, willing them not to
fall out by the way, for chat they are Brethren; and should thereupon (as thus
necessitated for his own and Soldiers safety, so the Publiques) mount the
Throne, put on the Crown, and assume the Scepter, etc. and so King it, entitle,
etc. as thus entitled thereto; I demand, is this usurpation, I, or no? the
weakling it may be will have it so, 'cause it is without the universal choice of
the people; but the wise man says, that its not usurpation, 'cause chosen by
his own deserts, so by the peoples desires, etc. (as by their necessities of
peace and safety) for what have we to do, says the wise man, with articulate
choice, if just necessities article against it? Now if the so chosen shall
conducingly protect and govern us, which I hope he will, I pray you then allow
him what he has, at least, seeing they who had much more, did much less.

To conclude, what did Saul, or Saul's Son David for the Public, to this our
Son of Jesse, for their Kinghoods? one of them was fetched from seeking Asses,
the other from folding of Sheep, yet (for killing a Giant at distance, whom it
may be he durst not come near) was as good as King'd; but our David has
apparently (and not of self-report only) killed many Lions Bears and Giants, so
is justly (as well as David) chosen for his deserts, besides twice of the
People, as I have proved, yet of the desertlesse, should be deserted, though
thus asserted, were it not for, etc.

DIXI.

