JVDAH'S RESTITUTION. A Sermon preached before the Reverend Judges, Sir
Christopher Turner Baron of the Exchequer, and Sir Richard Bernard Sergeant at
Law.

At the Assizes begun at York the 29 of July, 1661.

By Jos: Hunter Master of Arts and Minister in York.



YORK, Printed by Alice Broad, 1661.

To the right Worshipful Sir THOMAS SLINGSBEY, High-Sheriffe of the County of
YORK.
SIR,
YOu was pleased to command me out to an Honorable but hard Work, which
though slenderly performed by me) yet has been kindly accepted by you, and
earnestly desired by others to be made public: and I am the rather induced to
do it, that I might give unto the world a testimony and acknowledgement of that
esteem and gratitude, which I owe you for your abundant and undeserved Respects
to me.

I confess, you ran a very great hazard, when you made choice of me for such a
service: and I might at once both have something lessened your Credit, and
quite lost mine own; which perhaps was the expectation of some, who (though
they differed in other things) agreed in this: but whether they were
disappointed of their expectation or no, your Worshipp is able to give the
fullest account and answer. I have formerly upon the entreaty, and advice of
friends, exposed a Sermon of two unto common censure, and if any will be at the
pains to compare them with this, they shall find no contradiction, which made
me the more willing to adventure this.

And now that it is put out, if it were worth the owning, there is none has
more right to it than your Self. I desire no more, and I hope you will grant
no less than this, that as this Sermon had your Command for its production, so
it may have have your Patronage for its preservation. I know it is usual to
fill Epistles Dedicatorie with the praises of the Person, unto whom the
Dedication is directed; but his Majesty has so much honored you in preferring
you to such a place of Trust and Credit in your Country, and you have so far
honored your Self in the discharge of it, beyond the expectation of your
years, that I need say nothing. I will rather turn my Commendation^ into
Counsel, that you would study so to improve your time, your Abilities, and
your experience (ever having before you for your pattern, the Sobriety and
reservednesse of your honored Father) that you may still deserve the Royal
Favor, be more fit to do God and your Country service, and live long ( I do
not say to be envied) but if envied, for nothing else, but deserved Honor and
Happiness. So prays

SIR, Your Worships most humble servant, Josiah Hunter.

Isaiah 1 chap: 26 verse. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and
thy Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City
of Righteousness, the faithful City.


MY Text deserves your more serious attention, because taken out of the
Prophecy of Isaiah, which (for the divine matter thereof, see Robert's key of
the Bible. v. Hieron. sup. Jesch.
mixed with so many flourishes of humane learning) has ever been of high
esteem in the Church.

Christ (who might be said to preach all Text) yet sometime in his preaching,
took a Text out of this Prophet, as you may see Luke 4.17, 18. and this
prophecy is quoted oftener in the new Testament, than any other book of the old
Testament except the psalms: Alsted., in praecog. Theol. lib: 2. c. 122
whether Alstedius himself was at the pains of the observation or no, I know
not, but he tells us, that Isaiah is alleged sixty times and the Psalms but
sixty four times in the new Testament Amongst the very Ethiopians this Book
was in such repute, that the Queens Eunuch made it (his vade mecum) his
companion in his journey, and read the prophet Isaiah in his charion, though he
understood him not, Act. 27, 28. and St. Ambrose so highly esteemed and valued
this prophecy, that when Augustine wrote to him for his advice, what part of
Scripture he should especially read, he advised him to read the prophet Isaiah,
as Augustine himself tells us. Lib: confess: 9. ca. 5.

For the dependence of the words, Hyperius his note upon the Text is of good
use. It is familiar with the Prophets (says he) first to declare unto the
people their sins, then to threaten punishment, and last of all to let fall
some promises of mercy; the first to convince them and beget sorrow; the
second, to humble them and work fear; the third, to comfort them and erect
hope. This method our prophet observes exactly. For, first he discovers their
sins to them from the 2. unto the 24. verse. 2: He denounces judgment against
them, 24, 25. ver. 3: He scatters some promises of mercy, 26, 27. verses.

The state of the Jews (you may conceive) was very much declining and tending
to ruin: the gracious God, who always in judgment remembers mercy, promises
unto them the provision of a remedy, every way suitable to their malady, a
restistution according to their defection, Their defection is noted to be
general, in the whole body of the people, ver. 21. How is the faithful City
become an harlot, it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers: the particular cause of this general defection is noted to be the
corruption of their Governors, ver. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious and
companions of thieves, every one loves gifts and follows after rewards, they
judge not the fatherles, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.
Now observe, how suitable the remedy in the Text, is to the malady in the
context. They were declined, God promises, I will restore: the cause of their
defection was the infection or corruption of their Rulers; accordingly God
promises to remove that, by restoring their Judges as at the first, and their
Counselours as at the beginning; and now (sublata causa tolletur effectus) the
faithful City shall be no more called an Harlot or a Sanctuary for
murderers, but it shall be called, (as it was wont to be,) the City of
righteousness, the faithful City.

I will a little open the words, and when the shell is broken, it is easier to
take out the meat and dress it. And I will restore thy etc. And) that is the
Copula, which joins the Text and the precedent verse together, I will turn
mine hand upon thee and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy
tin, and I will restore thy Judges as at the first: you may take notice, how
evil Governors are like impure, corrupt and drossie mettalls, these God would
purge away: but because this was in it self but a privative mercy, therefore
he adds a positive in the Text, And I will restore thy Judges as at the first.

I will restore) there is a double restitution; one ex debito, another ex dono.
One due, another free. Due restitution is, when having taken away any thing
unjustly, non remittitur peccatum, nisi resti nature abla^um.
we return it again either in quali or in quanto: and this restitution is very
necesearie, for as Augustine says, without this restitution to men, we can
expect no remission from God, for this restitution, Zacheus is famous, Luke
19.8. Free restitution is, when a man has forfeited his interest in a thing,
and he, to whom it is forfeited, is willing out of clemency and bounty, to
release the forfeiture and re-enstate him again. Such is this restitution
promised in the Text, not a Due, but a Free restitution. The Jews had forfeited
all their privileges and immunities, and deserved ruin rather than
restoration; yet God promised to restore them, and now indeed, that he has
promised, he is become a debtor to his own word, but he was not bound before.

I will restore thy Judges,) Judges may be taken here, either more largely, or
more strictly: more largely, for all sorts of Magistrates. For all Magistrates
are in some sense Judges, and frequently so termed in Scripture, (ad denotandam
facultatem) to note their Ability, they should be able to judge, or else they
are not qualified to be Magistrates; and (ad denotandam potestatem) to note
their authority: they have power by their Office to judge (inter deum and
reum) between God and the guilty, in matters of sacrilege and blasphemy:
(inter Regem and reum) between the King and the guilty, in matters criminal
and contrary to the Law of the land: and lastly, (inter meum and tuum) in
matters of right and wrong, between party and party, when they are in
controversy about any Claim or Title. or

2: Judges may be taken here more strictly, for such as are lawfully deputed,
not only to execute, but also to expound and interpret the Law, and according
to that to give sentence. And that there was such an honorable office,
wherewith some were especially entrusted among the Jews, is plain enough out of
the Scripture. The Arche-type, or first draught of the office of Judges under
the supreme Magistrate, you have. Exodus 18:25. where it is said that Moses
(following the advice of Iethro) chose men out of all Israel, and they judged
the people at all seasons: and now this office being once invented and erected,
and by experience found to be of great advantage; we read frequently afterward
in scripture of Judges taken in this strict sense. Particularly, it is said of
Jehosaphat 2. Chro. 19.5. He set Judges in the land throughout all the fenced
Cities of Judah, City by City. And the Scripture tells us, how Samuel (judge
in Israel) used to ride the Circuit every year, 1. Sam. 7.15. Samuel judged
Israel all the days of his life, and he went from year to year in Circuit, to
Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places, and his
return was to Ramah.

I will restore thy Judges and thy Counselors) who are meant by Counselors
in the Text? Rem eandem bis dicit, in commen: sup: cap. 1. Jesch.
namijdem sunt Consiliarij, qui Judices: Thus Marlorate. Non denotat duos
separatos status, sed tantum geminum officuim. so Ursin and musculus. All
Expositors, that I had by me to consult with, do run this way, and conclude
that Judges and Counselors are both the same persons; only here is (duplex
nomen) because there is (duplex officium) they have a double Title given them,
to note a double duty required of them, which is not only to give judgment
(in rebus litigiosis) but also to give Counsel (in rebus arduis) Judges and
Counselors are both one here in the text, though not so amongst us: yet this
we may safely say, though every Counselor be not a Judge, yet every judge
ought to be a Counselor, nor is he fit to give judgment, that cannot give
Counsel. They do greatly dote, and are deceived (says Musculus) who think
that Commonwealth: can be well governed by simple, good men. As much goodness,
and as little guile as you will, admodum desipiunt, qui potant Respublicas
posse gubernari per viros simplices and bonos. in loc: suprcit:
in Governers; But to the due qualification of a Governor, especially a Judge,
it is not sufficient that he be an honest good man, but he must also be a wise
and prudent: such were the judges God promised unto Judah, judges that should
be Counselors too.

I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning,] there is some small difference amongst Commentators, how far to
extend this, ab initio and in principio. Some are of opinion, that it is to be
referred as far as Moses, Joshua and so along to the time of the judges,
whilst, as yet, Museul. and Vrsin in com. ut supra.
they had no King. God would restore them such judges as they were, not only
for qualities but also for form: and they that are of this opinion, do hold
that God here speaks (de rejectione regum and reductione judicum) as though
(when he restored Judah) they should no longer be governed by Kings, but by
judges, as they were before they had a King: and so indeed it fell out after
the Babilonian captivity, and therefore Lyranus thinks the judges, the Text
speaks of, were Zerobabel, Nehemiah, Ezra, the Macca bees, and such like.

But others there are that say (melius referuntur haec ad tempora Davidis)
this, Marlorase
at the first and in the beginning, is better referred to the times of David,
for in his time Jerusalem first became famous, both because it was the Seat of
the King, and also the Seat of Gods Worship: and so God promises that he would
restore unto the Kingdom of judah, Governors and judges that should be like
unto David, Men after his own heart.

If I might cast in mine own conjecture amongst such learned men, it should be
this. We need not much to trouble our selves in enquiring to what times this
should have reference, seeing the simple and genuine meaning of the place is
this: I will give unto thee Judges, that shall be able and upright, pious and
prudent, that shall help to reduce the state of Judah unto order and
establishment, as much as the corrupt judges have brought it near unto ruin
and confusion: and the reason why it is said, as at the first, and in the
beginning, is to note how very good those Judges (which God would restore them)
should be or every thing it is thought to be best in primordiis, in its
orignall, at first, corruptions creep in with time. This therefore, I conceive,
may be the sense of the place. I will restore thy judges as at the first, that
is, I will restore unto thee very good Judges, Judges of the first impression,
judges according to the original, before personal abuses had crept into and
mingled themselves with the Office.

Afterward thou shall be called, etc. Afterward] not before this restitution:
things and persons are to be called, as they are. If Jerusalem be fallen off
and degenerated, though she was called before the faithful City, yet now she
deserves no better name then harlot: if she be returned and restored again to
her primitive integrity, though she was for a time called Harlot, yet now she
shall be called again, the City of rihgteousnesse, the faithful City. We
must not call darkness light, nor light darkness.

Thou shall be called] of God, of the King, Isa. 5:20.
of the people. The City of righteousnes] because of the due and impartial
administration of justice in thee. The faithful Citie] Jerusalem was called
the faithful City for two reasons; first with reference to God, because they
observed and upheld the true worship of God, a great deal more than Samaria or
any City of Israel did, who worshipped the Calves that Jeroboam had set up.
Secondly, the faithful City with reference to the King, because they kept
their Loyalty and Allegiance to the successors of David, whom God had set up,
whereas the Cities of Israel revolted from him and rebelled against him under
Jeroboam.

The text thus explained, I will trouble you with no other division than this:
it is a gracious promise; of what? of restitution: I will restore. Of whom? of
Judges and Counselors: I will restore thy judges and thy Counselors. In
what manner? as at the first and as in the beginning. With what success?
afterward thou shall be called, the City of Righteousness, the faithful
City.

Before I enter upon these particulars, I shall speak this by way of
introduction. Be not offended, if I do as it is likely I shall this day deceive
many of you, in your expectation of two things; and they are Rhetorique and
Reflection. For Rhetorique, I know indeed, that modus orationis est auditor:
and eloquence should fall from this place, like Sions silver drops, upon the
lower ground: but as Moses said once, so do I now, my Lords I am not eloquent,
neither have I the tongue of the learned. For reflection perhaps some expect I
should handle the Text so; but I am more mindful of his Majesty's Act of
Oblivion, which if I should in this place and at this time, Job 31.28.
in the least violate, it would be an iniquity (as Job speaks in another case)
an iniquity to be punished by the judges. This being premised I begin with the
first. What it is that is promised? it is a restitution, I will restore.

Restitution is of a middle nature, between Creation and preservation: it is
not so much as Creation, yet it is more than ordinary preservation. The state
of Judah was not wholly destroyed, therefore there needed not a Creation: yet
it was much decayed, therefore there was great need of a Restoration.

First, Restitution is not so much as Creation. The Jews, though much relapsed,
yet were not quite ruined, therefore they needed not a creation: their state
was like an house, much ruined, yet the the foundation remaining. The Psalmist
in one place complains, Psalm: 82.5.
that all the foundations of the earth were out of course: so it was now with
the Jews, all their foundations were unsettled, yet not quite eradicated. There
was something to build on, therefore no necessity of a Creation, or a making
all things new.

1. They had their fundamental Government un-interupted; continued under
Kings and in the right Line. For Isaiah prophesied in the days of Uzziah,
Iotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, chap: 1. verse 1. All Kings and
lawful Heirs to the Crown. Uzziah the lawful Son and heir to Amaziah: Iotham
Son and heir to Uzziah: Ahaz Son and heir to Iotham; and Hezekiah Son and heir
to Ahaz. Epiph. in vit. prophet.
It is thought indeed, that he prophesied also in the days of Manasseh, and
was by his commandment sawne asunder: grant it, yet Manasseh was still the Son
and heir of Hezekiah. All this while the Government was not changed, nor the
succession interrupted. Here might need a restitution of some such Kings, as
David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, but none of the Government, for it was not altered.

2. They retained their fundamental Laws, which God prescribed them by Moses
for their Government, as they were a Civil state, that is, those which we
call (by way of distinction) Judicial Laws. However they did not observe
them, yet we read not, that they obliterated them, or made any others contrary
to them. defects in the execution of Laws, and perverting of judgment, is a
thing so ordinary, that the wise man bids us, we should not wonder at it, 5.
Eccles 8. However therefore they might be corrupt in the execution of their
Laws, yet they did not subvert them, but still in profession retained them,
and had them in reverence, as their MAGNA CHARTA, from the King of heaven.

3. They still retained the Foundation of their Religion. It cannot be denied,
but they borrowed many corrupt mixtures, both from Foreign Nations, and from
their next Neighbors and Brethren the idolatrous Israelites, which did very
much stain the purity, and darken the luster of their Religion: but still God
owned them for a true Church, and his own Spowse. Though he gave a bill of
divorce to Israel, Ier. 3:8. yet we read not of any Bill of divorce he gave to
Judah.

Secondly, Restitution is more than ordinary preservation. It requires more
skill and power in the Agent, because it supposes more unfitness and
indisposition in the Patient. It is with bodies politic, as it is with Bodies
natural; it is easier to preserve them in health and harmony, than it is to
restore them, when once a decay or disorder has fallen upon them. That the
jewish State was much decayed, is plain enough. Their Princes and Governors
very corrupt, so far disloyal, that they were rebellious, and so far
degenerate, that they were companions of Thieves. Their Laws in being, but not
in force, notoriously violated by the people, and perverted by the judges,
insomuch that our Prophet says, chap 59. v: 14. Judgment was turned back ward,
and justice stood afar off; Truth was fallen in the street and equity could
not enter. Their Religion also was horiblie defiled, by a corrupt mixture of
idolatrous inventions with it, especially in their divine worship: not only
Israel played the Harlot, but Judah also, so much, as if she would outstrip
Israel in spiritual whoredom, as you may see Jer: 3.9, 10. Here was very
great necessity of a Restitution therefore, or else this decay would soon
have brought them to destruction.

But will some say, it is true, Restitution is a greater work than
preservation: but the Lord, if he so pleased, might save himself this labor,
if he would (as we know he can) preserve a Church or Nation from decaies, then
he needed not to be at the pains of a Restitution. Why then does God suffer
such decaies, consumptions and over-turnings to befall a people, when he can
prevent them?

There are two reasons for it, the one is taken from his justice, the other is
taken from his Wisdom. The first is taken from his justice: thus it pleases
him many times to punish the sins of a wanton, unthankful, secure, proud and
contentious people. They first break with God, and then God sends breaches upon
them. You must consider, that God will not ordinarily work miracles for the
preservation of any Nation, but in his common providence lets every thing work
in it is course, and according to the disposition of second causes. Its no
wonder to see an unsound body fall into decay, its true God could preserve it
if he would, but he will not work a miracle in crossing natures course: So
usually States are unsound and diseased, full of distempers and corrupt
humors, before they fall into decay, God could, if he would, heal all; but he
will not step out of the way of his ordinary providence: things shall work as
they are disposed. He will not work a miracle to preserve a sinful people, but
is rather resolved for their many provocations, to send upon them a
consunption, and a languishment.

The second reason is drawn from Gods wisdom. He suffers these decaies to
befall a people. First that they may see and be sensible of their own
imprudence. Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish plucketh it
down with her hands. Prove: 14. 1. Some such foolish people there are too
(though they think themselves wise) who because they dislike something in the
building and presume they can easily rear up and reform all again, pluck
down a whole Nation. God lets them alone, he knows they will soon be warped
in their own folly; and at last they learn that it had been better to have
suffered some things, which they conceived amiss, than to have endangered the
destruction of the Whole. How does the foolish woman pluck down her house? she
either plucks it down, because she is fickle, and would have her house changed
too: or else because she is foolish, and knows not how to govern her house:
and thus it falls out often, that because Governors are imprudent, and the
people desirous of change, they pluck down a Nation between them. And the wise
God suffers it, that at last they may see their own folly.

2. God in wisdom suffers such decaies, to make people more, thankful for
their restitution. It is the epidemicall disease of Mankind, to take notice of
the price of any good, caremdo magis quam fruendo. Contraries are the best
Commentaries one upon another, and their mutual opposition the best
exposition. The thunder of the Cannon (the language of war) is the best
Rhetorique to commend peace: the horror of darkness, proves the benefit of light
to be heavenly: health is then preferred amongst us, when it brings letters of
Commendation from sickness: Anarchie is the best foil unto a well-temperd
government, whether in Church or State. When a people have found by experience
how dangerous defection is, then they wish for, and rejoice in the hopes of a
restitution.

3. God in wisdom suffers such decaies, that he may get unto himself a great
Name, and more glory, in exercising his divine power and skill, for the
recovering of a ruinous Nation. Preservation is bonum optabile, but restitution
is bonum mirabile. This it was that magnifyed Christ's cure of the woman, which
had the bloody issue, that he healed her suddenly, when she had spent all her
estate upon the Physicions, Mark 5.25.
and was never the better.

Now the observation I shall raise from hence, is this, That Restitution is a
great mercy to Church or Nation. I will prove it very briefly from the notion
importance of the word. Restitution is cordial, it is healing, it is joynting,
it is settling, therefore a great blessing. It is Cordial. That which is
restaurative, is cordial, and that which is cordial, is restaurative. The
whole heart of this Kingdom of Judah, our Prophet tells us, (at the fifth verse
of this chapter,) The whole heart was faint. great need they had therefore of a
Cordial or a Restaurative. The greater their necessity was, the more gracious
is the promise.

2: Restitution is healing. When a man is healed of a Sickness or distemper,
then is he said to be restored: so this people were at present in a very Sick
and distempered condition: The whole head sick, from the sole of the foot even
unto the head, there was no soundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putrified
sores; verse 5.6.
they had not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.
Great need they had therefore of healing and restoring: and still the greater
their need, the more gracious the promise.

3: Restitution is joynting. 6. Gala. 1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meeknes: the word is
((...)) set in joint, or set the bone that is broken of such an one. The earth
and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: (says the Psalmist) I bear up
the Pillars of it: Dissolved, that is, discompacted, disjoynted. Psalm 75.2.
Now when God is pleased to bear up a Nation thus disjoynted, it is a great
mercy; but much more, when he shall restore it, and joint it again, that it is
able in some measure to support in self.

Lastly, Restitution is settling. Mat: 17:11. Elias shall first come and restore
all things: ((...)) shall settle or establish all things, and the word
signifies properly, to establish, (per collocationem in proprio loco) by
restoring things and persons to their proper places. Now ask a man, whose
spirits were wel-nigh spent, how good a restaurative Cordial is? ask a man,
that has been long sick, it health be not a great mercy? ask a man, that
has broken a leg or an Arm, how good it is to have them safely set? ask one,
that has been banished from his Relations, his habitation, his inheritance,
how comfortable it is to be restored to them, and settled in the possession of
them again? such a mercy is restitution unto a people, it is Cordial, healing,
jointing, settling.

I will apply this in a few words. 1: For information. What God promised to
Judah, he has in a great measure performed to us. He has after much fainting,
distemper, disjoynting and dislocation, granted us a Restitution. He has
restored us our Native and undoubted Sovereign, our ancient Government, both
in Church and State, our fundamental Laws, our Liberties, our peace, and (I
hope) his own gracious favor with them all. I need not say much of this: a man
that has felt the fire, need not to be told that it is hot; and seeing the
advantages which arise from this restitution unto the whole Nation, are so
sensible, I need not tell you, how great a mercy it is. Perhaps there are some
that think this restitution but a relapse: I intend not to trouble my self to
convince them; I pray God restore them also to their right judgments in his
due time.

2: For excitation. One restitution deserves another. Gods (Restituam) should
stir us up to think of a (quid retribuam,) what shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits? Gods Restitution was free, but ours is due, and so much the
more due, because his was free. Hezekiah is blamed for not rendering according
to the benefit that he had received, and wrath was threatened to all Judah and
Jerusalem for it. 2. Chro: 32.25. Let us therefore (as the Apostle exhorts) 13.
Hebr: 15. Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise continually, that is the fruit
of our lips, giving thanks to his name. Let us take heed, lest as Philip
branded his soldier (that begged the lands of one that had entertaind him
kindly) with ingratus hospes on his forehead; so God brand not us with the
ignominious note of the unthankefull Nation.

3: For Caution, in the words of our Savior, Ioh: 5.14. Behold, thou art made
whole, go thy way and sin no more. Sin is a forfeiture of all. Let none be
offended, if I bespeake this honorable Audience in the language of Samuel 1.
Sam. 12.24. Fear the Lord and serve him in truth, and with all your hearts; for
consider how great things he has done for you; but if ye shall still do
wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King. So much of the first
particular, what it is, that is promised, Restitution; I will restore.

I come to the second: a restitution, of whom? of Judges and Counselors. Who
are meant by Judges and Counselors, I have showed you before. I shall choose
now to speak of them, as taken in the stricter sense, and give you this
Conclusion; That good Judges are a great blessing to a Nation.

Now there are several Qualifications required to the Constitution of a good
Judge: 1. The good judge is careful, that he act nothing but by Commission
from a lawful Power: or else, I know not how he can answer that question,
Exodus 2 14.
(quis constituit te judicem) who made thee a judge and a Ruler? In our Nation
all lawful Authority is derivatively from the King; the potestas judiciaria,
the power of judging does primarily belong to him, it is one of his jura
Regalia: a Man therefore must have his Deputation to the Office of judge from
him, or else he is an intruder. Submit your selves to the King as supreme, and
to Governors as to them that are sent by him. 1 Pet: 2:13: if they have not
their Mission from him, there is no submission due to them.

2 The good judge is just and impartial in the distribution of justice. When
he puts on his Robes he puts off his relations to any: This is indeed one of
the primae qualitates, that constitute a good judge to be no respecter of
persons, nor taker of gifts. I have read of a notable story of Canusus, Caussin
in his holy Court.
who having examined twelve Thieves, and condemned them, one of them pleaded,
that he was extracted from royal blood; it is reason (said the King) some
grace should be done to him, let him have the highest gibbet. And Caussin tells
us, that in Justinian's times, judges used to take an Oath with a solemn
execration; an Oath to maintain Religion and justice according to their power;
with this execration, that if they did corruptly, The horror of Cain, Gen 4
13.14. 2 King 5.27. Mat. 27.5.
the leprosy of Gehazi, and the portion of Judas might fall upon them. You
know what are the things that corrupt men in Office, thy are bribes, every one
loves gifts, and follows after rewards, Prove: 29.4.
is our Prophets complaint, concerning the corrupt Judges of Judah: and
although men keep touch stones to try gold, yet gold certainly is a notable
touch stone, Mr. Fuller.
whereby to try men. But now as the honest Woman preserves her chastity, so
does the good Judge preserve his integrity, and that is, by giving no
encouragement unto any to corrupt him. He despises the gain of oppression, and
shakes his hands from holding of bribes. Isa. 33:15: He will take no bribes
himself, and he detests that hypocrisy of the Mendicant Friars, who will
touch no money themselves, but have a Boy with a bag to receive it for them.

3: We will conceive the good Judge (when in the execution of his office)
divested of passion, and his mind so clear, that there is nothing to disturb
his judgment: and having this command of his affections, he can hear a simple
witness speak impertinencies, without impatience; which if duly considered,
does argue a great ((...)) or strength of mind: the good Judge has so much
judgment, as to consider the Rusticity and homeliness of common people in
giving of evidence, that they must be impertinent, before they can be
pertinent. But however he exercise thus much patience toward a simple
Witness, yet he has so much prudence, as not to bear it in a professed
Pleader: he will not suffer a Lawyer, with multitude of words and questions, in
a plain case, to darken the cause, consound the Jurie, or puzzle the Witnesses.

4: The good Judge is Courageous. What need he to fear? when he has God, and
the King, and the Laws, and the testimony of a good Conscience to bear him
out, if he do uprightly. It is said of Cato and Fabricius, that the Sun might
sooner be stayed or altered in his Race, than they in the course of Justice; it
requires a stout spirit, to be thus steddie. He had need to be a man of spirit,
that must neglect the displeasure and frowns; reject the Letters and Suits of
great men; as Judges must do, if they would be as Cato and Fabricius. Had not
he need to be a man of courage, that must (as it often falls out with Judges)
maintain right against might? had not he need to be of an undaunted spirit,
that must turn the wheel over the wicked, withstand the inundation of
profaneness, and suppress the Roaring Ladds, that fear neither God, nor man?
what was it that made Pilate yield to the condemnation of Christ, but his fear?
John 19.12
if thou let this man go (say they) thou art not Coesars friend: whereas a
Coesar indeed (such an one as our Coesar) accounts it an abomination, either to
condemn the Innocent, or to Justify the wicked for a Reward.

5: The good judge is not delatory. He makes not a Trojan Seige of a suite, but
does what he can to bring it to a speedy issue. He thinks it enough for one
party to lose the cause, and therefore endeavors, what he can, to lessen the
charges. Lewis the 12th used to say, delatory Justiciaries stretched the
leather with their teeth. Caussin concerning the practice of justice.
I have read a notable story taken (as my Author says) out of the Chronicles
of Alexandria, concerning one Theodoricke King of the Romans. Juvenalis a widow
(having a suit depending in the Court three years, which might have been
dispatched in a few days) makes her complaint to the King: he demanded who
were her Judges, and sent to them to expedite her Cause, which they did in two
days. After they had done, Theodoricke sends for them again (as they thought,
to applaud them for their expedition) being come, he asked them what was the
reason, they deferred that for three years, which they could dispatch in two
days? they made no Apology (that I read of) for their deferring, for it is
likely they had none to make: but they said, they had made such speedy dispatch
upon his special recommendation. How (said the King) when I put you into
Office, did I not consigne all Pleas and proceedings to you, and particularly
those of widows? you deserve death, for spinning out a business three years,
which might be drawn to a period in two days: and so commanded both their
heads to be smitten off.

I cannot stand to add colors to every lineament of a good judge. Let it
suffice, that I only point at the rest. 6: The good Judge is a special Patron
of Widows and Orphans; and therefore takes special cognizance of their
actions, for fear there should be any corruption in their Advocates. This is
God's high Style, psalm 68:5: A Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the
Widow is God in his holy habitation. For this it was that God was so much
incensed against the judges of Judah They judge not the fatherless, neither
does the Cause of the Widow come before them.

7: Mercy is a necessary qualification of a good Judge. They say a Butcher may
not be of the jury for Life and Death, much less should such an one sit as
judge. The good judge therefore (so far as he may with safety to his
Conscience) remits of the rigor of the Law, especially where indulgence may
work amendment. He insults not over Malefactors, with opprobrious and taunting
language, be their crimes never so foul: but takes occasion from thence to
pity the depraved nature of man, which is subject to such Exorbitances. He
pronounces not the sentence of condemnation without great commiseration; and is
careful, that they (who are not worthy to live) may by the instruction of some
able Minister, be the better fitted to dye, that however the flesh be
destroyed, the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.5.


8: The good judge is not Gallio-like, Acts 18.14.
careless in things that do concern Religion. He considers that his Majesty
is Custos utriusque tabulae, and has by Deputation made him so too.

Lastly, The good judge is a good Man; One that fears God, and escheweth
evil; of such uprightness and integrity, that his Conversation is exemplary
to all inferior Magistrates. One that keeps a judicature within his own
breast, and daily tryes all his actions in the Court of Conscience. One that
makes consciene of his duty toward God, as well as the King, remembering that
account he has to give, ere long, to the judge of all the earth. One that is
devout in his Closet, strict in his Family, and thinks himself as honorable,
with his Train waiting on him to the Church, as to the Court. In a word one so
pious, just, charitable, temperate, and free from vice, that he does as much
good by his example as by his Authority Thus I have shown you who is a good
judge: and let none think, that I have extracted this out of Sir Thomas Moore's
Utopia, and given you the description of a man, that never was nor ever will
be; you may take Job for a proof and president of all that I have said, Job
29:11:

Now that judges, that are thus good, must needs be a great blessing to a
Nation, is not very necessary to be proved. I know, you have in your own
thoughts prevented me, that I need say nothing Both the time and the matter do
now require, that I should direct my speech unto you (my Lords and Gentlemen)
for whose honor as well as instruction this Exercise is observed: I beseech
you therefore, as Paul once did Agrippa, Acts 26:3: that you would hear me
patiently. I confess, I am every way one of the least of the Sons of my Mother,
and should scarce have seen your Lordships for the Crowd, had I not been set up
in this Sycamore Tree: but now I have the honor not only to be your
Spectatour, but your Monitour.

I will only premise two things to that, which I have to say. The first is
this, that I speak any thing in this kind, is more because it is become
customary, than because I think it necessary. The second is, that determination
of the Schoolmen, who say, that an Angel of an inferior Order may inflame,
but cannot illuminate an Angel of a superior Order: this is the utmost, that
I aim at, to erect your Zeal, I presume not to add to your knowledge. This
being premised, I shall dispatch what I have to say, in three Words.

1 My Lords and Gentlemen, you know what a strict Proclamation his Majesty (out
of his Princely piety, not policy) has set out, against Vicious, Debauched,
and Profane Persons: and yet iniquity seems to abound; this calls aloud for
your observation and regulation. As I would not have them who have been
accounted the King's foes, to slight his promises; so nor those, that are
desirous to be reputed his friends, to neglect his precepts. Piety and Loyalty
are as consistent, as God and the King; Cursed be he that goes about to set
them at variance. I acknowledge indeed, that you see most what with other men's
eyes, and cannot punish abuses (unless you see them) without complaint and
information from others: yet verily, the profaneness of some men is such,
that they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not; Isa. 3.9.
and what men do not seek to hide, you may see if you will. To pass by
drunkenness, swearing and such like, how common is the profanation of the
Lord's Day: however God may seem to wink at it, yet he takes notice of it, and
will not suffer it, that we should so far entrench upon his Royalty, as to
make his Day either a day of business, see Trap: on John 21 1.
or a day of pleasure. Very strict were they in the observation of this day, in
the primitive times: for when the question was put (annon observasti diem
dominicum) have thou observed the Lords day? vid. Ignat. Epist 3. ad Magn^s:
the answer was returned, (Christianus sum intermittere non possum) I am a
Christian I may not do otherwise. But now nothing more ordinary, than for those
that call themselves Christians, to neglect the observation of it. It concerns
you that are in Authority, both by your examples and injunctions, to suppress
this inundation of impiety; or else it will endanger to bring upon the Nation
great wrath. It is true, God has mercifully, and miraculously restored us, but
remember what Ezra once said, Ezra 9.13. After thou have given us such
deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments, would thou not
be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping?

2: My Lords and Gentlemen, you know, what strict Laws we have against
Recusants, which the wisdom of his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, and
Progenitors, with their Counsels, thought fit to Enact against them; looking on
them only as Subjects, because Natives, but otherwise accounting them the most
dangerous enemies both to Church and State. And yet it is reported, that some
of them are so confident, as to promise unto themselves a toleration; which
they could not do, if those Laws were put in execution. My Lords, you know,
that such a toleration is contrary to the Laws of the Land: and the reverend
Bishops will soon satisfy you, that it is contrary to the Laws of God and
this Church. If any of them have done service to his Majesty, or those that
were in exile with him, they are sure to be well rewarded; who wishes that
they may not? but we pay them too dear for their Courtesies, if we lay them
our Religion in pawn for them; and if their Religion be tolerated, it is to be
feared lest in time it may justle out ours. I have read of a prophecy indeed,
That Antichrist should never overcome Venice, nor Paris, nor London; I say
Amen to it: yet I should much fear the last, if Recusancy should have a
Toleration.

3: My Lords, you know, what an enemy Schism has been to the welfare of this
Church and Nation, and is still like to be. It concerns your Honors, as you
are Counselors, to give your advice in this doubtful and difficult matter.
Some, it may be, are of opinion, that as the times produced this distemper, so
time must cure it again. I do not say, but this remedy may prove effectual,
but I cannot say, that it will: the hazard we run by such protraction is
certain, but what the issue of it may be, is uncertain. I do not conceive, that
the consideration of this subject, is out of your Lord-ships Cognizance: for it
is true, if these contentions about Church Matters were only agitated in the
Schools and had no influence upon the State, the matter were less, but we see
frequently, that Tumults and distractions in the State, arise from hence.

It is a good way to remove schism, to consider first what indeed Schism is:
that is the very subject of the question, and if we err in this we do stumble
in limine. Schism seems to me to be, a groundless rending of the Churches
Communion, joined with a contempt of the Churches Authority. And therefore I
suppose, though a man be in some things dissatisfied (so he give but all due
respect and reverence to Ecclesiastical authority) he may be said to be
scrupulous or at the most erroneous, but not Schismatic. All I will say more
is this, the disease is intricate, it may be superficially, but it will never
be soundly healed, till a narrow search be made into the nature of it. Thus I
have made bold to point out to your Lordshipps, the three great Troublers of
our Israel, Profaneness, Popery, and Schism; which so far as they fall upon
the state, require the observation and inspection of you, who are by your
Office, Physicians and Ministers of State.

My Lords: I have no more to add, but to congratulate this Honorable
Assembly, and to pray that the Lord of Lords would be a shield to protect you,
a Sun to guide you, an exceeding great Reward to honor, comfort and bless
you, in all your Counsels, Judgments, Journeys, and Returns. Unto this God,
who is one Essence, and three Persons, the King immortal, invisible, the only
wise God, be honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

