ENGLAND'S Faithful MONITOR: Being the WORKS of that Suffering Protestant, Mr.
STEPHEN HVSNANCE, when under Exile and Confinement, in the Years 1685. and 1686.

Wherein Popery, is briefly demonstrated
To be a Wicked Religion, by Scripture stated:
As Mass, Popish Pardons, and Purgatory,
Praying to Angels, Popish Penance, a Story.
Worshipping Images, and Merits, may see
In this book, are wicked, in every degree.
The Fundamentals of Religion are debated,
And the Protestant Religion vindicated.
Many Gospel Truths this Book does open,
I believed, and therefore have I spoken.
PSALM. 116.10. I will go in the Strength of the Lord,
I will make mention, as Scriptures record,
Of the Righteousness of Christ alone
By Faith, without which Salvation, none.
PSALM. 71.16. Gospel Worship, by Scripture I avow,
By's Grace, who taught me first to plow.
ISA. 28.6. Here is Englands Faithful Monitor
Would have all men their Sin abhor.
By Repentance, and real Reformation,
Now, under Gods wonderful Dispensation.
Here Is Scripture Truth drawn in one Chain,
Tells all unconverted, must be born again.
Many Extremes, and Objections disputed,
Gospel Truths cleared, and Errors refuted.
Wherein Christ is exalted to that degree,
Without Interest in Christ, none saved be.
How to do Duty, but rest on none
For Salvation, but on CHRIST alone.
Written by a poor Suffering Protestant,
By Grave knows how to abound and want.
First written for Comfort of my Souls Ends,
Now much enlarged by Importunity of Friends.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1689.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To his Honored and most Worthy Friend, Major Manly.
SIR,
SVch Impulsions I within me at present feel,
In which I admire God's providential Wheel, Ezekiel. 10.13.

In seeing God's goodness in your preservation
When under Exile, from your native Nation, Rev. 1.9.

And being prohibited by a Proclamation:
Also the great trouble had in your station,
Standing for the welfare of the Nation:
Your judicious understanding, Sir, 1 Cor. 10.15.
in relation
Unto State Affairs, and virtuous Inclination
For Gospel-religion, Sir, in your generation,
I have made unto your Worship this Dedication;
Hoping your Clemency, Sir, will you excite
To accept of, as it were, Sir, a Widows Mite. Mar. 12.42.

Oh may it do good in this wicked generation,
That Men may see their great abomination
Of all sorts of wickedness in the Nation, Ezekiel. 14.6.

And repent of them by real Reformation,
Under, this God's wonderful Dispensation,
Before God's wrath fall, or desolation feel,
Admire God's Works of wonder, Ezekiel. 1.20.
and cry, O Wheel!
God's rod is now, Sir, hovering over us,
Foundations of the Earth are out of course,
And without Reformation it will be worse Psalm. 82.5.

In England, for wickedness is little remorse.
I fear and tremble, Sir, the storm is not past,
Sin will cause on all Attempts a blast.
Though Popery now go out of the Land amain,
Yet, Joh. 4.20.
Sir, if we old Customs still retain,
And don't from superstitious Worship refrain,
It will provoke God to bring Popery again: Mat. 23.32.

Mercy and Judgments calls England repent,
But instead of it, murmuring and discontent.
What a Chaos of Confusion we are under
At present, consider England's sins, it is no wonder.
Many dangers and fears, Sir, lie upon us,
Yet, Sir, I tell you it may be worse.
Observe this Dispensation, Mat. 24.10.
though peace be intended,
Yet how many in the Nation are offended?
Many are for Onyons and Garlic of Egypt, Psa. 106.14, 15.

Will Worship, 'till God lash us with his Whip.
Oh when will England's eyes be open, say I?
This unto us, Sir, the Scriptures descry;
Before Christ's coming the Moon and the Sun Joel 3.15.

Shall be darkened, the Stars also as they run
Shall withdraw their light, Act. 2.20.
as though done.
For the Lord will roar out of Sion,
Utter his Voice from Jerusalem like a Lion, Joel 3.16.

The Heavens and the Earth shall shake;
Did not Bishops and Priests lately quake? Isa. 33.1.

God will shake also e're long Sea and Land,
That is, will move all Nations, understand;
From the highest to the lowest deemed, Hag. 2.7.

Kings and Beggars to Christ all one esteemed:
Not only Earth will shake, Temporal power,
But Heaven, Ecclesistical, in that hour.
Once more, signifies not only shaking, Heb. 12.26, 27.

But the removing things of Men's making,
Because all these were made with hands,
By power and authority of Men's Commands
And Inventions; then they will see plain
How they have worshipped God in vain. Mar. 7.7.

But those things which must remain
Are from God, not to be shaken once again,
For Christ will his Truth still maintain,
Will destroy all that don't desire his reign. Luke 19.27.

God has lifted up now his powerful hand
Against such who will not yet understand
His way of Worship, behold now England,
How has God wrought for us without delays, Isa. 26.10, 11.12.

And Cursed all Men of corrupt ways;
This is God's end, that England should feel,
Acknowledge God's overruling providential Wheel.
There is a Curse to all that don't understand
Or consider the operation of Jehovah's hand: Isa. 5.12.

How has God, Sir, wicked Men withstood,
Who designed Protestants lives and blood;
Who had been in blood before now involved,
Had not God in mercy their Plots dissolved:
This is the Lords doing, Sir, in our days, Psalm. 118.23.

And should be mavelous in our eyes.
God calls now aloud, not only by his Word,
But also his Works of wonder, now record
A Summons to give God glory, Psalm. 96.7, 8.
as does appear
Both by works of Mercy and Justice clear.
Many a time his anger has turned away
From us, has not, Sir, unto this day
Made a full end of us, even when we
Highly provoked God in such a degree
So to to do; Psalm. 82.5.
Oh let us not now in sin grow worse,
Though the World and Men are out of course!
God's Throne is in Darkness, Scripture says,
Which to us is the only Rule of Faith.
God's Wheels of Providence in their race
Are very difficult, Psalm. 145.3.
Sir, for us to trace
And find out; let us admire his Free Grace
For Gospel-liberty we had every place;
Let us admire now God's Works of wonder,
In guiding the King we did live under, Prove. 21.1.

By inclining the King's Heart to a Talleration,
So to enjoy Gospel-liberty in the Nation,
'Till this, Psalm. 82.1.
Jehovah's wonderful Dispensation,
God overrules Men, Sir, in their generation,
Beyond Men's Designs, and 86.10.
and their Intention;
God is God alone, as the Scriptures mention.
Who would have said, Sir, under that storm,
The other Year, we should enjoy such a Calm?
Blessed be God for his refreshing Balm!
By the Prince of Orange in the Nation, Jer. 51.28, 29, 30, 37.

Whom the Lord has called by his Dispensation
To be King of England in his generation,
To work, I hope, England's Reformation,
And so prevent England's Desolation.
I hope King William, Sir, will be instrumental,
Chief under Christ of great Babylon's fall.
For as Scriptures are truth without exemption,
The time draws near of Sion's redemption; Luke 21.28.

For before the Year 1700. we see or feel
Great turnings will be of God's providential Wheel.
Not, Sir, that I have a prophetical spirit given,
But what Scripture reveals, as my Name's Stephen;
God is sometimes pleased to suffer exasperation
To go high, Sir, that his power in a Nation
May appear more eminent in Men's station Isa. 42.8.

In composing of them for to stop's desolation;
Puts a stop to the great'st danger, it is no story,
This course God takes for his own glory:
God makes Men's wrath now him to praise, Psalm. 76.10.

And remainders of wrath stops in our days.
Let Us cry, O the Wheel within the Wheel! Ezekiel. 10.10.

Oh may England his operating work feel,
To be reformed! least the Wheel of Providence
Run as fast backward now from hence, Jer. 15.6, 7.

As ever it did forward for us by descent.
O let England by Reformation now repent! Ezekiel. 10.17.

Let Us now the motions of the Wheel discern, Psalm. 86.10.

For of all second Causes God sits at stern.
God works clear contrary to expectation Isa. 55.8. and 11.6, 7.

Of most; is not this truth in our Nation?
The Wolf and the Lamb together dwell,
The Leopard with the Kid, Scriptures tell,
The Cow and the Bear together feed.
Sure those things do from God proceed.
For many who smell like a Kirkish Verment, Mat. 7.15, 16.

Can now, Sir, put on a Lamb-like garment.
What Is too hard for the Lord to effect?
Is not God of infinite power to protect Psalm. 145.3.

His People? let us depend on God, Psalm. 146.3, 5.
and respect
Men but as Instruments in Jehovah's hand;
If God throws down, then none can stand:
This in England we have seen, O may we feel
God's Spirit, reforming us under this Wheel
Of Providence! for of all Kings God is greater,
God can bring Meat out of the Eater; 1 Timothy 6.15.

God can bring Water out of the Rock;
Let all Worship God, Psalm. 78.15, 16.
not stones and stock.
If God be God, worship him in Faith,
Not superstitiously, Idol Baal, Scripture says
God is a Spirit, 1 King 18.21.
and requires Age or Youth
To worship him in spirit and in truth:
Not like Book-worship, John 4.24.
which I could tell
How some limit the Holy One of Israel
By their Forms, Psalm. 78.41.
and still dead Liturgies desire,
But all this while where is the Spirit of Prayer.
We know not how to Pray as we ought,
'Till God's Spirit work it in our thought. Romans 8.26.

If Prayer, Communion with God be in a Book,
What need the Spirit any farther look? Verse. 9.

Yet without the Liturgy there is no Devotion,
But Schism, Act. 28.22.
a Sect, or some despised Notion.
But not to enlarge here, let none strife
For a dead Form, it is the Spirit gives life:
Bodily exercise profits little, not at all
Without the Spirit, Joh. 6.63.
he gives life in all.
Yet many for the Church of England cry,
Yet never are reformed by their Liturgy:
What is highly esteemed with Men in a Nation,
Is unto Jehovah in Scripture an abomination. Luke 16.15.

Demetrius, Acts 19.24, to 29.
the Scripture tells us plain,
His soul was merely for self-ended gain;
Sirs, You know by this Craft you and I
Have our Wealth, therefore against Paul cry,
For great is Diana of the Ephesians so high,
Whom the World worshipeth, Paul's Doctrine defy;
And so a Confusion they brought to pass,
Forsook Paul for love of worldly gain like Demas. 2 Timothy 4.10.

And others too, Sir, now in our Nation,
To define who, I Will leave to your Consideration.
What Is a Form of Godliness without the power by? 2 Timothy 3.5.

Without the Spirit's operation what is a Liturgy?
Yea, the purest Forms of Worship rested in,
Without Faith and Practice are all but sin. Romans 14.23.

Outside forms of Worship are but the shell,
The Spirit breaks the Nut, gives the kernel. 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.

Many rest in a form of Godliness in their race,
As if Duties ex opere operato could conferr Grace.
A lifeless formality is esteemed in the World high, Tit. 1.16.

As a Kab of Doves dung was sold, Scriptures descry,
In the Famine of Samaria, at a very dear rate; 2 Kings 6.25.

What Is a Profession without Practice for an eternal state?
He that Professes, and does not Christ's Command,
Is like the foolish, building his house in the sand; Mat. 7.26, 27.

What Is a Liturgy, or any Book to stand upon?
It Is a sandy-foundation to build Salvation on,
Let Us use Ordinances, but rest on none
For Salvation, but on Jesus Christ alone.
To draw, Sir, to a Conclusion, only this I Note; Levit. 19.19.

God under the Law forbids a linsey-woolsey Coat;
Then sure under the Gospel there is no Institution
For a Surplice, but from a Papal Pollution.
But to say no more at present, your judicious Eye, 1 Cor. 10.15.

Sir, knows very well what my lines imply.
Concerning Worship, at large my lines impart,
Which I present unto you, Sir, with my Heart.
Also a word of Free grace is here demonstrated, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.

And the arrogance of Free Will is dilated.
Also a word of Love in the latter end,
To know real from feigned, as many pretend:
Here is some Meat, though in a homely dress,
I aim at Matter, I am no Poet I confess:
Yet here is Gospel Truth, as much as those
For bulk as write, Sir, now in Prose;
For here is no phantasticol Rhyme or Verse, Col. 2.8.

But Scripture-truths it does full express,
By the Spirit's operation I hope, Col. 2.12.
Sir, in all,
Being written when none cared for my Soul;
When Father and Mother did me forsake,
God his Promise good unto me did make: Psalm. 27.10, 11.

When under that great hour of temptation, Rev. 3.10.

When betrayed Monmouth came in the Nation;
Then God preserved me wonderfully in those days, Psalm. 107.8.

Bless God, and 103.2.
O my Soul, O give God the Praise!
Thus, 1 Cor. 10.15.
Sir, I have given you a fore-taste
Of what my lines contain, now I haste
An end; on your Patience, Sir, I have intruded,
With Prayer for you my Epistle is concluded: Exodus 23.23.

The Angel of the Covenant still stand by
Your Worship, to protect you from your Enemy;
Jehovah bless you, Sir, I wish you well,
Grace be to you, Gal. 6.16.
and to all God's Israel.
To God my Prayer for you shall advance,
While I am, 2 Timothy 4.22.

SIR, Your Servant, Stephen Husnance.

THE PROLOGUE TO THE READER.
THese Lines to one, not supernatural learned, Dan. 12.12.

May seem a Paradox, are spiritual discerned:
They my Meditations, 2 Cor. 2.14.
when I expected Death
Every hour, but God preserved Life and Breath. Act. 17.25.

The remainder of my few and evil days
I may live to my Redeemer, and to his praise; Genesis 47.9.

And that from self, I may be set free;
I live, not I, but Christ which lives in me: Gal. 2.20.

These things were then as seed in the hulk,
Now through Grace grown to a greater bulk:
As God freely gives Seed, Mat. 10.8.
so will I sow
In my Generation in love what I know.
My Talent God has given, I will not hide, and 25.18.29.

But for my Makers Glory shall be employed:
Into the Treasury will cast the Widows mite, Mark 12.42.

Leaving enlargement to those better can indite:
Let none despise my Youth, Job 32.6, 8.
I have often said
Days and years should speak, I was afraid
To show my Opinion, till fire burned amain, Jer. 20.9. and 23.29.

No longer in my Breast it would contain.
Tho I am of a shallow Capacity and weak,
The more God's Power appears, if's Spirit speak:
In them Lord let thy glorious Power appear,
In an earthen Vessel 'twill shine more clear. 2 Cor. 4, 6, 7.

Those that fear God they will not despise
My Imbecility, God by such confounds the Wife. 1 Cor. 1, 26, 27.

God by Grace can make a Fisherman as able
As the great'st Doctor among the Rabble: Mat. 4.18.21.

Not many rich and noble, nor great men
Are called, be humble, O my Soul, Lam. 3.19.20.
for when
Thou see the workings of Free Grace, admire
God's Grace that called thee, Gal. 1.15.
not thy desire;
Till God infused Grace into thy Soul and Heart, Genesis 19.18.

Like Lot in Sodom, from sin loath to depart;
Till God did open thy Eyes, and thee deliver
From powers of Darkness, Acts 26.18.
praise God for ever.
Thus my Friends, you may plainly see
The Spirit is like the wind, John 3.18.
Grace is free;
Two things as principal my Lines impart,
To know God in Christ, Joh. 17.3.
and thy own Heart:
The latter by sin to know thy own misery,
Then to know in Christ, Ephesians. 2.4.
God's rich mercy;
Of Free Grace how thou may be Partaker,
By forsaking sin and living to thy Maker: Titus 2.14.

The true knowledge of thy own Heart, Prove. 4.23.

This tract if read, will help thee in part.
Here Is Gospel Truths, very brief and plain,
Tells all Unconverted must be born again: Mat. 18.3.

Here Is the substance of Religion in one Chain,
Tho brevity in every head was my aim:
I had rather speak five words with understanding,
Than ten thousand unknown words be banding. 1 Cor. 14.19.

I have not struck at Bark of the Tree,
But at the Root and substance, you may see:
Here is how to do Duty, Rev. 3.17.18. Luke 17.10.
and herein,
To rest in Duty done, a dangerous sin:
There are but two ways, mind them well,
Sin, and duties rested in, lead to Hell:
Full of extremes are many in our days,
To destroy Souls, 2 Cor. 2.11.
Satan has many ways.
Some do duty out of thoughts of Merit;
Others do not their duty, such a base spirit
Of Extremes does abound in our Land,
Few do their duty as Christ does Command. John 15.14. Luke 6.46. Jer. 10.23.
Isa. 45.22. Phil. 3.7, 9. Joh. 1.12. Romans 14.23.

Some do duty, but love of merit affect;
Others their duty, Christ's Command neglect.
To do duty don't delay, but rest on none
For Salvation, but on Jesus Christ alone:
Don't rest on outward performances done,
Like most, but by Faith on Christ the Son.
Outside Worship, though splendid it look,
Is profaneness to God, though in a Bishops book: 1 Timothy 6, 4.5. Jer. 7.4.10.
Luke 18.10. Josh. 23.7, 8. 2 Timothy 3.5. Tit. 1.16. Isa. 1.14, 15.

Many are taken with Forms in Notion,
Not considering what a Curse is blind Devotion;
Pharisees for Temple-praying, my Lines impart,
For bowing with Knee, but where is the Heart?
Many cry, the Temple of God, yet so evil
Themselves by sin the Temple of the Devil:
Strict for New Mons, Ceremonies in notion,
When God loathes Men, and their Devotion.
True Holiness is regulated in Age or Youth; Rev. 22.18.19.

None ought to add, or diminish from Truth:
Concerning Worship at large my lines impart, 2 Timothy 2.7.

If read them with a believing Heart.
Little of true Worship is in the World then, Mat. 15.9.

How God is worshipped by most of Men!
Read and consider how my lines cry
Against Mass, Will Worship, and Popery; Col. 2.18.23.

True Worship to God been long withstood; Rev. 12.15.

Satan cast after the Woman a Water-flood;
He corrupts Men's Understanding the Word,
Satan has many delusions, Scriptures Record: 2 Cor. 11.14.

The bottomless Pits smoke darkened the Air, Rev. 9.2. and 8.5.

To obscure the Saints way, then take care:
There are Lightnings and Voices God has,
In midst of darkness to direct their Path.
Some glimering Light, is in this Book; 1 Samuel 17.40.45. verses.

Like little David's Stones which he took,
And did not fear Goliah's great Sword:
What Is in this Book, is according to the Word. Romans 12.3.

Read, don't fear, for here is no Treason,
But words of truth, soberness, and Reason.
Tho some few Tautologies, may seem plain,
Yet to the Reader I hope not in vain: Mark 14.39.

Then don't fear to read, for my lines tell,
When Moses hand's down, of praying well, Exo. 17.11.12.

Amalek did prevail against Israel,
How little of praying amongst many dwell:
Little of praying in Faith in the Nation,
For all God's wonderful dispensation.
Lord, Isa. 26.10, 11.
when is lifted up thy powerful hand,
Men will not see, nor yet understand.
None rise against Evildoers, Psalm. 94.16.
and cry,
Or stand against workers of Iniquity;
Will not understand in sin grown worse,
Foundations of the Earth out of Course. and 82.5.

Most in their lives are now so odd,
Lovers of pleasure more than of God. 2 Timothy 3.4.

How many in England to this hour, Verse 5.

Have a Form of Godliness without the Power:
Never was there than now more sinning,
Never less remorse since the beginning:
For sin in all our English Nation,
How little Repentance by Reformation: Rev. 22.12.

Tho Christ is coming by's Dispensation,
Yet for's Coming, never less Preparation.
The greatest Wisdom of most in our days,
Consists in being wise in foolish ways. Jer. 4.22.

To deceive others, many such foolish Elves,
But in the end will deceive themselves: Romans 6.21.

Many are wise in our English Nation,
To deceive others in their Generation,
And so deceive themselves of Salvation,
Without Repentance and Reformation:
Many will be found foolish Virgins, says
Scripture, Mat. 25.8. to the 13 verse.
without the Oil of saving Faith
In their Lamps, who in their Generation
Thought they had enough in their Station,
Cry Lord, Lord, yet must to desolation:
Thus may see in this Book very plain;
Therefore from sin and false security refrain,
Before you fall in everlasting pain;
God will not be deceived, Gal. 6.7, 8.
I say again:
Whatsoever Man sows, that shall he reap;
Awake then from a presumptuous sleep:
Tho I may seem Reader, to thee a Fool,
Yet know, I have been at Christ's School:
By Free Grace, Joh. 9.6.
Gospel truths I display,
My Eyes being touched with Spittle and Clay.
What I have written, not in my thought
This way before, but God it me brought: Genesis 27.17.20. verse.

May it be to some Soul a savoury meat,
For Conversion, I the Lord entreat.
Consider Reader, for my lines mount
To tell thee for Reading must give an Account:
Take heed of sin, it is a mad delusion,
And puts the World in great Confusion;
Whilst wicked Men's heads plot against the Lord,
And his little Flock, wicked Men accord; Luke 12.32.

Their foul suggestions create ways so rude,
That Homo est homini Deus, we cannot conclude,
That Man is to Man a God, Psalm. 86.10.
this is to delude
Our selves, unless believe so sinful odds,
That there is a good, and bad, so two Gods. 1 Cor. 8.4, 6.

Est homo homini Demon, rightly understood;
Is Man to Man a Devil? No, not so good.
Satan's Kingdom against it self is not divided,
Says our Savior in Scripture, it is decided: Mat. 12.24. Mat. 3.24.

What Is Man then? Est homo homoni Lupus:
Is Man unto Man a Wolf? nay much worse.
Wolves prey not on Wolves, tho have Power;
The Savage Beasts don't one another devour,
As Men do one another in this Hour. Gal. 5.15.

What Is Man then? Homo est homini homo, a man
Is to Man, a Man, and what Creature then
Does more mischief to one another in's Station,
Then Men do to one another in their Generation? Psalm. 73.23.

Mind of late, that dreadful Dispensation,
What hanging and quartering in the Nation!
Burning, boiling, and many's desolation,
Betraying one another by false Accusation!
The Fire less cruel to, as Scriptures unfold, Dan. 3.27.

Shadrach, Meshech, Abednego, yea Lions bold
From hurting Daniel, they did all hold. and 6.22.

Wild Beasts unto Man have been more kind,
Than one Man to another man, to cruelty inclined:
Their cruelty cannot be yet out of your Mind, Prove. 12.10.

And more of Man's Cruelty is yet behind.
Yet the Earth more pitied Abel, as understood,
In opening her mouth to receive his Blood,
Then was Cain, who slew Abel his Brother;
Many in our days ruined one another: 1 John 3.12.

Though the wicked shall substract and cry,
From the number of the days of the godly;
Yet it is but to increase their own misery.
Tho the Righteous suffer much Trouble and Woe, Luke 10.30. to 35. verse.

In his way to Jerusalem from sinful Jericho,
Fall among Thieves, they wound him sad;
Yet the good Samaritan, makes Believers glad,
By pouring in Wine, Grace in their Heart;
Hope in Christ makes us from sin depart. 1 John 3.3.

Not like many who live as in the Land of Nod, Tit. 1.16,

Mere Atheists in practice, their lives so odd,
Profess there is, yet in actions deny God.
Read and practice, for I will not flatter,
In this Book is but little idle matter:
All care is for the Body, Mat. 6.25.
by every one;
But to care for the Soul, that is let alone.
How will it go with my Soul for ever? Acts 16.30.

Few make such a Question, Jer. 8.6.
but still persever
In false hope, till Death, then will quiver,
When God the Soul shall from him sever, Mat. 8.2.

From enjoying his presence, and that for ever.
Thus I have given, Mat. 13.27.
Reader, in love a fore-taste
Of what is contained in this Book, if have
Any love to thy Soul, read it, and mind
What readst, and to Godliness be inclined.
If Children, Romans 8.17.
then Heirs, it is only this,
By holiness the Lord knows who are his:
This is the Foundation that stands sure; 2 Timothy 2.19.

None shall see God, if not in Heart pure.
Where Christ is Justification, 1 Cor. 1.30. Heb. 12.14.
he is Sanctification:
Without Holiness there is no Salvation;
This may seem in this Book more clear,
Which from Scripture does plain appear.
Read it over, 1 Pet. 1.12.
and consider it well,
Here Is no encouragement in the way to Hell.
Here Is no Poor Robin's Jests, nor Aesop's Fables,
But shows Duty to God and Man in both Tables: Tit. 3.9.

Here Is for Saints and Sinners, my lines glance
To both, my aim is their Souls advance; Isa. 3.10, 11.

Here Is that in Love will touch thy Heart,
If from sins ways thou do but depart:
Observe, and consider them, may find
Things of Soul-consequence, if them mind.
Read, don't delay, 2 Timothy 2.14.
without a partial Eye
Consider, and observe well, as you pass by;
Though they may seem to you as dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.4, 5.

Yet cost many serious thoughts and groans;
Here Is no profane and vain bablings, for they
Increase unto more Ungodliness, Hell's way; Col. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. 2 Timothy
2.22, 23.

Here Is no Philosophy and vain deceit,
That Is to prefer the Dish before the Meat;
Does not lead to Christ, but Tradition of Men,
I have not persuaded, I say once again,
To be of this or that Opinion; Oh then
Read the Book with seriousness, 1 Cor. 14.19.
and sollum
May find so much as in a greater Vollum:
Though they don't smell of a Doctor as you run,
Don't despise them, is this the Carpenter's Son? Mar. 6.3.

When Saturn's under a Cloud, in a dark night
Lesser Stars sometimes unto us give light.
Don't despise the day of small things true, Zech. 4.9, 10.

Which in love to Souls is laid before you.
To know how it is with thy Soul don*t scorn,
Had not God hedged in my way with thorn, Lam. 3.7.

This Book into the World had never been born.
Which makes God's Love to me the greater,
In bringing such meat out of the Eater: Judge. 14.14. Jer. 9.2, to the 6th,
Verse: Judge. 18.7.

Though as to method they are ruleless Rhimes,
Yet they declare the sins of the times.
Then look more at meat than the dress,
I aim at matter, I am no Poet I confess;
As you may see by what is here done,
I am no Poet, no nor yet no Poet's Son:
Though no Poet, yet would do some action
To warn us all, in these times of distraction,
That are so overgone with sins security, Isa. 57.3, 4, 5.

Men will not Repent 'till they come to dye.
Observe my lines well, what they impart,
Tho now in print, Deuteronomy. 4.39.
print them in thy heart.
If I am a stranger to thee, yet them advance
In heart, and 11.18, 19.
for thy good, my Name's Husnance:
And that you may not put me to blame,
I have several times inserted my Name
In this Book, not in respect of any Fame,
But when the matter required the same.
Give God the glory if by it profit find, Psa. 115.1.

And in your Prayers have me in mind.
Pray for me, Jam. 5.16.
my request does move,
Who am weak in Faith and cold in Love. Romans 14.1.

I Would rather be at Cannons mouth of wicked, then
Against the Righteous, Psalm. 84.10.
when they say Amen.
Thus Reader, I keep to Scripture, for the matter
It Is plain, yet Truth, else not write a letter.
They being Scripture Truth, and plainly laid,
Observe, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and consider well what is said:
Though it be imperfect show thy self a Lover,
Love a multitude of imperfections will cover. 1 Pet. 4.8.

A Word more to move the Reader unto Love.
One Word more, Reader.
THe sum and substance of Gospel Grace
Shows how sin in Man God's Image did deface: Genesis 1.26.

So fell from that state he was Created, and 3.6, 17. Romans 5.12.

Brought on's self, and all Mankind so stated,
Loss of God's Favor, incurred Curse of the Law,
Liable to severity of God's Wrath here below:
By sin in transgressing God's Command,
Forfeited all Privileges in Eden's Garden-land: Genesis 3.23, 24.

Was cast out of God's Presence, which is a Hell,
Where God* Mat. 8.12.
by's Grace and Spirit don't dwell,
Hells darkness, Ephesians. 4.18. Mat. 17.5.
darkness in all: Natural Man
Having plunged himself in this state, none can
Or could satisfy Gods Justice, but only Christ,
The Lamb slain from the beginning, Rev. 13.8.
he is Priest;
To dye, to reconcile God and Man, Justice cried
For satisfaction, none could, but Christ that died: Heb. 2, 17.

This also the Gospel declares, which may see
In this Book, without Christ, cannot happy be:
Christ for Sinners salvation, God did Seal; John 6.27.

Mistake not, it is not for all Trees to heal
The Waters of Marah, as Scripture reveal.
Nor all Meal, to heal the deadly Pottage;
It Is not every hope, 2 Kings 4.41.
of presumptuous Dotage
Will attain Salvation, as Scriptures unfold;
Whilst Men in sin, are presumptuous bold, Job 8.13.

They have no ground on Christ to hold.
For Glory without holiness, in their Generation, Heb. 12.14

Wicked Men presume in their Station:
But they shall fail in their expectation;
The Hypocrites hope, is cut from Glorification: Job 27.8.

Only those, are they, who receive Consolation,
Who have the God of Jacob for Salvation: Psalm. 146.5.

And is begun, here in our Regeneration,
And made effectual by the Spirits Operation. Col. 2.12.

See this more clear, as you pass by,
Read, consider every head, as they ly:
Divided into parts, the better for Memory; 2 Pet. 3.2, 3.

Read the Book over then don't let it ly,
But consult the Scriptures, and them apply,
Which I have placed so near the matter,
Else in critical time would not write a Letter. Isa. 59.15.

Mind Scripture well, which I have multiplied, John 5.39. Isa. 8.20.

Which prove the matter cannot be denied,
Without denying Scripture, the Rule of Faith,
Such there are, I am for what Scripture says. 2 Timothy 3.16. John 4.20.

Some Custom Tradition, of old Fathers cry,
So the Rule, the Scripture, they pass by:
Others cry, the Light within, so they pass
The Scripture, as bad's those hold Mass. Romans 15.4. Gal. 1.7, 8.

Conscience enlightened, light within hearken to,
As a ruled Rule, by Scripture rule do.
It Is a Spirit of delusion in Age or Youth
Not to receive Scripture in love as Truth. 2 These 2.10.11

Men love darkness, when deeds are evil,
Hate Scripture light, Joh. 3.9.
is from the Devil:
Satan knows the tendency of Gospel Grace,
Is his Kingdom of Darkness to deface. 2 These. 2.4, 7.

Therefore, Satan and Antichrist, with his hounds,
Jesuits, Rev. 12.9.
Friars, Monks, his Kingdom abounds;
Do all they can to keep Gospel Light down;
So blind lead the blind into Satan's pound: Mat. 15.14.

Scripture worship they oppose, and would expel
Gospel Light, Rev 14.9, 10.
so all might follow the Beast to Hell:
Woeful experience of their Cruelty against those
Stand for the Gospel Interest they still oppose. and 12.17.

'Twill not be long, their Kingdom shall down,
Pope no more shall wear the Triple Crown: and 18..8 21.

Christ will come, before him they shall fall,
And in his Wrath, Luke 19.27.
will destroy them all.
Lord, 2 These. 1.8, 9.
hasten the fulfilling of thy Word,
That thy people may praise thee with one accord, Zech. 14.9.

Let Us hear of Babylons fall in our days, Rev. 18.2. and 12, 10, 11.

So may live for ever unto thy praise.
Then love the Scriptures, and them prize;
Are mercies to us, Psalm. 119.97.
though some them despise:
David said, verse. 103.
I love thy Law, not one word waste,
Thy precepts sweeter than honey to my taste:
How shall Man cleanse his way? verse 9.
not by Sword,
But by observing what is written in the Word:
Thy Word is a Lamp, a Light in my way;
Had not been for thy Word, 105. verse.
I Would gone astray.
Love Scripture by the Spirits Operation,
Are able to make us wise unto Salvation: 2 Timothy 3.15.

Where Is the Man, Phil. 1.27.
that lives in Conversation,
According to a Scripture Demonstration? Psalm. 138.2.

God exalted his Word above his Name,
For us, not to live according, is a shame:
Live the Scripture, in love let them dwell
Plenteously in us, Col. 3.16.
they dehort from Hell:
Read this Book, in love do you accord;
Live according to the revealed Word. John 13.17.

Consult this Book, Romans 12.9.
and you may find
A word or two of love in the latter end,
To discover fained from real, as we intend;
The love of Man does always ebb and flow, John 13.1.

But Christ's love is for ever, as Believers know.
Dangerous to be an Hypocrite, plainly laid; Mat. 6.24.

Cannot serve God and Mammon, is also said.
Here Is general things, I observing little order,
But abruptly in placing them, yet on the border:
If you please fee from whence they flow;
Search Scriptures, the Testimony, and the Law; Isa. 8.20.

If not according to that, cast them by; Joh. 5.29.

But first read them without a partial Eye,
If art carnal, it will not please thy Pallad, Romans 8.7.

Here are no Jiggs, as in a Poets Ballad:
Not to preface any farther don't look, Prove. 9.9.

Proceed, read, and well consider this Book:
They are hints, Hos. 14.9.
from my thoughts did rise,
A word or two is enough unto the Wise. 1 Cor. 10.15.

Happy are all English Hearts, says my Rhimes, Mat 24.30. 42 verse.

That discerns the signs of the present Times.
Jehovah with his blessing, these lines pursue,
By's Spirit's Operation, may Hearts renew,
Is the Effects of this Book, I pray for you,
Consider, Reader, well, what my lines tell; Gal. 6.16.

Grace be to you, and to all Gods Israel. Exodus 4.10.

Lord, I am a Child, not Eloquent, I am undone, Isa. 6.5.

Send, Lord, let some other this Errand run:
Go forth my lines into our English Nation, Jer. 1.6, to the 9. verse.

See what good can do in this Generation:
Who like a Man in a Swound, almost dead,
To recover life, must rub face and head:
Tho some Standers by, they may smile on it,
Count it prudence in evil time to be silent. Amos 5.13.

Yet do what God Commands, without delays,
Till of the Earth, Jerusalem be the praise. Isa. 62.7. and 58.1.

Cry aloud, spare not, tell the wicked they
Must be Converted out of Hells way, Mat. 18.3.

If they will be saved, Heb. 3.13.
that without delay
Repent, and believe, whilst it is called to day.
Make sure their Interest in Christ, Act. 4.12.
and pray,
For to Salvation, John 3.3.
Christ is the only way.
Tell all Unconverted, without Regeneration,
They have no ground to hope for Salvation: Heb. 12.14.

Daub no untemper'd Mortar, Ezekiel. 22.28. and 13.10, 18.
blow the Bellows
Of Truth, Hos. 10.12.
rouse secure from soft Pillows
Of Presumption, false hope, before it is too late:
At death enters an eternal everlasting State.
All the World's great Men, without exemption,
Nor the World's riches, Job 36.18, 19.
can procure Redemption.
Cast off false hope, repent, and sin forsake,
For Salvation, Romans 13.11.
or Damnation lies at stake:
Spur them with Motives, from false security;
Tell them in the burning Lake, Rev. 20.15.
it is sad to lie:
If any say, art Legal, that thou do deny?
Tell them it is Evangelical, Psalm. 71 16.
what do descry:
For Eree-Grace in England has been applied
Where it ought not, whiles they in sin abide.
Tell the fearful, Rev. 21.8.
and unbelieving, that they
Are in the very front of Tophets way.
If any question thy call in thy Station,
Answer, Conscience, and Gods Dispensation:
Tell them, it was not to gain Applause:
But say with David, 1 Samuel 17.29.
is there not a Cause?
Cry, 1 Kings 18.21.
if God be God, worship him in Faith,
Not superstitiously, Idol Baal, Scripture says.
Declare thy sincerity, Esth. 4.16.
false fear don't cherish;
Declare Gods Truth, if perish, thou perish.
Fear not Wickedness, Isa 41.10.13.
as the Light does shine,
For my Seconds, my life shall go with thine.
Tell thy message, 1 Cor. 3, 5.7.
if they will it follow,
Thou may do good, though not from Apollo.
Discharge Conscience, do good in thy Station,
Tho the Author be Exiled from's Habitation, Rev. 1.9.

From's Family kept, by the late dispensation,
Yet strives for Unconverted's renovation.
Go forth in love, Gal. 5.13. and 6 10.
loves way to us discover;
See, what Souls for Christ, can recover.
Go forth, in love to all; loves way take,
If have abuse, Mat. 5.44.
pray for them, for Christ's sake.
Go forth, fear not, Wolves may be kind,
Know not, Christ may change their mind; Genesis 33.4.

Since art called to go, take Loves way, Prove. 16.7. and 15.3.

Thy Captain looks how thou can play.
Now darkness is like to overspread the Land, Psalm. 119.105.

Take God's Word as a Lamp in thy hand:
Make a good guard, take thy Back-sword,
The whole Armor of God in his Word; Ephesians. 6.11, to the 17th. Ver.

Stand, having thy loins girt with truth,
Fear not in love to face Age or Youth.
Though some may hate and say thee nay, John 15.18.

Yet cannot hurt thee, if have fair play:
If wrong, master of the play will decide
The matter, and Justice to every one divide. Romans 2.6.

With Patience run thy race 'till tried, Heb. 12.1.

'Till that time Jehovah will provide;
Don't despond, Free Grace will be applied, Mat. 25.24.

Salvation is on his right hand side. Psalm. 18.46.

Tho no great Man for Patron by Dedication,
Yet fear not, thy God is God of Salvation.
Then Pray before thou go, Exo. 33.13, 15.
for God's Presence
To go with thee before thou venture hence.
Jehovah, bless thy way to great or small,
To bring some in the way of Life eternal: Mat. 25.46.

Lord, make it effectual, let this Book free
Many from Satan's Bondage to live to thee! Acts 26.18.

All glory, Lord, unto thee, to all Eternity. Jer. 13.16.

THE INTRODUCTION, AND PRODUCTION.
I Falling lately under that Cloud of Providence, Job 30.26.

Did draw this conclusion from hence,
I must Dye; Job 18.14.
my thoughts being full of horror,
Knowing Death in'ts self to be King of Terror.
Being in my thoughts mounted on the Stage, Jam. 1.3.

Where I did count must dye by the rage
Of wicked and ungodly Men, Job 5.15.
no doubt
Who declare their sin as Sodom, Job 16.10.
belch out
Swearing, Isa. 3.9.
Damning, and such Blasphemies,
As if Hell to them will be a Paradise:
Well, Mat. 23.32, 33.
they call and ball for a Dray or Sled,
On which I must be drawn or ride, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Before would my Soul and Body divide.
But the while a Halter was their scope, Heb. 4.15.

That I should be hanged with, or a Rope.
These things, Friends, being rightly understood,
Are not pleasing unto flesh and blood. Heb. 12.4.

My thoughts thus musing, Mat. 26.38.
and in a hurry,
I heard a Voice, Why art sad and sorry?
Where Is thy Faith which once had in me? 1 Pet. 2.22.

Is not my Grace sufficient to support thee? Isa. 44.8.

Did I not hang on the Cursed Tree; 2 Cor. 12.9:

Yet free from sin, Gal. 3.18.
yet made a Curse for thee?
Why did I take Man's Nature, Heb. 2.16.18.
was Tempted,
But to succor those are? would be exempted?
Have thou not known and read my Word? Mar. 10.24.

Must the Servant be above his Lord? Joh. 15.20.

Where Is dependence on Word of my Patience? Rev. 3.10.

Hold that, Mat. 14.31.
fear not in hour of temptation.
Stir up thy Faith, thy despondency I hate, Romans 7.25.

See how Death and thou will expostulate. Romans 8.34.

Death thy ghastly face I do not fear; Isa. 25.8, 9.

Nor do I dread thy dreadful Spear!
Thou art overcome, and conquered unto me, 2 Timothy 1.10.

By Christ my Captain, Heb. 2.10.
he has set me free
From thy Sting, which is Sin, Hos. 13.9, 14.
so that I
Through Christ's Blood, am not afraid to dye. Rev. 1.5.

That peacemaking blood, my only Reconciler, 2 Cor. 5.18.

Made an Atonement for me, a Sinner none viler: 1 John 2.5.

He Is Propitiation for my sins, Mar. 9.23.
on Christ alone
Do poor I depend for my Salvation. Heb. 7.25.

He is my Savior, and calls, Stephen, Stephen,
Believe in me; thy sins are forgiven.
Therefore Death, prithee Death, come near! Job 14.14.

Do as art commanded, let fall thy Spear! Heb. 6.19.

Do thy Office, since I thee so entertain,
For I know when dead, shall live again,
To praise my God, and my Redeemer dear, Job 19.25.

Which now bids me not thee to fear.
Thou his Usher, Isa. 44.22.
Christ did thee send
To fetch me, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Verses.
that sin may have an end.
Happy then, my Soul do thou adore
Free Grace, that thou shall sin no more. Ephesians. 2.8.

Sing, O my Soul, let thy Echo rise,
With praise to God, who is above the Skies. Rev. 7, 15.16.

Come on bold Death, thy Spear carry steady,
Strike when thou will, I am ready!
By this I conclude it is nothing to die, Rev. 22.20.

When God's Spirit comforts, and stands by. John 15.26.

SECT. II.
BY this time the whole Rabble rout, John 19.6.

Begin to stare and look about.
How long shall we stand wait all day, Mat. 27.13, 14. 23. verse.

Hang the Rebel Rogue out of the way!
Another comes, cries as he did run,
O Rogue! art not sorry for what have done?
For answer I was provided, had intent
To express it, but this I wave at present.
A third comes, as if he were a Reherser,
Calls, Thou Rebel, wilt have a Confessor?
In my thoughts told him, 'twas not my desire,
I hate Bald-pate Crown of Monk or Friar.
Said some, what this Fellow, talks so smart,
Why hearken ye to him, Acts 22.22.
drive the Cart:
But Sirs, if you please to give liberty,
I have a few words to speak before I dye.
Protestant Religion I own, 1 Pet. 3.15.
and of it vant;
By what follows, 1 Cor. 16.13.
Know, I am a Protestant,
In defense of it brought to this pass,
Yet whilst life, 1 Cor. 10.14.
I will disown the Mass.
Purgatory, Popish pardons abominate,
Praying to Angels, Jer. 50.38.
worshipping Images I hate.
Popish Penance, contrary to Gods Word,
As I am able, I Will use my spiritual Sword:
If I cannot throw down that Bashan Bull,
I will to my utmost strength give a pull. 2 Cor. 10.4,

From the damning Doctrines they have, I Will pass,
And first draw my bow against the Mass: Romans 14.23.

My first Arrow flies at Transubstantiation:
Hoc est Corpus meum, Mat. 26.26.
their words of Con^ecration.
After these words, the Host, the Water, they say,
Is turned into Christ's Body without delay.
This is an Error clear against Philosophy, Mat. 16.6.

As well as Reason, Scripture, and Divinity:
Against Philosophy, Heb. 7.26, 27.
if's Body be in Heaven,
It cannot be in bread, this is worse leaven
Than of the Pharisees, leaveneth the whole lump,
Christ's Body from Heaven into bread Jump, Luke 12.1.

Is ridiculous to Reason, and Scripture clear,
Which by Arguments may be made appear.
If Christ's Body be in Heaven, as is plain
In Scripture, Act. 3.21.
whom the heavens contain
Till restitution of all things, by this I make
Good, that Christ is not in the wafer Cake.
Scripture tells us of no such leaven,
But Christ is ascended into Heaven. Mark 16.19.

To remain at the right hand of God,
Not conjured down by a Mass-Priests Nod. Luke 22.19.

It Is called Bread and Wine, in Commemoration
Of Christ's Death, and Paul in his Station
Calls it bread several times after Consecration, 1 Cor. 11.26, 28

Cannot be a real Body by Mass Conjuration:
It Is called breaking Bread, in vain
If after Thanksgiving no Bread remain: Mar. 14.22.

If Christ's Body to bread could be involved,
Then Paul needed not desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.

And to be with Christ, when Paul he
Might every day with Christ at Altar be.
But Paul tho he had God's Spirit, yet alas
He practiced nothing of this wicked Mass:
No, no such wicked Mass in his days,
This made since by Popes several ways.
With Additions several Popes did move, Jer. 44.4, 5.

Which I could, if need, resist and prove:
And wicked too, in their lives so odd,
Both Popes and Mass abominable to God.
For Henry the 6th Emperor, Tit. 1.16.
eating the Host
Was poisoned, yet of Mass they will boast.
Also one of the Popes poisoned in the Challice;
O brave Mass, what a poisoned God of Malice! 1 Pet. 3.4.

Here Is the real presence in the whole,
If poisons Bodies, poisons more the Soul:
Yet call it Bread, came down from Heaven,
It Is a great untruth, and very bad leaven.
No Friends, I can tell you its pedigree,
Forty four of Isaiah, 15.17. Verse will describe it t'e. Isa. 44.15, 17.

To make's believe real presence, Popes strive,
That Christ's Body is in the Wafer alive:
Yet the Wafer still a dead thing it is plain,
Cannot move, but as the Priest does fain.
For Christ's Body, consider as we go,
Is a living Substance, and must be so; Romans 6.9.

Eternally being raised from the dead, says
Scripture, which is the only Rule of Faith:
Christ dies no more, being raised from the Dead, Rev. 1.18.

But lives for evermore the Churches Head.
Waser cannot be Christ's Body by a Priests Nod, Luke 20.36.

Being a dead substance, 1 Pet. 3.22.
Christ the living God:
Angels, Mat. 28.18.
Authorities, all Powers are under,
Made subject unto Christ; then I wonder
How a Mass-Priest came by such Power, 1 Cor. 1.24.

To command Christ into a Wafer any hour:
No, don't so believe, it is sinful evil,
Power Mass-Priests have, is only from the Devil:
Tho Popes did this wicked Mass devise, John 8.44.

Yet originally from the Father of Lies:
This power cannot command Christ, for they
Fear and tremble, Jam. 2.19.
and do Christ obey:
So then, their power is a delusion great,
That Christ is in the Wafer a mere Cheat: 2 These. 2.11.

If the real presence were true, what groans
Christ endures to eat his body and bones!
Consider Friends, good Counsel don't refuse;
Those Mass-mongers are worse than Jews: Luke 23.23.

They once crucified Christ in the Flesh;
But those Mass-Priests crucify Him afresh:
If bread could be substantiated by such Noddies
As real, then so many Wafers so many bodies.
Then Christ's Body is divided into many parts;
Consider this, 1 Cor. 1.13
you that have enlightened Hearts:
What says the Scripture, Is Christ divided?
No, he is not, by Scripture it is plain decided:
One Body, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord,
One Faith, one Baptism, as says the Word:
If every Wafer, consecrated by a Mass-Noddy,
Be metamophis'd substantial Christ's Body,
Then so many Wafers, by Papist Debators,
So many Christ's, yea Christ's Mediators;
Which is against Scriptures standing Rod, 1 Cor. 8.6.

Which say to us, there is but one God;
And one only Jesus Christ our Lord,
One God, and Mediator, says the Word:
Between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2 5.
the Man Christ Jesus;
Therefore, let Men's inventions not please us.
Christ took bread, Luke 22.19.
gave thanks, brake it,
Said, This is my Body, living when spoke it:
Signifies Christ's Body, do it in remembrance of me; 1 Cor. 11.24.25

Christ living did not eat his Body you see.
Should bread incorporate become Christ's Body, Psalm. 94.8.

Christ in Heaven, he believes this, is a Noddy: Romans 1.22, 23.

If bread's turned to Christ's Body, then when eat
The Wafer, they eat Christ, O horrid cheat! 1 Cor. 2.14.

The wicked don't receive Christ, none of them
Understand, things spiritual are foolishness to 'em. Dan. 12.10.

SECT. III.
MY first Arrow being gone through clear, Psalm. 51.17.

I will draw a second to make good the rear: Hos. 6.6.

A second Error in Mass, by which I cannot pass,
Say, they daily offer up Christ in the Mass! Mic. 6.8.

The Gospel allows Ministers, and Sacrifices too,
But not superstitious Ceremonies to do: Mat. 12.7.

Sacrifice of prayer, praise, a Heart Contrite, Psa. 116.17.

Broken for sin, praying in Faith, Gods Delight: Heb. 13.10.

Not in your gross superstitious Idolatries,
God will have mercy, obedience, not Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15.22.

That there is need offering Christ in the Mass, Heb. 9.26.

By way of sacrifice, is an error very gross
In Scripture, it is full of Blasphemies
Against Christ's priestly Offices, Heb. 10.10.
and implies
An imperfection in Christ's dying Sacrifice;
Contrary to Scriptures, which do us call,
Remember Christ's Offering his Body once for all
In sacrifice, to perfect them are sanctified,
Here Is compleatness of Christ's sufferings, Acts 4.12.
who died
To satisfy Gods Justice without delay,
Which could not be by any other way. Mat. 3.17.

Christ's one sacrifice without Exemption, Heb. 7.27.

Has completed for ever Man's Redemption:
Search Scriptures, once, once, Heb. 9.28.
once for all
Christ suffered for us, 1 Pet. 3.18.
whom God does call
An All-sufficient Sacrifice, Heb. 10.10, ^^.
I am well-pleased
In my Son, hear him, ye that are diseased:
Hear him, believe in him, as you pass,
Take heed of this wicked Idolatrous Mass! Mat. 17.5.

For to reiterate a thing once done, mind,
For the attaining or accomplishing the end
For which it is begun, declares an imperfection;
By Mass Christ's Sacrifice, Mat. 23.28.33. verse.
cast by rejection
As imperfect, therefore they offer sacrifice,
To perfect what Christ begun, O Blasphemies!
Making Christ himself a mere Cipher,
His sacrifice not valued as Ashes of an Hifer: Mat. 3.17.

Yet in Christ alone God's well-pleased, Mat. 28.18.
and
Has committed all power into his hand:
Yet see, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the 18. verse. Ezekiel. 14.3, 6.
these Mass-Priests how they vant
Of Mass, and render Christ's Death insignificant:
So the glory of Christ's priestly Office veiled,
The Gospel Truth's perverted, and concealed;
Here Is Mass-worship, John 5.21.
an Idol-god for a Savior,
As appears-by their Monkish lives behavior;
Trampling under foot Christ's precious blood, Heb. 10.29.

Glory of Christ's priestly Office, long withstood
The Patience of Christ, but it is not long
Christ will suffer them to usurp this wrong: Psa. 11.6.

How many Protestants lives, has this stood,
That the Wafer is not Christ's body and blood.
But the wicked shall do wickedly, Dan. 12.10.
and
None of the wicked shall understand.
The wicked shall wax worse and worse,
Deceivers, 2 Timothy 3.13.
deceiving, and deceived is a Curse:
It Is just with God such should be deceived,
When Truth with them cannot be believed.
When truth comes into the World in sight,
They love darkness still, John 3.19.
rather than light:
Will not believe, their Conscience so depraved,
Cannot receive truth, 2 These. 2.10.
that they may be saved:
They with malice Protestants inviron,
Having their Conscience seared with a hot Iron:
Their Consciences hardened, 1 Timothy 4.2.
in sin bold,
False wicked Doctrines they do unfold:
And affirm those things for real truth,
So falsely corrupt both Age and Youth.
Which they know to be false, yet deluded
By Satan, who on Adam and Eve intruded; Genesis 3.4.

Because they did not believe the Truth,
It Is just with God on Age or Youth,
To send them very strong delusions,
To believe the Devils wicked infusions; 2 These. 2., 11 12. verse.

That they should believe the Devils lies,
Because they delight in Blasphemies.
God's righteous in condemning Age or Youth,
Whose pleasure is in Unrighteousness, not in Truth:
How they adore wickedness in their Station,
And corrupt Scriptures by false Translation,
And false glosses thereon, and among
All, to serve God in an unknown Tongue: 1 Cor. 14.14

Denying Scriptures, by their command,
To be read by the Laity at no hand;
This their diabolical way to advance
Superstition, keeping People in ignorance.
Yet God in all Ages preserved by his Grace
Some that never wicked Mass did embrace; 1 Kings 19.18

But still did oppose Popery to it is face,
Yet by Popes cruelly suffered in their race:
Popes being for Cruelty, Prove. 12.10.
wicked and base
To Protestants, God change their Hearts by Grace!
I must tell you the Truth, I cannot spare ye, Col. 2.18.

They worship Images, and Virgin Mary;
An express Badge of Antichrist they carry, 1 Timothy 4.3.

Against Scripture, prohibiting times to marry.
Another Beast mark, which like a Cheat,
Against Scripture, command to abstain meat;
Humane Tradition, Holy Days, Deuteronomy. 18.10. 12. verse.
which is a plain
Mark of the Beast, yet how few refrain:
Yet Scripture forbids them, says Paul again,
I am afraid of you, lest labored in vain.
What Is tell of Scripture, that is not in their Eye, Gal. 4.3, 4.

They plead Tradition, Custom, and Antiquity.
Scriptures they lay aside, like a thing dead,
Hold the Pope to be the Churches Head! Col 1.18.

A brave Head he is, if you will him see,
Thirteen of the Revelations will describe him to'e. Rev. 13.1.

Here Is that Monster that long has bin
In the World, and for money forgives sin,
If you will believe him, but my lines cry,
He is the Beast that speaks Blasphemy,
And is guilty of that sin of Simony; Col. 2.8.

He is the Great Beast of all Iniquity,
This proud, insulting, domineering Priest,
Enemy to godliness, and is Antichrist:
Who forces all abomination with his Rod,
Exalts himself above all that is called God: 2 These. 2.4,

He is the Abomination that is void of Grace, Rev. 13.16.

Still opposes Christ, and his Image deface,
Which is Holiness, Josh. 24.19.20. verse.
not a Picture so base.
The Counsel which an ancient Author gave,
Let every one with special care receive;
He that would holy live, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the 18. verse.
from Rome be packing,
There Is all things else, but Holiness is lacking.
SECT. IV.
BY Mass see, breaking bread is misapplied,
The Ordinance they also do divide,
Wine to the Laity is by Mass-Priests denied;
Yet Christ, when his Ordinance set up,
Christ took bread, Luke 22.19.20. verse.
and also the Cup:
But the Wine from the Laity is put,
Priest alone receives it into his Gut.
Here Is your Mass-priest, he drinks Wine alone,
But the poor Laity they have never none.
Yet Christ did institute one as the other, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25

But Christ's Institution is as younger Brother,
Cast out by Mass-priests, as you may see,
What the Popes reckon Christ to be,
Or Gospel Institution in the least degree.
Many Crosses and Monkey-faces they make,
Before their Idol god they will take.
Yet no crosses used in the Apostles days,
Nor Scripture pattern for such Idle plays.
No Crosses were used by Christ his hand,
Nor by any example or Scripture Command;
Of Crosses there is made no mention
At the Institution, nor Scripture-intention,
These Crosses then are the Pope's Invention.
For Pagans did not use Crosses, in History see,
In their Idolatrous Worship: Crosses must be
By Pope Gregory the seventh in his station
Made, who was much given to Conjuration:
A mere Conjurer, here is the Infallible Head
Of Crossing the Challice, and also the Bread:
Reader, observe, and consider what is said.
They never say Mass without Wax-tapers
Or Candles, with many crossing Capers;
It Is spiritual darkness, as does appear,
What need Candles when Sun shines clear?
How corrupt are Mass-priests; understand,
Are Crosses and Candles God's Command?
Paul gloried in Christ's Cross in his Heart, Gal. 6.14.

Not use Crosses in Worship, that is Papists Art.
In Scripture no such Custom understand, 1 Cor. 11.16. Isa. 1.12.

Who has required this at their hand?
Must they not say our Master the Pope?
For no Command in Scripture scope
For such Practices; so Christ's Sovereignty deny,
And with inventions of Men comply. Mat. 15.9.

It Is great dishonor to Christ and Indignity,
To use that in Worship is mere Idolatry
Which Christ never instituted, is Popery:
As tho Christ was not the only Lawgiver,
Being Wisdoms Fountain, God blessed for ever. Romans 9.5.

Thus I have shot at the Mass, by his hand
Who gives Grace those things to understand.
No such Custom in Scripture, or Church of Christ,
To the Testimony, or go where they list.
If any Preach not according to Scripture bold, Isa. 8.20.

Let'm be accursed that against Scripture hold:
See what is this Mass, can any thing be worse, Gal. 1.8.

To receve the Beast-mark, a dreadful Curse? Rev. 13.16.

They that are filthy, will be so still,
Wickedness does now the Ephah fill. Rev. 22.11.

Away with your Mass, you god-eaters,
Make a Cake a god, then eat him, Cheaters;
That after many Crosses all in an hour,
Make a Waser a god, and presently him devour;
May be called belly-gods, Phil. 3.19.
for you advance
Your wickedness, keeping People in Ignorance:
Away then with your linsey-woolsey garments, Lev. 19.19.

God accepts you no more than Verments.
So Christ calls you a generation of Vipers, Mat. 23.33.

Who think Worship consists in Organ-pipers.
You are for Bowings, Crosses, hat and knee,
Yet live in sin, sure bad Men are ye;
What will ye do, Tit. 1.13, 14, 16. verses.
that think to please
The Lord with such vain things as these?
Think all well, if your Paternoster can
Say over, call your Neighbor heretick-man;
If not join with you in your Mass
Of Idolatry, Acts 21.28.
then for a Heretic must pass,
With flouts and scoffs, if once any fly
From superstitious Ceremonies of Popery.
To whom do you your Cruelties lay?
Who are termed Heretics so much as they
That fear God most? Acts 24.14.
Papists in sin persist,
As if could please God with what they list.
He that will not own the Mass, Act. 28.22.
must dye,
And if Commanded by the Pope's Authority;
Commit Murder or cruel Massacry
On Protestants, Psalm. 74.20.
poor Children pass not by,
Cruelly destroy all without Humanity.
To Christ's Kingly Office the Pope does fly;
Under pretense of ruling for Christ, does hate
His Servants, every where them Excommunicate:
Pretend have Peter's Key, Mat. 16.19.
if believe what they say,
If not, Paul's Sword will make you obey.
Without the Beast-mark none must buy or sell, Rev. 13.17.

That don't Conform to ways lead to Hell.
They make show of Wisdom in their station,
Of Will Worship as a show of Humiliation. Col. 2.23.

So cunning is Satan, and deceitful Man's heart, Act. 5.3.

Does think himself godly, Satan's art
To deceive, when from sin they never depart. Rev. 12.9.

SECT. V.
FRom the Mass I will now a little advance,
And write briefly of Christ's Ordinance,
Or last Supper, which is abused by Ignorance. Luke 22.15.

To institute this Ordinance nothing did move
Christ so to do, but his Grace and Love;
As a Memorial of his dying Passion free, Luke 22.19.

Do this in remembrance of me.
Breaking Bread was an Ordinance, says my rhimes,
Which Saints did use in Primitive times; Act. 2.42, 46.

By Jesus Christ was first instituted,
Though by many since it has been polluted, Act. 20.7.

By Men's inventions, contrary to Christ's Command,
As by Mass, and otherways too in England.
Breaking Bread has a twofold signification,
That we should remember in our station, Isa. 53.5.

Christ's Body broken for our Salvation:
Thereby to consider all the benefits we
Have received by Christ's sufferings free.
Also to be mindful of our Communion
One with another, Joh. 15.12, 13.
as Believers in Union
With Jesus Christ, who is their head,
Presented unto them in and by the Bread;
Which consists and made of many grains,
Not like Mass, where no bread remains
After Thanksgiving, as Mass-priest fains.
A double signification has the Wine likewise, Mar. 14.24.

Not like wicked Mass used in our days.
But puts Believers in mind of Christ's Blood,
Which he shed for their everlasting good.
Also Christ's Death is very significant
In ratifying unto us the New Covenant
Or Testament, and all things therein contained, Ezekiel. 36.25, to the 35. verse

Says Scripture, therefore Mass to be refrained.
It signifies Believers Communion in station, Luke 22.20.

And fellowship with Christ their Salvation. 1 Cor. 1.9.

Likewise to remember in our generation,
To be sincere to Christ under Temptation, Luke 22.28, 29, 30. verse.

Then shall reign with Christ in glorification.
Therefore all they who use this Ordinance
Should have no fellowship, 1 Cor. 6.2.
but should advance
From Idolaters and superstitious evils,
Who in the Scriptures are called Devils. 1 Cor. 10.21.

From unfruitful works of darkness move,
If break Bread, Ephesians. 5.11.
let it be in real Love.
Primitive Believers were of one mind
And heart, Act. 4.32.
let all malice be declined.
It Is a dangerous thing to partake or accord
Of this Ordinance unworthily, says the Word,
Are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord:
They eat and drink their own Damnation,
Not discerning Christ's Body in their station: 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29. verse.

Want the eye of Faith, which does advance
The Soul to see the end of this Ordinance:
So are damned for Unbelief and Hypocrisy,
Which is the Cause of many, I fear and cry:
Therefore try, by a heart real Examination,
Whether fit for such Communication;
And not like the Priests of the Nation,
Who admit Drunkards or any in their station,
Whoremasters, Profane Men in Conversation.
Woe unto the Bishops and Priests of the land,
When God shall say, Is this my Command?
Who has required this at your hand? Isa. 1.9.

How Profane are Priests in the Nation,
To all wicked men officiate Administration;
How corrupt with the Pope's pollution,
Few of them keep to Christ's Institution;
But Administer unto all, none exempt,
So bring the Ordinance into contempt.
How carelessly and promiscuously admit, Rev. 2.2.

Before they are by Examination fit:
Contrary to Scriptures, which you may see,
If you please to search the Scriptures free.
The Ordinance refreshes the soul of Faith, Romans 14.23.

But to the wicked Damnation Scripture says.
According to Christ's Institution it is good,
Yet Bread and Wine are not Christ's blood:
Nor is Christ in or under them, as Papist list,
It Is by Faith alone we receive Christ. Ephesians. 3.17.

Christ's Death by Believers is highly prized,
Christ our Passover for us is sacrificed: 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

Hate Mass, that by wicked Men was devised.
Purge the old leaven, sin, and keep the feast,
Not with wicked Mass, as does the Beast
And her followers all, both age and youth;
Let us with unleavened Bread, sincere truth,
Purge therefore the old leaven, be you new,
That Christ by Faith may dwell in you.
Christ as the only Mediator was crucified
To reconcile us in him, Justice is fully satisfied:
No need Mass, Christ the alone Propitiation, 1 John 2.1, 2.

On Christ alone will I depend for Salvation: Col 1.14.

It Is by his Blood my Soul is cleans'd, is eased,
Because God said, In him I am well pleased. Mat. 17.5.

SECT. VI. Concerning Purgatory.
POpery once again I here call to mind,
In opposition to Popery I have more behind.
Papists hold a middle and infernal place,
Where Souls suffer, without Money, a sad Case!
And it is a cunning Artifice to get Money by,
For if you are rich, and like to dye,
Then to a Mass-priest your selves apply:
He will Pray you out of Purgatory,
If you have Faith to believe his story,
But his Prayer never brings thee to glory.
For consider what Scriptures unto us tell, Luke 16.23.

At Death the Souls of wicked go to Hell
Immediately; the rich Man, mind it well,
In Hell lift up his eyes, he did not dwell
In Purgatory, his Condition sad, for alas!
In those days were no Priests to say Mass.
Though Satan's subtilty in wickedness was great,
Yet then to get Money had not this feat.
His Sons, the Popes, did since this complete,
So Money get, and many Souls they cheat.
See then, Mar. 11.22.
and understand these things plain,
Their feigned Purgatory is only for gain;
For without Money there the Poor may lie,
Not a Prayer for them, see their Charity,
For want of Money they in Purgatory frye,
But for their Comfort a Purgatory is none say I.
It Is true, there is in this life a Purgation;
That is, 1 John 1.7.
Jesus Christ's blood, by renovation
Must purge our Souls, by Regeneration.
Christ's Blood must be applied by Faith's desire
Whilst we live, Heb. 9.14. and 11.6.
or never after by fire.
When the wicked dye, no place of Purgation
Do they go into, but Hells Damnation.
Don't be deluded with Purgatory in station,
Must be Converted if ever enjoy glorification. Mat. 18.3.

All Believers at Death, when they dye,
Are carried into Heaven immediately;
By Christ's Mediation, that Pearl of great price,
This day shall be with me in Paradise. Luke 23.43.

Purgatory you see then is Men's device,
For it is clear, Scriptures they don't tell
Of a Purgatory, between Heaven and Hell.
No Reader, don't deceive thy Soul,
For a Purgatory there is none at all:
Here Is a twofold Cheat, what can be worse?
To deceive thy Soul, and also thy Purse.
Here Is another thing which does harden
Men in sin, Indulgences and Pope's Pardon:
Which frees Men from sin in God's sight,
This also a Cheat for Money, makes Purse light.
Can Man forgive sin? Luke 7.49.
a blasphemous story;
Here Is a Cheat for Money, as is Purgatory.
This is that brings grist to the Pope's Mill,
It Is diametrically opposite to Scripture still,
Which tells us Truth, that there is none
Can forgive sin but God in Christ alone.
By Indulgences wickedly invented by the Pope,
Men live in wickedness, yet have false hope:
Live in all kind of sensuality, Hell's road, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. verse.

Swearing, Whoring, Drunken sins, are all-a-mode:
Why? because they believe a Mass-Priest
Can pardon them, so live as they list.
As if Mass, Holy Water, by a Priest's Conjuration
Did purge sin, so live a wicked Conversation.
What need I care how I live, if with a fee
To a Mass-priest he can make me free.
I have read of one Martyr, whom I honor
In the Faith, being brought before bloody Bonner,
Said, Sir, at first I was of your Faith,
But now I believe what Scripture says,
Not a Priest, which did in sin me harden,
Cared not how I lived, because had a Pardon
Of a Mass-priest for Money, Isa. 6.16.
but now I cry
None can forgive sin but the holy Deity.
SECT. VII. Popish Penance.
HEre I will join Popish Satisfaction
By Penance, which is also a wicked detraction
From Christ's Merits, if by Whipping, Fasting, we
Satisfy God's Justice in our own Persons, see
What Papists count Jesus Christ to be.
Christ's Merits by Papists excommunicated,
Yet Christ's alone Satisfaction in Scripture stated:
By the travel of his Soul God is satisfied, Isa. 53.11.

Which by Popish Penance is wickedly denied.
Christ made an end of sin, Heb. 10.14.
by Faith applied
By one Sacrifice perfected them are sanctified,
For Believers obtained an eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.12.

Are Pardoned, Justified, without exemption.
By Christ alone we have Favor with God,
Sin made us Enemies, wicked, vile, and odd.
Alas, Col. 1.21.
Confession of sin is not Satisfaction,
Our best Duties are tainted with putrefaction
Of sin, our Repentance, Confession, Humiliation,
Are tainted with Hypocrisy and Dissimulation. 1 John 1.8.

Sin cannot satisfy, for it is clear in reason,
No more than a Traitor if Confess his Treason.
Our mourning for sin, Praying for Pardon
And strength against sin, should not harden
In sin, our striving for mortification,
Are quite other things than Satisfaction.
Whatever we offer to God for acceptance, Heb. 7.25.

It Is through Christ's Intercession and Mediation.
This is a sure Rule and Foundation-stone,
That God's Justice is satisfied by Christ alone,
For all Believers then like Christ there is none.
For Man's sin God's Justice would admit
No other satisfaction, Mat. 17.5.
this Point don't forget.
And this must be applied by Faith alone, Act. 4.12.

And this the Papist cannot abide to own.
They to the Virgin Mary themselves apply
For Intercession, and on Saints also rely,
As Mediators with Christ; 1 Timothy 2.5.
Oh Blasphemy!
As if Christ, blessed for ever, needed Coadjutors,
Which is a Blasphemy my Soul abhorrs;
It Is lifting up the Creature, and does deface
Christ's Merits, undervaluing God's Free Grace:
For if Christ's sufficient Sacrifice be denied, Col. 3.11.

To what end was Christ incarnate and died.
What greater Indignity, dishonor can be
To Christ, than is given by Papists you see?
What Is worse than undermine the Foundation
Of all Happiness? Col. 1.19.
by Christ alone is Salvation,
Not by Virgin Mary, nor Saints in station.
They cast their Crowns at Christ, Rev. 4.10.
and fall
Before his Feet, Christ being all in all.
SECT. VIII.
Obj. SOme may move this Objection so bold,
Why against Papists do you so hold?
Sol. Because receive their worship from old,
Pagan Heathens, which I could unfold,
From ancient Authors, and Scripture bold;
There was the Dragon worship at least,
From which derives worship of the Beast: Rev. 13.2, 3*4. Verses. and 14 15.

On which the generality of men does run;
It Is the grossest Idolatry under the Sun:
Because fairest pretense of worshipping Jesus,
So with Superstitions think to please us.
So turn Christ into an Idol it is plain,
What else does bowing to Images mean,
Their Wafer-god, and other things as vain?
Crosses, Crucifixes, and Beads such Idle Toys,
Fit to please Children and foolish Boys.
Being ignorant of Christ's Righteousness all one, Romans 10.2, 3.

Men invent a righteousness of their own,
Not living by Faith, into Hell are thrown.
God is a Spirit, and requires of Age or Youth,
To worship him in Spirit and in Truth.
Tho by what is written, John 4.24.
Papists may be enraged
Against me, yet my Soul is here engaged,
It Is a wicked Religion, for there is none
Other way to Salvation, but by Christ alone. Acts 4.12.

Must be saved by Christ alone, if at all,
None can be saved, whether great or small,
But in and through Christ, who is all in all.
Tho Christ don't save without Sanctification; Luke 17.12.

Yet Sanctification don't merit Salvation.
I bear Papists no malice, I wish them well,
Oh would they turn from the way of Hell!
Therefore let none mistake me herein,
I hate not their Persons, but only their Sin.
Christ's Excellency I will endeavor to advance,
Whiles I am in the World, Husnance.
To do them good I would in love accord,
My utmost strength in a spiritual way afford,
If would dispute according to the Word.
But that they deny with a stunning blow,
Cry old Fathers, John 4.20.
Tradition, and then you know,
Deny the Statute, to what end pleads Law?
They cannot defend their Religion by the Word,
Therefore, often use they Fire and Sword:
If cannot defend it by their magical Charms,
Then they use Paul's Sword, force of Arms.
When any false worship would introduce, 2 Pet. 3.16, 17.

They put by the Scriptures, by a sinful abuse.
By false glosses on Scripture, in their Station,
And by their corrupt and false Translation; Ephesians. 4.18, 19. verse.

Then their wicked Doctrines to advance
Is by keeping People in their ignorance.
It Is Will Worship clear, Col. 2.8.
in Scripture still,
So may receive twenty worships if you will:
Lay aside Scripture, what Rule for Faith,
A mere Chaos, if follow what Tradition says.
Then what Jews, Turks, and Pagans devise,
And what is invented by the Father of lies:
Therefore keep to Scripture in thy Station,
They were given by Divine Inspiration:
And Scriptures are by the Spirits Operation, 1 Timothy 3.15.16. verses. Col. 2.12.

Able to make us wise unto Salvation.
Papists have many Blasphemies, should follow 'em,
More Fopperies, than would contain a Volume:
But those I have written without dispute,
Strike at Jesus Christ, the Foundation Root.
Of all happiness therefore could not be mute
To extenuate Christ's Excellency as bad fruit:
Yea diabolical wicked without dispute,
Consider these hints, and thy self recruit,
With Scripture light those Errors confute;
Don't see thy Savior slighted, yet be mute.
Own Christ here, Luke 22.28, 29. verse..
don't believe Papists Story,
And fear not, Christ will own thee in Glory.
SECT. IX.
Obj. BUt some may say, in all your scope,
Cannot you tell us the Rise of the Pope?
Sol. At first they were Bishops understand,
Placed and advanced by the Emperors hand;
As Bishops are by the King of England,
And supported in dignity by his hand;
And did live in very much Tranquillity,
Under the Emperors power and Eye,
Until Pope Hildebrand, he did it deny,
Who was a Sorcerer, and by his wicked pride,
The Emperors power he did divide,
Both Ecclesiastical and Civil power applied
To the Pope, by whose Example and Ambition,
Filled Europe with most wicked Superstition:
Under pretense of Chastity, destroyed Marriage, 1 Timothy 4.3.

So base and wicked in their Carriage.
Under the Title of Liberty, Prove. 26.25.
did break peace
With Emperors, so Popes did increase
In wickedness, and abominable Idolatry,
And so resisted the Emperors Authority:
So at length they brought it to pass,
By the Popes Command to say wicked Mass.
And that a few Cardinals wickedly bent,
Should choose a pope without the consent
Of the Emperor, contrary to Law, and
The Emperors just right, and command:
To advance Bishops, the right his own,
This by Popes has been long overthrown.
Have extorted all into their own hands,
That under the Popes are, or commands:
And not content with that, have so prevailed
By usurpation, the Emperors have quail'd.
All power to Pope himself being wicked affected, 2 These. 2.4.

For whereas no Pope might be elected
Without the Emperor, that is now rejected
By the Pope, and no Emperor to stand
Without the popes consent and hand:
Who take upon them so in their Station,
No Emperor shall be in their Generation,
Without the popes holy Confirmation;
Yea, at pleasure the pope by Excommunication
Depose Kings, Psa. 73.6.
and Emperors by his pride,
See on Frederick the First, who was spied
To hold popes Stirrup on the wrong side,
For which the pope could not him abide.
Thus popes take on them imperial power
Over Kings and Princes unto this Hour.
For Henry the fourth, Emperor, did stand
At pope Gregorys Gate, by his Command,
Three days to beg pardon at popes hand;
The pope caused Henry second, King of England
For some difference with a Bishop, understand,
To go barefoot, by the popes command,
To Canterbury with his bleeding feet,
That he might a Bishops Tomb there meet:
Which for a King to do, was a wicked thing
Of the Pope, also John once Englands King,
The Pope caused to bow, and kneel down
At the feet of the popes Legate's frown,
And also to offen unto him his Crown;
And to kiss the Bishop of Canterburys Feet,
Which for a King to do, is very unmeet,
But England's King now has more Wit.
He is not Henry or John by Name,
But the prudent Understanding King William,
Will not suffer the Pope Supreme to be,
To Reign over him in such a degree: Prove. 29.4.

I hope power of the pope in his days
Will be abrogated, the King being wise.
Tho some Bishops were loath he should stand
As King-supream, all Bishops to command,
But now will know him King of England.
I cannot but pray for his Majesty's success, Eccl. 8.2, 4.

Also his Royal Consort Jehovah bless.
Make them King and Queen of high renown,
To throw Will Worship and Popery down:
But not to enlarge here, consider Popes pride,
How over Kings and Emperors ride.
See Popes and Bishops Ambition wicked and odd,
Exalt themselves above all that is called God.
Hence it appears that Popes vain Tradition, 2 These. 2.4,

Brought in all their wicked Superstition:
Superstition, by degrees brought Idolatry;
Idolatry increased Ignorance and Blasphemy:
Ignorance embraced that delusions Story,
And feigned great lie of Purgatory: Luke 16.22, 23. verses.

Purgatory brought the Doctrine of praying
For Souls departed, for Money playing.
Praying for the Dead, this wicked Cheat,
Did cause men to give Estates very great
Unto the Church of Rome, who did aspire
To Covetousness, to maintain Monk and Friar:
Then large revenues brought their Avarice,
So prompt them to all Sin and Vice:
Ambition brought their insulting pride Psalm. 10.3, 4.

Over Emperors, and many Kings beside.
Their pride sought for an Arm of Flesh,
Man's power to support wickedness afresh:
Power brought in Cruelty in possession,
The Popes Cruelty brought Oppression:
Oppression brought on cruel Persecution, Heb. 11.36.37, 38. verses.

Which brought many to their dissolution.
In which many Saints have suffered at least
Cruel oppression by power of the Beast.
The Pope and's adherents, which Scripture call
A Star from Heaven, the Church, Rev. 9.1 to the 12 verse.
did fall
From the Faith, full of Wormwood and Gall.
In respect of corrupt Doctrines in profession; Rev. 8.10.11.

Gall, in respect of their cruel Oppression:
Which has been manifest in all Lands,
Within jurisdiction of Popes commands.
Scripture the Pope lays aside as dead,
Popes commands and decretals are head
Above Scripture, of Blasphemy Papist not afraid.
You see, yea opposes God himself, understand,
Shall not bow to Images, Exodus 20.5, 5.
is Gods Command:
The Pope expungeth this Precept, and
Sets up Images in Churches by his hand
Or Authority; God says shall not bow down
To Idols, the Pope says with his Crown,
Worship these, or I on you will frown.
Here Is the Popes command, and threatening Rod,
As Antichrist blasphemously opposes God.
What think Reader, who shall we obey,
God or the Pope? consider it in thy way:
Instead of Purgatory, Hell is Popes pay,
Therefore God obey in this thy day. Act. 5.29.

The Pope has many Errors great and small,
For some sins Papists hold to be venial;
But Scripture does not at all say so,
The least sin is a Transgression of Gods Law:
Yea, the least sin which is much worse,
Exposes all Men to a dreadful Curse. Gal. 3.10.

But not to enlarge here, yet mind well,
For little sins, without Repentance I tell,
And Faith in Christ, God has a great Hell
Instead of Purgatory, with false hope don't swell.
Therefore take heed, who can in's fury dwell?
What Is to lie under Gods wrath, Psalm. 90.11.
none can tell.
Thus I have given you so brief's I can,
The Popes Rise, and their Actions scan,
Consider it, as art an honest Man.
Now Reader, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.
in love, to help thy Memory,
To sum up all, I will my self apply:
Consider it without a partial Eye,
Understand what is said, as passest by.
SECT. X.
MAny hundred years the Man of Sin
His Errors concealed, in the World bin:
All his wickedness, which he has done,
Has been admired by most as they run:
And received all Errors as they concluded,
By which most Men have been deluded.
The Errors which Papists have broached plain,
Are received for sound Doctrines, so vain
Are Men in Superstitious forms and ways,
To use them for true worship in our days:
The Man of Sin does style himself Head
Of the Church, and Christ's Vicar; it is said
That Jesuits, Priests, Monks, Friars are
Christ's Ministers, then of them take care:
The Laws and Canons of those deemed
Before Scriptures, are by many esteemed.
The power of the Pope unto this hour
Has been executed as Christ's power:
The Roman Episcopal Sea, Court without,
Has, and is counted Christ's Church no doubt.
By many their foolish Penance does pass,
For Repentance, also their abominable Mass
Has been received as the real presence, alas!
Many Protestants lives has this stood,
That the Wafer is not Christ's body and blood:
Their fained delusions, and wicked Story,
For a Money-cheat, is their Purgatory:
Their outward show of wisdom inclined,
As voluntary Religion, humbleness of Mind,
Not sparing the body, makes them esteemed
Religious and holy, their Ceremonies deemed
As necessary; their rich adorning Images, see
Their Altars and Temples, how rich they be
Set forth, their Wax-candles in degree,
And gaudy Copes by their light may see:
Their bowings, crossings, and Antic Tricks,
With this, Faith not keep with Heretics:
By which Errors most of Age and Youth,
Who are ignorant of spiritual Truth,
Do look upon the Man of sin as Head
Of the Church, so Christ's Institutions dead
With most, thus Satan does cunningly work
In the World, such baseness in men lurk. 2 Cor. 2.11.

Pope will tread on the Neck of Kings,
Yet be called a Servant of Servants sings:
He pretends to save Souls, yet with Idolatry,
Ways of false-worship and Blasphemy:
All ways of deceiveableness are found,
In Popery all unrighteousness does abound.
Put all ways of Unrighteousness together,
They may be found in Popery as Brother.
They scruple not to do any wicked act, Romans 3.18.

If they their wicked purpose can effect:
Witness that Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,
And others, with many a bloody Massacre:
Their inhumane Cruelty in Ireland,
Many poor Innocents suffered by Papists hand.
What bloody designs had against England
Now, had not God disappointed Papist, understand,
Protestants might in blood have been involved,
Had not God Papists wicked Inventions dissolved:
And in other places many Cruelties I find
Acted by Papist, Jehovah change their mind,
To love mercy and truth, Micah 6.8.
may be inclined;
To love Scripture Truths, and to Protestants kind.
And not hold it lawful to break Faith,
And promise with Heretics, as Pope says:
And disingage Subjects from Allegiance due,
Then raise Wars in England, it is too true.
What wickedness was acted by a Papist Crew,
Such as before, England never knew.
Papists tell Men they merit Heaven further,
If Men perpetrate or commit Murder
Or any Villainy, to advance wicked Baal,
The Church of Rome, as I may her call.
Oh that England now may loath her all,
That before our King and Queen may fall
Babylon, Rev. 17.1. to the 6. verse.
Rome, that false Prophet and Whore
Of Abominations, let us embrace her no more:
Let Us loath Popery with the greatest detestation,
Because from Pagans had it is derivation,
And too much practiced in our Nation,
Had I time, I could give a Demonstration.
But all Popery to declare and unmask
Particularly, were for me an infinite task.
Thus I have briefly gone through Popery;
I could say something also of Episcopacy,
But at present I shall pass it by,
And write briefly, as my lines imply
Of Gospel Worship, by Scripture-warranty:
How Christ's Kingly and Priestly office is invaded,
Under pretense for Christ, yet by Papist degraded,
Is taken notice of, you see in my walk,
Next of Gospel Worship I Will a little talk:
And consider it well as you pass by,
Gospel Truths by Faith rightly apply.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
GOD has showed thee, Micah 6.8.
Man, what is good,
What to believe, what to do, is understood
By Scripture, what God requires of thee,
To do justly, and to love Mercy free,
And to walk humbly with thy God, see
This in Scripture, both high and low degree,
Thy Obedience must all self-denying be, Luke 9.23.

Because our Salvation is by Christ alone, Romans 3.24.
free:
Justification, John 1.12.
Adoption and Sanctification
Are all free unto us in our generation; 1 John 3.1.

Are the fruit of Christ's Purchase clear, Romans 6.4, 6.

Which in the Scriptures does full appear. Ephesians. 1.4.

All Scripture is given by God's Inspiration,
Is profitable for Doctrine in Men's station,
For Reproof, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
for Correction, in Men's generation,
For Instruction in righteousness to Salvation:
That the Man of God may be perfect,
Thoroughly furnished, to all good works complete.
There Is nothing in Religion but is contained
In Scripture, Isa. 8.20.
and by Scripture maintained
Should be, Gal. 1.8.
and not by Men's Tradition feigned:
Which is vain Religion or Will Worship, Mar. 7.7.
see
In this Book more clear, Col. 2.18, 23.
search Scripture free.
The Apostle shows that all things may
And ought to be sought in a Scripture way; Romans 15.4.

Because Scriptures are sufficient for directation,
To make a Man wise unto Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.

To search Scriptures I have my self applyd,
The more, John 5.39.
because by many are laid aside:
Count them insignificant, though not flatly denied,
By a light within, and spirit of Pride. Obad. 3.4.

This is the Basis of all their arrogance,
Brethren to those that for Tradition cry: Jer. 9.13, 14.

Of this they boast, have the Spirits guide, 1 Cor. 2.10.

And so learned, pious Men, as is implied,
And Scripture-knowledge also lay aside. Prove. 13.13.

They have the Spirit, they cannot sin, Luke 10.16.

They cannot err in nothing herein; 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. verse.

They cannot speak, nor can they Pray,
But when the Spirit moves their way.
What should they do with natural Affection,
They are all Spirit still by reflection.
Scripture as a Rule they cast by rejection, Romans 1.30.

If heady, high-minded, it is the Spirit's inspection:
What may they not be carried to inherit
By the imagination of the Spirit?
Yet don't mistake what my lines imply, Col. 2.12.

As though the Spirits operation I did deny:
No, I do not, but how shall we try
The Spirit, if the Scripture we pass by?
What rule to know whether be of God, 1 John 4.1.

Or not, but by the Scriptures standing-rod.
There is an excellent spirit or light within
In every Man, yet this light not sufficient herein Ephesians. 2.10, 13.

To attain Salvation, this Scriptures record, Jer. 10.23.

God formed a spirit in Man, says the Word, Zech. 12.7.

Which spirit is called the Candle of the Lord:
With this Spirit there is also the Law, Prove. 20.27.

Or substance of the first Covenant, know,
Written or implanted in the heart. Romans 1.19, 20.

Of worst of Men, yet they not depart
From works of darkness, but still sinning,
Yet the Word which was in the beginning
With God, and was God, Joh. 1.1, to 5.
considered as he
By whom all things were made free,
And lights every one, high or low degree,
That comes into the World, therefore know
By means of this Spirit, Light or Law,
Mankind may know and perform in's station
Many things, yet not in way of Salvation.
Genesis 3.17.
The Law of Nature was before the fall
Written in heart, Ephesians. 4.18.
but much obliterated in all
By Adam's sin, Jer. 31.33. and 32.40.
therefore God promised to write
It in the hearts of his People, Scriptures recite:
So runs the tenor of the New Covenant,
I will give you my Spirit, Scriptures grant:
Therefore of a natural light don't vaunt,
It Is a new Spirit which we by Nature want; 2 Cor. 3.5.

All light within as of our selves recant.
God Almighty who is the original of light, 1 John 1.5.

And God of Spirits, made day and night,
By Christ his Spirits operation don't slight. Joh. 1.3.

Heb. 1.2.
It Is the Spirit gives knowledge to understand
Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.6.
as so to do God's Command,
Which Spirit the World cannot receive,
Neither can any natural Men believe;
Whilst in a natural state don't understand 1 Cor. 2.14.

As to do the things of God's Command:
There Is an insufficiency, as Scriptures speak,
In the Light within, Romans 8.3.
or Law, being weak;
Therefore God sent his Son to redeem us
From sin, Gal. 4.4, 5.
and death, and the laws Curse;
Which by light within or natural course
We could not do, but should grow worse.
Abhor^ that cursed Doctrine, Romans 12.9.
say what Men can,
Of an inherent legal Righteousness in Man; 1 Cor. 4.7.

Denying the imputed Righteousness of Christ,
Who to reconcile us to God was Priest, Romans 5.10.

To dye, shed his 'most precious Blood,
Which by a legal Righteousness is withstood:
Yet none can be justified, Joh. 14.6.
cleans'd or saved
Without Christ, Act. 4.12.
Man by sin is so depraved:
Which if Man could Salvation attain
By inherent Righteousness, Gal. 2.21.
Christ died in vain.
For if by works of Righteousness done
By us, Tit. 3.5.
could attain Salvation as we run,
Then there was no need of Christ the Son
To dye; if by walking up to light within
We should be cleansed from all sin, 1 John 1.7, 9.

Lead into all truth, and eternally saved;
What need was then of a Jesus craved, Romans 5.8.

To fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, Heb. 9.28.

And shed his precious blood here below,
To do so for us? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
if Righteousness I say again
Came by the Law, Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21.

This is a wicked Maxim, I say it plain.
Though self-righteousness be coasting
With many, and so entertain boasting, Jam. 4.16.

Which is excluded by the Law of Faith; Romans 3.27.

By Grace we are saved, the Scripture says: Ephesians. 2.8.

There is no other way unto salvation,
But by Christ alone, says Scripture-revelation. Act. 4.12.

Cast off filthy rags of self-righteousness, Job 15.16.
run
To Christ by Faith, or for ever undone. Isa. 64.6.

Respect Morality in way of sanctification, Zech. 3.4.

But count it dung in respect of Justification. Col. 3.8, 9

Full of extremes are many in our days,
To destroy souls Satan has many ways: 2 Cor. 2.11.

Some a legal inherent righteousness affect,
Others their Duty, Christ's Commands neglect: Luke 6.46.

He thoughts of self-righteousness does cherish,
And he does not's Duty, both shall perish. Mat. 5.20.

It Is not every hope of a presumptuous station, Job 8.13.

Nor yet a moral righteousness will enjoy salvation. Mat. 19.20, 22.

Don't mistake, as though moral Virtues I denied,
This is to have what I have said misapplied.
Moral Virtues are commendable in Man, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.

To be sober, chaste, prudent, yet none can
Commend us to God without Grace in heart, 2 Cor. 10.18.

Without Christ cannot be saved, I will declar't, Mat. 17.5.

Therefore from inherent Righteousness depart.
Many others are by Presumption so odd,
Profess there is, yet in actions deny God; Tit. 1.16.

Mere Atheists in practice, wicked, Oh fear Christ's rod!
This is the foundation that stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

None shall see God, if not in Heart pure. Mat. 5.8.

Where Christ is Justification he is Sanctification,
Without Holiness there is no Salvation: 1 Cor. 1.30.

This may see in this Book more clear, Heb. 12.14.

Which from Scripture does plain appear.
For a practical belief of Scripture I contend,
Without which eternal Death will be our end. Phil. 1.27.

To draw to a Conclusion, know herein,
I hate no Man's Person but their sin.
May be some Goliah's will despise my Youth, 1 Samuel 17.42.

Yet I fear not to speak Scripture Truth:
My Saviors glory, Joh. 15.8.
Souls good to advance
Is what I am at, whilst I am Husnance.
Consider what my lines tell, 1 Cor. 10.15.
so Farewell.
HAving written, Reader, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.
if you will look
And consider first part of this Book,
May see what is said concerning Popery,
And Protestant Religion, as my lines imply,
Vindicated by the Scripture-warranty:
God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.24.

If Worship reach not this in Age or Youth,
It Is Profaneness to God; for to be sure,
To worship in Spirit is with a Heart pure. Mat. 5.8.

Spirit yielding to Spirit, bad to good,
This Worship by Bishops been long withstood. Jer. 23.1, 2.

Worship in Spirit is Heart yielding to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Not mere action rested in, as Bishops list. Phil. 3.3.

True Worship is everlasting doors within, Joh. 6.63.

Doors of the Soul, that everlasting thing, Psalm. 24.9, 10.

Opened by the Spirit in Christ's auditory,
And so receives Christ King of Glory,
According to Truth, not Bishops story.
It Is holy Affection, like an Angel in a flame, Judge. 13.19, 20. verses.

Here Is to Worship God, not a Book, that is shame
To any under Gospel Light, to be so odd, 2 Timothy 3.7.

Without a Book not know how to worship God. Heb. 5.12.

To Worship in Truth is love become Divine, 1 Pet. 1.4.

By Grace in Heart the Soul does shine;
Labors to please Christ, and the rather,
That in Christ we may please the Father; Mat. 3.17.

In Worship, depend on Christ's Approbation,
Person and Worship left to Christ's Mediation. Heb. 7.25.

Oh consider Worship in this generation,
Under this God's wonderful Dispensation.
In Worship let there be a reformation.
True Worship is regulated in Age or Youth;
None ought to add or diminish from Truth. Rev. 22.18.

We are Commanded by God alone
Not to take the very least Cornerstone
Of the Babilonish Materials, Jer. 51.26.
Zeph. 15.
nor none
Are to make such a linsy-woolsy Nod
Or medley in the Worship of God; Lev. 19.19.

Being required to take heed in our station,
That we be not ensnared in Conversation:
Are not to enquire how other Nations
Did serve their Gods in their generations: Deuteronomy. 12 30.

We are not to do as they, but must obey
God's Commands in a Scripture way;
Are not to add any thing thereunto,
Nor diminish from, as the Bishops do.
All Worship is sinful with one accord,
That is not according unto God's Word.
It Is Will Worship as Scriptures make appear;
The Spirit of God charge us clear
Not to meddle or have to do on no Condition
With Ordinances which are after Tradition
Of Men, Col. 2.21, 22, 23. verse.
though have a show of Wisdom pretended,
Pretend to Decency, so Will Worship is defended:
This men do when Scripture they abuse,
And so their Superstitions they introduce.
How have Bishops heretofore torn and rent
Christ's little Flock, Luke 12.32.
by this Word Indifferent!
This term Indifferent, and pretended Decency,
Has been the foundation of all Apostasy
From Christ's Rule, as my lines imply:
What may not be under this Notion
Introduced in Worship or Devotion?
It Is not enough to be Baptized to Church, Gal. 5.5, 6. and 6.15

Say Prayers, if such Thoughts with you lurch.
Know, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avail,
Going to Church, your Prayer Book will fail:
Your being baptized or not baptized all one,
Without Grace in heart you are undone:
All Performances, Duties can do, rested in,
Cannot save, Acts 4.12.
without Christ, but prove thy sin.
If in Christ, a new Creature, it is only this,
If any have not Christ's Spirit, Romans 8.9.
none of his.
Holiness is the foundation stands sure, Heb. 12.14.

None shall see God, if not in Heart pure.
The New Creature in Faith working by Love,
In or of Christ, will cause of Salvation prove;
Not any Duty or Worship we can do, Gal. 5.5, 6.

Worship must have Scripture-warrant too; Isa. 8.20.

Else worship you know not what, Mar. 7.7.
it is plain
Will Worship, you worship God in vain. Isa. 29.13.14. verses.

If worship be taught by Men's precepts, then
Are conformable to traditions of Men: Luke 14.13.

Which is dreadful, consider it, Mat. 14.13.
at least
Are under dreadful marks of the Beast.
The Beasts mark is the Idolatrous way
Of worship, which Papists use unto this day: Rev. 13.8.16. verses.

The Beasts mark in the Forehead, is when
Any profess, or practice Idoltary openly, then
Receive his Mark in their right hand,
When persecute for not obeying Popes command.
How many Protestants have suffered in England,
For protesting against papists Blasphemies understand, Joh. 15.20.

How Protestants have suffered by the Papists hand.
Yea some Protestants have been cruelly racked,
Yet under a protestant Masque, Bishops act:
Which reader thou may see very plain,
In what is said before, if view it again.
All admired the Beast, whose wound was healed, verse. 3.

All were not in the Book of Life, were sealed
With his Mark, consider it, and tremble; verse. 8.

Worship is matter of consequence, don't dissemble.
All who are not in the Book, it is no Jest,
All the World were forced to worship the Beast,
All, that is, most did with Superstition Feast.
Mind the sad consequence, as dreadful effect
Of false worship, God will thy worship reject, Isa: 1.12.

And thy self too, if false worship respect.
If not in the Lambs Book, who was slain
From before the World's foundation, it is plain,
Thou must into Hell, for ever to remain. Rev. 20.15.

Take heed of worship, keep to Christ's Institution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

Tho for so doing thou meet with persecution.
Consider what is to be of Antichrists number,
To Hell must, tho herein they slumber.
See what it is to worship the Beast, to enjoy
Perishing vanities, and your Souls destroy
In Hell for ever, and not into Purgatory,
Don't cheat thy precious Soul with a Story.
Oh take heed of worship, Dan. 12.2.
my lines do cry,
Consider, consider, whilst haft life, Eternity,
Work out Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.

Worship God in Truth, cast off dissembling.
Worship according to Gods Will, Joh. 4.24.
don't annoy
Thy Soul with false worship, Psalm. 16.11.
'twill destroy,
Consider what it is eternally God to enjoy.
SECT. II
WOrship God is to endeavor to please God still, Joh. 15.10.14. verses.

We cannot please God without doing his Will.
Who will commend that Servant, that still
Does not observe, nor do his Masters Will?
Does not the instinct of Nature and Reason
Show, Ephesians. 6.5.
as bodily Masters ought in season
To be served according to their commands, shall
Not the high and puissant God, Psalm. 86.8.
who rules all,
Be worshipped, 1 Timothy 6.15.
served according to his Command,
Least said, Isa. 1.12.
who requires it at your hand?
Therefore let us labor Gods will to understand.
Lets consider, worship to God in our Station,
As a duty of holiness to God, for expectation,
It must be by doing his Will through Christ, Joh. 14.6. and 15.14.

Not according to men's Inventions as they list:
Worship, which on Man's Counsel is grounded,
Or on the Authority of Princes is founded,
Or custom never so ancient, or general received,
If not according to Scripture, Gal. 1.8, 9.
not to be believed
Nor practiced, because fruitless and dead,
Springing of the barren soil of Man's head.
Swimming like a fume in the outward part, Heb. 4.2. and 11.6.

But never received by Faith in the Heart:
So their lusts and sins are never subdued,
Nor their Souls cleans'd, Joh. 3.4.9. verses.
nor Hearts renewed;
By which Snare many in their Generation,
Never know what is to be holy, Ephesians. 6.6.
by Renovation:
True Worship is to depend on the Lord,
With an Eye to Gods Commands in his Word. 1 Pet. 5.2.

Which proceeds from a filial fear of God, Psalm. 4^.8.

Childrens fear, not always driven by's Rod: Psalm. 5.7.

But worship in love, obedient in Faith;
Without which all is sin, Soripture says. Romans 14.23.

Take heed in worship, let us not dissemble
With God and our Consciences, let us tremble; Mat. 27.4.5. Verses.

Lest we suffer in our selves a double Hell,
For truth, this Spira, and others can tell,
For conformity to the World, and complying
To their Worship, their Conscience still crying. Romans 2.15.

Dread sinning against Conscience, it will tare
And roar, a wounded Conscience who can bear? Prove. 18.14

A Hell have many had in their Conscience here
In this Life, don't sin against Conscience, fear
To sin against Conscience, Isa. 66, 24.
lest Conscience cry
To thee in Hell, the Worm does never die. Mar. 9.44.

Consider it, for if my Pen Iron were
In strength, yet would I not declare
The sad Effects of abused Conscience, Luke 16.24.
nor tell
What pains and anguish they suffer in Hell.
Reader, what is think of these things, art dead?
Will they not enter thy Heart nor Head?
Art worse then Foelix, a Heathen? don't dissemble; Acts 24.25.

When told of Judgment to come, did tremble.
Take heed of a seared Conscience, tho now asleep,
Like a Lion 'twill roar and make thee weep.
Once a storm in Conscience, tho at present withstood, 1 Timothy 4.2.

Nothing can quiet it but Christ's Blood. Heb. 9.14.

SECT. III.
IF all I have said will not a little move,
But for old Formalities have still a love; Isa. 66: 1, 2.

Then a word more concerning the Church,
That they no longer in thy Heart may lurch.
He Is not a Jew, which is one only to the Eye,
But he that in Heart and Life is lively Romans 2.28.

In holiness, and Circumcision I take to be
Grace in Heart, by the Spirits motions free.
Whereby enabled in a spiritual way to go. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Pray by the Spirit with understanding also.
Try what for Eternity, and the rather,
If have the Spirit, Romans 8.13, 14.
he will cry, Abba Father:
Answer in life the End of Christ's dying;
Do endeavor thy sins to be crucifying. Col. 3.5, 6.

Don't still live in Sin, that cursed evil,
Christ dyed to destroy works of the Devil; 1 John 3.8.

To purchase to himself a peculiar People
Zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
not of Churches Steeple:
As if that is enough to do for Salvation,
The Church commonly called in the Nation
Is no more holy than any other place,
Nor makes a duty holy, that is by Grace,
We are not under the Gospel Station, Gal. 5.1, 13.

Bound to such a Bishops dedication:
Nor can they make a place holy by Consecration,
Christ has abolished such practice in Station,
As was used of old by the Jews Nation,
Because we are under Gospel Dispensation.
Wheresoever in Christ's Name two or three, Mat. 18.20.

Christ promised among them he would be
By his Holy Spirit, and assisting Grace,
To bless them, not for love of the place:
Be for holy places, yet live unholy ways,
Live in sin and wickedness, yet for Holy Days:
To be for holy ground, Gal. 4.10, 11.
yet unholy Hearts,
Is a very sad delusion, my lines imparts:
Be for holy Church, make it a holy place,
Yet live unholy Conversations, is disgrace.
Swear, Whore, be drunk, common in the Land,
Then go to Church, Lev. 11 44.
is this Gods Command?
Under the Gospel not tied to this Mountain
To Worship, every where pray, not counting
One place more than another, 1 Timothy 2.8.
tho some be
More convenient, not holy, but that we
May meet in public Worship more free
From disturbance, in our homage to God see
What Gospel-priviledge we have by Christ,
Not tied to Worship at Jerusalem, John 4.21.
as Men list.
Worship a holy God, in holiness of worship due
To God from us, for direction his Word pursue, Lev. 10.1, 2.

As before is plainly said, in love unto you:
Take heed Worship be according to Gods Word,
Don't offer strange Fire, lest consumed of the Lord.
Be humble, holy, God will be sanctified
In or on us, see Nahab and Abihu who dyed.
God's the living God, don't offer a dead Sacrifice, Dan. 9.4.

A dead prayer with a dead Heart, Mar. 12.27.
Man will despise
Such a present as is blind, halt, and lame, Mal. 1.8.

Will It please Man before God? that is shame.
What Is a form of Godliness, without the Power!
Yet tell of Men's formalities, how they lower. 2 Timothy 3, 5.

Oh the Church of England, they still cry, Tit. 1.16.

Oh the Church of England, they still cry,
Yet the same still, nay, the same still, they die
Enemies to godliness, still workers of Iniquity.
Sure there cannot be a greater derogation Isa. 65.2.3 verses.

To God and the Gospel in our Station,
Than to live still a wicked Conversation.
By Prayer profess God, it is very plain,
Yet not live according, I say it again, Mat. 15.8, 9.

Without practice is taking Gods Name in vain.
As we profess, so let us do Gods Will,
And not be found workers of Iniquity still:
God looks not so much at parts in Prayer, Psalm. 145.18.19 verses.

As at the humble and sincere hearts desire:
A pair of Pigeons, or if but a Turtle-Dove,
Find kind Construction from the God of Love;
If tendered in Faith, then a Widows mite,
From willing minds find favor in Gods sight. Psalm. 51.17.

Who from a sense of need and duty bring
Their lowly Homage to their Heavenly King:
Their blemishes to vail, their spots to hide,
A costly Covering, Christ, God did provide:
And to encourage us by a spiritual supply,
The Spirits Operation helps our Infirmity. Romans 8.26.

Oh be holy in Life, and also in Devotion,
Live according to the Holy Spirits motion: 1 These. 5.19.

Calling on God, and not depart from evil,
May be said to be worse than the Devil.
The Devil han't mercy offered, Jam. 2.19.
yet does tremble,
Man has Mercy tendered, yet he will dissemble
With God and his Soul, Psalm. 9 17.
till God him sever
In pieces like a Vessel, Psalm. 2.9.
then none can deliver.
Consider it you Formalists, mind your Souls;
Can you dwell in everlasting burning Coals? Isa. 33.14.

Consider it, without holiness no Salvation,
Mind the necessity of your Souls Renovation. Heb. 12.14.

SECT. IV.
CArnal Worship pleases, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the 17 verse.
carnal Apprehensions
Are for outward show, tho Men's Inventions:
Come out from among them, Romans 12.2.
says the Lord,
Don't conform to the World, says the Word.
Obj. Some may say, we mast obey that an hour,
To dissent, we must obey the higher Power:
Sol. To obey is active or passive, to do or suffer,
To your consideration a word or two I offer: Jer. 7.23.

If what is commanded be according to God's Word, Luke 20.25.

Contained in Scripture, Isa. 8.20.
then Obedience afford.
Actively obey the higher Power, Scripture says,
If Commands are not against the Rule of Faith.
Obedience from Inferiors to Superiors in Station,
Is due to the King as Supreme in the Nation, 1. Tim. 2.2.

And to others, but with this limitation,
That Obedience be in or for the Lord,
According to Gods Command in his Word.
For Conscience Sake we are to obey the King, Romans 13.5.

Or other Magistrates, in any lawful thing:
As Subjects and Inferiors under their hand
In subordination according to Gods Command. verse. 7.

If the higher Powers Command Obedience, see
If command according to Scripture, 1 Samuel 12.24.
or we
Not bound to obey, Psalm. 95.3.
in Scripture that I can see;
If Men command Obedience in high degree
Command to worship, Jer. 10.6.
or believe implicitly,
Because said, Romans 6.16.
not Scripture, from obeying free,
Which to obey, Acts 5.29.
God or Man, is best, judge ye.
Gods absolute Sovereignty over us in chief, Psalm. 10.16.

Is foundation of our Religion, and belief.
None has any absolute Power or Propriety Deuteronomy. 27.10.

Over Conscience, that is Prerogative of the Deity: Exodus 19.5.

No power, but from God, grounded on his Law, 1 Pet. 5.3.

God ordained no power against himself know.
Humane Laws are but bylaws subordinate 2 Chronicles. 10.15.

To Gods Law, tho some would other wile have it,
He that rules over Men, should be just,
Ruling in Gods fear, not in his lust. 2 Samuel 23.3.

Are not Powers ordained of God absolute?
No; unless for God, this Reason will confute.
I cannot believe God ordained Power on condition,
Against himself, no, it is by permission:
Sometimes God suffers People a King to take
As a Judgment, when they the Lord forsake. 1 Samuel 12.27.25. verse.

See your great wickedness in this thing,
Take heed, least consumed, you and your King.
Thus it was with the People of Israel,
When would have a King among them dwell:
Only fear the Lord, Scriptures plain tell,
Then you and your King may do well. verse 24.

Consider then, Gods permission as we go,
God did not ordain Nimrod, Julian, Nero, Genesis 10.8.

God's Interest to overthrow, cause his Peoples woe.
God suffers them Power to take in high degree,
Yet stops their Inventions many times see: Isa. 10.7.

For if Kings take power beyond the degree
Of Christ's Rule, Ye have reigned not by me.
That is not according to the Scripture Command, 1 Cor. 4.8.

Or for Christ's Interest, as I the Word understand:
If Reign not for Christ, Kings have no Power
Over our Consciences, tho the Body devour.
In way of suffering Passive-obedience yield 1 Pet. 5.3.

In all submission, but take heed of sins field.
In obeying the higher Powers, don't be so odd
In thy Obedience, to sin against God, Jer. 17.13.

Fear and dread the Lords eternal Rod.
SECT. V.
Obj. SOme say we must comply, and obey;
If not, we shall be in trouble every day:
Tho at present have the Kings Toleration,
It may be changed by Death in the Nation:
Or other ways there may be an alteration,
Sol. Mat. 16.26.
Is this Obedience to God, bodily preservation,
Saving of Goods, Isa. 51.12.
and hazard Souls Salvation?
This is that Rock, that devouring Wolf
Has destroyed many in the eternal gulf. 2 Timothy 4.10.

Many to save their Goods and Estates comply
With Superstition, Col. 2.18.
Will Worship, and Popery:
The Primitive Christians were not so,
Tho in Mountains they were forced to go. Heb. 10.24.

At spoiling their Goods they did rejoice,
Now a little trouble, and a murmuring noise.
Like the Children of Israel, Exodus 16.3.
when tried,
Murmr against God, wish they had died:
We have but the badge of Christianity,
If we enjoy not content, all is vanity.
Many Men care not for the smile of God,
If they may enjoy the World, so odd
In their lives are most Men, and herein
They count it wisdom to sleep in whole Skin.
Time-servers, if the World they inherit,
Contented, Judge. 19.
sensual, having not the Spirit:
If they enjoy the mercy of a Brute,
Fat pasture and peace, they will turn to it.
They are for a part in Paris, Phil. 3.19.
Sin and Vice
In the World, care not for Paradise:
This will prove sad when come to die;
Therefore unto Christ by Repentance fly,
And Faith in Christ; 2 Cor. 6.20.
you are not your own,
You are bought, Christ sits on his Throne:
Has purchased you, commands Obedience due,
Kings owe Obedience so well as you 1 Timothy 6.15.

To Christ, see in the Scripture true,
In all Obedience Scripture-way pursue.
Christ, King of Kings, Rev. 1.5.
let all be subordinate
To Christ, else thy Obedience is abominate.
Obey higher Powers according to the Word,
Take heed it be for, or in the Lord. 1 Samuel 12.24.

Pray for the King and all in Authority,
Lord Convert all Unconverted, Pray, say I. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

Pray, Pray in Faith, let Prayer sound
For much sin, amongst the gods found, Psalm. 94.5, 6, and 97.7.

Lately in Kings and Rulers on English ground.
Pray God would incline the King's heart,
That from Gospel Worship he not depart;
Pray he may rule for Christ complete,
So may be William the good and great:
Pray earnestly in Faith, I cannot spare ye,
Pray for his Royal Consort Queen Mary:
Pray King and Queen so rule for God,
Not like the Assyrian who was his rod. Isa. 10.5.

Pray in Faith, for God will no doubt
By the King and Queen find great sins out.
Pray, King William may be instrumental
Chief under Christ of Babilon's fall. Jer. 51.1, to the end.

Pray for King William and's Queen say I again,
That they so rule whilst here remain,
That they Christ's instituted Worship maintain,
That in Heaven among Saints may reign.
Thus active and passive Obedience yield
Unto higher Powers as spiritually skilled, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20.

And Christ thy King will win the field:
Pray that Christ may then be thy shield.
A little time Christ will come with majesty, Isa. 35.4.

Then Tribes of the Earth mourn and cry, Zech. 14.9.

Repent, be not found workers of Iniquity, Jer. 23.6.

Bring forth fruit to Holiness immediately:
Justice, Truth, Righteousness he will maintain,
Will destroy all those don't desire's reign. Luke 19.27.

Christ King of Righteousness will sway Mat. 24.30.

The Scepter, his Name alone in that day
Will be exalted, Isa. 2.17.
therefore Watch and Pray
That Christ, Psalm. 10.16.
blessed for ever would have away.
The exaltation of Christ the Lord 1 Timothy 6.15.

Alone as King, the Scriptures record:
Which time draws near, Mat. 24.33.
Scriptures say,
And dispensations too Friends now a day:
Pulling down high things without delay,
And other things which Scriptures display.
Though the ball of Kingly Power men hurl,
Little consider Saints shall Judge the World. 1 Cor. 6.2.

Yet this Comfort to Saints Scriptures record,
Shall execute Judgment of the Lord.
Though Saints be here derided, yet when tried,
None shall be saved without they are sanctified: 1 Pet. 1.2.

Though here despised, 1 Cor. 1.2.
and wicked men inviron
Saints with Malice, yet shall bind with Iron;
Such honor, on Scripture record remains,
Shall bind Kings and Nobles with Chains. Psalm. 149.6, to the 9. Ver.

But hold my lines, here I would be mute,
Because at present this way I not dispute.
Thus have laid before you so brief as I can
Concerning Obedience to God and Man: 1 Samuel 12.14.

Therefore take heed, let thy Obedience run
In's proper channel, Obey Christ or undone,
For no salvation without in Christ the Son.
Let Obedience to God be of more esteem
Than to Man, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Man could not us redeem;
Nor can all Worlds Kings, though you cry
To them, do any good when come to dye.
Alas poor Creature, Man shall be as grass,
Cannot help's self into eternity pass. Isa. 51.12.

Then obey God who has you in's power, 1 Samuel 2.6.

Can make happy or miserable in an hour.
SECT. VI.
COnsider those things, 1 Cor. 10.15.
not as from me,
But as from Scripture you may plainly see;
For I would not speak or write a letter
Had I not Scripture-truth for the matter. Isa. 8.20.

Having thus far proceeded without delay,
I will now briefly write of the Sabbath Day.
The Sabbath is God's standing rule or rod,
In which we ought to worship God 1 Cor. 14.33.

In a more public or solemn way,
Tender our homage to God without delay,
Which is not Commanded on every day;
God's resting the seventh remember pray; Genesis 2.2, 3.

Remember, keep holy the Sabbath Day:
Remember it as if Jehovah should say, Exo. 20.8.

Take it as a Memento in your generation
Of my Providence in the Worlds Creation.
The seventh day was the Sabbath of old
But under the Gospel, the Scriptures unfold
The first day of the Week, Christians hold
For the Sabbath, and called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10.

Which we have cause to remember I say,
In remembrance of Man's redemption
By Jesus Christ, who without exemption
Or doubt, on that day had his Resurrection, Joh. 20.1, 19.

Which we should apply by Faith's reflection;
Believing Christ's rising from the dead
On the first day, lives for ever the Churches head. Col. 1.18.

First day is the Sabbath in Scripture clear, Mar. 16.2, 9.

When Christ unto his Disciples did appear;
Also Disciples on the first day brake Bread, Luke 24.1.

And Preached on that day, in Scripture said.
Oh then remember, and that without delay, Acts 20.7.

To keep it holy, not by idle sinful play,
Break God's Command, sin the Sabbath away: Isa. 56.2, 4, 6.

Seeing the Sabbath is of divine Institution,
Do not profane it by sinful pollution;
Be holy on the Sabbath, it is a holy day indeed,
By Gods standing Law it is so decreed;
Without it Religion were a mere Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33.

Although slighted by some under a Delusion: Lam. 1.7.

Yea how promiscuous would our Homage be
To God, if one day in seven were not free,
As a standing Rule, and perpetual Decree!
Keep holy the Sabbath in Commemoration
Of Christ's Resurrection, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who is our Salvation.
As you love your precious Souls, by the way
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day; Isa. 58.13.

For wherever Religion does flourish,
They an observation of the Sabbath cherish.
How careful have been, in their station
To keep holy the Sabbath, Mat. 28.1.
in Commemoration
Of Christ's Resurrection, in their generation,
Who is the only way unto Salvation. Act. 4.12.

Others, where Religion is gone to decay,
Live loose to sin on the Sabbath Day;
You may see it plain in old England,
Few practically remember God's Command.
Oh remember by holy Contemplation
Christ's rising from Death for our Salvation!
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, Exodus 31.15.
pray,
It Is your Seed-time, your Market Day
For your Souls, consider and be casting,
We shall celebrate a Sabbath everlasting
In Heaven, with the holy Deity for ever, and
Sing Hallelujah, Exo. 20.8.
then remember God's Command.
SECT. VII.
Obj. BUT is not every day a Sabbath? some will say:
Sol. Unto Believers I answer by the way.
Every day should be a Sabbath from sin,
We should sin on no day, but herein
Observe where Religion does rise or fall,
When It comes to every day, soon none at all,
Mere Libertines seldom on God call. Act. 6.9.

How many spend the Sabbath in idle-talking?
Others in Hells broad way are walking;
Some Whoring, Exodus 16.28, 29, 30. verses.
and on wickedness thinking,
Some in Alehouses spend the Sabbath in drinking;
Some formally observe the Sabbath, yet so evil
In their lives, all the Week serve the Devil:
They pretend to keep a Sabbath unto God,
Yet in their Lives very wicked and odd. Jer. 17.21.

Many rest from bodily labor at least,
But other ways are worse than the beast,
By sinful passing of the Sabbath away,
By Drunkenness, or with superstitious Play;
Whereas God requires of Age or Youth
To worship him in spirit and in truth: Joh. 4.24.

Many are for Holy Days, Men's inventions,
These things please carnal apprehensions. Jer. 7.4, to 11.

The Church, the Temple is Holy, some will say,
Yet themselves live unholy in their way,
Yea oppose the Holiness of the Lord's Day; Neh. 10.31.

Which God Commanded by his Institution,
Not holy Places, holy Days, by Men's pollution.
Many are for holy Places by Consecration,
Yet live wicked, unholy in Conversation,
It Is too too true in our English Nation.
Some their Children and Servants at play Ezekiel. 20.12.

So wickedly spend the Sabbath away;
What will they do when God shall say,
Was this your keeping Holy the Sabbath Day,
Which I Commanded? is this your serving me?
Then in Hell you shall endure eternal misery.
If the Jews were punished in their station Numb. 15.32, 35.

For breaking the Sabbath, in their generation,
Which was set apart in Commemoration
Of God's Providence in the World's Creation;
Sure God will punish those in cheir station
That break the Sabbath in their Conversation,
Which is set apart in the Commemoration
Of our Savior, Jesus Christ's Resurrection: Luke 23.56.

Yet how is the Sabbath slighted by rejection
By many, you may see by their Lives complexion;
It Is too manifest by their ways reflection;
How will it be when need Christ's protection?
Therefore keep Holy the Sabbath by Scripture-direction,
Whiles here in this World you remain, Heb. 12.23.

That in Heaven an eternal Sabbath may keep again.
SECT. VIII.
SO much briefly concerning the Sabbath Day,
Now concerning Prayer I will a little display,
And Consider it Reader, in thy way;
It Is a Duty incumbent on all to Pray. 1 Samuel 1.10, to 13.

Some unto Prayer have themselves addressed,
When no words have been expressed.
Secret Prayer is sometimes very good, Psalm. 139.2.

The Hearts desires are by God understood:
But yet public Prayer in thy station Dan. 9.3, to 21.

Should be vocal, for others edification.
Mental Prayer is good for self-reflection,
Yet vocal Prayer does move the Affection:
The expression of the Tongue with art
Of Faiths affection, does move the Heart.
As to the gesture in Prayer, Heb. 12.28.
some affect
One way, some another, and some neglect
All outward gesture, and do it reject;
Yet we should an humble gesture respect. Act. 20.19. Ephesians. 3.14.

But this is not what is in my eye,
So that the gesture I will at present pass by,
And to the matter of Prayer I will apply
My self, according to present light descry.
Prayer has been a Duty in all Ages, and still
Is, if we Pray according unto God's Will
Revealed in Scripture, though some it despise,
Being blinded by the Father of lies.
Pray not only for Friends but for Enemies, Mat. 5.24.

This direction our Savior Christ descryes
Unto his Disciples, and is a rule to us likewise.
The Saints Prayers are golden Vials, Rev. 5.8.

Prayer supports Believers under many Trials; Luke 21.36.

Like the Sun when shines clear on Dyals,
Tells us how our time does pass away,
As motives to make us Watch and Pray. Mat. 26.41.

If tenders thy homage to God by Prayer,
It must be with a spiritual desire;
It must be the breathings forth of Grace Isa. 26.9.

By the Spirit, in thy Christian race;
Don't live in sin, then Pray, that disgrace
Unto thy self, and does much deface
The Duty of Prayer, when still banding
Words, and not Pray with understanding: 1 Cor. 14, 15.

Let me tell thee, whether Age or Youth,
Thou must Pray in spirit and in truth: Joh. 4.24.

Pray in truth, not only to learn the art
To say a Prayer, when there is no Heart
To practice according, although thou cry
With thy Tongue, if thy Tongue say a lie;
Take heed, don't mock with the Holy Deity. Gal. 6.7.

Thou must Pray to God with a pure Heart,
With a resolution from sin to depart.
In heart don't regard Iniquity, nor sin desire,
If so, God will not hear thy Prayer: Psalm. 66.18.

If thou Pray, yet love thy sin still,
It Is not Praying according unto God's Will;
God's Will is even our Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3, 4.

Pray, and live according in our station;
To promote Christ's Kingdom in our generation,
To sanctify God's Name in our Conversation;
That God's Will may be done on Earth, even
As Angels and Saints do it in Heaven. Luke 11.2.

Not Pray, Christ's Kingdom come, like those
Who so say, yet Christ's Kingdom oppose;
The Reason is, they don't Pray in Faith, Romans 14.23.

So their Prayer is sin, as Scripture says. Psalm. 109.7.

Although a Seal for Prayer many pretend,
Yet by Faith on Christ they don't depend,
Nor in their Lives don't answer the end
Of Prayer, but in Life they Christ offend:
They cannot Pray with fervency of Affection,
The power of Prayer has no reflection
On their Hearts, that is cast by rejection:
The life and power of Prayer cannot abide, 2 Timothy 3.5.

But in their Forms of Prayer confide;
If formal Prayer they retain and inherit, Romans 12.11.

They contented, sensual, having not the Spirit; Jude 19.

Cannot Pray spiritually, but are so odd
In Prayer, cannot spiritually call on God;
Nor Pray unto God by Faith continually Col. 4.2.

In the Spirit, who can only Grace apply.
Not that we should Pray still the same,
But that our Hearts always be in frame
Fit for Prayer, that on all occasions we
Tender our Duty unto God more free,
By his Spirits operation, Col. 2.12.
and the rather,
Because the Spirit will cry, Abba, Father;
Makes intercession with sighs and cries, Romans 8.15.26. Verse.

The Spirit helps also our infirmities.
Both habitual, assisting, actuating Grace,
Is from the Spirit in our earthly race,
Let us not his motions then deface. 1 These. 5.19.

SECT. IX.
Obj. SAy some, May not a Form of Prayer be used?
Sol. Yea, if not rested in, or sinfully abused:
As Children have a staff to learn to go,
But when able, 1 Cor. 14.20.
the staff away throw;
Or as some others who learn to swim, then
They use Bladders you know, but when
Have the Art, from Bladders they depart
And swim like Men with a rejoicing heart. Ephesians. 4.14.

A Form of Prayer for Children or Youth
Is necessary, 'till they understand Truth
In a spiritual way, Col. 1.10.
then a Form they defy,
And Pray for the Spirit to help infirmity.
A Crutch is of use unto Men are lame,
Which unto sound Men you know is shame.
A Form of Prayer you see by reflection 2 Timothy 3.7.

Where it is used, does imply an imperfection.
Praying in Spirit is Heart-yielding to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Not a mere Form rested in, Phil. 3.3.
as Men list.
True Praying is everlasting Doors within, Joh. 6.63.

Doors of the Soul, that everlasting thing,
Opened by the Spirit to Christ, Psalm. 24.9, 10.
King of glory,
According to Truth, not according to Men's story:
It Is holy Affection, like an Angel in a Flame, Judge. 13.19, 20

This is praying to God, not a Book, that is shame
To any under Gospel Light, to be so odd, 2 Timothy 3.7.

Without a Book not know how pray to God. Heb. 5.12.

To pray in Truth, is love become Divine; 1 Cor. 1.30.

By Grace in Heart, the Soul does shine. 2 Pet. 1.4.

In Prayer depend on Christ's Approbation,
Person and Prayer left to Christ's Mediation: Psalm. 31.16

Not like Bishops and Priests in the Nation, Heb. 7.25.

Who rest in Forms in their Generation, Ephesians. 4.19.

Have no feeling of the Spirits Operation:
They say, Hallowed be thy Name, Mat. 6.9.

When their Lives by sin, cry shame.
How many fay, Deliver us from Evil, verse. 13.

Yet still do the Works of the Devil?
In their Lives pray for daily Bread
For the Body, when the Soul is dead verse. 11.

For want of Grace, and also herein
They say not, pray forgive us our Sin verse. 12.

As we forgive others; how would it be,
If God should do as they say? for see
They in malice run in a high degree.
They say, Lead us not into Temptation, verse. 13.

Yet run in all sin in their Conversation:
To be a Christian only in Name, it is plain,
Without practice, taking Gods Name in vain. Mat. 7.21.

It Is not enough to pray or say, Lord, Lord,
Without living in life according to the Word.
Pray, and be holy in Life, and the rather,
If not you don't believe in God the Father.
God is holy, Lev. 11 44.
and does also Command
Us to be holy, see Scripture, and understand. Ephesians. 1.4.

Don't pray, yet still in thy life so odd;
But live holy, like the Sons of God,
By Adoption, and real Regeneration, Romans 8.14, 15.

Which is effected by the Spirit's Operation:
As many as are led by the Spirit,
They live by Faith, and apply Christ's Merit.
As we pray, so let us do Gods Will,
And not be found workers of Iniquity still:
Only a form of godliness, Tit. 1.16.
nothing worse,
To pray, yet live in sin, a dreadful Curse,
Without the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5,
then let us tremble,
No longer with God in Prayer dissemble.
The Prayers of those whom God by donation
Has given unto Christ, Joh. 17.24.
in their Generation,
Are accompanied with Christ's Mediation,
And Intercession of Jesus Christ, presented
Unto the Father, let Prayer be augmented:
Tho in Prayer we in much weakness run,
Our encouragement is in Christ the Son.
Therefore in this Channel let Prayer run;
God is not pleased in any, Mat. 17 5.
but in his Son.
Let Us lift up holy hands in our Station,
Without wrath and doubting in our Generation: 1 Timothy 2.8.

Here is a spiritual, holy qualification;
Let Us be holy in outward Conversation.
As is the Fountain, so will be the Stream;
Let Us live by Faith, Jam. 3.11, 12.
not like Men in a Dream.
All our Souls Faculties must act in Prayer,
Our Undestandings, Affections, and Hearts desire.
Like Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.3.
let us seek the Lord,
Set all our strength, as says the Word.
Pray in humility unto God, understand
Thy own unworthiness, under whose hand
And Power thou art, who can command
The whole World into nothing, Isa. 40.17.
and
Both Soul and Body must live or dye Mat. 10.28.

At Gods dispose, for ever to all Eternity.
SECT. X.
Obj. BUt some may say, what need we pray,
God knows all our wants every day? Psalm. 44.21.

Sol. The Duty of Prayer is so clearly stated
In Scripture, John 21.17.
it cannot be abrogated:
It Is a Duty in Nature, the Heathens so odd,
Said to Jonah, Jonah 1.6.
Arise, call upon thy God.
It Is true, God knows before we can say
What we need, Job 34.21.
yet it is our Duty to pray,
That we may be sensible of our need,
Of what we want, God has so decreed: Psalm. 50.15.

We should pray, showing our dependency
On God for what we want, in humility
Supplicate the Almighty, who knows well
Our wants before we ask, yet Scripture tell
That God will be inquired of by Israel. Ezekiel. 36.37.

God has promised that he will hear Jer. 29.12.

Prayer, when we out of a sense appear 1 Pet. 3.12.

Of our wants before God, in holy fear; Jam. 4.8.

Then God will unto us draw near.
In time of Affliction, the Scriptures say,
Is a seasonable time for Men to pray:
Then the Spirits motions are quick,
Prayer of the faithful saves the Sick. Jam. 5.13.15. verse.

His Ears are open unto their praying cry,
Although some slight Prayer as they pass by:
Yet the Spirit does in our Christian Race,
Make the Soul fruitful in all Grace. Romans 15.5.13. verse.

The Spirit us and Duty does not divide,
But moves to Duty, like wind and tide
To a Ship, makes us run to Gods Command
In a way of Obedience, by the Spirits hand. 2 Cor. 1.22.

Pray frequently, fervently in our Station,
The Spirit gives wings unto Supplication;
Yea, then is the Soul filled with Consolation:
Tho Prayer by some be cast by rejection,
Yet Believers praise God with strong Affection Psa. 50.23.

Constantly, not like some in our nation,
Who pray when the Spirit in their Station Heb. 13.15.

Does move them to pray in their Generation:
So Prayer is in their Families little used,
At their eating and drinking very confused, 1 Cor. 10.31.

The Duty of Prayer they have much abused.
To neglect Prayer is a wicked infusion,
Instead of Gods Spirit, a spirit of delusion:
For the Spirit of God, where it does move, Ephesians. 2.18.

Constrains the Soul to pray in love:
And Faith by the Spirit, the cause is such, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Where much is forgiven, they love much: Luke 7.47.

They abound in work of the Lord,
In eating and drinking, says the Word:
Do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.
be active
In ways of holiness, in Grace to thrive;
Let it appear, the Spirit is in you alive:
Quickening you by his Spiritual Motion, Psalm. 16.5.

Delighting you to do Gods Will in Devotion,
Until you enjoy God as your Portion. Lam. 3.24.

SECT. XI.
TO sum up all, Reader, for thy Memory,
In love I will my self briefly apply. 2 Pet, 3.1, 2.

All my aim is thy spiritual advance;
I speak truth, as my Name is Husnance.
This Method cannot be unpleasing to desire,
Consider the, my conclusion of Prayer:
And mind well what is said before,
For thy good I will say a few words more.
All words put in a dead form of Prayer,
Are not Prayer, Isa. 11.15.
whilst the Hearts desire
Is for Iniquity, and after Sin does dance,
Whiles the Heart's full of sin and Ignorance,
When incredulity in Life does advance,
And uncharitableness in Conversation,
The Prayer of such is an abomination
Unto the Lord, Prove. 15.8, 9.
clear in Scripture, and
Why call me Lord, and do not my Command?
Prayer, Luke 6.46.
is not always to be banding
Words in Prayer, without Understanding.
Don't pray, Luke 13.27.
yet be a worker of Iniquity still,
This is not praying according to Gods Will.
Pray in Faith, and with a pure Heart,
And from sin in thy Conversation depart.
Answer the end of Prayer, in Conversation,
In sincerity, Lev. 10.3.
by the Spirits Operation.
Pray in the Spirit, whether Age or Youth,
In fervency, sanctify the God of Truth:
Pray constantly, and in humility,
For acceptance, Mat. 17.5.
Christ by Faith apply.
This is to pray unto God, then look,
Here is more than praying in a Book:
Here Is more than saying words in notion,
It Is not easy to pray by the Spirits motion,
Without watching thereunto, by Faith's desire, Luke 21.36.

This is to give one's self unto Prayer.
SECT. XII.
FRom the Duty of Prayer I will advance,
And write briefly of Baptisms Ordinance.
There are very many Arguments among
Some to whom Baptism does belong:
Scripture to this point satisfaction give,
Seems to me, it belongs to them believe, Act. 8.37.

Or of believing Parents, as a qualification,
All required to believe in their Station.
Infants of believing Parents, in Covenant
Are to be baptized, Scriptures seem to grant:
The Promise being to them, and their Posterity, Acts 2.39.

But here is not the main of what is in my Eye:
So pass it by, and write of Baptisms use
Briefly, and also of Baptisms great abuse.
Baptism is an Ordinance of Christ in's place, Joh. 3.5, 8.

Yet the very Act does not conferr Grace. Col. 2.11.

Baptism, not the cause of Regeneration,
The Spirit may work our Renovation Tit. 3.5.

Before, or after Baptism, a Type of Regeneration, Romans 4.11.

As a Sign or Seal of our Confirmation
And ingrafting into Christ in our Station, Acts 4.12.

Who is the only way unto Salvation.
Baptism, admits into the Church of God;
Afflictions also are called his baptizing Rod. Mar. 10.39.

Baptism is a lively Figure of Christ's Death, Romans 6.3, 4.

By baptism engaged to Christ, whiles breath:
It represents Christ's Burial and Resurrection;
Then live to Christ, depend on his Protection:
Being buried with Christ in baptism, Col. 2.12.
die to sin
And live unto Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24.
and herein
By Baptism we give it under our hand,
To fight under Christ's Banner, at's Command:
Deny our selves, by holy, real resignation,
Live to Christ, Ephesians 1.7.
who purchased our Salvation.
Baptism, is our covenanting with God;
Don't live a wicked life, fear his Rod.
Only Covenant making, is much like a Story,
It Is Covenant-keeping only brings to Glory. John 13.17.

Seal of a Covenant, makes not a Covenanter,
Don't live in life like a profane Ranter. Act. 2.17.

Baptism rightly understood, Gal 4.6.
by Christ's merit,
Brings us under a promise of the Spirit,
Which works in us true Baptism, Gal. 5.22.
saving Faith,
Having our Conversation holy, Scripture says.
Walk in love Brother-like, not like a Noddy
Of malice, being baptized into one body,
By the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.
whereby we come to see
Our depraved nature, John 7.37.39. verse.
by sin cannot happy be
Without Christ, to him by Faith flee.
In being baptized, only let none rest,
Without the end of it in life's expressed:
It Is not washing of water, as I understand,
Does good, as in obeying Gods Command.
This point from Scripture, I gather hence,
True baptism is answer of a good Conscience
Toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ,
To live holy, 1 Pet. 3.21.
and not in sin as we list:
By Baptism may be a Member of the Church,
Yet not of Christ, fear what thoughts lurch
In thee; may be in a state of Damnation,
Tho baptized, if lives a wicked Conversation.
A Man may be saved, Act. 8.13. to the 24.
tho not baptized,
If he believe, let not Baptism be Idolized.
Tho Baptism be necessary in its station,
Yet it is nothing without the Spirits Operation: Romans 3.30.

Tho Baptism be necessary in its place, Col. 2.12.

The end of Baptism in life don't deface:
For if thou do, the Truth I will tell,
Baptism will not save thee from Hell. Mat. 7.23.

SECT. XIII.
AS to Baptisms performance, Scriptures descry, Mat. 28.18, 19. verse.

Have Christ's Institution ever in thy Eye.
Purest Ordinances may be sinfully abused,
Much more those are superstitious used.
Take heed of Men's inventions, and pollution,
Few now keep to Christ's Institution: Psalm. 14.3.

Having Gossips and Cross in their scope,
Which things did derive from the Pope.
Baptizing Children, like a Stage Plays dance,
With a drunken Feast, is this Christ's Ordinance? Mat. 28.20.

They be entitled Christian, with a Feast,
It Is not Christ's way, but way of the Beast. Rev. 13.16, 17.

Baptism's efficacy is contained in Christ,
Not in the action, by a time-serving Priest; Psalm. 50.16.22. verse.

Who holds Regeneration on the deed done,
So, tho never so wicked, to Baptism run; Gal. 1.10.

Yet in their lives very wicked and odd,
For all their sign of Cross, Enemies to God:
Yet say are Christians, why? because baptized,
See how Baptism is abused and idolized
By most of Men; Col. 3.1, 2. to the 13 verse.
few answer the end
Of Baptism, tho Christians they pretend.
How profane are Priests in the Nation,
To all wicked officiate administration!
How corrupt with the Popes pollution Jer. 9.13, 14, 15.

Few of Priests keep to Christ's Institution.
Baptizing wicked Men's Children, none exempt, Prove. 13.13.

So bring the Ordinance into contempt.
How careless, and promiscuously admit,
Before they are, by Examination, fit:
Contrary to Scripture, Act. 8.37.
which you may see
Many Instances; search Scripture free:
The Eunuch examined, before baptized was he,
If fit to receive into Church Society. Acts 9.16, 17.

Not to baptize all come, hand over head,
Lay aside Scripture Rule as a thing dead:
Like Papist, Lev. 10.1.
by whom Superstition is augmented,
The Priest admits whomsoever is presented,
If the Parent never so wicked, not prevented,
And by whomsoever, tho a wicked Noddy,
Preposterous to insert such into Christ's Body,
The Church, when in all probability, we
Have no ground, Acts 2.4, 7.
that they Disciples will be
Of Christ, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
but rather Enemies, we daily see;
Yet the Priest with his Surplice, Cross and Font,
Baptizeth, and asks the Infant upon it,
Wilt be baptized in the present Faith?
I will, in the Child's Name, the Godfather says:
Which is ridiculous to men of Reason,
Infants not capable of Faith at that season: 1 Cor. 14.20.

If they were, how know they his mind?
They from consenting might be disinclin'd.
That Infants by Sureties believe and repent,
When capable of neither, is impertinent;
Yet see in our days it is plain, how frequent;
Most are for Baptism, yet no rule appears
In the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11.16.
nor for many years
Since the Apostles time, as some write
Of the ancient Fathers, whom I could recite.
Then those Ceremonies in all their scope,
Were introduced, since rising of the Pope.
Oh how corrupt are Priests of the Land,
Are Surplice, Lev. 19.19.
sign of Cross, Gods Command?
Paul gloried in Christ's Cross in his Heart,
Not the sign on's Forehead, that is Papist art.
No Crosses used in the Apostles days, Gal. 6.14.

Nor Scripture pattern for such idle Plays:
No Crosses were used by the Apostles hand,
Nor any Example, nor Scripture Command.
Of Crosses there is made no mention
In Baptism, not in Scripture intention;
Those Crosses then are the Popes invention.
In Scripture, no such custom understand,
Who then required this at the Priests hand? Isa. 1.12.

Must they not say, our Master, the Pope?
For no cammand in the Scripture scope Mat. 19.8.

For such practices; so Christ's sovereignty deny,
And with Inventions of Men comply: Mat. 15.9.

It Is a great dishonor to Christ, and indignity,
To use that in his Worship is mere Idolatry,
Which Christ never instituted, is from Popery:
As though Christ was not the only Lawgiver,
Being Wisdoms fountain, God blessed for ever. Romans 9.5.

SECT. XIV.
HAving written of breaking Bread before,
As Christ's Ordinance, I shall say no more
At present, 2 Timothy 2.14.
but shall according to what I know
Write briefly concerning the Moral Law.
Obj. Some there are say in our Christian race,
We are not under the Law but under Grace; Romans 6.14.

In the Gospel it is very plainly stated,
That the Law by Jesus Christ is abrogated.
Sol. This would require more than I shall say
At present, only a word briefly by the way.
The liberty which Christ has purchased, know,
Is deliverance from the Curse of the Law; Gal. 3.13.

For Believers take heed what thoughts lurks,
It Is deliverance from it as a Covenant of Works: Romans 7.6.

Christ frees Believers from its malediction,
But not from the Moral Laws prescription; Joh. 15.14.

The Law was added to the Gospel by reflect, Gal. 3.19.

Not as a supplement to make up a defect,
But as an Instrument to prepare the way,
And discover our need of a Gospel-day;
The Law, like John Baptist, as Scriptures say,
With his Axe a way did make or increase Mat. 3.2, 10.

Before Christ Jesus, the Brince of Peace:
The Law as a Schoolmaster, Scripture says,
To lead to Christ the object of saving Faith. Gal. 3.24.

The Gospel is the Moral Law translated,
Christ being the substance of the Law stated
In Scripture, which you may plainly see, Tit. 2.12.

The 2d. of Titus, 12 Verse, will explain it to ye.
Take heed of Hypocrisy, Luc. 12.1.
do as art able
Duty to God and Man in both Table;
Live righteously and godly, don't you part
What God has joined, let God have thy Heart.
Godly relates to Piety and Sanctification,
Righteousness relates to a moral qualification;
Join Piety to God and Morality together, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.

Where Grace is, Moral Virtues don't sever:
These things involve and comprehend
All the Law, from beginning to the end,
Though briefly, which is what I intend:
Christ has made us free from its Curse, Romans 7.6.

Not that in sin we should grow worse.
Christ saves us from our Enemies hands
To serve him, Luc. 1.74, 75.
and obey his Commands:
Christ has purchased for us Liberty to keep,
Not liberty to break the Law, Romans 6.20, 22.
and so sleep
In sin, as many do in our days we know,
And boast they are not under the Law;
No, nor under the Gospel neither, say I,
In way of salvation cannot no Promise apply. Heb. 12.14.

By Christ Believers have liberty from sin,
Not a liberty to do evil, and herein
The Law in its place is good and just:
'Twas by the Law Paul did know Lust.
The Law shows how by sin we are depraved, Romans 7.7.

That without Christ none can be saved;
The Law serves to humble us in our way,
Should drive us to Christ without delay.
The Law shows us our need of Christ,
Tells us we must not live as we lift.
Do this and live, Romans 10.5.
the Law to us does say,
Tells us when by sin we go astray.
The Law awakens Conscience, and herein
By the Law is the knowledge of sin.
The Law shows our impotency, Romans 7.7.
so to be humble,
If we sin, it makes our Conscience grumble;
Drives us to Christ, and that without delay,
Who alone did fulfill the Law, Col. 1.19.
Scriptures say.
The Law given as a Rule of Life, is so still, Psalm. 19.7.

Tells us what is not, and what is God's Will.
What God forbids, ought not to be done,
What God commands, it is Duty as we run;
Not to be justified by doing in our station, Tit. 3.5.

Let Us be holy as we can in our generation;
Yet without in Christ there is no Salvation,
The Law is of no use in way of Justification,
Yet it points to the way of Sanctification.
The Scriptures establish the Law in its place, Romans 3.31.

Yet Justification is by Christ's Free Grace.
SECT. XV.
THE Law given to Adam by the Creator,
But to us in the hands of a Mediator; Gal. 3.16.

Believers not bound to its obligation,
As to its rigor, that is off, by Christ's mitigation,
Having abollish'd all Rites and Ceremonies
Of the Ceremonial Law, by's dying Sacrifice.
Christ has blotted out, the Scriptures say, Col. 2.14.

The handwriting of the Law, taken it away:
Consider this point, Reader, without delay.
Paul don't mean the Moral Law; what then?
The Inventions and Commands of Men. Verse 22.

From Levitical and Ceremonial Law are free,
By Christ, who purchased this Freedom for we:
And so far as the Moral Law was against us,
Christ has freed Believers from its Curse;
Took it out of the way and nailed it to his Cross.
In point of Justification, don't you touch, Verse 21.

Neither taste, nor handle, which is as much
As though Paul had said, Don't you depend
On the Law, in your aim and end,
As though you could in a legal way or station
Fulfill the Law, and so obtain Salvation.
If this be your aim, then you are undone,
There Is no Salvation but by Christ the Son.
Do good Works as evidences of Salvation, Mat. 7.16, 17, 20.

By Fruit the Tree is known in his station.
Respect the Law as a spur to Sanctification, Gal. 5 22.

But count it dung in respect of Justification. Phil. 3.8.

Yea, Paul himself, as in Scripture plain,
Counts all things loss that were gain
Before his Conversion, but then cried he,
It Is dung, that in Christ I may found be,
Not having's own Righteousness, Scripture faith,
But the Righteousness of Christ by Faith. Verse 9.

Paul excludes the Law in Justification,
Yet owns it as a rule of Sanctification:
So the Moral Law is good in its place,
But not to Justify, Ephesians. 2.8.
that is by Free Grace.
The end in giving the Law, say all I can,
Was to humble the proud Heart of Man,
Who was pufft with self-conceited Pride,
What God Commands we will do, Exo. 19.8.
they cried,
As though able of themselves, did impart,
When as to Performance they had no Heart. Deuteronomy. 5.29.

The Law in it self is but a literal story,
Cannot discover Christ in his glory; Luke 24.45.

Let the Consideration of its rigor move
To go unto Christ by Faith and Love.
SECT. XVI.
COnsider farther, for I have more to say,
It Is impossible for any in a legal way
To keep the Law in way of Justification;
It was the Pharisees sin in their station, Luke 18.11, 9.

And I fear the sin of many in our Nation.
Many think to be Justified by their Works, Romans 10.3, 4.

Such will be saved no more than Turks.
Others in their lives Law and Gospel deface, Jer. 48.7.

Live in all sin still, Jam. 2.20.
and cry Free Grace.
Some are for the Law in way of legality,
Others are of an Antinomian quality.
Full of extremes are Men in our days,
To destroy Souls Satan has many ways: 2 Cor. 2.11.

So full of extremes is poor England,
Few in their Practice eye Christ's Command.
Many are for reading the Law in Churches,
As if that is enough, such baseness lurches
In Men and Women, as my lines impart,
Yet the Law not written in their Heart: Jer. 31.33.

Yet to have Moses read are still at strife,
Yet practice nothing of the Law in life;
Zealous for the Law, like the Jews of old, Joh. 5.42.

Who did oppose Moses to Christ, so bold
They were for Moses in their station,
Slighted Jesus Christ who came for Salvation.
Is it not so with many in our Nation,
For they practice nothing in Conversation
Of the Law in life; therefore it is but just
The Law condemn them, in whom they trust. Verse 45.

As Christ said to the Jews, in Scripture see,
It Is practice that makes the Law to be
A Rule, or leader unto Christ, that we
By Faith come to Christ, who did us free
From the Curse of the Law, and also has
Delivered all Believers from eternal Wrath; 1 These. 1.10.

Having Peace with God, as Scripture says, Romans 5.1. and 6.1, 2.

Being freely Justified in Christ by Faith:
Shall we sin then because Grace does abound?
God forbid, yet many such in England found.
Such baseness in many Men's Hearts there lurks,
Don't do Duty, least under a Covenant of Works;
And instead of doing Works of the Covenant,
Live in all Uncleanness, Lie, Swear and Rant;
Say, Christ died for Sinners, all is done by Christ,
So take liberty to sin, live as they list:
Sure these Men despise the riches of Grace, Romans 2.4.

Not knowing God's goodness, his Law deface;
They love darkness rather than light, we see,
Which will their eternal Condemnation be.
Many are with shaddows of the Law affected, Joh. 3.19.

When the substance in their lives is neglected.
Many Men and Women own Christ high
With their mouths, when their lives say a lie:
Many in words profess Christ in the land, Luke 6.46.

But Oh how few do Christ's Command!
He that will have Jesus a Savior know,
Must also have respect unto his Law: Psalm. 119.6.

He is Jesus a Savior only to those afford
Obedience to him as their King and Lord. Heb. 5.9.

Here Is point of distinction by the standing-rod,
He does not Righteousness is not of God:
Others are for doing the Law in their station, 1 John 3.10.

And rest in doing, in their generation;
It was, is so with the Jews, to this day
Are for the Law, the Vail not taken away.
He is a Jew in spirit, who alone can see
The use of the Law in its proper degree,
And only own Christ his Savior to be. Romans 2.28, 29.

To conclude this Head, and consider what is said,
Let the rigor of the Law make thee afraid;
Go unto Christ, live Holy without delay,
Secure thy Interest in Christ, 2 Pet. 3.1.
who is the way
To Salvation; 'till have by Faith so done
Art under the Law, therefore to Christ run
By Faith, God is not pleased in any but's Son?
'Till in Christ art under the Law, Mat. 17.4.
yea worse,
Under it as a Covenant of Works, a fearful Curse;
Therefore to Christ by Faith have recourse.
God will render all according to their deed.
Rouse Man, Rev. 20.13.
don't false Presumption breed:
Do according to the Law, but rest on none
For Salvation, Joh. 14.6.
but on Christ alone.
SECT. XVII.
THus, Reader, I have lead thee by the hand
Concerning the Law, as I at present understand;
Wherein thou may understand and see
The use of the Law in its proper degree.
Obj. But some may Object, and say unto me,
Don't you say that Heaven by Christ is free,
Yet something must be done by we?
Sol. Nothing done in way of Merit, God is just;
Is forsaking sin doing? Rev. 15.3.
would live in thy Lust?
By Grace are saved in point of Justification, Gal. 5.16.

Yet without Holiness no ground for Salvation: 1 Pet. 2.11.

Are not Justified by Works we have done, Heb. 12.14.

Justification is by the Merits of the Son. Tit. 3.5.

God's giving, Man's laboring don't sever,
Free Grace and full Duty go together; 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.

They are not an inconsistent station,
Free Grace, full Duty work out Salvation,
With diligence, with fear and trembling: Phil. 2.12.

Be in earnest with God, cast off dissembling.
That Grace which brings to us Salvation, Tit. 2.11, 12.

Teaches us to deny in our station
All ungodliness in our Conversation,
To live soberly and godly, by renovation;
Here Is the fruit of Christ's purchase clear, Tit. 2.14.

Which in the Scriptures does full appear.
Duties are a Believers Privilege by Christ,
Not to neglect Duties when we list.
By Duties we honor God, in Scripture see,
I will honor those that honor me. 1 Samuel 2.30.

A fruit-bearing Christian in his station
Is a God-glorifying Creature in's generation. Joh. 15.8.

A Believer Prays, Father, glorify me,
That thy poor Creature may glorify thee;
For what Comfort unto us when tried,
To hear and talk how Christ has died?
To hear the glorious Liberty Sons of God
Shall have by Christ's Redemption, Romans 8.21.
yet so odd
In our lives, wicked as in the land of Nod! Genesis 4.16.

What Is Redemption to any Natural Man?
'Till Converted, no more than to an American. Mat. 18.3.

If we hear the Gospel as we hear a Libel,
What the better? if not live the Bible.
Don't think because live on Gospel-ground, Gal. 5.13.

Because its Voice in our Ears does sound;
This don't exempt from rigor of the Law, Jam. 1.22.

And entitle to Christ, if thou will know; 2 Pet. 2.14, 15, 19.

Grace must operate in life as seed sown, Mar. 4.26, 27, 28.

By its growth what sort it is is well known.
Is Grace in thee from one degree full grown?
Christ came, Joh. 1.11.
was not received by his own;
Were they better for it? No, not a jot;
No more will thou, if thou do not
Bring Faith's fruit in thy Conversation; Mat. 3.8.

Without Holiness how can prove renovation?
If we hear the Gospel Preached frequently,
What the better if not depart from Iniquity? Luke 13.26, 27.

If Christ pass by our Hearts in the Word,
Yet if not with Zacheus to Christ accord,
Will not come down the presumptuous Tree
Of our Self-conceit, and 19.6.
then how can we
Expect Christ should come in that degree
To sup and lodge with us, Rev. 3.20.
if not free
To entertain Christ? then let us for shame
No longer be Christians only in Name;
Let Us rest in outward Privileges no more, John 8.39.

Let Us make haste, like Zacheus, open the door
Of our Hearts to Christ, if expect Salvation,
Tender Christ Obedience in Conversation, Heb. 5.9.

Without it the greater Condemnation. Luke 10.14.

SECT. XVIII.
THE way of Sin and Profaneness, Hell's road,
Is the broad way, Mat. 7.13, 14.
and the all-a-mode
Of the World, every son of Belial rides
This road, but there is another way divides,
Which is called Morality, and herein
It may be called also Legality, a great sin:
To rest in Duties done without saving Faith,
Has been the destruction of thousands, Romans 10.2.
says
Scripture, such baseness in Men's Hearts lurks,
The Galathians turned to the Covenant of Works;
Soon after Paul had Preached Free Grace, Gal. 1.6.

They that Doctrine did wickedly deface:
The Galathians had Preaching Seducers, cried
By Works they were to be Justified:
And most Men and Women in their station
Prone to this sin ever since the Creation. and 2.4.

It Is natural unto most Men, Micah 2.10
how prone
To rest in doing, are we every one!
Do this and live, is in most Men's Eye,
From Adam, and unto all his Posterity: Luke 17.10.

Men look for Righteousness and acceptance
More in Duties, than by Christ's Mediation: Romans 4.14.

More for the Precept in their Generation, Heb. 4.1.

Than in Eying the Promise of Salvation.
Man's Eye is so on doing, by sin depraved
Are we, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 16, 30.

Said the Jailer; we doing, so much respect,
That in doing, we Faith in Christ neglect;
So in doing, make Christ of no effect.
The Pharisee said, I do so and so, in's Station, Luke 18.11, 12.

His Eye on doing, not on Christ for Salvation.
To rest on Ordinances is no strange news,
Justified by doing, is the sin of the Jews:
They expect life, in Obedience to the Law; John 8.5.

So Christ for Salvation, they reject, know,
This was, and is their Error, and Mistake, Gal. 3.10. and 4.4, 5.

Let no Professor, of's Duties Saviors make.
Few under Ordinances, see themselves undone,
But still on in a road of Duties run,
See little need of Jesus Christ the Son.
Are not poor in spirit, tho the Scriptures say, Luke 1.53.

The rich, the full are sent empty away:
It Is the poor, the lost, the undone, the blind,
That Christ saves, as in Scripture find.
Those that feel themselves dead, as to life
Spiritual, with Corruptions still in strife;
What a litter, and nest of sin lies in Heart, Isa. 6.5.

Vile, base, such Expressions they impart!
The Soul convinced of every sinful thought,
Which conceited Man is not easily brought
Unto, Conviction goes before Conversion, Joh. 16.8.

Ordinarily, Scripture makes good this Assertion.
Sin appears to the Soul exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13.

To do this, the Spirit gives many a pull.
To bring to Christ, is the Spirits Intention, Mat. 18.11.

Man must be lost in his own Apprehension:
Which Man is not easily brought to see,
Till the Spirit convince Man of's misery
By sin, which he has committed against God,
So trembles, for fear of his eternal Rod:
Then longs for Peace and Reconciliation
With God, Psalm. 84.2.
through Christ, as his Salvation,
Which is the greatst happiness in his Station: and 119.174.

And prays for this blessing with tears, Psalm. 6.6.

As a Man sentenced to Death, is full of fears,
Does pray, Heb. 12.17.
sigh, and mourn, and cry,
For fear he should perish eternally:
Which Man is not easily won to, so odd
Is Man by sin, Col. 1.21.
naturally, an Enemy to God.
The Spirit does break for sin, the Heart,
Before he binds it up, as Scripture impart:
First wounds the Soul, before he heals,
Humbles the Soul for sin, Scripture reveals.
Softens the Heart, and makes it recant
From sin, Zech. 7.13.
which is compared to an Adamant.
Must drink of the Waters of Marahs station, Psalm. 126.5, 6.

Before can drink of the Well of Consolation:
Must sow in Tears, sorrow must annoy,
Before we can reap a harvest of Joy.
We must go into the House of Mourning,
We must repent, and from sin be turning:
The spirit of heaviness will take hold
On us, Isa. 61.3.
for sin, if in sin we are bold.
SECT. XIX.
Consider then, what has been spoken,
Has thy hard Heart from sin bin broken? 2 Timothy 1.6.

What godly Contrition, in thee is found,
For sinning against God, in Scripture ground?
Have gone mourning for sin all the day,
For dishonouring God without delay?
Not a legal sorrow, as my lines do say,
But godly sorrow, in an Evangelical way.
Then in all duties exalt Christ by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Without which, all is sin, Scripture says. Romans 14.23.

Hunger and thirst for more Acquaintance,
With Christ, by Faith, and true Repentance.
Desire to love Christ, delight in Union
With Jesus Christ, by holy Communion:
That in godly sincerity we may be found,
Not like the stony or thorny ground. Mat. 13.7.

Hear Sermons, to carry us to Christ, pray
The Word be not like seed fell by the way.
Use Duties as Noah's Dove did her wing, verse. 4.

Act by Faith on Christ, in every thing.
The Dove used her wings, Genesis 8.11.
as a means or way
To the; Ark to use Ordinances, don't delay
As the means or way to Christ, who can
Make duties acceptable, Ephesians. 1.6.
and also the Man
To be saved, by Ordinances, don't cherish
Such thoughts, this is a wicked flourish,
Yet without doing duties thou will perish. 2 Timothy 1 9.

Duties are Evidences of our Salvation,
Use Ordinances, to that end, in thy Generation:
Tho they do not save Man as is craved,
Yet they accompany such as are saved.
It Is the first part of our Redemption,
A People zealous, without exemption
Of good works, in Scripture it is plain, Tit. 12 4.

And shall Chists Blood be shed in vain?
It Is dreadful to fall into eternal pain.
Consider this seriously, and it regard,
It Is written for them who look Sion-ward:
That they would answer the end
Of Ordinances, 1 Cor. 15.2.
not only Profession pretend
Without its fruits in life, on Christ depend
For Salvation, it will thy life amend. Mat. 25.2.

In resting in Ordinances don't offend,
But act by Faith in Duties to the end.
The Field of duties, is the worst ground
For any to miscarry, Heb: 11.6.
Oh don't be found
Only a Professor! dread the Devils Pound;
To destroy Souls, Satan still goes round: Luke 10.13, 14 15.

To sow his Tares in Men's Hearts, of extremes,
Either to neglect duty, like Men in Dreams; Acts 5.3.

Or to rest on Ordinances, it is very plain;
Therefore take heed, I say once again:
There are but two ways, mind them well,
Sin, and Duty rested in, lead unto Hell.
Many pretend Faith, Jam. 2.14.20. verses.
but have no Works;
Others Works, but no Faith, such baseness lurks
In many Men, some pretend Zeal for God,
Yet not just in their dealing, Gal. 5.6.
in life so odd:
Others just in their dealing, 1, These. 1.3.
yet have no Seal
For God, so perish, as Scriptures reveal.
To conclude this head, Reader, in love mind,
Both to profess, Heb. 4.14.
and practice, be inclined.
To do duty don't delay, but rest on none
For Salvation, and 10.23.
but on Jesus Christ alone.
SECT. XX.
OF resting in Ordinances, Luke 2.19.
let us take care,
It Is not what Man says unto the Ear;
But what Gods Spirit speaks to the Heart,
It Is the Spirits Operation makes us depart
From sin, Isa. 30.21.
it is the voice behind you,
That turns, converts, and Hearts renew.
The Angels stirring the Water did only cure, John 5.14.

Desire and long for Ordinances pure:
When we have Ordinances, and them enjoy,
Use them as Ordinances, else will destroy.
Many follow a Road of Ordinances, Ezekiel. 33.31.
herein
What foot-way has Christ's Spirit within?
What heavenly influence, what intercourse
Betwixt God and our Souls? Gal. 6.45.
what remorse
For our barrenness under the means of Grace?
Do our Souls thrive in holiness, sin deface
In Heart, what immediate dispensation
From Christ, does the Spirit work Renovation?
What stirring the water under Ordinances,
In Grace and Holiness, 2 Pet. 3.18.
have spiritual advances?
Man may preach well, Man may afford,
Many good words, when none from the Lord.
Man may be very earnest, Isa. 48.17.
and active
In preaching the Word, do our Souls thrive?
You have mediate favors cast on you,
It Is mediate favors the Soul renew.
God is pleased to give us a toleration,
Free liberty by the King, in all the Nation:
Pray for a blessing, on the means in thy Station,
That the means of Grace may work Renovation:
It Is a mercy to have good Men's Preaching; Col. 2.12.

It Is the mercy to have the Spirits teaching.
The best preaching of Men will be found,
Like good seed cast into bad ground,
Without the Spirits Operation does abound.
The Law was written with Gods own hand, Exodus 31.15.

And dispensed as his Will and Command;
Which was Isreal's great favor, in part
Is the Law, by Gods Spirit written on our Heart.
The most of the World are spiritually dead 1 John 5.19.

Under Ordinances, few fed with Childrens bread.
Most of the World under Ordinances go to Hell, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Under a form of godliness, think all well;
Yet live in sin, like Esau in his Dottage,
Slight Heaven, so may enjoy earthly Pottage:
Are contented, like Beasts of the Field,
With corporal things, as Providence yield
To support such a corporal being, contented, alas,
With outward things, as a Beast with Grass!
Banished from Gods presence, was Cains Curse; Genesis 4.16.

Lie under Ordinances, not thrive! nothing worse.
What is it for a form of godliness to accord,
When we are not reformed by the Word.
No Communion between us and the Lord,
This is dreadful, as the Scriptures record: 2 Pet. 2.21.

But when the Spirit sets the Soul free,
It prays with Jacob, Jehovah bless me:
Yea, by Faith strives and struggles so;
Least thou bless me, I will not let thee go. Genesis 32.26.

Here lies Man's happiness, in Communion
With God, when Christ and Soul one in Union. Joh. 17.21.

When a sense of pardon comes by preaching,
Then we thrive by Ordinances teaching.
What experimental Knowledge, what Faith,
What divine Resolution, Josh. 24.15.
as Scripture says?
What droppings from Heaven on thy Soul,
Does the Word touch us like a burning Coal? Jer. 23.29.

That Is preaching, brings God and Soul together,
That a Christian hears, Jam. 1.25.
and does for ever
In his Conversation, from sin does sever.
Therefore of Heavens hope, let none talk,
Except according to Scripture Rule walk. Jer. 7.23.

I will put my Spirit in you, says the Lord,
To cause you to walk according to the Word: Ezekiel. 11.19* 20.

Not that we should wickedness maintain;
Let not drunkenness, and uncleanness reign,
Nor walk you after the way of Cain.
A way of cruelty and malice don't regard, Genesis 4.8.

Nor run greedily, Balaams way for reward.
A way of Covetousness, Numb. 22.
and unlawful gain;
This is against the Holy Scripture plain.
SECT. XXI.
UNderstand then, 2 Pet. 1.12.
my meaning clear,
Hear and practice in life, let it appear
That the Ordinances of God to thee are dear,
By loving his Ministers in holy fear.
Love good Men, let your Hearts be bent
To hear those whom God has sent. Romans 10.15.

Hear those, whom you believe God does hear,
And according in life, live with fear.
Honor a good Minister, for his works sake;
Let him from thee some supply partake, Heb. 13.16, 17.

According to thy Ability, Luke. 10.12.
with thy Heart,
Love such, as in sincerity the Gospel impart:
Who live, as well as preach the Gospel smart,
Pray for such, in love, as my lines impart,
That God would give Pastors after's own Heart:
Such God does most bless in their Station,
And follows their labors in their Generation
With his holy Spirits assisting Operation.
Take heed whom you hear, in Scripture asserted, Mar. 4.24.

By carnal, ungodly Ministers, few Converted.
How can it be, when Drunkards in station,
They not Converted, yet preach Renovation?
So like Priests, like People, in Conversation, Hos. 4.9.

You may see it plain in our Nation.
Many Priests, Swear, Whore, like drunken Elves,
Preach Conversion, yet never converted themselves:
Yet these Priests, by Men, fit for the Ministry,
If they smell (tho wicked) of an University:
Not that despise learning, I know well,
Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. Act. 22.3.

But when Priests their learning do deface,
By Whoring, Drunkenness, Covetousness, so base
Are most Priests, in their priestly race,
Which argues, the Priests have little Grace.
For they preach against those things by Name, Romans 2.21. to the 24 verse.

Yet Priests themselves practice the very same,
Which to Priests learning, methinks is shame.
Yet in their learning Priests still confide,
And a Man gifted by the Spirit, cannot abide: Mat. 4.18, 21.

As tho God could not make a Fisherman as able
As the great'st Doctor among the Rabble:
The learned Doctors of the Law, by pride
To have Christ preach, could not abide:
Because Christ was a Carpenters Son, Mar. 6.3.

And not bred as their pride did run,
In the learning of the Scribes, so deemed;
The learning of a Sott, is more than grace esteemed
In our days, most are their Souls deceiver,
Despise Gods Grace in Man, Jam. 1.17.
who is the giver
Of all Grace, can make a Comber or Weaver
To preach the Gospel-mysteries, as well
As those brought up at the feet of Gamaliel.
The learned Scribes and Pharisees, were those
Who did our Savior Christ most oppose. Mat. 27.1.

The learning of unregenerate Men, do lay
Most opposition to Christ's Interest to this day.
But not to enlarge here, I would be understood,
That learning, if not abused, is very good.
Scholastical learning, and supernatural together,
How good, when for Christ join as Brother.
Some such Ministers we have by Grace,
Such I honor in their Christian Race:
Prize such, but consider what does follow;
Idolize not Paul, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
Cephas, nor Apollo.
Tho very good Men in their Generation,
Look beyond Men's parts, the Spirits Operation:
Tho they preach well, our duties pressing,
Yet it is God by's Spirit, gives the blessing.
Paul may plant, verse. 7.
Apollo may water peace,
But it is God that must Grace increase.
Elisha's Servant, his Masters staff did lay
On the dead Child, 2 Kings 4.29. to the 34. verse.
as commanded, and say
The child is not awake, has no life,
Till Elisha came to revive the Shunamites Wife.
So it is with godly Ministers, tho they impart
Gods message, Job 23.21.
yet God must strike the Heart:
Before a dead Soul can be raised from sin
To the life of Grace and Holiness, Prove. 16.1.
herein
Don't rest on outward performances done,
Like most, Rev. 3.1.15, 16
but by Faith on Christ the Son.
To hear good Ministers, do you accord,
And pray for Gods blessing on the Word:
This is the ordinary way, Scripture says,
Hearing of the Word preached, Romans 10.17.
works Faith.
Therefore in love, let thy Heart be bent
To hear those, whom you think God has sent
To enjoy Ordinances, Mat. 5.6.
don't delay, rest on none
For salvation, but on Christ alone.
Man's happiness being in Christ complete: 2 Pet. 1.15.

This point, Reader, I cannot too often repeat.
SECT. XXII.
ALL this while, my lines are you greeting,
Tells you, Jam. 1.22.
rest not in mere going to Meeting.
Not that I am against Meetings, don't mistake,
But I praise God, Psalm. 8.4.
that of them I did partake.
Understand then what is my earnest suit,
According to what you hear, bring forth fruit.
Profession without Practice is like the Fig Tree, Mat. 21.19.

Leaves, no Fruit, therefore no fruit on thee
Shall grow; take heed what you hear do,
Then the God of Peace shall be with you.
Mind the Figg-trees doom, Phil. 4.9.
you have been invited
With many Sermons, Oh be to Christ united!
Lest Christ resolve of's Supper shall not taste;
Let not so many good Sermons be in wast:
It Is not said they shall not hear at last,
But of his Supper they shall never taste.
You may sit under Ordinances, them enjoy, Luke 14.24.

Yet if not profit by them will us destroy:
What though you hear many a good Sermon Heb. 4.1, 2.

Drop on you, as from the Hill of Hermon,
But how does it work? do we thrive
In Grace and Holiness? art spiritual alive?
If not savor of life, it is the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2.16.

Try thy Heart then whiles thou have breath:
For if do not thrive by the Word, it has
This written on it, thou art designed for Wrath. Isa. 6.9, 10.

Consider well of it, fear and tremble,
With God and thy Soul no longer dissemble.
Live according to Scripture, don't pretend
Profession, and not Practice, this will end
In Misery; nay, the greater thy Condemnation, Luke 12.47.

If improve not Mercy in thy generation.
Consider this, it is dreadful, to let thee see
The danger; shall be more tolerable in degree
Of Punishment, for a Heathen than for thee. and 10.13, 14, 15

Then live Holy, let not life be so odd,
But in all thou do eye the glory of God: 1 Cor. 10.31.

In buying and selling do as art able
Thy Duty to God and Man in both Table: Eccl. 5.2.

Let words be few, Mat. 12.37.
such may minister Grace
In thy generation, don't God's Image deface; Ephesians. 4.29.

In all actions God's glory be thy end,
Then in all thy Life thou will not offend: Jer. 9.23, 24.

Converse more and more with God in Heart,
The only way for sin and thee to part: Psalm. 77.12.

When about thy business in thy Vocation, and 104.34.

May Converse with God by holy Ejaculation.
Live in the exercise of Holiness and Grace, 1 Timothy 4.15.

Run the way of God's Precepts, sin deface:
If have wronged any, before thy dissolution,
If able, Psalm. 119.31.
with Zacheus, make restitution;
Don't be with shadows of Religion affected,
When the substance in thy life is neglected; Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.

It turns Mercies, Privileges, into a Curse,
When we have them, Mal. 2.2.
and in sin grow worse.
Improve the Means of Grace for your Souls,
Let the Word take impression like burning Coals. Jer. 23.29.

Now there is a Toleration, labor to understand
God's meaning, prize the Mercy, it is his hand
That overrules all the Rulers in the land: Psalm. 82.1.

Whatever is intended by all their Plods,
The Lord Jehovah overrules all the gods. and 86.8.

Oh improve this Privilege, and admire
Free Grace, Psalm. 115.1.
turn to God with Praise and Prayer:
So Profess, so do in way of your Function,
Take God in Christ, Heb. 12.1.
Faith, Love, all in conjunction.
Though Christ's satisfaction not our Sanctification, Gal. 5.6.

Be the ground of Justification and Salvation,
Yet where he is Justification he is Sanctification; 1 Cor. 1.30.

Consider it, without Holiness no Salvation.
External Profession without Soul-renovation, Heb. 12.14.

Will never partake of eternal Consolation.
Consider this, Isa. 44.18.
if have any spiritual sight,
They are not fancies, but of Soul-weight.
SECT. XXIII.
COnsider these things, my lines do mount,
To tell thee for reading must give an account; Luke 16.2.

Though dead lines without the Spirit's operation, Romans 14.12.

It Is thy Duty to Pray in thy generation;
Which thou may see before in this Book, Col. 2.12.

If in love you will retreat and look.
To help thee in love I will use this art,
Shoot one Arrow more at thy Heart: Deuteronomy. 11 16.

For thy Conversion I Would not leave one stone
Unturned, then don't thy self let sin alone.
First, be well acquainted with thy Heart,
It Is the best Advice to thee I can impart;
For if art to thy own Heart a stranger,
Sure of thy Salvation thou art in danger. 1 John 3.20.

Don't say, have been qualified at School:
Can trust my Heart, if so thou art a Fool.
Yet many in this Conceit do rest, Prove. 28.26.

Say they, no matter, my Heart's good's the best,
I never was in all my life for change, Jer. 17.9.

Must be born again, to most seems strange; John 3.9.

How cannot be, of this take a word before
Concerning Conversion, hereafter say more.
Don't so much consider God's dispensation
In the World, as thy own Hearts renovation; Ezekiel. 18.31.

This is of absolute necessity to Salvation,
More than God's Providence in the Nation: John 3.3.

For what will it avail, if all were well
In the World, thou in the way to Hell? 1 Samuel 16.7.

If all were Converted, which would be well,
Yet if sin and Satan in thy Heart dwell, Act. 5.3.

What advantage, consider, would it be
To you? though there is a God, what is that to thee,
If not thy God by a particular Application? Joh. 20.28.

What the better, if not God of thy Salvation?
What though Jesus Christ for Sinners died,
What the better, if art by Christ denied?
So wilt, if in Heart thou sin regard, Psalm. 66.18.

I know you not, Depart; here is thy Reward.
Therefore try thy Heart, Mat. 7.23.
for fear it cheat
Thee of Salvation, its deceit is so great:
The Motions of thy Heart, observe them well,
Every motion is a step toward Heaven or Hell. 2 Cor. 13.5.

If Motions of thy Heart be steps to Eternity,
Take heed lest they come actions of Iniquity.
Know thy Heart, if in the World high or low,
By outward Dispensation can not know Eccl. 9.1.

God's love or hatred; then whilst has breath
Of thy Heart are Motions of life and death. Prove. 4.23.

If thou art poor, if not poor in spirit,
Not see thy need of Christ, Mat. 9.12.
shall not inherit:
If art rich in the World, it is all one,
Without thy Heart purged from sin, undone:
None are saved by outward Dispensation,
But according to the Spirit's operation
In Heart inward, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.
real Regeneration.
What Is God doing in the little World within
Thy Heart? Joh. 16.8.
does the Spirit Convince of sin?
Observe what reforming Work he is doing
In thee; Is the Spirit thy Heart renewing?
Is the Spirit thy sins and lusts subduing? Romans 12.2.

What say Man? or art like the most;
Or as those who never heard of a Holy Ghost? Acts 19.2.

It Is Heart-work, and hard work for thee,
As before if thou consider may see.
Prove thy Heart, then shall thou rejoice
In Heart, Gal. 6.4.
and not in another Voice.
Converse more with God in Heart,
That Is the way for sin and thee to part.
Is Christ in thee the hope of Glory? Col. 1.27.
then
Look to thy Heart, I say once again.
Try the spirits, 1 John 4.1.
Gods Spirit is a sanctifier,
Pray for the Spirit, he will work desire.
Tell thee of Righteousness, Dan. 9.21, 22.
Judgment to come;
Don't quench his motions, 'twill put him from
His work in thy Heart; don't be so evil
To quench God's Spirit, 1 These. 5.19.
and please the Devil;
For Satan's spirit is all sins Fomenter,
Tempts to sin, 1 John 3.8.
then for sin a Tormenter.
God's Spirit sanctifies, then works Consolation,
Satan's spirit tempts to sin for desolation. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Consider this well, to conclude this head,
Remember, 1 King. 22.22.
Meditate in Heart what is said;
Don't be a stranger to thy Hearts renovation,
It Is of absolute necessity to thy salvation. Mat. 18.3.

SECT. XXIV.
FOR to fasten this Nail on thy Heart,
Consider farther what my lines impart; 2 Timothy 2.14.

I am in earnest, and will do all I can
For Conversion of any Unconverted Man.
And in my Walk methinks I spy
A righteous Moral Man as I pass by. Luke 18.11.

Obj. Who can spot me, say black is my eye?
I wrong no Man in all my Life, not I,
Am no Drunkard, why should I fear to dye?
Sol. Only Morally Righteous is a sad Condition,
For the whole need not the Physician.
Christ dyed not for the whole but sick, Mat. 9.12.

Those sin has wounded to the quick.
Moral Righteousness is desirable and good,
Yet if not evangelical righteous, 2 Pet. 1.4, to the 7th. v.
like a flood
Will destroy us, yet thousands remain
In this state, if gross sins they refrain,
Count all well, this thousands has slain.
Moral Righteousness is such a qualification
As leads a Man to do to others in's station, Heb. 11.6.

As would be done to in his generation,
A rectitude of spirit to Men, yet no renovation:
Such was Abimelech of old in his Life,
When took unto himself Abraham's Wife; Genesis 26.9, 10, 11.

Such a moral righteous Man was he
That came to Christ, no sin could see, Mat. 19.20.

Gave to all their due, says Scripture-truth,
Had kept the Precepts from his Youth;
Lived orderly among his Neighbors, he
Judged himself so good as need to be,
Yet but in a sad Condition for salvation,
When Christ told of a spiritual qualification. Verse. 22.

Moral Righteousness in its highest race,
Is but in moral Men restraining-Grace;
Which otherways would be to Man so odd,
As he is inwardly an Hypocrite to God.
This for truth in Abimilech you may see,
I withheld thee from sining against me; Genesis 20.6.

Yet many say I was never so in my life,
Whoremaster, Swearer, no such sin was rife
In me; shall I say what I think is true?
That Morality has destroyed as great a Crew Mar. 12.34.

As Profaneness; take heed don't so by you:
This was the Pharisees conceit, Mar. 10.20.
they knew
What was to be morally righteous, but few
Of them came to Christ as lost and undone,
They were righteous in themselves, Luke 18.21.
they run
In self-conceit, so no need of Christ the Son,
Nor of his Righteousness; Mat. 21.31.
that Christ told
Them, Publicans, Harlots, Heaven did hold
Before them, not that Publicans, Harlots bold,
Still living in sin shall ever enjoy Heaven
Without Repentance, reformation, not forgiven.
He that in a moral Righteousness does rest, John 3.36.

And all profane Wretches think it best
To live in sin, neither shall receive Salvation;
But Pharisee and Publican shall to desolation.
Rest not in a moral Righteousness, if so, undone,
Without Christ's white Raiment, Rev. 3.18.
to him run,
God is not pleased with any but in's Son,
Oh then know thy Heart, Mat. 17.5.
thou must be lost
In thy own thoughts, thy Salvation cost
Christ's blood; and 18.11.
go to Christ, he can withstand
God's Wrath, and bring thee to Canaan's land.
Remember this, that without Regeneration,
Moral Righteousness cannot attain Salvation. Mat. 18.3.

Dread self-righteousness, I must it double,
Don't be deceived, thy first had trouble,
More the New Birth, John 3.6.
don't think it strange,
There must be a thorough real Heart-change.
God's power appears in making the Sun
In the Firmament, Psalm. 8.3.
his glorious Power run
In making all things, Moon and Stars,
But in making a New Creature many Jarrs
The Spirit has with our Hearts, before it yield,
And from the strong Man win the Field. Luke 11.21, 22.

God spoke the word, all things were made new, Genesis 1.14, 15.

But to make a New Creature has more to do,
Than in making the World, more opposition
By Sin and Satan, such is Man's undone Condition;
How few return unto God by holy Contrition
Tremble, it is not easy matter to be Newborn, Luke 17.17, 18.

By Nature Satan's Captive, 'till by force torn:
Satan keeps possession of all Hearts by Nature,
'Till Christ by's Spirit make his departure. Act. 26.18.

SECT. XXV.
TO know how it is with thy Soul don't scorn, Mat. 15.19.

Examine thy Heart, wilt see cause to mourn,
And cry to God, Do thou my Heart turn
Unto thee, from sins dominion, Psalm. 80.3.
set me free
From Satan's bondage, to live unto thee:
Thus wilt sigh, with many groans, Romans 8.21.

Conversion is compared to broken bones, Psalm. 51.8, 17.

Many a bitter Pang with sorrowful moans:
Therefore if try thy Heart, Act. 9.4, 6.
thou may know
Whether art truly Converted, Yea or No.
All Men and Women by Nature born so odd Romans 5.10.

Into the World, till Converted, enemies to God.
Original sin in Man did God's Image deface Col. 1.21.

In all Jew and Gentile, want Christ's Free Grace. Romans 3.9, 10.

Then try thy Heart how the Cause does stand
Betwixt God and thy Soul, eye God's Command: and 10.12.

It Is very dreadful to fall into his hand Heb. 10.31.

Without Christ, and thy Souls renovation.
Have no ground in Scripture for salvation: Acts 3.19.

A moral Man is but an outside Holy Man,
Without Evangelical Righteousness saved none can.
Moral Righteousness is but close Hypocrisy, Mat. 23.27, 28.

Labor to know God in Christ in sincerity:
Moral Righteousness is like a counterfeit Ring,
Makes a fair show, but yet some other thing.
Yet don't mistake, as though moral Virtues I denied,
This is to have what I have said misapplied:
Where Grace is, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Mat. 19.20, 22.
Moral Virtues are also,
Yet Moral Virtues are where Grace don't go.
Take heed of Hypocrisy, do as art able,
Thy Duty to God and Man in both Table.
Live righteously and godly, Verse 6.
don't part
What God joins, let God have thy Heart:
Righteously relates to a Moral qualification, Tit. 2.12.

Godly relates to Piety and Sanctification;
Join Piety to God and Morality together,
For where Grace is Moral Virtues don't sever.
Then in a Moral Righteousness don't rest,
Must be Converted, Joh. 3.3, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.8.
born again, if blessed,
Must have Grace, if ever of Heaven possessed.
How many in the World counted honest Men,
Yet never know what it is to be born again?
Many in their lives very honest and just,
Will wrong none, this is good, but don't trust
In this: Moral Virtues are desirable, yet must
Be renewed in Heart before turn to dust. Romans 12.2.

Moral Virtues are commendable in Man, Ephesians. 4.23.

To be Sober, 2 Cor. 10.18.
Chaste, Prudent, yet none can
Commend us to God without Grace in Heart,
Without Christ cannot be saved, Romans 14.23.
I will declar't,
Therefore from self-righteousness depart. Luke 9.23.

Prove thy Heart, whether have Grace or no,
Grace that qualifies for glory, Gal. 6.4.
and so
Be made meet for Communion with God
Here, Col. 1.12.
and hereafter with Christ, where is rod
Will be turned into Love, Mat. 25.21.
Felicity and Joy,
That for ever nothing shall thee annoy.
Consider what is said, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
I wish as a Friend,
Oh were you wise to mind your latter end.
SECT. XXVI.
Reader, do these things please thy Palate? Mat. 22.5.

These are not Jiggs, as in a Poet's Ballad.
Here may see what is plainly asserted,
The dangerous case of all unconverted;
Then strive to enter into the strait Gate, Mat. 7.13, 14.

If not converted before Death, then too late:
No Repentance, no believing in the Grave, Eccl. 9.10.

In order to Salvation; therefore I crave
Thy consideration; as my Name is HVSNANCE,
I would do something God's Glory to advance:
They are my dying words for ought I know, Heb. 3.13.

As God freely gives feed, so will I sow.
My Tallent. God has given, I will not hide; Mat. 25. v. 18, 29.

But for my Maker's Glory shall be employed:
Then consider and observe, I am free
To ask thee some Questions, two or three.
How came to be a Christian? A Question blunt, Act. 11.26.

To answer it right, will put thee astunt.
Well, let us hear then what thou can say, Act 26.28.

And make the best then of thy Play.
I was baptized a Christian, 1 Cor. 7.19.
my Place and Station
Was among such; bred in such a Nation;
My Friends were so, and so my Education:
Besides, I believe the Christian Profession. Jam. 2.19.

Does this make thee a Christian? Art short;
A Turk by Education can plead so for it.
Well then, if wilt hearken unto my Verse,
It may the truth of it to thee rehearse;
It may make thee understand, and know
Christian Religion is not a thing so low, Mat. 16.24.

Nor Salvation so easy, at so cheap a rate
As many Men in the World would hav't, Mar. 8.36.

Must enter thy Soul, by a spiritual Frame:
Art a new Creature? Or art still the same? 2 Cor. 5.17.

Then art no Christian, though thou profess it;
Must be born again, Life will express it. Joh 3.3.

The whole constitution must be renewed,
Flesh to be mortified, Sin to be subdued, Romans 8.13.

Must be a change, Col. 3.5.
self must be denied;
Yea, Gal. 6.14.
and the World to be crucified.
Sure, all this is not a small matter;
Only a Christian in Name, don't flatter
Thy self in an almost Christian's Suit: Act. 26.28.

The Life of a Christian lies in its Fruit,
In Obedience to God, without Dispute.
Inward and outward Man, it is only this,
Christian Godliness is God likeness.
Don't live in Sin, yet Christian pretend,
For a Man's Life, Phil. 3.19.
foretells his end:
Life is an expression of the Soul's frame,
By Nature wicked, art still the same?
Then for Heaven can lay no claim,
Without Holiness be in thy aim. Heb. 12.14.

See what Paul says, it is not I make it,
Being clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.3.
we be not found naked
Of Grace and Holiness, in heart have tried
Thy need of Christ, Mat. 8.2.
by Faith applied,
Bewing thy Soul in obedience to his Law
Heartily, Heb 5 9.
as expect'st God should Mercy show?
He has this hope, 2 Cor. 10.5.
does himself purify,
As he names Christ, departs from Iniquity;
Without Faith can not be saved, 1 John 3.3.
don't venture
Thy Soul, Heb 11.6.
not all say Lord shall enter.
Rest not with the Name Christian, Mat. 25.11.
know
What Is a Name to live, and dead in Law;
Can not any Evidence for Salvation show? Rev. 3.1.

What Life a Man lives, does plainly tell
Whither he belongs to Heaven or Hell.
A Man wicked in his earthly Race,
You may see Hell in that Man's Face.
When Hell opens in a Man's Conversation,
He is in the broad way to dissolation. Mat. 7.13.

Christ died, not only to free Damnation,
But also to free from a sinful Conversation. Tit. 2.14.

Don't live in Sin, cast not thy self away,
Christ is Author of Salvation to them obey: Heb 5.9.

Mind this, I am in earnest to let thee see,
As is thy Seed time, Psalm. 126.6.
such thy Harvest be:
Remember't, rouse, in false hopes don't sleep, Gal. 6.7.

Whatsoever Man sows, he shall reap.
SECT. XXVII.
Having thus far proceeded in our way, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.

Consider farther, for I have more to say,
Which may be an use of Application,
A Branch of which is farther Examination.
Art under Satan's Power? Or does the Spirit
Work Sanctification, only Saints inherit; Col. 1.12, 13.

Though Saints be now derided; yet when tried,
None shall be saved without sanctified.
Divine Power makes Partakers of Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 1.2.

Does Faith in Christ, thy Soul manure? 2 Pet. 1.4.

Speak Man, don't hide Sin like a foolish Elf? Romans 6.12.16.

Put the Question thus unto thy self.
Have I received Christ, as being to rule me?
Am I from Sins commanding Power free?
Have I no allowed, loved Sin in me?
If not, a happy Man or Woman art thee.
Take heed, don't cheat thy self: Put to trial,
Have lived the Life of self-denial? Mat. 18.3.

Has the new Birth past on the plain?
Art Regenerate? Have been born again? 1 Pet. 1.23.

Do hate Sin, as sin? have any Acquaintance
With Mortification and true Repentance?
Repentance is a change of Heart and Mind Romans 8.13.

From that is Evil, and to good inclined;
It Is no Repentance, say, I am sorry for Sin, Ezekiel. 36.31.

Yet live in Sin, this long in the World been,
Will not be put out of it till they die,
Have Mercy cry, yet, workers of Iniquity. Mat. 7.22, 23.

Don't be deceived: Repentance is a higher lift,
It Is a supernatural Work, is God's Gift Act. 5.31.

Wrought by's Spirit, then pray, Lord, give
Repentance unto Life, let us no longer live,
An almost-Christian; let us be brought
From a State of Sin, make my Heart sought, Job 23.16.

That I may be his, who has me bought. 1 Cor. 6.20.

Let Us not have worldly Sorrow, that is Death; 2 Cor. 7.10.

But godly Sorrow while I have Breath.
Work Holiness in my Heart before I die,
So live to praise thy holy Majesty:
These things are of serious consideration,
Without Regeneration, Joh. 3.7.
no Salvation.
SECT. XXVIII.
Here Is another branch of Examination, 2 Timothy 1.6.

Whereby to know our real Renovation.
Men are known to what Nation they belong,
By their Language, Expression of the Tongue.
Does thy life speak Canaan, Numb. 13.23.
describe the Land?
Have been there? Did bring Grapes in hand?
Does thy life speak plain, and not lowre.
As though thou have eaten Grapes are sour? Ezekiel 13 2.

Speak, Man; Does thy life say plain?
From the Occasions of Sin, 1 These. 5.22.
do refrain?
Is Garlic (a state of sin) to thee more worth, Prove. 23. v. 20, 31.

Than Milk, Honey, Grace and Holiness? put forth
From Egypt (a state of Sin) for fear thou fall
In the Wilderness: Exodus 16.3.
Never enter Canaan at all.
Fear the Anakims Sin, believe Scripture true,
Many are called, Mat. 22.14.
but they are saved few,
Of thousands Caleb, Gen 7.23.
and Joshua Son of Nun.
Entered Canaan, take heed of Sin, or undone.
Don't cheat thy Soul with a false nod Numb. 14. v. 37, 38.

Like most of the World: Fear Christ's Rod.
All think themselves in the favor of God,
Yet most in their lives, very wicked and odd.
What Man alive, what Man's state so bad,
Yet hopes for Heaven, Jer. 13. v. 25, 26, 27.
when dies: It Is sad
When Men live in such wicked leaven
Of Ignorance, yet count to go to Heaven:
They their Souls in false hope still venture,
Make Heaven a place of all Souls Center:
Most are with false hope so much depraved;
Yet Scripture says, 1 Pet. 4.18.
the righteous scarcely saved;
That is, thorough many difficulties and fear,
Where then shall the ungodly appear?
The broad way, says Scripture, leads to Hell,
And most go therein; 1 John 5.19.
Remember well
And believe the Truth what Scriptures tell,
Don't live in unbelief like old Israel.
Why Israel did not enter Canaan, in chief,
Was that great Sin of their unbelief.
Let Us fear, Heb. 3.12. to the end.
lest there is in us an evil heart
Of unbelief, so from Egypt sin ^oth depart.
From this root, Unbelief, the Fountain spring
Does flow in Men's lives, sin, that cursed thing, Heb 49, 11. and 11.6.

Which did Men believe were such an evil
Against God, their Souls, they would not please the Devil.
All Satan's design is, to cause Men to sin;
Full of malice ever since his fall been: Job 1.7.

A roaring Lion, to destroy Souls, Zech. 3.1.
not that he
Gets by Man's ruin; 1 Pet. 5.8.
but envies that degree
Of Happiness, which lost by's Fall and Pride: Jude 6.

So God, and Godliness Satan cannot abide, Rev. 12.9.

Would have all from Godliness go aside:
Then watch against Temptations to Sin;
Satan has many ways, snares and ginn, 1 Timothy 3.7.

To catch Souls, and many has destroyed in
His infernal gulf, take heed of sin.
Sin's evil is so great, would us cheat
Of Salvation, its malignancy is so great
Against God: His ways, it is such an Evil,
Man has no Companion in but the Devil; 1 John 3.8.

Other Creatures answer end of their Creation,
Silly Man that should bring Damnation
On thy self, love Devils Company so well, Hos. 13.9.

Sin with Satan here, and with him in Hell.
Live in Sin, unbelief, this will be thy fare,
If love thy Soul, of sin take care.
The Christian is a new Creature, I still cry,
As we name Christ, let us depart from Iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19.

SECT. XXIX.
Thus, you see the cause of unregenerate State,
To help thee, Reader, Heb 11.1, 6.
I will a little more debate
The Cause, and in our way, What Is Faith
And Repentance, according as Scripture says?
Faith is the first link in a Believer's Chain, Act. 8.37.

Then follow Holiness, and Sins refrain.
Then God's Love is shed abroad in our Hearts, Rom ^ 5

By the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.8. and 6.16, 17.
so from Wickedness departs:
Faith, God's Gift, is a Believer's Shield and Sword,
Is ordinarily wrought in us by his Word, Romans 10.14.

By the Spirit's Operation, whereby we see
Our undone Condition by Sin, till set free
By Christ; then the Soul without delays,
Remembers his own sinful evil ways, Ezekiel. 36.31.

Returns unto Christ with Morning Praise,
Looks on Christ, whom has pierced Tears run,
Weeps bitterly, Zech 12.10.
as one mourns for his Son:
This is Repentance, that godly Sorrow unto Life,
Not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10.
with Sin is at strife.
Thus all who are Regenerate by saving Faith,
Having received the Spirit, Romans 8. v. 13.14, 15.
as Scripture says,
Enlightening our Understanding by's Operation,
To live in new Obedience, Ephesians. 3.16. to the 19. verse.
in Conversation:
This is writing God's Law in our Hearts
By his Spirit, so from Sin in life departs;
This is to be Regenerate and born again, Jer. 31.32.

When from Sin in Conversation we refrain: Joh. 3.3.

This is true Baptism made without Hands, Col. 2.11.

Having new dispositions to do God's Commands,
Not legal but evangelical, Romans 12.2.
Heart change,
Inward Reformation, Ephesians. 4.17.
our Minds did range
On Vanity, now new thoughts of future State,
New apprehensions of Christ and strait Gate, Mat. 7.13.

New formed Principles, 1 Timothy 1.5.
practical Resolution,
New thoughts of Godliness till Dissolution: Act. 11.23.

This is Repentance to Life, says Scripture true:
This is Regeneration, Josh. 24.15.
makes Man become new:
New Love to God in Christ is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.

Hates former ways: Grace adorns his Feature.
Grace, Gal. 6.15.
a pulsive, inward, regenerating change
Translates Man; this to the World seems strange.
By experimental Knowledge, Col. 1.13.
what this means,
How few know? Joh. 3.9.
but to false hope they leans.
God's merciful, Mat. 7.21.23.
so abuse Mercy till they die,
Don't believe the Scripture nor Sin fly:
Lord have Mercy, cry Workers of Iniquity,
Till lanch forth in the Ocean of Eternity.
Thou must be converted in thy Generation,
This must on thy Soul by Renovation, Mat. 18.3.

If ever art happy by way of Salvation.
Some use to say, when they see a sick Friend, Object.

If say, Lord have Mercy, he made a good end.
I would not discourage on a sick Bed; Sol.

But if thou presume on this, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
art led
By the Spirit of delusion, have no ground
For thy Salvation, without in Christ found.
It Is true, God's merciful, Joh. 14.6.
by his Prerogative
Did save the penitent Thief, whilst alive. Luke 23.43.

Here Is an Example of Christ's Mercy, but God
Has not promised Mercy at Death's fierce Rod;
Without a Promise, what ground for Faith?
All Promises are in Christ, Scripture says. 2 Cor. 1.20.

And Christ says, not all say Lord, Lord,
Shall enter Salvation; this, Mat. 7.21.
Scripture record
Without doing God's Will, says the Word,
Why wilt be so mad thy Soul to venture,
When many shall strive, and not enter? Luke 13.24.

Thou will say, this will make one despair: Object.

This also is the Devils work, his last snare, Sol.

Therefore of his wicked Devices take care;
Tremble and Fear, Satan waits for Prey, 2 Cor. 2.11.

And would hinder thee of Salvation's Way.
Let me tell thee, take it not in vain, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Where Despair has destroyed one, it is plain,
Presumption has it is ten thousand slain: Genesis 19.14.

Therefore false Hope do not still retain.
'Must have Trouble for Sin if art saved, 1 Cor. 15.34.

Dread false Security, Ephesians. 5.14.
thy Soul is depraved
With Sin, let not Presumption increase,
Where the strong Man keeps House, all Peace;
When a stronger comes, Christ by his Spirit, Luke 11.21, 22.

Must be troubled, the Devil to disinherit;
Then cast off false Peace in thy Generation, Rom 13.11.

Before thou fall in eternal Desperation,
Consider well, what is said in thy Station; Rev. 20.15.

All unconverted are in a state of Damnation, Mat 18.3.

Will not this spur thee to secure Salvation?
Don't think me rash, Scripture says the same;
Search Scripture, if not, give me blame:
It Is the only Terms, Scripture all accord,
No Conversion, Heb. 12.14.
no Salvation, says the Word;
By Scripture, shall be judged thee and I,
Then labor for Conversion before we die. 2 Timothy 4.7.

Fight the good fight of Faith in our Station,
So we may obtain Faith's end, 1 Pet. 1.9.
Salvation.
SECT. XXX.
Come on Reader, How do like this Play?
In other things, 2 Timothy 2.14.
as motives in thy way,
Consider Sin's evil, as before is said,
Man's Companion in sin is also laid
Before, consider things, as we go stated,
The sad condition of all unregenerated.
Thou may see the evil of unbelief, Heb 3 19.
hearing
The ground of all wickedness and sin.
Cast this cursed weed out of Heart, unbelief,
Cause of Man's Ruin, of sin the chief;
For did Men believe God's Word were true,
Would not content themselves, as they do
In a state of Sin; did they believe, then they
Would leave Sin, turn out of Hell's way;
Then would the Drunkard, and unclean flee
From Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.
would reformed be.
Scripture says, no unclean in his station,
So living, Romans 1.18.
so dying, shall enjoy Salvation;
Whoremongers, Swearers, many in the Nation,
Proud, Gal. 5 v. 19, 20, 21,
Covetous, Liars, shall have Damnation
For their Portion, Who does this believe?
But too like the Children of Mother Eve,
Believe Satan before God, Genesis 3.6.
pull the Tree,
Though forbidden, so in our lives do we.
God commands, take heed of Sin, that cursed,
Yet by most of the World, 1 John 5.19.
how it is nursed!
The reason Men don't believe, in sin dead,
Don't believe God's Wrath, Mat. 22.5.
what ever is said:
By some the whole Scriptures are denied;
Some others, the Scripture they divide;
Its Precepts some don't believe what it says,
Others in its Promises are weak in Faith.
Hence all this is from the Devil's Art, 2 These. 2. v. 10, 11, 12.

When Men receive not Scripture with the heart:
Men love Darkness when deeds are evil,
Hate Scripture light is from the Devil. Joh. 3.19.

Satan knows the Tendency of Gospel Grace
Is his Kingdom of darkness to deface:
Therefore Satan and Antichrist with his Hounds, 2 These. 2.4. to the 9. verse.

Monks, Friars, Jesuits, his Kingdom abounds,
Do all they can to keep Gospel Light down,
So blind lead blind into Satan's Pound: Rev. 12.9.

Scriptures were given by the Spirit's operation, Mat. 15.14.

Able to make us wise unto Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.

Where Is the Man that lives in Conversation,
According to a Scripture demonstration? Phil. 1.29.

God exalted his Word above his Name, Psalm. 138.2.

For us not to live according is shame:
Nay, to spur thee a little in thy way,
The Word I have spoken, Christ did say, Joh. 12.48.

Shall judge us all at the last day;
Therefore to believe Scriptures, let us accord,
And live according to the revealed Word.
What Unbelief in men's Lives expressed
Say they are Sinners, and so are the best, Gal. 6.7. and 5.16, 17.

Such Baseness in most men's hearts does rest.
It Is true, Sin dwells in us in this Life,
But in the regenerate, there is Strife;
Spirit against the Flesh, Sin don't reign
In Believers, but thou do Sin maintain:
Do obey it in the Lust thereof still, Romans 6.12.

Art captive to do the Devil's Will?
Consider, take this Caution by the way,
Thou his Servant art whom do obey.
Don't think to go to Christ for a Plaster,
And work Iniquity; Mat. 25.41.
no with thy Master
Don't be presumptuous, false hope don't breed;
Live holy, hate Sin, destroy that cursed weed;
Which if not, will destroy's, leave us dead,
As Jael Sisera strike the nail in his Head.
Sin does seduce us, Judge. 4.18. to the 21. verse.
as Jael Sisera coming,
Sin blinds us, as she him in Scripture seen.
Sin promises smooth things; but in the end,
Nothing but Wormwood and Gall shall find; Zeph. 1.2, 3, 7.

But of the evil of Sin, I have said before,
Consider it in Mind, and shall say more
Hereafter; hate sin, live holy in thy life,
Fear God's wrath, with sin be at strife;
Bring forth Fruit, unto holiness attend,
Eternal life and glory shall be thy end. Romans 2.7.

SECT. XXXI.
Some may say, Object. Deuteronomy 13.30. to the end. Sol.
being in sin very bold,
If this be true, what you do unfold,
What Is become of our Forefathers of old?
This Objection, I looked for in my way,
Because common with many now a day:
This is, with false hopes our selves to flatter,
We are not to enquire into this matter;
But to look to what God commands,
As our duty, Act. 17.30.
this God requires at our hands.
Time of their Ignorance God did at wink,
Take heed what sinful thoughts thou think,
Let not any false hopes in thee augment;
God requires all Men now to repent.
Don't with false hopes thy Soul delude,
Think best to go with the Multitude? Exodus 23.2.

This is like him, which Histories do tell,
When came to be baptized, mind it well,
Asked whether his Forefathers were in Hell:
The Bishop said, it is truth what you tell;
Then (says he) there will I also go,
Would not be baptized, the cause is so
With most of the World, Jer. 9.14.
the cause is sad,
When Men practice like Men are mad.
What is it to be a Christian, only in name,
When Men's actions in life, Tit. 1.16.
cry shame?
Alexander one of his Soldiers did blame,
Said sight better, or leave off thy Name.
So leave off Christian, Tit. 2.14.
or answer the end
Of Christian, and not Christian, only pretend.
Many things done among Christians I could name,
Which to Heathens would be mere shame. Ephesians. 5.12.

The Turks, the name of Christian defy,
Why, because do not live accordingly:
They of Christians make Slaves, and 4.18, 19.
herein
Many Christians make themselves Slaves to sin.
How corrupt is this our English Nation?
Few live Christian in their conversation.
How wicked, and profane in their Feasts,
In drinking healths, drunk worse than Beasts?
Yet Ahasuerus, who was but a Heathen King,
Did command against this wicked thing. Esth. 1. v. 7, 8.

The truth of which, Scriptures plain tell,
No Man to drink should one another compel,
Oh! Christians, those Practices are way of Hell.
To force Men to drink, is such an evil,
Is not from any good, but from the Devil;
Yet Men will to their knees in this desire,
When never to their knees in holy Prayer. Psalm. 14.4.

Oh! that England under a Christian King,
Should such wicked practices forth bring.
Jesuits say, a Cross honorable to a King's Crown, Isa. 5.20.

But I think not, when his Honors down
In his Subjects; when Iniquities abound,
It Is Religion, Holiness, makes a King renowned;
Let Us no more in these wicked practices be found,
But pray for King William in his Station, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Long may maintain in his Generation,
Gospel Religion by's coming in the Nation,
Pray more for the King in thy Station,
Swear and whore less in thy Generation,
Leave of Drunkenness in thy Conversation, Phil. 1.29.

This is the best health in the Nation.
Live like a Christian real, take my advice,
If ever you expect to enjoy Paradise,
Cast off those Practices of sin and vice
Pray against those things, in this England, Psalm. 7.9. and 143.10.

To do God's will desire to understand*
Be holy in Conversation, God's way choose, Rev. 14.7.

Many are more for harkening after News,
Than to know God, think ignorance will excuse.
How many say, where much is given,
Much is required, Luke 12.48.
as my name is STEPHEN.
Let me tell thee, and I will not dissemble,
Ignorance will be no excuse; then tremble,
Cast off Wickedness, no longer sin be banding,
God's displeased with People of no Understanding: Isa. 27.11.

Yea fear and dread, will not show favor
Nor Mercy on them do not Mercy favor,
In their Lives will not be their Savior,
That are ignorant of Christ in behavior: Luke 13.27.

When Christ comes in the World below, 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Will render Vengeance to all don't know
And obey him; tremble then, and be wise,
From Ignorance of Sin do thou arise,
It Is Scripture Counsel, Luke 12.47.
Don't it despise.
It Is true, he that knows his Master's Will,
And does it not, but is negligent still,
Shall have many stripes, suffer in a higher degree
In Hell, and 10.13, 14.
the greater his Damnation be,
But what comfort will this yield thee?
If in Hell, Joh. 17.3.
then labor for Knowledge, see
Thy need of Christ, Ignorance also flee.
Oh! it is sad enough, Man, to be in Hell,
Though thy Punishment so great don't swell Mat. 8.12.

As some others; Jud. 6.7.
yet Ignorance makes so odd,
It Is Hell enough to be excluded from God,
From enjoying his Presence, lie under his Rod.
What it is to lie under God's wrath in Hell,
Dread and tremble, Psalm. 90.11.
no tongue can tell;
Then labor to know God in Christ, and
To do God's Will desire to understand; and 143.10.

Darkness in thy Soul, darkness in Hell,
Here Is but little comfort for thee to dwell:
Try the light within thee, Mat. 6.23.
lest it darkness be,
If that is Darkness, Darkness is of great degree.
From Ignorance arise, I wish thee as a friend*
Oh! Deuteronomy. 32.29.
were you wise to consider your latter end.
SECT. XXXII.
Say some, Object. Isa. 8.20.
you stand for what Scripture says,
And hold it as the only rule of Faith.
Does Paul to the Thessalonians not say,
Hold fast the tradition in your way 2 These. 2.15.

Which have been taught, whether by word
Or our Epistle? the Papists to this accord, Sol.

For their unwritten Fables and Tradition,
Hence would hold up their Superstition:
Although there were some Doctrines of Faith
In matters of practice, as History says,
When Paul wrote this Epistle, not found
Expressly in writing in Scripture ground,
And been preached by the Apostles; Yet Sir,
This will not in the very least infer,
That now the Canon of Scripture deemed Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.

Is completed, Tradition should be esteemed:
We are not to practice as Tradition says,
But according to Scripture, the rule of Faith;
Yea Paul himself to us does unfold,
Let him be cursed, which is very bold; Gal. 1.9, 10.

Yea, if an Angel against Scripture hold,
Let him be accursed; in Scripture see,
That tradition can be no Rule for we,
Unless according to Scripture it agree.
Some complain of the Scripture's obscurity,
Yet themselves in sin grown to maturity;
Yet very plain to any would sin fly,
Scripture says, shall not commit Adultery; Jam. 2.11.

It Is plain, he that believes shall be saved,
He that believes not, is so depraved
With Sin, he shall be damned, Mark 16.16.
it is plain
In Scripture, therefore must be born again.
He that has this hope, or this Faith,
Purifies himself, as God's pure Scripture says. 1 John 3.3.

It Is plain, blessed are the pure in heart,
They shall see God, from sin depart: Mat. 5.8. Prove. 8.36. Heb. 12.14.

He that sins wrongeth his own Soul,
These Scriptures are plain enough to all:
Some others the Scripture they disdain,
Because Truth in them is so plain.
Full of extremes are many in our days; 2 Cor. 2.11.

To destroy Souls, Satan has many Ways.
He that orders aright his Conversation,
Shall be sure to enjoy eternal Salvation, Psalm. 50.23.

Live according to the Gospel of Christ Jesus;
Let not Men's vain Tradition please us.
No Book like the Scripture in its Station,
Of Christianity Scripture is the foundation.
Christ for Man's Redemption was sealed
By the Father, Joh. 6 27.
only by the Scriptures revealed.
The Gospel declares glad tidings of Salvation;
Let Us love the Scriptures in our Generation,
Though written by diverse Men in their station, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Yet concur in one by the Spirit's operation,
Though written by several Men, yet all accord;
Under several dispensations: yet the Word
Tends to one thing, to Holiness it does afford,
As men guided by the Spirit of the Lord,
Who spoke, as moved by the Spirit still,
All there Prophecies have, Mat. 24.34, 35.
and time will fulfill.
Man cannot certainly determine, it is decided,
Things future, that are contingent, if not guided
By God's Spirit. Scriptures harmonious intent
Is against Sin, to promote Holiness by one consent;
Therefore against Scripture, the wicked bent.
The Drunkard knows, it is sin at least,
But Intemperance is worse than the Beast: Psalm. 49.20.

The voluptuous and unclean in's Station,
Knows it is sin to commit fornication;
Therefore love darkness, Deeds being evil,
To hate Scripture is to please the Devil;
It Is a delusory Spirit in Age or Youth,
Not to receive Scriptures in love, 2 These. 2. v. 10, 11, 12.
as truth.
Some Custom and Tradition of old Fathers cry,
So the Rule, the Scripture, they pass by;
Others cry, the Light within, so they pass
From Scripture, are as bad's those hold Mass.
Conscience enlightened, Light within hearken to,
As a ruled rule, Isa. 8.20. Psalm. 119. v. 9, 105.
by the Scripture rule do.
How shall Man cleanse his way? not by Sword,
But by observing what is written in the Word:
Thy word is a lamp, a light in my way,
Had not been for the Word, I had gone astray.
Live the Scripture, Col. 3.16.
in Love let them dwell
Plenteously in us, they dehort from Hell,
And Remember what my lines do tell.
The Spirit, who guided Men by's Inspiration, Luke 24.45.

Must work a practical belief by's operation
Of Scripture in our Hearts in our Generation. Col. 2.11.

In writing the Scriptures, the Spirit did guide
Men in their Generation, as is implied
By what I have said, and cannot be denied.
Therefore, pray for the Spirit, Luke 11.13.
who still
Can guide us to understand God's will
Revealed in Scripture which leads to Salvation,
Is by Christ in way of sanctification;
For a practical belief of Scripture I contend, Joh. 16.13.

Without which eternal Death will be our end.
SECT. XXXIII.
If all I have said will not thee move
After Holiness, but still Sin do love:
Consider Sins sad effects as we run.
If any thing will move, see it on his Son, Romans 8.2.

How God poured out his Wrath afresh,
Yet but in the likeness of sinful flesh:
For sin, condemned sin in's Son, Shall we
Make light of sin, yet Christ was free?
In Christ was no sin, nor any guile; 1 Pet. 2.22.

Yet had such love, suffered for Sinners vile.
Christ was tempted, Is It nothing in thy eye? Mat. 4.1, 2.

Had such love, freely gave himself to die:
Was rich, became poor, of no reputation, 2 Cor 8.9.

Not a place to lay's Head, to purchase Salvation
For Sinners; fasted, was despised, rejected, Mat. 8. v. 20, 27 29, 30, 31.

Was spit on, buffeted, art still dissaffected?
Was derided, Shall not Christ be respected?
Sweat like drops of Blood, Luke 23.11.
sorrowful to Death
For Sinners, to appease his Father's wrath.
Christ was crowned with Thorns, Mat. 26.38.
Art
Still loath from thy Sins to depart?
No sorrow like Christ's, Isa. 53 3.
behold ye pass by
His Cradle, a Manger, Disgrace till came to die. Luk 2.7.

When born of a Woman, Luke 2.7.
no room in the Inn,
All this Christ suffered, cursed effects of Sin!
Christ wept, Joh. 11.35.
Do we laugh, Tears, Friends,
If it is nothing to us, sad will be our ends:
For despising Moses Law without Mercy died,
Slight Christ's Blood by which are sanctified.
And we expose our selves, Heb 10 28. to the 31. verse.
says the Word
Unto the severe Justice of the Lord,
It Is dreadful if we in unbelief accord,
To fall in God's hand, as says the Word
Is fearful; therefore let us obedience afford.
Out of Christ, God is a consuming Fire;
In Christ, Mat. 17.5.
a reconciled Father; let us desire
To be found in Christ by Faith and Prayer.
Let Us take Christ by Faith for our Refuge, Gen 7.1.

For God's wrath is too great a deluge
For us to wade; Psalm. 46.1, 2.
see what is before presented,
Our hearts hard, else would have relented.
God's wrath made Christ cry, Isa. 25.4. Mat. 27.46.
My God,
Can we stand under's revenging Rod?
Oh! shelter in Christ, this Ark will stand,
Carry us thorough God's wrath unto dry Land.
Consider yet farther, if all I have said
Of Sins effects, will you not be afraid
Of God's wrath for sin? The Scriptures tell
God cast Angels for sin from Heaven to Hell,
Cast Adam out of Paradise for his sin, Jud. 6.7. Genesis 3.24. and 7.23. and
19.24.

Destroyed the old World that long had been,
Rained Fire and Brimstone on Sodom for sin,
In Mount Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34.5.
Moses lost his life,
Because he sinned at the waters of strife.
Judgments on many more I could write, Exodus 14.28.

As an effect of sin, too many here to recite;
But above all those, Numb. 12. v. 9, 10, 11.
and a thousand more,
None like our Saviors, as you see before:
All Christ suffered out of love for we, 2 King. 5.27.

Yet not love Christ, Act. 5.5.
nor shed a tear for he,
Whose love was beyond any degree,
Yet not love Christ, then base are we. Heb. 10.7.

Was Christ incarnate, left his Glory all,
Not shed a tear for Christ, our love small.
Consider his love, 2 Cor. 5.14, 21.
let his love constrain
From Sin, else what I say will be in vain:
Christ's love to us, is love beyond degree;
The offended dies to set the offender free.
Lord with thy love make my Soul shine, Psalm. 31.16.

Never was such love as this of thine.
SECT. XXXIV.
Here Is Judgment and Mercy before's; yet we
Love and live in sin, have eyes and cannot see. Isa. 6.10.

Consider God's wrath, from sin be turning,
Who can dwell in everlasting burning? and 33.14.

If we leave not sin before it is too late,
'Twill be our damnation in a miserable state:
One of those two, shall be forced to cry
Out of a sense of sin, oh! wretched Man I, Romans 7.24.

Who shall deliver me from sin's misery.
Consider it, for God is still the same, Luke 16.24.

Or cry I am tormented in this flame.
Shun sin; for if God spared not his Son,
Who was the natural branch, Romans 8.32. and 11.21.
at long run
Will not spare thee; then of sin, take heed,
For to thy Salvation it is a cursed weed.
Moses died for one sin at waters of strife, Deuteronomy. 34.5.

What think that lives in sin all thy life?
God's merciful, this should obedience increase, and 29.19, 20.

Not go on in sin, to thy Soul cry peace,
And add Sin to Sin, Drunkenness to Thirst:
Fear lest thou die in sin, God is just;
Without Justice satisfied, though Mercy craved;
No Man by mere Mercy of God is saved,
Though Grace, Joh. 3.16.
Mercy be the original ground
Of our Salvation; yet let not sin abound:
Without Justice satisfied, no Salvation found.
If all the World to satisfy Justice had tried,
Nothing could, but only Christ that died; Mat. 17.5.

In him only God is well pleased, and
Has committed all power into his hand: and 28.18.

Mercy is over all; yet if Soul be filthy
With sin, God will not clear the guilty. Exodus 34.6, 7.

Don't abuse Mercy, since Mercy does abound,
To satisfy God's Justice, but one way found;
That Is only Christ, God's Justice would admit
No other satisfaction, Act. 4.12. Romans 8.1.
this point don't forget.
Go to Christ, in him is no Condemnation;
But without Christ, there is no Salvation:
No Condemnation to them obedience afford,
Who walk not after the flesh, says the Word,
But after the Spirit, as the Scriptures record;
If in Christ, no Condemnation from the Lord,
Yet may be condemned by Men, Luke 23.14, 23.
may accord
For their Condemnation at Council Board;
Yet if in Christ, 'twill this comfort afford,
Though condemned by Men, Romans 8.34.
none from the Lord.
Live as those in Christ, let not sin abound,
Walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25, 19, 20, 21.
in sins way be not found:
As many as are lead by the Spirit,
They live by Faith, and apply Christ's merit,
Who purchased not only their Salvation,
But redeemed us from a sinful conversation. Tit. 2 14. Romans 8.13, 14.

Don't live after the Flesh in life so odd,
But live holy like the Sons of a holy God,
By Adoption and real Regeneration,
Which is effected by the Spirit's operation; 1 Pet. 1.2.

Therefore of hopes of Heaven don't talk,
Except according to Scripture rule walk:
The Field of Sin is the Devil's ground, Gal. 5. v. 19, 20, 21.

If thou trade there, take heed of his Pound;
They were judged according to their works
Who believes this? Rev. 20.13.
but such baseness lurks
In Men and Women's hearts, the Devil's cheat,
God's merciful, so they with this conceit
Abuse mercy, 1 John 3.8.
and are led by the Devil,
Not believing every secret good or evil
Shall come into Judgment, Eccl. 12.14.
did Men believe,
Men would not sin as they do, Ephesians 4.30. 2 Cor. 5.10.
but grieve
For grieving God's Spirit, not in Sin run,
If believed God's Omnisciency, Prove. 15.3.
God looking on.
All things are open and naked unto God; Heb 4.13.

Then fear lest he smite thee with his rod.
Many do that, which if Men did see
They would be shamed, and from Men flee. Ephesians. 5.12.

Oh! take heed, God knows all thy actions,
God knows all thy thoughts and affections; Psalm. 44.21.

Then fear to sin against God, Luk 8.17.
for he has
Reserved workers of iniquity for wrath; Luk 8.17.

If Men condemn thee not, observe the Word, Job 21.30.

Without in Christ, condemned of the Lord.
SECT. XXXV.
Come on, Reader, How do like this Play? Jud. 17.

I have other things as motives in thy way,
On sins sad effects, see how I have been;
Yet it is to the evil and nature of sin
Nothing. See also how my lines run, 2 Pet. 1.17.

Without an Interest in Christ art undone.
But some may say in their Generation, Object.

Can we withstand sin and temptation?
Can we work our own Renovation? 2 Cor. 3.5.

Sin will break forth in our conversation
Though we are by our corruptions withstood, Sol.

And sin run over us like a great flood
Over a bank; Romans 6.13. to the 16. verse.
yet the bank does remain
Till the flood of water is gone again:
So it is with us, whilst here in Sin's Field;
If cut thorough the bank, we yield
To sin, Romans 7.15.
but when our resolution is bent
Against Sin, then we sin not by consent.
This in Paul, you may see very clear,
As the Scriptures to us do make appear,
Though cannot hinder Birds flying in the Air
Over us, from making nests in our Hair
We are able to prevent them, Ephesians. 6.10. to the 18. verse.
then take care
How thou yield and entertain Sin,
And consider what I say to thee herein;
It Is one thing to be conquered by an Enemy,
And another thing to yield and cry,
And surrender our selves presently
Without opposition, or from him fly; Jam. 4.7.

It Is one thing to be overcome by temptation,
Another thing to yield to sin in our station.
There Is great difference in sin remaining,
And in sin in our lives still reigning. Rom 6.12.

Don't still plead imbecility, and never depart
From sin in thy life, this is Satan's art,
Use the means to overcome sin with thy heart.
The impotent Man did wait, though weak
At the Pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5.5.
as Scriptures speak,
Do use all means to this end. Don't flatter
Thy self, God will judge thee for this matter.
Consider what I say to thee, and herein
Abhor thy self; Job. 42.6.
God's not the Author of Sin,
Be humble for corrupted nature, take heed
What thoughts concerning Sin thou breed. Jam. 1.13, 14.

Don't plead Sin's excuse. God will confute
Thy Plea without the Wedding Garment suit. 1 John 3.8.

Make use of Reason and Understanding assent, Mat 22.12.

Will regulate and draw thy consent. 1 Cor 14 20. Object.

Some may say we are weak and unstable,
What can we do to believe, not able?
We by Sin can still God's Spirit grieve,
Why do you persuade us to believe? Act 8.31. Sol.

I answer, here is the cause and condition,
When sick, don't you send for a Physician;
As a means of your health without delay,
And use all helps for the body that way?
Will you use means for the health of the body, Romans 13.14.

And not for the Soul, wilt be such a noddy?
Though not able to believe of our selves, Romans 10.16, 17.
says
Scripture, do we use the means for Faith?
The Apostles did to all this Counsel give,
Persuaded Sinners to repent and believe, Act. 3.19. and 16.31.

Which does imply a power from Sin to fly
In us though the Spirit works it effectually.
Do we attend the Ordinances of God Ephesians 3.7.

Appointed to this end? Don't dissemble so odd,
For faith comes by hearing, art attendant
In hearing the Word, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.
as a poor dependant
On God for his holy Spirit's operation,
To make the word effectual to Salvation?
Do wait at these Bethesda's; by reflect,
Do you prize the means, and don't neglect
No opportunity your Salvation to effect?
Do love the Word, and Messenger respect? Heb 2.3.

Such love to buy the word of truth;
Then sell it not, whether Age or Youth; Prove. 23.23.

Let no worldly profit or self respect
Cause you the means of Grace to neglect.
Have you esteemed the word more than Food? Job 23.12.

Ventured all for it, though sometimes withstood?
How did our Forefathers prize the Word?
For a few leaves of the Bible did afford
A load of Hay, as History does say:
Now the whole Bible slighted in our day. Mat. 22.5.

Oh! love the Word, and the Gospel prize;
They are Mercy to us, though some it despise;
Though by some Scripture's slighted and denied,
Yet are to Salvation a perfect guide; Romans 1.16.

Yea, the power of God unto Salvation,
Oh! love them, love them in thy Generation:
Live according, they are no feigned story,
But do direct us the way to Glory. Act. 20.32.

The Scriptures are called the word of grace;
Let Us not in our conversations it deface.
Scriptures give Understanding in their station
To the simple, makes them wise to Salvation. Psalm 19.7.

Love will speak for it is vindication
In thy Station, to hear the word move,
And receive it with faith and love; 2 These. 2.10.

Not only in notion and speculation,
But let love appear in conversation; Phil 1.27.

Don't neglect the means in thy station.
How shall we escape eternal damnation,
If we neglect our so great salvation? Heb. 2.3.

Use the means, don't delay, rest on none
For Salvation, but on Jesus Christ alone,
As I have said before, Joh 14.6.
and again repeat
Because our happiness is in Christ complete;
Yet use the means, don't thy Soul cheat;
If waited with many doubts and fears;
Yet wait still, though be thirty eight years.
Some God is pleased to hold many a day, Psalm. 40.1, 2.

Before they are sure of Salvation's way;
Yet our duty is to wait, watch and pray:
Some soon enjoy by faith this Treasure,
Others God's pleased to hold with longer leisure.
What shall I say to this, Ephesians. 1.5.
it is God's Pleasure;
Let Us do our duty in Faith, not measure
God's dispensations, Mat. 20.1. to the 16. verse.
he is God of Power,
Calls some the first, some the eleventh hour;
To some God gives five Talents, and 25.15.26.
some but one,
Emprovement is expected from all hereupon,
Must do our duty, as in our Station run,
Must not be slothful Servants in our station,
Must improve our Talent, work out Salvation
With fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
the means attend,
God ordains the means as well's the end.
Cast off dissembling* don't still pretend
Thy imbecility, Psalm. 40 1, 2, and 62.5, 6.
act Faith, on Christ depend,
In, and on the means, and to be sure
Thy Soul shall have an everlasting cure. Romans 10.11.

SECT. XXXVI.
Consider these things, 2 Pet 3.1, 2.
Reader, them dilate
In heart, they concern thy everlasting state:
The result of all my aim herein
Is, to bring thee an abhorrency of sin;
And to tell thee also, whether great or small,
If did but half so much for the Soul Mat. 6. v. 31, 32, 33.

As for the body, better Christians might be all.
To help thee farther, I will my self apply,
And consider what I say as thou passest by.
Does Sin appear exceeding sinful? Romans 7.13.
Do cry,
Who shall deliver, Romans 7.24.
to sin let me die?
Sin is a powerful and malignant Enemy,
So deceitful, Heb. 3.13.
would the ruin of thee and I.
Consider thy own impotency, and herein
Observe thy inability to overcome Sin.
Cannot nature change, nor heart renew,
Nor of thy self thy Lusts subdue? Jer. 10.23. Object.

Say some, What must be done, and we
Would from sin's Dominion be set free?
If on what is said have had reflection, Sol.

Had been no need of this objection;
However in love for thy Soul's advance,
I will tell thee truth, as my Name's HVSNANCE, Job 42.6.

Be humble, obhor thy self, know thy heart,
How deceitful it is, I need no more impart Jer. 17.9.

To humble thee, What a Cage of uncleannese lies
In thy heart, evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Mat. 15.19.

By nature, desperate, wicked whilst breath,
Watch thy heart, of it comes life and Death. Mark 7. v. 21, 22.

Be convinced of its evil, learn the Art
Of Prayer. Lord create in me a clean heart. Prove. 4 23.

Lord give me thy Spirit, open my eyes, Psalm. 51.10.

It Is thy Spirit's work to turn from ways
Of darkness, from Satan's Power unto thee, Act. 26.18.

I long a Slave to Sin, set thy Creature free,
Use the means, as before you may see.
If a Father in Age, or in years a Youth,
The Spirit can lead in the way of truth, Joh. 19 v. 8, 13.

Pray for the Spirit, the only Illuminator,
Convinces of sin, from sin makes a separater.
Lord give me thy Spirit, open the door
Of my heart, take Possession, go out no more;
Cast the strong Man out, destroy sin,
That the King of Glory may enter in, Psalm. 24.9.10.

Subdue my iniquities, let not sin reign
In me, let me be born again, Romans 6.12.

Then do not sin in thy life maintain:
Be convinced of sin, it is Satan's invention,
Must be lost in thy own apprehension. 1 John 3.8.

Here Is the effect of the means of Grace,
As before, do not the Gospel deface:
First step to Mercy is to see thy misery: Mark 10.51.

Lord, let me receive my sight must cry. Luke 18.41.

The way to Heaven is by the Gates of Hell,
Must not live in sin, yet think all well.
Christ came to save that which was lost, Mat. 18.11.

Fear lest instead of Heaven to Hell must.
Kiss the Son lest angry, and we perish, Psalm.2.12.

Hate false ways, in heart no sin cherish,
Agree with thy Adversary in the way, Mat. 5.25.

Make thy Calling and Election sure to day;
Now is the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
don't delay,
Slip time, God may not hear though you pray,
Because would none of his Counsel, and
The fear of God would not understand;
Therefore God may laugh at calamity,
Will not love you, Prove. 1.26, 29
cannot be in amity.
Consider, Job 28 28.
it is dreadful, don't Mercy abuse;
Let Us crucify our Sins, and God's Fear choose;
Let Us abhor our selves before the Lord,
Forsake our Iniquities, believe his word:
Resolve like the Lepers, if tarry we die:
Go from the state of sin to Christ, try,
He may have Mercy, 2 King. 7.3, 4.
if not can but die.
SECT. XXXVII.
Has Sin brought you to this? Mat. 11.28.
then see
Christ call, if heavy laden come to me.
Ho, all that thirst for Christ, don't doubt,
He will not turn his Promise about, Isa. 55.1.

Come by faith, Joh. 6 37.
he will not cast you out.
Go to Christ, Sinner, for Sinners Christ died,
Believe in Christ, you may be justified,
Came in the world to save Sinners in chief; 1 Timothy 1.15.

Believe in Christ, he will be relief
To thy Soul, Joh. 6.27.
Christ the way to us revealed
For Sinners Salvation by the Father sealed:
He is mighty to save to the uttermost,
All come to him throughout the Coast; Heb. 7.24.

Willing to save, waits to be gracious,
Come to Christ, Isa. 30.18.
his bounds of Mercy spacious.
If art a great Sinner, and in sin old;
Yet come, Rev. 3.20.
Christ does for Sinners Mercy hold:
Come to Christ, don't be ungrateful bold;
His Blood cries, Heb 12.24.
don't sin, Scriptures unfold
Christ's Sufferings as before, see, behold;
Don't sin thy self out of his fold.
Come with the Prodigal with this regret, Luke 15 20, 21.

I Have sinned against thee, Mercy will you meet;
If you out of a sense of sin mourn,
Christ's bowels with Mercy toward us yearn. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

Christ willing to save his Blood does cry,
Turn from your sins, Why will you die? Ezekiel. 33.11.

Repent, cast sin off, shall have his Robe,
White Raiment more worth than Job, Job 42.12.

Nay, more worth than the Worlds Globe. Mat. 16.26.

Oh! Believe, believe in Christ herein,
Know the Blood of Christ cleanses sin: 1 John 1.7, 9.

Forsake thy wicked thoughts, don't harden
Thy self, God will abundantly pardon. Isa. 55.7.

Christ don't quench smoking flax, desire, Mat. 12.20.

In sincere, but will increase the Fire,
If come to Christ by faith in Prayer.
Christ will not break the bruised reed
Of any, who see of Christ their need,
Oh! go to Christ by faith with speed. Rev. 22.17.

Cast off sin, don't delay till you die,
Don't abuse Christ's love by false security,
But make sure of Mercy; now say I Heb. 3.15.

If art young, I will tell thee truth,
Remember thy Creator in days of Youth, Eccl. 12.1.

Don't be presumptuous, still in sin bold,
Death calls the young as soon's the old:
They die in Youth, cast among unclean, Job 36.14.

Therefore Presumption do you refrain.
Oh come by Faith to Christ, be united;
Come to Christ, since so lovingly invited:
If you are old, then my lines cry, Heb. 9.27.

Prepare for Death, for you must die,
Cast off false-hopes, take this in thy way,
Consider it, as though did hear Christ say,
I stand at the Door, let me in, though true Rev. 3.20.

I have waited till my locks have had due; Cant. 5.2.

When many sins have been entertained
In thy heart thy Savior's company refrained.
It Is true, if by experience call to mind,
Is this thy kindness to me thy Friend? Deuteronomy. 32.6.

Such a Friend as I did freely for you die,
Is all this nothing as you pass by?
Greater love than this could none do,
Lay down his Life for his Friend, Joh. 15.13.
but who
Would die for his Enemies, as I for you?
My design to make you mine; it is true,
You were Enemies, Col. 1.21.
will you be so still?
Must my blood be lost, Ephesians. 2. v. 1.2, 12, 13.
and Satan have's will?
Did I leave my glory to do you good,
Yet no better do you prize my blood? Joh. 17.4.

Can hear Christ thus complain of's love,
And not our hearts toward Christ move?
Did his blood run love for us so free, Joh. 19.34.

Ours not a Tear for Christ, base are we
To love sin, be guilty of such ingratitude;
Though Christ cry, why will you die? intrude
On my Patience, Ezekiel. 33.11.
have such a latitude
To Sin, then on you Justice I must conclude:
Bind him hand and foot, Mat. 25.30.
I will you sever
From enjoying my Presence, and that for ever.
Say some, Object.
how can this stand, or be
With the free riches of Grace and Mercy,
Which are in Christ in such a degree,
As you before plainly have said unto we?
I answer, Sol.
the death of a Sinner may be
Considered two ways, if we sin so free
As to abuse Mercy, 1 John 3.4.
then Justice know
Is executed as a wilful breach of the Law;
Then God delights in a Sinner's eternal death, Prove. 1.24. to the 31. verse.

Not otherways; therefore whilst have breath,
Know Punishment is fruit of Sin's production,
God delights more in Sinners life than destruction:
But if Sinners abuse Mercy, and sin maintain,
Then God delights in a Sinners destruction plain,
Will destroy all those don't desire his Reign. Luke 19.27.

Oh! don't abuse Mercy, it is a wicked thing,
Because God is merciful, slow in punishing,
Many take liberty to live bold in sin.
Because Sentence is not executed against evil, Eccl. 8.11.

Therefore Man's heart's set to please the Devil.
Oh! dread and tremble. I wish thee as a Friend,
To abuse Mercy will be sad in the end.
Consider this, art dead, will nothing move
Thy Obedience to Christ? he deserves thy love. Cant. 5.10.

Consider his Sufferings as before, admire
God's Wisdom and Christ's love, in such desire
Of Man's Salvation, God sending his own Son Joh. 3.16.

To redeem us, when we by sin were undone.
Don't despise the Mystery of Godliness herein,
What ever Christ suffered was due to us for sin.
In despising God's goodness, I speak the rather,
Thou despisest the Wisdom of God the Father;
And also despisest the free love of the Son
In all his sufferings which he for's has done,
And do also in thy earthly Race
Do despite unto the Spirit of Grace. Heb. 10.29.

This will be very dreadful in the end:
Oh! now believe, repent, make Christ thy Friend;
For when once the Doom as before is passed, Job 36.18.

'Twill not be reached, cannot be reversed.
SECT. XXXVIII.
This may seem strange to some in sin quiet 1 Pet. 4.4.

Sin is to many now a very pleasing Diet;
Yet don't run the same excess of Riot.
Most in sin sport themselves herein,
None but Fools make a mock of sin. Prove. 14.9.

Let them alone make Holiness their laughter,
Yet no Holiness here, no Happiness hereafter: Heb. 12.14.

Mind what is said before, don't think it a Story,
For it is only Grace that leads to Glory; Mat. 5.8. and 25.4.

Only the pure in heart see God with Joy,
Get oil in Lamp, nothing shall thee annoy.
Go to God, and pray, and pray again Psalm. 32 6.

To God thorough Christ, then may obtain;
Ask, it shall be given, God has so decreed Joh. 16.24.

To give Grace to help in time of need: Heb. 4.16.

Mind what is said before concerning Prayer,
Go to God in Christ by faith's desire; Isa 44.3.

Let God's Glory be thy end in Prayer still, 1 Cor. 10.31.

So by Faith pray according to God's Will,
Make the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence Mat. 11.12.

In way of Duty; for think not thy expense
This way, Heb. 11.23.
till come unto that Auditory,
Church of the Firstborn with God in Glory; Dan 9.3.

When millions of years over, Psalm. 65.2.
no annoy
Happens to Saints to interrupt their joy:
They sin no more, Isa. 25.8.
all tears off their eyes
Are wiped, Rev. 7.17.
Hallelujahs sing above the Skies,
Eye not seen, nor heart of Man conceive,
What God has prepared for them believe; 1 Cor. 2.9.

Rivers of pleasures are at's right hand, Psalm. 16.11.

Laid up for them obey his Command; Mat. 25.23.

There Youth flourishes, that never grows old;
Love continues, Luke 12.33.
that never waxes cold,
Nothing lacking, when God himself will be
Joy and Light to our Souls to Eternity. Psalm. 36.8, 9.

Observe, Reader, what to conclude from hence,
What Is Heaven, Isa. 12.3.
but enjoyment of God's Presence?
It Is fullness of Joy, here is Christ's Auditory,
Christ prayed Believers might behold's Glory. Joh. 17.24.

Behold Christ's glory is joy beyond degree,
It Is fruit of Christ purchase clear and free
For us. Gal. 4.5.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
Or an Earth that can compared be?
What Is Heaven great God compared to thee? Psalm. 73.25.

Without thy Presence it is no Heaven to me,
Nor would be possese'd, Heaven unpossess'd of thee.
Wherever God by's special grace does dwell,
That Is Heaven; Isa 57.15.
where he is not, mind well,
Present by's Mercy and Grace, that is Hell;
That is, understand what my lines tell;
If Heaven don't enter thy Soul by Grace,
Shall never enter Heaven; that is a holy place.
Cast off sin, to false hope don't lean,
For there enters nothing that is unclean. Rev. 21.27.

Heaven's Holiness in perfection, if no desire
To Holiness in life, Romans 9 22.
then fit for Hellfire.
The total absence of all evil is Salvation,
And is begun here in our Regeneration;
Yet by corruptions many times withstood;
In Heaven, Saints have possession of all good.
Lord, Psalm. 84 11.
let us enjoy thy Presence here in Grace,
So may enjoy thy Presence in Heaven's place:
Make's such Lord as would have us be,
From my corruptions Lord set me free,
So may live forever in such a degree,
Being made meet to praise thy Majesty,
Where we shall be from Sin still free, Col. 1.12, 13.

And from all sorrow, trouble, and misery.
Thus Friends you may plainly see
Encouragement to hold fast integrity: Job 27.5.

No matter if Sufferings be great or small
A light Affliction, a Crown of Glory pays all. 2 Cor. 4.17.

Here Is the Feast of fat things well refined, Isa. 25.6.

Meditate on them well in your Mind,
And to Holiness in life be inclined,
Secure our Interest in Christ to Eternity,
Take Christ our King and Lord to be: 1 Chronicles. 1.30.

Prove thy heart whether grace or no,
Grace that qualifies for Glory, and so
Be meet for Communion with God
Here, and with God hereafter, where is Rod Psalm. 23.4.

Is turned into Love, Felicity and Joy, Joh. 16.20, 22.

That for ever nothing shall thee annoy.
SECT. XXXIX.
This is called Life eternal, mind it well, Mat. 25.46.

There Is another Eternity Scriptures call Hell;
There Is the wicked's Portion, a place obscure, and 8.12.

Full vials of God's wrath they must endure
For ever, they God, and his holy ways hated,
In Hell they must be for ever stated:
No middle place, no Purgatory purgation Luke 16.23.

Do the wicked meet, but Hell's Damnation;
Shall be chained fast against their desire,
To suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire, Jud. 6.7.

The Sinner and Hell never part, Oh! admire
God's Mercy that art not in Hell fire, Lam. 3.22.

Oh! run unto God by faith and prayer.
Now can swear, drink healths, and then.
Think you are qualified like great Men.
How wilt be when God takes your breath,
The end of those things is eternal death? Rom 6.23.

Repent, be converted, turn from sin about,
It Is refreshing day to have sin blotted out, Act. 3 29.

Your glass is running, though Mercy spare ye,
Your life may be cut extemporary;
Time is short, 1 Cor. 7.29.
like a Post, we are hasting
Unto Eternity, Jam. 4.14.
a place that is everlasting.
Oh! Eternity, Eternity, to thee my lines cry,
For fear everlasting Death should die,
What an eternal strait wilt then be in, Romans 13 11.

Oh! Dan. 12.2.
then haste, haste, cast off thy sin.
Consider if sick with Colic or Stone 1 Timothy 6.12.

But a day, how wilt sigh, mourn and groan.
How wilt be able to endure and stand Isa 3 11.

Under wrath of the Almighty's hand? Psalm 11.6.

When Rivers of Fire and Brimstone
Are about thee, Isa. 30.33.
then wilt cry and groan,
None to pity, Mat. 7.23.
Mercy is turned to hate,
Christ will not be an Advocate
For thee: Isa. 1.15.
Oh! repent before it is too late.
God will not pity, but on thee will frown,
Into Hell forever tumble thee down. Job 21.30.

Let Mercy lead to Repentance, Sin hate,
Run to Christ by Faith before it is too late.
Art on the brink of an eternal State. Jam. 4.14.

Don't put sar from thee the evil day,
So live in sin, Amos 6.3.
and repentance delay,
Thou know not what a day or night may
Bring forth, therefore watch and pray,
Death may soon call thee hence away;
Then whilst have time and called to day, Heb. 3.15.

Believe, repent, don't be like a sturdy oak,
Lest God take thee with his stroke,
As Elihu said to Job, there is no exemption,
Riches profit not, cannot procure Redemption.
God does not esteem riches nor Gold,
Nor all force of strength World does hold: Job 36.18, 19.

Let this consideration cause thy sorrow,
Lest feel God's wrath before to Morrow:
Go to God in Christ before the decree Luk 12.20.

Go forth, Zeph. 2.2.
and thou eternally condemned be;
If not do God's will which is sanctification, 1 These. 4.3, 4.

Must suffer's will which is damnation;
If will not obey his word to do well, Mar. 16.16.

You must obey his word, go to Hell, 2 These. 2.12.

Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, Mat. 25.41.

Sins wages is death, here is your hire:
Oh! believe and fear God's Wrath, Romans 6.23.
mourn
For displeasing God by sin, lest God turn
Thee out of's Presence with eternal scorn,
How wilt endure everlastingly to burn? Isa. 33.14. and 3.11.

When God takes his Creature in his hand,
By's Almighty Power makes it stand,
That it may feel what Jehovah can
Do against his Creature, woe to that Man;
Then may cry, wish had never been born, 1 Cor. 10 22.

When under Gods Wrath, from Sin turn.
Consider it; for if my Pen all Iron were
In Strength, Deuteronomy. 32 22, 41.
yet could I not declare
The sad Effects of Sin; nor cannot tell
What Pains and Anguish they suffer in Hell. Psalm. 90.11.

All this I have said, and plainly asserted
What will be the End of all Unconverted, Mat. 18.3.

As Motives to turn from Sin, that so
They may repent and escape eternal woe. Rev. 20.13.

SECT. XL.
You see is before you life and death, Deuteronomy. 30.19.

Take the way of life whilst have breath.
Now have time, therefore I crave
Thy duty; no working in the Grave, Eccl. 9.10.

Rouse up thy dead heart, my lines cry,
Consider whilst have life Eternity.
Don't this a little rouse thee: Oh! don't keep
Love to sin, Lord, awake's from sin's sleep. Hos. 10.12.

Consider those hints in thy Meditations,
Enlargement is left to thy contemplations: Psalm. 50.22.

Those things call for consideration, among
Which, Eternity thou do real belong:
How can rest, and sleep, and not tell
Whether do belong to Heaven or Hell? Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Consider sin's evil as before is said,
Man's Companion in sin is also laid
Before, mind things as we go, Have tried
Thy self, as is said before, Have cried
Out of sin, what shall I do to be saved?
Go to Christ, he is the way craved;
Secure thy Interest in Christ without delay. 2 Timothy 2.14.

Here Is the Foundation of all I can say:
If miscarry here, Joh. 14.6.
you are for ever undone,
None comes to the Father but by the Son.
There Is no other name or way, Act. 4.12.
and herein
Observe it is Christ's blood only cleanses sin: 1 John 1.7.

We can do nothing by way of expiation,
All our good works, nay our renovation
Does not merit, it is but a qualification:
It Is free grace makes us meet for Salvation, Col. 1.12. and 3 11.

Making us new Creatures by Regeneration.
Grace fits for Glory, not that we merit
Heaven by good Works, that is a Popish Spirit.
It Is by Christ alone we Salvation inherit.
Good works are a walking in our station Romans 4.13.

In the way too, but not the cause of Salvation.
If a Man proffer Gold, my hands full of Clay,
To receive the Gold, must cast Clay away,
Yet I don't pay for Gold to him that gave,
But cast Clay away, then fit to receive;
As a Man all rags, to receive a new Coat
Casts his rags away, yet don't pay a groat:
But for his new Coat, thanks does say,
He don't merit by casting his rags away:
We came into the World all rags and torn,
By sin Enemies to God, Col. 1.21.
till we are new born;
Though Heaven be proferr'd on terms of grace free,
Yet from our Sins we must cleansed be;
Heaven by Christ alone is purchased and free.
Free, because Man by sin lost that degree
Of Happiness, Gen 3.17.
never more regain could he,
Without Christ could never saved be
A part from Christ, the best attempts alas
Are tinkling Cymbals, and as sounding Brass.
Humane structures prove but wood and hay 1 Cor. 13.1. and 3.13.

In test and contest of that burying day,
What are outward Ceremonies, when tried
All boasting confidence of Flesh will hide?
Nay our best Righteousness, our all in all,
Must be resigned, surrendered, and let fall, Mat. 16.24.

Be sentenced, crucified, dispoil'd, disgraced,
And at the feet of Jesus Christ placed.
We must deny our selves, understand. Luke 9.23.

That which merits any thing at God's hand
Must be a Gift, we give not God's command;
But what ever us do, Romans 3.23.
such Bankrupts we
Cannot pay God his due, cannot merit you see;
To merit at God's hands, we must withal
Give God overplus, besides the principal:
But alas, if we cannot pay God his due,
How shall we give him overplus? It Is true,
He would merit any thing at God's hands
Must perfectly fulfill all God's commands, Gal. 3.10, 11.

Which no Man can, as I understands;
But Jesus Christ did as the Scriptures say,
We by faith in Christ, not in a legal way.
Can we offer any thing perfect? no alas,
It must through the hands of a Mediator pass Heb. 12.24. and 7.25.

For acceptance with God, or else undone,
Without intercession of Christ the Son.
Cast off merit, to Christ by faith run;
For sin does mix and incorporate in all
Our duties, cast off merit both great and small.
Woe to the holi'st Man alive, if God him try,
According to his justice, and holy equity;
When done all we can, I will be true to ye,
Man cannot merit, he does but his duty, Luke 17.10.

And unprofitable then in way of merit;
Yet to neglect duty, don't be of such a Spirit;
Mind what I have said before, Satan has
Many ways to destroy Souls in eternal wrath;
We enter the holy place by Christ's Blood, Heb. 9.12.

Yea, the holy of holiest; sin like a Flood
Would destroy's, had not Christ withstood
God's wrath; Christ the Fountain of all good
To us Sinners, if were rightly understood.
None to Christ, none to Christ, don't be deceived,
Man has nothing, 1 Cor. 4.7.
but what has received.
No merit can be by Man in any degree;
Angels are imperfect, Job 4.18, 19.
much more we
Sinful Creatures, Man cannot merit; see,
Be holy as we can; yet when all is done,
Filthy rags without Righteousness of the Son: Isa. 64.6.

Run the race of Holiness as we can;
Yet no merit, unprofitable Servants then;
In all we do, we something do amiss,
The perfection we attain imperfection is.
Our all is too little, our best is too bad;
Grains of allowance, and pardon must be had:
It Is Christ's perfections makes all Believers glad,
Slight Christ, Mat. 17.5.
pretend merit, are as Men mad.
SECT. XLI.
Consider this, Tit. 3.5.
be not of a Popish Spirit,
When have done all, no ground for merit;
If to Popery inclined, to put thee from,
I will gather all is said into this sum:
All grace, Col. 3.11.
holiness is in Angels and Men
Cannot purchase Pardon for the least sin; Luke 9 35.
then
Consider this point, don't read it as a Story,
Without interest in Christ never see Glory, Joh. 3.36.

Mind what is said before of Purgatory.
Don't cherish thoughts of merit so base,
But depend only upon Christ for glory's race.
Praise Jehovah, and admire his free grace
In Christ, Isa. 61.1.
who suffered for Believers free,
That Slaves to Sin, and Satan should not be.
Oh! love Christ, he is the living Spring
Of all good, Col. 2.9.
a Paradise of all pleasant thing:
Christ cheers our Souls, Psalm. 71.16.
he will them bring
On high with Saints to praise and sing
Glorious Hallelujahs with noise divine
To all Eternity to the Almighty Trine. Rev. 19.1.

Oh! secure our lnt'rest in Christ to eternity,
Take Christ our King and Lord to be,
Obey Christ in life, not with cap and knee.
Let Christ be exceeding precious to our heart, 1 Pet. 1.7.

Then from's love we shall not depart,
Nor height, nor depth, Romans 8.35. to the 39. verse.
nor bars nor gates
From Christ's love shall make us Seperates.
Love Christ, he is the pearl of great price, Mat. 13.46.

Can purchase favor for us in Paradise. Luke 23.43.

Let Christ be chief of ten thousand clear,
By counting all things dung, Cant. 5.10.
let it appear
By love to Christ's Members, if in want see, Phil. 3.8.

If not to those, you did not unto me;
Christ's own words in Scripture may see. Mat. 25.45. and 5.7, 44.

Christ commands love, and feed our Enemies,
Much more others when their condition cries
For pity; blessed are the merciful, for they
Shall obtain Mercy the Scriptures say;
But he shall have Judgment for his pay Jam. 2.13.

That has not bowels of mercy in his way,
Strangers be not forgetful to entertain,
Says Scripture, show mercy, malice refrain: Heb. 13.2.

Some have entertained Angels, Scripture says,
Pity strangers, charity must be in faith: Romans 14.23.

He that gives a cup of water in the name
Of a Disciple, though he may deserve blame; Mat. 10.40, 41, 42.

Yet if the Giver be right in his end
Shall not lose his reward, nor offend
Though the party be not real, as he pretend.
Christ's Commands relieve, distressed and
By faith to respect Christ's command. Heb. 11.6. Object.

Say some, our charity should freely go
To any in distress, if we did but know
They were such, we would relieve them so,
And not them oppose to increase their woe.
But what if they prove such as have faith Sol.

In Christ. Consider what Scripture says,
Christ says, he that shall any one offend
That trust in him, sad will be their end:
Better a Millstone about's neck, Scripture tell,
Cast in the Sea, that is sad, Mat. 18.6.
but worse in Hell
Dreadful for the World, how they oppose
Christ's little Flock, Luke 12.32.
they offend even those
That fear God most, still their malice runs
Against Christ, and his people; his little ones.
Alexander the Copper-smith did withstand, 2 Timothy 4.14.

Lord reward him with his mighty hand.
This will be sad for the World in the end,
Notwithstanding they for Christ pretend;
Yet sad for them, as truth Scriptures tell,
When all ungodly shall be turned into Hell: Psalm. 9.17.

But Onesephorus, Paul did for him pray,
Oh! let him find mercy in that day:
This was Paul's Prayer without delay.
I pray for any that did poor Souls feed, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18.

When forced to run for life with speed;
Lord show mercy when they most need.
Mercy, this Scriptures to us do unfold;
Then mercy will be more worth than Gold. Job 36.18, 19.

More of Love is in my eye, and intend
To write a word or two of love before I end.
To conclude this head, which Prayer applied
For them, Heb 4.16.
by whom poor Souls were supplied,
Lord grant in Glory, they may be dignified.
SECT. XLII.
My next Address, 1 John 3.18.
I confess is to all those,
Whom the World and wicked Men oppose;
If bear Christ's Image, Joh 17.14.
my love's to them all,
I love none for's opinion only, nor shall,
If any hold to the head, Gal. 5.22.
and in life so done,
There shall my heart go, and my love run.
Before you, Mark. 12 42.
I will cast the Widows Mite,
Leaving enlargement to those better can indite.
Then are you effectually called, Mat. 22.14.
Oh! admire
Free grace, 1 These. 4.7.
that you are this side Hell fire:
Oh! 2 Timothy 1.9.
let God's goodness, and mercy augment
Our diligence in ways of Holiness, and repent
Of our barrenness under mercies enjoyed: 1 Pet 1.15.

Oh! our ingratitude, it is mercy are not destroyed;
Fruitless under means, Lam. 3.22.
should cause Sorrow,
For a remnant's sake are not like Gomorrha. Isa. 1.9.

You that are of this little number, admire
God's love, not any thing of natural desire;
What knotty pieces God has hewed out,
And made meet for himself: Look about, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

And admire divine love, as the spring
Of God's love to us, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and not any thing
In us, God loves because he loves in season.
In Man, there is no motive, or reason
Why God should love us. Oh! then adore
Free grace, and love for evermore.
To admire free grace, don't you forget
To give thanks to God, Col. 1.12, 13.
who made us meet
To enjoy Glory; Nothing did God move
So to do, but his own free grace and love. Joh. 3.16.

Man's love is from motive, God's from none;
God lays cost on Dunghils, free grace alone
Makes us meet for Christ, a stately Throne. 2 Timothy 2.21.

What knotty pieces, we by sin and pride,
How many ways has the Spirit tried,
To bring us into any spiritual frame? Cant. 1.4.

To love sin by Nature, are still the same.
What drawings the Spirit has in our Station, Hos. 11.4.

To fit us for a spiritual qualification?
We had strong corruptions in us reign, Joh. 6.44.

It Is the Spirit's grace does a War maintain
Against the flesh, or sin had us slain; Gal. 5.17.

When we were in our blood by sin defiled,
Free grace did on us shine very mild;
Yea, said, unto us live, why will ye die? Ezekiel. 16.6.

Free grace, that good Samaritan passed by,
Said, again live, when defiled with sin,
Free grace pitied us, carried us to the Inn. Luke 10.31. to the 35. verse.

When Priest, Levite, pass by, in Scripture see,
Free grace in Christ did only pity we;
And nothing in us, did Jesus Christ move
To save us, but his free grace and love: Romans 3.24.

Free grace is our spring of supplies;
Let our love echo praise above the Skies
Unto God and Jesus Christ, as knowing
It Is Canaan of Milk and Honey flowing. Numb. 14.8.

Free grace makes a Man become all new,
As I have before presented to your view:
Free grace makes the Soul only rejoice,
Yet like Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.7.
it cannot tell its voice.
Free grace, it is the foreskin of the heart
Taken away, so from sin we depart;
It Is the wheel within the wheel in's place Ezekiel. 10.10.

Set right, this is the work of free Grace:
Free grace only sets the righteous apart,
For God, Psalm. 4.3.
Oh! let God have our heart.
Let Us live, free grace in obedience understand,
Free love has a long arm, and full hand,
Mercy for thousands that obey Christ's command.
Live holy to God in thy life, Exodus 20.6.
sin deface,
Don't live a wicked life, so abuse free grace:
Live a holy conversation by faith still,
If God's free grace don't lead thee, nothing will.
Consider what is said, Romans 2.4.
what shall I say more,
But that we free grace and God implore,
And Christ and the Spirit's love admire:
Let Us live holy to God by faith and prayer. 2 These. 1.10.

SECT. XLIII.
Consider, 2 Timothy 2.14.
Reader, what is said before in love,
Let God's free grace thy heart and Soul move,
We were by nature Lepers, does grace shine
In our Souls? Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
to praise God do we incline?
Ten were cleansed, Luke 17.17.
but where are nine?
In how few it appears, they are such indeed
As cleans'd, few return to Christ with praise,
How ungrateful are most in our days?
Instead of living holy, false hope they breed,
Live in sin still, pull that cursed weed,
Live like Cain in the Land of Nod, Genesis 4.18.

Wicked, How little have we lived to God?
The World lies in wickedness, admire then,
Grace makes us differ from worst of Men: 1 Cor. 4.7.

Free grace I say did freely choose us of pity,
One of a Tribe, and also two of a City.
Two Men equally miserable in their degree,
To make a difference, in the Scripture see
Nothing but free grace to man could be. Mat. 24.40, 42.

One taken of two grinding at the mill;
The other left, this is only free grace still,
And not in the freedom of their own will.
All this I say, Reader, to draw thy desire
In holy obedience to God, and free grace admire:
Even so, Father, Mat. 11.25.
for so it pleases thee
To pass by the World's Nimrods, and free
To reveal Salvation to them of low degree.
Thy good pleasure, the only cause that we
Are chosen; free grace, the Fountainhead, Joh. 15.16.

Whence our life springs that were dead Luke 12.32.

In trespasses and sins, yea to God Enemies,
Till reconciled by Christ's dying Sacrifice;
Without the Covenant Aliens, Ephesians. 2.5, 12, 13.
made near
By the blood of Christ, love Christ dear:
He Is the spring of all good; let obedience run
In its proper Channel, live holy or undone. Tit. 2.14.

Adorn Protestant Religion, don't recant,
Let thy conversation say art a Protestant, Romans 6.19, 22.

Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior,
Be a Protestant in thy life's behavior; Tit. 2.10.

Practice it, be not only a Protestant in name,
So dishonor Religion in life, that is shame. 2 Cor. 7.1.

Many are under notion of Protestant;
Yet no Religion in them; if tried, recant. Phil. 1.27.

Protestant Religion has its foundation
From Scripture, Heb. 11.35, 36.
stood many's life in the Nation
So may again, though at present a tolleration.
Therefore wait on God, and keep his way:
Now all Beasts of the Forest go out for prey,
Let Us do our duty, watch, and pray; Psalm. 37.34.

Let the wicked play out full their play;
Let him that is filthy be filthy still; Rev. 22.11. and 3.11.

Let Idolaters continue so if they will.
But let him that is a Protestant hold fast
To the end, lest he lose the Crown at last.
Well, art a Protestant, hold to the end,
Fear thy own strength, on Christ depend.
He is the true vine, except in him abide,
Wilt bring forth no fruit, Joh. 15.2.
but go aside;
If have gifts and parts able to dispute
For Protestant Religion, able to confute
Many errors, these fail in a tiring hour,
If a Prison, a Halter should try thy power;
Nothing but an Interest in Christ and grace,
Can carry thee on those things to embrace; Luke 22.23, 60, 61.

It Is easy to talk, to dispute when withstood,
Not so easy matter to resist unto blood.
I speak my own experience, Heb. 12.4.
I did try
What fears on the Soul, when come to die:
But when the comforting Spirit came in,
No more doubts on my Soul were seen. Joh. 15.26.

God's power keeps us in our station,
If God leaves, 1 Pet. 1.5, 7.
we never attain Salvation:
Live a holy dependence on God always,
By Christ's blood overcame, to him be praise
That preserved us in those bloody days. Rev. 12.11. Psalm 27.13.

Praise God, my Soul, to him sing praise,
That from so dreadful death did thee free,
In whom I trust, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
he will yet deliver me.
SECT. XLIV.
Thus, 2 Timothy 1.6.
friends, you see how my lines run,
I have more to say before I have done;
To proceed, to them my lines have regard,
That in heart and life look Sion-ward.
Christ said in the World shall have trouble; Joh. 16.33.

For any thing I know may be double
What you have seen, let faith increase,
Keep to your Center, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12.
you may have peace.
God may make this season a time of trial,
To see what we know of self-denial,
We must deny our selves, Luke 9.23.
life and all,
If will be Christ's Disciples, observe his call.
Take Christ's Cross, and rejoice withal.
Consider what is Cross is, don't be so apish,
To think Christ's Cross is made like a Papish: 1 Cor. 1.18, 19.

They think a Cross, and a Crucifix all well,
As if Crosses, Crucifixes, keep from Hell. Col. 2.14.

Consider, Protestants, what I you tell:
I was in London, some Jesuit, no doubt,
In vindication of Crosses a Paper set out;
The occasion this, some Crosses were worn
In a show on some Beasts Heads, and Horn.
Indeed I will not encourage in such ways,
Because I was never a lover of such Plays.
But this Jesuit, for Cross, throws the Dice,
Takes on him to give Protestants advice;
Tells us, must honor the Cross evermore, Isa. 5 20.

In our Prayers, must the Cross adore;
If not, are worse than the Heathen Men,
And not like Christians; and also then
Tells us of Constantine a Man so witty,
Laid up the Cross for preservation of's City;
If this be true, I wish some had been turned
Of Crosses in London when it was burned.
If any question, if Crosses there were any,
At that time, I believe, were Crosses many;
Ay, Crosses, sure enough, but don't mistake,
I mean such Crosses as the Papes make;
So that you see, Crosses don't preserve a City.
The Jesuit also tells us, being politic witty,
Of Chrysostom's, Augustin's, and Austin's faith;
But not a word of this St. Paul says:
No, no, that was not in his eyes,
He for Tradition of old Fathers cries:
So the Scripture, the Jesuit passes by's; Joh. 4.20.

For no Crosses used in the Apostle's days,
Nor Scripture pattern for such idle plays.
No Crosses were used by Christ's hand,
Nor by any example, or Scripture command.
Of Crosses there is made no mention
In the Scriptures, or Scripture intention;
These Crosses then are the Pope's invention.
For Pagans never used Crosses in their way
Of Idolatrous Worship in their day;
But used Surplice in Worship, History say.
See the Original of Surplices derivation Mat. 15.9.

From Pagans, yet used by Priests in the Nation.
Papists then to their Worship have this addition
Of Crosses in their ways of Superstition,
Which we not to receive on no condition;
We not to own what old Fathers say,
If not according to Scripture rule and way. Jer. 9.14.

They were subject to errors in their day;
Therefore according to Scripture we obey.
Alas, what are crosses and such idle toys,
Beads and Crucifixes sit for idle Boys?
Do crosses make a Christian in Age or Youth?
Is this to worship God in Spirit and Truth? Joh. 4.24.

To use Crosses in prayer is like conjuration,
Better then praying by the Spirit's operation. 1 Cor. 14.15.

What Is the Cross, though called by the Jesuit a sign
Sacred, when against the thing signified combine,
And oppose? Oh! that under the Gospel Light,
We should live such a darkness night;
Which will the World's Condemnation be,
Love darkness rather than light, Joh. 3.19.
cannot see
Into the mystery of Godliness in its purity.
Would the Jesuit take Scripture advice,
Which is also mine, it is better than his dice.
Would he but read in love, and look,
And consider what is written in this book,
Better advice than his, I am not mistook;
For I keep to the unerring rule of faith, Isa. 8.20.

The Scriptures, and not what Tradition says.
Now, Reader, if wilt a Scripture definition,
Believe of Christ's Cross, Rom 10.15.
here is the condition,
Not according to humane vain tradition.
SECT. XLV.
Christ's Cross is to forsake sin and blame
And also to suffer for Christ's name, Phil 1.29.

Not live in sin, then take a Cross, that is shame.
Christ's Cross is to deny our life and all
That Is near and dear, if Christ for it does call.
He that loves Father, or Mother, or Wife
More than Christ; yea, Mat. 10.37, 38.
or his own life,
Is not Christ's Disciple; In the Scripture see,
Christ faith, He is not worthy of me:
Here Is Christ's Cross, how few Disciples be
Take up this Cross, or attain this degree, Mark 8.34.35.

To deny all for Christ in holy sincerity?
In how few of the world does it appear
They forsake all for Christ? yea, Children dear,
Here Is the parting point, Luke 9.23, 24.
take heed and see
Nothing stand between Christ and thee;
Christ's Cross is, rather than sin desire
In Shadrach, Meshach, Dan. 3.21. and 6.16.
and Abednego's fire
To be cast; here is Christ's Cross, I say again,
With Daniel to be cast in the Lion's Den
Rather than sin; here is Christ's Cross, yonder,
With the Primitive Christians sawn asunder, Heb 11.36, 37. and 12 4.

Rather than sin; here is the World's wonder.
To strive against sin, to resist unto blood,
Here Is Christ's Cross, if rightly understood:
This Cross to most is not pleasing good.
Now, Reader, that thou may suffer no loss,
Be well advised who takes up this Cross; 1 Pet. 3.14, 17.

If wilt be Christ's Disciple, observe his call,
In taking Christ's Cross, don't sin withal;
It Is not the blood makes a Martyr, understand,
But suffering according to Christ's command: 1 Pet. 4.15, 16.

Therefore, for thy Soul's good, a word I offer,
When truth is opposed, then called to suffer,
Or not to be filent, therefore put to trial,
Lest our lives be of Christ a denial; Mat. 10.32.

Then are we called our lives to deny
For Christ's truth, and Christ will stand by;
Also when Sin and Sufferings us surround,
That we cannot get out, but be found,
Either complying, or on denying ground;
Then are we called to suffer, and herein
To choose sufferings rather than sin. Heb. 11.25.

In suffering, receive it not as a Story;
Let it not be for self, but God's glory.
If you suffer for Christ's interest, rejoice
Under suffering, take heed of a murmuring voice; 1 Cor. 10.10.

And farther, let me be so understood,
See thy call clear, and right cause good.
Now, Reader, how like this definition?
Is this Cross like Papists used in Superstition?
They use many Crosses unto this day,
Yea, when say their Pater noster, or pray:
To use Crosses in Worship is not Christ's way,
But the way of Antichrist, Scriptures say,
Who has required this at your hands, Mark. 7.7.

To make an addition to God's Commands? Deuteronomy 42.

To take a Cross in my hand is an easy way
To Heaven, could I believe what Papists say.
Paul gloried in Christ's Cross in his heart, Gal. 6.14.

Not sign on his forehead, that is Papists Art:
Christ's Cross wrought Paul's conversion, and
Desit'd Christ crucisi'd, Act. 9.3, 4.
to understand,
Not a Cross and a Crucifix in his hand;
No, no, were no Crosses used in his days,
Nor Scripture Precept for such idle Plays. 1 Cor. 2.2.

A Cross, a Crucifix in hand easy to take,
Do they work conversion, so sin forsake,
Or live in all uncleanness; Rom 6.6.
then do this
Swear, drunk, then Crucifix sweetly kiss?
If so, of Heaven you will surely miss:
All that practice this, my lines do tell
For all their Crosses, Gal 5.21.
Crucifixes, go to Hell:
Then live by faith, not by Cross; I tell
By Faith only, Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ in us does dwell;
By Virtue of Christ, my heart is renewed;
By his Spirit's operation, Romans 12.2.
my sin's subdued:
Not by Cross Papists make, Col. 2.12.
my lines cry,
That Is made by the workers of iniquity. Gal. 2.20. and 5.24.

Cast off wickedness and be holy, my lines imply,
England's best Crucifix is sin to crucify:
A Cross does no good, when come to die;
Then live holy for all the Cross, 2 Cor. 7 1.
say I.
But not to enlarge on Crucifixes so gross,
Lest enlargement, Reader, be to thee a Cross.
I will conclude this Head against Idolatry,
Would not have Protestants with Cross comply. Romans 10.14.

SECT. XLVII.
Stand fast, Protestants, 1 Cor. 16.13.
since God has made
You his people, do not walk retrograde: Ephesians. 6.14.

Let not any reproach that can be named Jam. 1.21.

Make you Apostate, lest Christ of you's ashamed.
Woe to any, when Christ is on's Throne,
Who in that Day, Christ is ashamed to own, Mark 8.38.

What, though the world rejoice and vaunt,
Against the despised, rejected Protestant? Joh. 16.20.

Although, now Protestants seem much affected,
Yet it is question, whether in heart respected. Psalm. 12.2.

Dissenting Protestants, I mean, how they
Seem now revived, and bear some sway,
I fear a Cloud in latter end of the day;
Therefore, be not presumptious, watch and pray.
Stand fast, Protestants, against the Pope, Psalm 118.6.

Fear not the biggest hatchet in all is shop, Mat. 10.28.

Fear not the Pope, nor his bloody rope. Lev. 19.4 and 26.1.

Fear not to own Protestant Religion, stand
Since have a tolleration by the King's hand:
Improve the Mercy, Protestants, stand fast,
That Christ may be our friend at last.
Own Protestant Profession, Scripture says,
Edify one another in the holy faith: Jud. 20.

Let Us not set our hand unto God's Plough,
And look back, God will not that allow; Luke 9.62.

Yet many Men look back, even now,
Like Water men, I could tell you how,
They look one way, and the other row.
Janus-like, many such in our Nation,
Are for their own interest and reputation: Act. 19.24, 25.

Many Men care not for the smile of God,
If they can enjoy the World; so odd
Are they in their lives, and herein
Count it Wisdom to sleep in whole skin.
Time-servers, if the world they inherit,
Contented, sensual, having not the Spirit; Jud. 19.

If they enjoy the mercies of a Bruit,
Fat Pasture, Peace, they will turn to it,
Are for a part in Paradise, sin and vice,
Enjoy the World, care not for Paradise.
Many have Jacob's smooth tongue, Genesis 27.22.
and
Talk well, but have Esau's rough hand:
Many have great notions, high speculations;
But in life, heart, corrupt conversations;
They profess much, like Angels of light,
But do deeds of darkness; heart's not right; 2 Cor. 11.14.

When Religion's countenanced by Authority, then
Forward in way of Profession, no such Men;
If Religion is shut at, Sun don't shine,
Come a storm on Religion, Joh 6.27.
then decline;
If the Gospel be not for their advance,
Farewell Religion, after worldly interest dance,
As true in our days, as my name's Husnance.
Many such in England, who like the Mass,
Are for their interest in the World; 2 Timothy 4.10.
alas,
Experience tells, how from Religion pass:
Profess much, go to the high Priest's Hall,
And then if tried, deny Christ and all;
Though Christ, the Gospel, in word don't deny,
Yet when in question, Mat. 26.56, 57, 58.
with the world comply:
This is following Christ afar off, and
Many such followers are in England;
The experience of this, Joh. 6.66.
we had of late;
In Person, Men; in action, Devils incarnate:
How they were by many accommodated,
Had love, when many others were hated;
How many did comply with sin and evil?
Rejoice with such, Romans 1.32.
were as bad's the Devil:
Pretend love to Christ, Jam. 4.4.
yet part will take
With sin and evil, so Christ in action forsake;
I confess it was a tiring time in the Nation,
And Scripture tells of an hour of temptation, Rev. 3.10.

Which shall try all that on Earth do dwell,
Who shall be for Heaven, and who for Hell;
Therefore in thy heart false hopes don't breed,
God renders every Man according to his deed.
What profit then, Romans 2.6.
if the whole world gain,
And lost their Souls in everlasting pain? Mat. 16.26.

It Is true, now is a toleration, they seem alive;
But come a storm, run like Bees into a Hive:
Are for Religion is uppermost, come Turk, 2 Cor. 4.4.

To keep their interest in the world are sor't.
What Is the end of those things? I cry, Heb. 10.38.

What' world, or Men's favor, when must die?
Therefore, mind death, and believe eternity. Job 36.19.

SECT. XLVII.
Consider what is said, take it in good part, 2 Pet. 3.12.

I aim at good, I speak it with my heart:
To Apostate is dreadful, as said before;
Also, without in Christ, miserable poor. Rev. 3.17.

A word I have to say to some Men more,
And it is to them, who do lay aside
Holiness in Practice, to do duty cannot abide; Tit. 1.16.

Instead of doing duty to God in Prayer,
By faith in Christ, this they don't desire;
But in false Presumption, they still aspire,
Delight wallowing in sin, as the Sow in mire. 2 Pet. 2.22.

Christ died for Sinners, all is done by Christ,
So take liberty to sin, live as they list.
That in Men's lives this should be found!
Shall we sin, because grace does abound? Romans 6.15.

God forbid, yet many such in our nation,
Say, Christ died for Sinners in their station,
So live still a sinful conversation.
Rouse Man, in false hope don't still sleep,
Whatsoever Man sows, that shall he reap: Gal 6.7.

God renders every Man according to his deed, Romans 2 4, 5, 6.

Then don't false presumption always breed;
The point of distinction by the standing rod,
He does not Righteousness, is not of God. 1 John 3.10.

Remember what is said before; when sick,
Don't you send for a Physician very quick,
As a means for health; the cause is sad,
Use means for the Body; yet like Men mad
Use none for the Soul, but conclude the end,
Yet exclude the means; Oh! do not pretend
Hopes for Heaven, and still in thy sin lie,
This will bring eternal death, Job 8.13.
my lines cry,
Or else I for thee will eternally die. Heb. 12.14.

God fits us by his Word and Spirit alone,
Do use the means, or else use none?
God sits us by duty, by faith in prayer,
Do use duty, 2 Pet. 1.10.
or else to duty no desire?
Up, and be doing thy duty by reflection,
For action speaks out Man's affection;
To what a Man has a heart, he has a hand,
If Man love Christ, Joh 14.15.
he will keep's command,
And not live in sin and wickedness still,
So to excuse his sin, say, has not free will;
It Is idle talk and fancy, mere dreams,
It Is Satan fill Men's hearts with such extremes. Act. 5.3.

There is a defect in will, but more in heart;
With the heart Man believes, Romans 10.10.
from sin depart.
Take heed what thoughts with thee lurks,
We are created in Christ unto good works: Ephesians. 2.10.

We cannot partake of sin's cup of evils,
And the Lord's cup, 1 Cor. 10 21.
and the cup of Devils,
Says Scripture, therefore mind it well,
Cannot enjoy Heaven, and keep way of Hell:
Cast off false hope, remember what I tell,
Heaven must enter thy heart here by grace,
Or never enjoy Heaven, that is a holy place;
As you hope for Salvation, Heb. 12.14.
Holiness embrace,
Up, and be doing in thy earthly race,
Practice holiness, don't God's Image deface.
Well doing makes happy, said Christ the Son,
All Gospel promises in this channel run,
Well doing only meets with a well done.
Well done, Mat 25.23.
good and saithful, says the word,
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord,
If you know those things Scriptures record, Joh. 13.17.

Happy are ye, if do them, says the word;
It Is a slight happiness to know in our station,
But know and do, that leads to Salvation:
A Man may know much, yet be so evil,
In his life, 1 John 3 8.
a member of the Devil.
Satan knows so much, if not more than any;
Know, and not do, is the sin of many,
And are like Satan in this, Scripture says,
The Devils though wicked, yet have faith: Jam. 2.19.

Don't rest in a mere notional speculation,
But know and practice it in conversation.
He overcomes sin, shall have a new name, Rev. 3.12.

Answer the end of Christ, dying for shame.
Take heed of false hope, for God is just,
Don't think Christ died to maintain lust;
But to live righteously, godly in our station, Tit. 2.12.

Without which, no evidence for Salvation;
We must work in the Vineyard hard,
Before we can have our penny for reward; Mat. 20.2.

Not a reward of merit, but of free grace,
All are not called to work in their race,
Good works are evidences of Regeneration;
Not that we merit, it is but qualification Col. 1.12.

By Christ alone, as said before, is Salvation.
If love your Souls, live a holy Conversation,
Fight the good fight of faith in our Station, 2 Timothy 4.7.

That we may obtain Faith's end, Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.9.

Walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
don't run in a hurl
Of Uncleanness, Luke-warmness with the World:
Redeem time, the days so evil are, they
To depart from evil, makes Man a Prey; Isa. 59.14, 15. and 45.22.

Get on spiritual Armor, make good play,
Before comes to Canaan, Anakins in the way.
You cannot tell what times may afford,
Stir up thy faith, depend on the Lord
By faith, expect fulfilling of his word;
Then fear, lest instead of Peace, a Sword:
Observe the times, though peace be pretended; Mat. 24.34, 10. and 18.7.

Yet before Christ's coming, many offended.
Now Is a liberty of Conscience in the Nation,
Yet many offended with the Toleration;
Especially Priests, how they in heart jarr,
Yet Bishops, the cause of Trouble and War. Jer 23.1, 2.

Many others discontented, yet sin don't cease,
As our sins, so troubles will increase, Isa. 57.20.

Because to the wicked, there is no peace.
No content with few in the Nation,
It Is fulfilling Scriptures in their Station, Mat. 24.34.

And threatens unto England desolation,
Or Judgments in a severe dispensation.
Now we have liberty, let us be active,
Provide for a Storm; Mat. 6.20.
like Bees are alive
In a fair day, gather Honey into their Hive.
Now provide for your Souls in this calm, Luke 12.33.

Be earnest with God, lest end in a storm.
As sure, as Scripture's true, cannot stand long:
To provide for your Souls is no wrong.
Don't think I have reflection on the King. Isa. 59.1, 2, 3.

No, no, it is sin, that evil cursed thing,
That Judgments on People and Nations bring,
Has sometimes destroyed People and King; 1 Samuel 12.25.

Judgments are fruit of sin's production;
Yet, 1 These. 5.3.
some cry peace, when sudden destruction.
SECT. XLVIII.
Say some, before you pass on your way,
A word or two of mortality to us display.
To answer your desire, consider what I say,
As motives to make sure Election; 2 Pet. 1.10.
don't delay,
But from the practice of all sin, have away
Before Death comes, Heb. 9.27.
and the Judgment-day;
When Death comes, must to Heaven or Hell
Immediately; therefore, consider what I tell,
According unto grace given, 2 Timothy 2.7.
as present light,
I will lay truth very plain in your sight.
Consider mortality, as thy Glass does run:
To die, Man, is but to be once done.
If we err in that action, Eccl. 9.10.
woe, say I,
Unto us, we are undone everlastingly.
Either we enjoy Heaven or Hell, Luk 16 23.
not Purgatory:
Let Us not cheat our Souls with such a story.
The Prayers of all Men cannot bring one to glory,
Without interest in Christ, cannot be of's Auditory:
Therefore, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
have thy end ever in thy eye;
In all thy actions, consider well Eternity;
For as Death shall be well, or ill ended,
With either endless joy, Luk 23.43.
or sorrow is attended.
Mind death, and thy Soul's joy, or misery,
It Is attended with eternal flames, or felicity. Luke 16.24.

Therefore, consider death, my lines cry,
Secure thy interest in Christ before you die;
Without reconciliation to God by Christ, say I, Mat. 3.17.

We are undone forever, to all eternity.
The wise Virgins went with the Bridegroom: and 25.4.10.

The door was shut, had their eternal doom:
They that were ready, did behold Christ's face;
Happy you, Verse. 3.
if whilst the door of grace
Is open, are found ready for Heaven's place.
Woe, if door be shut, Preparation to make;
No Oil in lamp, must into the burning lake; Rev. 20.15.

Then in life, thy lusts and sins forsake.
Do that now, whilst life, which, say I,
Would wish had done, when come to die. Numb. 23.10.

Know what make for thy everlasting peace:
Let uncertainty of death diligence increase.
Uncertain as to death's time or hour; Mat. 24.42, 44.

When Christ send's death, cannot stop's power.
Nothing so certain as death, says my Rhyme: Heb. 9.27.

Nothing more uncertain, as to its time.
Of coming into the World, look about,
Is but one way, but many of going out.
Consider, at death thy immortal Soul alone,
Must go, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and appear before the Throne
Of Christ, Romans 2.6.
who will render every one
According to his works; Rev. 20.12.
then don't delay
To make thy peace with God in Christ, pray
The Judge to befriend you in that day.
Consider, what would wish had done,
When come to die, therefore to Christ run.
God will not be pleased, but in his Son. Mat. 17.5.

Depend on Christ in life, and he will smile,
Make us happy, though by nature, Sinners vile;
Therefore, watch, says Scripture, and pray;
For to Salvation, Christ is the only way. Act. 4.12.

For mercy, you will cry, when come to die:
Oh! then, take the way of Mercy speedily. Psalm. 119.60.

You know not how unfit you may be
For Repentance, when death shall seize thee. Luke 19.6.

This for truth, you may see very plain,
Many in sickness, are overcome with pain.
All friends can do, is often in vain.
Cannot ease the Body, Job. 16.2.
much less the Soul:
Miserable comforters, they may be all.
What tumblings, what pains in the head,
And cannot make use of a bit of bread?
Is this a time to repent? Is this a season
To believe, when often deprived of reason,
And assaulted by the King of Terror, Job. 18.4.

With thoughts of sin filled with horror?
Then Satan, and all Powers of Darkness swell
Against thee to bring thy Soul to Hell;
When in sickness, thou art near thy end,
Then will Satan to accuse thee attend.
Satan is called the Brethren's Accuser, Rev. 12.10.
he
Envies Man's happiness, in Scripture, see.
Satan goes to and fro the World's Globe
To destroy Souls, see in the cause of Job
And others: Job. 1.7.
His name Legion, many at command,
To resist, or accuse, stands at Saint's right hand.
Oh! fear his snares, don't thy self delude,
He Is a lying Spirit, Zech. 3.1.
has destroyed a multitude.
Satan, like a roaring Lion, does not delay
To destroy Souls; then in this thy day,
Whilst have health, keep out of his way;
In sickness, 1 Pet. 5.8.
not capable to defend his Play,
Acts all his subtilty to make thee his Prey:
Like a cunning Gamester, 2 Cor. 2.11.
at a dead lift stand
Against thee; unless Christ hold thy hand,
Wilt be cast, Luke 22.32.
then obey Christ's Command.
Work out Salvation in fear and trembling;
Live to Christ, cast off dissembling:
No Repentance after death in way of Salvation,
Therefore, live holy in thy Generation.
Consider, when in this life, run thy race,
Thy Soul carries nothing with it but grace;
When separate from the Body, comes in place,
To receive Sentence according to its deed
Done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
false hope do not breed.
Make thy peace with God on good ground,
No Salvation, without in Christ found.
Walk by Christ's rule, and daily direction; Joh. 14.6.

Watch thy heart, depend on Christ's protection;
Mortify thy Members, which to sin move, Col. 3.5.

Pride, Covetousness, and also self love:
Strangle thy lusts, fear God, and herein,
Stand at Sword's point against beloved sin;
Those sins to which by nature most prone, Prove. 14.12, 13.

Let not any loved sin in thy Soul alone;
Those sins which did delight with gladness,
At death turn into sorrow and sadness: Luke 6.25.

No more pleasing the flesh, no more joy
In sin, those things will thy Soul Destroy.
All vain pleasure and sinful laughter
At death depart, and Judgment comes after; Heb 9.27.

Then all thy secret sins at Death stand,
Conscience opened with a Sword in's hand,
To accuse of the breach of every Command; Romans 2.15.

Without an interest in Christ, understand
All thy thoughts, words, and sinful actions; Romans 2.16.

Yea, thy secret sins, and vile affections
Will be presented to thy view and memory.
Before death begins to close a Sinner's eye,
His Conscience is open, and begins to cry,
Oh! quiet it now with Christ's Blood, say I. Heb. 9.14.

Get an interest in Christ before thou die;
His merit to thy Soul by faith apply;
For without the Wedding garment mute. Mat. 22.12.

Go ye cursed, is a very sad salute;
Eternal death and misery is sin's fruit. Romans 6.23.

Oh! live to Christ before it be too late,
On a moment depends thy eternal State; Jam. 4.14.

Whilst have life, consider this word Everlasting:
Mind Death, for when thy eyes are blasting,
To all worldly comforts, death puts an end,
Take Christ for Refuge, make him thy friend,
By holy resignation unto Holiness attend. Heb. 12.14.

Prize time and life, also remember this,
After death, no mending what is amiss
In thy Soul; for as the Tree does fall,
So it lies; Eccl. 11.3.
as death leaves us, so we shall
Receive Sentence, Romans 14.12.
accordingly be judged all.
Then live to Christ, Act. 17.31.
whilst here remain,
That after death, with Christ may live again.
SECT. XLIX.
Consider farther what is said concerning body, 2 Timothy 2.14.

As well as Soul, don't live a wicked noddy:
Observe, not only thy Soul is immortal,
But also thy Body, understand this exhortal;
Though thy Body die, as to its first being,
Yet intentionally is immortal, seeing
It lies in the Grave but till the Resurrection;
None but Sadduces can deny it by rejection.
For this mortal, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54.
must put on immortality:
This is a Mystery, which Scriptures discry,
That the Body does not die eternally; Col. 1.26.

But in the Grave, till Resurrection does lie:
And then, Soul and Body, it is very plain
In Scripture, shall be reunited again.
Oh! Col. 1.21. to the 23. verse.
happy, if in Christ, Oh! then, what joy
To Soul and Body, nothing shall annoy;
If lived holy, then Soul and Body rejoice,
As a Bride does, Joh. 3.29.
to hear the Bridegrooms voice.
Happy then those Bodies, that do not yield
Their Members, Romans 7.12, 13.
as Instruments of Sin's Field.
But unto Righteousness their Members apply;
If not, Soul and Body must eternally die:
The Body by Christ's power shall appear,
The Soul come with trembling and fear;
The Body from the Grave, Joh. 5.27. to the 29. verse.
the Soul from Hell,
If wicked, consider this, and mind it well:
What Is to endure God's wrath, none can tell;
Dreadful for Body, Psalm. 90.11.
and Soul to live in Hell.
What a woeful and miserable salutation,
When Soul and Body must to desolation,
Oh labor how to prevent it in thy Generation, Mat. 10.28.

That forever have their eternal doom.
Oh! and 25.6.
then, whilst life, meet the Bridegroom,
Christ Jesus, unto him by saving faith fly;
Get Oil in thy lamp, Christ's merits apply.
Live in life unto Christ by holy dependancy;
Remember thy Body lives again, though it die; Job 14.14.

Then not only for thy Soul's Salvation, reflect;
But also thy Bodies eternal welfare respect.
Consider this, do not think it is a Story;
If no grace, whilst in this Body, no glory. Heb. 12.14.

Let me tell thee, they are as Brother,
One cannot be happy without the other: Romans 6.12.

Seeing the Body must have an eternal being
With the Soul, and 8.10, 13.
then in thy life be freeing
Thy Bodies corruptions, prepare like a Bride, Rev. 21.2.

To entertain thy Soul, since they divide
But for a time; Soul must again inherit
The Body. From filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Cleanse thy self, and present thy Body
A living Sacrifice; Romans 12.1.
not like a polluted noddy
Of Sin, 'twill not be acceptable unto God:
Live holy in Body, fear God's eternal Rod. Mat. 6.31. to the 33 verse.

Don't make those things eternal by abuse,
For punishment, that cannot be eternal for use.
Seeing thy Body, as well as thy Soul
Must live eternally: On then in all
Thy actions, have eternity in thy eye.
Remember, and consider, though thy Body die, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

It must live again unto all eternity.
SECT. L.
Some may say, Object.
Which has the great'st hand
In sin, the Soul or Body I would understand:
That the Body defiles the Soul, by the way, Sol.

Or is the only subject of sin, I cannot say:
Yet the immediate original derivation
Of sin unto us, Men and Women, in station,
Is only by our bodily Generation,
From Adam, Genesis 4.1, 2.
as a means of sin's propagation
In the World by death, has it is abrogation;
By sin came death, and observe herein,
The Body must die as the fruit of sin.
For Flesh and Blood cannot inherit; 1 Cor. 15.50.

Therefore, the Body dies, and only the Spirit,
The Soul is capable of joy or misery,
Upon dissolution of the body immediately. Luke 16.23.

But some may say, Object.
as they pass by,
For the Bodies Sin, Why must the Soul die?
The Soul is principal in Man, Sol.
and chief,
Is confederate with the body, as a Thief
In sin, so partakes in joy or grief;
Also consider, when I have said all I can,
The Soul is principal, 1 Cor. 14.20.
and chief in Man;
Without it, Man were but a sensitive Creature;
Reason, Understanding, adorn Man's feature,
The Understanding, Psalm. 49 20.
and Conscience at least,
Without which, the Body were as the Beast:
As to its first being, the Soul capable of grace;
Then with thy Body, Romans 6.6.
don't thy Soul deface.
Live holy to God in thy life's desire,
Lest Soul and Body be cast into Hell fire. Mat. 10 28.

Don't live in sin still, like a wicked noddy,
Mind not only thy Soul, but also Body.
I mean it is eternal welfare, seeing must
Live again, Job 19.26.
after it is turned unto Dust.
I need not say, mind thy Body's preservation,
As to its present being in thy Generation.
Most Men and Women in their station
Are for the present being: Oh! how prone
And careful for the Body is every one? Phil 2.21.

What pains Men and Women take, and care
For the Bodies temporal being, don't spare
Any pains, when the Soul has no share,
Nor Body neither, as to its eternal welfare,
Cloth the Body, Mat. 6.31.
when their Souls go bare.
For a temporal being, every thing in's place,
For the Body, Rev 3.5.
when the Soul has no grace:
The Body daintily fed, and neatly dressed;
When to it is eternal welfare, no care expressed.
In life for a present State, art such a lover,
When no Wedding Garment the Soul to cover, Mat. 22.12.

How sad to see, under a beautiful face,
A deformed Soul, for want of grace;
Therefore consider Reader, Psa. 119.37.
what I unfold
When thou thy self, do in a Glass behold: 2 Cor. 3.18.

Remember, when in thy dress, mind it well,
Say it is pity such as I, should go to Hell;
Be holy, in Soul and Body, in grace excel.
Cast off thy pride, Jam. 4.6.
and the Lord entreat
For Salvation, of Soul, and Body complete,
Thy Body should be, the Spirits Temple alone,
By Redemption, you are not your own.
Glorify God, in thy Body, take this advice, 1 Cor. 6.19.20.

For Soul, and Body, are bought with a price;
Then Read, Hear and Pray, as for eternity,
Believe, Repent, and Practice, my lines Cry,
Knowing, you must live, or dye eternally, Mat. 25.46.

Understand then what my lines imply
Care for thy Body, with respect to Eternity.
Take my advice, don't cast it by rejection,
Mind thy Body, must have a Resurrection,
Which will augment thy Joy or Misery,
When Soul and Body must everlastingly
Joy in Gods presence, Psa. 16.11.
in the heavens high,
Or under his wrath, in Hell for ever lie. Joh. 3.36.

Then whilst in the body, of sin repent,
Resurrection, will Joy, Luke 15.3.
or Sorrow augment
Though the Souls of the Righteous have great
Consolation, yet it is not so complete,
Till the resurrection, to give another pull, Heb. 11.40.

Reuniting of Soul and Body, makes Joyful
When Conformable to, Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.10, 21.

Remember this, don't live a wicked noddy;
Care for thy body, in its earthly race, 1 Timothy 6.12.

Mind Eternity, don't give sensuality place
Whilst life, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
act thy strength and force
At death man has, finished his course.
Sect. 51.
REader, how do you, 2 Timothy 2.14.
like this sallet
These are not fancies, as in a Poets Ballad,
My aim is, thy Souls, and Bodies advance
In way of Salvation, and from sins ignorance;
Then pray for me, who am poor husnance
And before we part, Jam. 5.16.
or our way divide,
I will display briefly, Covetousness and Pride,
Because they are sins, we all, rightly applied,
Are guilty of, in our lives, cannot be denied
Other sins are plainer, Gal. 5.17. to 21.
in men's generation,
As Drunkenness, Swearing, Idolatry, Dissimulation,
Lying, Cheating, Murder, and sometimes Fornication,
And other sins, are more visible in station;
Though Pride, Covetousness, be not such a ranger
In sight, yet by it, our salvation is in danger
There is no sin worse, in any man's station,
Than pride, Prove. 16.5.
the proud in heart are abomination
Unto the Lord, says Scripture Revelation
Neither is there any man in's generation
But has some Relics, in's Conversation,
Of this sin pride in heart, by exaltation,
Yea the best of men, have some inclination
To this sin pride, especially, if things divide
And all things go well, on their side,
As Hezekiahs heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
was lifted up by pride,
There is no man, but has this sin to hide
In his heart, therefore take heed of pride:
The Seed Plot of this vice, is man's heart
Not in Apparel or Riches, my lines impart
These are but the effects, of this thing
Pride; a beggar may be, as proud as a King:
Therefore, take heed of pride, in thy Station
God knows thy very heart, Heb. 4.13.
and inclination,
Be not like those, which my lines descry,
The proud glories in all his prosperity, Job 12.4.

And scorneth the upright in his adversity;
The Enemies of David, did him deride,
Nodded their heads, Psa. 22.7.
at him only by pride
Pride makes men desire the uppermost seats
In Synagogues, and Feasts, with Regreets
Of Right Hand, Mat. 23.6, 7.
and Walls, in the Streets
Men look, for much respect, by Pride alone
From other men, when they deserve none;
Pride makes men boast, of their descent, John 8.39.

By pride there is very much discontent
In the World, and in our days very frequent.
The Wife opposes the Husband, 1 Pet. 3.1.6.
by pride
Children, their Parents sometimes, cannot abide; Ephesians. 6.1.5

By pride the Servant, his Master does offend,
Pride, makes the Landlord, to contend
With the Tenant, Pro. 13.10.
Pride Separates a Brother
One Neighbor goes to law, with another
By pride, till the Lawyer, their money smother.
Pride many times, causes the superior
to trample, and hector, on his inferior; Psa. 10.2.

Pride causes many, vile wicked Jarrs.
Raises one nation, against another in Wars
Sometimes pride, appears in apparel
And in behavior, sometimes causes a quarrel: Isa. 3.16. to v. 23.

What monsters, some make themselves by pride
If God should create them so, it is impli'd
Many Men and Women, would have cried, Pro. 30.13.

Pride into extremes does men often hurl,
Pride is a wicked evil, in the world,
Pride in the wicked is, of such a degree
That against the Godly, they malicious be
David said, The proud, are risen against me. Psa. 86.14.

The Learned Doctors, of the Law, by Pride
To have Christ preach, could not abide
Because Jesus Christ, Mar. 6.3.
was a Carpenters Son
And not bred, as their pride did run
In the learning, of the Scribes so deemed
Christ, as to outward appearance, was esteemed,
His divinity in Humanity, was to them a story,
The Chief Priests and Rulers, did not see his glory, Mat. 26.59.

They were puffed up, with their learned pride
That Jesus Christ by them was cast aside
And are the same, unto this day by pride, and 27.20.

Christ in a poor man, the high Priests cannot abide.
By reason of pride, the Bishops still contend
And oppose Christ in his people, yet pretend
Christ's ministers: dreadful is their end,
Pride only was, Jud. 6.
the wicked angels fall
Pride cast Adam, out of paradise with all,
Pride led proud Haman, such a dance
That at last, Esther 7.9.
the gallows, was his advance.
Pride made the rich man, fare deliciously,
But when dead, in hell lift up his eye
And for a drop of water, Luke 16.24.
he did cry:
Oh therefore be humble, mind humility,
We have sinned by pride, reader thee and I,
And all Men, and Women, as my lines imply
Either, by an external, or spiritual pride
Which without watching, our hearts hide
This sin; therefore, take heed of secret pride.
Learn of Christ, Mat. 11.29.
to be humble, and pray,
And Christ will guide thee Salvations way,
Be humble, and depend on Christ, I say,
By Faith, Psa. 25.9.
and thou shall not, go astray;
The humble, in their Judgment, God will guide,
Gives grace to them by spirits operation applied, Jam. 4.6.

But abhors the proud, oh take heed of pride.
Sect. 52.
NOw Reader, consider what is said, of pride,
And Covetousness, Jer. 13.15.
I will bring by its side:
For Pride and Covetousness go together,
Most times, in Men and Women, are as brother,
Ambition, and avarice, are birds of a feather,
They are both links, of the same Chain,
The Covetous man, Ephesians. 5.5.
is an Idolater plain,
His heart being set, upon desire of gain.
Whatsoever, a man sets his heart on
More than on God, if his affections run,
Inordinate on vanity without a bridle
Of moderation, that is only man's Idol;
A Covetous man, Col. 3.5.
is an Idolater so odd
What his heart is most set on is his God,
Desire is the beginning, of this evil,
And promotion, the end is from the Devil;
The Covetous man, blesses himself in all
He has, and sings a Requiem, to his Soul,
Thou have much goods, laid up in store, Luke 12.16. to 21.

When the Soul is most miserable poor
For want of grace, see rich glutton before.
A Covetous man, is commonly an oppressor,
Cares not, how of what is another, is possessor,
Covetousness, spurs men to unjust action,
For gain is from, inordinate affection
This sin is originally, from the Devil,
Desire of money, is the root of all evil: 1 Timothy 6.10.

He that desires, and Coveteth gain
Will leave no way, unattempted, it is plain,
So he may his covetous end attain;
Jesabel she did, subborn false accusation, 1 King. 21.9, 10.

Against Naboth, for his vineyard or habitation,
See the cruel desire, of Covetous Station
David will slay Vriah, to marry his Wife, 2 Samuel 11.14. to the end.

Gehazi will tell a lie, to Naaman in's life
For love of Silver, Covetousness was so rife;
By Lying, Murder, Oppression you, see plain, 2 King. 5.20. to 23.

Men commit, the worst of sins, for gain;
And to accomplish, their covetous end
Care not how, or what way they offend:
The life of the owner, without any delay
For gain, Covetous men will take away,
Covetous men, not content with what they have,
But the more riches, the more they Crave;
Like the Grave, barren Womb, Earth, Fire, Pro. 30.16.

So insatiate, are Covetous men's desire,
To gain earthly things, will with Saphira lie, Act. 5.8.

Achans Wedge of Gold, they cannot pass by,
Murder with Achan with Judas will betray,
For love of the world, they run hells way,
The Worlds love, kept those invited, at least
From coming, unto the great marriage feast, Luke 14.17.

Love of the world is like a wicked Charm,
One could not come, Covetousness bought a farm,
Another, v. 18.
worlds love, had married a Wife,
Therefore he could not come for his life:
A third had bought, v. 20.
Yoke of Oxen must try
Them so from coming they all pass by;
Take heed worlds love, v. 19.
don't so by us I Cry,
We too guilty of this sin, reader thee and I
It Is like David, has ten thousand slain
Consider it, and inordinate love refrain
With the heart we are said, to forsake God
Not with our feet, when affections so odd
Are set on sins vanity, in the Land of Nod,
This is forsaking the Creator, Ephesians. 4.17.
and herein
To be estranged from God in heart no greater sin,
Though we may not be guilty, so complete;
Of Covetousness, to commit Murder, Satan's feat
As some others, or oppression, let us not Cheat
Our Souls, because not sinners so great,
As some others are, Pro. 23.26.
but who has thy heart;
God or the World most, fear this will part,
God and thy Soul, that mind earthly things;
More than God, everlasting death brings
Covetousness is an evil root, Phs. 3.19.
of a bad tree,
Which brings forth evil fruit, you see;
Covetousness makes the Judge, in's degree
Judge for reward; Mica. 7.2.3.
when money comes free,
Stiffles Conscience, till in Hells misery;
Covetousness, makes the Lawyer for a see,
Plead right or wrong, all for money he
The cause good or bad, Luke 11.46.
will a Solicitor be,
Will make a Cause strong, though it wear weak,
But if purse be dumb, his tongue cannot speak.
Woe unto Lawyers as the Scriptures tell,
When with their brother Dives, in Hell,
Then they will reflect, on all the wrong
They have done many, all their life long
When Cry for water, Luke 16.23.24.
to Cool their tongue
Oh Consider Lawyers, then this among
What profit when have played your Game;
When Cry I am tormented, in this flame?
The Priests also is, for Covetousness plain
Like Balaam Priests, are greedy for gain
For Cruelty, have gone the way of Cain
Without money few Priests would remain; Mica. 3.12.

Bishops and Priests, all preach for hire
The wages of unrighteousness, they desire,
Little Consider, Judah in Tophets Fire: Isa. 30.33.

To Covetousness all men, almost aspire.
Covetousness makes Tradesmen from truth evade, Act. 19.25.

Many lies for gain, acted in every Trade;
What profit, if the whole world gain
And lose their Souls, Mat. 16.26.
in everlasting pain
Oh think then, what it is will you stand
Instead, when Judged by the almighty hand, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Don't after vanity so much be at strife
Labor for that endures to eternal life Joh. 6.27.

Oh Cast off Sin, in Conversation I Cry,
Whether Rich or Poor, Col. 1.27.
as my lines imply
To conclude this head of Covetousness and
Also of pride, Reader, this understand
Pride and Covetousness bear a great sway
Consider how true meaning does decay. 1 Cor. 10.15.

Sect. 53.
COme on Reader, in love if thou please,
l'le show greater abominations than these Ezekiel. 8.15.

Oh what a Troop of Weepers I desery,
Of Widows, Fatherless, Exiles in my Eye, Isa. 59.4.14.

As Prisoners who were condemned to dye,
By that bloody wretch Jefferies my lines imply,
By him men's lives been bought and sold
Without money death like Sheep of a fold Mica. 7.2.

That in England for truth should be told
But vengeance has Jefferies for it now in hold
Also for money Jefferies had a new supply
For those exiled if any had money to buy,
'Twas hanging Forenoon and Judging the After, Hab. 3.14.

Oppression for money made Jefferies laughter:
It Is fulfilling Scripture though the Prophet's dead,
Buy and sell my people as they eat bread;
Judge asks a reward, Psa. 53.4.
great men's desire
Was to Crush the poor most did conspire,
Consult together for money were so greedy,
So wrapped up or of your lives we speed ye Mica. 7.3.

First to take many lives they did debate
Then after hanging their Goods and Estate; Jer. 30.20.

This to the Lord for vengeance did Cry,
Though did seem nothing to some pass by Hos. 4.1. 2.

Yet Jehovah has heard the oppressed, say I,
Though wicked men are not rid immediately,
Yet as sure as Gods word in Scripture's true
Sin of oppression vengeance will pursue
Oppression in Justice blood touches blood Jer. 23.10.

For Swearing England, mourns sin not withstood
Murder, drunkenness common in the Nation,
Covetousness, Pride, Idolatry and Fornication
Besides Hypocrisy, Gal. 5.19. to 21.
Formality, Dissimulation,
Of many professors and others I dilate
In England many other things abominate,
The world is corrupt both age and youth,
Few in our days are valiant for truth,
They proceed from evil to evil, speak lies,
And weary themselves, Jer. 9, 3.5.
to commit iniquities,
The Drunkenness, Idolatry, that is in England,
Swearing, Adultery, Oppression, did stand
Till God came, by's wonderful dispensation,
Oh let us improve it, by a real reformation
Let Us repent and reform, sweep our own door
Let Us turn to the Lord, Zeph. 2.3.
and sin no more
Now, from oppression I will take my way
And the evils of the tongue, a little display
The tongues evils are so many, and great
That I cannot describe them all, complete,
Yet I will give, a brief demonstration
Of its horrid evils, in men's generation
Still observing the Scripture Revelation Isa. 8.20.

As my Rule; and guide, to Salvation,
Whilst I am in the world, husnance
Scriptures brought me, from my ignorance
By the Spirits Operating, Gracious, Glance
To proceed against the tongues evils I advance;
First, Psa. 10.7.
Cursing is an evil of the Tongue
Which is too too common, now among, Romans 3.14.

Some, in this sin, are so wicked rife,
Are so impious, Job 2.9.
like unto Jobs Wife
Curse God, when are crossed in their life,
Many in this sin, are in earnest strife;
Out of the mouth of wicked ungodly men
Proceeds blessing and Cursing; Jam. 3.10.
Oh when
Will men be reformed, and fear God?
Dreadful under Gospel light, to be so odd,
Live wicked still as in the Land of Nod Joh. 3.19.

Take heed of this sin, dread Christ's rod.
Many are given so to Cursing, at least
Curse any thing, nay the very beast;
If Cross them a little in their Station,
Then presently, a dreadful imprecation, Lev. 24.23.

Too Common with Masters, in the Nation
And more Common with Servants Station; Romans 12.14.

Nay, many in this sin are so rife,
Will Curse their Children, and Wife;
Nay, many, for triffles, Curse one another, Pro. 20.20.

The Wife the Husband, the Sister her Brother.
Oh these things ought not to be so,
Says Scripture, oh fear an eternal woe, Jam. 3.10.

No longer, in this wicked sin, don't go,
Lest the Lord, thee into hell throw;
Yet many now, belch forth such blasphemi
There Is no fear of God before their eyes,
Swearing, Cursing, Romans 3.14. 18.
is to many pleasant play s
Nay, falseswearing common in our days;
For many of late, by false accusation, Jer. 7.6. 9.

Did not fear to bear in their Station
False witness, to bring some to desolation;
False witness, has been in our Nation
Too common, Jer. 8.10. and 9.4, 5.
in this wicked generation.
By false swearing, men destroy the poor
And innocent, and rich too, heretofore;
Oh may it not be so, any more.
Take heed of this sin in thy generation,
False Swearing Perjury brings damnation; Hos. 4.2.

God himself, will pass their desolation,
Nay, be a swift witness, for condemnation,
Against false Swearers, Mal, 3.5.
in their generation.
Cast off this sin, before it is too late
Execute Judgment, Zech. 8.16, 17. v.
uprightly, in the Gate;
If men did fear the Lord, Scriptures say,
They would hate every false way;
This sin, Psa. 119.104, 128. v.
false swearing, though high it fly
Is no other than an aggravated lie,
Lying is also an evil of the Tongue say I:
Lying, is a great sin, a wicked evil
It Is the very mark of the Devil,
For he is a Liar, and all Liars Father,
Says Scripture, Joh. 8.44.
see this the rather;
And dread lying, though used by many,
It Is a great sin, Nay there shall not any,
Enjoy heaven, who love sin of lying,
Take heed, Rev. 22.15.
and from this sin be flying;
To his Neighbor, let all speak truth,
Unto one another, Ephesians. 4.25.
both Age and Youth;
For sin of lying, let great and small,
Dread Gods Judgments Rich and Poor all, Josh. 7.25.

Take heed of dissembling and equivocating,
Cast off vain words, Act. 5.10.
and Idle prating:
Though many reproach Gods holy ways,
His people, 1 These. 4.6, 7, 8. v.
his worship, in our days,
By despising and wicked, dissembling plays,
Because, Job 21.14.
care not for knowledge of Gods ways,
They can Lie, Curse, Damn, and Swear,
Reproach others, and also, false witness bear:
He that inventeth, any false report,
Does wickedness, yet to many, it is sport,
Little consider, they work for the Devil, Exodus 23.1, 2.

Should not follow a multitude to do evil;
Or join with any, to overthrow truth,
Take heed, of false swearing, age or youth:
As before it is against Gods Command,
Though too much practiced in England;
Oh let us all desire, Gods will to understand, Psalm. 143.10

And prize the mercies, we enjoy, in the Land;
All are from Gods Free, Sovereign hand.
Let us cast, off, all sin, and among
All, take heed, of the evil of the tongue,
Many Count words nothing, Mat. 12 36, 37.
yet when tried
By them, shall be Condemned, or Justified;
Death and life, are in power, of the tongue, Pro. 18.21.

Says Scripture, consider then among
All thy words, to tell you, my lines mount,
For every Idle word, must give account,
Says Christ, therefore, it is no story,
It Is, Scripture truth, which directs to glory;
Let words be few, such may minister grace
Unto others, in our Station or earthly race, Ephesians. 4.29.

Be circumspect, don't God's Image deface
By Idle words, see what Scriptures tell,
The tongue is set on the fire of Hell; Jam. 3.6, 8.

Full of deadly poison, an unruly evil,
Many times, an instrument for the Devil,
And defiles all, the whole body, see
Then, what a multitude there be, Eccl. 5.2.

Of men and women, of all degrees,
Who little consider Idle words fees;
Most spend their time, in Idle talking,
How many are, still, this way walking, Pro. 10.19.

How wicked are most, in our days,
For Idle words, in work and plays,
He that is most wicked the most wise, and 23. v.

So good Company, as one can be in,
Yet all the while, nothing but sin;
A jesting lie, or a lie in jest, Ephesians. 5.4, 6.
I still cry
May cause one in Hell, in earnest to lie,
Consider, Idle words may make Laughter,
But thou must dye, Heb. 9.27.
and Judgment comes after:
To conclude this head, consider once again,
Words will cause Joy, 2 Timothy 2.7.
or eternal pain,
Therefore, Idle words, do you refrain.
Sect. 54.
ALL this while, Mat. 7.3.
methinks, I see and spy,
How prone to see, a mote, in another eye,
Cannot see the beam, that is in our own,
It Is, too common now, as I have known,
Is Christ in you the hope of glory? Col. 1.27.

Look to thy heart, not after another story,
Cry not so much, against others sin, alone,
As against sin, and Corruptions, of thy own;
See sin in another, Luke 18.13.
common in our days,
So put off, our own repentance with delays;
How common, in England, now is this sin,
That hundreds of years, in the world been;
Adam was so bold, Genesis 3.12, 13.
told God to his face,
The woman thou gave, brought this disgrace:
The woman having plucked, of forbidden tree,
Would her self free, The Serpent beguiled me;
Esau sold his birthright, Genesis 27.36.
was such another,
He Is rightly called Jacob, a supplanter, by's brother;
He don't say fool, I should live such Dotage,
To sell my birthright for a mess of Pottage.
Also Ahab, Kin. 18.17, 18.
as soon as he did Elisha see,
Ahab said, The troubler of Israel, thou art he;
Elisha turns about, throws back the ball,
The troubler of Israel he does Ahab call:
The Pharisee in's self, no sin could see,
I do so and so, Luke 18.11.
what is this publican to me?
That this is an old sin, you plainly see,
Most in their own Conceits, Pro. 30.12.
from sin free;
As this sin, Isa. 65.5.
long in the world, has been,
So, in England now, it is plain to be seen,
For some, Prove. 21.2.
cry, on this man, Thou art he,
That have undone us, and 24.2.
thou have troubled me,
When Judgments fall, we cannot withstand
Some cry, Monmouth has undone the Land,
Here I must be mute, but I could enlarge,
But that the Oar, may overtop my barge;
Some again cry out, on the other side
Say, they are the cause, so in sin abide;
Thus they bandy, but who reforms? in sin run, Jer. 8.6.

Few men or Women say, What have I done?
Jonah said, For my Sake this evil, Jon. 1.12.
here is one
Owns sin; few say, sin has us undone;
Cry not of Monmouths coming in the land, 2 Samuel 24.10.

As against sin, sin the cause, if's understand:
Neither say the Kings the cause some so bold,
It Is our iniquities, do good things withold,
This to us, the Scriptures do unfold; Isa. 59.1.3.

When any people, grow by sin so odd, Jer. 5.25.

Who ever is the instrument is Gods rod, Isa. 10.5, 6.

In punishing, the wicked, yet some counting,
All the defect is in, or from the fountain,
Obj. Say some, if the fountain, corruptly appear
How can the Streams, then run clear?
Sol. A corrupted fountain, Jam. 3.11.
cannot have water sweet
Yet when many Streams do together meet,
As a flood rebound, on the fountain Spring,
Make it more filthy, consider this thing, Pro. 17.14, 15.

When any people, grow wicked, under a King;
The cause is not so much, by reflects, 1 Samuel 12.14, 15.

In the King, or Prince, as in his Subjects;
For the King acts by Counsel in's Station,
And not always, as his own Inclination, 2 Chro. 10.6.14. v.

It Is a delusion, for any to say I Will declare
Such and Such, are the cause (Satan's art)
Of Judgments, when from sin, don't depart
Themselves, but retain sin, still in heart,
If the Subjects did repent, as Scriptures tell, 1 Samuel 12.14, 24.

Then King, and Subjects might do well;
God sometimes raises a King, in his Station,
To punish the sins, of the former generation:
We cry, Popery Popery, but continue in sin,
Yet sin, ^sa. 1.4.
the cause, does this Judgment bring,
And all other Judgments, Genesis 15.16.
but when sin's full,
Nothing but Judgments, yea a dreadful pull;
Which in little time, on us will break out,
If we repent not, Jam. 1.15.
and turn from sin about:
Sin, a forerunner of Judgments, an antecedent
of desolation, Number. 32.23.
if repentance, it not prevent,
Judgments an effect of sin, and of Gods wrath,
Sin, Ezekiel. 8.17, 18.
the provoking cause, decreed God has,
To power out's wrath on us; can any say
The effect will cease, cause not taken away?
If Popery were out the land, Amos 5.26, 27. v.
if sin retain
It would provoke God, to bring't again;
Oh Cursed nature of sin, makes us so odd
To cause wrath, Psa. 78.21, 22. v.
in a most merciful God,
All have sinned let us tremble, before's rod;
Let no professor think, because he
Is a professor, Romans 3.23.
from repentance is free,
Yet some lay, Gal 3.22.
can attain that degree,
I question, if from sin, they cleans'd be;
Yet no man's person, I do not despise,
I hate such a maxim, Pro. 30.12.
pure in my own eyes.
Consider Scripture, you of all Nations known,
Yet you I Will punish, Amos 3.2.
don't think sin have none;
I will punish thy iniquities as thy own,
Exempt thy self, I Will not let thee alone;
If weighed Te^el, Dan. 5.27.
would be too light,
You have sinned, 1 Kin. 8.46.
and that in Gods sight;
Woe, to the holiest man alive, if God him try
According to his Justice, and holy equity,
Let Us smite our thighs therefore I cry,
Like Ephraim, Jer. 31.19.
let us repent, every one
If God, lets falls stroke, we are all undone,
There needs, Isa. 1.7.
a personal, national reformation
Before Gods wrath fall, for desolation,
Let Us fear and tremble, Joh. 5.14.
sweep our own door,
Let Us turn to God, and sin no more;
Let there be, Change, in heart and mind, Joel. 2.13, 14.

Let Us turn to God, that we may mercy find.
Obj. Some may say, who are disputable
If God in his Decrees, is immutable;
If his Justice, against a nation is bent,
To what end, is it for them, to repent? Number. 23.19.

God is not as man, that he should relent,
Nor as Son of man, in all his intent.
Sol. God is infinitely wise, in his determination,
At what instant God speaks against a Nation, Jer. 18.7, 8.

If they repent, God, turns their desolation,
Not his decree, this to some seems strange,
God don't change his will, but wills a Change.
God sometimes, 1 Kin. 21.28, 29. v.
changes a sentence with speed
He has pronounced, against sinners deed,
But never changes the Council has decreed;
God said, Yet in forty days, Jona. 3.4, 10. v.
shall Nineveh
Be destroyed yet by repentance, were not, see
In Scripture, but had longer liberty:
Observe, is God like one of us? can he,
When he has said it, alter his decree?
Denounced Judgment God, does often prevent,
But neither changes Counsel, nor intent,
The noise of heaven, don't threat perdition,
But with express, or an impli'd Condition;
So that if a Nation, return from ill,
God turns his hand, not turn his will; Pro. 29.1. and 15.10.

Then repent, England, forthwith begin,
Turn at Gods reproof, break off thy sin:
And thou may be yet, a happy England,
Yet, God changes nots will, but turns his hand,
From what is said such a meditation borrow,
Live to day, as if should dye to morrow; Jam. 4.14.

Knows not what a day, or night, may I cry,
Bring forth by death may go, to eternity; Psa. 74.19, 20, 21. v.

I fear and tremble, of a bloody massacry,
Therefore, to God in Christ, by faith apply;
Thy self, and then fear not man's Cruelty, Psa. 29.13.

Get interest in Christ, whiles have breath,
Prize life, pray for Conversion, before death,
Don't live in sin, Mat. 18.3.
consider what is said
Let thoughts of wrath, make thee afraid,
Live in sin, Psa. 81.11.
is a Judgment, of sad degree,
From a reprobate life, Lord deliver me,
To live in sin, a greater Judgment cannot be; 2 Pet. 1.10.

Therefore mind, thy eternal state, I cry,
Prepare for death, and also, for eternity,
Knows not how soon, by bloody hands may die;
Therefore, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
have eternity, ever in thy eye.
Sect. 55.
Obj. SAY some, Methinks, God should's people free,
From all those Judgments, and Calamity;
Sol. Consider man, what thou says, herein
I must tell thee, Josh. 24.19, 20. v.
knows not, the evil of sin,
God delights, in's peoples prosperity, herein
Observe, afflictions are the fruit of sin,
God never makes, his people, feel his rod,
Till provoked by their sinning, against God; Lam. 3.33.

God does not afflict willingly, but when
Provoked, then grieves the Children of men,
Cursed evil of sin, Psa. 78.21, 22. v.
makes us so odd,
To cause wrath, in a most merciful God;
Cursed nature of sin, makes us so vile,
Were it not for sin, God would on us smile;
God does his people good, by afflictions fairly,
In afflictions, Hos. 5.15.
they will seek God early;
In the day of their affliction, mind it well,
Then they look unto the holy one of Israel; Isa. 17 7.

In prosperity, we are like to Noah's dove,
If find a twig, to rest on, will not move
Toward the Ark, till God, out of love,
By affliction, all our props command
From us, all earthly things on which we stand,
Then, Psa. 142.4. 5. v.
when we look, on every hand,
Know not what to do, then the rod
Of affliction, drives us then, unto God;
When in affliction, as in a great deluge,
Then we say, the Lord is our refuge,
Now Lord, when afflictions, of great degree,
What wait I for? my hope is in thee,
Afflictions to Gods People, when sanctified
Are for their good, said one, that tried, Psa. 119.67.71. and 76.10.

Therefore Man or Woman, thou tells a story
God suffers this for's peoples good, and his glory,
What ever troubles come on the people of God,
Whoever be the instruments as his Rod,
God has his way in it, ordering it mind, 1 These. 3.3.

As to its Measure, Season, and also Kind,
As to its continuance, without dispute, Amos 3.6.

And as to the ends, also to its fruit,
Troubles issue from the same love, mind well,
With redemption, of our Souls from Hell, Isa. 14.27.

God does all in pursuance, of his decree
And purpose of his love from Eternity, Jer. 51 29.

God has now, a special design in hand,
Therefore, just so far, as God will understand;
Carry on that design, now in the Land
Toward his people's good, he will command,
Or permit, how far, the Enemy shall go, Isa. 10.7.

Though the wicked in Heart mean not so,
They count to destroy many, as they run,
But God overrules them, as clear's the Son; Psa. 82.1.

There Is no evil in the City, but what is done
By God; that is still, by Gods permission, Amos 3.6.

And not any otherways, on no condition;
Though all things come to pass, or brought be
According to Gods purpose, or eternal decree,
Yet is his decree, the cause of no sin, Jer. 9.14.

The decree inferring, no necessity herein
Of constraint, but of immutability,
The decree of God, Eze. 18.31, 32.
takes away neither Liberty
From the reasonable Creatures, nor contingency
From second causes, man is not herein
Condemned because, man cannot choose but sin,
In regard of Gods eternal determination,
But sins in regard of his own inclination,
Though wicked men, do act nothing, Act. 4 37,
see
But what God has appointed in's decree,
Yet man in all his intentions sins still,
Because does all in obedience to's own Will,
Does not eye Gods command to fulfill, Luke 6.46.

But of this I have said, elsewhere more clear,
Shall not at present, say any more here,
But return again, Reader, unto my way
Concerning afflictions, I have more to say,
Prosperity to man's Salvation is a cheater,
But of troubles comes meat out of the eater, Judge. 14.14.

Tho afflictions come on them like a flood, Romans 8.28.

God works all things, for his peoples good,
God has promised never to let them fall,
God brings sweetness of Wormwood and Gall, Heb. 13.5.

Yet herein observe, tho troubles combine
On us, yet they are no infallible sign
Of Salvation, Eccl. 9.1.
afflictions are as I define,
Like the Red Sea, Exodus 14.28, 29.
in the Scripture found,
Deliverance to Israel, when Egyptians drowned;
Gods Rain on Just and Unjust does fall,
Do remember, Mat. 5 45.
the Wormwood and Gall,
Is thy Soul humbled here is the end of all? Lam. 3.19, 20.

How does it work? Does thy Soul thrive
In Grace, by afflictions? Art Spiritual alive?
Know thy Heart; Gal. 6.4.
if in the World high or low,
By outward dispensation can not know:
Gods Love or Hatred, 2 Cor. 2.16.
then whiles have Breath,
Afflictions are the Savor of Life or Death.
Obj. But you may say, why does God delay,
Or suffer his Elect in troubles to stay,
When wicked men sometimes none in their way.
Sol. I answer, the righteous their Faith's tried ever,
Whether they in Gods way will persever, 3 Pet. 1.7.

And raise more praise unto God for ever,
When God shall them from troubles deliver;
But must not think themselves so free: Psa. 89.30, 33.

As tho did not deserve rebukes from he;
Why does God suffer them to be tempted, 2 Cor. 12.7.

By Satan's Messengers they should be exempted?
Sol. When the wickeds Rod is on by permission,
There Is that in them, does deserve contrition,
Too much self love, Pride a Thorn in the Flesh,
Actuates the motions of their Souls afresh, 2 Cor. 12.7.

God by afflictions causes them herein,
To remember their former ways of Sin,
When Joseph's Brethren saw themselves taken
For Spies in Egypt, as by Joseph forsaken,
And in present danger of their lives; so
The Sin they committed many years ago, Genesis 42.21.

Came fresh into their minds, and lay
On their Conscience at that very day.
In all afflictions, to Gods People his intent
Is to humble them, therefore does sin present;
God intends their good without dispute,
To purge their sin is all the fruit; Isa. 27.9.

There Is need of heavyness, 1 Pet. 1.6.
tho troubles runs
On them, without it Bastards and not Sons, Heb. 12.8.10.

To your objection, concerning the delay
Of the wicked in the World by the way,
Reader understand, I have this to say
In answer to hasten the end of my way,
Sometimes God suffers the wicked as his Rod,
To humble his people, in the land of Nodd, Isa. 10.5, 6.

Without afflictions, God people would says
My lines, live more by sense than by faith,
Also to declare the long suffering of God,
To the wicked holds in his revenging Rod,
Holds in his Justice, holds out his Grace,
If they his forbearance and mercy embrace; Romans 2.4, 5. and 11.23.

All to leave the wicked without excuse:
It may be also for calling of the Jews;
Judgment deferred on the wicked for Salvation, 1 Pet. 3.9.

To many unconverted in our Nation,
As brands must be snatched out of the fire, Jud. 23.

Oh would all unconverted conversion desire,
Few know practically what is conversion, pretend
Themselves Christians, Ephesians. 4.18,
but still blind
As to practice, they never answer the end
Of Christian, Ti^. 2.14.
their lives never amend,
Consider what is said, I wish as a friend,
The wicked they are left to play
In Sin, till God call them hence away,
But oh for them, a dreadful reckoning day!
God will pay off every unprofitable life,
With everlasting death, and eternal strife,
Cast the unprofitable servant into Hell, Mat. 25.30.

There will God make his wrath to swell,
Against the wicked for ever, Psa. 9.17. and 11.6.
mind it well:
The wicked let alone, till God them send
Such wounds and pains as know no end,
For these reasons and more might be given,
But I am for brevity, as my name's Stephen,
For these considerations I am satisfied,
I hope may be so to you when tried. 2 Timothy 2.7.

Sect. 56.
YOU see why Gods people in trouble stay, Heb. 10.24.

When the wicked none in their way,
Now which side had you rather be, Deuteronomy. 8.5.

With the righteous in trouble, in high degree,
Or in wickedness with the wicked free?
Moses made his choice, Heb. 11.25, 26.
had good reason
To suffer, rather than enjoy sin a season:
What Is present sufferings to an eternal sore?
Eternity is for ever, Rev. 10.6
time shall be no more,
Whether our sufferings be great or small,
A light affliction; 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. v.
a Crown of Glory pays all,
If the wicked continue in Sin still bold;
I would not be in their case for Gold,
Nor for all Riches, Job 34.12, 19. v.
the World does hold.
Oh dread Gods wrath since are foretold!
Who can abide, or in his fury dwell, Prove. 11.4.

His wrath burns unto the lowest Hell?
What Gall and Wormwood, Deuteronomy. 32.22
he puts in
The Cup he gives his people for sin:
Must his own, Isa. 33.14.
drink deep of the Cup?
The dregs the wicked will drink up: Psa. 107.1.

Think you, He who so corrects his own,
Will still chastise them, and let you alone?
Do they lie deep in sorrows? and must you
Still joy and triumph, like a wicked Crew? Job 20.5.

Can you all his Omnipotence subdue?
When God takes you into his hand
By's Almighty power, makes you stand,
That you may feel what Jehovah can Deuteronomy. 32.41

Do against you, then woe to that man
Then may cry, wish had not been Born,
When under Gods wrath; O from sin turn! Isa. 3.11.

And because the wickeds presumption's great,
A word of what is said before, I Will repeat
That sin may not thy Salvation cheat
Without Conversion, Mat. 18.3.
for glory not complete
If Heaven don't enter thy Soul by grace,
Cannot enter Heaven, that is a holy place.
Cast off sin, to false hope don't lean
There enters nothing, Rev. 21.27.
that is unclean
Heavens holiness, in perfection, if no desire
To holiness in life, then fit for Hell fire. Romans 9.22.

Don't think slight of those things, as some
When meet with discontent, Exodus 16.3.
words come
From them, wish they were dead, presently
Being ignorant, of Gods wrath, and Eternity, Joh. 3.3.

Thou must be Converted before thou dye.
Wish thee dead, if things don't go well
Before Converted, remember what I tell
It is to wish thy self in Hell. Rev. 20.6.

Labor for part, in the first Resurrection,
Go to God in Christ, for mercies protection,
Without in Christ, Heb. 10.31.
thou can not stand
Under wrath, it is terrible to fall in Gods hand
Without reconciliation, by Christ understand, Col. 3.11. and 1.19. and 2.9.

If all Angels and Saints, should for thee pray
It would avail nothing, Christ the way,
Take heed, as before, of a Mass Priests absolution
When thy Soul is defiled with sin's pollution.
Monks, Friars, like the Devils Hound
Drive all come to them, into Satan's pond.
Then wait on God in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17.
by Faith
All thy appointed time, Job 14.14.
as Job says,
Take Christ, for refuge this Ark will stand,
Carry through Gods wrath to Canaans Land. Psa. 46.1.

In Christ, 2 Pet. 1.17.
only God is well pleased, and
Has committed all power into his hand,
Here Is my Comfort, Mat. 28.18
which makes me smile,
God will discern, and separate from the vile.
Then let us our duty to the Lord advance, Mal. 3.16, 18.

For there is a Book of Remembrance;
Fear not, it is as true as my name's Husnance.
Though few stir themselves to seek the Lord, Isa. 64.7. and 55.6.

Let us call upon God, as faith the word,
Though the world with sin themselves defile;
If to serve God be, 2 Samuel 6.22.
let us be more vile:
Let us do our duty in our Generation,
Let Us watch and pray to God for our Nation; Mat. 26.41.

That God would have mercy, so we may
Obtain his mercy, let us keep Gods way;
Let not fear of sufferings make's go astray.
Consider the Scriptures, believe Gods Word,
Balaam out of Gods way, Number. 22.22, 26. v.
the Angels Sword
Was like to destroy him, so shall we
If keep not Gods way, hold fast integrity
Jonah went out of Gods way, and withal,
Met with a mighty Tempest, Jona. 1.12.
and great Whale;
To commit sin, to avoid sufferings, I tell
Is to save our bodies, mind it very well
And destroy our immortal Souls in Hell, Rev. 21.8.

To Apostate is dreadful, as said-before,
Oh dread Gods wrath and sin no more! Heb. 10.38.

Sect. 57.
CHrist said, Joh. 16.33.
In the World shall be trouble,
For any thing I know, it may be double
What you have seen, let Faith increase,
Keep to your Center, in Christ have peace,
Own God in all his ways, tho withstood,
However it be with us, yet God is good,
God is Jehovah still, Psa. 107.1.
he is God alone,
Can do great things like to Jehovah none, Psa. 86.2.

We think God is not God, and cry,
As tho God needed help of standers by;
Is not Jehovah God alone, cannot he
From troubles his little flock and people free?
Such and Such a man must act or we dye; Luke 12 32.

This the cause of casting a brave instrument by.
You know what I mean, what my lines imply,
Esteem man less, depend on God say I;
The Egyptians were drowned, Heb. 11.29.30.
Scripture says
On a sudden; Jericho also fell by Faith,
Politic heads and diabolical wits shall be
Nonplus'd by Gods own power, by Faith see
The Stone cut out, Dan. 2.45.
shall smite without hands
The Image of various mixtures in all Lands,
Break it to pieces; Rev. 21.2, 3
new Jerusalem comes down
From Heaven, power works, tho seem to frown,
Once more not only Earth, God will shake
But also Heaven, God himself will power take, Heb. 12.25.

Destroy, that rotten Heaven of men's inventions,
Tho upholden by many wicked intentions;
Not by might, nor power says the Lord,
But by's Spirit, not man's help, says the Word, Zech. 4.6.

We expect our happiness too low from men, Isa. 43.13.

But 'twil come from Christ, when comes again,
God don't tie himself to do great work
With humane strength, as in our hearts lurk,
We have a Heaven depending, yet fears swell,
What will become of us, little time will tell. Dan. 12.13.

Repent, repent England, thy days draw near,
Return from thy Apostasy, tremble and fear; Ezekiel. 22.4.

Thou have left thy first love in our days, Rev. 2.4.

Many leave Religion, for superstitious plays,
It Is fulfilling the Scriptures which unfold,
Before Christ comes great Apostasy, love cold, Mat. 24.12. v. 49.

Cold to Christ, his ways, cold to one an other,
Instead of love many will smite his Brother,
Be in love with Drunkards in this age,
We live, don't those things truth presage
The coming of Christ draws near at hand, Mat. 24.33.

Many under-name Christ's Servant in the Land,
Instead of love to Christ, do degenerate,
Those who appear for Christ, did hate,
Did smite them not only with the Sword, Luk 6.22.

But with reproach and cruelty, says the Word;
Instead of choosing for their associates those
Fear God, Act. 4.18.26.
did them cast out and oppose,
Tho yet the toleration, smell like a Rose;
But see the end, as you run the race,
Were not drunkards, Luke 23.12.
swearers, men void of grace,
Enemies to Christ, such upholden every place?
Can this be well, are we such foolish elves,
To think God is such a one as our selves? Psa. 50.21.

Yet Satan so much wickedness does hatch,
Before Christ comes; Mat. 24.42.
then pray and watch,
Let not Gods dispensations seem strange,
The Vision is for appointed time, their range
Is limited, Hab. 2.3.
God over rules, Hell works a change,
Act Faith on God, Isa. 26.4.
he is Jehovah still;
Can Will a change, yet not change his Will,
Now will I arise says God, Psa. 12.5. Isa. 42.8.
on him depend
Fear not, God will bring about his end,
Which is his Glory, Romans 8.28.
and his peoples good,
Tho at present, it is by wicked men withstood,
God will pour out his Vials on the Throne Rev. 14.10, 11.

Of the Beast, and her followers every one;
Come out from among them says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.17.

From their sins separate says the Word,
For the great day of God is at hand,
To visit for the iniquities of the Land, Jer. 5.9.

Tho at present we hopes of escape borrow, Mat. 24.8.

Yet these things are but beginning of sorrow,
Judgments will overtake us like Gomorrow,
Gods people also, may much suffer and smart
By cruelty, which is the wickeds dart,
God may sufter drops of wrath to fall, Rev. 12.13.

On his own people, to try them all,
Who will be for God, and 3, 10.
and who for Baal.
Therefore my request to all I must double,
Repent, believe, and prepare for trouble,
For you will see in short great tribulation, Mat. 24.21.

For great is Gods wrath against the Nation,
Not only to visit, but a day of vengeance; Jer. 51.6.

On Jehovah let be your dependence, Isa. 26.4.

And all those transactions will surely end
In Antichrists ruin, but Jehovah will defend
His little Flock, in those Judgments ensuing, Col. 3.5, 6.

Tho dreadful shall end in Antichrists ruin,
A shelter from the storm have Saints provided,
They by Christ's counsel shall be guided; Isa. 35.4.

The Assyrians flood may their peace annoy,
Yet in due time, shall their God enjoy,
God overrules the wicked, which are's Rod,
Tho they act as if there were no God: Psa. 76.10. and 17, 13, 14.

God, if I may so say, is now making way
For his own glory let us the wicked play;
But as Scripture's true, in few years insuin,
Christ will exalt himself in Antichrists ruin, Rev. 22.12.

Act Faith on God, don't think he is slack,
Their Rod's not always on the righteous back; Psa. 125.3. Zech. 14.9.

Fear not, let not thy faith seem to yield,
A little time Christ comes with Majesty, Jer. 23.6. Isa. 60.12.

Christ thy King will come win the Field,
Then Tribes of the Earth Mourn and Cry;
Righteousness, Truth he will maintain,
Will destroy those don't desire his Reign, Luke 19.27.

Christ King of Righteousness the Scepter sway, Isa. 2.17. and 26.4.

His name alone is exalted in that day.
Trust in the Lord for ever, for at length,
Will find in Jehovah, is everlasting strength; Jer. 51.12, 13. Romans 11.23. 2
These. 2.3, 8.

Babylon shall come down, shall surely fall,
Both Jews and Gentiles shall have a call;
The man of sin shall down be destroyed,
That has Christ's People so long annoyed,
Hell Gates shall not prevail, Mat. 16.18.
God will preserve
His little flock, they shall not swerve;
Let Heathens rage, and People all conspire, Psalm, 2.1, 2.]

Let ravening Wolves, whom Hell sets on Fire
Let cunning Politicians all do their worst,
Swell with malice, till they all burst,
Yet never shall throw Gods Sion down,
But on their ruin, God will gain renown;
Tho the Bush is always burning in the Fire, Exodus 3.2.

Shall not be consumed; Prove. 21.10.
tho the wicked desire,
And practice too, to destroy that Tree,
The Church of Christ, but shall not be;
The Brethrens accuser shall be cast under, Rev. 12.10.

God will work such a work, who shall hinder?
Fear not, Isa. 43.13.
Satan shall be trodden under Foot,
The God of Heaven will bring him to it; Romans 16.20.

Tho Satan be still like a roaring Lion,
Yet there is deliverance, in mount Sion,
Although the Devil roar, he cannot rent,
The Lion of Judah will his rage prevent.
Depend on Jehovah, and in him trust,
And then let the Devil, do his worst,
The Stone cut, Dan. 2.24, 25.
of the mountain, without hands
Will make all the World obey's commands,
When Christ is revealed, 2 These. 1.8, 10.
in flaming fire,
To render vengeance, to all don't him desire;
Then call to Rocks, Rev. 6.16.
lament and grieve,
But is admired by all that believe,
Oh then live by faith, Mat 26.41.
watch and pray,
He now lets will let, till taken away,
Satan is full of wrath, 2 These. 2.7.
busy to hurt,
Because he knows, Rev. 12.12. and 22.4.
his time's but short;
Live the Life of sanctification, the rather,
Because Holiness, is mark of the Father:
It Is the Fathers name, on their forehead,
Grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
feed with Childrens bread,
Follow the Lamb, Jesus Christ in love,
Keep your selves Virgins, don't you move
After the Beast, Rev. 14.4.
his mark don't approve;
Stand fast, Protestants, fly superstition,
Receive not the Beasts mark, 1 Cor. 10.14
on no condition,
Contend for Protestant Faith, stand at least,
In hour of Temptation, fear not the Beast, Rev. 3.10.

Keep your garments clean, in your scope,
Practice no ceremonies come from the Pope;
Protestant Religion has its foundation
From Scripture, stood many's life in the nation, Gal. 1.8.

So may again, tho at present, a toleration:
Then practice Holiness, in conversation, Luke 12.35 36, 37.

Happy that servant who when, I say still,
His master comes, is doing his will,
They who are Christ's, will be turning,
Will gird up their Loins, and lights burning,
We depend too much on man, such leaven
Is in us, oh look for Christ from Heaven! Cant. 6.1^.

Depend on Christ, and on's mighty power, Mat. 24.42.

Know not how soon, or what hour
Christ comes; watch that dreadful shower
Of vengeance, 2 These. 1.7, 8.
which Christ will fourth pour
On the wicked, give them a total rout,
Therefore, by faith, friends, look about,
Babylon shall fall, she shall come down, Rev. 18.21.

Pope no more shall wear the triple Crown,
Tho lately did sit, like a Lady or Queen
In England, Popes pride no more be seen; v. 7. and 8.

For strong is the Lord, as does appear,
Now in England, oh let us Jehovah fear! Rev. 19.1, 2.

Hallelujah sing, friends, be of good cheer,
The day of our redemption draws near
Tho may a dreadful shower yet fall,
'Twil be short, believe and on God call: Mat. 24.46.

Let none think, the storm is past,
Sin will cause, on all attempts, a blast, Isa. 59.1, 2.

Without we repent, by real reformation, Jer. 5.25.

Now under Gods wonderful dispensation,
Which is withstood* by some in the nation, Isa. 26.10.

Which may bring on us desolation,
Therefore pray, such petitions to Jehovah send,
That men's wickedness, may have an end: Psalm. 7.9.

Lord open our eyes, and change our Hearts,
Let Judgments not fall as our deserts, 2 Chro. 15.2.

Though Gog did incamp in the Land, Ezekiel. 38.2.

Yet thou, Lord, did them all withstand:
Though Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8.
did muster their force,
Yet Lord, thou did prevent their course.
Christ's Enemies, did gather and incamp
Light of the Gospel, Psa. 2.1, 2.
did count to damp;
Yet God did save, at destructions brink,
Do more for England than we can think.
Oh turn us! Ephesians. 3.20.
Lord, turn us unto thee
By Reformation, Jer. 18.7, 8.
that England may not destroyed be;
Make King William, and Queen of high renown,
To pull Will worship, Col. 2.23.
and Popery down.
Oh that Bishops and Priests may reformed be,
Before God's Judgments fall in high degree! Isa. 1.16.

Lord help us all to sweep our own door
By Reformation, John 5.14.
and let us sin no more.
Give glory to God, by believing to day,
Before cause darkness, Jer. 13.16.
and blind our way,
Whiles hope for light, darkness take place;
Lord help, Isa. 59.8.
our condition, a dangerous case.
Lord pardon's, let England find mercy, and
The Gospel continue, the glory of England:
Let the glorious light thereof expel 2 Cor. 4.4.

Those fogs of darkness, that lead to Hell:
Let the Kingdom of Grace, Zech. 12.10.
be advanced free,
And Kingdom of Darkness destroyed be;
That Kingdoms of the world, with one accord
May become Kingdoms of Christ our Lord. Rev. 11.15.

Oh! hasten those things which Scriptures record:
Lord hasten the fulfilling of thy Word:
Hasten the blessing, Heb. 2.14.
which Scripture contains,
Of its descending, like the latter Rains,
To usher in the glory of Christ's day;
Thy Kingdom come, blessed God, haste away;
Let Us hear of Babylon's fall, Rev. 18.21.
in our day,
So may live for ever, unto thy praise,
Let thy Kingdom come, it will please us;
Come Lord, and 22.^0.
even so come Lord Jesus.
Lord show grace, more and more, to me,
Or take me hence this world to thee, Psa. 31.16.

The third part of this Book does appear
An invitation to love, though in the rear.
To love one another, let us be inclined,
To be for Christ, of one heart and mind.
Christ prayed for oneness and peace;
It Is Christ's command, love should increase.
Let Us clear up to Christ our Union,
By love to one another, in holy Communion.
Receive as written in love, what does follow,
Despise it not, though it be not from Apollo.
Let not a fancy, an opinion, a mere notion,
Hinder love, one with another, in Devotion.
A Preface to move the Reader unto Love. 1 Cor. 10.15.

TO love our Neighbor, as our selves, know, James 2.8. Gal. 5.14.

Is fulfilling of the royal Gospel Law,
Says Scripture; how many are so odd,
Instead of love, are for a malicious Rod?
In holy love, how few are taught of God, 1 These. 4.9.

But are like Cain, in the Land of Nod?
Who did not only hate, but slew his brother;
Many in our days murder one another; 1 John 3.12.

Nay, he is a murderer, who does but hate
His brother, the Scripture does this state; v. 15.

Those that live in malice, and wicked strife,
Cannot enjoy God's presence in eternal life:
For God is love; oh then! let love run
To one another, and all malice shun; 1 John 4.7.

Love all men, especially the household of Faith; Gal. 6.10.

Love your Enemies, as the Scripture says:
Every one is our neighbor, and brother
By nature, love the welfare of one another. Acts 19.26.

By love is known the Spirit of Truth,
And the Spirit of Error, in age or youth. Ephesians. 2.3.

Holy love is the very mark of those
Whom God for his, by Election, has chose. Joh. 13.34, 35.

By love, the Children of God are known
From Satan's; they for malice, every one,
He does not righteousness, Scriptures discover,
Is not of God, 1 John 3.10.
nor he loves not his brother.
How many, for want of love, are so evil,
For malice, Jam. 3.14, 15.
the very mark of the Devil?
God's Command does for love still run, Rev. 12 13.

And also to believe on his Son. 1 John 3.23.

Fidelity and love are inseparable, says
Scripture, which is the only Rule of Faith;
Where one is, Gal. 5.22.
there is also the other;
Cast off malice, and love as brother.
This command is from God, as we go,
He that loves God, 1 John 4.21.
loves his brother also,
Real, not feignedly, as most now do
Dissembling, one with another, is too true;
How flattering is one neighbor to another? Jer. 9.4, 5.

Little real love between sister and brother;
Fair to their faces, but turn their back,
Then speak ill, or despising, and so detract
What love pretended, Joh. 3.16.
real love is slack.
God's love, freely, unto us did run,
In sending forth to die, Gal. 4.4, 5.
his only Son:
We all ought, if God so loved us,
To love one another; 1 John 4.11.
malice is a Curse:
Hatred and malice is the mark of Hell, Jam. 3.15, 16.

Oh! 1 John 2.11.
cast off malice, and consider it well;
Hatred, malice, revenge, is such a Leaven,
Shuts all guilty out the Kingdom of Heaven. Gal. 5.21.

He that says loves God, 1 John 3.15. and 4.20.
and hates his brother,
Is a Liar, says Scripture, Oh! love one another;
It Is good for brethren, Psalm. 133.1.
in love to hold
In unity, the Scriptures unto us unfold;
In days of cruelty, Mat. 24.12.
let not love wax cold.
Oh love! for you see men in wickedness bold;
Love one another, Job 9.6.
in this shaking hour,
Lest, in stead of love, one another devour;
Live in love, and peace. love as brother,
Lest we are consumed one of another. Gal. 5.15.

Antichrist, by Jesuits, has love withstood;
Satan cast after the Woman a water-flood. Rev. 12.15.

See now how Pope, with his Popish Crew
Against Protestants does now still pursue,
England, and Holland, they count to subdue; Psalm. 68.30.

By their wicked and diabolical Jarrs,
Raises one Nation against another in Wars, Rev. 17.14.

All, to cause Protestants ruin and woe;
But fear not, Protestants, and also know, Psalm. 2 4, 5.

God will, ere long, give them an overthrow;
Stand still and see the Lord's Salvation, Exodus 14.13.

God will work Deliverance for our Nation; Psalm. 44.5.

Then love one another, in this generation,
Let not Satan hinder love in our station;
Satan fills men's hearts with Pride's invention,
For by Pride comes wicked Contention; Prove. 13.10.

All the study, wit, parts, art and skill
Of some, has been to oppose one another, will
You, instead of love, continue so still?
If so, you do not Christ's Command fulfill: John 15.12.

Christ commands love, you may it see
By what follows, if your love impartial be; Jam. 2.1, 9.

Let not an opinion, a fancy, a mere notion,
Hinder love one with another in Devotion,
Love to one another is from the Spirits motion: Gal. 5.22.

The Spirit's fruit is love, Scripture says, Jer. 32.39.

Shall be of one heart in the latter days:
See how the people of Israel did of old, Zech. 14.9.

Knit together, as one man, Scriptures unfold: Judge. 20.1, 11.

Want of this love has hindered Reformation,
Other things too, I could tell, in the Nation;
They entered into Covenant, to seek the Lord
With their hearts and souls, says the Word; 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13.

Whosoever would not seek, whiles breath,
The God of Israel, should be put to death.
Oh! that in love, Psalm. 119.2.
we would enter in band
To seek God, with all our hearts, in England; Hos. 10.12.

There is a time, will needs love, at hand,
Therefore love, and my meaning understand:
Oh! love one another, it is Christ's command;
Receive as written in love, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
what does follow;
Despise it not, though it be not from Apollo.
Consider Reader, what my Lines tell,
So from the Stream, go to the Well;
Read love in love, so may for ever dwell
With God of Love, Gal. 6.16.
the holy One of Israel.
Oh! that those weak lines may love advance
To God, Acts 17.30.
and to one another, cast off ignorance,
Of malice; so prays thy friend Husnance:
Consider in love, what my Lines tell,
Love as a Christian real, 2 Timothy 2.7.
so farewell.
Sect. 1.
AN Appendix, Heb. 10.24.
or word of love, in the end,
As said before, if you an Ear will lend;
This word love I will put in the rear,
Because little of real love does appear;
And it is that our Savior has foretold, Mat. 24.12.

In the latter days love should wax cold;
Yet Christ commands love, may see it true
In Scripture, Joh. 15.17.
love as I have loved you,
Who writes after this Copy, age or youth,
That love is real, 1 John 3.23.
in deed, and in truth:
In time of prosperity, many pretend love,
Then what they will do, self ends move:
He never lacks, shall never lack a friend,
If rich, Prove. 14.20.
then friendship enough pretend;
But if in trouble, Micah 7.5.
their Love is at an end:
Whosoever in his need a feigned friend try,
Instead of friendship, Zech. 13.6.
finds him an enemy:
But, as none look on a Dial when the Sun
Is under a cloud, Prove. 19.7.
so if try, their love's done;
It Is true Reader, as clear's the Sun.
When Paul before Nero, for's Life was tried,
All men forsook him, 2 Timothy 4.16.
their love to hide;
Before Paul came to his Answer, they cried,
They would stand by him, as is implied:
Such love, in our days, has been descried,
Many pretend love, but when need it, denied:
A friend loves at all times, Prove. 17.17.
and a brother's born
For adversity; this love out the world's worn,
For the least difference does passion move
Into anger, then farewell all pretended love;
Love without dissimulation, not for self ends; Romans 12.9, 18.

Love is now for self ends, or farewell friends:
It Is not according to Christ's Rule; shall I move
You to press after this virtue? God is love; 1 John 4.20, 21.

Can you love God, and not love one another?
It Is not love of God cannot hold together;
He that says, loves God, and hates his brother,
Is a Liar; Oh then love! and from malice sever;
Follow peace and love, Heb. 12.14.
Oh that I could hurl
This ball love and peace through the world:
It Is not a love to sin I press, don't mistake,
That I am against, for my Savior's sake,
Pray for their Conversion, don't carry hate
To their persons, in their sins be separate: Ephesians. 5.11, 12.

Keep universal love and peace unto all;
As occasion offers, do good to great or small: Romans 12.18, 27.

Don't live in envy, that pleases the Devil;
Then love one another, times are evil
Days we live in, call for love together, Ephesians. 5.16.

Our Cause dangerous, from love don't sever;
Hold in love together, now love or never.
Do good to all, especally the household of Faith; Gal. 6.10.

Love your Enemies, as the Scripture says,
Much more Christ's Image, where you it see, Mat. 5.44.

By the fruit holiness, may know the Tree: Mat. 7.16.

Without partiality, high or low degree, Heb. 13.1.

If Christ's Image, let love impartial be. 1 John 5.1.

Love Christ's Image, but don't be so Apish,
To love a Picture, and hate Christ, like a Papish.
They pretend love to Christ's Picture so free,
Yet malign Christ in his Members in high degree. Luke 6.35, 36.

The difference between God's Children see,
And Satan's, I will briefly lay before thee.
As God and's Children are known to be one Jam. 3.17.

In love, mercy, pity, in their lives does run,
Patience, long-suffering, love, wishing the health,
Life and welfare of all as himself.
So Satan and his Children are known one Prove. 12.10.

In envy, cruelty, oppression, is by them done
Malignancy, revenge, murder, tyranny,
Improverishing, Psalm. 74.20.
and undoing many a family:
See how God's Children by love are known
From Satan's; James 3.14, 15, 16.
they for malice, every one;
Oh! then love one another, don't be so evil
To live in malice, the mark of the Devil.
Oh! Rev. 12.13, 17.
love one another, it is my earnest suit,
Herein's God glorified, John 15.8.
if you bring love's fruit,
Sect. 2.
INstead of love, Mat. 18.15.
backbiters our times afford,
If a brother sin, who, according to the word
Of Christ, go tell him his fault, Scripture record,
In love tell him his sin 'twixt him and thee,
If can gain thy brother, verse 16.
if not, try, see
What can do, then take more with thee.
Take heed, let not backbiting in thee lurch,
Persuade in love before tell it the Church. verse 17.

How few observe this Rule in our Nation!
No, their love is now for information.
Scripture says, Psalm. 15.3.
who shall dwell in salvation?
He that backbiteth not with his tongue;
And Paul also reckons a backbiter among 2 Cor. 12.20

Worst of sinners, Romans 1.29.30.
and shall have damnation
Without repentance, and real reformation.
The evil of backbiting is, it hurts love,
And does antipathy and hatred move, Prove. 15.1.

Brings in dissension, and at long run
By this evil, and 26.28.
backbiting, many undone:
Sin of backbiting has this peculiar evil,
It hurts a man absent, Prove. 11.9.
as bad's the Devil;
Does covertly undo men, before aware,
Therefore of backbiters had need take care,
For many times it dissevers friends asunder,
Gives such a wound as makes some wonder; and 18.8.

Therefore Scripture says, Better an open enemy
Than a secret friend; a backbiter undoes secretly;
What greater prejudice can be than Infame
A man in's credit, reputation, and good name?
To rail and backbite, common in woman, Prove. 9.13.

But Scripture says, Speak evil of no man; Tit. 3.2, 3.

Yet common, in our days, men are so base, Jam. 4.11.

Their love is for one another disgrace,
Like Jeremiah's familiars, he does them call,
Pretend love, that watch one another fall. Jer. 20.10.

I heard defaming of many on every side,
This comes from Satan, and dissembling Pride, Jam. 3.15.

For the Hypocrite and Backbiter are twins, Mat. 24.51.

Shall have Hypocrites portion for their sins.
Oh! give off backbiting, and for mercy call,
Judge not thy brother, Romans 14.4, 12.

Unto God, who will judge thee and all.
Cast off backbiting whiles have breath,
Set love to work, save a Soul from death: Jam. 5.20.

Consider worth of Souls, let love move
In thy generation, this way employ love, Mat. 16.26.

Not in backbiting; cast it off, don't delay,
Do it in love to Christ, it is thy best way;
The wages of backbiters is very bad pay;
Take heed of false hope, and presumptuous play. Romans 6.23.

Sect. 3.
IN Scripture I read, Luke 13.26, 27.
many in the last day
Will presume on their familiarity, and say,
They had eat and drank in Christ's presence,
Some expostulating with Christ, from hence
Have prophesied, cast out Devils in thy name, Mat. 7.22, 23.

Done wonderful works; shall we have blame?
Can this be without love to Christ? true,
Had we such ground, should say so too;
Yea confident, if such evidence of union
With Christ, think us safe of communion
With God hereafter, could we say as they, verse 23.

Consider of it, Reader, and mind, I pray,
Yet, for all this, they were sent away:
I know you not, they were such, no doubt,
Did not really love Christ, therefore turned out,
Notwithstanding their flourish of protestation,
Let Us fear if such were sent to desolation;
Oh! let us fear and tremble in our generation, Luke 6.46.

Let Us practically love Christ in our station;
All think they love Christ; Oh that we deed!
To think how many will be deceived, Mat. 7.13, 14.
I bleed
In heart, to see that many on better ground
Than us, Luke 13.27, 28.
are sent to the Devil's Pound:
Oh! let us not venture our everlasting state
On groundless surmises; let us before too late,
Work out salvation with fear and trembling: Phil. 2 12.

Let Us really love Christ without dissembling;
Let Us pause and consider, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
it is Soul matter;
Let Us not with false conceits our selves flatter;
Let not untowardness of our flesh hinder,
But, John 14.5.
let us real obedience to Christ tender:
Let Us not, like many, whiles they have breath,
Rest content, Job 8.13. and 27.8.
Lord deliver from sudden death;
Say, have mercy, when going to Eternity,
Yet in their lives still workers of iniquity;
Yet Christ says to all such, from me depart,
Oh! cast off false hope from thy heart;
With presumptuous conceits let us not venture
Our Souls, Mat. 7.21.
not every says, Lord, does enter;
And if the righteous be scarcely saved,
What think, 1 Pet. 4.18.
who with sin art depraved?
Christ's blood must wash thee by renovation,
By faith manifested in a holy conversation, Heb. 12.14.

Or no ground in Scripture for salvation;
Then with a speedy impartial examination,
Try whether in the way unto salvation. Gal. 6.4.

Don't rest in a false love to Christ, let us try,
Make sure of interest in Christ before we die; 2 Pet. 1.10.

Know on what ground stand for Eternity;
Here Is the one thing needful, Luke 10.42.
yea so needful,
Without it our condition is very dreadful.
Sect. 4.
COnsider those things well in thy station, 2 Pet. 1.12.

For glory don't build on a sandy foundation;
Practice love to Christ, don't rest in speculation
Without love; what is gifts and parts? alas!
No better than a Cymbal, or founding Brass: 1 Cor. 13.1, 13.
or sounding Brass:
Of all gifts, the greatest is love, charity,
Then love Christ and one another, I cry,
Without love to Christ, Scriptures tell
What Is done in way of charity, mind well,
If not in love to Christ, may go to Hell; Heb. 11.6.

Yet many with conceit of merit swell,
If give all to the poor, Scripture says,
Nay, our bodies to be burnt, and have Faith
To remove mountains, and have not charity, 2 Cor. 13.2, 3.

That Is real love to Christ, am nothing I;
Oh! then let us our love unto Christ try;
Let Us examine our selves, our hearts prove
Whether have no self-end in our love, Joh. 6.26, 27.

Follow Christ for love of loaves, self-end,
Jud is like, Hail Master, love pretend;
This will be sad, yet Judas called friend. Mat. 26.49, 50.

Was Judas the better? no more shall we,
If love to Christ be not real, fare as he;
If give to the poor, don't think to merit
By any thing can do, that is a Popish spirit;
If do give thy body to be burnt, yet see
Does not merit, in love to Christ must be
The thoughts of merit thou must flee; Gal. 5.6.

Do thy duty, merit's no work for thee,
In works of charity eye Christ's command, John 15.14.

Christ commands to feed the poor, and
To do our duty, in love to Christ, understand,
Not in love of merit, at no hand;
To do thy will, Lord make me understand; Psa. 143.10.

Full of extremes are many in our days;
To destroy Souls Satan has many ways; 2 Cor. 2.11.

Some do good works, on thoughts of merit,
Others do not their duty, 1 Timothy 3.7.
such a base spirit
Of extremes does abound in our Land, Mark 8.34.

Few do their duty as Christ's command;
Some do good works, which by reflect,
They thoughts of merit in all affect,
Others their duty, Christ's commands neglect. Luke 9.23.

To both these I shall in love this only say,
If they please to consider it by the way, Romans 2.6.

He that thoughts of merit does cherish, Rev. 20.13.

And he does not's duty, Romans 2.6.
both shall perish;
Take heed of those extremes, Rev. 20.13.
and love
Thy duty; let not thoughts of merit move;
Observe, 2 Timothy 2.26.
see how many ways Satan has
To betray poor Souls in eternal wrath: Epa. 6.11.

Oh then! let me a little your hearts move
To follow peace and holiness in love. Heb. 12.14.

I need not say, love the world, you are free
To follow the world close in every degree:
Fear how thou loves the world, 1 John 2.15.
the rather,
If love the world, have not the Father;
Who loves the world is the enemy of God; Jam. 4.4.

The world's love God thy enemy, fear's Rod,
Love to the world, a general sin, still sleeping,
Like no sin, Phil. 3.18, 19.
yet Paul told of it weeping:
Many walk, of whom I have often told,
Enemies to Christ, who love the world bold,
Whose end is destruction, do still make
Love to the world their ruin, cannot forsake
The world's gain, Rev. 20.15.
till in the burning Lake.
It Is like David, has its ten thousand slain,
Mind it, and inordinate love refrain:
The world's love kept those invited, Luke 14.17, 18, 19.
at least,
From coming to the great Marriage feast;
But of this I have said before complete,
If you with an eye of love retreat;
Come to Christ in love, Rev. 22.17.
at his invitation;
Love to the world will be thy desolation;
Don't sin, love Christ, is thy best gain,
What Is world's love you in eternal pain? Mark 9.44.

Sect. 5.
REader, Isa. 44.3.
consider, thy love to Christ prove,
Be restless in heart till the Spirit move,
And have some evidence of Christ's love.
Without intrest in Christ, Romans 8.1.
no consolation,
Without Christ, Heb. 2.18.
no support under temptation:
In prosperity or adversity, Isa. 57.29.
no comfort in life,
Nor death, no peace when Conscience at strife:
Men by lu^^ing Conscience at present may keep
Themselves quiet, 1 Timothy 4.2.
from false love Conscience sleep,
But if in Conscience storm arise, wilt weep, Prove. 18.14. and 11.7

Without Christ's love sad fruit wilt reap.
Jonas lay asleep till stormy tempests came, Jonah 1.6.

Without intrest in Christ, God's the same, Heb. 13.8. and 9.14.

With horror, at death, then love Christ's name.
The Lord knows how soon we may die,
Let Us our love to Christ by's Spirit try:
No plaster of love will stick, or on us lie, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.

Without the Spirit does Christ's love apply,
All other love, comforts, will do no good, Joh. 14.26.

When sorrow and death comes like a flood;
All love of the world at death fail,
Without Christ's love heart will quail:
For thy Soul's sake, after Christ move; Job 16.2.

All friends miserable comforters prove;
When God comes to deal with thee for sin, Romans 14.12.

Set sin home on the Conscience herein: 2 Cor. 5.10.

All guilty of sin of omission and commission; Romans 3.23.

Oh! let us take love's way, holy contrition. Lam. 3.40.

To seal pardon of sin, it is the Spirit's love,
To work, draw our hearts, Ephesians. 3.30.
make it move
After Christ in love; Oh! then in love arise
From false love, follow the Spirit's ways: Cant. 1 4.

Though men be merry for a time, yet sorrow
Will overtake them at death, like Gomorrah,
Then they will reflect on their ways, cry, Lam. 5.16.

Woe that we have sinned to all eternity;
Then they see nothing but sin behind,
And terrors before, then now it mind,
And to holiness in thy life be inclined:
In love arise, don't give sleep to thy eyes,
Till an intrest in Christ, this don't despise; Ephesians. 5.14.

All God's promises are in Christ Yea and Amen,
Still in Christ, love Christ I say again: 2 Cor. 1.10.

If no intrest in Christ, have none in God, Col. 3.11.

No intrest in the Promises, in Life so odd,
Can not to thy self any Fromise apply
Without an intrest in Christ, then sin fly;
Cast off all sin as the sin of extortion,
Happiness lies in having God thy portion. Lam. 3.24.

Whom have I in Heaven, Psalm. 144.15. and 73.25.
O Lord! but thee?
Nor on Earth like thee, none can compared be.
Oh! 1 Pet. 2.7.
in heart crown the Prince of Peace,
The Lord Christ, this will your love increase;
Receive him in love, Isa. 44.4.
as your Lord and King,
He can this grace of love unto you bring:
Set a Crown on his head in heart with love,
Christ will crown you in Heaven above; Mat. 25.23

Then love one another, clear up your Union
To Christ in love, John 13 35.
having communion
One with another, let no difference rise
In love's way, Christ's Prayer don't despise.
Christ prayed Oh Father! John 17.22.
let them be one,
Shall we not love? yet love his Prayer run,
Laid it as a mark on his here below,
By loving one another, shall all men know
You are my Disciples, 1 John 3.14.
passed from death to life,
Love one another, let there not be strife;
Love is fulfilling the Law, love once again,
Fall not out by the way, Genesis 43.8.
you are brethren;
Love one another, for it is by Love alone,
That God and his people shall be one;
God shall be one, Zech. 14.9.
his people one, yet we
In our generation, to love real, not free.
Christ's Church is imperfect, Heb. 11.40.
Scripture says,
Till Jews and Gentiles are in unity of faith,
Jews and Gentiles must own, Scripture Record,
Christ, Ephesians 4.13.
then let us love one another in the Lord:
Oh! let us press after love in our degree,
With one heart, one mind, serve God more free:
It Is by love Jews and Gentiles can be united;
Love one another, Romans 15.6.
since so lovingly united.
Sect. 6.
REader, 2 Timothy 2.7.
love, if wilt have Christ's protection,
If on what is said of love have reflection;
It Is not love the passion, or natural affection,
But love wrought by the Spirit, Isa. 26.12.
saving grace,
Where this love is, Christ is, don't deface
His Image in thy Soul by sin so base. 1 John 4.16.

The fruit of the Spirit is holiness and love; Gal. 5.22.

It Is tho Spirit does holy love in us move;
Love the special grace by which Christ dwells Ephesians. 2, 22.

In us, by's Spirit works of sin expels; Gal. 5.6.

Where love to Christ is, there is also faith;
Faith works love, love proves fidelity, says
Scripture, faith without love is dead belief; Jam. 2.16, 17.

Love without faith is sinful relief; 1 John 4.8.

Where love is, the Father is; God is love, Phil. 1.11.

He has this love, grace in him, does move
From sin, dwells in God, God in him, Col. 1.10.
prove
Thy love, do love God in Christ dear?
For where is this love, the Spirit is clear; Gal. 5.22.

Where love is, faith's fruits will appear; Ephesians. 3.17.

Where this love is, there is Christ and God,
What a sad condition are those so odd, Micah 3.2.

Who in their actions hate with their Rod
Of malice God and his people? yet pretend love
Love to Christ, but of love's way don't approve,
After holiness in their lives never move. Mat. 26.49.

Many profess Rabbi, Master, Judas like,
Yet the first that at godliness will strike,
Bow before Christ, with their Hat a flourish, Jer. 18.12, 18.

But in their hearts wickedness they cherish:
Here Is their love, if Complements will excuse,
They the men, like Judas, Pilate and Jews;
But obedience in love to Christ they refuse.
Many's Religion a mere Complement, rude,
In conversation wicked, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.
yea a multitude
Of such among us with self-love delude
Themselves by sin, so in false hope conclude,
And expose themselves to fearful misery, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.

As said before, if collect your memory,
Which in this Book, if read, mays find
Sins dreadful effects, ponder them in mind: 2 Pet. 2.21.

The Lord direct us unto his love alone,
Many this way of love have never known: 2 These. 3.5.

Is this grace love wrought in us? admire
Free grace, and not our natural desire: Ephesians. 2.4, 5.

Every good and perfect gift is from above,
The donor of all mercy, the God of love; Jam. 1.17.

Then love not the world, let affections move
Toward things eternal, Col. 3.1, 2.
in Heaven above
There Is matter enough to draw your love;
If you have tasted the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2 3.

Are many Mansions, and walks spacious
For love to run, John 14.2.
if art contemplations
Love in the highest degree, Genesis 24.63.
if meditations
Love, yea oneness in love, love one another,
Shall we not love? John 17.21.
till in Heaven together
In Heaven love is for ever, there is no place
For faith, 1 Cor. 13.8.
hope, they end in fruition's race;
Oh! then let us not this virtue love deface,
Not live in love, to a Christian is disgrace,
To profess Christian, love only in name,
Not live in love one with another is shame. Psalm. 82.16.

Consider Reader, 2 These. 2.11, 12.
what is said, this head, I Will conclude,
Do not thy Soul with self-love delude.
Sect. 7.
WHat can say more? 2 Timothy 1.6.
my Lines aspire,
Go one step higher, for love's desire
As motives to spur us, John 3.16.
all in love's way
Strain thy string, Ephesians. 1.4.
let us hear what can say;
I have but one way, John 15.16.
if that will move
Our hearts, that is Christ's free grace and love,
Shall not Christ's love our love constrain? Ephesians. 2.4.

Then all I can say will be in vain, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Christ's love to us is love beyond degree,
The oftended dies to set the offender free: Romans 5.10.

It Is love beyond reach of men's capacity:
Shall not Christ's love us move, base are we;
This love of Christ the Angels did admire 1 Pet. 1.10, 12.

His Incarnation, Christ having such desire
Of love for's Elect, Psalm. 40.8.
in Christ was no neglect
To appease God's wrath, John 4.34.
his love did this effect,
Die to reconcile us unto God, Col. 1.21.
when Enemies:
Oh the riches of Christ's love! don't despise:
Shall not this consideration a little move Romans 2.4.

Our ungrateful hearts for Christ's free love? Heb. 10.24.

Mind what is said before of free grace, pray
Consider farther, for I have more to say
As motives to move us all in love's way;
But none like Christ's love can any say;
Man by sin forfeited not only salvation,
But also external mercies in's generation, Gen 3.17, 18.
by sin lost
Brought a curse on the creatures, by sin lost
God's favor, to repair this breach cost 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

Christ's blood, so that in our generation
All the mercies we enjoy in our station,
Are by Christ's purchase clear and free;
Shall we not love Christ in that degree
Of love, in sincere holiness? base are we, 2 Cor. 1.12.

If not love Christ in holy sincerity.
All mercies we enjoy are from God's love;
To make us happy free love did him move: John 3.16.

Consider things as we go, and I will tell
Christ has at's dispose Heaven and Hell; Rev. 1.18. and 8.7.

Christ opens, none shuts, shuts, none open can,
If will be happy, love Christ every man;
In his hand is our being, life and breath,
Our Souls, and all, Oh! love him till death: Acts 17.25.

Christ will judge every man, and try
Us to eternal life, or to eternal misery: 1 Pet. 4.5. Col. 1.16, 17.

Christ made all things, Earth, Heaven above,
He is the great God, and commands our love,
The whole world, and every Nation Psalm. 18.46. and 68.20.

Are nothing to him, he is God of salvation;
All to God are like a water drop, and dust
In the balance, love him, and in him trust: Isa. 40.15, 17. and 33.22. and
54.5.

He is God, whom Angels worship and adore,
Then love him, on Christ depend evermore;
He Is our Creator, Lawgiver, Sovereign Maker,
It Is free grace, of his love we are partaker:
Consider, God deserves love in thy station,
More than all great Men in the Nation,
Therefore to please Men in thy generation,
Don't comply with sin out of a fears Nod,
What, afraid of Man shall die? fear God,
Fear not Man, lest thou feel Christ's Rod:
I mean, fear not Man sinfully, for alas! Isa. 51.12, 13.

Poor creature Man shall be as grass,
Cannot help's self, when to Eternity must pass.
Then love God, who has you in's power,
Can make happy or miserable in an hour; Mat. 28.18.

Keep Covenant with God, he will with you,
Love God in Christ, Isa. 51.10.
loves way pursue.
Sect. 8.
DOn't those things move? Romans 2.5.
I wish you well,
If not, fear lest hardened in way to Hell.
Christ says, John 14.15.
If love, keep his commands,
If not, how will Christ take it at our hands?
If to lay down our lives, Luke 9.23.
should not we
At Christ's command love in such a degree?
Let Us love one another, lay aside animosity:
Let Us cast off division, and love's way take;
Shall we not love for our Savior's sake?
The Devil and wicked men hold together Luke 23.12.

Against Christ's little flock; Oh! love for ever;
Stand all together, from love don't sever;
It Is against the nature of Christ's Sheep,
When Wolves abroad should together keep;
Though there be a toleration to this day,
Yet know, there be many abroad for prey;
Oh! then love one another without delay:
See what Paul of dividing love does say,
One is for Paul, 1 Cor. 3.4.
and another for Apollo,
You are carnal, love's way do not follow.
God of love, and 14 33.
is God of order, not confusion,
Partiality in holy love is from delusion,
If difference in Judgment, Jam. 2.4.
must it in Affection?
Love bears with failings, is not for rejection;
Love covers many infirmities, 1 Pet. 4 8.
yet herein
Let not thy love encourage any in sin,
Set love to work while; have breath,
For conversion save a Soul from death; Jam. 5.20.

Consider worth of Souls, let love move
In thy generation, Mat. 16 26.
this way employ love,
Not in opposing one another, as I have seen
Too much of this love in the world been
Amongst those profess love to one another,
A difference in Opinion from love did sever; Acts 15 39.

What Is the reason we lie under this cheat?
One reason is, Rev. 12.15.
the Devil's subtilty is great;
And from presumption, false security, not fears,
Whiles men slept, the enemy sowed tares; Mat. 13.25.

Satan's policy is to separate and divide Prove. 26.12.

Communion, Union in Holiness cannot abide,
So fills men's hearts with self-conceited pride; Acts 5.3.

To hinder love one with another, Satan's feat
Is every Opinion is wise in's own conceit; Romans 11.25.

Every one thinks is right, they perfect be,
Yet no Church, I read of, had this degree; and 12.16.

The Churches of Asia were commended,
Yet not one of them but had offended; Rev. 1.4.

Then let us love, let not a circumstance
Cause a difference, but let us all advance
In love to Christ, and to one another; I say,
Let Us love, as Christ commands, let us him obey; John 15.14.

Let Us press after holy love in our degree,
We know but in part, in Scripture see, 1 Cor. 13.12.

Therefore our love must imperfect be;
The Angel said, want of love's against thee,
Thou have left thy first love, all alone, Rev. 2.4.

To consider how it is in our days, I groan:
Most men and women, all seek their own,
For the things of Christ love have none, Phil. 2.21.

In those times of blasphemy, who such love
To mourn in secret, love to God did move, Jer. 13.17.

Who have been afflicted for sin and shame;
Lord, what wilt do unto thy great Name? Josh. 7.9.

Little has Religion had of our tears, Lam. 3.39.

Instead of our love, complaints and fears,
That child-like spirit which uses to be
In God's Children, is perished, so shall we,
If not a filial love to God in that degree,
To carry us above love of any but he: Mat. 10.37.

The last days shall be perilous, and we
In our generation live those days to see, 1 Timothy 3.1.

Sin abounds, love cold, as Christ says,
When comes on Earth, shall he find Faith? Mat. 24.12.

Which implys, though his Spirit been winning, Luke 18.8.

Last days shall be great times of sinning,
The wickedness, coldness of love found, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Signs of Christ's coming, when sins abound,
Coldness of one, Mat. 24.10.
abounding of the other,
Late experience, few could trust his brother;
When under that dreadful cloud of dangers, Jer. 9.4.

Had we love of relations? no, from strangers
Love of relations; Mat. 24.10.
if did see a brother run,
If we entertain you, we shall be undone;
It Is truth, Prove. 27.10.
Reader, as clear as the Sun.
This their love; but Jehovah did provide
By's Providence, Job 38.41.
of strangers were supplied,
For them I pray in glory may be dignified;
I pray for any that did poor Souls feed,
Lord, 2 Timothy 1.16.
show mercy, when most mercy need.
Sect. 9.
COnsider those things, 2 Pet. 1.12.
Reader, in thy station,
Let love work toward thy near relation,
Wife and Children, love their salvation:
If thy Wife be unbelieving, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13, 14.
pray in love,
Pray again in faith, God's Spirit can move
Her heart with love, he works saving faith,
Labor to gain thy Wife, Scripture says,
Edify one another in the most holy faith: Jude 20.

This is God's way, and way of holy love;
Oh! in way of holiness after salvation move:
If unbelieving Husband, let Wife likewise
Do her duty in love, 1 Cor. 7.16.
to pray don't despise:
Oh! that there were many such in our days,
Few that live to their Maker's praise,
It Is for want of understanding God's ways:
Few understand that Covenant obligation,
Between Husband and Wife, in their station,
They should be one in love, Ephesians. 5.31.
in edification,
In love labor for one another salvation,
And design God's glory in their generation:
Be not unequally yoked, 2 Cor. 6.14.
Scripture says,
Do not marry any are not of a Gospel Faith,
For love of riches; 1 Cor. 6.16.
take heed, God is just,
It Is not marrying in God's fear, but of lust,
The lust of the world, and pride of life
Passes away, 1 John 2.16, 17.
therefore love a holy Wife;
Many aim in marriage to advance station
In the world, little mind in their generation
God's glory, or their own precious Souls salvation, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Yet worldly things to be minded in our station,
But all to God's glory must be in subordination.
End of marriage few practically understand,
Want of which, few do their duty, Col. 3.18, 19.
and
Is cause of much discord in the Land:
Husbands sometimes out of holy love's way,
Wives in love don't their Husbands obey, Tit. 2.5.

But discontent and confusion in their lives,
Few converted by conversation of Wives, 1 Pet. 3.1. to v. 8.

Few the ornament of a quiet spirit in subjection,
How few in love live in holy affection?
Also Husbands sad experience does tell,
Few in holy love with their Wives dwell,
Instead of living in love, contentious strife;
Many, instead of love, as Husband and Wife,
Are contentious, wicked, in their lives so odd, Romans 3.17, 18.

All Is for want of love the true fear of God;
How cross are many under Satan's power,
By wicked strife do one another devour; Gal. 5.15.

The condition of many families that dwell
In England, their lives like a forerunner of Hell,
Whence comes this disorder and confusion? Jam. 3.14, 16, 17.

From the Devil, the spirit of delusion:
God is in the still voice, whereas peace and love,
Satan's for thundering discords does move; 1 Kin. 19.12.

The wisdom from above is peace, not evil;
Discord and confusion is from the Devil.
What sad families are in our English Nation?
Know nothing of their Souls renovation:
Many are wise to the world in their station, Jer. 4.22.

But know little of loves way to salvation,
Prudent and careful for the bodies preservation, 1 Cor. 2.14.

But fools, and dead to their Souls salvation,
As in Egypt, when one dead in every family,
No question, there was a dreadful cry, Exodus 12.30.

But in England, Oh! that it were not true,
Are many families live, like a wicked crew,
Dead Husband, Romans 8.5, 6.
dead Wife, Children and all,
Don't do family duty, Jer. 10.25.
nor on God call,
Don't know love's way, nor things spiritual.
Many Parents will play in this hurl,
When Children are careful for the world,
They then say unto them all, well done;
Few say, how is it with thy Soul, my Son?
If carefully for worldly things look after,
Then Children are their Parents laughter; Prove. 10.1.

Few say, how is it with thy Soul, my Daughter?
How is it between God and Soul for salvation? Deuteronomy. 6.7.

This question let alone in their generation;
Carefulness is our duty in our station,
But must be, as said before, in subordination.
To God's glory, in furthering our salvation,
Many Elies in the world are conniving 1 Samuel 2.2^, 24.

At Childrens sin, when in the world thriving;
So there are many Nabals, a mere churl
Unto their Children in the world.
Reader, understand this, the rather
Because I have been abused by my Father,
And so I have too, if truth wilt know,
Been abused also by my Father-in-law;
What shall I say? I know not what,
But only this, it is my fate and lot,
The Lord forgive them, Acts 7.60.
I will still pray
I hate malice, I am still for loves way;
I pray for all have done me wrong,
Either in action, in thought or tongue;
This is loves way, as the Scripture says,
Which to us is the only Rule of Faith,
But Scriptures are by some cast by rejection
In the last days, Tim. 3.3.
many without natural affection;
Unnaturalness is a curse laid on men
By reason of sin, as a Judgment; for when
Any are given up to sin, by reflection,
It Is dreadful to be without natural affection,
Are worse than the Beasts, Job. 35.11.
they are inclined
To be tender of their young, in kind;
Unnaturalness does argue a wicked mind,
To be without natural affection so odd,
That man has nothing of the Nature of God: Psalm. 103.13.

See, Reader, how many ways Satan has
To betray poor Souls to eternal wrath; 2 Cor. 2.11.

Some are too fawning on Children by reflection,
Others are as bad, without natural affection;
To extremes, all men and women too prone,
All care is for the body by every one, Phil. 2.21.

But to care for the soul, that is let alone:
How will it go with my poor soul for ever? Jer. 8.6.

Few make such a question, Mat. 8.2.
but still persever
In false hope, till death, then they quiver,
When God, the soul, shall from him sever
From enjoying his glory, Luke 13.27,
and that for ever
Awake from the dead, and love's way take, Romans 13.11.

Thy salvation or damnation lies at stake;
Up, be doing, in love's way for salvation, Jam. 5.16.

Pray for Wife and Children in thy station, Deuteronomy. 4.9.

Teach them God's fear in their generation;
Let 'em know what is to fear God, by education;
Oh! were this practiced more in the Nation,
It would prevent wrath falling for desolation; Col. 3.16.

Pray in faith and love to God for England,
Pray in thy family, Psalm. 32.6.
let servants understand
The fear of God, so do his command;
Pray God would divert his Judgments, and
That God would continue the Gospel in England. and 122.6.

Thus, in love, to fear God, do you accord,
And Children, obey your Parents in the Lord; Ephesians. 6.1, 6.

Parents, to provoke your Children, don't afford,
Or give occasion, here is what Scriptures record;
Servants, be faithful to your Masters word, Col. 3.22, 23.

Not with eye-service, but as unto the Lord,
Heartily, honestly, in love, says the Word,
Children and Servants, learn to fear God,
Train them in love's way, fear his Rod; Prove. 22.6.

Be holy in love, fear God all thy life, Prove. 3.7.

Take love's way, and rule, don't live at strife, Jam. 3.16.

But live in love with Children and Wife;
Have a Church in thy house, says the Word, Phil. 1.2.

Resolve, Josh. 24.15.
with Joshua, to serve the Lord,
Do duty in love, don't delay for shame,
God has wrath for them call not on's Name; Jer. 10.25.

Be doing in love's way, for thy soul's sake,
Dreadful to be cast in the burning Lake. Rev. 20.15.

Sect. 10.
COnsider what is said, Psalm. 14.2, 3, 4.
before my Lines cry,
To think in England are many sad family;
Therefore rouse man, let me a little move
Thy heart to follow holy, Heb. 12.14
to God in love;
Love God, and his ways do you approve.
Say some, Object.
you say, love God, who does not?
Ar't free to speak? Sol.
thy Arrow soon shot,
But let us try, and in the end I doubt,
Whether can love to God make out;
What has love cost thee? what have done
For Christ? Mat. 7.21.
it is not love, as tongue run;
If thou see Christ's Intrest lie at stake,
What would do? which side would take?
Must be Pro or Con, in Scripture see,
Christ says, Luke 11.23.
he that is not for, 's against me.
Intrest does in us always move affection, Psalm. 103.13.

Does echo love to Christ by reflection;
Love Christ real, if expects his protection.
Don't pretend love, yet with the world combine,
Against Christ for self intrest, if so, it is sign
Art for self-love, from Christ do decline.
Love to Christ will in action it self express, Mat. 26.7.

Who have visited in those days of distress;
Has love been to Widows and Fatherless? Jam. 1.27.

This is love's pure Religion before God,
Instead of love, it may be a hateful Nod,
If so, Prove. 14.21.
take heed least feel Christ's Rod.
Many whose friends are exiled and dead,
Are in a sad condition, may lack bread;
Such need thy love, take heed and see,
Christ says, Mat. 25.45.
if not those, not to me
That is to any stand in need of Charity.
Don't complement with Christ, we eat
And drink in thy presence; Luke 13.26, 27.
do not cheat
Thy soul, only profess love, Satan's feat,
To destroy souls, only profess and talk,
Will deceive, unless love's way we walk; Luke 6.46.

Many pretend love, to thee I will impart
Few is Christ the object of their heart. 2 Chro. 6.14.

Many Professors that drive great trade,
For self ends profess, by it are made, Acts 19.25.

But when should stand for Christ, John 6.66.
evade retrograde
From the interest of Gospel grace, the Ark,
They not troubled, that is not their mark, 1 Samuel 4.13

Who trembles for fear of the Gospel, few Elies,
Watch, tremble, with tears in their eyes;
Where Is the man refuses comfort in's life, v. 20, 22.

For fear of the Gospel, like Phinehas Wife?
Where are our Moses, stand in the gap, Psalm. 106.23.

Our Elijahs, Vriahs, that fear God's lap?
Some such there are by grace, for mercy call, Isa. 1.9.

For a remnants sake, are not destroyed all; Acts 18.17.

Most like Gallio, care not for Religion's way,
Are for civil concernments every day,
For meum and tuum, how Trading goes on,
For intrest of the Gospel, that is let alone,
Yet profess, go to the High Priest's Hall,
If try their love, deny Christ and all; Mat. 26.56, 58, 72.

Though the Gospel and Christ in word don't deny,
Yet, if in question, with the world comply;
Pretend love to Christ, yet part take
With sin, so Christ in action forsake,
If can enjoy the world, let the Gospel go,
Remember, for them is an eternal woe, Amos 6.1, 2.

Who never consider Sion in distress,
Nor fear the Gospels danger, though profess, Rev. 2.5.

In Hell their condition will be remediless;
What profit if the whole world gain Mat. 16.26.

And lost their souls in everlasting pain?
Sect. 11.
COnsider, Reader, what is said in thy station, 2 Timothy 2.7.

Try thy love, do not rest in speculation;
Love to Christ will appear in conversation; Mat. 7.16.

Think it not love to Christ enough to be
Of this or that Opinion, and 10.73.
because we
Go under such a notion, it is not that degree
Of love that brings to Christ then see
On what ground stands for eternity; Mat. 7.21.

Without holiness there is no salvation,
And holiness is but our sincere dedication Heb. 12.14.

To God in our lives and conversation,
In this consists our real sanctification, 1 These. 4.3, 4.

In living unto God by holy resignation;
It Is only this, whatever in men lurks,
Show forth thy faith by thy works; Jam. 2.18, 26.

The great question will be, when tried,
Have we lived unto Christ who died?
Or to carnal self, who has thy heart
Most, Jer. 2.13.
God or the world? fear this will part
God and thy soul; consider thy end,
Be holy in heart, Gal. 2.20.
and on Christ depend
For salvation, own him as Sovereign King
In thy heart by faith, 1 Cor. 1.30.
it is the only thing
God requires; and although hone can
Pay God his due, yet saved is no man
Without God, Col. 1.18.
have the pre-eminence in chief,
God must rule in heart by holy belief,
If have Jesus, Ephesians 3 17.
a Savior, says the Word,
Must receive him also as Christ a Lord,
He Is Jesus a Savior, only to those afford
Obedience to him as their King and Lord, Heb. 5.9.

The distinction point by Scripture Rod,
He does not righteousness, 1 John 3.10.
is not of God,
Live a holy dependence on God always, Psalm. 71.5.

In love to God do duty, Mat. 26.41.
watch and pray,
Rest not in being of this or that Opinion,
Whether Presbyterian, Anabaptist or Arminian,
Or any other Judgment in thy station,
These are Egyptian Reeds to rest on for salvation.
Opinion will not pass for Religion, when
We must appear before Christ; 2 Cor. 5.10.
Oh! then,
As we profess, so let us do Jehovah's will,
And not be found workers of iniquity-still; Mat. 7.23.

It Is not he that of God and Christ does talk,
But he that in love with Christ does walk
In holy obedience, he is the Christian alas! Luke 6.46.

Easy from one Opinion to another pass;
It Is an easy thing to take up a name,
And by Profession promote a man's fame, Psalm. 83.16.

When man's actions in his life cry shame.
It Is very easy to unite ones self with all,
To be of this or that Form, as some it call,
To be of this Worship, or of that way;
But where is the Christian all this while pray?
Where Is that is professed according to the Word? Mat. 7.21.

It Is not enough to say still, Lord, Lord,
The whole constitution must be renewed,
Flesh to be mortified, sin to be subdued, Romans 12.2.

Must be a change, self must be denied, Col. 3.5, 6.

Yea and the world also to be crucified. Luke 9.23.

Consider, Reader, this is no small matter, Gal. 6.14.

With an Opinion let us not our selves flatter:
Gospel Religion is no idle speculation,
Not only bare Profession in our station,
Only a form of godliness in our generation; Tit. 1.16.

We must live according in conversation:
The life of Religion lies in faith's fruit, Phil. 1.27.

In holy obedience to God, without dispute
Inward and outward man, it is only this,
For pure godliness is still God's likeness;
There cannot be a greater derogation Tit. 2.13, 14.

Unto God and the Gospel in our station,
Than to live a carnal life in conversation;
Only in words profess God, it is very plain,
Yet not live according, I say it again,
Is taking God's holy Name in vain. 2 Cor. 5.17.

The Christian is a new creature I still cry,
As we name Christ, let us depart iniquity:
Let Us practice holiness, as on the means intendant, 2 Timothy 2.19.

It Is easy to say I am so, an Independent,
If not loves fruit, what is the end on it?
It Is living the Gospel in our conversation,
Intiles to glory; it is not safe in our station
To lay the stress of eternal salvation
On the being of any Opinion; Mat. 18.3.
it is renovation
Must pass on thy soul in thy generation; John 2.3.

Without this, never will enjoy glorification:
Say some, Object.
this is a hard saying, who can
Then be saved? Sol.
what is impossible with man,
Is possible with God; Mat. 19.25, 26.
be humble, and pray
To God for his Spirit, this is love's way;
The Spirit's love can convince thy need Dan. 9.21, 22.

Of Christ, John 16.8.
pray the Spirit will love breed;
When the enemy shall come on like a flood,
The Spirit's love can stand for thy good; Isa. 59.19.

The Spirit alone can open blind eyes,
The Spirit's work to turn from the ways Acts 26.18.

Of sin unto God, 1 These. 5 19.
the Spirit does love raise.
To conclude this head, consider and look,
Reader, and practice what is written in this book,
Hate sin, practice holiness, without delays,
Then shall live for ever to thy Redeemer's praise. 2 Timothy 2.7.

Sect. 12.
ONE word more, Prove. 4.13. and 10.17.
so hasten to an end,
To spur in loves way, I hope don't offend
You that profess love, love without delay,
Don't you comply with the world pray, Joh. 6.66, 67.

Lest with grief cause Christ to say,
As to his Disciples, Will ye also go away?
Part with Christ here, Jer. 13.17.
truth I will tell,
Thou shall part from Christ into Hell;
Take heed of Apostasy, consider what is said well,
To apostate from Gospel Religion, how prone
Unto Superstition and Idolatry every one; Exodus 32 4, 8.

The Children of Israel, Aaron in their behalf,
In Moses absence, presently made a Molten Calf;
The Galatians, Gal. 1.6.
they errors so much loved,
That from Gospel Worship were soon removed:
Satan sows this wicked seed, Mat. 13.25, 39.
it is his feat,
So most of the world Satan does cheat
Of their salvation, as my Lines impart,
Keeps possession of every unbelieving heart. Luke 11.21.

There Is an evil heart of unbelief in the best,
But in the wicked it does reign and rest; Heb. 3.12.

They are inclined unto Idolatry so odd,
So they depart from the Living God;
How often does the Apostle the people call Jam. 4.4.

Adulterers and Adulteresses? they did fall,
As now, from Gospel Worship, to worship Baal.
Most men had rather be by reflection,
Of that Religion is uppermost, for protection, Acts 19.24.

In the world to be advanced, are so depraved
By sin, than be of that Religion craved,
Which would lead them as to be saved:
They for this world are so at strife, Mat. 22.5.

Prefer present vanities before eternal life.
Take heed of backsliding and Apostasy,
Dread how with the world you comply;
It Is very dreadful in Hell for ever to lie: Gal. 1.8, 9.

Stand up against superstitious Idolatries bold,
Let them be cursed that against Scriptures hold:
Let your zeal be kindled evermore Rev. 17.4.

Against every Bracelet of the Scarlet Whore.
If any man draw back from, in his station,
Gospel Worship, or from Gospel-conversation; Heb. 10.38.

Christ says, read that Scripture at leisure,
My soul in him shall have no pleasure:
Woe to him that Christ is not his Advocate,
Keep to Gospel Worship, mind your eternal state; Phil. 3.2.

Take heed of deceitful workers, I still cry,
Dread of dissembling, and hypocrisy;
Thy spiritual state try by a spiritual eye,
God knows thy heart's intention, Psalm. 44.21.
he will spy
What end thou had in love, if God cry
An Hypocrite, only a Professor, woe to eternity; Jer. 17.10.

Dread of an Hypocrite, thy self fear, Job 8.13.

Lest said before Angels, an Hypocrite is here;
Mind Hypocrites portion, they must dwell, Mat. 24.51.

Where s weeping and gnashing of teeth in Hell:
Fear, Satan has baits for all qualities,
Not only with flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but principalities
Thou must fight with, to obtain love's way,
Satan is cunning Fisher, waits for prey, 1 Timothy 3.7.

Will ensnare thee, if out of love's way:
Satan turns himself an Angel of Light,
Makes his baits to sin pleasant in sight, 2 Cor. 11.14.

Take heed of's deceits and wicked infusion,
Is still a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
a spirit of delusion;
This you may see in this Book complete,
If with an eye of love you retreat;
If morally righteous, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.
let not this cheat
Thy soul, because not a sinner so great
As some others, but, who has thy heart?
God or the world most? fear this will part
God and thy soul, if mind earthly things
More than God, Phil. 3.19.
everlasting death brings;
With the heart are said to forsake God,
Not with our feet, Psalm. 10.3, 4.
when affections so odd
Are set on vanity in the Land of Nod:
This is forsaking the Creator, Col. 3.2, 5.
and herein
Be estranged from God in heart, no greater sin;
Don't think, Prove. 20.9. and 30.12.
because no drunkard, swearer, or any
Notorious sin in life appears, art free,
This conceit been the ruin of many,
If rested in, Luke 18.11.
will also of me and thee.
To conclude, I Will sum up all so short I can,
Leave consideration of all to any honest man;
Prevalency, predominancy of sin in heart,
Will cause God and Soul at last to part; Mark 8.34.

We must deny our selves, life, and all
That Is near and dear, Luke 9.23.
if Christ for it call.
Here Is the parting point, take heed and see
Nothing stand between Christ and thee; Mat. 19.22.

Be not overcome of evil, though withstood,
But overcome evil by Faith in Christ's blood. Romans 12.21.

Thus friends, my Lines have so far extended
In love, 1 Timothy 4.15. and 2.13, 11.
much more than what I intended;
If any on what I have done is offended,
Cast it from him, the matter is ended.
To conclude, with love's peace I wish all well,
Live in love, Gal. 6.16.
grace be to all God's Israel.
Sect. 13.
NOw Readers, Prove. 4.13.
you see my Book's concluded,
To sum up all what in it is included,
Very briefly, and plainly, without delay
At the last there will come a terrible day, Acts 17.31.

When all Mankind shall be summoned away.
Rich and Poor, without difference of degrees,
Before Christ, to receive their Eternal Fees.
When Crowns of Kings, now so highly deemed, Acts 10.34, 35.

And Rags of Beggars, all one then esteemed
The Peasants Russet, and the Gallants bravery,
The Courtiers Luxury, and Politicians knavery,
The Scholars curiosity, and all men's pride,
And all vain fancy shall be laid aside, Rev. 20.13.

And without respect of Persons, will be tried
According to their works, Christ sentence divide, Romans 2.16.

Then Mass, Superstition, and all Formalities
Used in Episcopacy, and also Poperies Fopperies
In worship; Complements, which men Idolize,
Which are now the darling sins of our days. Romans 10.3.

The self-justiciary in way of legality,
And also them of an Antinomian quality, Tit. 1.16.

Will then prove but sinful acted vanities, 2 These. 2.11, 12.

From a delusion of the Father of Lies.
The luxurious Riot, and swaggerings of Pride,
The nice, and quaint lasciviousness descried, Isa. 28.1, 3.

Interlar'd, and complemental Oaths beside,
New invented Courtings, and Beauties Adoration,
Out of Gods mouth, have pronunciation
To be but a mere glittering abomination, 2 These. 2.12.

Then the adulterating, of Wars in the Nation,
Counterfeiting of lights, Mic. 6.10.
in their station
Double Weights, false Measures, in men's Generation,
The courteousness of men's equivocation, Prove. 26.25.

Greedy of gain, which is, of men retrograde
From godliness, acted in almost every Trade Mat. 7.23.

Will then be found but actions of iniquity,
And Soul-deceiving into Eternal misery. Col. 2.8.

The curious subtilties of wit so choice,
The knotty questions, and vain strife of voice, 2 Timothy 2.23.

Variety of reading, and disputes of reason,
Of general and secular Learning in this Season
Pursued, with so much eagerness in the Nation,
By the more ingenious Spirits, in their Station
Will be found but Cobwebs of falsification, Jer. 9.14.

And vanishing delicacies of profanation,
Whose end and reward is Eternal damnation. Mat. 23.33.

Then the poor, despised Profession understand
Of the power of godliness, on the other hand,
A trembling at the Word of Gods command. Isa. 66.2.

A scrupulous and conscious forbearation,
Not only of Oaths, Mat. 12.36.
but Idle words in Station.
A tenderness and aptness in our Generation
To bleed at any sin, in our Conversation;
A boldness against Idolatry now in England, 1 Cor. 10.14.

And all corruptions, now to withstand
A Conscience, 1 These. 5.22.
but of the appearance of evil;
This inrageth wicked men, and the Devil,
To walk humbly before God till dissolution;
To be strict and circumspect in resolution;
Walk in an exact Geometrical Station
Of holiness, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
in our Conversation,
In the midst of a crooked perverse Generation. Phil. 2.15.

This the World disesteems and scorns then,
As peevishness of few silly unpolitick Men, Joh. 7 48, 49.

Shall then from God himself in that day,
Be declared to be the true narrow way Mat. 7 14.

Which only leads unto Salvation,
The Enemies thereof must to desolation
And cry, Acts 26.24.
We counted their Life madness,
And their end to be only mere sadness;
We never thought of Soul-spiritual gladness:
But now they enjoy glory so weighty, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Have their portion with the Almighty,
Then remember, now, Oh remember truth,
Thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.

While the evil days come not nigh.
Remember death will not pass you by;
There Is no pleasure in sin when come to dye: Romans 6.21.

Yet rejoice, O young man, in thy youth,
Is but an Ironical expression of the truth;
Let thy heart cheer thee, in sin take part;
Walk in the ways of thy own heart,
And in the sight of thy own Eye, Eccles. 11.9.

But to tell truth, it is but plain mockery;
Then know, though holiness be thy grudgment, 2 Cor. 5.10.

For all these things, must come to Judgment.
Oh think then what it is will thee stand
In stead, when judged by the Almighty's hand!
When Death and Judgment come on rise
Don't after vanity so much be at strife, Joh. 6.27.

But labor for that indures to Eternal Life.
Lay up treasures in Heaven, Scriptures unfold, Luke 12.33.

Get our selves Bags which wax not old.
Oh don't be presumptuous in sin still bold.
What will Learning or all Riches, man has, Prove. 11.4.

Profit in the great day of Gods wrath?
Oh cast off sin, and walk holiness path! 1 Timothy 6.17.

Oh would men consider their latter end:
For that is well ends well, says a Friend. Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Laugh he that laughs at last, behold
The end of the upright, Scriptures unfold,
However, ill soever, though troubles increase
In the world, the end of such is peace; Psalm. 37.37.

But as for sinners, who still grow worst, Isa. 65.20.

Though live an hundred years, yet dye accursed.
Though have past man's day of approbation,
Yet in that day meet with Gods reprobation. Psalm. 73.7.

Though have more than their hearts desire;
Eyes stand out with fatness, they aspire
In voluptuousness in their Generation; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

Yet, without in Christ, must to damnation.
Oh cast off sin, now in Conversation; Ephesians. 5.5.

Labor by Faith in Christ for renovation.
Oh how much better! as the Scriptures tell,
To be a Lazarus here, and hereafter dwell
With Lazarus, than to be, mind it well, Luke 16, 20, 22, 24.

A Dives here, and to be with Dives in Hell.
Oh then labor to be righteous, I still cry!
Whether rich or poor, as my lines imply;
For when death comes to close thy Eye, Number. 23.10.

Thou will wish the righteous death to dye,
Then live the life of the right'ous say I,
Live to Christ by faith, Psalm. 37.34.
don't false hope pretend,
Admire free grace in sparing you, life amend,
Consider what is said, I wish as a friend,
Bring forth fruit, unto holiness attend,
Eternal life and glory shall be your end; Romans 2.7.

To do duty do not delay, but rest on none
For salvation, but on Jesus Christ alone.
Reader, consider in Love what my Lines tell,
Practice holiness, Ephesians. 3.17.
by faith let Christ dwell
In you, 2 Cor. 13.11.
on Christ depend, so farewell.
Sect. 14.
THE result of all, Mat. 24.13.
what I have craved
Be holy, on Christ depend, shall be saved;
Lord write those things by grace in my heart,
And thy Spirit's operation, whiles I impart
Truth to others, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27.
let me not be cast away,
But Lord guide me by thy Spirit I pray;
Give grace whiles in the world Husnance, Isal. 143.10.

That thy creature thy glory may advance:
I have cast thy seed at thy command,
It Is thou Lord makes me to understand Luke 5.5.

Those things, Psalm. 94.10.
take thine own into thy hand,
Make it an instrument of much good, and
Lord follow it with thy blessing in England;
Thou can make weak ones instrumental 1 Cor. 1.27.

Of bringing many unto life eternal;
Let thy Spirit work by his motions free
Internally on the external means in degree: 2 Cor. 3.6.

Lord make it effectual, let this Book free
Many from Satan's bondage, so live to thee;
Take all the glory, Acts 26.18.
it is thine in every degree;
Let all the glory of my glory still be
To give all glory, Romans 11.36.
and my self to thee;
Oh! thou who art my souls rich store,
Let me fall down, humbly thee implore
For free grace in Christ revealed to me,
As I have received, 1 Cor. 4.7.
let the glory return to thee;
Oh my Lord! divorce my self from me,
Then single I will single worship thee; Gal. 2.20.

One wish more for better two than one,
And it is not good for man to be alone; Eccles. 4.10.

That I may to thee double honor give,
Let thine in me, me in thy Spirit live: 2 Timothy 1.14.

Thy Spirit can direct, he is still the same,
Therefore all glory unto thy glorious Name. Deuteronomy. 28.58.

The Epistle to the Reader, in it good news
To Elected sinners, whether Gentiles or Jews.
Concerning Free grace, a few lines more,
Which should have been in page 167 before.

SAnctification is wrought in us, it is plain, 1 Pet. 1.2.

By the Spirit, Election is of the same Chain;
For all whom God did purpose, still
According to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.

To elect unto life and eternal salvation,
Them God foreknew in's eternal dispensation,
Them only God calls by Justification,
And in them works effectual sanctification: Romans 8.29, 30.

The decree of Election is the foundation
Of happiness, effected by the operation
Of the Spirit, in working our renovation;
Having this seal, holiness the cause this, 2 Timothy 2.19.

The Lord knows who are really his;
Whom he foreknew, he did predestinate,
Chose them freely, I would debate,
As a Potter out of diverse lumps of Clay
Chooses some, and others casts away;
He makes some unto honor, by name, Romans 9.21.

And accordingly works their frame;
So God works freely in all his Elect, Isa. 26.12.

Some God makes choice of, others reject; Ephesians. 1.11.

So declares the riches of his glory,
In making some few meet for his auditory;
Freely qualifies them for Heaven's place,
Preparing them all by sanctification's Race, 2 These. 2.13.

Imputing unto them in their generation
Christ's righteousness, who is our salvation;
So righteous before God, being sanctified,
And cleans'd by Christ's blood, 1 John 1.7.
by faith applied,
Which righteousness or holiness so done,
In us, is purchased by Christ the Son,
As in the fullness of time did run:
God sent forth his Son, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6.
made of a woman,
To redeem us, not by free will, of no man,
Christ became obedient to death, freely runs,
That we might receive Adoption of Sons
By Christ's resurrection, 1 Pet. 1.3.
and ascension,
All this is free grace, in my apprehension,
Because Sanctification, Ephesians. 4.7, 8.
and Justification,
Are cleared to us, Romans 8.11.
by the Spirits operation
The effect, of which is a holy Conversation.
See, Romans 8.15.
for this in Scripture, the rather,
The Spirit of adoption, will cry, Abba Father,
In all the elect, in their Conversation,
And are called, 1 Pet. 2.8, 9.
holy, a chosen generation,
Which does imply, electing, grace still,
And not, in the power of man's free will,
The manifestation, Psalm. 27.17.
of free electation,
And Justification, of elect, in their generation,
The time of effecting, their sanctification
Is not revealed unto them, in their Station,
At any certain time, Mat. 25.13.
of age or day,
Some are called, the Scriptures say,
At the third hour, without delay,
Some called, And 20.3, 5, 6.
the sixth hour, come away,
Some others, at the eleventh hour,
Admire free grace, God is God of power,
Gives some a strong, Romans 4.20. and 14.1.
some a weak faith,
Some, that fear the Lord, Scripture says,
But walk in darkness, see little light
Are under, many doubts, and fears, in sight,
As to assurance, Isa. 50.10.
are in a darkness night;
Yet trust in God, he can clear, your way,
Depend on him, let God be your Stay,
Pray to God, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.
on the means, be attendant,
As a poor creature, on God dependant
For his holy Spirits, operating free grace
To make clear, thy election, in your race,
Whether belong, Gal. 6.4.
to Gods chosen number
When most are left in sin, to slumber,
Admire Gods free grace, I say still,
To come to God is not of man's free will, Joh. 6.44.

Which may see, if read more clear,
By what follows, by Scripture, appear,
Read distinctly, whether age or youth,
Be sure you apply rightly the truth, 2 Timothy 2.7.

You will see, free grace advanced still,
And not the arrogance, of man's free will,
Consider well, what my lines express,
I aim at matter, I am no Poet, I confess,
Look you more at meat, than the dress, 1 Cor. 10.15.

And God, with his free grace, you bless:
To conclude my epistle, I wish all well,
Grace be to you, and to all Gods Israel, Gal. 6.16.

To God my prayer, for you shall advance,
Whiles I am your friend, Stephen Husnance. 2 Timothy 4.22.

A word or two, concerning Gods free grace, 2 Timothy 2.7.

And man's free will, in its natural race.

Obj. SAy some before you pass on your way,
Distinguish, free grace, and free will we pray,
Concerning both let us hear what you say,
According to Scripture the truth display --
Sol. To answer, your desire, I will in love apply
My self, consider it as you pass by, 1 Cor. 10.15.

Then know free grace I will still advance,
Whiles I am in the World Husnance,
Free will I cannot advance at no hand,
It Is of grace, any is saved, as I understand, Ephesians. 2.8.

We like a company of Malefactors cast, Genesis 2.17. and 3.17.

By sin, by Gods law sentence on us past,
The sin of those Malefactors brought death
On all by law, yet whiles they had breath,
The King freely one of those would save,
The rest must dye, the King ones life gave,
Was guilty as the rest, the King not bound
To save him, 'twas free mercy he found;
It Is so with us, Tit. 2.14.
we by sin God's favor lost,
Justice for Execution cried, to appease it cost
Christ's blood, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6.
out of free love, not bound
To save any, 'twas mercy lost man found,
God manifests more grace in saving any, Romans 11.22.

Than severity of Justice in destroying many;
Man wilfully sinned against God, 'twas love
In God to pity man, Joh. 3.16.
free grace did move,
Not man's free will, to come to God, for he
Did run from God behind the Tree; Genesis 3.8.

God called to Adam, in the Scripture see,
Not he to God, his will, no such degree,
Had not free grace pitied him, yea did run
To Adam, or else had been for ever undone:
God commanded Adam, don't sin, that is evil,
Yet Adam's will led him to please the Devil.
If Adam's free will in Innocence did lean
To sin, Prove. 20.9.
who of us can say, My heart's clean?
Man's will not only blemished with indisposition, Jer. 44.16.

But also biased to God's with opposition;
Man's will not subject to the will of God, Mat. 23.37.

Nor can be subject, by nature so odd,
And averse, Romans 8.7.
natural men don't understand,
Nor love the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
till God's hand
Makes a willing people, by's power in's day,
By's Spirit regulates our wills in his way. Psalm. 110.3.

Men naturally are dead spiritually, no love
To spiritual things, till free grace us move;
Man's will not only impotent, but obstinate,
Resists the Spirit's motions whiles unregenerate. Acts 7.51.

Man by nature so far from doing a good act,
He cannot so much as a good thought effect;
Papists say, man has some seed of good,
But Scriptures don't, that I ever understood,
Whiles in a natural state, in Scripture find,
An enemy against God is a carnal mind; Romans 8.7.

Though many have had very great dispute
Concerning free will, yet we see sad fruit;
Hot disputes about free will are banding,
Yet man's like the Beast, without understanding, Psalm. 49.20.

Will, a self-determining faculty yet withstood, Jer. 44.26.

By its corruptions not inclinable to good, Joh. 8.44.

But to evil, by sad experience, and herein
Abhor thy self, God's not the Author of sin; Job 42.6.

Be humble for corrupted nature, take heed Jam. 1.13, 14

What thoughts of free will thou breed;
Don't plead sin's excuse, 1 John 3.8.
God will confute
Thy plea, without the wedding garment mute; Mat. 22.12.

Make use of reason, understanding assent,
Will regulate and draw your consent, 1 Cor. 14.20.

Understanding, affection, conscience at least
Are principal in man, will is in beast.
Now, Reader, you may plainly see still
Free grace only leads to God, not free will,
Man's will being corrupted and depraved, Ephesians. 2.8.

It must be by free grace we are saved: Object.

If this be truth, then a question craved, Jer. 10.23.

Whence is it man's will should exalted be
To come to God? can he attain this degree?
Some are free to give man this liberty: Sol.

No, Christ is the way, I must tell thee, Joh. 14.6.

There Is no other name or way, and herein
It Is the blood of Christ only cleanses sin; 1 John 1.7.

Though many in conceit of their free will run,
None comes to God but by the Son; Acts 4.12.

To attribute that to man's will, I Will impart,
Which is from grace, is from a proud heart; 2 Cor. 3.5.

Proud man would be something, that he
Might glory, not all to Christ beholden be; Gal. 5.26.

Thus lies fallen forlorn man, and degenerate, Romans 1.21, 22.

Locked up in obstinacy, darkness, Micah 3.2.
does hate
God and godliness, living in unbelief still,
Minding his own things, doing his own will; 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

So by sin man works his own damnation,
Unless God's Spirit works his regeneration;
The Spirit alone can open blind eyes,
The Spirit's work's to turn from the ways Acts 26.18.

Of sin and Satan unto God, by his displaies.
Don't stifle the Spirit's motions when alive, 1 These. 5.19.

The Spirit with thee may not always strive, Genesis 6.3.

Thy sin may hinder the Spirit, herein
The Spirit works so far, no excuse for sin; Romans 1.20.

Grieve not the Spirit, for without exemption
The Spirit seals the day of Redemption; Ephesians. 4.30.

So if thou perish, Hos. 13.9.
it is of thy self, and
It Is of grace any is said understand;
Though the Spirit do work in the intellectual,
Yet God not bound to make it effectual;
Be humble, Luke 9.23.
man, lie low, deny thy own will,
If do expect to come to salvation's Hill,
Abhor thy self, Romans 9.16.
free grace and love adore,
By Christ alone have God's favor any more,
To exalt man's free will does God's free grace, Col. 3.11.

Christ love, and righteousness much deface,
And does slight also the Spirit of grace; John 8.36.

Therefore, Romans 11.33, 36.
far be it from me, I Will pray still,
And depend on Christ, Mat. 17.5.
it is the Father's will,
To him be glory, Psalm. 115.1.
and to his glorious Name,
But to us belongs confusion and shame. Dan. 9.8.

Sect. 2.
SOme say, Object.
it seems, free will by reflect,
And general Redemption you reject;
Yea, Sol.
which I shall make more clear
By what follows, Heb. 12.28.
if read with holy fear,
And first in my way falls by reflection
This great point, and many Objection
In answering, I hope your desire to fulfill,
Then proceed more distinctly against free will.
The Objection.
That God has received a Ransom for all, Object.

And if all be not designed, but fall
Short of glory's way in their station, 1 Timothy 2.6.

God is unjust to take for their salvation
A Ransom, to free them from desolation,
And yet appoint them unto damnation.
I answer, Sol.
God has received a price indeed
Of worth, enough for all, but oh take heed,
It was not intended for all, nor for all paid,
By God the Donor, nor, observe what is said, John 17.24.

By Christ the sufferer, so that in property
Of speech Christ did not for all men die;
Nor God has not, I also do debate, Psalm. 50.16.

Received a Ransom for any Reprobate;
Take heed then, at free grace don't grutch,
For Christ paid not a Ransom for any such; John 17.9.

Christ does not for the world pray, Romans 8.33.

Much less does Christ for the world pay;
God received no Ransom by reflect, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6.

For any such, but for his own Elect.
Christ redeemeth men of all Nations, Rev. 5.9.

And of all conditions in their generations,
But not all particular persons in their stations. John 17.19, 20. and 2, 4.

For God the Father did not choose all,
Neither did Christ die for great and small, and 15.15.

As to redeem all were of Adam's fall;
For the work of Christ in Redemption,
Does not exceed the work of God's intention; and 12.49, 50

Christ's work in Redemption by Reflection,
Does not exceed God's work in Election,
See in Scripture, I speak this the rather,
Because Christ works from the Father; 1 Pet. 1.2.

Also the Spirit does not work Sanctification
In all, Tit. 2.14.
therefore Christ in way of salvation
Did not redeem all in their generation;
For the work of the Spirit in Renovation,
Is not short of God's work in Electation, John 14, 26. and 15.16.

Nor of Christ's in Redemption, so done,
Because works from the Father and Son,
Taking possession of those God did Elect,
And Christ purchase also with respect,
To those only whom redeemed by reflect, Joh. 16.7, 13, 14, 15.

Their sanctification the Spirit does effect.
The cause of man's Redemption was love John 3.16.

In God and Christ, Romans 9.13.
only mercy did move
Christ to die, which does not extend to all, John 13.1.

Neither intended for great and small
Of the world, Christ did not rise again
For all, neither die for all, it is plain
In Scripture, and 17.9.
Christ does not for all pray,
Neither did Christ die for all, Scriptures say,
Nor redeem all from sin and Satan's way, Acts 26.18.

It Is a plain truth in the world to this day,
The Death, 1 Timothy 2.5.
Resurrection, and Mediation
Of Christ are inseparable in their station,
His Sufferings and Offices are one complete
In Christ, as Redeemer, I would repeat
His Intercession, Heb. 7.25.
only for his, a mercy great,
Then this general Redemption does cheat
Most of the world, in false hopes Satan's feat
For Christ does not inwardly all instruct
As a Prophet, Mat. 13.13.
nor rule by a spiritual product
In all hearts as a King, which does imply,
For all as a Priest Christ did not die; Rev. 15.3.

The Offices of Christ are of equal extent,
To this the Scriptures do full consent, Romans 8.31, 32.

They for whom Christ died, Gal. 5.22.
Scripture says,
To them is given the Spirit and Faith, 2 These. 3.2, 3.

Love, Hope, with every spiritual saving grace,
But this all men have not in their Race,
Which is evident in most men's lives, 1 John 5.19.
base
In conversation, the Gospel they disgrace;
Christ died to destroy works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.

And to redeem his from sin and evil; Tit. 2.14.

Had Christ laid down for all his life
A Ransom, Isa. 45.21.
then God's Justice would not strife
For further satisfaction, if once complete
Satisfied, a second punishment so great,
Could not without injustice be inflicted, Rev. 15.3.

This in the Scripture is clear predicted.
Sect. 3.
THat the freedom all have by Redemption Heb. 9.12.

From temporal and eternal, without exemption,
Punishments at present and to come, I dilate
All the good to heart, soul body, or state
That any enjoy, is by Redemption clear
Of Christ, Psalm. 36.6.
who saves all, as does appear
In Scripture, both men and beasts, and
Especially them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10.
understand.
Here Is God's general presence with all, seeing.
From God all live, move, have their being,
Fills Heaven and Earth, as God omnipresent,
As the Infinite God a Being has lent
To all creatures, as the works of his hands, Act 17.27, 28

Is with them that keep not his commands,
Nor live not in his fear in all Lands.
Christ in a general sense was the Lamb slain
Before the foundation of the world, Rev. 13 8.
maintain
The world in being, and all to this day,
Otherwise Justice would soon us slay;
Yea Adam had been destroyed for his sin
Immediately, had not Christ stood in
To appease God's Justice, which did cry,
Adam has sinned, he shall surely die: Genesis 2.17.

God's general grace upholds the whole Creation;
But it is special grace that leads to salvation, Joh. 20.28.

By a special and particular application,
My Lord and God of my salvation, Gal. 2.20.

Who loved me, and died for me;
Here lies man's happiness, you may see; Psalm. 144.15.

Cast off general Redemption as Extortion,
Happiness is in having God for my portion Lam. 3.24.

By faith in Christ, in a particular application,
Being freely given to Christ in our station
In Election, by the Father's free donation, John 17.9.

Which is effected in us by Sanctification
Of the Spirit, in working our Renovation, 1 Pet. 1.2.

Little of this work appears in conversation 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

In a general way in our English Nation, 1 These. 5.3.

But live in false hope, and presumptuous security
Content themselves, Christ did for sinners die;
What though there is a God, what is that to me,
If that from Sin and Satan I am not free?
If God is not my God, by faith applied,
What though Jesus Christ for sinners died?
What the better if by Christ I am denied? Mat. 7.23.

What comfort can be to us when tried,
To hear and talk how Christ has died,
If not according to Gospel faith applied?
What Is Redemption to any natural man
Till converted? Mat. 18.3.
no more than to an Indian;
Only in this, by Redemption have at least
Their lives and beings preserved, Psalm. 36.6.
so have beasts.
God makes his Rain on the Just to fall,
And Unjust, Mat. 5.45.
in an external way good to all;
As I said before, man may in his station
Enjoy all external things, yet not salvation;
It Is the Elect only that in salvation share, Romans 8.33.

Then of general Redemption take care;
Don't think Christ for all has died still, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.

And so may have salvation by free will;
Though many in general Redemption hurl,
Yet Christ prays not for the world;
And is it a likely thing Christ should die
For the world, John 17.9.
and in prayer pass them by?
Should Christ spend his blood to death,
For whom he will not spend his breath?
Will Christ such love the world afford,
For whom he will not give his Word?
Christ prays not for the world, Scriptures descry,
And would Christ then for the world die?
Consider what is said before, Jud. 4, 5.
as you pass by,
And according to Gospel faith it apply:
The Elect shall obtain a full Redemption
From Sin, and Hell, without exemption,
They, and only they, the cause this,
The Lord knows all who are his; 2 Timothy 2.19.

This the foundation that stands sure,
God will make his Elect in heart pure,
Will give grace to fit them for his glory,
By grace saves us, Ephesians. 2.8.
not like free will story,
By grace makes us run his Commands;
None shall pluck the Elect from his hands, John 10.29.

Once in Christ, on whom Believers depend,
Christ loves them still unto the end; and 13.1.

They are safe in Christ by Election,
And not like those men, who by reflection
Say, a man may be now a Child of God
In the morning, yet in his life so odd,
Before night may be by sin so evil,
That he may be a Child of the Devil.
Reader, consider, understand and see
What men make of God's Eternal Decree,
How erroneous men are, and refutable, Mal. 3.6.

In making the Eternal God mutable, Heb. 13.8.

Which does imply, and also give a lift
To man's free will, and not as Gods gift
To give grace and glory at his pleasure, Psa. 84.11.

But as man acts, at his will and leisure, Ephesians. 1.5.

Which is repugnant to Scripture clear,
Which by Grace I shall hereafter make appear.
To conclude this head, with errors to deface
God's general, and also his special grace, 2 Timothy 2.7.

Are not inconsistent in their proper place;
Yet it is special grace leads to eternal life,
Although some about it are still at strife,
How Pelagians, Arminians, do all fly
To this, the special grace of God deny, Romans 11.5, 7.

And that Christ did for all men die, 1 These. 5.9.

With equal extent, which Scriptures deny,
Which before is said, if rightly them apply, 2 Timothy 2.10.

Yet those men were of great parts, yet
Misled, their understandings wrong set,
Which I shall make more full appear, 1 Cor. 12.31.

As my Lines shall bring up the rear.
Sect. 4. Object.

SOme hold that God in's Eternal Decree,
Has not absolute appointed some to misery,
But that God electeth, with some frequent,
All, upon condition that they repent
And believe, which in effect implies still,
They may repent and believe if they will;
So consequently God rejects; in's station,
No man absolute from his salvation,
But that God suspendeth his determination,
Expecting man's repentance in his station. Sol.

I answer, according to Scripture demonstration, Prove. 16.4.

That there is a particular and special reprobation; Romans 9.22.

Therefore cannot be an universal electation, Jud. 4.

That you may not in your generation
Be misled, Romans 11.7.
or drawn in your station
To believe that God in's eternal dispensation
Has chosen all men unto salvation, Rev. 13.8.

On condition, leaving it wholly still
To themselves, to their own free will,
Either to ratify it, Jer. 10.23.
or infringe it, see
What men make of God's Eternal Decree; 2 Cor. 3.5.

If men believe not, then God's Decree's annoyed,
If persevere not, then Election is void,
Otherways, if men believe, and still pursue
Holiness to the end, then they affirm it true;
Election remains in full power and virtue,
That this Opinion may not take with you,
I Will say something against it, 1 Cor. 10.15.
I hope true:
Consider what I lay before you new,
And that you may understand by reflections,
I shall endeavor to answer some Objections,
In which I shall follow Scripture directions,
According to free grace unto me given, Gal. 1.11.

I will lay Truth plain, as my name's Stephen,
Good works not the cause of Electation, Tit. 3.5.

Though sin's the cause of reprobation;
Damnation is the fruit of sin's production,
But not why God ordains men to destruction; 2 Pet. 2.1, 3.

God in all his determinations is free, Mat. 11.26.

Neither Election nor Rejection in degree
Are of works, God's Decree, though by some torn,
Passes on Children are not yet born, Romans 9, 10.

Having done neither any evil, or good,
God is free in Election, or Rejection understood
Rightly, it is plain in Jacob and his Brother,
Choose the one, and did refuse the other;
Why God passes some men by preterition,
I cannot define the cause on no condition,
But only in God, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
of some to make choice,
And others to reject, must be free grace noise,
God has free mercy on whom he will,
And whom he pleases he hardens still, Romans 9.18.

As God has Elected some unto Salvation,
So God has appointed others to Damnation.
God all things for himself made has,
Yea, the wicked for the day of wrath; Prove. 16.4.

As God ordains vessels of mercy, it is no story,
So there are vessels of wrath by preparatory
To destruction, on which Justice has glory. Romans 9.22.

This is very clear in the Scripture stated, verse 13.

Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated:
What other reason for this can be
But his own pleasure, and Eternal decree? Mal. 1.3.

Gods absolute power over man is intended
Clear, and free grace to the Elect commended. Object.

But some may say unto me herein,
Don't you make God the Author of sin? Sol.

No, for reprobation goes before sinment, Jud. 4.

Not as a Cause, but as an Antecedent. 2 Pet. 2.8.

God by the decree of reprobation,
Don't infuse sin into man in's station, Ephesians. 2.5.

Nor compel man to do any sin or evil, Jam. 1.13, 14.

Sin is of's own concupiscence and the Devil;
Yet God does set sin's determination,
Not to confer on man a confirmation
In grace, to make man stand in's station, Deuteronomy. 29.4.

But permits man of his own accord
To commit sin, Psalm. 81.12.
as says the Word
In Scripture, it is very plainly so, Ephesians. 4.19.

Limits man how far in sin shall go: 2 Kin. 19.28.

Reprobation being an act of Gods power,
Has no other cause but God to this hour; Romans 9.21.

But sin's the meritorious cause of damnation, Hos. 13.9.

As Justice executed in man's condemnation.
Man is not condemned, understand herein,
Because man cannot choose but sin; Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.

In regard of Gods decree of reprobation, Jer. 9.14.

But sins in regard of's own inclination;
Though unregenerate men do nothing see,
But what God has appointed in's decree, Acts 4.27, 28.

Yet understand man sins, because still
Does all in obedience to his own will; Mat. 23.37, 38.

And not in obedience to Gods command,
Whom God has not ordained, understand
To save, 1 Pet. 2.8.
they from sin never depart,
But follow the imagination of their own Heart
Till the measure of their sin is full, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Mat. 23.32, 33.

Then Justice on them all gives a pull.
Sect. 5.
Some may bring forth this production
Hard, Object.
God should ordain men to destruction.
Shall not the great Creator be free. Sol.

To dispose his Creatures according to's decrees. Mat. 20.15, 16.

Shall not the Sovereign of the world alone,
According to his pleasure dispose of his own?
If man have any thing of's own in Season,
To dispose it at pleasure is but reason.
Has not the Potter power over his Clay? Romans 9.21.

Shall not the great God have his way,
Who made both the Potter and the Clay.
Say some God will have all to be saved, Object.

Therefore Electeth all, 1 Timothy 2.4.
though with sin depraved.
God will have all to be saved, Sol.
the intent
God wills, and commands men to repent,
And believe the Gospel, so may be saved;
Man is to do his duty as is craved:
God will have all men saved, Romans 10.12.
good news
To Elected sinners, whether Gentiles or Jews,
Yet we see grace in: Life most refuse.
If God would have all men to be saved,
All sorts, all Nations, is the question craved.
How is it they are not saved, that still
They live in sin, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
and their Lust fulfill?
Yet who can, Romans 9.19.
or has refisted his will?
God would, and yet not saved by reflect,
Implies in Gods will or power, is a defect:
If men had power according to their will,
None in the world but would it fulfill;
To affirm God wills all men's Salvation, Mat. 22.14.

Without exception in their Generation;
And the reason is always implied still,
Why God does not save them, or fulfill
The work of grace, is obstinacy of man's will
By which they reject the work of grace, Psalm. 50.21.

So hinder God, or his work deface; 1 Cor. 10.22.

This is to make God for man too weak,
Which is Blasphemy for any to speak. Object.

Say some again in their Generation,
If God Elect not all men to Salvation, Ephesians. 3.3.

He Is partial, since all were in sins station,
Alike in their natural State or Creation. Sol.

This is not matter of debt, in this case,
Or matter of Justice, but matter of grace. 2 Timothy 1.9.

Suppose God choose a few, must he fall
To be bound to save, or choose all? Romans 3.24.

Though God do freely choose, and save many, John 3.16.

Yet not bound to choose, or save any.
If a King, as before, of Malefactors save one
Of many, must he therefore, hereupon
Save all, no, no reason it should be done. Object.

But if God a few only choose and cherish,
And leave the greatest number to perish
In Hell, for Eternal flames to be fuel; 1 John 5.19.

If God be not partial, yet seems cruel. Sol.

I answer Gods bounds of mercy are spacious; Ephesians. 2.4.

God is infinite, and unutterably gracious.
To choose any man or woman, and herein
Observe, out of the corrupted Mass of sin. Ezekiel. 16.6.

When polluted in our Blood, God should say
Live, and from the world, come away,
And leave the rest in their sin to stay;
In that forlorn undone condition, by sin
Man brought himself, in this cause, herein
God no way bound, as before you see,
To redeem any man, or any one to free:
So then this conclusion I draw must,
God is righteous, not cruel he is, but just. Isa. 45.20, 21,

Justice does but condemn in its station,
As man is in sin so passes condemnation: Rev. 15.3.

God is gracious that any enjoy Salvation,
And but righteous, if all in their Generation
Had been appointed unto utter desolation.
There Is cause in man, Romans 3.23.
Justice should pass ye,
But there is no cause at all of mercy.
When God rejects men, his determination
Is to condemn them for sin to desolation;
But when God Electeth any in their station,
He determines not to bring to Salvation;
For their obedience in their Generation, Tit. 3.5.

But for his free, Ephesians. 1.4.
eternal dispensation;
There Is somewhat moves God to damnation, Isa. 48.9, 11.

But nothing without God moves to Salvation.
If any be appointed unto consolation,
If all be not appointed unto damnation;
Gods mercy upon his Justice has the hand, Romans 3.23.

For all have transgressed Gods command, Ephesians. 2.5.

It Is by free grace any is saved, understand.
Sect. 6.
This universal and conditional Election,
Does in some respect set man by reflection
Above God, and overthrows Gods end
And aim, Romans 9.23.
in all is counsel, and decrees intend
The glory of's free grace in his dispensation.
This God designed when Elected any to Salvation.
This is plain in the holy Gospel story,
To make known the riches of's own glory,
On those whom God prepares for his auditory
By free grace, Gol. 1.12.
makes meet for Heavens glory.
How shall God attain this in's dispensation?
Not by choosing all men unto Salvation,
If they will themselves in their Generation.
How is the glory of his free grace magnified,
If sufficient power in the Creature did reside,
If grace to one more than to another be denied,
If God does alike for all by free will implied;
Electeth all alike, to glory and salvation;
If God prepares Heaven no more by implication, Mat. 25.34.

For one man than another in his station,
Does not the Spirit work our renovation.
The will of God, John 14.2.
by this opinion you see
Is ordered and disposed by man's will free.
God Electeth all on condition in their station,
But Gods final and absolute determination
Is suspended, by man's will in operation,
As if man could of himself attain salvation.
Man at liberty to make it good at leisure,
Or to make it void at his pleasure;
If he will be saved, he may in's Generation,
If not, then man must have damnation. Acts 13.48.

If God have ordained him unto salvation,
All is as men act in their station;
What is this, but to make God by reflect,
An underling unto man in some respect?
For to make the will of God, I say still,
Subservient unto that of man's will,
Which is a most blasphemous derogation
To God, for by this opinion, by reflection,
God does not do so much, in Election, Isa. 43.13.

And glory, as man does, in his Station, Phil. 2.13.

God chooses man, on condition to Salvation,
If he do thus and thus in his generation,
As if heaven depended on his Conversation,
But man strikes the stroke, here still,
Makes salvation sure, by his own will,
So that man elects, himself, in's generation,
Much more than God does for salvation,
Consider, my Friends, this point, observe, see, Ephesians. 1.11.

What greater derogation to God can be,
Than is given to man's will in such a degree,
Christ said to his disciples, in Scripture see, John 15.16.

You have not chosen me, but I you free;
Not they Christ by their deserts I say still,
Nor by the good use of their free will,
If all chosen be, on condition to salvation,
If they will accept it in their Generation,
Or act for it, which does imply still, Romans 11.7.

That they may have it if they will:
Damned Reprobates in Hell by this leaven,
Have as much reason as a Saint in Heaven,
To be thankful unto God, he may say,
But not I am sure in a Scripture way;
God did as much for me, a foolish Elf
As him, Gal. 2.16.
but did not so much for my self.
Consider on the other side, mind it well,
May not a Saint in Heaven say and tell,
God has done so much for those in Hell,
As ever he has done for me by reflection,
For they and I had all one Election;
Yea, God assisted them as much as me,
Which implies there is nothing in Gods decree, Ephesians. 2.9, 10.

For he is to all alike, which implies still,
They have not used their own free will,
As well as I have done, it is so craved,
The only cause are damned, and I saved;
Therefore I will thank my own free will
And not God, Isa. 65.5.
at least I have implied still
No greater cause to thank God than
Those in Hell, of all the damned men,
If any difference be, between them and me,
It Is not God made it, 1 Cor. 4.7.
nor yet his decree,
But my self, see how free will does strike;
For God did for them and me alike;
Though they not saved with me, the reason
Did not for our selves a like in season; Romans 11.6.

Therefore, they are all, every way I cry,
As much obliged to thank God as I.
Consider this Reader, and understand, see
Here Is free will, Psalm. 115.1.
exalted in a high degree;
But from such a conceit Lord, Dan. 9.8, 9.
deliver me,
And let me admire thy gracious love still free.
Sect. 7.
If any man be saved by free will story, Romans 8.29, 30.

He may thank himself, in's self glory,
And not in God, how do men deface
Gods glory, or the glory of's free grace;
By exalting man's corrupted will so base,
God has predestined us in our race Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

By Christ, to the praise of his free grace;
How so? not by man's own inclination still,
But according to the pleasure of God's will,
To show God works freely in our salvation,
Without any impulsion, or any provocation, Ezekiel. 16.6.

From External causes in his dispensation,
In saving us freely in his salvation;
We must be saved according to God's will
And pleasure, not according to our own, still
God must have the first and great stroke 1 Cor. 10.22.

In this mercy, let us not the Lord provoke,
Or despise the riches of his free grace still,
By advancing corrupted man's free will; 2 These. 1.10.

Let us all rather God's free grace admire,
Not free will in us, or any natral desire;
Why God has chosen me, and neglecting
Others, oh! this should be heart-affecting,
That God should take me into his Decree, Luke 1.6.

Whence is it? what did God see in me
More than in others whom God passes by? Psalm. 8.4.

Why God did choose me, is free grace, I cry,
What Is man that God should mindful be
Of such a brute? a beast by nature is he:
Admire the goodness of the Lord of Lords,
That such free grace unto man affords,
Man that is corrupted Clay, yea worse by sin, Isa. 43.15.

Oh! then admire the goodness of our King;
We were all alike to God by reflection,
In the act of his free, eternal Election, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Lay together in the same corrupted mass
Of sin, how came it then so to pass,
That God should pitch on me? for alas! Ezekiel. 16.6.

I was in my blood, in the same gore
Of sin, admired be free grace for evermore,
When God came to choose a little number, 1 John 5.19.

In comparison of those he left to slumber
In sin and corruption; oh! what a mercy
That God should pitch on thee and me,
Which if free grace had not so run,
We had been lost, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6.
and for ever undone;
Had God ordained all to salvation complete,
His mercy had been out of measure great,
But that God ordains any to salvation,
When on the contrary, in men's generation
He has ordained millions unto desolation, Mat. 7.13.

Whose state by nature was no way worse
Than ours, and strength in a natural course
Was as great as ours in their generation, Ephesians. 2 3.

Yet to exempt them from eternal salvation,
Whose care great as ours for reconciliation,
In any natural way, or natural creation,
Till God was pleased in mercy to prevent
Us, Col. 1.12, 13.
should not this our thanks augment
To God, and raise our hearts in admiration
Of God's free grace, in choosing us to salvation?
Blessed be God's grace, who has chosen us,
Who deserved as others his eternal Curse; Gal. 3.13.

Were no better for's choice than other,
But by nature were all as Brother; Ephesians. 2, 1, 2, 3.

Yet us, when many others are rejected,
Free grace and love has us respected;
It Is clear, for of two grinding at the Mill,
One taken, Mat. 24.40, 41.
the other left, implies grace still,
And not in the acting of their own will;
God's will and pleasure is the only reason
Why two men equally miserable in season,
Are made to differ the one from the other;
For by nature were both as Brother,
Therefore not the foresight of our will,
Or natural inclination in us, Romans 8.7.
I say still,
In receiving or rejecting grace proposed,
Although free grace be by some still opposed, Zech. 12.10.

Yet free grace, free grace, for ever I cry,
And blessed be God for his rich mercy; Ephesians. 2.4.

Nothing made a difference, 1 Cor. 4.7.
but, say I,
Free grace, 2 These. 1.10.
which Saints will admire to eternity.
SECT. VIII.
Some say, if God in his eternal Decree, Object.

Has appointed some unto eternal Misery; Mal 3.14.

It Is in vain for such to hear and pray,
And to use the means of Salvation's way;
Were as good do nothing in their Station,
If they be Reprobated, ordained to Damnation.
There is no Man knows his Reprobation, Sol.

Though several marks of it in his Conversation:
It Is God's secret, and to us it is very obscure;
Let Us follow the Scripture, a rule more sure.
Secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
let us not flatter
Our selves, let us do duty, and pass this matter;
And know this, whatever any pretend,
God appoints the means, as well as the end.
For as God has appointed Men to Glory; Ephesians. 1.4.

Consider it well, don't think it is a story:
So, God has appointed them to Sanctification;
And to the use of all in their Generation: 2 These 2.13, 14.

Holy means to attain the end, Salvation,
And accordingly live in their Conversation.
And for ought I know, one reason may be,
Why God from Man conceals his Decree
Of Reprobation, for the Lord is independent;
Therefore, Man should be still Attendant
On the use of means, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.
as a Creature-dependant
On God; for though Man be weak in's station;
Yet from God, Man has a Power by derivation,
In and by use of the means, it is plain; Mal. 3.14.

Therefore, don't say, to use means it is in vain.
Faith comes by hearing, Scripture's record, Romans 10.17.

There Is a power in Man to hear the Word;
To wait on God, must his duty afford,
Must wait God's call, as Scriptures record.
The impotent Man waited many years
At Bethesda, no doubt with many fears; Joh. 5.2, 3.

Because of's imbecility could not step in
To the Pool for a Cure, consider this thing.
Had he had a power according to his will,
He would have cured himself, verse 7.
would fulfill
His own desire; by this you may plain see
His Will unable to attain this degree,
Till Christ came, verse 8.
and made him free,
Had not power of himself so to be;
Yet wait on Ordinances, but rest on none
For Salvation, but on Christ alone.
Some soon enjoy by faith this Treasure,
Others God's pleased to hold with longer leisure,
What shall I say to this, it is his pleasure?
Let Us do our duty in faith, not measure
God's Dispensations, Mat. 20, 3, 6.
he is God of power,
Calls some the third, some the eleventh hour;
Then don't conclude thy Reprobation bold,
Don't exclude thy self out of Christ's fold. Joh. 10.16.

To inquire into God's eternal Decree
Is not thy duty, it is no work for thee;
Therefore to the means thy self apply,
Depend on Christ in use of means, try,
He may have mercy, 2 King 7.3, 4.
if not, can but die;
Take the Lepers resolution, to Christ fly,
Mind what is said before, as you pass by,
For elected Sinners salvation Christ did die.
The work of Salvation is by God, see
By the inchoation, or beginning of the decree,
In Christ, as the means of God's dispensation,
And by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4.
in way of consummation;
The means is made effectual to Salvation:
The Spirit does work faith, and does apply
The means in all elect, though not immediately.
In all the Spirit works grace without dispute; Ephesians. 3.7.

Then obedience, holiness, is the first fruit
Of faith, Gal. 5.22.
and way to Heaven, it is plain
In Scripture, then do thy duty, I say again.
God has required thee the means to use,
As revealed in Scripture, don't it refuse.
Remember what I say, Joh. 14.26.
don't it forget,
At Christ's Command, Luke 5.4. to the 7 verse.
let down the net;
Perhaps the Lord has appointed thee
To life and glory in his eternal Decree,
Which is obscure, and hidden from we.
To make thy Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
is more plain
In Scripture, then do thy duty once again,
Though thou know not the issue or event,
Leave that to God, and the means frequent:
Use Ordinances, and practice them in Power,
God may save thee in the trying hour;
Yet in using them, don't such thoughts cherish, Luke 17.10.

As to merit by duties, that is a Papist's flourish;
Yet, without the means, you will perish.
Having this Seal, God knows who are his.
Don't venture thy immortal Soul amiss, Mark. 8.36, 37.

Upon such hazard and uncertainty as this.
Who knows, God may receive thee into bliss
And glory, then will accomplish his Decree,
May live to his praise unto all Eternity. Joh. 17.24.

Thus I have distinguished according to desire,
Between free grace and free will; admire
Free grace, live to glory by faith and prayer. 1 Cor. 10.15.

Consider what is said, and thy self recruit
With Paul, those errors of free will to confute.
Who art thou that against God do dispute.
For a conclusion, Consider these Scriptures deemed, Romans 9.20.

Admire free grace, let free will be less esteemed. Mat. 11.25, 26.

Psalm. 115.1. Jer. 10.23. Dan. 9.8. Joh. 15.5. Romans 9.16, 18. 1 Cor. 4.7. 2
Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.4. to the 7 verse. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever, and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.
FINIS.

