THE DEVOVT SOUL, OR, Rules of heavenly DEVOTION.

ALSO, THE FREE PRISONER, OR, The Comfort of RESTRAINT.

By Jos. H. B. N.

London, Printed by W. H. and are to be sold by George Latham, Junior, at the
Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard.

M. DC. L.

TO All Christian Readers, Grace and Peace,
THat in a time when we hear no noise but of Drums and Trumpets, and talk of
nothing but arms, and sieges, and battles, I should write of Devotion, may
seem to some of you strange and unseasonable; to me, contrarily, it seems most
fit and opportune; For when can it be more proper to direct our adress to the
throne of grace, than when we are in the very jaws of Death? or when should we
go to seek the face of our God, rather, than in the needful time of trouble?

Blessed be my God, who in the midst of these woeful tumults, has vouchsafed
to give me these calm, and holy thoughts; which I justly suppose, he meant not
to suggest, that they should be smothered in the breast wherein they were
conceived, but with a purpose to have the benefit communicated unto many. Who
is there that needs not vehement excitations, and helps to Devotion? and when
more than now? In a tempest the Mariners themselves do not only cry everyman
to his God, but awaken Jonah, that is fast asleep under the hatches, and chide
him to his prayers. Surely, had we not bin failing in our devotions, we could
not have been thus universally miserable; That duty, the neglect whereof is
guilty of our calamity, must in the effectual performance of it, be the means
of our recovery. Be but devout, and we cannot miscarry under judgments; We is
me, the tears of penitence, were more fit to quench the public flame, than
blood. How soon would it clear up above head, if we were but holily affected
within? Could we send our zealous Ambassadors up to heaven, we could not fail
of an happy peace. I direct the way; God bring us to the end; For my own
particular practice; God is witness to my soul, that (as one, the sense of
whose private affliction is swallowed up of the public) I cease not daily to
^ly the Father of mercies with my fervent prayers, that he would, at last, be
pleased, after so many streams of blood, to pass an Act of Pacification in
heaven: And what good heart can do otherwise? Brethren, all ye that love God,
and his Church, and his Truth, and his Anointed, and your Country, and your
selves, and yours, join your forces with mine, and let us by an holy violence
make way to the gates of Heaven with our petition, for mercy and peace; and not
suffer our selves to be beaten off from the threshold of Grace, till we be
answered with a condescent. He, whose goodness is wont to prevent our desires,
will not give denyals to our importunities.

Pray, and farewell. NORWICH. March 20. 1643.
THE DEVOUT SOVLE.
SECT. I.
DEvotion is the life of Religion, the very soul of Piety, the highest
imploiment of grace; and no other than the prepossession of heaven by the
Saints of God here upon earth; every improvement whereof is of more advantage
and value to the Christian soul, than all the profit and contentments which
this world can afford it.

There is a kind of Art of Devotion (if we can attain unto it) whereby the
practice thereof may be much advanced: We have known indeed some holy souls,
which out of the general precepts of piety, and their own happy experiments of
Gods mercy, have, through the grace of God, grown to a great measure of
perfection this way; which yet might have been much expedited, and completed,
by those helps, which the greater illumination and experience of others might
have afforded them: Like as we see it in other faculties; there are those, who
out of a natural dexterity, and their own frequent practice, have got into a
safe posture of defense, and have handled their weapon with commendable skill,
whom yet the Fence-schoole might have raised to an higher pitch of cunning: As
nature is perfited, so grace is not a little furthered by Art; since it
pleases the wisdom of God, to work ordinarily upon the soul, not by the
immediate power of miracle, but in such methods, and by such means, as may most
conduce to his blessed ends. It is true, that all our good motions come from
the Spirit of God; neither is it less true, that all the good counsails of
others proceed from the same Spirit; and that good Spirit cannot be cross to
itself; he therefore that infuses good thoughts into us, suggests also such
directions, as may render us apt both to receive and improve them: If God be
bounteous, we may not be idle, and neglective of our spiritual aids.

SECT. II.
IF you tell me (by way of instance in a particular act of Devotion) that there
is a gift of prayer, and that the Spirit of God is not tied to rules; I yield
both these; but withal, I must say there are also helps of prayer, and that we
must not expect immediate inspirations: I find the world much mistaken in both;
They think that man has the gift of prayer, that can utter the thoughts of
his heart roundly unto God, that can express himself smoothly in the phrase of
the holy Ghost, and press God with most proper words, and passionate
vehemence: And surely this is a commendable faculty whersoever it is: but this
is not the gift of prayer; you may call it, if you will, the gift of Elocution.
Do we say that man has the gift of pleading, that can talk eloquently at the
Bar, that can in good terms loud and earnestly importune the Judge for his
Client; and not rather he that brings the strongest reason, and quotes his
books, and precedents with most truth, and clearest evidence, so as may
convince the Jury, and persuade the Judge? Do we say he has the gift of
Preaching, that can deliver himself in a flowing manner of speech, to his
hearers, that can cite Scriptures, or Fathers, that can please his auditory
with the flowers of Rhetoric; or rather, he, that can divide the Word aright,
interpret it soundly, apply it judiciously, put it home to the Conscience,
speaking in the evidence of the Spirit, powerfully convincing the gainsayers,
comforting the dejected, and drawing every soul nearer to heaven? The like
must we say for prayer; the gift whereof he may be truly said to have, not
that has the most rennible tongue, (for prayer is not so much a matter of the
lips, as of the heart) but he, that has the most illuminated apprehension of
the God to whom he speaks, the deepest sense of his own wants, the most eager
longings after grace, the ferventest desires of supplies from heaven; and in a
word, whose heart sends up the strongest groans and cries to the Father of
mercies.

Neither may we look for Enthusiasmes, and immediate inspirations; putting our
selves upon Gods Spirit, in the solemn exercises of our invocation, without
heed, or meditation; the dangerous inconvenience whereof has been too often
found in the rash, and unwarrantable expressions that have fallen from the
mouths of unwary suppliants; but we must address our selves with due
preparation, to that holy work; we must digest our suits; and fore-order our
supplications to the Almighty; so that there may be excellent and necessary use
of meet rules of our Devotion.

He, whose Spirit helps us to pray, and whose lips taughts us how to pray, is
an all-sufficient example for us: all the skill of men, and Angels, cannot
afford a more exquisite model of supplicatory Devotion, than that blessed
Savior of ours gave us in the mount; led in by a divine, and heart-raising
preface, carried out with a a strong and heavenly enforcement; wherein an
awful compellation makes way for petition; and petition makes way for
thanksgiving; the petitions marshalled in a most exact order, for spiritual
blessings, which have an immediate concernment of God, in the first place; then
for temporal favors, which concern our selves, in the second; so punctual a
method had notbeen observed by him that hears prayers, if it had been all one
to him, to have had our Devotions confused, and tumultuary.

SECT. III.
THere is commonly much mistaking of Devotion, as if it were nothing but an act
of vocal prayer, expiring with that holy breath, and revived with the next
task of our invocation; which is usually measured of many, by frequence,
length, smoothness of expression, lowdnes, vehemence; Whereas, indeed it is
rather an habitual disposition of an holy soul, sweetly conversing with God,
in all the forms of an heavenly (yet awful) familiarity; and a constant
entertainment of our selves here below with the God of spirits, in our
sanctified thoughts, and affections; One of the noble exercises whereof, is our
access to the throne of grace in our prayers; whereto may be added, the
ordering of our holy attendance upon the blessed word and sacraments of the
Almighty: Nothing hinders therefore, but that a stammering suppliant may reach
to a more eminent devotion, than he that can deliver himself in the most
fluent and patheticall forms of Elocution; and that our silence may be more
devout than our noise. We shall not need to send you to the Cells or Cloisters
for this skill; although it will hardly be believed, how far some of their
Contemplative men have gone in the Theory hereof; Perhaps, like as Chemists
give rules for the attaining of that Elixir, which they never found; for sure
they must needs fail of that perfection they pretend; who err commonly in the
object of it, always in the ground of it, which is faith; stripped, by their
opinion, of the comfortablest use of it, certainty of application.

SECT. IV.
AS there may be many resemblances betwixt Light and Devotion, so this one
especially; that as there is a light universally diffused through the air, and
there is a particular recollection of light into the body of the Sun and Stars;
so it is in Devotion; There is a general kind of Devotion that goes through
the renewed heart and life of a Christian, which we may term Habitual, and
Virtual; and there is a special, and fixed exercise of Devotion, which we name
Actual.

The soul that is rightly affected to God, is never void of an holy Devotion;
where ever it is, what ever it does, it is still lifted up to God, and fastened
upon him, and converses with him; ever serving the Lord in fear, and rejoicing
in him with trembling.

For the effectual performance whereof, it is requisite first, that the heart
be settled in a right apprehension of our God; without which, our Devotion is
not thanklesse only, but sinful: With much labor therefore, and agitation of
a mind illuminated from above, we must find our selves wrought to an high,
awful, adorative, and constant conceit of that incomprehensible Majesty, in
whom we live, and move, and are; One God, in three most glorious Persons,
infinite in wisdom, in power, in justice, in mercy, in providence, in all that
he is, in all that he has, in all that he does; dwelling in light
inaccessible, attended with thousand thousands of Angels; whom yet we neither
can know, (neither would it avail us if we could) but in the face of the
eternal Son of his Love, our blessed Mediator God and Man; who sits at the
right hand of Majesty in the highest heavens; from the sight of whose glorious
humanity, we comfortably rise to the contemplation of that infinite Deity,
whereto it is inseparably united; in and by him, (made ours by a lively Faith)
finding our persons, and obedience accepted, expecting our full redemption, and
blessedness. Here, here must our hearts be unremoveably fixed; In his light
must we see light: no cloudy occurrences of this world, no busy employments,
no painful sufferings must hinder us from thus seeing him that is invisible.

SECT. V.
NEither does the devout heart see his Grd aloof off, as dwelling above, in the
circle of heaven, but beholds that infinite Spirit really present with him; The
Lord is upon thy right hand, says the Psalmist. Our bodily eye does not more
certainly see our own flesh, than the spiritual eye sees God, close by us;
Yea in us; A man's own soul is not so intimate to himself, as God is to his
soul; neither do we move by him only, but in him: What a sweet conversation
therefore, has the holy soul with his God? What heavenly conferences have they
two, which the world is not privy to; whiles God entertains the soul with the
divine motions of his Spirit, the soul entertaines God with gracious
compliances? Is the heart heavy with the grievous pressures of affliction? the
soul goes in to his God, and pours out it self before him in earnest
bemoanings, and supplications; the God of mercy answers the soul again, with
seasonable refreshings of comfort: Is the heart secretly wounded and bleeding
with the conscience of some sin? it speedily betakes it self to the great
Physician of the soul, who forthwith applies the balm of Gilead for an
unfailing and present cure: Is the heart distracted with doubts? the soul
retires to that inward Oracle of God for counsel, he returns to the soul an
happy settlement of just resolution: Is the heart deeply affected with the
sense of some special favor from his God? the soul breaks forth into the
passionate voice of praise and thanksgiving; God returns the pleasing testimony
of a cheerful acceptance: Oh blessed soul, that has a God to go unto upon all
occasions; Oh infinite mercy of a God, that vouchsafes to stoop to such
intirents with dust and ashes. It was a gracious speech of Dr. Preston
a worthy Divine upon his deathbed, now breathing toward heaven, That he
should change his place not his company: His conversation was now before hand
with his God, and his holy Angels; the only difference was, that he was now
going to a more free and full fruition of the Lord of life, in that region of
glory above, whom he had truly (though with weakness and imperfection) enjoyed
in this vale of tears.

SECT. VI.
NOw, that these mutual respects may be sure not to cool with intermission,
the devout heart takes all occasions both to think of God, and to speak to
him. There is nothing that he sees, which does not bring God to his thoughts.
Indeed, there is no creature, werein there are not manifest footsteps of
omnipotence; Yea, which has not a tongue to tell us of it is Maker. The heaven
declare Psa. 19 1, 2
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handyworke; one day tells
another, and one night certifieth another: Yea, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom Psa. 104. 24.
have thou made them all: The earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and
wide sea, where are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts:
Every herb, flower, spire of grass, every twig and leaf; every worm and fly;
every scale and feather; every billow and meteor, speaks the power and wisdom
of their infinite Creator; Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant; Esaias sends
the Jews to the Ox and the Ass; Our Savior sends his Disciples to the Ravens,
and to the Lillies of the field; There is no creature of whom we may not learn
something; we shall have spent our time ill in this great school of the world,
if in such store of Lessons, we be non-proficients in Devotion. Vain Idolaters
make to themselves Images of God, whereby they sinfully represent him to their
thoughts and adoration; could they have the wit and grace to see it, God has
taken order to spare them this labor, in that he has stamped in every creature
such impressions of his infinite power, wisdom, goodness, as may give us just
occasion to worship and praise him with a safe and holy advantage to our
souls: For the invisible things of God, from the creation of the world, are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead. And indeed, wherefore serve all the volumes of Natural
History, but to be so many Commentaries upon the several creatures, wherein we
may read God; and even those men who have not the skill, or leisure to peruse
them, may yet out of their own thoughts, and observation, raise from the sight
of all the works of God sufficient matter to glorify him. Who can be so stupid
as not to take notice of the industry of the Be, the providence of the Ant,
the cunning of the Spider, the reviving of the Fly, the worms endeavor of
revenge, the subtilty of the Fox, the sagacity of the Hedgehog, the innocence
and profitablenesse of the Sheep, the laboriousnesse of the Ox, the
obsequiousness of the Dog, the timorous shifts of the Hare, the nimblenesse of
the Dear, the generosity of the Lion, the courage of the Horse, the fierceness
of the Tiger, the cheerful music of Birds, the harmlesnesse of the Dove, the
true love of the Turtle, the Cocks observation of time, the Swallows
architecture, shortly, (for it were easy here to be endless) of the several
qualities, and dispositions of every of those our fellow creatures, with whom
we converse on the face of the earth; and who that takes notice of them, cannot
fetch from every act, and motion of theirs, some monition of duty, and occasion
of devout thoughts? Surely, I fear many of us Christians, may justly accuse our
selves as too neglective of our duty this way; that having thus long spent our
time in this great Academy of the world, we have not, by so many silent
documents, learned to ascribe more glory to our Creator; I doubt those
creatures if they could exchange their brutality with our reason, being now so
docible as to learn of us so far as their sense can reach, would approve
themselves better Scholars to us, than we have been unto them.

Withal, I must add that the devout soul stands not always in need of such
outward monitors, but finds within it self, sufficient incitements to raise
up it self to a continual minding of God; and makes use of them accordingly;
and, if at any time, being taken up with importunate occasions of the world, it
finds God missing but an hour, it chides it self for such neglect, and sets it
self to recover him with so much more eager affection: as the faithful spouse
in the Canticles, when Cant. 5. 6.
she finds him whom her soul loved, withdrawn from her for a season, puts her
self into a speedy search after him, and gives not over till she have attained
his presence.

SECT. VII.
NOw as these many monitors both outward and inward, must elevate our hearts
very frequently, to God; so those raised hearts must not entertain him with a
dumb contemplation, but must speak to him in the language of spirits: All
occasions therefore must be taken of sending forth pious and heavenly
ejaculations to God; The devout soul may do this more than an hundred times a
day, without any hindrance to his special vocation: The Huswife at her Wheel,
the Weaver at his Loome, the Husbandman at his Plough, the Artificer in his
Shop, the Traveller in his way, the Merchant in his Warehouse may thus enjoy
God in his busiest imploiment; For, the soul of man is a nimble spirit; and
the language of thoughts needs not take up time; and though we now, for
examples sake, cloth them in words, yet in our practice we need not: Now these
Ejaculations may be either at large, or Occasional: At large, such as that of
old Jacob, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation; Or that of David, O save me
for thy mercies sake: And these either in matter of Humiliation, or of
Imploration, or of Thanksgiving: In all which, we cannot follow a better
pattern than the sweet singer of Israel, whose heavenly conceptions we may
either borrow, or imitate.

In way of humiliation, such as these. Heal my soul O Lord, for I have sinned
against thee. Psa. 41. 4.
Oh remember not my old sins, 79. 8.
but have mercy upon me. If thou will be extreme to mark 130 3.
what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? Lord thou know the thoughts
of man 94. 11.
that they are but vain. O God why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face
from me.

In way of Imploration. Up Lord, and help me O God; Oh 3. 7.
let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. Lord, where are
thy old loving 89. 48.
mercies? Oh deliver me, for I am helpless, and my heart is 109. 21.
wounded within me. Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto 86. 4.
thee O Lord, do I lift up my soul. Go not far from me O Psalm. 71. 10.
God. O knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy name. 86. 11.
Thou art my helper and redeemer, 70. 6.
O Lord make no long tarrying. Oh be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the
help of 60. 11.
man. Oh guide me with thy 71. 23.
counsel, and after that receive me to thy glory. My time is in thy hand,
deliver me from the 31. 17.
hands of mine enemies. Oh withdraw not thy mercy from 40. 14.
me, O Lord. Lead me O Lord 5. 8.
in thy righteousness because of mine enemies. O let my soul 119. penult.
live, and it shall praise thee.

In way of Thanksgiving: Oh God, wonderful art thou in 68. 35.
thine holy places. O Lord, how glorious are thy works! 92. 5.
and thy thoughts are very deep. Oh God, who is like unto thee! 71. 17.
The Lord, lives, and blessed 18. 47.
be my strong helper. Lord, thy loving kindness is better Psa. 63. 4.
than life it self. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy 145. 10.
Saints give thanks unto thee. Oh how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have
thou 04. 25.
made them all. Who is God but 18. 31.
the Lord, and who has any strength except our God? We will rejoice in thy
salvation, 20. 5.
and triumph in thy name O Lord. O that men would praise 107. 8.
the Lord for his goodness. Oh how plentiful is thy goodness, 31. 21.
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! Thou Lord 9. 10.
have never failed them that seek thee. In thy presence is the 16. 12.
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. Lord,
what is man 8. 4.
that thou art mindful of him? Not unto us Lord, not unto us, 115. 1.
but unto thy Name give the praise.

SECT. VIII.
Occasional Ejaculations are such, as are moved upon the presence of some such
object as carries a kind of relation or analogy to that holy thought which we
have entertained. Of this nature I find that, which was practiced in S. Basils
time; that, upon the lighting of candles, the manner was to bless God in these
words, Praise be to God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy ghost; which that
Father says was anciently used; but who was the Author of it he professes to
be unknown: to the same purpose was the Lucernarium, which was a part of the
evening office of old; For which, there may seem to be more color of reason,
than for the ordinary fashion of apprecation, upon occasion of our sneesing;
which is expected, and practiced by many, out of civility: Old and reverend
Beza was wont to move his hat with the rest of the company, but to say withal,
Gramercy Madame la Superstition; Now, howsoever in this, or any other practice,
which may seem to carry with it a smacke of Superstition, our Devotion may be
groundless and unseasonable, yet nothing hinders but that we may take just and
holy hints of raising up our hearts to our God. As when we do first look
forth, and see the heavens over our heads, to think, The heavens declare thy
glory O God. When we see the Psalm. 19. 1.
day breaking, or the Sun rising, The day is thine, and the night is thine,
thou have prepared 74. 17.
the light and the Sun. When the light shines in our faces, Thou deckest thy
self 97. 11.
with light as with a garment; or, Light is sprung up for the 36. 9.
righteous. When we see our Garden imbellisht with flowers, The earth is full
of 39. 5.
the goodness of the Lord. When we see a rough sea, The waves of the sea rage
horribly, 93. 5.
and are mighty; but the Lord that dwells on high, is mightier than they.
When we see the darkness of the night, The darkness is no darkness with thee.
When we rise Psa. 139. 11
up from our bed, or our seat, Lord thou know my 139. 2.
down-sitting, and my up-rising; thou understa^dest my thoughts afar off. When
we wash our hands, Wash thou me, O Lord, 51. 7.
and I shall be whiter than snow. When we are walking forth, O hold thou up my
goings 17. 5.
in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. When we hear a passing bell, Oh
teach me to 90. 12.
number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom: or, Lord, let me know
my end, 39. 5.
and the number of my days.

Thus may we dart out our holy desires to God, upon all occasions; Wherein,
heed must be taken that our Ejaculations be not, on the one side, so rare, that
our hearts grow to be hard and strange to God, but that they may be held on in
continual acknowledgement of him, and acquaintance with him; and, on the other
side, that they be not so overfrequent in their perpetual reiteration, as that
they grow to be (like that of the Romish votaries) fashionable; which if great
care be not taken, will fall out, to the utter frustrating of our Devotion.
Shortly, let the measure of these devout glances be, the preserving our hearts
in a constant tenderness, and godly disposition; which shall be further actuated
upon all opportunities, by the exercises of our more enlarged, and fixed
Devotion: Whereof there is the same variety that there is in Gods services,
about which it is conversant.

There are three maine businesses wherein God accounts his service, here below,
to consist; The first is, our address to the throne of Grace, and the pouring
out of our souls before him in our prayers: The second is, the reading and
hearing his most holy Word; The third is, the receipt of his blessed Sacraments;
In all which there is place and use for a fetled Devotion.

SECT. IX.
TO begin with the first work of our actual, and enlarged Devotion: Some things
are pre-required of us, to make us capable of the comfortable performance of so
holy and heavenly a duty; namely, that the heart be clean first, and then that
it be clear: clean from the defilement of any known sin; clear from all
intanglements and distractions: What do we in our prayers, but converse with
the Almighty? and either carry our souls up to him, or bring him down to us;
now, it is no hoping, that we can entertain God in an impure heart: Even we
men loath a nasty and sluttish lodging; how much more will the holy God abhor
an habitation spiritually filthy? I find that even the unclean spirit made that
a motive of his repossession, that he found the house swept Luke 11. 25
and garnished: Satan's cleanliness is pollution; and his garnishment, disorder
and wickedness; without this he finds no welcome; Each spirit looks for an
entertainment answerable to his nature; How much more will that God of spirits,
who is purity it self, look to be harbored in a cleanly room? Into a
malicious soul wisdom shall not enter, nor Wisd. 1. 4.
dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. What friend would be pleased that
we should lodge him in a Lazar-house? or who would abide to have a Toad lie in
his bosom? Surely, it is not in the verge of created nature to yield any thing
that can be so noisome and odious to the sense of man, as sin is to that
absolute, and essential Goodness: His pure eyes cannot endure the sight of
sin; neither can he endure that the sinner should come within the sight of him;
Away from me, ye wicked, is his charge, both here, and hereafter. It is the
privilege and happiness of the pure in heart, that they shall see God; see him
both in the end, and in the way; enjoying the vision of him, both in grace, and
in glory: this is no object for impure eyes: Descend into thy self therefore,
and ransack thy heart, who ever would be a true Client of Devotion; search
all the close windings of it, with the torches of the law of God; and if there
be any iniquity found lurking in the secret corners thereof, drag it out and
abandon it; and when thou have done, that thy fingers may retain no pollution,
say with the holy Psalmist; I will wash Psa. 26. 6.
my hands in innocence, so will I go to thine Altar. Presume not to approach
the Altar of God, there to offer the Sacrifice of thy Devotion, with unclean
hands: Else thine offering shall be so far from winning an acceptance for thee,
from the hands of God; as that thou shall make thine offering abominable. And
if a beast touch the Mount, it shall dye.

SECT. X.
AS the soul must be clean from sin, so it must be clear and free from
distractions. The intent of our Devotion is to welcome God to our hearts; now
where shall we entertain him, if the rooms be full thronged with cares, and
turbulent passions? The Spirit of God will not endure to be crowded up together
with the world in our strait lodgings; An holy vacuity must make way for him in
our bosoms. The divine pattern of Devotion, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily,
retires into the Mount to pray; he that carried heaven with him, would even
thus leave the world below him. Alas, how can we hope to mount up to heaven in
our thoughts, if we have the clogs of earthly cares hanging at our heels: Yea,
not only must there be a shutting out of all distractive cares, and passions,
which are professed enemies to our quiet conversing with God in our Devotion,
but there must be also a denudation of the mind from all those images of our
fantasy (how pleasing soever) that may carry our thoughts aside from those
better objects: We are like to foolish children, who when they should be
steadfastly looking on their books, are apt to gaze after every butter-fly, that
passetin by them; here must be therefore a careful intention of our thoughts,
a restraint from all vain, and idle rovings, and an holding our selves close
to our divine task: Whiles Martha is troubled about many things, her devouter
sister, having chosen the better part, plyes the one thing necessary, which
shall never be taken from her; and whiles Martha would feast Christ with bodily
fare, she is feasted of Christ with heavenly delicacies.

SECT. XI.
AFter the heart is thus cleansed and thus cleared, it must be in the next
place decked with true humility, the cheapest, yet best ornament of the soul.
If the wise man tell us, that pride is the beginning of sin; surely, all Ecl. 10.
gracious dispositions must begin in humility. The foundation of all high and
stately buildings must be laid low: They are the lowly valleys that soak in the
showers of heaven, which the steep hills shelve off, and prove dry and
fruitless. To that man will I look (says Esa. 66. 2.
God) that is poor, and of (...) contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word:
Hence it is, that the more eminent any man is in grace, the more he is dejected
in the sight of God; The father of the faithful comes to God under the Genesis
18. 27
style of dust, and ashes: David under the style of a worm and no man; Agur the
son of Jakeh, Pro. 30. 2.
under the title of more brutish than any man, and one that has not the
understanding of a man; John Baptist, as not morthy to carry the shoes Mat. 3.
11.
of Christ after him; Paul, as Ephesians. 3. 8.
the least of Saints, and chief of sinners: On the contrary, the more vile any
man is in his own eyes, and the more dejected in the sight of God, the higher
he is exalted in Gods favor: Like as the Conduict-water, by how much lower it
falls, the higher it rises. When therefore we would appear before God, in our
solemn devotions, we must see that we empty our selves of all proud conceits,
and find our hearts fully convinced of our own vileness, yea nothingness in
his sight. Down, down with all our high thoughts; fall we low before our great
and holy God; not to the earth only, but to the very brim of hell, in the
Conscience of our own guiltiness; for though the miserable wretchedness of
our nature may be a sufficient cause of our humiliation, yet the consideration
of our detestable sinfulness is that which will depresse us lowest in the
sight of God.

SECT. XII.
IT is fit the exercise of our Devotion should begin in an humble confession of
our unword^^nesse. Now for the effectual furtherance of this our
self-dejection, it will be requisite to bend our eyes upon a threefold object;
To look inward into our selves, upward to heaven, downwards to hell. First, to
turn our eyes into our bosoms, and to take a view (not without a secret
self-loathing) of that world of corruption that has lien hidden there; and
thereupon to accuse, arraign, and condemn our selves before that awful Tribunal
of the Judge of heaven and earth; both of that original pollution, which we
have drawn from the tainted loins of our first parents; and those innumerable
actual wickednesses derived therefrom; which have stained our persons and
lives. How can we be but thoroughly humbled, to see our souls utterly
overspread with the odious and abominable leprosy of sin: We find that Uzziah
bore up stoutly a while, against the Priests of the Lord, in the maintenance of
his sacrilegious presumption, but when he saw himself turned Lazar, on the
sudden, he is confounded in himself, and in a depth of shame hastens away
from the presence of God to a sad, and penitential retirednes. We should need
no other arguments to loath our selves, than the sight of our own faces, so
miserably deformed with the nasty and hateful scurse of our iniquity: Neither
only must we be content to shame, and grieve our eyes with the foul nature and
condition of our sins, but we must represent them to our selves in all the
circumstances that may aggravate their nainousnesse. Alas, Lord, any one sin is
able to damn a soul; I have committed many, yea numberless: they have not
possessed me single, but, as that evil spirit said, their name is Legion;
neither have I committed these sins once, but often; Thine Angels (that were)
sinned but once, and are damned for ever; I have frequently reiterated the same
offenses, where (then were it not for thy mercy) shall I appear? neither have I
only done them in the time of my ignorance, but since I received sufficient
illumination from thee; It is not in the dark that I have stumbled, and fallen,
but in the midst of the clear light and sunshine of thy Gospel, and in the
very face of thee my God; neither have these been the slips of my weakness,
but the bold miscarriages of my presumption; neither have I offended out of
inconsideration, and inadvertency, but after and against the checks of a
remurmuring conscience; after so many gracious warnings, and fatherly
admonitions, after so many fearful examples of thy judgments, after so
infinite obligations of thy favors.

And thus having looked inward into ourselves, and taken an impartial view of
our own vileness, it will be requisite to cast our eyes upward unto heaven,
and there to see against whom we have offended; even against an infinite
Majesty, and power, an infinite mercy, an infinite justice; That power and
Majesty which has spread out the heavens as a Curtain, and has laid the
foundations of the earth so sure that it cannot be moved; who has shut up the
sea with bars and doors, and Job 38.
said, Hitherto shall thou come and no further, and here shall thou stay thy
proud waves; who does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth; who commands
the Devils to their chains, able therefore to take infinite vengeance on
sinners. That mercy of God the Father, who gave his own Son out of his bosom
for our redemption; That mercy of God the Son, who, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, etc.
thinking it no robbery to be equal unto God, for our sakes made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; and being found in fashion
as a man, humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the accursed
death of the Cross; That mercy of God the holy Ghost, who has made that
Christ mine, and has sealed to my soul the benefit of that blessed
Redemption; Lastly, that justice of God, which as it is infinitely displeased
with every sin, so will be sure to take infinite vengeance on every impenitent
sinner.

And from hence it will be fit and seasonable for the devout soul, to look
downward into that horrible pit of eternal confusion; and there to see the
dreadful, unspeakable, unimaginable torments of the damned; to represent unto
it self the terrors of those everlasting burnings; the fire and brimstone of
that infernal Tophet; the merciless and unwearible tyranny of those hellish
executioners; the shrieks, and howlings, and gnashings of the tormented; the
unpitiable, interminable, unmitigable tortures of those ever-dying, and yet
never-dying souls. By all which, we shall justly affright our selves into a
deep sense of the dangerous and woeful condition wherein we lie in the state of
nature and impenitence, and shall be driven with an holy eagerness to seek for
Christ, the Son of the ever-living God, our blessed Mediator; in and by whom
only, we can look for the remission of all these our sins, a reconcilement with
this most powerful, merciful, just God, and a deliverance of our souls from
the hand of the nethermost hell.

SECT. XIII.
IT shall not now need, or boot to bid the soul which is truly apprehensive of
all these, to sue importunately to the Lord of life for a freedom, and rescue
from these infinite pains of eternal death, to which our sins have
forfeited it; and for a present happy recovery of that favor, which is better
than life. Have we heard, or can we imagine some heinous Malefactor, that has
received the sentence of death, and is now bound hand, and foot, ready to be
cast into a Den of Lions, or a burning furnace, with what strong cries, and
passionate obsecrations he plies the Judge for mercy? we may then conceive
some little image of the vehement suit, and strong cries of a soul truly
sensible of the danger of Gods wrath deserved by his sin, and the dreadful
consequents of deserved imminent damnation; Although what proportion is there
betwixt a weak creature, and the Almighty; betwixt a moment, and eternity?

Hereupon therefore follows a vehement longing (incapable of a denial) after
Christ; and fervent aspirations to that Savior, by whom only we receive a full
and gracious deliverance from death and hell; and a full pardon and remission
of all our sins; and if this come not the sooner, strong knockings at the gates
of heaven, even so loud that the Father of mercies cannot but hear and open:
Never did any contrite soul beg of God, that was not prevented by his mercy;
much more does he condescend when he is strongly entreated; our very entreaties
are from him, he puts into us those desires which he graciously answers: Now
therefore does the devout soul see the God of all comfort to bow the heavens,
and come down with healing in his wings; and hear him speak peace unto the
heart thus thoroughly humbled; Fear not, thou shall not die but live. Be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: Here therefore comes in that divine grace
of Faith, effectually apprehending Christ the Savior, and his infinite
satisfaction and merits; comfortably applying all the sweet promises of the
Gospel; clinging close to that all-sufficient Redeemer; and in his most perfect
obedience emboldning it self, to challenge a freedom of access to God, and
confidence of appearance before the Tribunal of heaven; and now the soul clad
with Christ's righteousness, dares look God in the face, and can both challenge
and triumph over all the powers of darkness: For, being justified by faith, we
have peach Romans 5. 1.
with God through Jesu Christ our Lord.

SECT. XIV.
BY how much deeper the sense of our misery and danger is, so much more welcome
and joyful is the apprehension of our deliverance; and so much more thankful
is our acknowledgement of that unspeakable mercy: The soul therefore that is
truly sensible of this wonderful goodness of it is God; as it feels a
mavelous joy in it self, so it cannot but break sorth into cheerful and holy
(though secret) gratulations: The Ps. 103. 8.
Lord is full of compassion, and mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness;
he keeps not his anger for ever; he has not dealt with me after my sins, nor
rewarded me after mine iniquities. What shall I render unto Ps. 116. 12, 13.
the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will thank Ps. 119. 18, 21, etc.
thee, for thou have heard me, and have not given me over to death, but art
become my salvation. O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his; Praise thou
the Lord O my soul.

SECT. XV.
THe more feelingly the soul apprehends, and the more thankfully it digests the
favors of God in its pardon, and deliverance, the more freely does the God of
mercy impart himself to it; and the more God imparts himself to it, the more it
loves him, and the more heavenly acquaintance and entirenesse grows betwixt God
and it; and now that love which was but a spark at first grows into a flame;
and wholly takes up the soul. This fire of heavenly love in the devout soul,
is, and must be heightened more and more, by the addition of the holy incentives
of divine thoughts, concerning the means of our freedom and deliverance. And
here, offers it self to us that bottomless abyss of mercy in our Redemption,
wrought by the eternal Son of God, Jesus Christ the just, by whose stripes we
are healed; by whose blood we are ransomed; where none will befit us but
admiring and adoring notions. We shall not disparage you, O ye blessed Angels,
and Archangels of Heaven, if we shall say, ye are not able to look into the
bottom of this divine love, wherewith God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life: None, oh none can comprehend this mercy, but he that wrought
it. Lord what a transcendent, what an infinite love is this? what an object was
this for thee to love? A world of sinners Impotent, wretched creatures, that
had dispighted thee, that had no motive for thy favor but deformity, misery,
professed enmity? It had been mercy enough in thee, that thou did no^ damn
the world; but that thou should love it, (...) more than mercy. It was thy
great goodness to forbear the acts of just vengeance to the sinful world of
man; but to give unto it tokens of thy love, is a favor beyond all expression.
The least gift from thee had been more than the world could hope for; but that
thou should not stick to give thine only begotten Son, the Son of thy love,
the Son of thine essence, thy coequal, coeternal Son, who was more than ten
thousand worlds, to redeem this one forlorn world of sinners, is love above
all comprehension of men and Angels. What diminution had it been to thee and
thine essential glory, O thou great God of heaven, that the souls that sinned
should have dyed, and perished everlastingly? yet so infinite was thy loving
mercy, that thou would rather give thy only Son out of thy bosom, than
that there should not be a redemption for believers.

Yet, O God, had thou sent down thy Son to this lower region of earth, upon
such terms, as that he might have brought down heaven with him, that he
might have come in the port and Majesty of a God, clothed with celestial
glory, to have dazeled our eyes, and to have drawn all hearts unto him; this
might have seemed, in some measure, to have sorted with his divine
magnificence; But thou would have him to appear in the wretched condition of
our humanity: Yet, even thus, had thou sent him into the world, in the
highest estate, and pomp of royalty, that earth could afford, that all the
Kings and Monarchs of the world should have been commanded to follow his train,
and to glitter in his Court; and that the knees of all the Potentates of the
earth should have bowed to his Sovereign Majesty, and their lips have kissed
his dust, this might have carried some kind of appearance of a state next to
divine greatness; but thou would have him come in the despised form of a
servant: And thou, O blessed Jesu, wast accordingly willing for our sakes, to
submit thy self to nakedness, hunger, thirst, weariness, temptation,
contempt, betraying, agonies, scorn, buffeting, scourgings, distention,
crucifixion, death: Oh love above measure, without example, beyond admiration!
Greater love (thou say) has no man, than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends; But, oh, what is it then, that thou, who were God and man,
should lay down thy life, (more precious than many worlds) for thine enemies!
Yet, had it been but the laying down of a life, in a fair and gentle way, there
might have been some mitigation of the sorrow of a dissolution; there is not
more difference betwixt life and death, than there may be betwixt some one kind
of death and another; Thine, O dear Savior, was the painful, shameful,
cursed death of the cross; wherein yet, all that man could do unto thee was
nothing to that inward torment, which, in our stead, thou enduredst from thy
fathers wrath; when in the bitterness of thine anguished soul, thou cryedst
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Even thus, thus wast thou
content to be forsaken, that we wretched sinners might be received to mercy;
O love stronger than death which thou vanquishedst! more high, than that hell
is deep, from which thou have rescued us!

SECT. XVI.
THe sense of this infinite love of God cannot choose but ravish the soul, and
cause it to go out of it self, into that Savior who has wrought so
mercifully for it; so as it may be nothing in it self, but what it has, or is,
may be Christ. By the sweet powers therefore of Faith and Love the soul finds
it self united unto Christ, feelingly, effectually, indivisibly: so as that it
is not to be distinguished betwixt the acts of both: To me to live is Christ,
says Phil. 1. 21.
the blessed Apostle; and elsewhere, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, and Gal. 2. 20.
the life which now I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me. My beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant.
2. 16.
says the Spouse of Christ in her Bridal Song. O blessed union, next to the
hypostaticall, whereby the humane nature of the Son of God is taken into the
participation of the eternal Godhead.

SECT. XVII.
OUt of the sense of this happy union arises an unspeakable complacency and
delight of the soul in that God and Savior, who is thus inseparably ours, and
by whose union we are blessed; and an high appreciation of him above all the
world; and a contemptuous under-valuation of all earthly things, in comparison
of him; And this is no other than an heavenly reflection of that sweet
contentment, which the God of mercies takes in the faithful soul; Thou have
ravished my Cant. 4. 9. 6. 4, 5.
heart, my sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, Turn away
thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. How fair is thy love, my sister,
my Spouse? How much better is thy love than wine, and the smell of thine
ointments better than all spices. And the soul answers him again in the same
language of spiritual dearnesse; My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief est
Cant. 5. 10.
among ten thousand. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a 8. 6.
seal upon thine arm, for love is as strong as death: And as in an ecstaticall
qualm of passionate affection; Stay me with fiaggons, and comfort me 2. 5.
with apples, for I am sick of love.

SECT. XVIII.
UPon this gracious complacency will follow an absolute self-resignation, or
giving up our selves to the hands of that good God, whose we are, and who is
ours; and an humble contentedness with his good pleasure in all things;
looking upon God with the same face, whether he smile upon us in his favors,
or chastise us with his loving corrections; If he speak good unto us, Behold
the servant of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word; If evil, It is
the Lord, let him do whatsoever he will: Here is therefore a cheerful
acquiescence in God; and an hearty reliance, and casting our selves upon the
mercy of so bountiful a God; who having given us his Son, can in and with him
deny us nothing.

SECT. XIX.
UPon this subacted disposition of heart will follow a familiar (yet awful)
compellation of God; and an emptying of our souls before him in all our
necessities. For that God, who is infinitely merciful, yet will not have his
favors otherwise conveyed to us than by our supplications. The style of his
dear ones is, his people that prays, and his own style is, the God that
hears prayers: To him therefore does the devout heart pour out all his
requests with all true humility, with all fervor of spirit, as knowing, that
God will hear neither proud prayers, nor heartlesse: wherein his holy desires
are regulated by a just method; First, suing for spiritual favors, as most
worthy; then for temporal, as the appendances of better; and in both, aiming
at the glory of our good God, more than our own advantage: And in the order of
spiritual thngs, first and most for those that are most necessary, and
essential for our souls health, than for secondary graces, that concern the
prosperity and comfort of our spiritual life: Absolutely craving those graces
that accompany salvation, all others, conditionally, and with reference to the
good pleasure of the munificent giver; Wherein, heed must be taken, that our
thoughts be not so much taken up with our expressions, as with our desires; and
that we do not suffer our selves to languish into an unfeeling length, and
repetition of our suits: Even the hand of a Moses, may in time grow heavy; so
therefore must we husband our spiritual strength, that our devotion may not
flagge with over-tiring, but may be most vigorous at the last. And as we must
enter into our prayers, not without preparatory elevations, so must we be
careful to take a meet leave of God, at their shutting up: following our
supplications, with the pause of a faithful, and most lowly adoration; and as
it were sending up our hearts into heaven, to see how our prayers are taken;
and raising them to a joyful expectation of a gracious and successful answer
from the father of mercies.

SECT. XX.
UPon the comfortable feeling of a gracious condescent, follows an happy
fruition of God in all his favors; so as we have not them so much, as God in
them; which advances their worth a thousand fold, and as it were brings down
heaven unto us; whereas, therefore, the sensual man rests only in the mere use
of any blessing, as health, peace, prosperity, knowledge, and reaches no
higher; the devoute soul, in, and through all these, sees, and feels a God that
sanctifies them to him, and enjoyes therein his favor, that is better than
life. Even we men are wont, out of our good nature, to esteem a benefit, not so
much for its own worth, as for the love, and respect of the giver: Small
legacies for this cause, find dear acceptance; How much more is it so
betwixt God and the devout soul? It is the sweet apprehension of this love that
makes all his gifts, blessings. Do we his gifts, blessings. Do we not see
some vain churl, though cried down by the multitude, herein secretly
applauding himself that he has bags at home? how much more shall the godly man
find comfort against all the crosses of the world, that he is possessed of him
that possesses all things; even God All-sufficient; the pledges of whose
infinite love he feels in all the whole course of Gods dealing with him?

SECT. XXI.
OUt of the true sense of this inward fruition of God, the devout soul breaks
forth into cheerful thanksgivings to the God of all comfort, praising him for
every evil that it is free from; for every good thing it enjoys: For, as it
keeps a just Inventory of all Gods favors, so it often spreads them thankfully
before him and lays them forth (so near as it may) in the full dimensions;
that so, God may be no loser by him in any act of his beneficence. Here
therefore every of Gods benefits must come into account; whether eternal or
temporal, spiritual or bodily, outward or inward, public or private,
positive or privative, past or present, upon our selves or others. In all
which, he shall humbly acknowledge both Gods free mercy, and his own shameful
unworthiness; setting off the favors of his good God the more, with the soil
of his own confessed wretchedness, and unanswerablenesse to the least of his
mercies.

Now as there is infinite variety of blessings from the liberal hand of the
Almighty, so there is great difference in their degrees; For, whereas there are
three subjects of all the good we are capable of; The Estate, Body, Soul; and
each of these do far surpass other in value, (the soul being infinitely more
worth than the body, and the body far more precious than the outward estate) so
the blessings that appertain to them, in several, differ in their true
estimation accordingly. If either we do not highly magnify Gods mercy for
the least, or shall set as high a price upon the blessings that concern our
estate, as those that pertain to the body, or upon bodily favors, as upon
those that belong to the soul, we shall show our selves very unworthy, and
unequal partakers of the Divine bounty. But it will savor too much of earth,
if we be more affected with temporal blessings, than with spiritual and
eternal. By how much nearer relation then, any favor has to the Fountain of
goodness, and by how much more it conduces to the glory of God, and ours in
him, so much higher place should it possess in our affection and gratitude. No
marvel therefore if the Devout Heart be raised above it self, and transported
with heavenly raptures, when, with Stephens eyes, it beholds the Lord Jesus
standing at the right hand of God, fixing it self upon the consideration of the
infinite Merits of his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and
finding it self swallowed up in the depth of that Divine Love, from whence all
mercies flow into the soul; so as that it runs over with passionate
thankfulness, and is therefore deeply affected with all other his mercies,
because they are derived from that boundless Ocean of Divine goodness.
Unspeakable is the advantage that the soul raises to it self by this
continual exercise of thanksgiving; for the grateful acknowledgement of
favors, is the way to more; even amongst men (whose hands are short and
strait) this is the means to pull on further beneficence; how much more from
the God of all Consolation, whose largest bounty diminisneth nothing of his
store? And herein the devout Soul enters into its heavenly Task; beginning upon
earth those Hallelujahs, which it shall perfect above in the blessed Chore of
Saints and Angels, ever praising God, and saying, Blessing, and Glo-ry, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God
for ever and ever.

Amen.
SECT. XXII.
NOne of all the services of God can be acceptably, no not unsinfully
performed without due devotion; as therefore in our prayers and thanksgivings,
so in the other exercises of Divine Worship, (especially, in the reading and
hearing of Gods Word, and in our receipt of the blessed Sacrament) it is so
necessary, that without it, we offer to God a mere carcass of religious duty,
and profane that sacred name we would pretend to honor. First then, we must
come to Gods Book, not without an holy Reverence, as duly considering both what
and whose it is; Even no other, than the Word of the ever-living God, by which
we shall once be judged. Great reason have we therefore, to make a difference
betwixt it, and the writings of the Holiest men, even no less than betwixt the
Authors of both: God is true, yea, truth it self: and that which David said in
his haste, S. Paul Psalm. 116. Romans 3. 4
says in full deliberati on, Every man is a lier. Before we put our hand to
this Sacred Volume, it will be requisite to elevate our hearts to that God
whose it is, for both his leave and his blessing: Open mine eyes, says the
sweet singer Psalm. 119. 8.
of Israel, that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Law. Lo, David's eyes
were open before to other objects; but when he comes to Gods Book, he can see
nothing without a new act of apertion: Letters he might see, but wonders he
could not see, till God did unclose his eyes, and enlighten them. It is not
therefore for us, presumptuously to break in upon God, and to think by our
natural abilities to wrest open the precious Caskets of the Almighty; and to
fetch out all his hidden treasure thence, at pleasure; but we must come
tremblingly before him, and in all humility crave his gracious admission. I
confess I find some kind of envy in my self, when I read of those scrupulous
observances of high respects given by the Jews to the Book of Gods Law: and
when I read of a Romish Saint, that never read Carolus Bor romaeus.
the Scripture but upon his knees, and compare it with the careless neglect
whereof I can accuse my self, and perhaps some others: Not that we should rest
in the formality of outward Ceremonies of reverence, wherein it were more easy
to be superstitious than devout; but that our outward deportment may testify,
and answer the awful disposition of our hearts: whereto we shall not need to
be excited, if we be thoroughly persuaded of the Divine Original, and
authority of that Sacred Word. It was motive enough to the Ephesians zealously
to plead for, and religiously to adore the Image of their Diana, that it was
the Image that fell down Acts 19. 35.
from Jupiter. Believe we, and know, that the Scripture is inspired by God; and
we can entertain it with no other than an awful address, and we cannot be
Christians if we do not so believe.

Every Clause therefore of that God-inspired Volume, must be, as reverently
received by us, so seriously weighed, and carefully laid up; as knowing, that
there is no tittle therein without his use. What we read, we must labor to
understand; what we cannot understand, we must admire silently, and modestly
enquire of. There are plain Truths, and there are deep mysteries. The bounty of
God has left this Well of Living-water open for all; what runs over is for all
comers; but every one has not wherewith to draw. There is no Christian that
may not enjoy Gods Book, but every Christian may not interpret it; those
shallow Fords that are in it, may be waded by every Passenger, but there are
deeps wherein he that cannot swim, may drown. How can I without a Guide, said
that Ethopian Eunuch: Wherefore serves the tongue of the Learned, but to direct
the Ignorant? Their modesty is of no less use than the others skill. It is a
woeful condition of a Church when no man will be ignorant.

What service can our eyes do us in the ways of God without our thoughts? our
diligent and frequent reading, therefore, must be attended with our holy
meditation: we feed on what we read, but we digest only what we meditate of.
What is in our Bible is Gods; but that which is in our hearts, is our own: By
all which our care must be, not so much to become wiser, as to become better,
laboring still to reduce all things to godly practice.

Finally, as we enter into this task with the lifting up of our hearts for a
blessing, so we shut it up in the ejaculations of our thanksgiving to that God,
who has blessed us with the free use of his Word.

SECT. XXIII.
OUr eye is our best guide to God our Creator, but our ear is it that leads us
to God our Redeemer. How shall they believe except they hear? Which that we
may effectually do, our devotion suggests unto us some duties before the act,
some in the act, some after the act.

It is the Apostles charge, that we should be swift to hear, but heed must be
taken, that we make not more haste than good speed: we may not be so forward as
not to look to our foot when Eccles. 5. 1.
we go to the house of God, lest if we be too ready to hear, we offer the
sacrifice of Fools. What are the feet of the soul, but our affections? If
these be not set right, we may easily stumble, and wrench at Gods threshold.
Rash actions can never hope to prosper; as therefore to every great Work, so to
this, there is a due preparation required; and this must be done by meditation
first, then by prayer. Our meditation first, sequesters the heart from the
world, and shakes off those distractive thoughts, which may carry us away from
these better things: for what room is there for God, where the World has taken
up the lodging? We cannot serve God and Mammon. Then secondly, it seizes upon
the heart for Gof, fixing our thoughts upon the great business we go about;
recalling the greatness of that Majesty into whose presence we enter, and the
maine importance of the service we are undertaking; and examining our
intentions wherewith we address our selves to the work intended; I am now
going to God^ House; Wherefore do I go thither? Is it to see, or to be seen?
Is it to satisfy my own curiosity in hearing what the Preacher will say? Is
it to satisfy the law, that requires my presence? Is it to please others eyes,
or to avoid their censures? Is it for fashion? Is it for recreation? Or is it
with a sincere desire to do my soul good, in gaining more knowledge, in
quickening my affections? Is it in a desire to approve my self to my God, in
the conscience of my humble obedience to his command, and my holy attendance
upon his Ordinance? And where we find our ends amiss, chiding and rectifying
our obliquities; where just and right, prosecuting them toward a further
perfection.

Which that it may be done, our meditation must be seconded by our prayers. It
is an unholy rudeness to press into the presence of that God whom we have
not invoked: Our prayer must be, that God would yet more prepare us for the
work, and sanctify us to it, and bless us in it; that he would remove our
sins, that he would send down his Spirit into our hearts, which may enable us
to this great service; that he would bless the Preacher in the delivery of his
sacred message, that he would be pleased to direct his Messengers tongue to the
meeting with our necessities; that he would free our hearts from all
prejudices and distractions; that he would keep off all temptations, which
might hinder the good entertainment, and success of his blessed Word: Finally,
that he would make us truly teachable, and his ordinance the power of God to
our salvation.

In the act of hearing, Devotion calls us to Reverence, Attention, Application.
Reverence to that great God, who speaks to us, by the mouth of a weak man; for,
in what is spoken from Gods Chair, agreeable to the Scriptures, the sound is
man's, the substance of the message is Gods; Even an Eglon, when he hears of a
Judge. 3. 20.
message from God, rises out of his seat. It was not St. Paul's condition only,
but of all his faithful servants, to whom he has committed the word of
reconciliation; They are Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 20
for Christ; as if God did beseech us by them, they pray us in Christ's stead to
be reconciled to God: The Ambassie is not the bearers, but the Kings; and if we
do not acknowledge the great King of heaven in the voice of the Gospel, we
cannot but incur a contempt.

When therefore we see Gods messenger in his pulpit, our eye looks at him as
if it said with Cornelius, We are all here present before Acts 10. 33.
God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God; whence cannot but
follow together with an awful disposition of mind, a reverent deportment of the
body; which admits not a wild and roving eye, a drouzy head, a chatting tongue,
a rude and indecent posture; but composes it self to such a site a may befit a
pious soul in s^ religious an impoiment. Neither do we come as authorized
Judges to sit upon the Preacher, but as humble Disciples to sit at his feet.

SECT. XXIV.
REverence cannot but draw on Attention; We need not be bidden to hang on the
lips of him whom we honor. It is the charge of the Spirit, Let him that has
an ear hear; Every one has not an ear, and of those that have an ear, every
one hears not; The soul has an ear as well as the body; if both these ears
do not meet together in one act, there is no hearing: Common experience tells
us that when the mind is otherwise taken up, we do no more hear what a man
says, than if we had been deaf, or he silent. Hence is that first request of
Abigail to David; Let thine handmaid speak to 1 Samuel 25. 24.
thine ears, and hear the words of thine handmaid; and Job so importunately
urges his friends, Hear diligently my Job 13. 17.
speech and my declaration with your ears. The outward ear may be open, and the
inward shut; if way be not made through both, we are deaf to spiritual things.
Mine ear have thou boared, or Psa. 40. 6.
dug, says the Psalmist; the vulgar reads it, my ears have thou perfitted:
Surely our ears are grown up with flesh; there is no passage for a perfect
hearing of the voice of God, till he have made it by a spiritual perforation.

And now that the ear is made capable of good counsel, it does as gladly
receive it; taking in every good lesson, and longing for the next: Like unto
the dry and chopped earth, which soaks in every silver drop, that falls from the
clouds, and thirsts for more; not suffering any of that precious liquor to
fall beside it.

SECT. XXV.
NEither does the devout man care to satisfy his curiosity, as hearing only
that he might hear; but reducts all things to a saving use; bringing all he
hears, home to his heart, by a self-reflecting application; like a practiser of
the art of memory, referring every thing to its proper place; If it be matter
of comfort, There is for my sickbed, There is for my outward losses, There for
my drooping under afflictions, There for the sense of my spiritual desertions;
If matter of doctrine, There is for my settlement in such a truth, There for
the conviction of such an error, There for my direction in such a practice; If
matter of reproof, he does not point at his neighbor, but deeply charge
himself; This meets with my dead-heartedness and security, This with my
worldlymindednesse, This with my self-love and flattery of mine own estate,
This with my uncharitable censoriousnesse, This with my foolish pride of heart,
This with my hypocrisy, This with my neglect of Gods services, and my duty;
Thus in all the variety of the holy passages of the Sermon, the devout mind is
taken up with digesting what it hears; and working it self to a secret
improvement of all the good counsel that is delivered, neither is ever more
busy, than when it sits still at the feet of Christ. I cannot therefore
approve the practice (which yet I see commonly received) of those, who think it
no small argument of their Devotion, to spend their time of hearing, in writing
large notes from the mouth of the Preacher; which, however it may be an help
for memory in the future, yet cannot (as I conceive) but be some prejudice to
our present edification; neither can the brain get so much hereby, as the
heart loses. If it be said, that by this means, an opportunity is given for a
full rumination of wholesome Doctrines afterward: I yield it, but withal, I
must say that our afterthoughts can never do the work so effectually, as when
the lively voice sounds in our ears, and beats upon our heart; but herein I
submit my opinion to better judgments.

SECT. XXVI.
THe food that is received into the soul by the ear, is afterward chewed in
the mouth thereof by memory, concocted in the stomach by meditation, and
dispersed into the parts by conference and practice; True Devotion finds the
greatest part of the work behind; It was a just answer that John Gerson
reports, given Sermon. ad Eccles. cautelam.
by a Frenchman, who being asked by one of his neighbors if the Sermon were
done; no says he, it is said, but it is not done, neither will be, I fear, in
have. What are we the better if we hear and remember not? If we be such
auditors as the Jews were wont to call sieves, that retain no moisture that is
poured into them? What the better if we remember, but think not seriously of
what we hear; or if we practice not carefully what we think of? Not that which
we hear is our own, but that which we carry away: although all memories are not
alike, one receives more easily, another retains longer; It is not for every
one to hope to attain to that ability, that he can go away with the whole
fabric of a Sermon, and readily recount it unto others; neither does God
require that of any man, which he has not given him; Our desires and
endeavors may not be wanting where our powers fail; It will be enough for
weak memories, if they can so lay up those wholesome counsels which they
receive, as that they may fetch them forth when they have occasion to use them;
and that what they want in the extent of memory, they supply in the care of
their practice; Indeed that is it, wherein lies the life of all religious
duties, and without which they are but idle formalities; that which the
Philosopher said of all virtue, I must say of true godliness, that it consists
in action; Our Savior did not say, Blessed are ye if you know these things;
But, If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. The end of our
desire of the sincere milk of the Gospel, is, that we may grow thereby in the
stature of all Grace, unto the fullness of 1 Pet. 2. 2. Ephesians. 3. 9.
God.

SECT. XXVII.
THe highest of all Gods services are his Sacraments; which therefore require
the most eminent acts of our Devotion. The Sacrament of initiation, which in
the first planting of a Church is administered only to those of riper age and
understanding, calls for all possible reverence, and religious addresses of the
receivers; wherein the Primitive times were punctually observant, both for
substance, and ceremony; now, in a settled and perpetuated Church, in which the
virtue of the Covenant descends from the parent to the child, there seems to be
no use of our preparatory directions: Only, it is fit that our Devotion should
call our eyes back, to what we have done in our infancy, and whereto we are
ever obliged; that our full age may carefully endeavor to make our word good,
and may put us in mind of our sinful failings. That other Sacrament of our
spiritual nourishment, which our Savior (as his farewell) left us for a
blessed memorial of his death and passion, can never be celebrated with enough
Devotion. Far be it from us to come to this feast of our God, in our common
garments; the soul must be trimmed up, if we would be meet guests for the
Almighty. The great Master of the feast will neither abide us to come naked,
nor ill clad: Away therefore, first with the old beastly rags of our wonted
corruptions: Due examination comes in first, and thoroughly searches the soul,
and finds out all the secret nastinesse, and defilements that it hides within
it; and by the aid of true penitence, strips it of all those loathsome clouts,
wherewith it was polluted; Sin may not be clothed upon with grace; Joshuah's
filthy garments Zach. 3.
must be plucked off, ere he can be capable of precious robes: Here may be no
place for our sinful lusts, for our covetous desires, for our natural
infidelity, for our malicious purposes, for any of our unhallowed thoughts; The
soul clearly divested of these and all other known corruptions, must in the
next place in stead thereof, be furnished with such graces and holy
predispositions, as may fit it for so heavenly a work. Amongst the graces
requisite, Faith justly challenges the first place, as that which is both most
eminent, and most necessarily presupposed to the profitable receipt of this
Sacrament; for whereas the main end of this blessed banquet is the
strengthening of our faith, how should that receive strength, which has not
being? to deliver these sacred viands to an unbeleever, is to put meat into the
mouth of a dead man: Now therefore must the heart raise up it self to new acts
of believing, and must lay faster hold on Christ, and bring him closer to the
soul; more strongly applying to its self, the infinite merits of his most
perfect obedience, and of his bitter death and passion; and erecting it self to
a desire and expectation of a more vigorous and lively apprehension of its
omnipotent Redeemer. Neither can this faith be either dead, or solitary; but is
still really operative, and attended (as with other graces, so) especially with
a serious repentance; whose wonderful power is, to undo our former sins, and
to mold the heart and life to a better obedience: A grace so necessary, that
the want of it (as in extreme corruption of the stomach) turns the wholesome
food of the soul into poison; An impenitent man therefore coming to Gods
Board, is so far from benefiting himself, as that he eats his own judgment:
Stand off from this holy table, all ye that have not made your peace with your
God; or that harbor any known sin in your bosom; not to eat is
uncomfortable, but to eat in such a state is deadly; yet rest not in this plea,
that ye cannot come because ye are unreconciled; but (as ye love your souls)
be reconciled that you may come.

Another Grace necessarily pre-required is charity to our brethren, and
readiness to forgive; For this is a communion, as with Christ the head, so
with all the members of his mystical body: This is the true Lovefeast of God
our Savior, wherein we profess our selves inseparably united both to him and
his; If there be more hearts than one at Gods Table, he will not own them;
These holy elements give us an Emblem of our selves: This bread is made up of
many grains, incorporated into one mass; and this wine is the confluent juice
of many clusters; neither do we partake of several loaves, or variety of
liquors, but all eat of one bread, and drink of one cup. Here is then no place
for rancour and malice; none for secret grudgings and heart-burnings;
Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there Mat. 5. 23.
remembrest that thy brother has ought against the, Leave there thy gift, and
go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and them come and offer thy
gift.

Neither may we do, as those two emulous Commanders of Greece did, who
resolved to leave their spite behind them at Mount Athos, and to take it up
again in their return; here must be an absolute, and free acquitting of all
the back-reckonings of our unkindnesse, that we may receive the God of peace
into a clear bosom.

SECT. XXVIII.
BEsides these graces there are certain holy predispositions so necessary that
without them our souls can never hope to receive true comfort in this blessed
Sacrament; whereof the first is an hungring and thirsting desire after these
gracious means of our salvation: What good will our meat do us without an
appetite? Surely without it, there is no expectation of either relish, or
digestion; as therefore those that are invited to some great feast, care first
to seed their hunger ere they feed their body; laboring by exercise to get a
stomach, ere they employ it; so it concerns us to do here: and, as those that
are listlesse, and weak stomached, are wont to whet their appetite with sharp
sawces; so must we by the tart applications of the law, quicken our desires of
our Savior here exhibited.

Could we but see our sins, and our miseries by sin; Could we see God
frowning, and hell gaping wide to swallow us, we should not need to be bidden
to long for our deliverer; and every pledge of his favor would be precious to
us.

Upon the apprehension of our need of a Savior and so happy a supply thereof
presented unto us, must needs follow a renewed act of true thankfulness of heart
to our good God, that has both given us his dear Son to work our redemption,
and his blessed Sacrament to seal up unto us our redemption thus wrought and
purchased; And with souls thus thankfully elevated unto God, we aproach with
all reverence, to that heavenly Table, where God is both the Feast-master and
the Feast. What intention of holy thoughts, what fervor of spirit, what depth
of Devotion must we now find in our selves? Doubtless, out of heaven no object
can be so worthy to take up our hearts. What a clear representation is here of
the great work of our Redemption? How is my Savior by all my senses here
brought home to my soul? How is his passion lively acted before mine eyes? For
lo, my bodily eye does not more truly see bread and wine, than the eye of my
faith sees the body and blood of my dear Redeemer; Thus was his sacred body
torn and broken; Thus was his precious blood poured out for me; My sins
(wretched man that I am) helped thus to crucify my Savior; and for the
discharge of my sins would he be thus crucified: Neither did he only give
himself for me, upon the Cross, but lo, both offers and gives himself to me
in this his blessed institution; what had his general gift been without this
application? Now my hand does not more sensibly take, nor my mouth more really
eat this bread, than my soul does spiritually receive, and feed on the bread
of life; O Savior, thou art the living bread that came dome from heaven; Thy
flesh is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink indeed: Oh that I may so eat of
this bread, that I may live for ever. He that comes to thee, shall never
hunger; he that believes in thee, shall never thirst: Oh that I could now so
hunger, and so thirst for thee, that my soul could be for ever satisfied with
thee; Thy people of old, were fed with Manna in the wilderness, yet they dyed;
that food of Angels could not keep them from perishing; but oh, for the hidden
Manna, which gives life to the world, even thy blessed self, give me ever of
this bread, and my soul shall not dye but live: Oh the precious juice of the
fruit of the Vine, wherewith thou refreshest my soul! Is this the blood of the
grape? Is it not rather thy blood of the New Testament, that is poured out for
me? Thou speak, O Savior, of new wine that thou would drink with thy
Disciples, in thy Fathers Kindome, can there be any more precious and pleasant,
than this, wherewith thou cheerest the believing soul? our palate is now dull
and earthly, which shall then exquisite and celestial; but surely, no liquor
can be of equal price or sovereignty with thy blood; Oh how unsavory are all
earthly delicacies to this heavenly draught! O God, let not the sweet taste of
this spiritual Nectar ever go out of the mouth of my soul; Let the
comfortable warmth of this blessed Cordial ever work upon my soul, even till,
and in, the last moment of my dissolution. Do thou bid me, O Savior, do this
in remembrance of thee? Oh, how can I forget thee? How can I enough celebrate
thee for this thy unspeakable mercy? Can I see thee thus crucified before my
eyes, and for my sake thus crucified, and not remember thee? Can I find my sins
accessory to this thy death, and thy death meritoriously expiating all these my
grievous sins, and not remember thee? Can I hear thee freely offering thy self
to me, and feel thee graciously conveighing thy self into my soul, and not
remember thee? I do remember thee O Savior; but oh that I could yet more
effectually remember thee; with all the passionate affections of a soul sick of
thy love; with all zealous desires to glorify thee, with all fervent longings
after thee, and thy salvation; I remember thee in thy sufferings, Oh do thou
remember me in thy glory.

SECT. XXIX.
HAving thus busied it self with holy thoughts in the time of the celebration,
the devout soul breaks not off in an abrupt unmannerlinesse, without taking
leave of the great master of this heavenly feast, but with a secret adoration,
humbly blesses God for so great a mercy, and heartily resolves and desires to
walk worthy of the Lord Jesus, whom it has received, and to consecrate it
self wholly to the service of him that has so dearly bought it, and has
given it these pledges of its eternal union with him.

The Devout Soul has thus supt in heaven, and returns home, yet the work is
not thus done: after the elements are out of eye and use, there remains a
digestion of this celestial food, by holy meditation; and now it thinks, Oh
what a blessing have I received to day! no less than my Lord Jesus, with all
his merits; and in and with him, the assurance of the remission of all my sins,
and everlasting salvation: How happy am I, if I be not wanting to God and my
self? How unworthy shall I be, if I do not strive to answer this love of my
God and Savior, in all hearty affection, and in all holy obedience?

And now after this heavenly repast, how do I feel my self? what strength, what
advantage has my faith gotten? how much am I nearer to heaven than before? how
much faster hold have I taken of my blessed Redeemer? how much more firm and
sensible is my interest in him?

Neither are these thoughts, and this examination the work of the next instant
only, but they are such, as must dwell upon the heart; and must often solicit
our memory, and excite our practice, that by this means we may frequently renew
the efficacy of this blessed Sacrament, and our souls may batten more and more,
with this spiritual nourishment, and may be fed up to eternal life.

SECT. XXX.
THese are the generalities of our Devotion, which are of common use to all
Christians; There are besides these certain specialties of it, appliable to
several occasions, times, places, persons; For there are morning, and evening
Devotions; Devotions proper to our board, to our closer, to our bed, to Gods
day, to our own; to health, to sickness, to several callings, to recreations;
to the way, to the field, to the Church, to our home; to the student, to the
soldier, to the Magistrate, to the Minister, to the husband, wife, child,
servant; to our own persons, to our families; The severalties whereof, as they
are scarce finite for number, so are most fit to to be left to the judgment,
and holy managing of every Christian; neiis it to be imagined, that any soul
which is taught of God, and has any acquaintance with heaven, can be to seek
in the particular application of common rules to his own necessity or
expedience.

The result of all is,

A devout man is he that ever sees the invisible, and ever trembles before
that God he sees; that walks ever, here on earth, with the God of heaven; and
still adores that Majesty with whom he converses; That confers hourly with the
God of spirits in his own language; yet so, as no familiarity can abate of his
aw, nor fear abate ought of his love. To whom the gates of heaven are ever
open; that he may go in at pleasure to the throne of grace, and none of the
Angelical spirits can offer to challenge him of too much boldness: Whose eyes
are well acquainted with those heavenly guardians, the presence of whom he
does as truly acknowledge, as if they were his sensible Companions. He is well
known of the King of glory, for a daily suitor in the Court of heaven, and none
so welcome there, as he: He accounts all his time lost that falls beside his
God; and can be no more weary of good thoughts, than of happiness.

His bosom is no harbor for any known evil; and it is a question whether
he more abhorres sin, or hell; His care, is to entertain God in a clear and
free heart, and therefore he thrusts the world out of doors, and humbly
beseeches God to welcome himself to his own: He is truly dejected, and vile in
his own eyes: Nothing but hell is lower than he; every of his slips are
heinous, every trespass is aggravated to rebellion; The glory and favors of
God heighten his humiliation; He has looked down to the bottomless deep, and
seen with horror what he deserved to feel everlastingly; His cries have been as
strong, as his fears just; and he has found mercy more ready to rescue him,
than he could be importunate: His hand could not be so soon put forth as his
Saviors, for deliverance. The sense of this mercy has raised him to an
unspeakable joy, to a most fervent love of so dear a Redeemer; that love has
knit his heart to so meritorious a deliverer, and wrought a blessed union
betwixt God and his soul. That union can no more be severed from an infinite
delight, than that delight can be severed from an humble, and cheerful
acquiescence in his munificent God; And now, as in an heavenly freedom, he
pours out his soul into the bosom of the Almighty, in all faithful suits for
himself and others; so, he enjoyes God in the blessings received, and returns
all zealous praises to the giver.

He comes reverently to the Oracles of God, and brings not his eye, but his
heart with him; not carelessly negligent in seeking to know the revealed will of
his Maker, nor too busily inquisitive into his deep counsels; not too remiss
in the letter, nor too peremptory in the sense: gladly comprehending what he
may, and admiring what he cannot comprehend. Does God call for his ear? He goes
awfully into the holy presence and so hears, as if he should now hear his last:
Latching every word that drops from the Preachers lips, ere it fall to the
ground, and laying it up carefully where he may be sure to fetch it. He sits
not to censure, but to learn, yet speculation and knowledge is the least drift
of his labor; Nothing is his own but what he practices. Is he invited to Gods
feast? he hates to come in a soul and slovenly dress; but trims up his soul,
so, as may be fit for an heavenly guest: Neither does he leave his stomach at
home cloyed with the world, but brings a sharp appetite with him; and so feeds
as if he meant to live for ever. All earthly Delicates are unsavory to him, in
respect of that celestial Manna: Shortly, he so eats and drinks, as one that
sees himself set at Table with God, and his Angels; and rises and departs full
of his Savior; and in the strength of that meal walks vigorously and
cheerfully on toward his glory. Finally, as he well knows that he lives, and
moves, and has his being in God, so he refers his life, motions, and being
wholly to God; so acting all things, as if God did them by him, so using all
things, as one that enjoyes God in them; and in the mean time so walking on
earth, that he does in a sort carry his heaven with him.

THE FREE PRISONER: OR, The COMFORT of RESTRAINT.

Written Some while since in the Tower, BY I. H. B. N.

The Free Prisoner: OR, The Comfort of Restraint.
SECT. I.
SIR,
WHiles you pity my Affliction, take heed lest you aggravate it, and in your
thoughts make it greater than it is in my own; It is true, I am under
restraint; What is that to a man, that can be free in the Tower, and cannot but
be a prisoner abroad? Such is my condition, and every Divine Philosophers with
me. Were my walks much straiter than they are, they cannot hold me in; It is a
bold word to say, I cannot, I will not be a prisoner: It is my soul that is I:
my flesh is my partner, (if not my servant) not my self: However my body may be
immured, that agile spirit shall fly abroad, and visit both earth and heaven
at pleasure. Who shall hinder it from mounting up (in an instant) to that
supreme region of bliss, and from seeing that, by the eye of faith, which S.
Paul saw in ecstasy; and when it has viewed that blessed Hierarchy of heaven,
to glance down through the innumerable, and unmeasurable globes of light (which
move in the firmament; and below it) into this elementary world; and there to
compass seas and lands, without shipwreck, in a trice, which a Drake, or
Cavendish cannot do, but with danger, and in some years navigation; And if my
thoughts list to stay themselves in the passage; with what variety can my soul
be taken up of several objects; Here, turning in to the dark vaults, and
dungeons of penal restraint, to visit the disconsolate prisoners, and to fetch
from their greater misery, a just mitigation of mine own; There, looking in to
the houses of vain jollity, and pitying that which the sensual fools call
happiness; Here stepping in to the Courts of great Princes, and in them
observing the fawning compliances of some, the treacherous underworking of
others; hollow friendships, faithless engagements, fair faces, smooth tongues,
rich suits, viewing all save their hearts, and censuring nothing that it sees
not; There calling in at the low cottages of the poor, and out of their empty
cupbord furnishing it self with thankfulness; Here so overlooking the Courts
of Justice, as not willing to see rigor or partiality; There listening what
they say in those meetings which would pass for sacred, and wondering at what it
hears. Thus can, and shall, and does my nimble spirit bestirre it self in a
restless flight, making only the Empyreall heaven, the bounds of its motion;
not being more able to stand still, than the heavens themselves, whence it
descended: Should the Iron enter into my soul, as it did into that good
Patriarchs, yet it cannot fetter me: No more can my spirit be confined to one
place, than my body can be diffused to many. Perhaps therefore you are
mistaken in my condition; for what is it I beseech you that makes a prisoner?
Is it an allotment to the same room without change, without remove? What is
that still to a mind that is free?

And why is my body then more a prisorer than the best man's soul; that, you
know, is peremptorily assigned, for inhabitation to this house of clay till the
day of dissolution: Why more than the stars of heaven, which have remained
fixed in their first stations ever since they were first created? Why more than
those great persons which keep up for state; or dames for beauty? Why more than
those Anachorites whom we have seen willingly coopt up for merit? How much
more scope have we than they? We breath fresh air, we see the same heavens
with the freeest travelers.

SECT. II.
BUt we have (you will say) bounds for our restraint which the free spirit
hates; as never being pleased, but with a full liberty both of prospect and
passage; Any bar, whether to the foot, or to the eye, is a death: Oh vain
affectation of wild, and roving curiosity! If their desires cannot be bounded,
yet their motions must; When they have the full sight of heaven above them,
they cannot climb up into it; they cannot possibly see that whole glorious
contignation; and when the whole earth lies open before them, they can measure
but some small pieces of it. How can they be quiet till they have purchased
Tycho Brahe his prospective trunk of thirty two foot long, whereby they may
discover a better face of heaven; some lesser Planets moving round about the
Sun, and the Moonets about Saturn and Jupiter, and the mountains, seas and
valleys in the Moon? How can they rest til having acquainted themselves with
the constellations of our Hemisphere, they have passed the Equinoctial, and
seen the triangle, the cross, and the clouds, and the rest of the unknown
stars that move above the other Pole? And when all this is done, they are but
who they were, no whit better, no whit wiser, and perhaps far less happy than
those, who never smelt any but their own smoke; never knew any star, but
Charls-wayn, the morning star, and the seven. For me, I do not envy, but wonder
at the licentious freedom, which these men think themselves happy to enjoy;
and hold it a weakness in those minds, which cannot find more advantage and
pleasure in confinement, and retiredness; Is it a small benefit, that I am
placed there, where no oaths, no blasphemies beat my ears? where my eyes are
in no peril of wounding objects; where I hear no invectives, no false
doctrines, no sermocinations of Iron-mongers, Felt-makers, Cobblers, Broom-men,
Grooms, or any other of those inspired ignorants; no curses, no ribaldries:
where I see no drunken comessations, no rebellious routs, no violent
oppressions, no obscene rejoinings, nor ought else that might either vex or
affright my soul. This, this is my liberty: who whiles I sit here quietly locked
up by my keeper, can pity the turmoils and distempers abroad, and bless my own
immunity from those too common evils.

SECT. III.
IS is the necessity, and force of the restraint; since those things which we
do voluntarily, are wont to pass from us with delight, which being imposed
seem grievous to us? Why should not I have so much power over my will as to
make that voluntary in me, to undergo, which another wills forceably to
inflict? the mind that is truly subacted to Grace, can so frame it self to
what it must suffer, as that it finds a kind of contentment in patience; Thus
we daily do to the Almighty, whose will, by our humble submission, we make
ours; and pray that we may do so: And who can restrain us without him? If
therefore my wise and holy God think it best to cage me up, by the command of
authority (upon what cause soever) why should not I think this enclosure a
better liberty: who know there is perfect freedom in his obedience? So then,
if constraint make a prisoner, I am none; who am most willingly, where my God
will have me: And, if my will did not often carry me out of my own walls at
home, why cannot it as well confine me to a larger compass of the Tower?

SECT. IV.
IS it solitude and Infrequence of visitation? This may perhaps be troublesome
to a man that knows not to entertain himself; but, to him that can hold
continual discourse with his own heart, no favor can be greater; For of all
other, these self-conferences are most beneficial to the soul; Other men's
communication may spend the time with more advantage of learning, or mirth; but
none can yield us so much spiritual profit, as our own soliloquies: And when
all is done, the Greeks (...).
said well; It is not much, but useful that makes truly wise. Besides this,
we can never have the opportunity of so good company, as when we are alone:
Now, we enjoy the society of God, and his Angels, which we cannot so freely
do in a throng of visitants: When God would express his greatest entireness
with his Church, Ducam eam in solitudinem, says he: I will bring Hos. 2. 14.
her into the wilderness, and there speak comfortably to her. We cannot expect
so sweer conversation with God, in the presence of others, as apart. Oh the
divine benefit of an holy solitariness, which no worldly heart can either
know, or value! What care I for seeing of men, when I may see him that is
invisible? What care I for chatting with friends, when I may talk familiarly
with the God of heaven? What care I for entertaining mortal guests, when I may
with Abraham and his Nephew Lot feast the Angels of God: and (which were too
great a word, if God himself had not spoken it) be attended by them?

SECT. V.
IS it the reproach and ignominy that commonly attends the very name of an
imprisonment? weak minds may be affected with every thing: but, with solid
judgments, it is not the punishment, but the cause that makes either the
Martyr, or the malefactor. S. Paul's bonds were famous: and Petrus and vincula
is not without a note of yearly celebrity: and it were hard, if so many blessed
Martyrs, and Confessors, who have lived, and dyed in Jayles, for the truths
sake, should not have brought prisons (such as they may be) into some credit.
Shortly, as notorious crimes may be at liberty, so even innocence may be under
restraint; yet those crimes no whit the better, nor this innocence the worse.

Besides (that which perhaps came not within your freer thoughts) every
restraint is not for punishment; there is a restraint for safety, a salva
custodia, as well as arcta, such is this of ours: This strong Tower serves not
so much for our prison, as for our defense; what norror soever the name may
carry in it: I bless God for these walls, out of which I know not where we
could (for the time) have been safe from the rage of the mis-incensed
multitude: Poor seduced souls, they were taught it was pieto to be cruel; and
were misperswaded to hate and condemn us for that, (which should have procured
their reverence, and honor) even that holy station which we hold in Gods
Church; and to curse those of us, who had deserved nothing but their thanks and
prayers: railing on our very profession in the streets; and rejoicing in our
supposed ruin: Father, forgive them, for they knew not what they did: Here we
were out of the danger of this mis-raised fury, and had leisure to pray for the
quenching of those wild-fires of contention, and causeless malice, which (to
our great grief) we saw wicked incendiaries daily to cast amongst Gods dear,
and wel-minded people. Here we have well and happily approved with the blessed
Apostle, that (what ever our restraint be) the Word of God is not bound; With
what liberty, with what zeal, with what success has that been preached by us
to all comers? Let them say, whether the Tower had ever so many, such guests,
or such benedictions; so as if the place have rendered us safe, we have
endeavored to make it happy; Wherein our performances have seemed to confute
that Non enim potest men's attrita and oneribus and importunitatibus gravata,
tantum boni peragere, quantum delectata, and oppressionibus solut a. Cornel.
ep. 2. Rufo Coepiscopo.
which Cornelius Bishop of Rome long since observed, that the mind laden with
heavy burdens of affliction, is not able to do that service, which it can do
when it is free and at ease; Our troubles through Gods mercy made us more
active, and our labors more effectual.

SECT. VI.
Add unto these (if you please) the eminent dignity of the place, such as is
able to give a kind of honor to captivity, the ancient seat of Kings, chosen by
them, as for the safe residence of their Royal Persons, so for their Treasury,
their Wardrobe, their Magazine; all these precious things are under the same
custody with our selves; sent hither, not as to prison, but a repositorie; and
why should we think our selves in any other condition? How many worthy
inhabitants make choice to fix their abode within these walls, as not knowing
where to be happier? the place is the same to us, if our will may he the same
with theirs; they dearly purchase that, which cost us nothing but our fees;
nothing makes the difference, but the mere conceit of Liberty, which, whiles I
can give to my self, in my thoughts, why am I pitied as miserable, while their
happiness is applauded?

You see then, how free I am in that which you miscall my prison; see now, how
little cause I have to affect this liberty, which you imagine me to want;
since I shall be, I can be no other than a Prisoner abroad: There is much
difference of Prisons; One is straight and close locked, so far from
admitting visitants, that it scarce allows the Sun to look in at those
crosse-barred grates; another, is more large and spacious, yielding both Walks
and access; Even after my discharge from these Walls, I shall be yet sure to
be a Prisoner, both these ways; For, what is my body but my prison in the
one? and what is the world, but my prison in the other kind?

SECT. VII.
TO begin with the former, never was there a more close prisoner than my soul
is for the time to my body; Close in respect of the essence of that spirit,
which since its first Mittimus, never stirred out from this strait room; never
can do, till my Gaole-delivery.

If you respect the improvement of the operations of that busy soul, it is any
where, it is successively, every where; no place can hold it, none can limit
it; but if you regard the immortal, and immateriall substance of it, it is fast
locked up within these walls of clay, till the day of my changing come; even as
the closest Captive may write letters to his remotest friends, whilst his
person is in durance; I have too much reason to acknowledge my native Jayle,
and feel the true Symptoms of it to my pain; what darkness of sorrow have I
here found? what little-ease of melancholicke lodgings? what manacles and
shackles of cramps? yea what racks of torturing convulsions?

And if there be others, that find less misery in their prison, yet there is
no good soul, but finds equal restraint: That spiritual substance, which is
imprisoned within us, would feign be flying up to that heaven whence it
descended; these walls of flesh forbid that evolation, (as Socrates called it of
old) and will not let it out, till the God of spirits (who placed it there)
shall unlock the doors and free the prisoner by death; He that infused life
into Lazarus, that he might call him from the prison of the grave, must take
life from us, when he calls us out of this prison of flesh; I desire to be
loosed, and to be with Christ, (says the Apostle) as some versions express
it; whiles we are chained to this flesh, we can have no passage to heaven, no
free conversation with our Savior; Although it was the singular privilege of
that great Doctor of the Gentiles, that he was in heaven before his
dissolution: whether in the body, or out of the body, he knew not: How far that
rapture extended, whether to both soul and body, if he knew not, how should
we? But this we know, that such ecstasy and vision was in him, without
separation of the soul from the body; which another should hope for in vain:
And for him, so he saw this glory of Paradise, that he could not yet enjoy it:
Before he, or we, can be blessed with the fruition of Christ, we must be
loosed, that is, freed from our clog, and our chain of this mortal body.

What but our prison walls can hinder us here, from a free prospect? What but
these walls of flesh can hinder me from a clear vision of God? I must now, for
the time, see as I may: Nothing can enter into my soul, but what passes
through my senses, and partakes, in some sort, of their earthlinesse; when I am
freed from them, I shall see as I am seen; in an abstracted and heavenly way; so
as one spirit apprehends another: I do now, at the best, see those spiritual
objects darkly, by the eye of faith, as in a glass; and that not one of the
clearest neither: (Alas, what dim representations are these, that I can attain
to here, of that Majesty, whose sight shall make me blessed?) I shall once see as
I am seen, face to face; the face of my glorified soul shall see the face of
that all-glorious Deity, and in that sight be eternally happy; It is enough for
a prisoner in this dungeon of clay, to know of, and fore-expect, such felicity,
whereof these earthly gieves render him as yet incapable.

SECT. VIII.
VVOE is me! how many prisons do we pass? so soon as ever this divine soul is
infused into this flesh, it is a prisoner; neither can any more pass out of
this skin, till this frame of nature be demolished: And now, as the soul of
this Embryon is instantly a prisoner to the body, so the body is also a
prisoner in the womb, wherein it is formed: what darkness, what closeness,
what uneasinesie, what nuisance is there in this Dungeon of nature? There he
must lie in an uncouth posture, for his appointed month, till the native bonds
being loosed, and the doors forced open, he shall be by an helpful
obstetrication drawn forth into the larger prison of the world; there indeed he
has elbow-room enough: but all that wide scope cannot free him from a true
incarceration: Who knows not that there are many differences, and latitudes of
restraint? A Simeon may imprison and enchaine himself in the compass of a
pillar, not allowing himself the ease of his whole dimensions; Peter may be
locked up in a larger Jayl, betwixt his two Leopards (as that Father terms
them;) S. Paul may Acts ult.
be two years allowed to be a Prisoner in his own hired house, but under the
guard of his keeper, and not without his chain: There are those, who upon
heinous, and dangerous occasions may be kept close under many locks; there are
prisoners at large, who have the liberty of the Tower; yet even these last
notwithstanding the allowance of spacious walks, and fresh gardens, are no
other than acknowledged prisoners: Such is my condition to the world, when I am
at my fullest liberty. It is true, that when I look back to the straitness of
my first, and native prison, and compare it with the large extent of that wide
world, into which I am brought, I may well with Isaac's Herds-mensay, Rehoboth,
Genesis 36. 22
For now, the Lord has made me room: but when I compare that world, wherein I
am, with that whereto I aspire, and which I know to be above, and look to
enjoy; I can see nothing here, but mere prison-walls, and profess my life to
be no other than a perpetual durance.

SECT. IX.
IF Varro said of old, that the world was no other than Magna domus homuli.
the great house of little man, I shall be bold to add what kind of house it
is; It is no other than his prison, yea, his dungeon.

Far be it from me to disparage the glorious work of my omnipotent Creator: I
were not worthy to look upon this large, and glittering roof of heaven, nor to
see the pleasant varieties of these earthly landskips, If I did not adore that
infinite power, and wisdom which appears in this goodly, and immense fabric;
and confess the mavelous beauty of that majestic, and transcendent
workmanship; Rather when I see the Moon and the Stars, which thou have Psalm.
8. 3, 4.
ordained, I say with the Psalmist, Lord what is man?

But, O God, it is no dishonor to thee, that though this be a fair house, yet
thou have one so much better than it, as a Palace is beyond a Jayl.

This beauty may please, but that ravisheth my soul: Here is light, but dim,
and dusky, in respect of that inaccessable light, wherein thou dwell: Here
is a glorious Sun, that illumineth this inferior world, but thou art the Sun
who enlightenest that world above: Thou, to whom thy created Sun is but a
shadow.

Here we converse with beasts, or at the best, with men; there with blessed
souls, and heavenly Angels: Here some frivolous delights are intermixed with a
thousand vexations; There in thy presence is the fullness of joy: So then, let
the sensual heart mis-place his paradise here in the world, it shall not pass
for other with me, than my prison: How can it? Why should it? for what other
terms do I find here?

What blind light looks in here at these scant loopholes of my soul? Yea, what
darkness of ignorance rather possesses me? what bolts and shackles of heavy
crosses do I bear about me? how am I fed here with the bread of affliction? how
am I watched and beset with evil spirits? how contumeliously traduced? how
disdainfully looked upon? how dragging the same chain with the worst
malefactors? how disabled to all spiritual motions? how restrained from that
full liberty of enjoying my home, and my God in it, which I daily expect in my
dissolution? when therefore, I am released from these walls, I am still
imprisoned in larger. and so shall be til the Lord of the Spirits of all flesh
(who put me here) shall set me free; and all the days of my appointed time will
I wait, till this my changing come.

SECT. X.
YOu see then by this time, how little reason I have to be too much troubled
with this imprisonment, or my friends for me; But indeed, there are some sorts
of Prisoners, which neither you nor I can have tears enough to bewail: and
those especially of two kinds.

The one, those that are too much affected with an outward bondage: The other,
those that are no whit affected with a spiritual.

In the first rank are they that sink under the weight of their Irons: Poor
impotent souls, that groaning under the cruelty of a Turkish thraldom, or a
Spanish Inquisition, want Faith to bear them out, against the impetuous
violences of their tormentors: I sorrow for their sufferings; but for their
fainting more: Could they see the Crown of Glory, which the righteous Judge
holds ready for their victorious Patience, they could not but contemn pain,
and all the pomp of Death, and confess that their Light affliction (which is
but for a moment) works for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. But alas, it is the weakness of their eyes, that they only look at the
things that are seen, close walls, heavy fetters, sharp scourges, merciless
racks, and other dreadful engines of torture, and see not the things which are
not seen, the glorious reward of their victory, blessedness. Had they had
Stephens eyes, they would have emulated his martyrdom; Surely whosoever shall
but read the story of the mother and the seven brothers in the Maccabees, and
that of the forty Armenian Martyrs frozen to death, reported by Gaudentius,
and shall there see the fainting revolter dying uncomfortably in the Bath,
whiles the other thirty and nine (together with their new converted Keeper) are
crowned by an Angel from heaven, cannot choose (except he have nothing but ice
in his bosom) but find in himself a disposition emulous of their courage, and
= ambitious of their honor; But alas, what ever our desires, and purposes may
be, it is not for every one to attain to the glory of Martyrdom; this is the
highest pitch, that earthly Saints are capable of: He must be more than a man,
whom pain and death cannot remove from his holy resolutions, and especially,
the lingering execution of both. It is well if an age can yield one, Mole: In
what terms shall I commemorate thee, O thou blessed Confessor, the great
example of invincible constancy, in these backsliding times (if at least thy
rare perseverance be not more for wonder than imitation) whom thirty years
tedious durance in the Inqusitory at Rome, could not weary out of thy sincere
profession of the Evangelical truth? All this while thou were not allowed the
speech, the sight of any, but thy persecutors: Here was none to pity thee, none
to exhort thee; If either force of persuasion, or proffers of favor, or
threats of extremity, could have wrought thee for thy perversion, thou had
not at last dyed ours. Blessed be the God of all comfort, who having stood by
thee, and made thee faithful to the death, has now given thee a Crown of life
and immortality; and left thee a noble pattern of Christian Fortitude, so much
more remarkable, as less frequently followed.

Whether I look into the former, or the present times, I find the world full
of shrinking professors.

Amongst the first Christians, persecution easily discovered four sorts of
cowardly Renegadoes; The first, and worst, whom they justly styled Idolaters,
that yielded to all the public forms of worship to those false Gods: The
second, Sacrificers, who condescended so far, as to some kind of immolation
unto those fained deities, or, at least, to a tasting of those things which
were thus offered: The third, Incensers, such as (with Marcellinus himself)
came on so far, as to cast some grains of incense into the Idols fire: The
last were their Libellaticks, such as privately by themselves, or by some
allowed proxey, denied the Faith, yet with their money bought out this
ignominy, and sin of any public Act of Idolatry.

Not to speak of those many thousands which fell down before Solomon the
second, and held up their finger to signify their conversion to his
Mahometism, for ease of their taxations? how many do we hear of daily of all
nations, and some (which I shame and grieve to say) of our own, who yield to
receive circumcision, and to renounce their Savior? Oh the lamentable
condition of those distressed Christians! If constant to their profession, they
live in a perpetual purgatory of torment; If revolting, they run into the
danger of an everlasting damnation in hell; Even this gentle restraint puts me
into the meditation of their insupportable durance; Why do not all Christia
nhearts bleed with the sense of their deplorable estate? why is not our
compassion heightened, according to the depth of their peril, and misery?

What are our bowels made of, if they yearne not at their unexpressible
calamity? Ye rich Merchants, under whose employment many of these poor souls
have thus unhappily miscarried, how can you bless your selves in your baggs,
whiles you see themembers of Christ your Savior, thus torn from him, for want
of a petty ransom? Ye eminent persons whom God has advanced to power and
greatness, how can you sleep quietly upon your pillows, whiles you think of the
cold and hard lodgings, the hungry bellies, the naked and waled backs of
miserable Christians? Lastly, what fervent prayers should we all, that profess
the dear name of Christ, pour out unto the God of heaven for the strengthening
of the faith and patience of these afflicted souls against the assaults of
violence? and for their happy and speedy deliverance out of their woeful
captivity?

SECT. XI.
THese prisoners are worthy of our deep compassion; as those, who are too
sensible of their own misery; Others there are, who are so much more worthy of
greater pity, by how much they are less apprehensive of their need of it;
plausible prisoners under a spiritual tyranny; whose very wills are so
captived to the powers of darkness, that to choose they would be no other than
bondmen; pleasing themselves in those chains, whose weight is enough to sink
their souls into hell; such are they, who have yielded themselves over to be
enthralled by any known sin; No men under heaven do so much applaud themselves
in the conceit of their liberty; none so great slaves as they; If the very
Stoic Philosophers had not enough evinced this truth, Divinity should: Indeed,
the world is a worse kind of Algier, full of miserable captives; here lies one
so fettered in lust, that he rots again; there another, so laden with drunken
excess, that he can neither go nor stand, and in very deed is not his own
man: here, one so pinched with golden fetters, that he can neither eat, nor
sleep, nor at all enjoy himself; there, another so pined with envy, that he is
forced to feed on his own heart: here, one so tormented with anger that he is
stark mad for the time; and cares not how he mischieves himself in a furious
desire to hurt others: there, another so racked with ambition, that he is
stretched beyond his own length, and lives in the pain of a perpetual
self-extension.

These, and all others of this kind are most miserable prisoners, chained up
for ever-lasting darkness: So much more worthy of our pity, as they are less
capable of their own: Spend your compassion (if you please) upon these
deplorable subjects; But for me, wish me (if you will) as free from any
imputation of evil, as I was, and am from the thought of it; wish me in your
free champian, where I may have no hedge so much as to confine my eye: wish me
happy in the society of so dear and noble a Friend; but in the mean while,
think of me no otherwise, than as a Free Prisoner, And

Yours thankfully devoted in all faithful observance, I. N.

FINIS.
Several Tractates written by Dr. Hall B. of Norwich, In and since his
Imprisonment and Retiring. Namely,
1. THe Devout Soul, and Free Prisoner. 2. The Remedy of Coffeehouse, Or, A
Treatise of Contentation in whatsoever condition. 3. The Peacemaker, laying
forth the right way of Peace in matter of Religion. 4. The Balm of Gilead, Or,
Comforts for the distressed; both Moral and Divine. 5. Christ Mystical, Or,
The blessed union of Christ and his Members: To which is addded, An holy
Rapture, Or, A Patheticall Meditation of the love of Christ. Also, The
Christian laid forth in his whole disposition and carriage. 6. A Modest Offer,
tendered to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. 7. Select Thoughts in two
Decades, with the breathing of the Devout Soul. 8. Pax Terris. 9. Imposition
of Hands. 10. The Revelation unrevealed -- Concerning, The thousand years
reign of the Saints with Christ on Earth. 11. Susurrium cum Deo. Or, Holy
Selfe-Conferences of the Devout Soul, upon sundry choice Occasions. Now in the
Press, and never before Printed.

