QVERER Por Solo QVERER: To Love only for LOVE Sake: A DRAMATICK ROMANCE.

REPRESENTED AT ARANJUEZ BEFORE THE KING and QUEEN of SPAIN, TO CELEBRATE The
BIRTHDAY of that KING, BY THE MENINAS: Which are a Set of LADIES, in the
Nature of LADIES OF HONOR in that COURT, CHILDREN in Years, but Higher in
Degree (being many of Them Daughters and Heirs to GRANDEES of SPAIN) than the
ordinary Ladies of Honor, Attending likewise that Queen.

Written in Spanish by Don Antonio de Mendoza, 1623.

Paraphrased in English, Anno 1654.

Together With the FESTIVALS of ARANWHEZ.

London, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
White-Hart in Little-Britain. 1671.

Sir R. F. upon this Dramatick Romance, Paraphrased by him during his
Confinement to Tankersly Park in Yorkshire, by Oliver, after the Battle of
Worcester, in which he was taken Prisoner, serving His Majesty (whom God
preserve) as Secretary of State.
TIme was when I, a PILGRIM of the SEAS,
When I, 'midst noise of CAMPS, and COURTS Dis-ease,
Purloin'd some Hours, to Charm rude Cares with Verse,
Which flame of FAITHFUL SHEPHERD did rehearse:
But now restrained from SEA, from CAMP, from COURT,
And by a TEMPEST blown into a PORT;
I raise my thoughts to Muze on Higher Things,
And Echo ARMS and LOVES of QUEENS and KINGS:
Which QUEENS (despising Crowns and HYMEN'S Band)
Would neither MEN Obey, nor MEN Command.
GREAT PLEASURE FROM ROUGH SEAS TO SEE THE SHORE!
OR FROM FIRM LAND TO HEAR THE BILLOWS ROAR.
ILle Ego, qui (dubiis quondam jactatus in Undis)
Qui (dum nunc Aulae, nunc mihi Castra strepunt)
Leni importunas mulcebam Carmine Curas,
In quo PASTORIS flamma FIDELIS erat.
At nunc and Castris, Aulisque ejectus and Undis,
(Nam mihi Naufragium Portus, and Ira Quies)
Altius insurgens, REGUM haud intactus AMORES,
Et REGINARUM fervidus ARMA Cano:
Quae (vinc 'is HYMENAEE tuis, spretisque CORONIS)
Nec Iuga far virum, nec dare Iura veliat.
Dulce procellosos audire ex Litore stactus!
Eque truci Terram dulce videre Mari.
TO THE Queen of Spain.
MADAM,
THis Comedy having been admitted to Your Majesty's Eyes, has leave to throw
it self at Your Feet: It was written to Celebrate the BIRTHDAY of the KING;
this gained it that Credit, which it ought to have lost for being mine: It has
been sought at the Festival of Your Majesty; for, in virtue of that Esteem
which Your Name gives it, Men pardon it, the having been Penned by me. To this
Task I was emboldened by D. Maria de Gusman, believing that a Creature of her
Father would happen to Serve Your Majesty better with his Obligation, than
Others with their Wit; the mistake was just, I do not blame it, nor those who
desire to read it, since it had the Honor to be heard by Your Majesty; and it
will gain two Plaudits (without deserving one) Your Majesty being now the
second time its PATRONESS.

Your MAJESTY'S Servant, Don Antonio de Mendoza.

THis Comedy I consent not to the Printing of, suffer it I do, thus Copied, to
distribute amongst those who ask it, for I have not the presumption to offer it
to any; if it be a boldness in whosoever prints, in me it would be called a
Madness; one day is master of another, against what is written to day, will be
that which is better known to morrow, and who is it that knew not less
yesterday? The ambition of the Press is a fault, which it is not sufficient to
repent; and, in case this common danger were wanting, my fear would create a
new one, though that which deserved to come to the Eyes of their Majesty's,
might well lose the fear of all Men's Ears; for caution, advertency, and study,
were more due to those that Acted it, than to those that shall read it; and
this being more than sufficient for approbation, the Council was not pleased it
should have any other: I write it in obedience, and no Friends persuade me to
publish it, for I have none so vain; I rather think that their opinion would
obstruct me in this resolution, finding in it those defects, which are hidden
from the proper Author; for in the things of other men, it is easy to be more
wise; and, without denying the defects of mine, I have been very willing to
content with some Copies as many as seek them, deceived with that which was
owed to so splendid an Occasion: Nor let any Man expect that the Errors of my
Pen, shall be accompanied with my disacknowledgment, yet, not to be excessive
in difference neither, I believe, that if so remarkable a Festival, required
not a greater ability than mine, it would be worthy of some Applause, since
compared with vulgar ones, it deserves not much Contempt.

The Prologue: (Called by the Spaniard The LOA, i. e. The Praise, because
therein the Spectators are commended to curry favor with them:) Spoken by the
Lady Isabella Velasco, and the Lady Isabella Guzman; the latter pulling the
former in with her upon the Stage.
Vel. I Will not forth with thee (that is plain)
Child, thou tir'st thy self in vain.

Guz. Isabel, thy Face, Life, Mien,
Be now my Second, now my Skreen.

Vel. I Garb? I Spirit? Beauty I?
What, oblige me with a Lie?
Skreen thee that Face, thy Mettle fine,
Which second is to none, be thine.
I join with thee in the Prologue?
I with the Audience to collogue,
Stiling them Senate? Was I Born
To Lead of Pigmies the Forelorn?
There Is Lady's work with all my heart!

Guz. I, but, Velasco, take her part,
Who of the Minikin Brigade
The youngest is, the Lanspresade.

Vel. Marry, a good, and mending Fault,
But who must afterward be sought
To make me confident and bold?
For, Guzman, neither am I old.

Guz. Well, of the Play then I despair,
Since with the Dames whatever's rare,
Sprightful, Divine, is wanting all:
For, no Dames, no Festival.
Unto whose Top-top-gallant Beauty
To strike, is little Fly-boats Duty:
Superlatives have there a Rise:
Comparisons are odious twice.

Vel. That Fear has Reason on its side,
But a worse matter I have spied:
The pityous humane Poet, he
Fears too, his Farce will tedious be.

Guz. What a Fear that for the base Rout!
What a misbegotten doubt!
("For Modesty may split it self
"On a high Rock, or a low Shelf.)
No, no, our Festival, however
It in it self has cause to fear,
(For of Meninas even the name
Speaks littleness) yet our great DAME
(Whom, were She not Divine all out,
Heaven would have made a humane doubt)
Making it now her Offering
Upon the Birthday of the King,
It must for that be understood
Both short and sweet, and great and good,
That It is Hers deserves Applause:
Effects are measured by their Cause.
Chiefly so fair Porch being made
Thereto; as such a Mascarade,
In which the INFANTA'S Self would be,
To grace the QUEENS Solemnity,
The KING too Her refined Gallant
(For no high strain of Soul can want
In one whose Body is so pure)
What Favor does not he ensure?
It must be full as much at least
As His Divine Sister expressed,
With their two Brothers; All High Born:
Children of Phoebus, and the Morn.
The Dames w' are sure of to their powers:
All then is safe, all then is ours:
In so much Beauty, so much Glory.

Vel. And the Foreign Auditory.

Guz. Friend, thou will, drown in shallow water,
Bespeak not Ills, things hap thereafter,
My Life upon it, our Festival
To see, will hurt none of them all:
Whip me, if of the Twenty four
They feel not many hours creep slower.

Vel. Away then with the Prologue, Wench:
But beg not favor of the Bench,
Nor silence: Nor whine out at first,
Pardon our faults, (that Fault's the worst)
Be out, nor praise the King for fair
Beauty is perishable Ware,
And I my Master would commend
For parts alone which time will mend.
Shape is the humane By of Kings,
Who in the Main are God-like Things:
Call me the Queen, French Flower no more,
But in Field Azure a Sun Or;
Now so much Native of Casteel
That even Her Soul is Spanish Steel:
Nor Charles and Fernand Branches both
Of the old Laurel of the Goth:
But Scyons of a better Tree
In Paradice's Nursery:
And of MARIA (Glorious Dame)
Beauty without, lined with the same
(Since even strong Lines cannot afford
To do her right) speak not a word,
But let her praise to it self sing
Like Bells that, without pulling, ring.

Guz. Kings should be praised with reverence then,
As they are Kings, not as they are Men;
Their fortitude, and not their face;
The sordid Flatterers Commonplace:
His Actions I will Celebrate;
His parts, as they are parts of State;
Much of King, in Years but few;
Spains Honor, and her Indies new,
And his fair Spouse.

Vel. That task is Fames:
Begin.

Guz. Still vailing to the Dames.
The Lady Isabella Guzman advances some steps, and begins the Main PROLOGVE, as
follows. WHilst Thee Great PHILIP (apprehensive Scholar,
In the Great Book of GOVERNING well Read)
The Nations Wonder, and Applause, proclaim
In every Action of thy Life a King;
Whilst on the Occidental Gulphs a Yoke,
Whilst on the Seas of the Levant a Law,
Thy Hand imposes, and thy boundless Valor
Props Heaven, and Is the Bridle of the Earth:
Whilst thou art like thy Great Grandsire, before
The Worlds suspension, and thy thundering Ships
To Northern Regions, Armed with Plates of Ice,
Are fiery Mountains on their snowy Waves;
And thy Iberian Flags (Victory's Wings)
Both Germanies and Africa fear, and strike to:
(For if of old their Valor made those bow,
They do it by Custom and prescription now.)
Grace the Solemnities of thy bright CONSORT
Which strive in vain to equal the Occasion,
So every way Majestic: A Perfection
Divine, the utmost stretch of humane Nature,
And thou ISBELLA (fair even to the Soul,
The Daughter of a King, whose valiant Hand
More trusting to it self than unto Chance
Hammered his Crown out with his Sword) receive
With a benign and amiable Brow
(It must be amiable) this small Earnest
Of our Devotions; whom to see alone
Claims Knees and Hearts, sat'st thou beneath the Throne:
And thou, the pleating terror of the Earth,
In smooth Apollo's Spirit, Spirit of Mars,
King of two Worlds, let thy good hap enjoy
Another greater Empire in her Beauty.

Vel. Live, Reign (High Princes) more than Time it self,
And (fairer in your Virtues than your Persons)
Drop Stars with Heaven: The blessed Progeny
Of your Immortal Loves (your Beauties sparkles)
Let Spain Adore, and in so great a Glory,
PHILIP the Fifth expunge Fifth CHARLES's Story.
And you young Men, who by your budding Greatness
Proclaim the Splendor of your Royal Cradle,
Pave with a lofty and a radiant Foot
The Milky Way.
And thou (the Envy of the Goddesses)
Illustrious INFANTA may thy Fortune
Equal thy rare Endowments. To be Fair
Ah! let it not a woeful Blessing be,
Nor Beauty a desired Misery.

Vel. We two (Is'bellas) ISABELL Divine,
Present thee one Play more, with more Refine,
Framed and Endited by Earths greatest King,
Penned with the fairest Plume in Cupid's Wing,
Acted by Queens below, by Saints above;
A truer Comedy, called, LOVE for LOVE.

Guz. And may this Birthday [ Ecce to another Birth]
E're next Spring do it with Flowers, perfume the Earth
With a sweet Prince, like Him from whom He came.

Vel. In FACE.

Guz. In VIRTUE.

Vel. In RENOWN.

Guz. In NAME.

A Song After the Main Prologue, Painting the Festival of Aranwhez.
THe Flowers that most adorn
Of Aranwhez the Plain
(Following a black-ey'd Morn)
A Laurel entertain;
Of flowery May the King,
Apollo's gallant Son,
He at His Fifteenth Spring
Ware of the Field the Crown:
When His Seventeenth April came,
Worshipping that Goddess yonder,
Wonders wrought He in Her Name,
But His Faith the greatest Wonder.
CHORUS. O how deft, how sweet to boot,
First handsome, and then light of foot;
Tagus's Nymphs of best renown,
To whom no Love nor Grief is known
(Brighter, fairer) from Heavens Globe
Steal away the Starry Robe,
And the Earths embroidered Gown!
OF all the World admires
For rare, a fair disdain,
Placed bounds to her desires,
And that best object made her Eyes refrain.
How great, and how well placed,
A Roses love? With Use
How well was it at last
Paid by a Flower-de-luce?
Love from complaints is free:
That we for once might find,
Beauty may happy be,
And Happiness be kind.
CHORUS. O how deft, how sweet to boot,
First handsome, and then light of foot;
Tagus's Nymphs of best renown,
To whom no Love nor Grief is known
(Brighter, fairer) from Heavens Globe
Steal away the Starry Robe
And the Earths embroidered Gown!
YEars (which deserve perpetual Spring,
And which deserve to be his Years)
Joy them, He that loves the King;
And adore them, He that fears.
Clasp let his early Valor on
Strong and glittering Steel of Spain,
Multitudes in whom alone
Of Fernand's and Alfonso's Reign.
Never let him rust with Calms
But His Hand purchase, His Hand cut
As many Crowns out, and as many Palms
As His Forefathers tumbled at his Foot.
CHORUS. O how deft, how sweet to boot,
First Handsome, and then light of foot;
Tagus's Nymphs of best renown,
To whom no Love nor Grief is known
(Brighter, fairer) from Heavens Globe
Steal away the Starry Robe
And the Earths embroidered Gown!
The Final End of the Prologue.
The Persons in the first Act.
Represented. Representing. ZELIDAURA, Queen of Tartaria, Lady Mary Gusman.
CLARIDIANA, Queen of Arabia, Lady Anne Sandi. FELISBRAVO, Young King of Persia,
Lady Frances Tavara. PRINCE CLARIDORO, Lady Mary Cutinio. PRINCE FLORANTEO, La.
Margaret Tavara. The CAPTIVE PRINCE, Lady Izabella Gusman. The GENERAL La.
Margaret Zapata. ROSELINDA, Lady attending Zelidaura, Lady Izabella Velasco.
FLORINDA, attending Claridiana, Lady Mary Salier, of the Privy-Chamber. First
GIANT, Lady Lucy Prada, of the Privy-Chamber. Second GIANT, Lady Frances
Quiros, of the same. RIFALORO, the Drole, La. Katherine Quiros.
Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.
THE FIRST ACT.
Drums and Trumpets, and enter at one end of the Stage the General with a
Truncheon in his hand, and Soldiers with Banners; before him Captives, and
amongst them one of better appearance than the rest: At the other, Felisbravo
habited after the Persian manner, with a Royal Train; and let the General
approach him, laying the truncheon at his feet; and the General is to wear a
laurel Crown, which he takes off when he comes at the King. General.
Unconquered Sir.

Felis. Rise wise and valiant General.

Genesis Give me thy Feet, these Plants shall be my Laurels.

Felis. General, into my Arms, into my Heart:
To pay good Services is Kings best part:
Relate thy Victory.

Genesis Dread Sovereign, Mine
The Sweat was, but the Victory was thine.
With full two hundred Ships of monstrous burden
( Crammed with Land Soldiers too) the Foe usurped
Thy narrow Seas, and hovered over these Lands
As over a certain Prey, on which he looked
As the sole Obstacle betwixt his high
Hopes, and the UNIVERSAL MONARCHY.
Thou (to receive this Storm where e're it falls)
Stay'st must'ring on the Shore thy fearless Bands;
In head whereof, thou Marchest bravely Mounted
In silver Arms; writ in thy Face, and Star,
THE SON OF FORTUNE BY THE GOD OF WAR:
Mean time, go I to hunt them out at Sea,
Under the auspicious flight of thy guilt Standard
Approached them; Ship by Ship I visit thine
(Guiding my self a Barge's Rudder) spurred
On both sides with long Oars, and from each poop
Bid ours remember, in that AZURE FIELD
We are our Island's, It is the Worlds shield.
Wellcom'd on board my own with shouts, re-eccho'd
With general acclamations of the rest,
Which one by one bear up to pay my visit,
And all come sooping underneath my Lee
To fetch new courage; briskly we advance
Upon the Foe, who all this while had stood
With smiling silence on the trembling FLOOD.
His potent FLEET was cast into the form
Of a Half Moon, gaping to purse us up,
As that dire African at dismal Cannae
Did once ROMES Army led by a rash CONSUL;
Withal, to boast it self the SOVEREIGN
(Like horned Cinthia) of the curled MAIN.
My brave Vice Admiral (a second DRACO,
Writing his laws in blood texted with flame)
Swears by the Queen of Night,
To be a perfect CRESCENT It wants light.
As the proud Bearer of the three-fork'd Thunder
And winged Lightening on her towering Plumes
(On whom her Master JOVE bestowed the Empire
Over all the feathered People, for her service
In the famed rape of ruddy GANIMEDE)
Steered with her trayn, sails driving through the Clouds,
Thence stoops Plebeian Birds; so his bold Frigate
From a big Wave, on which she soared aloft
In clouds of smoke, flies at the Covey entire,
Arrow of Gunpowder, Eagle of Fire.
Not Priams City crackled in more Flames,
When to the fatal Horse she opened her Walls,
Then did those wooden Towers; nor with more fury
The Greek Host (ushered by that Horse) did reign
In her waste streets, than I with thy whole FLEET
Sent whizzing amongst theirs (in foaming Mead)
From feathered Squadrons Thunderbolts of Lead.
The Sea is made another Sea of Blood,
The sailing Wood, a Wood of floating Bodies.
In fine, a Victory by Sea robs thee
Of one by Land: And of this vast ARMADA
(Beneath whose weight the Main it self did shrink,
And which did threaten even the Earth to sink)
The scattered fragments kiss thy princely Feet;
Ships, Captives, Banners, Streamers, Rudders, Keels,
Tall Masts, and launching Oars,
Now the torn Spoils and Trophies of these shores.
Of all thy Navy but one Ship is missing;
And thou (King of the TRIDENT, second NEPTUNE,
Lord of four Seas) have hurld
A Bit, FEAR, ENVY, on the Sea, SUN, WORLD.

Felis. Once more, O let me hold such virtue fast!

Genesis What dangers courts not one, thus doubly graced,
His Kings Hand kissed, to inspire him going out;
Returned, his Arms, to fence him round about?
This rears your Bulwarks; for that Prince who takes
One Soldier into favor, thousands makes.

Felis. A MONARCH'S gracious Eye, preserving State,
Makes a brave Soldier, and just Magistrate.

Genesis Kiss all of you great FELISBRAVO's plants.

Capt. Cross Stars!

Felis. There Is greatness in that countenance.

Capt. I Am sure there is woe.

Genesis This slave, of a high soul,
Thy Name did conquer.

Capt. At thy Feet I roll.

Felis. How comes so stout and brave a Man to show
Such poorness, as to sink beneath a woe?

Capt. It is the least I feel; who much repine
This should be thought to share one sigh that is mine.
To be thy slave an honor always is,
And now to me a seasonable bliss;
A Good, which I do owe my Ill.

Felis. Unfold
To me thy Grief.

Cap. It Is easier bourn, than told:
For, though my life be thine, my grief's my own.

Felis. Trust me with both, I have not Ruth alone,
But Remedy.

Cap. Though it is to saw a sorrow
To tell't, let me thy Ear in private borrow.

Felis. General retire the Folks.

Capt. Take then a pain
Equally hard to speak as to contain. Exeunt Genesis etc.
Great FELISBRAVE, new Founder of this Empire;
Phoenix, whose birth into the Throne began
Out of the dissolution of a SWAN;
Who in the compass of two years, have lived
"A thousand Ages (for so much live KINGS,
"As they do Reign; Reign, as they do great things.)
TARTARIA, a famous Part of ASIA
(For now it rivals her fair Country, who
A Star in Heaven, is a Rose in Cyprus)
Has for its Queen the beauteous ZELIDAURA,
Whom the most rich embroideries of Praise
Serve for her wearing upon Common days,
Those vulgar terms (with which a mortal Face
Men basely flatter to the Morns disgrace)
Those bold comparisons with newborn day
And midday Suns (which HEAVENS and GARDENS lay
So splendidly to heart) are, of her Youths
Inestimable blossom, most fair Truths;
In whom perfections see nothing to mend by,
And miracles themselves something to envy:
To whose fresh Years, and Cheeks, the Aprils throng
For flowery license to be fair and young.

Fell. Is she so fair?

Capt. The least in her that is rare.

Fell. And good?

Capt. Yes, ten times more than she is fair.

Fell. (Rare Wight indeed) Aside.
Captive proceed.

Capt. Those poor Examples, in which Poets feign
Of much Romantic Princess such profane
Impossibilities, outdone by Her,
Her sobrer Beauty joins sweet with severe,
Majestical with humble, for a King,
Not for a Woman, made: She takes the Ring,
Guirds Steel, and Laurel: Pond'ring on the acts
Writ of Semiramis, and manly facts
Of great Penthisilea, she becomes
Of a light flame, as, at the kindling Drums,
Achilles hid in lying Petticoat,
His choice betraying what his face did not.
A Man amongst her Counselors she lives,
A Woman with her Ladies; Laws she gives,
And Hearts she conquers; beautiful, and wise.

Fell. Is she so gallant?

Capt. She does Monarchize
With such sage valor, that the world --

Fell. Pass an.
Seeing Felisbravo disturbed he stops. (What a rare Woman!)

Capt. (What a curious Man! Aside.
But, who can hear so great a Queen set forth,
And not be ravished with her matchless worth?) Aside.
I, by her Fame drawn from Cicilia (where
The King my Father all those Nations fear
As far as Nile) amongst many, to present
My self one Trophy of her Beauty, went;
True always, always firm, always in vain:
And, when in highest tow'rings of my Flame,
In lowest stoops of humble Adoration,
Excess of Love with me was Moderation,
And wonders possible; It so befell --

Fell. 'She Married?

Capt. She!

Fell. What proved?

Capt. Invincible.

Fell. Conclude thy Story then (and let her be
In a good hour fair, and at liberty.) Aside.

Capt. -- My Father sick'ned (Noble Felisbrave)
And, in a War where Love and Duty strave,
That which I sided with was overcome;
For, with two Ships to visit him I come,
When five of that Armada meet with me
(New-wrecking Quicksands of the cruel Sea!)
Against which, receiving thousand wounds I strive,
That, for their killing me, I might forgive
Their making me a Slave; Thy General comes
To round thy Coasts: He them again overcomes,
Chains them, conducts them, where the King may put
Upon their Bellies his tryumphant Foot.
I (Captive twice) on peevish FORTUNES Frown
Pretend not to establish a Renown:
For a Fool too may be unfortunate.
But if a King; If, by an Antidate
Of early VIRTUE, when years fifteen came
Thou wrot'st Eternal; If you are like thy Fame;
If thou know Pity: If admitt'st of Tears,
To supple thee; Of Prayers, to storm thy Ears;
Past Ages, to incite thee; History,
To make thee glorious to Posterity: Offers to throw himself at the Feet of
Felisbravo, but he does not permit him.
Or set me free, or kill me instantly;
If it be possible a wretch can dye.

Fell. Rise, gallant Youth, and Courage new acquire.

Capt. My Soul bates to be gone, proud to expire
At so brave Feet.

Fell. (Alas, he swounds!) and mine
Two tender Passions does partake from thine,
(Let in at several doors) Love at my Ear,
Grief at my Eye: Hoe, General!

Genesis I am here.

Enter General. Fell. New matter that thy virtue may not miss,
Save me this Slave from death; and tell him this,
A King (that knows how to be one) commands
Thee, trust thy Life and Fortune in his hands.

Genesis He would not let his wounds be dressed.

Fell. Ply, serve him
As thou would me; and all the Gods preserve him.
The General carries him out upon his shoulders, and Felisbravo remains alone.
What Circe in a moment has purloyn'd
The wonted peace and freedom of my Mind?
What War is this, that lays soft batteries
Unto a Soul inured to Victories?
What heavenly Zelidaura is this same?
What new device of Love, out of a Name
To shoot so sweet a Poison? O, then I
Less wounded Slave! Thou 'lt leave me, if thou dye,
Something to envy in what thou do deplore,
And in thy Story something to adore.
But, though so great a Beauty force my Love,
And to suppress it against Nature prove,
I Will be a better Prince, than Lover: Brave,
And hard, therefore my Act! Free be the Slave:
And (if he live) see Tartary; whilst I
Of Love, of Sorrow, and of Honor dye.
And let us bring in fashion, 'twixt us both,
Justice in Rivalship, in Absence Troth.

Enter General with a Picture. Genesis He lies all weltring in his Blood, and live
He cannot: This fair Picture he does give
For thee to keep: And (if he dye) for Wife
Prays thee to make a conquest of the Life,
To him (he said) and all the World, but Thee,
Angelical Impossibility.

Fell. Reach it: Return, and let your care be more --
(Gust yield to Reason) -- then it was before. Exit.
Tempt me not, Love: The Face I will not see,
Blind Argus, if my Ears were scall'd by thee
What second engine against my Eyes must move,
To burn my Heart to Cindars? I, in love!
I, pangs! I, pulings! I, to be afraid
My Faith cannot deserve, my Vows persuade!
Tears, from a Manly Face! Sighs, that shall find
Themselves no more regarded than the Wind!
Oh! Why should Love such servile things enjoin?
But why this Pride? Does Beauty not enshrine
A Deity? Did it not GODS subdue?
Then let it tame a Man, and let me view
The lovely noble Feature, and the bright,
Of this fair Shade. Love is a lessening flight:
When he does vail his Plumes, it is such a thing
As when an Eagle stoops upon the Wing.
Looks upon the Picture. This Face all Soul is, and so full of Life,
That Life and Beauty are in it at strife
Which shall be more: -- What Spirits? -- What Spells too?
If in a little Card a Compass show
The Earth, and lay it out in several;
In this, a PENCIL has Mapp'd Heaven and all,
And Mapp'd it to the Life. -- For on these Cheeks
Looks upon it again, and again. (Where white and red divinely intermix)
Aurora's hands hang snowing Iesamines,
-- Her Fingers bleeding Roses; -- The MOON shines
Bright in these Tresses, where each Hair's a Ray;
-- Two twinkling Stars; -- Two speaking Rubies; -- May
Buds; -- The MORN Blushes; -- At one skip the Sun
Gets up; -- High NOON as soon as Day's begun!
I Will love, I Will dye (O most unhappy man!)
In love a Phoenix, and in death a Swan.

Enter General. Genesis The Captive (Sir) is something livelier.

Fell. How?
What do thou say?

Genesis That he is better.

Fell. (Now Aside.
Must he needs mend?) Good News: And I would do thee
Some good for bringing it.

Genesis Heaven keep him to thee.

Fell. Love, I shall crush thee yet, as arrogant
As false too as thou art; As I am Man,
I may be staggered; but, as I Am a KING,
(Born for more Sovereign Ends) thou can not throw me.
We, should, with sprawling of our Childish Arms,
The cruel Serpents of ALCIDES strangle:
We, in the midst of all the SIRENS Charms,
Should the wise caution of ULISSES carry.
Let my desire be tamed, and not
My Obligation be forgot;
I more provoking Envy's Sting
As virtuous, than as being a King;
The World admiring in my Pains
Sober Madness, and free Chains.

Exeunt. Trumpets, Enter the Queen Zelidaura, her Head-dress full of Plumes,
Roselinda Lady of Honor to her, Prince Claridoro, and Train, as in heat of
Argument, begun in the Tyring-Room. Zel. My Will to me's a Law. If it appear
Prepost'rous for a Woman Arms to bear,
Let it suffice I make the Precedent.
Since there be Men effeminately bent,
We Manly Women must that wrong undo;
For you see sometimes NATURE can lie too.

Claro. Brave ZELIDAURA, thy Heroic Mind
Who does not wonder at?

Zel. Little inclined
Always to sloth, the Pride I have, I place
In a great Heart, and not in a fair Face.
If on the Borders of my Land, we have
A Novelty so manifoldly brave,
A woing Warfare, this ENCHANTED QUEEN,
A Beauty the more sought the less it is seen,
Nor of less difficulty to the Wit
Than to the Sword, shall I not step to see it?
To see such Noble Action? chiefly I
Giving the frailty of my Sex the Lie?
Not, that my Courage has so much of heat,
As to thrust Prudence wholly from her seat;
So metled I am not, as if that I
Affected it to quit deformity;
Nor yet so foolish as some Women are,
Who for that only do suspect they 're fair.

Claro. HEAVEN, that created thee thus warlike, stole
Into a Woman's Body a Man's Soul.
But Nature's Law in vain thou do gainsay:
The Woman's Valor lies another way.
The Dress, the Tear, the Blush, the witching Eye,
More witching Tongue, are Beauty's Armory:
To rally, to discourse in Companies
Who Is fine, who courtly, who a WIT, who wise:
And with the awing sweetness of a DAME
(As conscious of a Face, can Tigers tame)
By Tasks and circumstances to discover
Amongst the best of PRINCES the best LOVER;
(The Fruit of all those Flowers) who serves with most
Self diffidence, who with the greatest boast;
Who twists an Eye of Hope in brayds of Fear,
Who silent (made for nothing but to bear
Sweet scorn and injuries of LOVE) envyes
Unto his Tongue the Treasure of his Eyes:
Who, without vaunting shape, has only Wit,
Nor knows to hope reward, though merit it:
Then, out of All, to make a CHOICE so rare
So lucky-wise as if thou were not fair.

Zel. Will men never leave this freak? that Beauties fate
Is neither to the wise, nor fortunate?
ENVY would have it so, She ushered in
This vulgar Error, or some scorned Man's Spleen
Or homely Woman's Comfort. PRINCE, that DAME
Who lets her self be loved with a true Flame,
Considers not how ill INGRATITUDE
Will look, when she must afterward be rude.
Should I examine if this Man's a Gull,
Or the other Gull a LOVER? Poor, and dull!
To render him the object of my Care,
Who should be of my Scorn! Only Despair
Will I allow to Men, nor can dispense
With so much show of hope, as diligence.
What a fond antiquated Error? (Save me!)
I must called Love, because a Man would have me
For his none-self: He swears he is mine alone;
Then (grosely) prays me not to be my own.

Ros. Sounds it not merit unto thee for one
To serve thee, who is braver than the Sun?

Zel. Would thou have me admire and value than
The painted Plumes of any Peacock-Man?
I Have Pride enough my self. It makes me smile
(And yet I Am vexed) to hear what Love the style
And serving in a GALLANT; to new sheath
Himself each day, not let his Mistress breath,
But haunt her to the Park, or to the Bourse,
On that the vulgar call a goodly Horse;
Hat in the hand, her colors in the hat,
Then tell her with a trembling boldness -- (What?)
That he is an Ass; Affect a diffidence,
Yet wear her Porch out; making diligence,
Smell rank of Hope. If Importunity
Is called Desert, what more absurd can be
Than for a fair one to become his prey
That hunts her down? Let Greater ASIA
Her Princes send their Valors here to prove:
I would see Fighting, and not hear of Love.

Ros. Our Ancestresses would; but we (more wise)
The Ignis fatuus of Love despise.

Claro. These Ceremonies which thou seek'st to bar,
From the first hallowing fundamental are
To Lady-hoods fair Order; for, discreet,
Secret, and stout, and gay; of a complete
Lover, are the Ingredients: And in SPAIN
The gallant Mock-war of the Bulls, and CANE
Does in a Courtly Valor comprehend
Both that which you, and that which I commend:
For those fierce GAMES (though Sports they called are)
Proclaim in jest what Men in earnest dare.

Zel. Secret (quoth you!) If he must trusted be
With nothing, what is his secrecy to me?
Thou (CLARIDORO) do extremely err,
If thou think Courtships can this Bosom stir;
Not my AFFECTION, Body, Air, and Mien;
But Soul, Deeds, Virtues, purchase my ESTEEM.
Thy brave Youth hazard in this Enterprise:
(For Sloth in Princes is a double Vice.)
Whence, if thou conquer, thou come burnished forth
With Glory; if thou dye, what greater worth
Than to lose well a Life.

Claro. But I keep mine,
To be spent better in some CAUSE that is thine;
Mean while, at thy adored Feet it lies:
And where can be a nobler Enterprise,
Than to overcome thy Love's disdainful, high
And Beautiful Impossibility?
'T has more of danger in it too: For there
My Valor combats, but with Thee my Fear.
If thou dispraisest Praise, neglectest Care,
And hate to be loved, why art thou fair?

Zel. I am not fair, nay fair I will not be;
And less endure to be so called by thee.
If Truth, where is the favor? if a Lie,
It mends me not. What vain Civility!
(I wonder it should please some as it does)
A great Lie it is, and would be a small Truth.

Claro. Be not displeased that I thy Beauty praise;
It Is a Debt which my Eye owes, and my Tongue pays:
Give me thy Heart then, or thou wilt dye in debt.

Zel. If I have thine, where? Show me my Receipt.

Claro. It Is well: The anger of a Mistress swells
In thee; in me a LOVER's Patience dwells.

Ros. If all thy Servants thus thou entertain,
I look this Prince too should be bond, or slain;
For of the other nothing yet is known.

Zel. Ay, and absence killed him, he has done
The part of a Wiseman and of a Lover.

Claro. The ENCHANTED CASTLE does it self discover.

Zel. A goodly Fabric!

Claro. Princely!

Zel If the Cloud
Shine so, what does the light that it does shroud?

Claro. The two wings various workmanship seems rather
A Sphere, than Palace; Miracle, than either.

Zel. The uniform and equal structure vyes
Twin-Beauties so, it is Music of the Eyes!
And its perfections (greater their fame)
The style of Royal, for Divine disclaim!

Ros. It shows 'midst so much Beauty, as delights,
A Majesty that awes, Honor that frights.
What MONSTERS muster!

Claro. That of Creet (I think)
I am surveying, and his LABYRINT.

Zel. Here hangs a Trumpet.

Claro. It Is, without all doubt,
TO advise when any strangers are without.

Zel. Blow it, and call.

Ros. Is it no more but so?
Madam, when thou do call, do thou not know
Thou call'st a thousand Monsters?

Zel. Pish! We may
Be, without fears, all Ladies -- Blow, I say.

One Blows the Trumpet, to which they answer from within with another, and a
Giant appears upon the Battlement. Gy. 1. The Advent'rer, who?

Ros. (Dire shape.)

Zel. 'Twere not amiss
To learn before what the ADVENTURE is.

Gy. 1. You would not use your hands then, but your feet.

Zel. With civil Giant shall one never meet?

Claro. He knows not thee.

Zel. How many have pretense
To Valor, only by their Insolence!

Ros. Excuse them, Madam, the Books make them so.

Gy. 1. Approaching Knights themselves in Armor show.

Ros. Again? I fear me here will be a fray.

Zel. A Troop of Horse? My GENIUS feasts to day.

Ros. Madam, we are not safe.

Zel. Masked in this dress
Here will I stand to witness the success.

Ros. But, Madam, why have thou not made a new
ENCHANTED CASTLE for thy Beauty too?

Zel. Because that Beauty has a stronger fence
Which is immured with its own innocence.

Sound Trumpets. Ros. All Is War.

Zel. Thy Fortune in the Adventure try.

Claro. Ah! how much more's the Enchantment of that Eye.

Exeunt. Enter Felisbravo, the General, and Rifaloro in the Spanish Habit, or
how they will, out of the Persian, as in Journey toward Tartaria, Felisbravo
replying to their disswasions from it. Fell. This is Love (start not at the
word) 't will blind
Soonest the clearest sight, and (read) you 'l find
Great Lover, and Great Prince, went ever joined.
It is a Spirit, an immortal Guest,
The prop'rest Passion of a Kingly breast,
As higher by the head than all the rest.
If Bounteous, prudent, constant, valiant,
Secret, and affable, and vigilant,
Are Royal Styles; and Love is all these things:
See, if good Lovers will not make good Kings.
"'It Is a dull Wisdom not to love, a cursed
"Imperfect Virtue; and it is at worst
"A Manly fault high Beauty to adore.
It Is fit my youth [divinely bent] explore,
Not sweet variety to please my taste,
But (to contemplate on) a Phoenix chaste:
Whom having found, out of the vulgar path,
My Soul (then wholly taken up with Faith)
Shall shut out hope; For this pure Spirit that grasps
In its immenseness whatsoever Heaven clasps,
And Earth, contains yet but one Will; which one
Should be so brave, and firmly moved upon
Her center, as to love eternally
In a Life's moment: So without a Why,
As if all Beauty it were death to covet,
Or (saving only to love it) to love it,
As if, even to deserve, were to encroach,
And the least spark of favor, Faith's reproach.
Then, rackt with passion, to confess in the end
A flame, which only pardon shall pretend,
"Who (loving much) himself has little sought,
"If fault it be, has done a civil fault.
"Nor added to (in his more noble fire)
"The sin of Love the crime of a desire:
"Forcing his Mistress with too close pursuit
"To kick him off with an enraged foot.
"Importuned pity causes just disdain:
Whilst self-denyers may enjoy their pain.

Rif. There Is no such Liar as your Lover is:
Not one of them but says, not one does, this.
Would thou have humane Love without desire?
No, all below is culinary fire,
Talk what they will.

Fell. The Captive died, and me
This ZELIDAURA'S Beauty calls, to see
If fame have not been lavish in her Praise;
And, following the bright Lanthorn of her Rays,
(Pretending to that God a Pilgrimage
Whom superstitious Greeks adore in Delos)
I quit my Kingdom (a poor Complement)
For I would quit as many, in her quest,
As Spain possesses, or old Rome possessed.
But, if I greater than a Kingdom be,
(Since where I am, I am not without me)
What do I quit?

Genesis Although there is no Law
Which can a Country, and a People awe
Like their KING'S Eye; thou leave at the stern two
Great Statesmen, whose least praise, is that they bridle
Envy's black Muzzel; who, of themselves good,
Surpass themselves in goodness; since we see
They are the better even for fear of thee.

Fell. Their Zeal and prudent Courage prop my Throne:
Yet I too am not absent, though from home
For Princes care is over all that is theirs:
Nor can good Kings have evil Counselors.
A King should be all Eye and Ear; he should
Be learned, to be wise; wise, to be good.

Rif. I quake: This Prince was born to rule the World.
O the transcendent baseness of a pack
Of Hounds, of us, who (with what we call Loyalty)
Not follow, but even hunt so sweet a King,
And worry him! For those, whom I have known
To boast most faith, and pure devotion,
Have never been concerned how Riches Stream
Ebbed with our Master, so it flowed with them.

Genesis In RIFALORO (for thy Recreation)
Thou have a Mirth without scurrility,
An understanding wrapped in Raylery.
In him is found a sober Madness, sport
Without abuse; all very new in COURT.
A Man so honest, that he will (I know)
Speak always truth to thee.

Rif. He will not though.
Nor lie, nor truth, shall from my mouth proceed,
(Good my Lord General, there is no such need)
Not lie, because to lie, is a disgrace;
Not truth, for it belongs not to my place.
My gay and frolic humor shall dispense,
Not lies (I scorn't) not truths (they give offense.)
I, Truths? I Am not a Fool to that degree,
'T would countenance lies, to have truths told by me.

Genesis Such then about all Majesty should come,
As will tell Truths, and whom Truths will become.

Sound a Trumpet within. Fell. What Is that?

Rif. A Trumpet here?

Fell. I Am ravished! this
To noble Ears the sweetest Music is.
Amongst these Trees a stately Pile I spy,
Fair butt of the Desire, bound of the Eye.

Genesis Is 't not the Sphere of that Illustrious QUEEN?
Thy Heart's strong Lodestone, drawing it unseen?

Fell. We are not got so far as Tartary:
For yet we tread the Happy Araby.

Genesis Draw nearer let us.

Fell. Rather let us balk
Vain Curiosities: For, when I walk
Another way then toward my North Pole,
I am complained upon by my own soul.

Genesis See, various Works, and strange Inscriptions under,
Where Novelties lay to arrest our wonder.

Fell. It says here: Reads upon the (...). I am a Bondage, or I am a Prize:
I Marry with the Valiant, and the Wise:
Valiant or Wise, alone, will not suffice.

-- And it says here: Beauty is denied a voice,
In making for it self a choice:
'Cause Reason would not trust a Bliss
IN a thing so prone to choose amiss.

The words are plain: But why they are writ here
I cannot reach.

Rif. I can.

Genesis Then, prithee, say.

Rif. To make wise fools of all that pass this way.

Fell. Let Us call.

Rif. Here hangs a Trumpet: Must we call?

Genesis Blow't, Rifaloro, do.

Fell. If here I shall
Be held, but for one instant, my Love mourns:
For a true Lover's Heart sits upon Thorns.

They call as before, and a Trumpet answers from within, and another different
Giant comes up, who puts off his Hat. Rif. They come.

Gy. 2. Your pleasure, Knight? Draw near.

Rif. What Is that?
'Fig for your Courtship! Prodigal of Hat;
Thou sleep'st in sheets, drink'st thy Sherbet with Snow,
And wait'st on Ladies (doubtless) to a Show:
A Giant A-la mode --

Gy. 2. What is your Worships pleasure?

Rif. Worships too?
Mountain of Bone, if thou can tell us, do,
What is embraced by this Castle's Dyke?
Say, prodigy; to humane creature like.

Gy. 2. The fair Claridiana, who gives Laws
To all this Country: For so strange a cause,
And in so strange a way, Enchanted here,
As (if you are at leisure) you shall hear.

The first Giant comes up very angry, and the second sneaks away. Genesis Say on.

Gy. 1. Peace, Busy; get you whence you came.

Gy. 2. I go.

Rif. He seems a GIANT, is a LAMB.

Gy. 1. Who is it would be informed?

Rif. A Squire.

Gy. 1. A Squire?
Squires are no piece of History: Retire.

Rif. O Rogue! as long as this year and the last!
Vizard of Valor!

Gy. 1. Squire? It makes me --

Rif. Nay, I deserve no better: Was I drunk,
To raise that scandal on my self? Thou, Trunk;
Thou, Pomontory; thou, deluge of flesh;
Some Errant Knight with a white face shall thresh
Thee out (I vow) and not one whole Bone leave thee,
With glittering Morglay: For the gentle slit
Over the Nose would never Giant fit.

Gy. 1. Out, Worm!

Genesis Great Porter (Giant is no more)
Answer.

Gy. 1. (Thou Art troublesome) Upon what score?
Were thou a Knight, I would; but with this Mace
I Will come, and purge you All out of the place.

Fell. Must I hear this, and purse up the disgrace?
Rude, saucy, arrogant.

Gy. 1. ('Twere good, in troth,
If Giants should take notice of such froth.)

Exit. Fell. Knock, knock a thousand times, for I am --

Rif. (What, Orlando Furioso?)

Fell. A new HERCULES
To break in fitters these enchanted Gates.
But, what is Claridiana unto ME?
Whether the wonder of the Earth she be,
Or Envy of the Heaven? Away, away;
My Soul cries shame on me for this delay.

Genesis Sir, though Love spur you, and your heart say no,
Sleep, rest, repose a little; since you go
So tired: Do more for Nations (whose Lives sheath
Themselves in yours) than for one Picture; Breath:
Enjoy this cool cessation of the Sun,
The gentle April's greenest Mansion.

Rif. This flowery Wood (so well described) enjoy;
Thy love goes too, if thou thy life destroy.

Genesis Sit by this silver-fed, and murmuring --

Rif. Means he by that a COURTIER? or a Spring?

Genesis I go to see the Palfreys, do not move
From the King, Rifaloro.

Rif. Of this Grove
Exit General. I am the sleepy Burgess. -- Sleep'st not thou?

Fell. Ill custom this of sleeping; a dull badge
Of humane frailty: Thief of love and life.

Rif. Has the world such a pastime, as dear Sleep?
O folly of transcendent gust! to wink,
And for some certain time of nothing think;
But, if I were a King, I Would never lay
My lids together, to reign night and day.

Fell. If sleep invade me strongly, That may sever
My life some minutes from me, my love never.
But it is impossible to sleep (we know)
Extended on the Rack: If that be so,
Takes out the Picture. (...) Larum, come thou forth: Eloquent Mute,
For whom high Heaven and Earth commence a Suit:
Of Angel-woman, fair Hermaphrodite!
The Moon's extinguisher! the Moon-days night!
How could so small a Sphere hold so much day?
O sleep! now, now, thou conquer'st me -- But stay:
That part thou conquer'st, I Will not own for mine.
Tempest I seek, not calm: If the days thine,
Thou quell'st my body, my Love still is whole:
I give thee all of that which is not Soul.
And, since in Lodgings from the Street Love lies,
Do thou (and spare not) quarter in my Eyes
A while; I harb'ring so unwelcome Guest
(As Men obey thy Brother Death's arrest)
Not as a Lover, but a MORTAL --

He falls a sleep with the Picture in his hand. Rif. He Is fallen a sleep; so
soon? What frailty is?
More like a Husband, then a Lover, this.
If Lovers take such sleeps, what shall I take,
Whom pangs of Love, nor Honor's Trumpets, wake?

Rifaloro falls asleep. Enter Zelidaura like a Huntress, with a Bow and Quiver.
Zel. Solitude, of Friends the best,
And the best (...):
Mother of Truths, and brought at least
Every day to bed of one:
In this flowery Mansion
I contemplate how the Rose
Stands upon thorns, how quickly goes
The dismaying Iesamine:
Only the (...), which is divine,
No decay of Beauty knows.
The world is beauty's Mirror; Flowers,
In their first virgin-purity
Flat'rers both of the Nose and Eye,
To be cropped by Paramours
Is their best of Destiny.
And those nice darlings of the Land,
Which seemed Heavens painted bow to scorn,
And bloomed the envy of the morn,
Are the gay trophy of a hand:
We, that are Queens, in style and power.
Serve but to take up a Man's Game,
Into his hands to put the same,
Who may neglect us the next hour.
"She on whom greatness Heaven does shower,
"If she the Main is, or the By,
The means of knowing is debarred;
Therefore my CROWN I would discard,
Because it lets me not descry
Whether my FORTUNE'S loved, or I*
I am not foul, nor very proud,
Yet, out of measure jealous grown,
Least Suitors (who my Palace crowd)
Are come a woing to my Throne.
But, as in vain, with rueful tone
The amorous Birds in flowery Vales
Tell the fair Morn a thousand Tales;
In vain do me these Lovers haunt:
Little Twat'lers, ignorant
Importuning Nightingales.
With shooting I Will divert me --

Rifaloro talks in his sleep, at which Zelidaura startles, and, turning, spies
Felisbravo. Rif. (Rare sops!)

Zel. I hear a Man -- A Knight there lies,
Who, in a Picture (eyes) the vaunted spoil
Of some Court Beauty (whom he will beguile)
Holds in his hand the Idol of his eyes.
She draws nearer him. He sleeps; she loves him, by this light:
For Men, if handled with disdain,
Cannot sleep (they are in such pain;)
But if once they are loved, good night.
SLEEP, and LOVE, are two blind Gods
That have always lived at odds.
Therefore the Man that sleep is taking
Little cares for him who is waking.
Lullaby'd in FAVORS lap,
No wonder this should take a nap.
-- Bless me! She loves him past all bound,
His sleep could not be else so sound.
He, her for ends, I lay my life;
Those compast, his flame dies.
Sure, he considered her his WIFE,
For she has closed his Eyes.
O that her self had napping caught
Her Knight! that she might weep
To see the much, for him sh' has watched,
Rewarded with a sleep.
That she with rage might understand,
In Men, that Truth most prize,
How soon a favor in their hand
Is lessening in their eyes.
She draws yet nearer. LOVER (because ungrateful's worse,
I say not foolish Lover)
Thou should have put it in a purse,
The disesteem to cover.
I Will take it from him: Let him wake
As rightly served, as inly madded,
Fond Ship-wreck of a Bliss to make,
Which he despised because he had it.
Takes the Picture from him. Lady, thou art revenged by me;
Without thee let him 'bide,
Who, being in thy company,
Could take himself aside:
Whom favor made to face about:
Who neither loves thee, nor did keep --
Looks upon the Picture. But, what is this! without all doubt
I dream, if he 's asleep.
I feel a hidden hand distill
A poison flow into my will.
My Organs in their places stand?
It Is I (unhappy Beauty!)
I, limn'd? And in a Poltroons hand
That sleeps upon his duty?
Where Is the due reverence to my state?
(Heavens!) What is this face become?
I, pocketted? And by a Mate
That uses me for Opium?
The Root of Woman's Pedigree
Makes me fear my self his Bride;
Because my self I taken see
(Whilst he sleeps) from his side.
I should love him by ONE Token,
That his sleeps are so unbroken;
But he wrongs me (I Am sure) by two,
Pictured, and neglected too.
To know who it is, more fear in me
Then Curiosity does move:
For little is his Quality;
If it is not greater than his Love.
Another fault I cannot find:
A sweeter Man my Eyes never saw!
Here were a LOVER, if his Mind
One by his Face and Shape could draw.
If I have cost thee Love, (a pain
Thou have so rare an Art to hide)
Thee I conjure, for my disdain
Sufficiently be qualified.
She hears the footing of somebody. (People approach.) Masked with my fear
In this same place again I Will be,
To know news of him -- (Love, hold there)
I was about to say -- Of me.

Exit. Enter Claridoro calling after her. Claro. Hear (fair one) thou a Man
have slain,
Yet fly not for it;
For, besides that it is in vain,
'T will make the fact more horrid:
In vain: for ( Flowers up-growing
Where thou art going)
O ZELIDAURA, see
Each ROSE accuses and confesses Thee!
Through this dark Wood I shoot,
Where thy scorns lead,
And ( Pencil of the Mead)
Thy Milky Foot
A Miracle does show,
That the red Flowers should spring from the white Snow.
If you are enraged to find
My Murdress, I declare,
My silence does prepare
To pacify thy Mind.
But (HEAVENS!) How is that possible,
Since when I tell my fear, my Love I tell?

Felisbravo wakes, and begins to speak to the Picture. Fell. Can, Can it be that
I have slept?
Then let my sin my penance be,
For all that while I have been kept
(Companion for a God) from thee.
Misses the Picture. Hah! The Picture? I had rather
My self were lost, (O heavenly Father!)
He whom to wake that could not make,
Let him sleep, and never wake.
In my Coffin I should blush
Though I now died of Grief and Love.
One Life would for offending thus
But slender expiation prove.
If I dye, my grief dies too,
If I would kill grief and all,
Death has something else to do
Than to come when Wretches call.
If I dye in fine, in vain
Will a demi-cure be wrought:
Death, that takes away my pain,
Cannot take away my fault.
Live then, I, and live my GRIEF;
Wander my surviving Ghost
(Stripped of her Solace chief)
Round about this treasure lost.
Let my Soul a stranger be
To what e're of comfort tastes;
And my Body dying see,
Whilst long-lived sorrow lasts.
Ill on me is well bestowed,
I have deserved so cross a fate,
Whose misfortune most is showed
In that I once was fortunate.

Claro. What does he prole about for here?

Fell. It Is stolen from me (my Anger grow --)
This Man has stolen it -- Cavalier,
I Am one the WORLD (I Would have you know)
Has bourn so great, that (though in jest)
I cannot any wrong digest;
And (by none else to be dismayed)
Of my own name I am afraid.
Never did I, my whole Life long,
With RAUNTS (you understand)
Give to a Braggadocia Tongue
The office of the Hand.
Therefore, in courteous sort I pray,
Deliver the Sun back.

Claro. What means the Man?

Fell. My Soul I say,
Which I too long do lack.

Claro. Is he not mad?

Fell. Think not to put me off,
By putting strangeness on; with it, in one
Pencil, restore a thousand rays, a thousand
Suns in one Picture.

Claro. Yet, I cannot reach him.

Fell. Restore it, or (I vow to JOVE) the art dead.

Claro. I neither know your meaning, neither fear
Nor esteem you: For let me tell you --

Rifaloro wakes, and gets upon his feet in a grant fright. Rif. What clattering
's this?

Fell. Not understand me? little
Know thou whom thou offend'st.

Claro. Thou know me little.

Rifaloro draws and puts himself on the side of Claridoro. Rif. Do, tame that
Colt.

Fell. Thou do misken me doubtless.

Rif. No, no, but to help one (a Medicine tried)
Clap a hot Coward to the other side.

Fell. No fooling, my chafed fury shall consume him:
Once I have sworn.

Claro. And, if my honest word
Thou will not take, I pawn thee here my Sword.
They fight, when suddenly let there be a noise within, many Inventions are
shot off, and all that may move horror and admiration. Trumpets and Drums
loftily. But what is this!

Fell. What horror! 'less Heaven falls,
The Enchantment is dissolving: or these Walls.

The same. The noise continues, sound Trumpets with much harmony and clash of
War. Enter the General, and let a Drawbridge fall from aloft, parting
Felisbravo and Claridoro, and within let there appear a staircase, by which
the Prince Floranteo is to descend richly clad, and with him the Giants, and
let many horrible shapes be seen: And enter Zelidaura like a Shepherdess, and
with her Roselinda in the same habit. Ros. The Adventure is tried doubtless by
some Knight.

Zel. Hide me (rough Bark) while I enjoy this sight.
But he that comes to try it, is the same
That wore my Picture. O, fair Knighthoods shame!
One Woman pictured, and another sought?
That thou a Traitor art, is thy own fault:
But, were thou an ungrateful one, 'twere mine.

Let all the staircase be coverd with Arms, and Appurtenances of War, and the
covering and floor covered therewith, and let there fally out of the mouth of a
Serpent a black Giant armed with a Club, and spitting fire. Genesis The matter,
Rifaloro?

Rif. Do thou divine,
I cannot now the while, I do fear so;
Fear with me, and hereafter we shall know.

Floranteo puts himself between the two Adventures. Flo. Generous KNIGHTS,
ambitious of the honor
To interweave LAUREL with OAK, and twist
MARS with APOLLO. From this dazzling wonder,
From this fair Prodigy, from this (now) truth,
But a Romance to succeeding Ages,
This general Loadstone, BABEL that threats HEAVEN,
A great ill Neighbor with fantastic Towers
Your coming has proceeded.
Hear what it promises, what it contains,
To what it binds, what it observes, what teaches:
Laeomedon (the Glory of these Provinces
Wise, learned, valiant,) in ARABIA was
The last of all her Kings, whose Magic Voice,
Which silenced Circe's and Medea's Charms
(Bridle of Sea and Winds) gave the Stars Laws.
A Daughter had he (Natures Masterpiece)
Who might boast verified in her perfections
All that base FLAT'RY LIES, so without Art
Handsome, that her unaided Beauty chides
The lies and dims the truths of Rose and Snow,
Her (crowned with Roses and pale Iesamines
A MAIDEN QUEEN) twelve flowery SPRINGS being there
Out flourished by her Beauty, the sole Heir
Of her Sires REALM and FAME, and that so sole,
That she stands fair for sole Executrix
To the ARABIAN PHOENIX --
He (judging Beauty fit to be an EMPRESS,
But an ELECTRESSE not, as having given
So frequent cause of sorrow and disgrace
To the unhappy Boasters of a face)
To all the NOBLES of this Land presents
And in her hearing uses this plain Language,
One foot now in the grave. Love and Ambition
Will from the spacious Universe hereafter
Draw many Suitors to my Crown and Daughter:
I will not that endangered by the SIREN
Of cruel Flattery (which sings in Rocks
TO entrap the wariest Ears) a false supplant,
Or soft heart counsel her, Misfortune dark'ning
The splendor of her Beauty; and, instead
Of choosing a WISE Husband and a VALIANT
(Her Eye, perhaps, swaying her to a fair one)
A COWARD or a FOOL govern ARABIA.
This said (and seconded with a dire SPEL)
The cleft Earth trembles, utt'ring to the Air
This glittering EDIFICE; In which incloyst'ring
His fair INHERITRIX (with double wards
Of task on task secured) He one ENCHANTMENT
Locks in another, leaving (to the end
Great Souls may try the Adventure) much for VALOR
To cut, as much for WISDOM to untye;
To have ARABIA so (Her Queen the Prize)
Defended by the STOUT, Ruled by the WISE.
For (to oblige his Realm) he did ordain
These two (which make one PERFECT PRINCE) should Reign.
Then on, Young Men, A Beauty and a Crown
He gains that wins, the loser gains Renown.

Fell. He who does seek this Realm, this Beauty wish,
Let him these dangers conquer, court this Bliss:
Not he, who does adore a greater LIGHT,
And mourns its absence in a longsome night.

Zel. One worn? One sought? A third loved? (facil Man!)

Fell. Nor think inamour him that Scepters can,
Whose Mistress is all Dowry, who reproves
The Common truck of Mercenary Loves
By his more noble thoughts, and does disclaim
All guerdon but the glory of his Flame.

Claro. The same say I, and that I too adore
A greater Mistress, fortified with more
Impossibilities than Heaven has Lights.

Flo. I must propose a Question: Are ye Knights?

Fell. I am.

Claro. And I.

Flo. Then tell them (BROCADAN)
The LAW observed here by every Man.

Gy. 1. The LAW is this; That whatsoever KNIGHT
Presumes t'approach this famous CASTLES sight
Shall, if the ADVENTVRE he shall then eschew,
Confess himself a FOOL and COWARD too,
Else We, the GIANTS, and WILD BEASTS that wait
On our Commands, are bound to fight him straight.

Flo. And Whosoever tries it, and shall fail, that he
Remain behind to expound the Mystery.
My Case: Who had the Heart to attempt the thing,
But not the fortune to succeed therein.

Fell. Such baseness do these barbarous Laws obtrude
On KNIGHTS, twice Valiant by their Oath and Blood?
I Will end the Adventure, that another's Eyes
(More fair) may have a Rival to despise.

Claro. Vyes he the Game? then I will see it,
Whose LAURELS here I vow,
For strewings to another's Feet,
Not garlands of my Brow.

Trumpets and Drums softly. Flo. Let the Trumpets give the sign
Let the second Draw bridge fall,
And to the proof of WIT divine
Both enter, for that first does call.
The Drawbridge falls down like a Percullis, and let Rocks full of horror
appear, and in them many dreadful Animals spitting fire. This Labyrinth decides
the thing,
Which he will show he understands,
Who by the one door entering,
Comes forth by that which right against it stands

Fell. Have at the Castle then.

Claro. The same I say,
This day I am immortalliz'd.

Fell. This day
Imp I new feathers in the Wings of FAME
With which to Heaven she shall advance my Name.

Zel. Clear Spirits both; and, if one's WIT burn dim,
I, in my Picture's right shall blush for him.
But, if he twice prove VICTOR, he must Marry
The Arabian Queen -- It cuts two ways --

Rif. They tarry
Exceeding long (me thinks) my little bit
What if tried of Prowess, and of Wit?
It Is but to third a Maze, and to other thing
Of being Valiant, and I am a KING.

Gy. 1. Said not I, Squires are only to look on
In acts of CHIVALRY? Presto: Be gone.

Rif. St. Belianis! a Snake stung my toe.

Zel. IN COURT THERE IS NOT A WORM BUT STINGS YOU KNOW.
Rifaloro either flies back, or is swallowed into the mouth of one of the
Monsters, or a Giant snatches him, and the Giant goes out in wrath. Sound
Trumpets. Within. [VICTORIA! VICTORIA!]

Zel. Who has won
The Prize of Wisdom? --

Claridoro enters at the contrary door. Claro. CLARIDORO.

Flo. Son
Of PALLAS, shadow with that Tree thy Head,
Which ciphers hope, and yet of scorns 'twas bred.

He proffers Claridoro a Crown of Laurel, and he refuses it. Claro. No Conquest
this, since for an unseen face,
And ZELIDAURA is not in the case.

Enter Felisbravo very angry at the same door by which he went it. Fell. I lost
the Prize of Wit (the stuff that lines
A gallant Man) fond Error! which defines
It WIT, a misty LABYRINTH to hit,
More savouring of Memory than WIT,
Whose lofty Plumes to higher things aspire,
And fetch from Heaven the Promethean Fire.
Quite contrary, a Memory was never
A friend to Wit, but its discredit ever.

Zel. The Man wants BRAINS, and well he may, that gives
His Mind to sleeping so, and idly lives.

Trumpets and Drums softly: Flo. Again, Young man. Those Monsters which did bear
Thy Wit respect, make now thy Valor fear.

Claridoro draws and charges, and the Monsters spit fire. Claro. All their grim
horror does but whet my Blade.
Have at you dogs.

Zel. How bold he does invade!

Flo. How bravely he attacks!

Claro. But I aspire
Impossibles; for though my Soul's on fire,
Though it scorn all that is Monster, kick at danger,
My strength is not immortal like my anger.
O, Devils! Devils! --

Claridoro retires, and Felisbravo assaults the shut Gates, and they open in
two parts, and the Giants appear to stop his passage. Fell. This day it will be
seen, if Heaven think fit,
Valor shall recompense the the want of WIT.
I come, pale Monsters: Coward Beasts, It Is I:
In my HAND Thunder, Lightning in my EYE.

The Serpents spit fire, and go retiring and sinking down, and let the Giants
come with their Clubs, and let there be much tumult and demonstration of war
and danger. Genesis This can my valor suffer! to forsake
My King's brave side! INCHAUNTMENT I would make
My way thorough thee, and his displeasure too,
But that I know his Sword can more subdue.

Zel. They run, they run, with steel, and terror struck:
Trumpets and Drums. His arm may play, he kills them with his look.

Let the Giants and Wild Beasts fly sinking down. Fell. Fantastic dangers!
Conquests of light Air!
Give me fresh Foes, for I have deaths to spare.
Within. Floranteo Crowns him with Laurel. [Victoria! Victoria!]

Flo. To thy Brow
This Laurel MARS presents, there to root, grow,
And multiply. The Enchantment 'twixt you twain
Is now dissolved; In her it does remain
To choose: And (see!) her Godhead does unshrowd,
Like Phoebus breaking glorious through a Cloud.
Corners. Let the Castle come down, with much Music, and let doors fall open
with Crystal Casements, and much splendor, that it may be admirable to
behold, and sitting in a Throne the Queen Claridiana with a Garland of Flowers
upon her head. What a rare Beauty!

Claro. May she WIT abhor.

Zel. Grant, Love, she may not like a Man of War.

Let Claridiana come forth of the Enchantment. Cla. Arrogant KNIGHTS, who
(foolish and presumptuous)
Before you have been SUITORS, would be HUSBANDS,
One of you two ye look now I should choose.
How fond and vain an Error! since there be
Yet greater charms to overcome in Me.
'Twere more than time the disinchanted Queen
Thanked both your Loves for taking down her skreen,
Could me by CONQUEST any Mortal claim,
Or by his Wit (as people win a Game)
I Would burn my self alive first. But, is it Wit
The windings of a Labyrinth to hit?
To overcome two Serpents, a pretense
To be the Son of Mars? To speak a Prince
Valiant to cut and slash, does not suffice,
Nor to resolve a RIDDLE styles him wise.
Speaks to the Company. To be a King (wise-valiant) of these twain
Which Battles wan? which Ruled a Land with BRAIN?
If my free choice my unjust Father rest,
Why was my WILL, why was my REASON left?
I, by Enchantments overruled to be?
Not for two Thrones. My Body, but not Me,
He did inchant -- Prepost'rous! to bring one
For us to see, when all is agreed upon?
That our imposed Masters we must go
First to obey, and afterward to know?
I ask not the sole making of my choice:
But why am I denied my Negative voice?
This Victory to me worse THRALDOM is,
If it oblige me to be his, or his.
But it shall not, I Will love my self alone;
Not of the WISE nor VALIANT, but mine OWN.

Flo. Madam, a Queen might well choose either;
But of the two --

Cla. This Queen likes neither.
I, for a Husband, the Discreet would have;
But, for a KING, one both Discreet, and BRAVE.
One I Will not injure, nor to two belong:
Wise and stout you see are twain:
Then (till they be friends again)
If I refuse both, I do neither wrong.

Zel. How resolute, and how discreet!
Envy couches at her feet.

Fell. How can be so wise, and fair,
One that is not ZELIDAURE?

Claro. O, how worthy my applause!
Though my LOVE another cause.

Zel. I find I Am not in love, since I
Nor Envy feel, nor Jealousy.

Cla. First plead the Cause, and try by dint of words
If Brain or Valor most adorns a King;
Those proving vain, then come to appeal to Swords,
And let those tongues of steel decide the Thing:
He who the Bays of both these Duels gains,
May wear CLARIDIANA for his pains.

Fell. (How little I that Glory prize!) Aside.

Claro. (How much do I that bliss despise!) Aside.

Fell. Where we left off, remember Knight,
And the proud wrong which thou have done.

They lay hands upon their Swords. Claro. Thy Insolence does me incite
To end the Quarrel we begun.

Zel. A Man who with my Picture came
To combat for another Dame!
I Am vexed, but jealous not a whit.
Trumpets softly. Hah! have we more Enchantments yet?

They begin to fight, and let there be a noise like the first, and let them be
all divided, as if they saw not one another. Claro. The Earth is hid with
terrors dire.

Fell. Heaven lets down sheets of fire.

Genesis What obscurity!

Claro. What sadness!

Fell. What horror!

Zel. What affright!

Cla. What gladness!

Ros. What fear!

Cla. Let twice my Liberty
VICTORIA! VICTORIA cry.

Let them all disappear, the Drawbridge be closed, the Percullis drawn up, and
the whole vansh in a trice. The End of the first Act.
At the End of the first Act, the Lady Mary Cutinio, and the Lady Frances
Tavara, came forth and Danced with swords (in form of a chain) The Gallery of
Love.
Then the following Song, between the first and second Act. I.
WHere TAGUS, Crowned with plumes of Woods,
(Now master of the field)
Makes to his Crystal Yoke the Floods
Of proud HARAMA yield.
II.
BELIZA ( Shepherdess on Earth
The best that e're swayed hook)
The day of her Phileno's birth
Did like an Angel look.
III.
And a new Quire of NIMPHS appears
To celebrate in Verse
(At least if Gods do count their years)
His happy Anniverse.
CHORUS.
And in this Novelty,
With brave variety,
We all join as one;
For the better adorning
In the Western Levant the fair years of a Sun,
Which make all but one Morning.
IV.
Now festive, and Majestical
Have lost, on Tagus's shore,
The fear of being matched at all,
The hope of being more.
V.
After so much of Greatness shown;
And an applause not under,
Nothing will ever dare to own
The title of a Wonder.
VI.
For that BELIZA's Name (the stuff
Of everlasting story)
Alone is Festival enough,
And has to spare of Glory.
CHORUS
And in this Novelty,
With sweet variety,
We all join as one;
For the better adorning
In a Western Levant the fair years of a Sun,
Which make all but one Morning.
The Persons of the second Act, are the same with those of the first, adding,
CUPID The Lady Isabella Gusman. A GENTLEMAN The same Lady Isabella. A SERVANT
of Prince CLARIDORO The Lady Mary Salier. A CITIZEN The Lady Lucy Prada.
Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.
THE SECOND ACT.
After the foregoing Song, loud Music, and let Claridiana descend alone, by a
pair of stairs on the right hand, and let it be quite another Scene. Cla. IN
what a War, Father unjust,
Have thou plunged me? for what cause
Did thou confine my choice to Laws
So Heterogeneal to my gust?
What satisfaction to thy dust
Can it be, I so should wed?
Who put that fancy in thine head?
That I should not be capabel
To choose for my own self, as well,
As thou for me, after you are dead?
O (in thy own opinion) wise!
How have thy spectacles discerned,
That there, where I am most concerned,
I must be cozened by mine Eyes?
Admit, they should their choice revise,
And rue too late with sad reflection
Their Error in their undeception:
Were it not better owe that Ill
To the deception of my will,
Than to the wilfulness of thy deception?
If to Enchantments thou confide
My happiness, thou may with much
More ground, what I shall choose for such,
Trust to my Spirit and my PRIDE:
If a Star's trusted to provide
A Match for me, though that see far,
It Is fair, and therefore like to err
In Happiness, and (with thy leave)
As to Love matters (I conceive)
A Woman knows more than a Star.
If it be noted a thing rare,
For Beauty fortunate to prove,
Yet I may fortunately love;
For what have I to do with Fair?
But Beauty now will quite despair
That ever Bliss to her should come,
When (cruel Father!) by thy doom
I, who have none, condemned must be,
Dead to my self, to live to thee:
Like a Watch-candle in a Tomb,
Is it decreed I must admit
Perforce of Love? what madness, this?
Serves Beauty only to hand bliss
TO another, that usurpeth it?
Virtue, Education, Wit,
To be noble, to be fair,
To be every thing that is rare,
Let not these for ever be
Woman's infelicitie,
Let not these for ever scare.
My years in HYMEN'S slavish bands!
The freedom of my Soul reduced
To live after another's Gust!
I, molded in another's hands!
At an imperious Man's Commands!
It must not be: Let Men divine
With similies; Let them in fine
Date Beauty by a flower that blows:
(How everlasting in a Rose!
How trivial in a Iesamine!)
Fright Fools with this, That Youth 's a blaze:
That, which my Envy does engage,
Is the Prerogative of AGE;
Which from a higher ground survays
The Labyrinth of humane ways,
And, undeceived by Time, does know
That all is deception here below;
And whether calm, or storm appears,
Is laid up in the Bay of Years,
And lets it shine, and lets it blow.
No ancient Fester, no new Sore,
Makes Age wish CUPIDS Bow were burst,
For TIME by this has cured the first;
And high time it is, to have no more,
Love's golden Field being now all hoar.
Free I was born, and remain free;
Mine own I am, If I will be
Another's, it is my fault; with whom
For me unhappy to become,
Can never happen without me.
Liberty, my noble Will:
For these Ills, so well forecast,
How bitter will they be to taste,
When, imagined but, they kill?
Indeed the Fates have used me ill:
I ask them not Revenge, nor Pelf,
But quiet, and to 'scape a shelf.
This sure can be no great offense;
It Is begging in my own defense
To pray I may but save my self.

Enter Floranteo. Flo. This now is LOVE'S last Will, and last shall be,
Which (thankful to the hand that gave me death)
Shall leave my Murtheress a Legacy,
And sigh her Blessings with my dying breath:
And these shall be not the first tears, which, stilled
Out of the Bosom's principaller part,
Shall have the Fate of Wealth profusely spilled,
Which seldom meets with any grateful heart:
And this shall be a Love so obstinate,
That, for all Love it shall a pattern grow,
To live in spite of Time, or Change, or Hate,
Yet there is one comfort amidst all this woe,
That, for a wretch his way to death to grope,
There needs in fine, nor Remedy, nor Hope.
To Her. Upon the License given by thee
This glorious Pil^ to come and see,
Hundreds do flock, to view the Place,
But thousands to behold thy Face;
Whom, though these Knights did disinchant,
The Adventure is not finished ye,
Because that WISE, and VALIANT,
Have not in one subject met:
So, in the SWORD again it lies,
By DUEL to decide the Prize.

Cla. I weigh not my dead Sires command,
Where his Will his Law I find;
No King that ever Ruled a Land,
Could stretch his Empire to the mind,
I wonder in my heart, that he
(With all his Wisdom) could not see,
The Husband he did fore-decree,
Would not so well examined be
By an Enchantment, as by Me:
Nor so authentic in Love-matters
An Old Man's judgment, as his Daughters.
This is a Lott'ry, I profess,
Not giving him the happiness
Who has most worth but best success.
And may not I acquainted be
With who they are?

Flo. It may suffice
To know, they are both of Knights degree,
And that thy Sire was very wise.

Cla. I have a better way to know
Who Is Valiantest, and Wisest.

Flo. How?

Cla. He shall be the Valiantest
Who my scorns best suffer can --

Flo. Good.

Cla. And him that loves me best
I shall count the wisest Man.
But sadly, I do live in fear;
For, though I would not fair appear,
And, though in truth I am not fair,
Haunted I am, like those that are:
And here, among these rustling leaves,
With which the wanton Wind does play,
Inspired by it, my Sense perceives
This snowy Iesamine (whispering) say;
How much more frolic, white, and fair,
In her green-lattice she does stand,
TO enjoy the free and cooler Air,
Than in the prison of a hand,

Flo. Madam, Thou might be pleased to read
Other Lessons in this Mead;
All whose Flowers (as from the Spring)
Take from thee their life and being.
See, this JESAMINE; which does owe
To thy HAND fingers of Snow,
To its sovereign whiteness, how
All his silver Banners bow!
See, that sanguine Gilly-flow'r
( Spicy, big with pearly shower)
Which a new AURORA dips
In the scarlet of thy Lips!
See, the LILLY'S so pure white,
It might be margent to the Light!
Such a white Foyl to those black EYES
Is that smooth Forehead's crystal Rise.
See, a quire of Nightingales;
Bidding thee a thousand Hales;
Twice taken for their MORNING bright,
By the Flowers; and by the Light!
For in those clear Eyes, Ray for Ray,
The SUN'S translated, and made better,
And, flower for flower, in those Cheeks MAY
Copied in a FAIRER LETTER.
But, least in limning Thee my Art
Should play the unskilful PAINTERS part,
Let this Crystal RIVER pass
For thy liquid Looking-glass.
See thy self there! but, if thine Eye
Too long on that sweet Center dwell --

Cla. This Man (I fear me) by and by
Will drop into NARCISSUS WELL.
Since now I came, where I am Witness to
The WORLDS Ambitions, I have no content.

Flo. Not, that your self you disinchanted view.

Cla. Thou nam'st the thing which I do most resent.
Till then, I lived in jollity,
On others dangers looking down,
From the serene Tranquillity
Which my Soul truly termed her own:
For, placed above what MAN calls Bliss,
And (into her self retired)
By a heavenly Ecstasis
Ravished, elevated, fired;
She saw the multitude of Woes,
A fair one on her self bestows,
When it is her Riches, and her Pride,
To see her LOVERS multiplied.
Who, even to qualify disdains
(For, not disdaining, BEAUTY's dull)
Must be content to take the pains
To be reputed Beautiful.
And, if with beautiful disdain
To let Men fall, it be her style;
Even by Refusals this they '^l gain,
That she has thought of them the while.
I looked, if underneath the Cope
Were one that loved, and did not hope;
But from his Nobler Soul remove
That modern Heresy in Love:
When, hearing a shrill voice, I turn,
And (lo!) a sweet-tongu'd Nightingal
(Tender adorer of the Morn)
In him I found that one and all:
For that same faithful Bird, and true,
(Sweet and kind, and constant Lover)
Wondrous Passion did discover
From the terrace of an Eugh.
And, though ungrateful she, appeared
Unmoved with all she saw and heard;
Every day, before 'twas day,
More and kinder things he would say.
Courteous, and never to be lost,
Returned not with complaints, but praise;
Loving, and all at his own cost,
Suffering, and without hope of Ease:
For, with a sad and trembling throat,
He breaths into her breast this Note,
I love thee not, to make thee mine;
But love thee, 'cause thy Form's Divine.
Here now was candor! Here Faith strove!
How ruled a pain! how full of duty!
Not his own happiness to love;
But to love another Beauty!
Where (O how base!) the Man, whose flame
Soars highest, if he spy no Game,
AURORA'S self (so fresh so gay)
Shall see him late a second day*:
And I was scandalized at Love
(If, since the thing did hence remove,
The name remains) to find one can
Believe a Nightingale, and not a MAN.

Flo. Believe 't (when he does love) a MAN
Loves more than BRUITS or do, or can:
His towering Passion scorns to vale
TO a silly short-wing'd NIGHTINGALE.
The Nightingale loves nothing else
But the presence of his Dame;
Love (like Faith) in this excels,
That see, or not, it is the same.
The MORNING hears his Roundelaies,
Which though she do not thank him for;
A Dame, that listens to her praise,
May be presumed not to abhor.
The difference then is very great:
For, where there is most diffidence,
A Cause that can a hearing get
Will pick an Eye of Hope from thence.
But Oh! the space (Madam) the space
Betwixt his passion, and relief,
Who suffers, and restrains his Grief,
Nor opened to the JUDGE his Case.
For once I will discover mine,
Not to persuade thee to incline
The least, but only let thee see
What silence thou have owed to me.
O, how it sweeten would my pain,
Could my CAUSE hope but to be cast
Out, after formal sentence past,
In the fair Court of thy Disdain!
For, though I have a Patience
Which needs not this experiment,
Yet I would owe experience
It self to being a Patient.

Cla. Henceforth thou shall not to my face
Tell me I would not hear thy CASE;
Nor me with thy dumb Passion twit,
For thou have disinvelop'd it.
Him, who his silence for respect
Obtrudes upon my estimation,
For punishment I will direct
To speak in nothing, nor no fashion.
For, if he persevere not mute,
I Will tell him, and I Will (smiling) do 't,
What time his pain has speechless been,
'T was 'cause (being small) he bit it in.
Which if he now could do no more,
But LOVE brake open his prison door;
Though with dark-keeping he was mad,
He 's tame, since he began to gad.
I make no difference 'twixt a wrong,
And telling me thou do despair;
LOVE haulks at hope, when in a Tongue
He walks abroad to take the Air.
If nourish hope thou ought not, Thou
Do thy self wrong, as well as me,
Confiscating by speaking now
The merit of thy Secrecy.
He, that of honor understands,
Pained, has his cure in his own hands:
The glory of concealing it,
The smart of suffering it does quit,
And (FLORANTEO) for the Truth
Of thy Affection, I should doubt it,
But that one thing confirm me does,
That I desire to be without it.

Flo. My Error did not think to be
So much beholding unto Thee:
And faintly hoped, from thine own mouth
The undeceiving of my Youth.
I, better than I looked for, fare;
Though I presumed to entertain
Some thought, that to complete despair
I might be helped by thy disdain.
Be not so prodigal of scorns,
On me thy Rigours do not wast;
With such a deluge of good turns
I may grow insolent at last.
And I to thee would owe no more,
Meaning to dye to pay this shot,
And set thee something on my score --

Cla. I hear thee, and I hear thee not.

Flo. My death will bring some good to thee
In ridding thee of me.

Cla. I doubt it:
Thy death will bring no good to me,
For I Will be rid of thee without it.

Offers to go away. Flo. Into the Garden comes a Knight.

Cla. Withdraw, that I may see, unseen,
Whether, or no, he does acquit
The promise of his Princely Mien.

Exit Florant^o. Cla. No Man was born to be my Husband, no Man
Deserves a Love. For as, when this Man's scorned,
His everlasting whining deafs a Woman;
So that grows saucy, if his Love 's returned.
The best unjustly blames the worst of Fate,
Is it unjust to give to all their due?
He is a Man; enough to merit Hate:
He loves me; that is unpardonable too.
Nor let fair Virgins murmur at their chance
Of being entit'led to ill luck. O dull,
Though frequently repeated, Ignorance!
Is 't no good luck then to be beautiful?
For if to make us happy, Men were able;
What needed more to make us miserable?

Enter Felisbravo. Fell. A second ARGO, fraighted
With Fear and Avarice,
Between the Sea and Skies
Has penetrated
To the new World, unworn
With the red footsteps of the snowy Morn;
Thirsty of Mines,
She comes rich back, and the curled Rampire past
Of watery Mountains, cast
Up by the winds,
Ungrateful shelf near home
Gives her usurped Gold a silver Tomb.
A devout PILGRIM, who
To foreign Temple bare
Good pattern, fervent prayre,
Spurred by a pious Vow,
Meas'ring so large a space
That Earth lacked Regions for his Plants to trace;
Joyful returns, though poor,
And, just by his abode,
Falling into a Road
Which Laws did ill secure,
Sees plundered by a Thief,
(O happier Man than I!) for it is his Life.
Conspicuous grows a TREE,
Which (Wanton) did appear
First fondling of the Year
With smiling Braverie,
And in his blooming pride
The lower house of Flowers did deride:
When his silk Robes, and fair,
(His Youth's imbellishing
The Crownet of a Spring,
Narcissus of the Air)
Rough Boreas does confound,
And with his Trophies strews the scorned ground:
Trusted to redious hope
So many months the CORN,
Which now begins to turn
Into a golden Crop;
The lusty Grapes, which (plump)
Are the last farewell of the Summers pomp;
(How spacious spreads the VINE!
Nursed up with how much care!
She lives, she thrives, grows fair!
'Bout her loved Elm does twine)
Comes a cold Cloud, and lays
In one, the Fabric of so many days:
A silver RIVER SMALL
In sweet Accents
His Music vents
(The warbling Virginal
To which the merry Birds do sing,
Timed with stops of gold the crystal string)
He steals by a green Wood
With fugitive feet
(Gay, jolly, sweet)
Comes me a troubled Flood,
And scarcely one sand stays
To be a witness of his golden days.
The SHIP'S up weighed;
The PILGRIM made a Saint;
Next Spring recrowns the PLANT;
Winds raise the CORN was laid;
The Vine is pruned;
The Rivulet new tuned;
But in the Ill I have,
I Am left alive only to dig my Grave.
Lost BEAUTY, I will dye
But I will thee recover,
And that I dye not instantly
Shows me more perfect LOVER:
For (my Soul gone before)
I live not now to live, but to deplore.

Cla. (This is he that was more stout.) Aside.

Fell. In these blind Paths I go,
To hunt my Foe;
Whom having once found out,
His Blood shall purge the soil
Of a short nap, and an immortal spoil.

Cla. (Well (believe 't) the Man's no Fool,
Nor a boisterous Sword-man solie:
For Wisdom (taught in Sorrow's School)
Is the Child of Melancholy.) Aside.

Fell. Am I a Prince? or am I vile?
Am I a refined LOVER?
Am I stout? yet all this while
Not the PICTURE to recover?

Cla. (Heaven be juster then that he
Have a Picture had of me!) Aside.

Fell. Fairest Madam, well it is seen
I was ignorant indeed,
That durst wrong so bright a Queen --

Cla. (Wronged he me in word or deed?) Aside.

Fell. Yet wise enough I am to know
Losing my painted Mistress,
The unpainted one will after go --

Cla. (Else she her self a STATUE is.) Aside.

Fell. A Voice!

Cla. He has me in his Ear,
Therefore will I my self unshroud,
And try his Wit too -- Knight.

Fell. Who Is there?
Claridiana shows her self. What Heaven! what Sun breaks through a Cloud!

Cla. Though my presence All admit,
Thy presumption wants much Wit,
If, before the ENTERPRISE
Be wholly finished, thou suppose
To pry into the Mysteries
Which these enchanted Walls enclose.
To tame two Dragons you account
Is one Woman to subdue;
But, upon an Audit, true,
It will not to so much amount.
LOVERS are HEROICAL
When they sigh, and when they weep,
When before our Feet they fall,
When they stand in studies deep.
MANHOOD I despise not ( This,
And justly, all the WORLD approve)
But show, what kind of Manhood it is
Which conquers in the Wars of LOVE:
And, the great odds if Thou regard
Betwixt MY SELF and this dire Spell,
To vanquish It Thou found'st it hard;
But Me it is impossibel.

Aside. Fell. RESPECT may to this Dame be shown,
Though MISTRESS I another call:
For, though the Heart can lodge but one,
CIVILITY has Room for all.
To Her aloud. CLARIDIANA (Theme of FAME)
I am a Man would blush my Flame
Should own an Object, but the most
Accomplished one the WORLD can boast.
And know my Spirit is so high,
That at less Game it scorns to fly
Then where the greatest difficulties lie.
This, which my lucky SWORD has lately reapt,
Was not the Victory I did design;
Whose Valor for a SHIELD is kept
To bear the brunt of scorns divine.
Over strong Spells to be victorious,
Guilds (I must confess) a name,
But, to submit unto a DAME,
This to me seems much more glorious.
For there, my valor takes my part,
My strength, and my good Sword, befriend me:
But in this War I have no heart,
No steel Breast Plate can defend me.
If, first the Foe's invincible,
And I betrayed by my own fear;
TO overcome how is it possible
Where arms against my self I bear?
In the glorying of my Love
I abide no Competition,
Nor in the cause whence it does move,
Nor of the pain in the fruition;
Yet, so great Love my grief exceeds,
And this grief likewise owns a chief:
For a lost Lady my Heart bleeds,
But 't will not break, and that 's my grief.

Aside. Cla. Equally witty, and discreet;
He covers, but not hides his Flame;
Holds his Game so, that I may see 't,
Yet I Will not seem to see his Game.
To him. With what end love thou?

Fell. With what end?
My Love is the perpetual moving;
No end in loving I pretend,
No end will ever make of loving.
Love is of Love the only scope:
Love scorneth to be mercenary:
You find not such a word as Hope
In all the Lovers Dictionary.
Nay, LOVE alone does scandal me:
For the silent'st and most wise,
From sights, from peeping is not free
Out at the casements of the EYES.
See, 'twill now and now 'twill hear;
And the least of joy it gits,
Whether at the Eye, or Ear,
Puts it clean beside the wits.
First know, I have a Misteriss;
Then, that to her true Faith I bear:
And, where Faith once through kindled is,
Superfluous are the SENSES there.

Cla. Hop'st thou nothing?

Fell. Nothing I.
Either hope, or yet desire.
Yes I do, to live and dye
In this elemental fire.
She, in her self, is proof against all:
Then, for me to aim at her,
Were to add a Brazen Wall;
So successless is my Star.
Nor so alone in things of Love;
But my Life over and above,
Because on her it does depend,
I have no power to make it end.
And (the full Case to understand)
My Life and Death, because in fine
Love has put them in her hand,
Both are therefore out of mine.

Aside. Cla. From the mark I shot not wide,
When him of folly I did quit:
For the sharp SWORD that arms his side
Has much to envy in his WIT.
It Is not against Majesty
His discretion to approve;
Nor, if his good parts I spy,
Must it presently be love.
His goodly shape, his flowing mien,
His talk, and what his valor wrought,
May claim attention from a QUEEN,
Yet never sink deeper in her thought.
A leaning (KNIGHT) I do confess --

Enter Zelidaura and Roselinda in the habit of Shepherdesses, their Faces
muffled with silver Scarfs. Zel. In this Countrey-tone and dress
Disguised rudely, safe we are.

Ros. Man-like bent to feats of War
Of a Woman's left in thee
Only Curiosity.
What boots it thee to understand
Who a Man is?

Zel. What doth't boot?
When I my picture found in 's hand,
And now may opportunely do it?

To Felisbravo. Cla. Lies your happiness in this,
To overcome the other Knight?

Fell. Madam, all my life and bliss.

Cla. In the name of MARS then, fight --
Aside. Who grant (say I) thou may subdue!

Zelidaura spies them together* Zel. Bless me! who is this I see?
(Is it? -- It Is not --) Ah! it is HE:
With CLARIDIANA too:
O Sigh! base brat, not of the Royal Mind,
With which I Am lined,
But of this Clown's false cover
I have drawn over.
What matters it? -- Much, the contempt -- In Love
The least misprission does High Treason prove.
This has a tang of Jealousy.
I, disordered? Plaintiff, I?
Should any thing the Heavens beneath,
Make me a mean complaint to breath!
I, resentments! I, in wroth!
I, concerned in breach of Troth!
I? who, to make fond LOVE depart,
Hung padlocks on my Eyes, and Heart.
Though in this war, I feel beginning,
I doubt not in the end of winning
The victory; one moments wasting
This way, I pay with blushes everlasting.
CLARIDORO scorned, and curbed,
Not for neglect, but too much Love?
Am I asleep to one I have disturbed?
Does one, that sleeps at me, my Larum prove?
Odd figaries has this CUPID;
Strangely killed, and strangely born;
If kindness make him dull and stupid,
And if that he be roused with scorn.
But what have I to do with LOVE,
And the frailer WOMAN'S LAW?

Cla. Women are there in this grove?
Then it is time that I withdraw.

Aside. Fell. 'Twas for manners I forbore
To take leave of her before.
Ah! ZELIDAURA, ( Mistress fair)
No joy is, but where you are.

Aside. Cla. Of Valor thou may justly boast,
That conquer'st wheresoever thou go.

Claridiana goes away by degrees casting looks back at him. Zel. So is split in
twain a RIVER,
And the streams (bound several ways)
In a kind of amorous maze
Back at one another gaze:
As this melting Couple sever.

Cla. Inclination, not so fast:
For from me one gracious look,
Speaks more in that diminutive book,
Then other Women in a VOLUME vast.
From me then (LOVE) enough is wrung:
For where HONOR ties the tongue,
She, who does a Suppliant hear,
Makes him answer with her Ear.
To Him. Knight, to overcome endeavor.

Fell. Lady, I shall do it, or dye.

Aside. Cla. Disinchanted, more than ever
Re-inchanted now, am I.

Exit Claridiana. Zel. Just there, where I did point thee, stay:
But come, if any bend this way.

Ros. Alone you will be, if I am gone,

Zel. By my self, is not alone,

Ros. True: The Man does still remain.

Zel. Then, I am alone again.
Exit Roselind I Will see, whether his wit keep pace
With his valor, garb, and face.

Fell. What a spanking LABRADORA!

Zel. You (th'unkent Knight) Godyegudmora!

Fell. (The Time of day thou do mistake)

Zel. -- And joy --

Fell. Of what?

Zel. That I discover,
By a sure sign, you are awake.

Fell. Awake? -- the sign?

Zel. Yowr being a Lover.

Fell. In love am I?

Zel. And very deep.

Fell. Deep in love? how is that seen?

Zel. Perfectly: you do not sleep.

Fell. Rustic Excellence, unskreen,
And discover that sweet face,
Which covers so much Wit and Grace.

Zel. You but dreamt so: sleep agin,
And forget it.

Fell. Why now (Saint?)

Zel. Why? the LADY, that went in,
Lukes, as if that she did paint.

Fell. What has that to do with sleeping?
She is, indeed, Angelica^

Zel. That Picture now is well worth yowr keeping:
For why? it is an ORIGINAL.

Fell. Is this Shepherdess a Witch?
Or saw the sleeping Treason, which
I committed against LOVE,
Erst, in the ENCHANTED GROVE?
Me, have thou ever seen, before?

Zel. Seen? I, and know thee, for a Man
That will turn him, and sleep more
Than a dozen Dunces can.
Thou kenst little, what Sighs mean!

Fell. Unveil (by JOVE) that Face serene.

Zel. What, to make thee sleep agene?

Fell. Still, in Riddles!

Zel. Now, he sees:
This pinching wakes him by degrees.

Fell. Art thou a Nymph.

Zel. Of PARNASS-GREEN.

Fell. Sleep I, indeed? or am I mad?

Zel. None serve thee, but the INCHAWNTED QUEEN?
I think what dull conceits y' have had,
Of the Bird PHOENIX, which no Eye
E're saw, an odoriferous Lie.
How, of her Beauties spells, she is told;
That by her spirit thou art hawnted;
And, having slept away the old,
With this new Mistress worse inchawnted.

Fell. I affect not, Shepherdess,
My self in such fine terms to express;
Suffizeth me, an humble strain:
Too little happy, to be vain!
Vnveil --

Zel. Sir Gallant, not so fast.

He offers at her Scarf. Fell. See thee I will.

Zel. See me you shall:
But, towch not Fruit, you mun not taste.
What says it, now the leaf does fall.

Vnmuffles her self. Fell. It says, it is worthy to comprize
The KERNEL of so rare a Wit:
Nor, that it grows in PARADISE,
But Paradise does grow in it!
The tall and slender TRUNK no less divine,
Though in a lowly Shepherdesse's RINE!
Aside. This should be that so famous Queen,
For unquell'd Valor, and disdain.
In these ENCHANTED WOODS is seen
Nothing but Illusions vain!

Zel. What stares the Man at?

Fell. I compare
A Picture, I once mine did call,
With the divine Original.

Zel. Fallen asleep again you are*
We, poor humane Sepherd-lasses,
Nor are pictured, nor use Glasses.
"Who skip their rank do 'mselves, and Betters wrong:
"TO our Dames (God bless them) such queint things belong.
Here, a tiny Brook alone,
Which, freng'd with borrowed Flowers (he has
Gold and Siller enough on 's own)
Is HEAVENS proper Looking-glass,
Copies us; and I^^ reflections
Showing natural perfections,
Free from soothing, free from Error;
Are our Pencil, are our Mirror,

Fell. Art thou a Shepherdess?

Zel. And bore
On a Mountain called, There --

Fell. Wear'st thou ever heretofore
LADY'S Clothes?

Zel. I LADY'S Gear?
Yes (what a treacherous Powl have I!)
In a COUNTREY-COMEDY
I once enacted a main part
(Still I have it half by heart)
The famous HISTORY it was
Of an ARABIAN -- (let me see)
No, of a Queen of TARTAREE:
Who all her Sex did far surpass
In Beauty, Wit, and Chivalree:
Who, with invincible disdain,
Would fool, when she was in the vain,
Princes, with all their Wits about them;
But, and they slept, to death she would flout them:
And, by the Mass, with such a Mien
My Majesty did play the Queen:
Our Curate had my Picture made
In the same Robes in which I Played.

Fell. And what is thy name?

Zel. LAURA, forsooth.

Fell. O pleasant Play, and bitter truth!
That I, who dreamt of ZELIDAURA,
Should wake, should wake, and find her LAURA!
Aside. O beauteous Counterfeit of Majesty!
NATURE, what made thee make so fair a Lie?
Where is that crowned Beauty now become?
That Lyon's Courage, kindling at a Drum?
Those manly Deeds? Those Papps, which Armor pressed?
ACHILLES once more in a Kercher dressed?
SEMIRAMIS 'is Mode, who not with Box,
But Teeth of LAURLEL, combed her golden Locks?
Where, my heroic and dear Flame, which sprung
From Painters Pencil, and a Captives Tongue?
Consumed to ashes of a Rustic Love,
Rude Goddess of these Rocks, and this wild Grove?
Is It come to this? I then absolve thee, sleep;
And blame my high thoughts, that so low could creep.
To TARTARY will I, But I am mad
If I do love that Queen, unless she add.
This Beauty to those Virtues; and shall rave
If both this Body, and that Soul, she have.

Aside. Zel. What stands he mutt'ring to himself? May be
He likes me not. If he fought after me
Under the notion of a QUEEN, I Would have
Him find me a mean Shepherdess: I save
My Honor so. The Traitor shall not think
He (ZELIDAURA in his hand) could wink,
Hence Women learn, for all your LOVERS brags,
Men are no friends to Beauty clothed in Rags.
If Beauty strike LOVE'S Fire, why should it, less,
Than in a QUEEN, placed in a SHEPHERDESS?
Nor does; but (when it seems the World to set
On fire) where dowry wants, the tinder 's wet*
To Him. Might I entreat yowr Worships Name,
And the business you have here?

Fell. Squire of a foreign Prince I am,
Who to this glorious Theater --

Zel. Not a Master? By my troth
My own tongues end it was upon:
A mischief take thee, by thy sloth
I thought thou were a Zerving-mon.

Fell. No more that string.

Zel. He goes concealed*
Aside. A Knight he is I Am certain; At
The Enchanted Castle I saw that;
And, by his garb too, it is revealed.
To Him. Follows he (said thou) this Emprize?

Fell. In love, upon the score of Fame,
With the most accomplished DAME
That ever murdered Man with Eyes,
And the Worlds greatest Queen; to this
Enchantment came he, where an envious Thief
(The Coward Rival of his Bliss)
Found means to rob him of his chief
Delight, and Glory, in that thing
From which his most Heroic thoughts did spring.

Zel. O Usage, courser than my Coat, and more
Then I could bear, were I as Lambkin meek!
That one, who ZELIDAURA wore,
Should CLARIDANA seek!
It Is to apostatize from Reason,
To think more of him. Treason! Treason!
To enter my Benevolence,
At the back-gate of an Offense!

Enter Roselinda. Ros. CLARIDORO comes -- he is here:
Muffle thee quickly.

Zel. What disgust?

Fell. One, to be born a Mountaneer,
That ows such Beauty? how unjust! --
Who is 't?

Zel. A Man, of whom I stand
In awe a little.

Fell. (O, that hand! --)
Rural Goddess, keep'st thou Sheep?

Zel. Yes, and my self I better keep.

Enter Claridoro. Claro. I Would love without reward, and cannot do 't,
To love, is Love's Reward; I would endure
For her, what not? and that such joy to boot
That in my smart I play the EPICURE.
I pray against Life, and with the self same breath
Unpray that Prayer, lest it the GODS should hear
It Is to be out of pain; I then fly death,
And Valor councels me what others fear.
If I do live, my wound may seem but slight;
And if I dye, LOVES TROPHY I remove:
To live, 's to pine; to dye, 's to lose her sight;
My two supporters then, are Grief and Love:
For where Grief's Dropsy, and Love's Fever strive,
Though either kill, both often keep alive.

To Felisbravo. Zel. In fine, aspir'st thou to be glorious
By conquering thy Competitor?

Fell. It Is that my Love contendeth for.

Aside. Zel. O, May thou never prove victorious!
But do: for mine own self, I conquer will,
And whom thou conquer'st then, it does not skill.

Claridoro turns and sees them. Claro. What Is this? what see I there? Is 't not
ZELIDAURE, who (meanly clad)
Has her own Majesty forgot,
And affronts my Love too bad?
What jealous thoughts surprise me? I do fear
She (bent to Arms) affects the Valianter:
But he was not so; if to dare things high
Be Valor, who was valianter than I?
I, who her first of Alms am yet to gain,
Of her facility shall I complain?
Was not enough for me my own distress,
But I must dye of others happiness?
My Soul contending with so many Foes,
I would not have it sink with Envy's blows.
"More generous wounds were made for nobler Hearts,
"and in base blood are steeped pale ENVY'S darts.
Thus, jealous I should be, and know not how.
ENVY I could, but ENVY disallow:
Then must I bear it? must I? let me think --
'Twere monst'rous tameness to look on, and wink.
Nor LOVE, nor HONOR, such a Scene approve:
I Will chide then, mixed yet with respect and Love.
To Her. Ho! Shepherdess, is this well done
To mind thy Recreation
In Gar^^^, whilst another way
Thy flock does on the mountain stray?
Although he^d-shepherd thou have not,
Yet nothing is by gadding got.
Perdie, to see thee in this plain,
Grypes many a sprunt and jolly Swain.
Back to the field, and Brooks return,
And Pastures grazed in heretoforn,
Nor mell with any others sheep,
Since thou a flock of mine do keep.
To Him. Nor Thee, the ambition of whose fire
Does (soaring) to a QUEEN aspire.
Beseems it stoop from so high place,
A Rustic Shepherdess to chase.

Zel. How courteously the cares that do him press
He has cut out, and measured by my dress.

Fell. In rustic phrase his jealousy
Of her he vents, and pike at me.
Then I suspected not in vain
He stole the Picture; in the face
(When he espied it) reading plain
The features of this RURAL GRACE.
Undoubtedly she is his own --
To Claridoro. You will not now, Sir, face me down,
But that, when I bad watch did keep
( Surpised, e're by the foe, by sleep)
Thy treacherous Envy came an stole
(Not more out of my hand than soul)
A Jewel which I then called mine,
Though much despise it since it is thine,
Yet must and will I have it back,
Not that I It esteem, or lack;
For, the whole gust I take therein,
Is now, to take 't from thee agin.

Claro. I think thou art not yet awake,
But I shall rowse thee -- Do thou stare?

Zel. A truer word you never spoke:
He sleeps with spread Eyes like a Hare.

Fell. Traitor I Will be revenged --

Claro. Rude Man!

Aside. Zel. Must I step in to part you than?
If I do rear it, on my word,
This hook shall be a two-hand-sword --
This she must say Majesticaly like a Queen, without Felisbravo 's perceiving
it. Hold both, or I --
To Felisbravo.
Claro. Though not thy Quarrel, mine I understand --

Zel. Hold, CLARIDORO: It is I command --

To Claridoro. Fell. In fine, do thou deny it still? --

To Zelidaura. Claro. I obey thy unjust will.

Enter Claridiana and Floranteo, with Attendants. Cla. ZELIDAURA was 't you
said,
Like to a Shepherdess arrayed --
Turns and sees them quarrelling. Swords drawn in the Garden? who are we? --

Flo. Why Gentlemen, it cannot be,
Whilst yet the Enchantment is not brought
T'an end, in COURT a Duel fought
Unlicenc'd? when with license too
Ye may the same thing shortly do?

To Felisbravo. To Claridoro. Cla. I come --

Fell. Or do but stand me there --

Zel. I Am rent with doubt.

Cla. I dye with fear.

To both. Flo Provide ye Arms, and fight it out --

Zel. (O how fiery!

Cla. O how stout!)

Claro. I never provide any thing --
Within me I of all am stored --

Fell. And I both a sharp stomach bring,
And a long knife to fall abord.

Fight again. Zel. How implacable!

Cla. How cruel
They do a fresh in Battle join!

Zel. May neither conquer in this Duel.

Cla. Yes, one! and then the Conquest's mine.

Zel. In either Valor does abound.

Cla. Discretion is in neither found.

To Claridoro. Zel. With thee how little I persuade?

Cla. Our Guard!
Of Monarchs that last Reason will be heard.

She stamps, and sallying out, the Guard parts them. Claro. Madam, if now you
stop our rage --

Fell. The promised Combat --

Cla. Take our gage --
Throws her Glove to Felisbravo. Exeunt Claridoro, and Felisbravo at several
doors, and Claridiana turns to Floranteo. To Floranteo. Would thou have me
believe a Queen, whose name
In Triumph sits over the wings of fame,
Lurks now disguised in ARABIE?

Flo. If her such manly virtue decks,
That she is the wonder of her Sex,
Were It not another wonder, she
(Greedy of Knowledge, as of Arms)
Should leave unseen these fights, and charms,
Thy Realm too being so near his own?

Cla. Withdraw I Will talk with her alone.

Exit Floranteo. Ros. CLARIDIANA this way does make
To speak with thee --

Zel. Two short words take --
Your Countenance hold, what e're you hear;
Stop your mouth, and open your ear.

Cla. Hola! sprightly Shepherdess.

Zel. What commands thy Ladyness?

Cla. Discover, by thy life, that face.

Zel. Now by the facks) this of your GRACE
Needs no comfort, nor no foyl,
For Skies and Meads it does revile.
Or see (if thou mun needs have one
To set it off) you cloudless Sun!
Then for thy Beauty (challenging
Of Heaven the witness principal)
Over me a Gloria to sing,
Would prove a conquest very small.

Cla. Art thou fowl?

Zel. But envious not,
And so civil (markst Thou that?)
That to acknowledge I Am not squeemish
Her to be fair, who has no blemish,
Nor, where it is, will hit a Blot.

Cla. Whom loves an ugly woman best?

Zel. An uglier woman -- Was 't well guest?

Cla. Thou, a Shepherdess? Prompt Lass,
What is thy Business in this Place?

Zel. Marry (no Treason it is I ween)
To zee the fair INCHAWNTED QUEEN,
And the brave dundring of Alarms:
For, from my very Nurses arms,
According to our Country word,
I loved the slish-slash of a Sword.

Cla. Lo, half thy Errand! I am she:
And therefore, give consent that we
Our Eye too with the sight may bless
Of so divine a SHEPHERDESS.

Zel. Highness, mock on: -- Behold the Wight!

Takes off her silver Scarf* Cla. O Golden Morn of Silver Night!
What modest confidence! quick Air!
What Spirit! what excess of fair!
What queint, and more than courtly dress!
What exquisite neglecedness
Of those curling billowy Locks
Flowing round two Ivory Rocks!
What hands! that have to take their part
Not care it self (so far from Art)
Yet conquer all the World: wherein
A red Soul peeps through the white Skin!
SOL might envy her least grace.

Zel. I knew, yow'd mock me to my face.
How easily are People got
To praise, that which they envy not?
I am not yet a Clown so much,
But, when I see yowr Beauty such,
I find, into my CROWN you beat
The part, I should to you repeat.
Nothing beneath, or in the Sky,
Holds beautiful when you are by:
Possessing not so much in common,
As Envy, with an ugly woman:
But, when the splendour of your Rays
Is more than all the World can praise,
Releasing much of what should come to you,
You pay to all the World above their due.

Cla. A new delight her words provoke
By the rare grace with which they are spoke

Zel. I know, why LADY likes my wit;
And why my Face remains her debtor.

Cla. Why?

Zel. I know --

Cla. Then out with it.

Zel. Vaith, because her own are better.
I Would have all fair ones discommend
My Face; I would upon my word.

Cla. Why so, my understanding friend?

Zel. O! then, they are with Envy sturd.

Cla. But Envy croaks, and Snake-like stings --

Zel. Believe me (Princess) no such matter:
No Sycophant so sweetly sings:
"For she that envies me, does flatter.
"This back-hand praise goes homest still,
"'It Is stricken with so good a will.

Cla. ENVY is Adulation then?

Zel. Thou hitst the Nail on the head right:
And I have heard from Book-learn'd Men,
"'It Is courtly Rudeness, and kind spite.

Cla. Prithee, what would thou counsel me to do,
If me for Goodness ENVY should pursue?

Zel. Be ten times better than thou were before,
That ENVY may pursue thee ten times more.
That is the way which I affect,
No treason lurks, no malice there,
If I my self alone correct,
To be at full revenged on Her.

Cla. In every point she does perform --

Zel. Envy, a piteous creeping worm!
"A brave, and happy Pride it is,
"To envy neither WORTH, nor BLISS.

Cla. Do thou happily know LOVE?

Zel. Who is his Worship? Is it not
A foreign Prince, who, they said, died above
A twelvemonth sin of a great Cold he got?
Yes, by hearsay, I do know him,
Not that any spleen I owe him
For mischief he to me, or mine has done:
Though I have heard a long-long-while agon
The COURT he troubled, and the COUNTRY spoiled,
Till he both COURT and COUNTRY was exiled.

Cla. Do thou not Love?

Zel A Question
To ask a fool, have I not youth?

Cla. Whom love thou then?

Zel. My sell alone --
Nay, I have a curious tooth --
Love? what a base disgraceful word!
The sound is harsh, and shrill.
Lies all the Valor in the Sword?
No conquest over the Will?
Nor it a decent part hold I
(So much unto my self I owe)
To speak of that thing knowingly,
I do not, nor I will not know --
But do you love?

Cla. What is to Love?

Zel. To deny 't.

Cla. A Rustic LESS?
Hard question to one bred in Court 't would prove --

Zel. Not when she is in her Teens my word I Will pass.
If you do love, with wondrous Care
Hide that unfortunate disease:
For (feggs) declared Affections are
The Mother of Unthankfulness.
I knew a Gallant (from zuch keep)
Who, having zome how made his prize,
But a Dame's Picture, dropped asleep
With that Sun shining in his Eyes.

Cla. Troth, let them sleep or let them watch,
All Men alike are cheap with me:
To whom (for favors none they catch)
They never can ungrateful be
From Love (a contemptible Foe!)
My retreat make I by broad-day;
And look on Suitors just as though
They were Mad Lovers in a Play:
No, Fear not me, in such a way.

Zel. Kenn'st thou the Tow're where Confidence does dwell?
REPENTANCE lives hard by in a low Cell.

Cla. Ill dissembling Shepherdess
(For now dissemble Shepherdesses too)
If thy Courtesy 's not less
Than thy Beauty, thy Name show.
By my Life.

Zel. A powerful Spell!
This now would make a Gallants heart
Leap out, much more his name --

Cla. Well, well,
Tell me both what, and who, thou art.

Zel. Fairest CLARIDIANA, than,
I say I am no Shepherdess --

Cla. A Woman asks not like a Man --
Tell me thy Name --

Zel. I am -- (suppress
My Name I will --) a great Lord's Daughter,
Nor a less Soldier; taking after
My Father so much, that his Trade
I follow in the Mountain-shade:
For such do I take HUNTING for;
Not counterfeit, but substitute of WAR.
Reverence I bear to thy Command --
But, Madam, do not ask me more:
The Keys are in a sullen hand,
And Porter Silence keeps the door.

Cla. I will not press thee against thy Mind:
But since thy Soul has manly scope,
And that great MARS, and PHOEBUS (joined)
Are Masters of thy HOROSCOPE;
I will that thou, in habit fit,
Come straight to witness with thine Eyes,
And by Our Self in Judgment sit
Betwixt the Valiant, and the Wise:
And I shall then make my Election
More by thy vote, than my own Eye;
"For more (and chiefly in affection)
"Than Gamesters, see the Standers by.

Zel. Madam, my part is to be ruled.
To whether stand'st thou most inclined?

Cla. To him that loves me most.

Zel. I should
To him that bears the bravest mind.

Cla. My liking upon thine depends --
(Thus I shall dive into her ends.)

Aside. Zel. I Will study the contentment of your GRACE --
(But (with your leave) mine own in the first place.)

Aside. Exeunt, and enter Rifaloro crippled, between two Giants. Rif.
Charitable, loving, sweet,
Good faced Giants and discreet,
Spite of so many lying Books
That paint you Fools with ugly looks.
ORLANDO, and the KNIGHT OF THE SUN,
Pay you this good work ye have done;
And peaceably dye in your beds,
With all your senses in your heads;
No Errant Knight, in hideous duel,
Be so unconscionably cruel,
Armor and all, with Blade in fist,
To cleave you down from poul to twist.
Squires (inconsiderable Wights)
That bind your selves Prentice to Knights,
Mark well this doleful Story all,
And take Example by my fall:
Leave ERRANTY to those staid Wags
Who charge upon their running Nags,
Who enter never the Lists, though sore
Threat'ned above a Month before.
To those too, who do there appear,
Having nothing to do there:
Their Gennets Bells, and their own Gulls:
The Peoples laughter, and the Bulls;
Leave it --

Gy. 1. Leave satyrizing thou.

Rif. If I am not abusive, How
Shall I in reputation git,
And be canonized for a WIT?
A Drole, and not satirical?
I never knew but one in all
My life, and 'twas a precious Fool,
The never-enough-prais'd O TOOL!

Gy. 1. Sas! Coward, bustle up thy self.

Gy. 2. Ah! Brother, do not harm the Elf.

Rif. O Giant of my Guard! into
Thy hands I recommend me do.

Gy. 2. The PERSIAN entertain no fear.

Rif. I do not, but it will be here.

Gy. 2. Shall I heal thee in a trice
By Magic?

Rif. Have thou that Device!

Gy. 2. See! thou art whole.

Rif. Hah! I am well:
A MIRACLE! A MIRACLE!
St. Sacrapant! I run, leap, skip
And fly, like Beggar cured with Whip.
Let not the DOCTORS know of this,
For they will take it much amiss
If any 's cured without their aid;
Yet where is the Cure that they have made?
The Church has DOCTORS too, and they
Complain of wrong too in their way:
That Emp'ricks DOCTORS are become,
And DOCTORS Patients now -- but Mum.

Enter the General. Genesis Horrid confusions do I tread:
And Mazes upon Mazes thread
In this new COURT, where FELISBRAVE
Transported with his Conquests brave,
In the pursuit thereof suspends
The progress to his amorous Ends.

Gy. 1. RIFALORO, will thou eat
(For I would give thee some choice meat)
A salv'ry Leg, or little Wing
Of a Camel which we bring?

Rif. I would not rob your Grandiships:
We say, LIKE LETTUCE TO LIKE LIPS.
This, if you please (having been sick)
A Chine of Beef, but not too thick.

Genesis Of Rifaloro somewhere near
The whining Echoes strike my Ear.

Gy. 1. Say, shall we post thee through the Air in nimble
Egg-shell, to PERSIA, or in vagrant thimble.

They go about to lay hold on him, and he cries out. Rif. No, no, a sober Mule:
the Spanish pace
On foot, or mounted, not the Wild-goose Chase.

Genesis It Is he, and those same Giants dire
About to murder the poor Squire:
Hold, Cowards! what is this ye do?

Gy. 1. Slave, who are we, and what are you?

Rif. Hold, tardy succ'rer of distress!
These are Giants of the Peace.

Gy. 2. Consider, valiant Knight --

Gy. 1. With those
That raunt, my Courtesy is Blows.
Loose me that I may kill him.

Genesis Come,
Presumption; but be sure strike home:
Those Rebel-Gyants I would scorn to fear,
Whose Mountains, to scale Heaven their Ladders were.

Rif. GENERAL, y' undo me with your wroth,
These Worthies are my friends in troth,
I tell you true, done more for me they have,
Than my good Grandam who is in her Grave.
I owe (and shall acknowledge whilst I breath)
A thousand favors to their Worships: Sheath
Thy Blade, and be advised to be more plyant:
The Knight's not always sure to kill the Giant.

Gy. 2. This more: Since the dissolving of the Charms,
Know, that we Giants must now lay down Arms.

Rif. Well fare thy heart, O Giant well inclined,
Holy and sage, and of a peaceful Mind!
He tells you true, the Books are clear in it all;
To wit, Parismus, Amadis de Gaul,
And Cavalier del Phebo -- Then it is rare,
To unpick quarrels, when Laws studied are.

Enter a Gentleman called Zelindo. Gent. Prince FLORANTEO wills you
From CLARIDIANE to show
Unto the Noble Strangers, all
This Enchanted Court.

Gy. 1. We shall.
Mark; and thereof ye shall be showed
Each Rarity, and every Mode.

Rif. Are there Complaints? Are there Ambitions?
Lies are there? Are there ill Conditions?
Are there Envyings? Are there Words
Sweeter than the Tunes of Birds
Before one's face, behind the door
Back-racket-strokes of a left handed MOOR?

Gent. How e're enchanted, Court it is still,
Here they do lay their sick and ill,
Of vast extent their SPITTLE is:
The Quarter of the Grumblers, This.

Rif. Bad men they are; yet have they had much wrong;
Reaping Rewards, which to the Good belong.

Gy. 1. There are the enviouus.

Rif. Good Lads those,
They kill themselves: Give me such Foes.

Gy. 2. There, those, good Fortune, puffs.

Rif. To morrow
I Will talk with them. "Such never can bear sorrow.

Gy. 1. There, those, who judge by the successes still.

Rif. May all their Actions be condemned by Ill.

Gy. 1. Here, those, that trust in PRINCES FAVOR.

Rif. Presumption! bind them to their behavior.

Gy. 2. A swarm of DUENIAS, there.

Rif. With things
I will not meddle that have stings.
Duenias, Mondongas, Dwarfs and Pages,
I leave to bold Plebeian Stages.
In COURT is sacred every Lawn,
Each setting Beauty, or which now does dawn,
I there adore: Each Tyar a DIADEM,
A weilded SCEPTER each shak'd Fan does seem.
I call each Quoif, nay every Bib, a CLOTH
Of STATE, and all for fear I Will take my Oath.

Gent. Of Court Diseases talk no more, for there
Of others weal we all are sick I fear.

Genesis What, not one honest Man in Court then?

Gent. Yes,
A Thousand in the Spanish COURT there is:
Whom you shall see in Magic Perspective,
Applaud the Golden Age they now retrive.

Gy. 1. What is that old short Man we spy?

Rif. I take 't he writes a Comedy
For the MENINAS.

Gy. 1. Who are they?

Rif. A flight of Birds the first of May:
Whose chirping Bills (which true Division run)
Will flout, and out of Countenance dash the Sun:
And I can tell a Secret of them too:
But if thou tell 't again, By all that is true --

( Gy. 1. I tell?)

Rif. They would have Husbands, and exact
From him a Farse, themselves intend to act
On that high day which to the WORLD did give
Their Royal Master on whose Beams they live.
And four hundred Columns terse,
And a conceit in every verse,
And a disdain to each eight feet,
And a Sonnet in each sheet,
And to every part, they ask:
To comply with which huge task,
The foresaid Poet by main strength
Wire-draws his PLAY to such a length,
That, for a ^ife 'twould serve, of one
That does no good under the Sun,
Or after whom there is an Advowson,
Or before whom there are a Thousan,
Or of a Suit in CHANCERY,
Or of a COURT ^xpectancie,
Which is the Eternal of Eternity.

Gent. Four hundred hours last let it,
And he who so is wearied wo't,
The name of tedious shall git
Unto himself, with Clown to boot.
For a FESTIVAL, set forth
To celebrate PHILENO's years,
By BELIZA's Royal worth,
Should stop the motion of the Spears.
And merits to last evermore,
As do the years it does adore.
Come, see Wonders that surpass,
In this enchanted Looking-glass!

Relates, as seen in the enchanted Glass, the Festival which the Queen of Spain
made at Aran Juez for the Birthday of the King. Genesis Here view I (with what
sweetness blessed!)
Beauteous CYTHERIAS Nest:
And a BABYLON of Flowers
Amongst so many pleasant Bowers.
What an illustrious Palace fair!
Such a Play-fellow the Air
Has not elsewere: None so nigh
And splendid-neighbour has the Sky.
If DRAGONS kept the GOLDEN-FLEECE,
And Apples of the HESPERIDES,
In the Fable: In this Truth
(Fairer than the Morning's youth)
HARAMA (a glib Crystal Snake)
A Girdle to her Fields does make;
TAGUS (a silver Giant) falls
At the feet of her proud Walls.
-- This SEAT
To whom belongs it?

Zelind. To the Great
Shepherd PHILENO, who appears
Fuller of fame, and Worlds, than years.
Whose foot, whose hand
( Both temperate in Command)
The one an easy yoke does sit,
The other is a prudent Bit.

Genesis -- Who
Leads to this Bower of Bliss?

Zelind. That new
PHOENIX of Spain, swathed in fire,
Son of himself, and his Great Sire.
Fair seav'nteen Springs has he complete,
Whose understanding is so great,
That in his pupillage appears
The expecience of an hundred years.
And in these fields is celebrated
That happy day unto the Earth
When he received his Royal Birth,
Whence GOOD MEN'S hopes, and BAD MEN'S fears, are dated.
Him his two Gallant BROTHERS follow,
Luminaries bright of SPAIN,
Sparks that fly out of his Flame,
For they are Stars, if he APOLLO.
On whom both Purples we shall view,
Of TIBER, and of DANOW too;
The one his CROSIER glorify;
The other raise his SCEPTER high.
The Festival you see does come
From his Illustrious SPOUSE; in whom
(Of two WORLDS sitting at the Helms)
EARTH more perfections sees, than Realms.
For but of one Ray of her Hair
(Since seldom Kings have Kindred waigh'd)
On the mere score that she is fair,
A Clasp for two Crowns might be made.
Not Lilly of France, but Rose of brown
Casteel, that to our SOL shall bring
A Spanish Violet to heir his CROWN;
'Sted of a Flemish Iesamin.
Another equally divine
SHEPERDESSE, that, stead of those
Flocks of Swans, which TAGUS shows,
Shall reign the EAGLES of the RHINE;
Fair SISTER of the MASTER-SWAIN
(Whose parts betwixt respect and fear
The proudest merits do constrain
To strike their sayls) consorts with her.
And of an hundred NYMPHS beside
(The love and envy of the SUN)
Accomplishments so multiplied,
So without earthly Paragon,
That not her Train, and less her Eye
Filled up to the brim with Glory,
Either her Royalty belie,
Or leave imperfect Beauties story.
Majesty, and sumptuous Clothes,
And the Art to put them on,
And variety of those
All without comparison.
The Valleys sing, the Mountains skip,
The Elms and Poplars dance and trip,
APRIL himself a part rehearses,
And pricks his flowers in all the verses.
NIQUEA's GLORY (whose strong Spells
Even conjure up Impossibles,
And Miracles of Wit do muster)
Is the Theater's first luster.
The second is the golden Fleece,
Which having first begun in GREECE,
The way to TROY did after find,
And ends in SPAIN with ILIUM'S fire refined.
And now the Play without doors is
A dull Man's (who his homely Quill
TO excuse in part) can tell you this;
Without command he writes not ill.
Sound a Trumpet. A world of People flock together
To be spectators of the sight:
And from this Instrument I gather
The approach of one, and the other Knight
They sound another Trumpet near. To the crowned Lists. -- Let Us go, to gain
A fight of them: And live this MORN,
And rising Sun, and Stars of SPAIN,
Till crippled Time be made their scorn.

Exeunt. Cornets. Sound Drums and much Harmony, and Enter at one door, with a
splendid Train, and very brave in Apparel, Prince Claridoro; and if they will
they may be armed, or leave that till the last Act; and at another door King
Felisbravo, with a splendid Train likewise, etc. and the General, with many
others by his side; and let a Curtain be drawn close, Cornets sounding, and on
a high conspicuous Throne behind it, let Claridiana and Zelidaura at her right
hand, appear, as gloriously clad as may be, and in the fashion they like best;
and many Ladies seated upon the Strada, and Floranteo standing at the bottom of
the fo^t pace upon which the Throne is, and the Giants like two supporters at
the Ends thereof; and enter Rifaloro with his Master, and with Claridoro a
Servant of his, receiving instructions for something from his Master. Claro. Be
sure this part now be well played,
Entering as if thou were afraid.

Serve. Put no, if, to 't, I shall be so.

Claro. (By this Invention I shall know
If Zelidaura's stay here, be
Love, or Curiosity.) Aside.

Serve. I go.

Claro. This is the War alone
Exit Servant. In which I fear to be overthrown.

Now let the Curtain be drawn back, and each make a profound Reverence to the
Queens, and the Queens rise from their seats, as likewise the Ladies, and then
the Knights make a Reverence each to other. Comppany. With what a careless
Bravery They
One another do survey!

Genesis And how composed, like honorable Foes,
They interchange Salutings before Blows!

Cla. Both are gallant.

Zel. Gallant, both:
Yet I with each am in such wroth,
That I to neither side incline,
Though I am one's, and to other's mine.

Claro. Hah! ZELIDAURA on the Throne?
She doubtless has her self made known
To CLARIDIANA.

Fell. I
Am made up of perplexity!
The Picture went at first for ZELIDAURA,
TARTARIA's Liege! then represented LAURA!
A Shepherdess! and now again one seen
In Sovereign posture by a Crowned QUEEN!
Once more sleep I bolt upright:
When shall I wake, for I do move
Like one that is waking, and my sight
Equivocates, but not my Love?
Who will this glorious Woman prove?

Flo. Knights, the Queen stays; and now the last
Dice of FORTUNE both must cast.
Dispute, if that untye it not,
Your Swords must cut the Gordian-knot.

Claridoro takes off his Hat, covers again, and begins. Claro. MADAM: (Since
you remitted have to words,
That which at first were better tried with swords)
I argue thus; By Books Wars Art is taught,
And without WISDOM no great thing was wrought.
Thus the great Son of THETIS (dire annoy
And ten years Plague of miserable TROY)
Had his Head armed with Prudence more than Steel,
Or than his Mother left unarmed his heel
By the learned CENTAUR: Thus KING PHILIPS Heir
(Who envied to others TRUMPET more than SPEAR)
Instructed was, in Aristotle's Cell,
To understand the World, and then to quell:
Thus Marched high CAESAR through the heart of FRANCE,
A Pen in one, in the other hand a Lance,
And, in the Pride of that Success, did show
To BRITTONS bold an armed CICERO.
With the same weapon (to abridge disputes)
Men conquer Men, with which Men conquer Brutes.
Of BEASTS, more fierce, more strong, more armed are many
Than MEN; and BARBAROUS MEN as stout as any,
More numerous far. But WISDOM tames the BEAST,
And WISEST NATIONS mastered still the rest,
Until the Brutish WORLD its own strength knew,
And with their MAXIMS fell their EMPIRES too.
It Is not the brawny vigor of an Arm,
But inward courage (which the heart does warm)
Makes FORTITUDE: A Life-despising Eye,
And (not to conquer, but) to dare to dye.
Strength makes it not. It I like strength did want,
And met like dangers, I Am more valiant;
Because my Soul was of a larger growth,
And, when her Second failed her, fought for both.
He that out-lives his Honor is a Fool:
To Cure a Coward send him then to School.
But many Valiant have outlived their Fame,
For lack of Wit to play an after-game.
The Wise weighs all things, who sometimes does know
The Soldiers Praise is to decline a Foe;
And (slighting Rumors) his safe glory sums
In this, that, "He fights best who overcomes.
"Who rashly fights (though he the World amaze)
"A valiant Fool will be his best of Praise.
When a great CHIEF his Squadrons up has led,
With others hands he fights, but his own head;
Therefore (and fitly) for such valiant wile,
His head has BAYS, his Soldiers hands the SPOIL:
And when the Sword decides a bloody Fray,
Their HANDS that one, his HEAD fights every day.
"Thus only Prowess unto KINGS pertains,
"Who ought to wear their Valor in their Brains.
As, though ten thousand hands a PALACE frame,
Yet he, whose Head contrived it, bears the Name:
Just so a PRINCE, who acts with others hands,
(His own Head steering) EARTH and SEA Commands.
Upon a Couch the CONTINENT he awes,
And from a COUNCIL gives the OCEAN Laws.
To hack wild Beasts is not a Sovereign's part:
Kings fight not with their Hands but with their Art.
I end: In Iron WAR, in PEACE's Down,
Their MAXIMS Conquer, and their COUNCILS Crown.

A Flourish. With the noise whereof Feli: bravo rowses as out of a deep Muse.
Fell. ( Little of all he said heard I,
Such a diversion have I had
Of Beauty, like a Rustic clad
Sometimes, sometimes with Majesty!) Aside.
THE SWORD --
Takes off his Hat, makes a Reverence, then, covering again, proceeds, speaking
to the Throne. -- Made EMPIRES; VALOR guards rich WISDOM'S Coffers,
As Fear betrays the succors which it offers:
He then whom Danger mazes, may for Brain
Go to the Camp, he went to School in vain.
When a great Leader, a great Rest does play,
PRUDENCE gives aim, but VALOR wins the day:
And, though he is not obliged a Breach to enter
The first, his Men must know that he dares venture.
If Valor he never showed, what is truly Wise
Will be in him reputed Cowardice.
COWARD is a Disease bred in the Liver,
Which qualified may be, but cured never.
Wise Men (and therefore they are Wise) do know
How to seem valiant, if they are not so.
Who venters farther than is fit, a Sot,
A Madman may be called, but Coward, not.
And, who his Valors Proof does long forbear,
Would be thought wise, but will be thought to fear.
To dye is very well; but yet to kill,
Is more; the Victor is the Victor still.
A Soldier boasted to a King his gashes:
But give me him (quoth he) that gave such slashes.
A valiant Prince, he is his Empire's Wall:
Safe without Armies, Terrible to all.
Of Realms acquested, THESE THE SWORD DID WIN,
We say, though POLICY did most therein.
Now, to whose Name the FECIT put you see,
The MASTER BUILDER, past all doubt, is he.
Council may moderate a Prince that is rash:
But who shall fortify a Spirit lash?
High Mettles, like strong Wines, may water bear:
But Council's vain, where there is the Traitor FEAR.
No King should so presume on WIT, to think
To govern Lands with Pens, and Seas with Ink:
Better than at a COUNCIL TABLE, He
In TENTS the Land, in CABBINS rules the Sea.
Well may a Prince be learned, Perfect none
Who wants that best supporter of a Throne.
But (for we skirmsh'd have too long with words)
Prepare to feel that SCEPTERS live in SWORDS.

Trumpets. They Draw: The Queens rise in their Seats, sound a Charge, the
Giants put themselves between the Knights: A Cloud descends, and in it the God
of Love with a Nymph, who in a Basin brings many fresh Flowers, and amongst
those some withered. Cup. How Is this! Suspend your Furies.

Zel. Heaven
With wonder new lets down the Skies,
And crowns the Earth with Prodigies.

Cla. The Valianter did much out-go,

Zel. That is because you wished it so:
But the Dispute was balanced even.

Cornets. Cup. Claridiana fair and bright,
I am LOVE who come to light
Thee out of this dark Wood the art in,
And if thou would have him to win
Who loves thee best, I Will let thee see
Which infallibly is He.
But ( will or nill) the sovereign
Decree of Heaven does thus ordain,
That he by whom thou art most adored,
Shall be thy Husband, and thy Lord.

Aside. Cla. Since he that was the Valianter
Loves me, I Am sure, what need I fear
The sentence, but may well submit
My Soul and Will to Heaven and It?
Thus cut I with my People's grain,
Nor can the losing Knight complain.
To Cupid. Great LOVE, my Glory it is that thou
To clear my doubts to Earth would bow:
With thee I trust them.

Cup. Then, that Man
Who these withered Flowers can
(Put into my hand) recover
To pristine state, is thy best Lover.

Zel. Who but that stranger Knight there can it be,
That came to fight for her, and injure me?

Claro. In me what venture is it, if I
Do for ZELID AURA dye?

Fell. If ZELID AURA I adore,
I may venture upon that score.

Cup. Noble CLARIDORE, advance.

Let him take a dry Flower, and put it in the hand of Cupid, and let it
dissolve to ashes. Claro. In Name of the ARABIAN Queen
Let this withered Flower grow green.

Cup. It Is fallen to ashes.

Cla. What good chance!

Zel. What ill luck!

Cla. The Victory
Stays, with my wishes wings to fly.

Zel. O may thou never victorious prove!

Cup. Glorious INCONNU, move.

Fell. I deliver thee this same
In CLARIDIANA'S name.

This Flower too falls to dust. Cup. Dust it is, and transitory.

Cla. This is Treason.

Zel. This is Glory.

Rif. Into my Country I will carry
A Receipt so necessary,
To prove all Men what ever Liars,
Who blind poor credulous Women with false Fires.

Cup. Brave FLORANTEO, draw thou near.

Cla. Avaunt!

Cup. If he in worth and birth is peer
Unto the proudest of them all, in vain,
CLARIDIANA, do thou him distain.
Draw near --

Flo. In name of fair, but merciless
CLARIDIANA (who contemns
Much Love, and little Happiness)
Receive this Flower.

Cup. See how it gems,
Smiles, and recovers! Noble Youth,
Lo, LOVE in person does reward thy truth!

Offers to join them, and Claridiana flies back. Cla. I Will lose my life first.

Cup. Thou have said
Thou't obey HEAVEN; and HEAVEN will be obeyed.

All. Live Floranteo.

Cla. Live (say I)
Claridiana, and All dye.

Cup. To FLORANTEO 'longs Arabia's Throne:
Give him the joy, and homage every one.

Cla. Is HEAVEN become a cousener too?
What ill Example! -- Traitorous Crew! --

Citizens. Of FLORANTEO Wife thou art,
And he our King.

Fell. Dare none to start
From his Allegiance.

Claro. Cowards stay,
In her defense do I this Sword display.

Enter the Servant of Claridoro, as in a great fright. Serve. CLARIDORO without
peer,
Mixest thou in Quarrels here,
When in Tartary they are
All in confusion, all in War?
For ZELIDAURA being self exiled
In uncouth Mountains, and in Forests wild,
Nor choosing any Husband out,
Her Subjects to uncrown her go about.
Thou then (since of her Blood thou art)
Draw thy Sword to take her part,
And thy faith, and prowess high
In that just Cause alone employ:
If thou linger --

Claro. It Is enough.

Fell. Heavens! I shall be sure accursed
If my Sword aid her not the first,
For an eternal Love, and tough
Revenge, for Cause declared now,
Me furiously into that War does throw.

Exit in a Rage. To Rifaloro. Genesis Let Us follow FELISBRAVE.

Rif. You know I trundle
Under you General -- By my Persian faith
This sweet enchanted Creature is a Bundle.
And Nosegay, of AURORA'S.

Claro. There Is my path
To serve you Madam: So LOVE wills, that I
Who dye his Martyr, should your Soldier dye.

Cla. What an unlooked for Change!

Zel. The Rout
(Heavens) in my absence, without doubt,
Is blown up into Tumults -- Queen and Laws
Of Hospitality, perdon the Cause.
Now no more curious Fooleries, in old
And valiant Earnest let the WORLD behold
Armed ZELIDAURA, and TARTARIA feel
The dire effects of her provoked Steel.

Exeunt Zelidaura and Roselinda. All. For FLORANTEO Victory!

Flo. Villains, in your Throats ye lie.

Citiz. To Floranteo, Madam, yield your Hand,
Or all Arabia falls from your Command.

Cla. Coward and Raskal-Heard, that shall be tried.
This is my Hand -- Who? who, will give the Bride?
Approach that dare -- See, Traitors (whom my breath
Draws. Should drive like chaff) It holds the Key of Death!

And Floranteo draws in defense of her. Flo. Retire: His Sword for whom ye
mutiny
Defends Claridiana.

Citiz. Enemy
To thine own Heart! Thy self, and all the Gods
Thou do oppose, provoking their just Rods.

Flo. Insolent Varlets --

All. Kill him.

Flo. I had rather
Serve her, than have her.

Cla. O, my deep-read Father,
Permit'st thou this? Now save me by thy Art:
Now is the moment.

Flo. Madam, Take good Heart.
He drives them out, and returns to Claridiana. The Cloud's dispersed; y' are
safer in my Guard
Then if the Stars all owned you for their ward.

Trumpets. Exeunt. The End of the second Act.
The Persons of the third Act, are the same with those of the second, adding,
MARS. AURELIO. A CAPTAIN. And OTHERS.
Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.
THE THIRD ACT.
Enter Aurelio, and others, as receiving with joy, Zelidaura, with her
Roselinda, in Tartaria. Zel. THis is t'entrap me; well, my Foot
Within the City I Will not put,
Till a full Trial make it clear,
Whether things are, as they appear.

Aur. Great Madam, it is enough the Realm
Thy secret wandering did incline
To murmur at thee, and repine;
Our Pilot absent from the Helm.
But, to be censured once disloyal,
TARTARIA merits not. What Trial
Would thou have more, than the Applause
And Joy, which thy Return does cause;
Both this, which meets thee on the Bounds;
And that, which from yon Walls resounds?
Though, as to lighting us, some time,
Abscence eclipsed thee to our Clime;
Not as to Influence; for, to Faith,
No Back at all a SOVEREIGN has.
Since the false news did thee no harm,
And now thy Beams TARTARIA warm;
This Errour's debtor we remain,
For giving us our Queen again.
Enter the City (we implore)
Nor let thy Anger cost it more.

Zel. First, in that Rural Palace hid with Bowers,
I Will rest -- But what is this noise?

Rif. Help, Heavenly Powers!
Trumpets. Within a great noise of Swords. The World sinks with their strokes.

Zel. Make have, have make.

Enter Felisbravo and Claridoro fighting, and much People endeavoring to part
them, and with them the General, Rifaloro, and a Captain. Fell. Now, on thy
treach'ry will I take
A full Revenge.

Claro. Now, on thy Head
Shall be revenged what I have bled.

Zel. Rule me those Swords, two lives defend,
Which the Owners prodigally spend.
(O Heavens!) --

Fell. Leave, of all his Train.
Not one alive.

Genesis Cowards, in vain
Ye muster Regiments of Hares:
The more you are, the more your fears.

Aur. What Fury! Tide encounters Tide.
(Vain Labor!)

Rif. I am by thy side:
None of your petty Clownlings, we;
The Bombast of a Comedy.

Zel. Part them, I say. The two that fight
Are CLARIDORO, and the Knight
Of the Picture.

Rif. There Is thy score --
Rifaloro hits one of them. No fencing it with RIFALORE.

The Knights are parted. Fell. That, e're so many People came,
I killed him not, I blush for shame.

Claro. That I, by these should hind'red be
From killing him, it vexes me.

Capt. Both are hurt.

Zel. The Stranger bear
First to be Cured: And, OFFICER,
Quarter him in the Mansion
Of LAURA'S Father, CORIDON.

Capt. I shall.

Zel. Prince Claridoro too
(Whose Life I fear less of the two)
Place in an equal Quarter near.

Aur. I shall.

Zel. Before you go (do you hear!)
Clap in such wise on both a Guard
That they perceive not their way barred.
I would secure them each from either,
Yet not be seen to do it neither.
The Captain comes to Felisbravo, and Aurelio to Claridoro. Aside. And how (O
LOVE) how shall I know,
Whether he fought for me, or no?

Capt. Please you to come where they may cure you?

Fell. The wound is nothing I assure you.

Capt. By your Life (Sir) consider't more

Aur. Prince, reply not, y' are hurt sore.

Claro. A scratch, believe 't.

Aur. You Will find it none:
However, the Queen will have it done

Claro. A spark of pity now from Her!
Then look for quarter from a Murderer.

Fell. Captain, how far from hence to Court?

Capt. Your Cure (Sir Knight) does more import
You, than that knowledge.

Fell. To secure
ZELIDAURA, is my Cure.

Capt. What Faith a groundless lie will win!
And O! how late it is called in?
But, come along, and you shall see
How well this Care may spared be.

Fell. To my Revenge I do prefer
The greater sweet of serving her.

Exeunt Felisbravo and Captain. Aur. Come, Prince.

Claro. It Is so: Now, Madam, I do find
You (who even then are cruel, when you are kind)
Because from Life, I sue out a divorce,
To punish me will make me live perforce.

Exeunt Claridoro and Aurelio. Rif. Do they bear them Prisoners hence?

Genesis Prisoners? I Will follow my dear Prince,
Resolving by his side to dye.

Rif. That Is not for me; and yet I lie;
For I (to give my self my due)
Do whiff the smoke of HONOR too.

Exit General, and Rifaloro offers to follow him, but is staid by Roselinda.
Zel. Stop that Servant.

Ros. Gentleman,
I come to call you.

Rif. Virgin, can
You pick out of this face, and mien,
No higher Title? Well it is seen
You know me not, you don't in troth,
You don't -- How low our Market go'th?
You have been somewhere nearly bred,
So thin your Courtesy you spread.
'T has vexed me -- Gentleman, quoth you?
When Knighthood is so common too!
Well, your business?

Ros. She that calls
Herself the Mistress of these Walls --

Rif. Is a Goddess, and clep'd is --

Ros. What a new strain, new Humour's this?
If she a Goddess be, or no,
Let thine Eyes tell thee.

Rif. Where Is de Froe?

Rifaloro turns, takes off his Hat and falls at her Feet. Zel. Approach.

Rif. Now let me never stir,
What difference 'twixt the Sun, and her?
A Clustre of ripe Stars she is:
Let me that hand, adoring, kiss; --
That hand, by which the LILLIES brown appear,
And the Crystal is not clear,
Laced with Saphyr, tagg'd with shell
In which the Orient Pearl does dwell:
Give me that pretty foot, which goes
Knitting sweet flower with Ivory Toes,
But none so short as It; for thine
Is BREVIAT of a JESAMINE:
Give me --

Zel. Withdraw, and let him stay.
Roselinda goes aside. -- Art thou the Stranger's Servant? Say.

Rif. I am, nor of him do complain.

Zel. Is he so good?

Rif. So bad; w' are fain
At every turn to be made friends:
But seldom in this World meet Ends:
Ill Masters have good Servants, Good
Are answered with Ingratitude.

Zel. What Place?

Rif. An Office of great trust.

Zel. How great?

Rif. His MUTE.

Zel. His MUTE? I must
Confess, that is not for a FOOL.

Rif. There Is an Exception to each Rule.
For (let me tell you) I do blend 'um,
Holding the latter in COMMENDUM.

Zel. Thy Conceits like me past expression.

Rif. It Is incident to our Profession
That (let it miss, or let it hit)
We Fools are offering still at Wit.

Zel. Who is thy Master?

Rif. He is one
Whose Country I Will to you make known,
His merit, humor, disposition,
But his Name, on no condition.

Zel. And why his Name will thou not tell?

Rif. For doing of a Miracle:
That once this saying may be true,
A Servant told not all he knew.

Zel. It Is not worth thanks to hide his name,
When all things else thou do proclaim.

Rif. Of the old Apple a new slice!
Mother EVE'S inquisitive Vice!
His name? in troth it may not be.

Zel. Hola!

Rif. Why call you?

Zel. Thou shall see.
Enter Aurelio. "With a base mind, what gentle courses
"Cannot persuade, that Rigor forces.

Aur. Ordein your pleasure.

Zel. (Anger me!)
Hang presently --

Rif. Upon a Tree
Say not, by thine Eyes; for I
Shall then prevent the Rope, and dye
Of the unkindness.

Zel. Away take him.

Lays hold of him, and he struggles. Rif. In earnest is it?

Zel A pattern make him
To Fools, who shall pretend to hold hereafter
A Secret -- (My Entreaties made a laughter!
I pray in vain!)

Rif. By this good day
I think thou know not how to pray.
In fine, I must be hanged.

Zel. Thou must
(Without his name) forthwith be trussed.

Rif. Then drive on, Cart, Note WORLD, a Woman hung
A Man, because he held his Tongue.
March, March.

Zel. (For once it shall be told,
A Woman could from knowing hold
A Secret, which she dies to know; withal,
Which a Man says, he will dye, before she shall --)
Aside. Leave him at large -- What Countryman
Aurelio goes aside. 'S thy Master?

Rif. He Is a PERSIAN:
For whom great MARS bids make already
All his tryumphal Charets ready.

Zel. Is he highborn?

Rif. And so discreet,
Valiant, bountiful, and sweet
In his deport, that he is the great
Idea of a PRINCE COMPLETE.

Zel. Is It FELISBRAVO?

Rif. Unto thee
Is that Name known? No, it is not He.
'S precious! that Royal Prodigy
Above the bounds of MAN does fly.

Zel. And what is his business? To this Coast
What Wind brings him (for thou know?)

Rif. O WOMEN!

Zel. Speak, go not about
The bush.

Rif. Then, turn me inside out,
Seraphical Examiner.
They say there is in TARTARIA here
A Mad-cap Queen, that kembs you wyre,
And wears a Helmet for attire;
Who, 'sted of a wide Vardingale
And reverend Apron, puts on Mayl,
And glittering Arms, in which are writ
The valiant Deeds she did commit;
Who nothing but the Spear, and Rest,
And Pouldron, minds; She hoops her breast
With Brass, and her long fingers fair,
The deserts of the Needle are.
A mischief take the Woman! Let her
Resign to Men (whom it suits better)
INCAMPINGS: Let her Kerchers hem,
Leave hemming in of Troops to them.
If a Spider cross her sight,
Let her take a famous fright;
And purse her Mouth when she says, Man,
Or Husband, like the Nimphs of SPANE.
Let her tremble at a Rat,
More than it does at a Cat.
"She, for a Beauty who would pass,
"Must be as nice as Venice glass;
"And, if one hold his hand up, wink,
"For fear he brain her with a pink.
In fine, to see this Queen we came:
When a Knight (Rival of his Fame)
His Fury would have killed: They both
Lie hurt, and I am so in wroth
With this Man-Woman, Angel-Devil,
(Who to the Sun would scant be civil)
That could I light upon her GRACE,
I Would tell her roundly to her face,
Spin Highness, Spin (as good as you have spun)
For y' are a Woman, not an AMAZON.

Zel. (He serves me right --) Who sent him?

Rif. (No, you sed
You Would have me hanged) -- He came of his own head.
For he has Valor, Birth, and All
With which a QUEEN in Love should fall:
And I (his Servant) shall not bate
Much of a COUNTESS for my Mate.
I know too in the World a QUEEN
(I name her not, but) she has been
Late disinchanted, for which pains
Such favors upon Him she rains,
That -- But I stop --

Zel. Say, prithee, does he love?

Rif. Is he a Brute?

Zel. And is he loved?

Rif. You move
A curious Question -- This (shall I be free?)
Is a graft too of the forbidden Tree.
From me no more is to be got,
And therefore (pray you) press me not.
Good faith, 'twere much more like a Friend
To hang me, as you did intend.

Zel. This one thing wilt not let me know?

Rif. Pray, why should you desire it so?

Zel. Only to keep it secret still.

Rif. Forbear to know it, and you will.

Zel. How mainly thou art given to scoff!
It is not noble to put off
With a light jest a serious suit.

Rif. No? as great Men as I will do 't.
But come (since you will have the truth)
He is a Man much loved by many,
Yet one of such a curious tooth,
That in his life he never loved any.
White Hands, black Eyes, curled Locks, have no more force
On him, than Physic has on a dead Horse.
From some dry Mother-in-law the Man did learn
Not to relent -- He? He has no concern,
Cannot discourse of love, though in his prime,
Though on all other Theams his tongue's a Chime,
Though none so dressed, none dances so, none pours
Himself so out; for He Is a rock of Flowers.

Aside. Zel. A Knight that is so accomplished, not
To love, appears to me a knot.
I must undo it by some Art:
For at this secret hangs a Heart.
To Rifaloro. Pleased me thou have exceedingly:
And I unthankful shall not be.

Rif. I kiss thy foot, and am thy slave.

Zel. Here me AURELIO, take this Knave
To prison.

Rif. Me to prison?

Zel. Yes,
For being a Blab.

Rif. Ah! Traiteress,
Horrible Inquisitrix,
Are these thy thanks? and do thou fix
The name of Blab upon me too?
O! take by me example, you
That are Gallants, you that love:
Thus do Ladies thankful prove.

He is carried away to Prison. Ros. Should your Highness be more cruel
Than you are to this sweet Jewel;
Never was it so well bestowed,
Or so like a Mercy showed.

Exit Roselinda. Zel. Dissolved in Tears, and languishing delight,
The whispering FOUNTAIN is a tale of LOVE;
The Rosy MORN, inam'ring at first sight,
Sweet PHILOMELA's Oraisons does move;
The smiling FLOWER* the tender peeping BUD,
APRIL importunes with soft showers; the DOVE
Lives vowed to everlasting Widdowhood,
Temple of LOYALTY, and Soul of LOVE.
Love grasps both Globes: LOVE all below inspires:
Love guides with constant change the spears above:
MARS feels LOVES darts, APOLLO feels LOVES fires,
Even HE that hurls the thunder, yields to LOVE.
All these to me no warrant; whose intent
Is not to vouch, but make a PRECEDENT.

Exit Zelidaura. Enter Claridiana in Man's Apparel, with her Floranteo, and
Florinda Lady of Honor to her. Cla. Leave haunting me, and leave thy vain
And impertinent desire;
The more thou do of me complain,
The more 's the honor I acquire:
For (credit me) I more approve
That all the World should be my Foe,
Than I defended by thy Love:
It is a debt I would not owe.
Though Heaven with plaguing me tire never,
I hope yet it will use me better
Than (to complete my Plagues) that ever
I should be my Tormentors debtor.
Return, and let ARABIA gather
Her Rebel-Armies in thy Name:
Be kindling there seditious, rather
Than kindled here with amorous flame.
The cause of this disguise you see,
Is, that your self and me,
You now no more may vex,
But look on me as one of your own Sex.
Be gone, provoke me not too far,
This field presume not to transgress;
For, if my Eyes such Murth'rers are,
My Hand will be a greater Murtheress.

Flo. BELLONA, armed with the Sun;
That Conquest which thy Face has sure,
Some hazard in thy Sword may run,
Although its temper too be pure.
For Hearts ignoble (which your sweet
Majestic Eye cannot command
To lie down trembling at your FEET)
Reserve the anger of the HAND.
Not revilings so well spoke,
Not the pain with which I Am stung,
Not thy scorns can me provoke;
"For want of luck is not a wrong.
Nor merit I to be exiled
From the dear place which thou art in,
Though scorned, tormented, and reviled;
For, nor is want of luck a sin.
TO obey, I do not ask thee now
High Heavens by thee despised will.
But that (abhorring ME) yet thou
Would give me leave to Love THEE still.
Nor do I so much thank the Gods
That they were pleased to vote thee mine,
As that from all the World the odds
They judged to me of being thine.
But, since thy hate I constant find,
This Cruelty has opened mine Eyes
To see that all the Stars are blind,
And thou than Heaven it self more wise.
Return into thy Kingdom free;
There, at the ALTAR, I Will refuse thee:
Let not ARABIA lose THEE,
It is enough that I do lose thee.
Foreign Succors thou need'st none:
Return, thou have (if thou can see)
Champion enough in me alone,
And in thy self a Victory.

Cla. On thee I lay not all the fault,
For (FLORANTEO) without doubt,
That, against which I bend my thought,
Heaven is too prone to bring about.
Now, as for Beauty, I pretend
To none, and, if I had such lot,
My Beauty's Conquests should extend
To something that I hated not.
That thou art object of my Hate
To impute's erroneous vanity,
Unto thy being unfortunate,
And not unto my knowing thee.
Makes a streak on the ground. Step not an Inch beyond this line.
For, should the World arm all agin me,
And all the Elements combine,
I have my Victories within me.

Flo. Most Beautiful, Illustrious, Generous,
Divine CLARIDIANA, whom to excel
Self-Rival'd Nature being ambitious,
With flesh and blood found it impossible.
New PHOENIX of Arabia, Miracle
Greater than She, who in of Her SELF lies,
Dies when she rises, rises when she dies.
Celestial Princess, able to make Wars
Out of the private stock of thy Perfections:
(For thou might press full Regiments of Stars,
Would thou but give thy foot those bright directions.)
Advance, thy Beauty's Royal Standard spread;
Beat up thy Drums in Hearts that freedom plead;
Give out Commissions under white and red
To kill and slay, to burn, and to make prize,
And let thy Foes look Armies in thy Eyes.
See, how thy fugitive feet, by calling Strangers
To thy assistance, steal the Victory
Thy face (if showed) would gain, dispersing dangers
More than the GORGONS HEAD! that spakling Eye,
The whiteness of that Hand, without a Blow,
All that contrast with thee, must overthrow
In a celestial War of Fire and Snow.
BEAUTY pretends not warring with a Sword,
But with a gentle look, or a kind word;
To be robustious, furious, warlike, are
Not Graces, but distortions of the Fair.
A scorn that sweetly balsoms when it wounds,
A word that striking courteously rebounds,
An em'rous Frown; these tie Men to their duty
With cords; for " A persuading War is Beauty.

Cla. Thou see I ask no Prince my part to take
(How brave so e're) none such my Champion make.
But beg (how meetly!) ZELIDAURA'S Aid,
A MAIDEN QUEEN to right a CROWNED MAID.
She (the illustrious Bulwark of her land,
And Mistress of a SOUL white as her Hand)
Disdains her Name, and her Heroic Sail
To such a trifle as a Man should vail.
Since then the Tartars unrevolted are,
And now in Peace, though always prone to War,
Their Martial Spirits let her exercise,
TO undo a wrong which loud for Vengeance cries:
I, by a Woman or by none, will rise:
Too proud, my life (if saved b' a Man) to own,
Or with my Freedom to redeem my Throne.
To be robustious, fierce, and arrogant,
They are not BEAUTIES proper Arms, I grant;
For her smooth rigidness her slack comptroll,
Cloth not with steel the body, but the soul.
I grant, Cheeks swollen with choler have no hooks;
That no temptations are in furious looks:
For the Brest's inward softness (without doubt)
Is Beauty's soul, which seasons that without.
But, ceased SEMIRAMIS, to be a Dame,
PENTHASILIA ceased she to inflame,
(Theit Helmets off) because, when on they were,
This HECTORS Sword, That shook ACHILLES Spear?
Discreet, prompt, active, gallant, happily
Are they entayl'd upon DEFORMITY?
And evermore must Beauty bear the taunt
Of luckless, cowardly, and ignorant?
To a discreet and an obedient Lover
Her self in her own shape let her discover,
("For when all is done, to pierce a Wiseman's breast
"Beauty's the sharpest sword.) But for the rest,
Who vex, who cross me, them, not with a white,
But armed Hand, I Will take, kill, burn, in fight.
Here it is, that BEAUTY quits her native charms;
And plays the Soldier with those borrowed Arms.
Shall I those People that would suck my blood,
Slay with a LADY'S Weapon? ( That were good:)
And REBELS, shall so sweet a death o'rewhelm,
As by my BEAUTY? No, the impious Relm
Shall rue their work -- What talk thou of my Face!
It is my Sword must right me in this Case.
My HANDS must quell those that against me rise:
For other are the Conquests of my EYES.

Flo. Peace: ZELIDAURA comes.

Cla. I blush; although
Transformed CLARIDIANA who can know?

Flo. Thy Beauty in such Characters is writ,
That a dull Eye may soon discypher it.

Cla. By thee (who art my shadow) me it may:
Back therefore, FLORANTEO.

Flo. Though thou play
The Tyranness, I am thy subject still:
Then cease thy Anger if I do thy Will.

Exit Floranteo. Claridiana and Florinda remain. Florin. In her superlative
perfections,
Thou will see a peerless Dame.

Cla. Of her Beauty faint Reflections
Are rendered by the Glass of Fame.

Enter to them Zelidaura, Aurelio, Roselinda, and others. Zel. Here leave us.

Ros. Madam, are you well?

Zel. I ayl nothing ROSELIND --
Aside. What new Disease! -- I cannot tell,
This disinchanted Queen is wondrous kind,
Or wondrous grateful -- Thought, thou 'rt not my Friend --
To her Train. Leave me thou too -- we would be left.

Ros. A weight
Hangs there -- and, if that Heart beneath it bend,
Believe me it must needs be great.

Exit Train. Zel. What tyrannous resentments move
Such monstrous billows in my breast?
Jealous am I, before I love?
And before I fear, oppressed?
If CLARIDIANE is Queen
Of Araby, what makes she here?
Is it to see only, unseen?
That much unlikely does appear.
If for the Love she bears the Stranger, ill
Did he to leave her, though worth spurred him on:
But, if he reigned as King in her good will,
She did as good as bid him get him gone.
-- Fool, Fool, to be concerned so
In wrongs her Beauty does sustain;
When all the pity I can show
Is not enough for my own pain.

Flor. Approach, what fear thou?

Cla. Strange confusion!
Whom see I?

Zel. Yes, I know that Face,
Claridiana knows Zelidaura when she sees her, and Zelidaura knows her. And
that gate too --

Cla. It Is no delusion;
She, whom I saw in a course case,
Was ZELIDAURA --

Zel. My suspition's true;
The wronged CLARIDIANA does pursue
The Stranger whom she loves -- Down flames --

Cla. Troy's ours:
My name but sounded, brings me all her Powers.
To Zelidaura. Courageous Queen, bright honor of thy kind,
At these tryumphant Feet thy Slave's inclined.

Falls at her Feet. Zel. Rise, and inform us what thou art.

Cla. I am
(Famed ZELIDAURA) an Arabian Knight,
Who beg thee drowned with pity in the name
Of my dread Mistress, brought into sad plight
By Rebels -- If thou art the blew-ey'd Maid,
Who is the Deity of War; Aid, Aid,
Injured CLARIDIANA --

(Zel. Part well played!)

Aside. Cla. In her dear Country, in her Throne replant
CLARIDIANA; then thou shall not want
New DECADES to thy Story, and give Fame
( Who loves to sing thy Praises) a large Theme.
Arm; let thy valor freeze the Usurper's veins:
Nor let thy hand kill less, than thy disdains.
Thy Beauties in their dazeled faces shine,
And teach thy Sword to conquer, though it is thine.
On Spanish Gennet hang 'twixt Earth and Air:
Nor MARS, but SOL, be now the God of War.
To Cowards, and to Valiant, fatal prove:
Making those dye for fear, as these for love.

Aside. Zel. In flatt'ries wrapped, her purpose close she bears:
How well they 're called, the poison of the Ears!
Another now (thus jealous) would be thought
In love, but I Am not guilty of that fault,
Yet here are sighs would make me think I were,
And never lie, did so like truth appear.
I Will answer coldly, till I know if War.
Be in her land, or love do make 't on her.
If Treason drove her thence, without delay
My conquering Flags I in her Cause display.
But, if (a frantic Lover) she pursue
The gallant STRANGER, I will make her rue
She e're came hither; and upon them both
(Though I should dye for it) wreak my burning wroth.

Cla. What is your answer?

Zel. Is there, did thou say,
Such a Rebellion in ARABIA?

Cla. Madam, there is.

Zel. And did that Queen send thee
To make request for succors unto Me?

Cla. It Is very certain.

Zel. And as certain, this,
That she does hope them from me?

Cla. Madam, it is.

Zel. And for my Answer were thou bid to stay?

Cla. Madam, I was.

Zel. LA REINE SAUISERA.

Exit very stately. Cla. How Is this? An Answer how unlike her Fame?
Are these the Actions that cry up her Name?
Is this that they call Manly? This to be
Invincible? What an Indignity!
Upon how slight an Errand FAME will go?
And how it gathers like a Ball of Snow!
When I supposed her Valor would burst out,
And sow with Squadrons all my fields about,
To reap, for our two heads, a twofold CROWN,
Of Gold for mine, of Laurel for her own:
When the two sweetest things EARTH can afford
I made account to owe unto her Sword,
Revenge and Empire; paying me in brief
The common Wages of a light belief,
She answers (neither brave, nor pitiful,
Nor courteous, but pitifully dull)
SHE WILL THINK OF IT. And if her Bowels yearn'd
Not now, will she with thinking be concerned?
What shall I do?

Flor. Sue to some King, and choose
Him such a King, as you did most abuse.
If you obliged ANY heretofore,
Take heed of him upon that very score.
How well your Entertainment she does quit!

Cla. Her rustic weed belied not her Soul yet.
"THE WORST OF FOES ARE THANKLESS FRIENDS; for those
"One never did good to, are at worst cheap Foes.
Ingratitude is cruel. Seek I must
(I see) to my wise Father, though unjust.
Ah ZELIDAURA, thou have a Man's Heart,
Because untouched with sense of Woman's smart!

Exeunt. Enter Claridoro with his Armin a Scarf. Claro. From this deep Vale,
with horror crowned,
Whose bottom not the Stars can sound,
I breath up sighs no less profound.
Where, if hard trees, and harder stones,
Hear my moans;
Never again
Will I to cruel Womankind complain.
Silence not still respect implies:
For he from whom, when racked he lies
Nothing is wrung,
Slights his Tormentor whilst he holds his tongue.
What need of silence has respect?
It looks to me as if the Flame
Were held a shame,
Which all the Care is how not to detect.
Here, here, let me let loose my groans,
Let the great Bell out be rung:
Here safely all my LOVE at once
Unload thy self into my tongue.
If she should overhear it, Crime 'twere none;
Faith is alive, but hope is dead and gone.
If our Predecessors Passions
Had been regulated thus,
BEAUTIES new Fortifications
Had not been raised against us.
For who could take a just offense
At an humble Patience,
At a true Hearts silent aching,
Or even a suit presented quaking?
ZELIDAURA Star divine
That do in highest Orb of Beauty shine,
Pardoned Murd'ress, by that Heart
It self which thou do kill, and coveted smart:
Though my walk so distant lies
From the Sunshine of thine Eyes,
(Into sullen shaddows hurled,
To lie here buried to the World)
It Is the least reason of my moan,
That so much Earth is 'twixt us thrown.
It Is absence of another kind
Grieves me: For, where y' are present too,
LOVE'S Geometry does find
I have ten thousand Miles to you.
"'It Is not absence, to be far;
"But, to abhor, is to absent.
"To those, who in disfavour are,
"Sight it self is Banishment.
But I love thee with all my heart,
Whom therefore thou can never fly;
Since, in whatever place thou art,
The art present to my Fantasy.
As the Optic 's turned, the Object comes and goes:
DISDAIN no presence, LOVE no absence knows.
Custom of Ills is poor relief,
It only stands on the defense:
The faint Compounder of a Grief
After the first violence.
Nor has that place in a new Wound,
And my Wound is ever new,
And every day is more profound,
And every moment festers too.
Only one Woe (for 't were a Crime)
I never can be guilty of:
To love her less than at this time,
Or not to love only to love.
Nor would I quench the fire in which I dye,
To be the light of any other Eye.

Enter Zelidaura in a Rustic Habit. Zel. The wounded Knight I come to see:
Let no one stop me -- Is that he?

Claro. Who is so out of fashion, as to look
Upon a Man whom Fortune has forsook?
What a sparkling Shepherdess!
(Here may be more than I yet guess.)

Zel. Ay me! It Is CLARIDORO, This.

Claro. Through her disguise how fair she is!
It Is ZELIDAURA (for my sight
Has found her out by her own light)
But it is a Happiness, and I
In that may even mistrust my Eye.
Possible in nature is it,
That to me can be this visit?
Or, so beside my self am I,
To think ought mine that is Felicity?

Zel. He knows me, but I Will face him down
I am not I: But he is such a Clown
He Will not believe me, should I swear it:

Aside. Claro. Why might not my immortal passion merit,
And force thus much, from Her? It might do so,
If I were not a Man made sure to Woe:
Nor would it the first glorious triumph prove
Over scornful Beauty, by submissive Love:
Though I do mainly doubt it, and should say
'Twere a great wonder, were it true: I Will pay
My truth her wages with believing it is:
And so deceive my self into a Bliss.
Addresses himself to her. SHEPHERDESS, whose Sheep-Walks reach
From CHINA'S WALL to the MUSCOVIAN BEACH;
Who to a thousand Flocks do look,
And rul'st them with a Golden Hook;
Whom Title, Beauty, Wit, combine
To render in all points divine:
Humane only toward me,
Nor that till thou these hurts did see;
As if (to dye) that I had need
By other hand than thine, to bleed.
Such pity ZELIDAURA keep:
For all these Wounds I long may live:
A Foe's Weapon cuts not deep:
Pity that, a Friend does give.
For this high Grace, thou now bestow'st --

Aside. Zel. (Were 't meant, I see it were not lost.
But yes: It were an Ill-plac'd Boon
On one, that can believe 't so soon)
To Him. Where Is any ZELIDAURA here?
Do thou a simple Body jeer?
It Is well --

Claro. You over act it ZELIDAURA:

Zel. ZELIDAURE not me, I LAURA
Am, the Daughter of thine Host.
Thou, little, Zelidaura know.
A Majesty so proud, so grave,
To come and visit thee? do rave?
With me thou double-wrong'st her GRACE,
In her Discretion and her Face.
I Am pitiful a little, much at home:
To see thee (hurt) on these two scores I come.

Claro. Thou art my Health, when Health's away,
And of my Hopes the only stay.

Zel. Thou 'rt of the Sect of HOPERS than?

Claro. Fair ZELIDAURA, if you can,
In this sweet truth, or error, dye let me.

Zel. Either I am not, or will not be she.

Claro. Goddess of snow, fair Copy of the Sun,
Ecclipsing this, and making that look dun;
Whose piercing sight (predominant in Souls)
Two Globes of Light, two Spears of Beauty, rowls;
'Bout which ten thousand fluttering CUPIDS swarm,
And sindge those wings they there presumed to warm:
Whom with one gracious smile if thou requite,
Thou kill'st with Life, and strik'st them blind with Light.
Thou, from whom (armed with steel and love are sent
Thy Billets into every ELEMENT
(Enraged) rending.) and ADORNING (Fair)
The Earth with Stars, with Cannon-shot the Air.
The WOODS (from which all other Sun is shut)
(With Lilly Hand, with odoriferous foot,
( Speeding unerring Shafts, recruiting Bowers)
Thou robb'st of Beasts, and pay'st again in Flowers.
Celestial ZELIDAURA, fair Comptrol
Of all that share an understanding Soul,
(For it is the least of Praise thy Beauty boasts
To trample outward force, and vanquished Hoasts.)
Though, 'twas the dream of one that ill did rest
To fancy gentle pity in thy Breast,
(The wrack of Hearts, and temple of a Saint
Whose Walls can boast not one relieved Complaint.)
It was a vanity my LOVE brought forth,
When I considered that, and not thy worth.
Nor dare I so much wrong that noble Passion,
To think it might not merit a Compassion,
Though not return: Yet, Bliss on any score,
Which knocked at mine, it seems mistook the door.
For when THOU come (and then THAT comes) to ME
BLISS, is not Bliss, nor ZELIDAURA, She.
I know thee not (let not thy choler rise)
For I believe THEE more than my own EYES.

Zel. Alack! alack! much loss of Blood
Has turned his Brain, and makes him wood.

Claro. O LOVE (thou well may be called blind)
The happier Stranger came she not to find?
O Heavens! with this suspicion I do pass
To be envious and base.
But if blind LOVE made me conceit
Fondly of her, as to me:
Stranger, the wonder 's not so great,
If I think meanly of her, as to thee.
Here me, LAURA.

Zel. Now 't's too late:
Poor Soul, thou talk at a strange rate!
Besides, I do not like thee half so well,
Since I perceive thy thoughts so vastly swell.

Exit Zelidaura flying away from him. Claro. Why (ungrateful) fly'st thou me,
And seek'st my Rival? Was disdain
(O HEAVENS!) too little, without JEALOUSY?
Envy, was 't not sufficient to complain?
Killed with another Happiness?
Sufficed not for a WRETCH his own distress?
I took another Bliss for mine
(A wise Conceit!)
That harms themselves cannot my Wits refine!
That from my ill, that good I could not get!
That I should, not be able
To make some use of being miserable.
My Soul shall follow thee,
Too fleet for me:
For from my Soul I Am sure thou can not go,
And I know all the paths that lead to Woe.
O Life, with Sorrows rife,
Only to Misery thou art a Life!

Exit. Enter Felisbravo with his Arm in a Scarf. Fell. Lashed by the Winds, the
OCEAN raves, and craves
To be a Star, and not an Element:
The WINDS cry FREEDOM from their horrid Caves,
Not clogs of Mountains can their escape prevent.
The MOUNTAINS crack; the crowded Air upheaves
The Pillars of the Rocking FIRMAMENT:
For none, to that which smart or loss receives,
Forbids a sigh, a tear, or a lament.
I only (a dead mark of Fortune's spite)
Stand on the highest pinnacle of Grief
Firm as a Diamond, silent as Night.
O Smart well disciplined, without Relief
For a poor LOVER to support his woe!
So much a sorrow does to custom owe.
Immortal, doubtless, is the thing
Which me does pain,
And that again
Which does eternally remain
From a Celestial Cause must spring.
My Soul is short as unto Me,
It Is Epigram:
But, Madam, to the World I came
Eternal, as to loving Thee,
For unto thee, all Soul I am.
The greater torment I sustain,
The less I would
My days conclude;
For, dying to be out of pain,
Is the Cowards fortitude.
Grant, I should (my pain to cure)
Suffer Smart
Break Thee, HEART;
Can I another Heart procure
To love with, when thou broken art?
But little skill in love thou have,
Who e're thou art that think or Bliss,
Or Valor is,
In dying for 't; since, Life once past,
Neither LOVE, nor his PANGS, last.
Therefore would I alive remain,
'Cause (dead) impossible 't would prove
To obtain
Either more Love to cause sweet pain,
Or more time in which to love.
I do not with presumptuous Heart
Value my self on FORTUNES Frown:
He, that is overthrown
For want of taking his own part,
Gets no Honor by being down.
The Man that merits not good Fortune,
If he complain,
Is not in vain
Complained of: For, in due misfortune,
To murmur, is to offend again.
I hold it for a withered Bays,
For which I nothing have to show,
But that proud Fortune is my Foe:
A poor it is, and heartless praise,
Which to my misery I owe.
Heavenly ZELIDAURA, I
Am my own
Confusion:
And blame not thee, my Misery
Being owed unto my self alone.
From others pity I could never
Extract a Bliss; nor fit
Imagine it,
That others should the sorrow bear,
When I the folly did commit.
In thy regard, alive or dead,
I cannot be
Comforted:
For, whilst I live, thou 'rt lost to me;
And, dead, I lose the loving thee.
When shall these Eyes behold the light
For which I
Languishing, dye?
When? -- But what needs corporeal sight?
LOVE can see without an Eye.
That I, a Persian, should Adore the SUN,
Is no wonder;
But, in some Pool it is safest done,
Or when a Cloud it is under.
For, my best SUN, if Thee
I should see,
'Twould scorch me with the heat, 'twould blind me with the Ray,
Unless (as thee I once survay'd)
'Twere in thy Picture's cooler shade;
Or thus, by strength of fancy, when even that 's away.

Stands or lies down, with his Eyes fixed toward the door, as upon the dear
object. Enter Zelidaura in the Habit of a Shepherdess. Zel. The Patient stays
in pain, make room,
A goodyer take you, let me come.
To Him. Will your Worship be dressed now?

Fell. The Chyrurgioness art thou?

Zel. Yes, and might be too the wound.

Fell. Thou might indeed: For the most sound,
If with this object he did meet,
Might dye of a Disease that is sweet.

Zel. Art smit?

Fell. Not I. I Am prepossest.

Zel. But a new, outeth an old guest.
He looks upon her amazedly. What do you gape at?

Fell. If eternally
I do not sleep, nor All ENCHANTMENT be
Which I do lay my Eyes upon, This Face
I Have seen, with wonder, in another place.
She 's like the SUN in all: save that the Sun
Is sole, but ZELIDAURA is not One.
Did Nature dote so on her pieces worth,
As to give sundry Copies of it forth?
Or (which no less upon my wonder calls)
Has that one Picture four Originals?

Zel. Now his Brain works like Wax, and his five Wits
Relapse into their Apoplectick Fits.
I am resolved I will know his Name,
Having already broke the Ice of shame.
What so becalms thee? Grievous is the wound?

Fell. Not, now, that of my Body.

Zel. More profound
That of thy Soul is, thou inferr'st. Take heed
Of Sleep, for that will make it inward bleed;
And the Man's given to Sleeping.

Fell. I shall dye,
If but of wonder.

Zel. Where does thy pain lie?

Fell. Just at my Heart: ENCHANTMENTS are the Cause,
And absence of a Queen that gives it Laws.

Zel. Peace: I would be contented to know less.

Fell. It Is she, or else her Shadow. -- SHEPHERDESS
Come hither, have I seen thee before now?

Zel. Can I tell what thy Eyes have seen?

Fell. Have thou
Been ever in ARABIA happily?

Aside. Zel. (Once, but no Happy ARABY to Me.)
To Him. How curious to know all! I never was out
Of these sweet fields --

Fell. And therefore past all doubt,
They are so sweet -- And how art thou called.

Zel. LAURA:
Coridon's Daughter.

Fell. Know thou ZELIDAURA?
(I fear a new Intrigue) Seen thee has she?

Zel. Tell me thy Name, and here I promise thee
A Secret which may fully recompense
A Courtesy of greater consequence:
For to this Graunge comes ZELIDAURA often.
And these dumb flowers, these murmuring springs, this soft
Consort of Nightingales, this Garden Wall,
Those circumjacent fields, LAURA and all,
Are witness to a pain she does deplore --
But till thou have obliged me first, no more.

Fell. (O jealousy! and was not Love enough?
Jealous so soon? Am I such catching stuff?)

Zel. If it import thee to know more of this,
Say what thou art, and why thy coming is.

Aside. Fell. Forgive me Modesty, it does behove
I lay thee by, to seek (not Praise, but) Love.
To Her. Friend have your Wish.

Zel. Begin not with (Attend.)

Fell. Nor with (O yes.)

Zel. You have a merry Friend.

Fell. A King has PERSIA (FELISBRAVO hight)
High Envy of the GODS, MANKINDS delight,
His birthday a few Mays have marked with Flowers:
The same (joined with the drops of April show'res)
Sum up his virtues. As in LOGARISM
Nine figu^es makes of numbers an Abysm:
So a few Springs (as he has ordered it)
Have multiplied his Years to Infinite:
Who, though not full eight thousand mornings strong,
He that now wrote his Life would find it long:
His Body and his Soul are so well met,
That the best Gem, has the best Cabinet.
A Veil of Love his Majesty does shroud;
Which yet is so seen through, that the most proud
Tread upon fears, and hear their faults aloud.
He walks through the wide Fields of History:
North-Star of Kings, to steer a true Course by;
And, for their Faults, a GLASS that will not lie.
His Hand is of two Natures: It does hold
STEEL, that is clapped into it, lets go GOLD,
Yet strong submission wrests there out the Sword;
And, frank of Deeds, he is niggard of his Word:
Lest bashful Bounty make him say the thing
Which will not hold: For that is unlike a KING.
Lets no base whispers misinform his Youth,
Nor thinks it thrift on Trust to take up Truth.
Vice he has none, nor any Age has seen
Amongst so many Flowers so little green.
He looks on BEAUTY (pleased) and passes on:
A FREE PRINCE still, even where she plants her Throne.
The light thereof he takes, the Fire he does
Reject: A temperate and a glorious YOUTH!
Till some just War shall wake his sleeping Sword,
And splendid Theams to Tongues and Pens afford;
He follows peaceful War, breaks truce with Beasts.
Sloth Foe to All, but most to Royal Breasts.
The second SOL without his radiant Hair,
He sacks the Woods, dispeoples the wide Air:
The first ADONE, without his VENUS, Groves
He does adorn, and peoples those with Loves.
This Prince felt never, never he LOVE'S smart,
Nor his most Golden Shaft durst wound his Heart;
Until a Captive did in Persia thunder
Such Praises of a PRINCESS (the Worlds Wonder)
As stunned his senses, set his Heart at Bay,
'Twixt trembling boldness, and 'twixt bold dismay.
Of Wounds less mortal died the Royal Slave,
Who ZELIDAURA'S Picture to him gave,
Mute Circle of two Suns. The enamored King
(Whilst he, impatient, settles every thing
In order to come after, that his Realm
Lament not his short abscence from the Helm)
Commands my Journey to Tartaria poast,
TO inform my self whether the Picture boast
Real Perfections of her Queen. I fly,
And reach in a few days to ARABY,
Where (Mortal Frailty yielding to Sleeps power)
A Villain steals it. An Enchanted Tower
Is interposed 'twixt our drawn Swords (at once
That thundering with its fall, and I with groans)
Thence to this Forest we adjourn the War,
His Treason's Altar, my Revenge's Bar.
We meet; when ours so many Swords repel,
As if each Blade of Grass were one of Steel.
To lose my Picture, and not lose my Life,
I pierced with Woe;
And that to Poison, that to Sword, nor Knife,
My Death I owe.
To Persia dare not (for the King) return
(For coldest Hearts, when fired once, fiercest burn)
Who, sweetly snared with ZELIDAURA'S Fame,
No Love else answers, hears no other Name.
Rare SHEPHERDESS (whether thou be the Flower
Of foreign Plains, or of these Hills the Tower)
If help thou have, or help to thee be known,
If more thou art, or can, than thou do own,
Pity my Woes, set my Confusions right,
Ease so great pain, show day to so great night.

Aside. Zel. Most undoubtedly it is He,
Because (for more disguise) I see
His proper Praise he did not spare.
To Him. I shall soon find it. -- Thy great Care
And Courage (PERSIAN) I admire.
Could thou the Picture know again?

Fell. If it take up my Thoughts entire,
And Copied in my Heart remain,
Must I not know it?

Zel. Look on this:
And mark it well.

Fell. Had I no Aim
By any feature, whose it is
The matchless Beauty would proclaim.
Aside. What Bon-fires (HEART) will thou now make for Joy?
I would not have them less
Than my LOVE'S Flame, or those of TROY;
And monstrous, as to me, is Happiness.
A Lover is not glad,
Unless withal he is Mad:
Nor can my Gratitude expressed be
With any thing that is less than Lunacie.
I do not celebrate my Good
With so much splendor as I ought,
Nor its full worth have understood,
If this effect it have not wrought.

Zel. He Is like a Man that talks to a Spirit --

To the Picture. Fell. Beautiful and injured Shade,
More blame (I must confess) I merit,
Than past his Hour a LOVER who has staid.
To Her. Shepherdess, who gave it thee?
For, amidst variety,
Seeing the self-same Beauty ever,
I credit, what I tremble to assever.

Zel. Then, Persian, of a Country Lass
Perceive an Act a Queen might do;
Through this blind Labyrinth to pass
My Pity giving thee a Clew.
I am the Woman thou did see,
In several shapes, in Arabie;
And who from thee this Picture stole;
And whom, if that rare King (the Soul
And Martial Glory of the Chase)
Merit the Praise thou giv'st His GRACE,
Wish thee return to Persia faster
Than thou came hither, and thy Master
(The Generous FELISBRAVO) tell;
He shall to TARTARY do well
To come with wings, where (if he prove
As humble, and as much in love,
As great in Courage, and high-flown)
Queen ZELIDAURA is his own:
The most exempted Heart reserving
For the Person most deserving:
And say, thou heard'st it from one LAURA,
Who heard it in this place from ZELIDAURA.

Aside. Fell. Shall I think my Senses true?
ZELIDAURA it is I view.
No, no, it is not; It Is my Eye
Flatters my Wishes with so sweet a Lie.
To Her. Angel I go; and shall the King
Quickly to TARTARIA bring.

Zel. It is not FELISBRAVO, no;
For he his Mask now off would throw.
What have I done? My being kind
I will retract, unless I find
This Face, this Courage, and this Mien,
In a Kings Person, to deserve a QUEEN.

Compares her with the Picture, interchangeably regarding either. Fell. That, of
the Hand which made us all,
Picture, is thy Original,
None, that before appeared such,
Did Face to Face avow so much.
An Egg is not more like an Egg,
Nor the Left to the Right Leg.
NATURE, that drained her Stores to do
One Face like this, despaired of Two.

They descant to themselves upon ea^h other. Zel. Is this a Servant?

Fell. Is this Laura?
I never was in a Maze till now.

Zel. Then art not FELISBRAVO, thou?

Fell. Art thou then, ZELIDAURA?

Aside. Zel. (His fear compels him to conceal,
My love shall prompt him to reveal,
Himself --) Sir Knight --

Fell. Fair Shepherdess,
Thy divine commands express.

Zel. The Picture 's mine, I am not LAURA:
If thou art FELISBRAVO, follow
To the Temple of APOLLO:
I am relenting ZELIDAURA.

Exit Fell. Suspend thy steps: With all my Heart
(Beauteous Queen) I follow thee:
(But that is already where thou art --)

As going after her, when Enter hastily, Claridiana in Man's Apparel and stays
him. Cla. Valiant King, come back to me.

Fell. Off, Remora --

Cla. Whom hurlst thou fro thee?

Fell. Youth, for this ill turn beshrow thee.

Cla. Hear me, thou new Alcides.

Fell. What
Would thou with me?

Cla. Know me not?

Fell. No, nor would.

Cla. So soon (unkind!)
CLARIDIANA out of mind?

Fell. Me, that the Sea burns, tell.

Cla. Look upon me, Stranger, well.

Fell. The Clothes and smartness, thou put'st an,
Speak the bold language of a Man;
But that Complexion, and that Grace,
WOMAN write upon thy Face:
And one, whom I have elsewhere seen.

Cla. Ah! Wonder not, the most distressed
Of Women, seeks of Men the best:
Of ARABIA I am Queen,
On which the Gold, that therein is,
The Name of HAPPY did bestow,
And, of PERFUMED, from her Trees
The Aromatic Tears that flow.
My Father (through whose Magic Lore
The shook Earth groaned, and on whose back,
As on strong Atlas'is of yore,
The Heaven was a Golden Pack)
Erected there the enchanted Tower,
For curious and magnificent,
Proportioned to Regal Power,
And Art's Divine Astonishment,
The intention was to thee made known,
Then, when thou could not keep by WIT
That, which by Valor thou did git;
So many Monsters overthrown.
The Duel was abruptly done,
Abruptly was the War begun,
Feigned to be here in TARTARY
By CLARIDORO'S Jealousy.
Certain Eyes were thy North-Stars,
Which directed thy Course hither:
If Ruth, or Love, or love of Wars,
The Cause, thou know; I know not whether.
I staid alone: My Subjects (broke
Loose from their Duty) They, require
TO an Idol I should offer smoke,
For whom my Altar had no Fire.
Up-sighing, to the Gods, Complaints;
Heavens sacred pity I implore;
The Sun, surpised with darkness, faints;
The Thunder in the Air does roar.
My Magick-Father (reconciled
By her misfortunes to his Child)
Informs me how this Cabin mean
Inshrines the Persian King serene.
Thou art the Man, thou FELISBRAVO art,
In Praise of whom Fame sings her well conn'd Part:
Two Worlds already with thy Name does fill,
And makes both Poles hear plain her Trumphet shrill.
Thy Aid I crave, to thee my wrongs discover,
As thou art brave, not as thou art a Lover:
(For, tell not me of constant Lovers; such
I have heard much of, but believe not much.)
Restore CLARIDIANA to her Crown:
Thy Name will make the Loyal (who are down)
O'retop the rest. These, are the spoils thou ow'st
To Fame's bright Temple; These, are deeds to boast
Thee, for their Author: Leave, famed Prince, soft thoughts,
Leave CUPID'S vain Caresses, and tame faults
Of Idleness; thy Damask Blade unsheath;
In Rest couch Ash; on which when North Winds breath
It bends (a Twig) but now (more stubborn W^od)
Shows Beak of Steel, made drunk with Crimson Flood.
Armed, let the Field behold thee; and make blush
The shoulders of thy dug Bucephalus
With Foamed Spurs: In thee APOLLO bright
Be died with Blood, Red Mars be guilt with Light.
My Truncheon weild with that victorious Hand:
Two Phoenixes shall then the ARABS Land
(As to immortal, as to glorious) have;
But (as to valiant) only FELISBRAVE.

Aside. Fell. LOVE, and HONOR, pull two ways;
And I stand doubtful which to take:
To Arabia, Honor says,
Love says, no; thy stay here make,
HONOR (like to lose the day)
Pity throws into her scale
LOVE, Gratitude in his does lay;
Fearing else not to prevail.
Fair ZELIDAURA shall I flee,
Just now, when in her Grace I stand;
One of those happy Fools to be,
Who prize no bird that 's in the hand?
Aside. So (your less Fool) a Child too, cries
For a rich Gem, which got, the Boy
Runs after something else he spies,
And leaves his Jewel for a toy.
Deaf then to loud Music of MARS,
To his spread Flags let me be blind.
I Am summoned here to higher Wars:
And those are cruel, these are kind.
To wronged Claridiana, than
Discourteous Coward shall I prove?
Knowing my Heart (as I do) can,
Dare I, to it, such baseness move?
Not, by Courtship, not on Do^n;
Is acquired sublime Renoun:
But Prowess indefatigable
Scales Alps and ploughs up Seas unstable.

Cla. How long he does debate it in his Breast?
" Slow comes Relief, where little Love does rest.

Aside still. Fell. Pardon me, Zelidaure, this way I take
And (which is more) I leave thee for thy sake:
For, of thy Lover none deserves the Name,
Who will not succor a Distressed Dame.
Stand me, Arabia: If I gain the day
The Spoils at ZELIDAURA'S Feet I Will lay.

Enter General. Genesis Leave FELISBRAVO, leave the vain Alarms
Of a false HONOR, and LOVE'S veins Charms.
These pull proud PONTUS on thy trembling Relm.
Even Courage fears, the Pilot from the Helm:
Have home: It Is brav'ry past my skill to admire,
To quench another's house, thine own on fire.
Once let not appetite prevail, not still
The worst be chose, and Reason stoop to Will.
Waste not thy years in Love, or cruel Ruth,
And weed betimes even Flowers that choke thy Youth.
Return to PERSIA, leave Romancing, leave
Disnerving Loves, and all that may deceive
The Harvest of so fair a Spring. "The Birth
"Of Kings is to be Patterns to the Earth,
"Not blotting-papers, but to write fair by;
"Nor pleasures Slaves, or tryumphs of an Eye.

Cla. This seems a trick. Heavens! That a Man should dare
To forfeit his good Manners to my Prayer!

Fell. GENERAL, well urged: But first I Will pay two scores:
One here, another where my Soul adores --
To Her. CLARIDIANA comfort thy soft Breast,
Heroic Minds are tried when they are pressed.
List me thy Captain, or thy Soldier: Come
Live thou, though I dye here, and lose at home.

Genesis Bright Persian Prince,
The WORLD will hang the Temple of thy worth
With all the Vows OPPRESSION shall rack forth.
TO ARABIA then; thy look will conquer there,
And thy Fame strike the Pontick King with Fear.

Aside. Fell. Good Courtier, but ill Lover, now am I:
I know it, but I know no Remedy.

Aside. Cla. I carry thee, to War against my Land:
Against my Heart to War too, underhand.
Exeunt. Enter Zelidaura. It Is not, the Persian FELISBRAVE;
He would have followed: And if FAME
With a true Mouth his Worth proclaim,
HE (if he loved) my Love might have.
For he that will my Hand deserve,
Must, in a constant Soul, comprize
The understanding of the Wise.
The diligence of those that serve,
Perfections of a KING discover,
And the tremblings of a Lover.

Enter Claridoro habited like a Country Gentleman. Claro. For the Queen now
To Court to call me is no pleasure
To one who wisely minds the Plow,
And rowls in Leisure.
Sweet Solitude! still Mirth, that fear no wrong,
Because thou do none! Morning all day long!
Truth's Sanctuary! Innocency's Spring!
Invention's Limbeck! Contemplation's Wing!
Peace of my Soul, which I too late pursude!
That know not the Worlds vain Inquietude:
Where Friends (the Thieves of Time) let us alone
Whole days; and a Man's Hours are all his own.
Happy art thou, that, unsupplanted, plantest;
Nor see in COURT (which to thy Harm thou hantest)
The undoing Truth of rigid Honesty;
The profitable Lie of Flattery;
The sweet Disease of Hope, the Potion,
And bitter Health of Undeception.
Turns to her. Madam, your pleasure (for, in haste,
A Servant called me, to wait on
Your Highness.)

Zel. Diligence goes fast:
As for haste else, there was none.
The wounded Stranger, is he gone?

Claro. Just now.

Zel. (I asked that which I grieve to know)
Aside. Went he Cured fully?

Claro. Truly, No:
He stumbled over his Health, because a Woman,
In a Man's Habilliment
(Invited by his Fame) did summon
Him, to some Action; and with Her he went.

Zel. With a Woman?

Caro. Yes, and one
Whose spriteliness, whose Beauty's Rays,
Whose every way perfection,
I never to the worth can praise:
And the valiant FELISBRAVE
(For so she called him) went with her,
So contented, brisk, and brave --

Zel. Peace: It is too much to hear.
Treason against Love, nay High-
Treason? Together did they go?

Claro. Together.

Zel. Now you lie, you lie --
But (ah!) it is true, because it grieves me so.
Bid them that Fellow hither bring
I caused be seized on.

Claro. What means this?
But Duty says, know not the thing,
Which hidden by thy Sovereign is.

Exit. Zel. A Man denies to me his Name;
Leaves me, and for another Dame,
And have I yet so much good nature
As to complain of such a Creature?
Go, thou cruel Man to me;
Hope not, I Will my self deplore
Upon thy score:
For, to form Complaints of Thee,
Were to make my favors more.
If, the mere thinking thou were loved,
To remove
Thee could move,
Well thou might have not removed,
For thou were not yet beloved.
If my Will inclined a little,
Well that deserved thy hope to swell*
CONFIDENCE, well;
Well, thy Vanity to tickle;
But it not deserved thee fickle.
Thy thus for getting, does confess
Thou held'st the victory, secure,
Thy Triumph sure;
For (whilst you live) a Happiness
Is Mother of Forgetfulness.
O, froward Stars! What I, betrayed?
How can I suffer such a strange
And sudden change?
That I, whom LOVE feared to invade,
Object should of SCORN be made!
Ignoble Knight!
Lover unkind!
Inconstant as the Wind!
If she thy Love requite,
In midst of Joys be sterv'd,
And let unhappiness be once deserved.
Art thou a PRINCE? Fame lies:
"Plain dealing is for Majesty's.
"A Prince will falsehood fly,
"If but because it argues fear, to Lie.
Seem only wise, in that
Thou be unfortunate;
Earn neither Brass, nor Pen,
To make thee live with Men;
And let thy Name (if it in FANES they kerve)
For scorn, for pity, nor for pattern, serve.
In thee just jealousy move
A thousand ways, Another
Less lovely, less a Lover.
So short let thy sweets prove,
That thy felicity
May be an inch to measure BEAUTY by.
This (who, thy Wife to be,
Seeks, by supplanting Me)
May thou love her, like those that foul ones choose:
May she love thee, as courted fair ones use:
And, if she prove a Bane,
In being immortal, let it seem my pain.
If ye shall disagree,
Live to Eternity;
If ye love, live a year;
An hour, if fondly dear;
But, do not live a jot;
And let a Faulchion cut your NUPTIAL Knot.

Enter Rifaloro trembling. Rif. O that in fooling tune I were!
But, I am not in tune to fool.
By HERCULES, I have a fear,
Withal my strength, I cannot rule.
And, if Rewards for fear were set,
I those from all the World should get.
They say, it is ZELIDAURA'S Grace,
Whom I called Mad-cap to her face:
So now, must I expect the pay
Of those, who Truths to Great-Ones say.
Give me, Madam -- (I recoil)
Offers to approach her, and dares not. Thy Feet -- No --

Zel. The Servant vile,
He, for that Lie, shall feel my Thunder --
But -- If a King could lie, what wonder?

Rif. A Devil, Angeliz'd, is she.
I tremble like an Aspine Tree:
Each joint's a leaf.

Zel. What makes this Rascal stay?
Sees him. Oh! Is he there?

Rif. Give -- Give me (I say.)

Zel. I Will give thee Death, Impostor. Traitor --

Lifts up her hand, as if to strike him. Rif. Hold Thunderbolt of Lillies --

Zel. Traitor,
How is thy Master called?

Rif. Things seem,
And are not: Man's Life is a dream --

Zel. His Name --

Rif. A Servant is all Ear, and sight --

Zel. I Will have his Name --

Rif. And reason good:
PERSIANO. (I Am not understood.)

Zel. Villain, His Name --

Rif. I say the same
DON PERSIANO is his Name.

Zel. Thou triflest with thy Life: Confess --
Offers at him with a Dagger. Or --

Rif. Hold then --

Zel. His true Name express --

Rif. PER -- SI -- A -- NO -- Angel, stay:
Playing with Hands, is the Clowns play.
In Cipher is his true Name writ:
And I have lost the Key of it.
Falls on his knees. Weary not thy self, QUEEN mine:
Racks shall not force it from this Breast:
For, though to Jesting I incline;
I never thought Knavery a good Jest.

Zel. A Rogue on Honors points to stand!
In thee it is a sauciness:
('It Is well I knew it before hand:)
And yet, withal, I must confess,
This Servant, with the Soul he has,
Might teach his Master to keep Faith.
What a foul shame it is!

Rif. By the Gods,
Those Sages, who do boast such odds
Of all the World, shall find -- We Fools
Are most considerable Tools.

Zel. The ill-deserved Name to ME
Of FELISBRAVE is known already:
Who, of Arabia, is gone to be
The petty King, and the Gallant unsteddy.
He Travailed with CLARIDIANE.
Follow him thou (this Royal Hand
With servile Blood I scorn to stain)
And let thy Master understand;
Though he pretend to invincible, that I
Will make him, for my trampled footstool, lie;
A Woman, in Revenge; a Sovereign,
In Courage; and a MISTRESS, in Disdain.

Rif. With CLARIDIANE (by JOVE)
Did he go?

Zel. I think thou 'rt glad.

Rif. Have I not cause, if he can love
A pair of Queens, and make them both run Mad?
The Spanish fashion has my Vote,
In Mistresses, though not in Diet:
One goes but dully down the Throat,
Six in a Dish the modern Riot.

Zel. If thy Doctrine, Knave, Men follow;
They had need of a great swallow.

Rif. Two at a clap! why, now he is somebody,
He 'as laid already the trunk-breeches by.
One, was the stint of old; our Fare now mends:
To thy Twin-Sister have thou no Commends?

Zel. Away, like Lightning; tell them their Fate comes:
SCORN clears the Ways, and ANGER beats my Drums.

Rif. This Queen knows how her Poast to choose,
That sends a Fool with an ill News.

Exeunt. Trumpets and Drums Sound a March, and Enter Felisbravo, General, and
Claridiana, Armed, and People as an Army Marching. Cla. This is ARABIA.

Fell. You Adamant Wall,
With its proud Towers, at thy kissed Feet shall fall:
For so resolved (though slender) are thy Bands,
To Ammunition they will turn these Sands.

Genesis A flying Squadron meets us on the Border,
In a loose way, without all Martial Order:
It looks like Peace.

Fell. To overcome, procure:
"In Traitors looks no signs of Peace are sure.

Trumpets and Drums, and Enter Floranteo with People. Flo. Thy warlike
Preparations (QUEEN) suspend:
Gay Purple button, clasp not glittering Steel;
Since now, the People neither Wall defend,
Nor with Usurping Grasp, the SCEPTER feel.
Enter thy lofty PALACE, Roof'd with Gold;
Thy little-spoil'd though much profaned ABODES;
Choose, where thou like; and in calm Peace grow old:
"'It Is ill Rebelling against Kings, or Gods.
Not, to disturb it FLORANTEO came;
But, thy disturbed Kingdom, to recover:
To kiss thy hand, as of his Sovereign Dame;
Not, challenge it, as thy presumptuous Lover.

Cla. Rise, and be second to thy thankful Queen.

Flo. Wear this Gold-Crown first, wreathed with Laurel-green,
And Olive, which thy Birth, and Virtue, give:
Live long our QUEEN!

All. CLARIDIANA, live!

Enter Rifaloro with a Poast-whip in his hand. Rif. Rare Posthorses! in less
than half an hour
To bring me hither from TARTARIA?
My own Barbs (laid) would have conveyed me slower:
Nor could I have come sooner in a Play.
The Woman is a Harpie: O! that I
Were one of your Wind-mongers, that Cry News;
To relate mine, with strange Romancery:
But, I have no Alliance with those Jews.
Here are Soldiers -- That, is he!
Sir, your Foot; and take my Knee.

Fell. These Arms, my RIFALORO -- Where have been?
What have thou done, since thou by me were seen?

Rif. The Story's long: Some other tell it Thee,
Who has no Wit to spoil his Memory.
Rowse, Sir, with thicker Steel your Breast immure:
Nor FELISBRAVO, nor ARABIA now,
Nor the spectator World, can be secure
From ZELIDAURA; who, because that thou
Deny'st to her thy Name, and she 's alarmed
With your joint-journey, comes with Terrors Armed.

Fell. Thou Slave (it seems) made of the coursest Clay,
A Secret so important did betray.
But, I Am right served --

Rif. This it is now, to know any
Secret, of one, who tells it unto many.

Fell. This it is, when Kings consort themselves with Grooms.

Rif. Help (Masters) or, if not, Might, Right o'recomes.

Genesis What is the matter?

Rif. Nothing, but the King
Pays Honesty her Wages: A fine thing
It is, to look on; a rare decking (sure)
For a Rich Man; but, 't will undo a poor;
And be suspected too. So counterfeit
Seems the best Jewel when it is meanly set.
All, I have gained, by being true, was (There)
A Iayl, a Dagger at my Bosom; (Here)
This, which you see. It Is time to rest (say I)
And cast safe Anchor upon Knavery.

Fell. In what a leaking Butt
Have I my Secret put!
No (angry Fair One) No: Not, of thy Blade,
My Life; but, of thy Doubt, my Love 's afraid.

Rif. Thus, do good Actions shine? Is this, the Meed
To faithful silence is decreed?
This of being an honest Man,
Is a lean Office; with Fees none:
It will not keep a Gentleman,
Without some other good Means of his own.
The Foe, in Reason, cannot far off be;
For ZELIDAURA Marches furiously.

Cla. Come all TARTARIA with her; here she stands,
Will welcome Her, more Valiant, and less vain:
That barbarous Warriouress shall, of these Hands,
The Trophy be, the scorn, and the disdain.
Our Self is General.

Genesis Great ATLAS quakes,
A trepidation of the Spheres it makes,
To hear that sound from thee; who, in these Wars,
Wilt Muster Flowers, and Lead an Host of Stars.

Fell. I Will view their Camp, and count the Enemy.

Cla. Such a SPY is quickly spied:
I tear thy danger.

Fell. 'Twas Wisdom put out POLYPHEMO'S Eye;
That Mountain of swollen Pride.
Come (RIFALORO) by thy Masters side.

Rif. I fear thy Anger:
Thou tell it in this AUDIENCE; would go hid:
Points to the Spectators. They, tell it ZELIDAURA: Then I Am chid.

Genesis What AUDIENCE? The Man dreams -- I go with thee.

Rif. Yes, Let my Fellow go; and I will be
Thy LEIDGER here

Flo Sir, let me beg the Honor --

Fell. By no means (FLORANTEO:) Wait upon her
Fair Majesty. Fear is to me unknown:
And mine 's a Business best performed alone.

Aside. Cla. (I think no less, and hide my fear in vain
Under the silence of my Virgin shame)

Fell. It Is Fear, makes Mortals peep through their disguise:
Unseen, we 'll third Our Person through their Eyes.
Come, RIFALORE.

Rif. Not I, one of course Earth
Consort with KINGS? A Slave of Dunghill Birth?
I renounce Honesty, I pray your Grace
Choose a new Fool, and tie that to the PLACE.

Cla. Less of the LOVER than the BRAVE it shows,
Thy self to such wild dangers to expose.
Let common Soldiers hazard in this kind:
"VALOR, within due bounds, should be confined.

Fell. If known, I would not fear an Host of Men;
Though Armed with Fire and Horror: March on, then.
Dangers I court, and all that Dangers brings:
"For Bullets bear a Reverence to Kings.

Trumpets. A March. Exeunt. Sound Trumpets and Drums, and Enter Zelidaura,
Claridoro, Roselinda, and Soldiers. Zel. Now, CLARIDORO, on Arabian Mould
We tread, and have the Enemy in view.

Claro. Since so much Beauty fights thy Cause, be bold
To write; I CAME, WAS SEEN, AND DID SUBDUE.

Zel. Not Love, but Honor, made me March thus far.
A Queen's it is, and not a Woman's War.
If I overcome, I Will scorn them, as I live:
" Two Victories; to Conquer, and Forgive;
"On ground that is hard, it is easy ground to win:
"But feet, which tread upon the soft, sink in.

Claro. THE CAUSE I never ZELIDAURA scanned,
It must be good which thou do take in hand:
And, doubt the Conquest, where thou present art,
No more, than whether I should take thy part,
Whose Services are Debts to thee; and when
Thou lett'st me pay thee one; that one grows ten.
Thy heavenly force is unto me so known,
That, though great MARS in SOL's bright Armor shone,
IN the adverse Camp; I should not fear the day:
For BEAUTY stole one's Sword, the other's Ray.
But, for thy pardon -- That, may spared be:
What greater Death, than to be scorned by thee?

Enter a Captain bringing Felisbravo in the Habit of a Country Boor or Clown.
Capt. Madam, This Clown, who seems a SPY,
I bring before thy Majesty:
That thou, from him, may draw, and know,
The Strength, and Posture, of the FOE.

Zel. Whom see I? Is It not FELISBRAVE?
It Is Anger, and not Love, did grave
His Visage here; and my Revenge's Eyes
Have picked him out of his obscure Disguise.

Ros. A SPY thou well might think him; feel,
He has his Cassock lined with Steel.
A GENTLEMAN, at least, by this.

Zel. No, no, a Clown I Am sure he is.
Speak for thy self, art thou not one?

Fell. A Clown in my Attire alone.

Zel. In one thing more ('twixt me and you)
Thou sleep'st to One, and wak'st to Two.

Fell. Me, does your Worship know?

Zel. At last;
For there is a distance vast
Betwixt a CLOWN'S Tongue, and his Mind:
And his Faith is hard to find.

Fell. Dissembling words, and little faith,
Boast, they COURTLY Vices are:
"Nothing more CLOWNISH is, than wrath;
"And Revenge, that none will spare.
Wade not in doubts too far, the effect
Of which, is bitterness, and rue:
"For (let me tell you) to suspect,
"Is, a kind of sleeping too.
Do not wake JEALOUS: For, indeed,
It Is courteous baseness, and no other.
Nor borrow, of thy Clownish Weed,
The MALICE, that, is used to cover.
He never fled, who wheels about:
And He, who (born for higher Ends)
Did best, when he lay under doubt;
Gallantly his Faith defends.
And He, whose worth in every thing
(In this I will appeal to LAURA)
Proclaims him not a perfect King,
Deserves not to love ZELIDAURA.

Zel. CLOWN, or SPY, or what thou will,
Think not to appease me thou art able:
For justifying a known Guilt,
With Women is impardonable.
Aloud. Tell me (Lab'ring-Man) how strong
Is CLARIDIANA?

Fell. Hear --
Aside. ( Heavens! how it thunders Vengeance from her Tongue?
Yet still it is Music to my Ear.)
Aloud. ARABIA being reduced to her obedience,
She has two Armies of old Soldiers,
Beat to the Trade of WAR; valiant, and disciplined;
In suffering, noble: and in acting, bold:
The GODDESSE-QUEEN (whose Beauty does eclipse
The brightest luster of the midday Sun)
Comes for the GENERAL; and in her alone is
NARCISSUS joined with SOL; MARS with ADONIS.
From a Sphere, crowned with plumes (like Summers Clouds
When the Day feels a Lightning before Death,
Or Gardens in the Air)
Armed with a heavenly Anger, she discovers
In THETIS Body great ACHILLES's Soul.
Her Sword cuts more than all those of her Army;
Her Beauty more victorious, then her Sword:
For where is the life so sure that Love can pick
No hole in it, which would not soon surrender
It self into her hands, without more strife,
To sue out a new grant to be a life?
With gallant grace she traverses the Field
Upon a Horse, that pays the vanity,
Infused into the Bruit by his fair Burden,
With mettle, and with motion that keeps time:
His swiftness calls him DART, his striking fire
A THUNDERBOLT, his color and his gate
Majestic SWAN. Like a SHIP under sail,
Tossing the foam up, proudly he does go,
With Plumes for Streamers, ARGOSIE of Snow.

Zel. With great LATONA'S Off spring do not brag,
Least thou be turned to a weeping stone.
Say, it is a fine fore-handed Nag,
That has his paces every one:
And lacks (to do a thousand pranks)
Only, to have been foal'd on BETIS Banks.
Here Is trapping out a Horse withal my heart,
Why, 'twould make one his Bridle break:
SNOW, SHIP, SWAN, STREAMERS, THUNDERBOLT, and DART?
Troth, go but one step more, and make him speak.
A Description call'st thou this?
In blank Verse (of all four lame)
With equal Tropes, and Emphasis,
To Cry a Beast up, and a Dame?

Fell. Her BEAUTY then she brings along:
And that is ten thousand Graces strong.

Zel. Flat jealousy in my Face hurled?
(The greatest Clown'ry this in the World!)
If, that, I brought, I by did throw;
Shall I catch this he throws me? No,
Let CLARIDIANA come;
With her, her BEAUTY, and her FELISBRAVE;
In every thing I Will her overcome:
Even in this too, that less of vain I Will have.
Back, FELISBRAVO; put into each Troop
As much of Courage, as I hope to quail:
To whom thy Fear, and not thy Love, shall stoop;
And I, by Force, not Beauty, will prevail.
Thou art my Prisoner (foolish Man)
Conquered by putting this shape an.
But it is not thou shall pay me: It Is my boast,
To pay my self, that which to me thou ow'st.
Fight well to day: Since thou do love
CLARIDIANE;
Let not Twain
Thee reprove;
One Woman call thee Coward, to other
Twit thee with perfidious LOVER.
But, this I Will say; had I loved thee,
Thou would not thus have used me:
Nor durst have acted such a valiant Sin,
As unto Me UNGRATEFUL to have bin.

Fell. Madam, how high an obligation
This lays on me, and on my passion!
A Servant now, that takes no Wages of thee:
But LOVES THEE (why?) only to love thee.
In the hearing of the rest. -- Hear me, ZELIDAURA --

Zel. Turn
This Fellow back to his own Camp:
And (with my glittering Bands) though these Woods burn,
Though, on these plains, my numbers strike a damp.
Tell FELISBRAVO; CLARIDORE, and I,
Without or MARS, or SOL, their Powers defy.

Aside. Fell. Even her Anger, O! how sweet!
I hope my self yet, at her Feet
To prostrate Victory -- But no,
To Her. Her Eyes will snatch it first -- I go.
Set thy People in Array.

Zel. This, CLARIDORO, is thy day.

Claro. Where thou art, all things must go well.

Zel. Sound an Alarm.

Fell. Tole my Knell.

Trumpets a little. Exeunt. Enter General with his Sword drawn. Genesis Bloody
perdition, tyrannizing yoke,
Grim War, that strewd'st with Carcases the way
To the first Injustice, which free Mortals broke,
And Iron Scepter placed in hand of Clay:
Barbarous Trade, so murmured at in vain,
To spur the fiery Coursers of pale Death,
As if Time flagg'd, as if to be humane
Were not Disease enough to stop our Breath.
But, though thou (WAR) art dire, art full of dread;
There is a Feud more dire, more dreadful far,
When BEAUTY's bloody Flag (hanged out and spread
In Virgins Cheeks) proclaims a scornful War.
Love, let me rather be a rough-hand's Prize,
Than the soft Captive of insulting Eyes.

Enter Rifaloro with his Sword drawn. Rif. They March to shock these Girls,
some small Wit now
Would Lids of Marchpane call, Caesar's of Snow.

Genesis Why, Rifaloro, Went not with Him, Thou?
It Is not well done to fail thy Duty so.
To jest out faults is an uncomely thing.

Rif. Can I (that from the Trojan BRUTUS spring)
That vaunt great Blood, I have much Blood I spill,
Be wanting to the Huff, to the Punctil
Of Honor? Being of the Mountains too,
In which the HECULESSES always grew?

Genesis Art thou a BRITTON then?

Rif. So brags each one
That would write Gentleman, when he is none.
This day shall set the King high on my score;
For, such an honest Man is RIFALORE,
So faithful to his Master, that a Trim
Map of Misfortune might be made of him.
And (see the fate which still attends upon it!)
The scurvy Poet, giving each a SONNET,
Leaves only me without -- But, by the faith
Of a MAHUMETAN, since thus he has
Provoked me to 't, upon his skirts I Will sit:
Damme all his Matter, 'cause in Verse it is writ:
And, in defiance of the TRIPLE THREE,
Promote a Law, importing, that, to be,
Or not to be, a POET; shall suffice
To prove, past doubt, one is not, or is, wise.

Genesis Stand, RIFALORO, to thy Arms: The Drums
Do beat a Charge, and FELISBRAVO comes.

Rif. St. whom invoke they?

Genesis MARS, the God of Wars.

Rif. St. GEORGE for Us, the Garter'd English MARS.

Exeunt. Enter Marching at one Door Claridiana, as with an Army, Drums and
Files, and her self in the Rear with a Truncheon, and Felisbravo by her side;
At the other Door Zelidaura in like manner, with Claridoro before her all
Armed, Cla Valiant ARABIANS, let these barbarous Troops
(Men built to serve) their bending Foreheads yield:
As, with a fierce South Wind, an Army stoops
Of drowsy Poppies in a barren field.

Zel. Food for your Steel brave Sons of Tartarie)
Let these so^t Peasants of Arabia be:
For, ill can brook the glittering of a Sword,
A Country only famous for a Bird.

Cla. In our contention now, not Mars,
But CUPID is the God of Wars.
And (turned to tears) thy proud disdain
Puts Love in Arms, makes HEAVEN complain.
If thy coming be to wring
From me the famous Persian King;
Though I do love him, I esteem
From thee to have got him, more than him.
For, amongst my Glories, I less prize
My Conquest, than thy HUE and CRIES.

Zel. To pull this fickle Prince from thee,
Is Honor, and not Love, in me:
For, with so false a Lover, know,
I Will part at all times to a Foe.
To give to him, no hand I bring;
But feet, on both your necks to print:
For, in my greatest Conquering,
And utmost of tryumphing in 't,
Having first punished his Inconstancy,
For more Revenge, I Will after give him Thee.

Offers to Charge and Felisbravo throws himself at her Feet. Fell. ZELIDAURA,
hold thy Hand:
Conquer not twice a Man unmann'd.
She needs not Weapons, that is fair:
He needs not Death, who has despair.
Already, of thy generous Feet
I kiss the yoke. In the most sweet
And glorious Cause of LOVE, let my life owe
To me, the divine choice to lose it so.

Zel. Rise; hence; begone; I will not have thee dye
At thy Election, nor in Courtesy,
But, by my Fauchion: Not, like FELISBRAVE,
Not, my devoted, but my conquered Slave.

Cla. Stay, Traitor, where thou art: Revenged I Will be
Both on the proud, and on the humble: THEE
I Will conquer, and forget; and both your Hearts
(Transfixt with other, than with amorous Darts)
Under my vexed feet trample --

Rif. Well played, Girls:
Mastiffs of Ivory! Dragons of Pearls.

Fell. I Will have no Battle.

Cla. The whole Earth a Lake
Of Blood, and Scene of Horror, I will make.

Rif. O how Sir Poll, my Grandsire would cry ('S Bears!)
Kings and Queens seen together by the Ears!
Well, there 's no flinching now; my strengths I summon:
To see the last Man born and the last Woman.

Zel. Sound, Sound a Charge.

Cla. Lock with the Foe.

Fell. Hold --

Claro. Charge them home -- But, the Heavens (lo!)
Rash the Clouds open.

Rif. Monsieur JOVE
Throws (thundering) 'twixt them his steel Glove.

Sound Drums and Trumpets, and let Mars pass over the Stage in a Chariot drawn
with Lions, having in his hand a fiery Lance. Mars. CLARIDIANA (second Phoenix
of
Arabia) and thou Tartarian QUEEN
(In whom alone pride is not folly) I
Who ( General of Heaven, and Earths Protector
Suppressed the proud Rebellion of the Giants
In Pilegra's Plains: I, who in burning TROY
(Supplying the bold Greeks with fire and sword)
Saw frighted Xanthus scud 'twixt ^^^ks of Cyndar^^
I, who (through Romes revenging fury) saw
Of the great Carthage scarce one stone remaining
For a dumb witness that she once had been:
I, who upon Iberian Walls beheld
Turbants for Battlements, and Barb'ry Mares
Turned loose into the Andalusian Corn:
Now (a PEACEMAKER) bring, not signs of Wars,
But Leagues confirmed with Characters of Stars.
The Gods (who call you by a hid impulse
To people the grave Temple, and wast Grove
Of the most chaste best Goddess) know, the WORLD
Has not a Prince deserves so high perfections:
For Heaven is stuck all over with injured Beauties.
Thou, gallant CLARIDORO, Rule (as King)
Great Tartary; and FLORANTEO, thou
Reign in the famous and the fair Arabia.
For the most Valiant Knight, and perfect Lover
(Though ZELIDAURA know not this, or will not)
Let the Great KING of Persia be Crowned.
Queens lay down Arms; for (to make War on Beasts)
From painted Quivers, at your shoulders hung,
Of Shafts a flying Squadron will suffice.
DIANA'S Nuns are coming to receive you,
Their Heads with Olive, Flowers, and Laurel bound.
This, in the rolling chambers of the Spheres,
The glorious Heptarchie of Heaven ordains
By a Law always just, always inviolable.

Drums and Trumpets. Fell. Hold, MARS divine; for thou (both Judge and Party)
Envy'st my Flame, whose object does as far
Outshine thy Mistress, as the Sun a Star!

Claro. Stay, Sovereign MARS, I Would rather be, than have
The whole Worlds Empire, ZELIDAURA's Slave.

Flo. I, from this sentence, to those Gods appeal,
Who feel more love, or more compassion feel.

Zel. Princes, resist not Heaven; for still ye may
Love, without hope; and that is the noblest way.

Cla. I reverence it, and adore its Laws.

Rif. A foolish ending! Were 't not just
(Into a Cloister if they must)
Heaven for these Virgins, did reserve
Some portions, that they may not sterve
When they repent them? And, must not,
After their Dames the Damsels trot?

Ros. The Damsels stay, for visible Example
To a bad World, in which they are a TEMPLE
And CLOISTER to themselves, meaning to live
Not less austere, though less contemplative.

Fell. I always loved thee only, for Love's Cause
And Joy, a glimpse of Hope once blessed mine Eyes
Which on his Altar I may sacrifice.

Claro. Thou, ZELIDAURA, shall still guide the Helm:
Whilst I am still the Defender of thy Relm.

To Claridiana. Flo. And thou shall be ARABIA'S Queen, and mine.

Zel. " Virtues are Kingdoms at DIANA'S Shrine.
If so, then their Possessions greatest call
Who dispossess themselves of All.

Cla. Crown FLORANTEO.

Soldiers. Thy Feet kisses
Crown Him. ARABIA: Live Crowned with Blisses.
Crown Claridoro. Live, CLARIDORO.

Claro. Cry
Dye, CLARIDORO, dye.

The Temple opens. Cornets. Genesis The TEMPLE opes, the Air rejoices,
Gay Nymphs present sweet Flowers and Voices.
They sing within. Live, Fair Ones, for your Selves, whilst the Men do
Think it enough, if They may Dye for You.

The Queens enter the Temple from whence many Nymphs come forth to receive
them, and therein let Diana appear. Zel. I, born was, for my Self alone.

Cla. The Altar now shall be my Throne.

Claro. My Love does no reward pretend.

Flo. My torment never will have an end.

Fell. "TO LOVE ONLY TO LOVE, is Love,
"Like that w' are loved with from above:
" He that hopes, no Love does bear.

Claro. Then what should he, that hopes not, fear?

Rif. It remains now --

Genesis What now remains?

Rif. That the Magnifick POET give
Some Thirty Mannours all with large Demains
Amongst the Actors upon which to live;
And do in any Case declare
That All our Worships Cosen Germans are.

Genesis What a Conceit of a stale date!

Rif. SIR (for now Men say not, STATE)
Here ends the PLAY
Of for Ever and Aye;
Tiring Female and Male,
Without a Marriage in the Tail;
And this it does git
By being Penned without Wit.

FINIS Of the Dramatick ROMANCE OF To LOVE only to LOVE.
Immediately upon pronouncing the last words, the Temple or Throne ascended to
the Place where it was before ( viz the upper Tower of the Castle) and in it
Zelidaura and Claridiana seated on either side the Goddess, also some Nymphs;
and at the same time (Trumpets and Drums Sounding) the two Armies went Marching
off at several doors, the Comedy ending there; and the Festival in a Dance,
after the manner of a Tournament by The Lady Mary Gusman, The Lady Anne Sandi,
The Lady Margarite Zapata, The Lady Margarite Tavara, The Lady Mary Cutinio,
The Lady Frances Tavara,
All Armed in Men's Apparel, and the Dance being ended all the Instruments
Sounded out at once.

FIESTAS de ARANIVEZ: FESTIVALS REPRESENTED AT ARANVVHEZ BEFORE THE KING and
QUEEN of SPAIN, In the Year, 1623.

To Celebrate The BIRTHDAY of that KING, Philip IV.

Written in Spanish by Don Antonio de Mendoza.

Translated into English, Anno 1654.

London, Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, 1670.

FESTIVALS OF Aranwhez.
The Site of Aranjuez.
ARANVVHEZ is the Recreation of the Kings and Queens of Spain, One and Twenty
Miles from Madrid, the Court thereof; a Sear, which makes it credulity even to
believe ones Eyes, the more seen, the more wondered at, and which in its
natural simplicity, would rather have scorned, than admitted of Art, had not
the Greatness of the Owners made it beholding to them for what was impossible,
adorning it not only with a sumptuous Building (which, not exceeding the
proportion of a Villa, or Countrey-House, deserves the Name of a Pallace-Royal)
but also with transcendent Culture, in which there is a constant variety; what
in the Luxuriancy of its Gardens, what in the Gallantry of its Meadows, which,
for Flowers, Birds, and Plants, leave nothing to be admired in the strangeness
of the most remote Provinces; (that being there common, which is singular in
every of them;) and what in the excellency of its Groves, which, peopled with
all manner of Game, and Beauty, excuse no Royal Entertainment.

The Fields of Aranjuez.
THe least of its Beauty is under the Charge of two the most celebrated Rivers
of Castile; Xarama, which dilated through the Fields hereof, begins their
Fertility, and with a gentle Plain, Crowned with Corn and Fruits, draws the
first respect to the Majesty of its Master, defended by that respect, better
than by the watching of so numerous Guards; (for, in so vast Limits, in vain
would be the Care of many, if they were not kept by the veneration of All;) the
Courage of the Bulls thereof giving the second estimation to the Borders of
this River, which (civil to Tagus) retires it self, leaving to him the upper
and nearer place, and afterward Duty more than Custom carries it to join with
him, making him greater, not more beautiful.

The Garden of the Isle.
THis Seat (which will always seem an Hyperbole to the Ear, and a Deception to
the Eye, being only used the two best Months (serving the other ten, only for
a complaint to as many as behold it, that it should lie fallow the rest of the
year) contains amongst many other Miracles of amoenity a Garden, which Tagus
embraces with two Currents, sometimes in suspense, some times hasty, shaping it
an Isle, and serving it for a Wall, over which the Trees are one way delightful
Battlements, another, they are flowery Margents. Amidst the intricacy of the
matted Herbs, of the Galleries of Flowers, of the Meandrian Wildernesses, of
the diversified Plats, of the Crystal Fountains (Competitors in Plenty and
Novelty) there is reserved a most beautiful Space, which has the openness of a
Marketplace, and wants not the pleasantness of a Forest. This the Queen made
choice of to Celebrate therein (with the greatest Magnificence that any Age
has seen, boast what it will the Roman Ostentation) the happy Birthday of Our
Sovereign Lord the King, the Seventeenth Year of his flourishing Age, and the
Second of his most blessed Reign.

One of the greatest things of which is composed the Majesty of the Kings of
Spain is, the Splendor of their Court, in which they do more surpass the other
Princes of the World, than even in having under their Command so many Kingdoms;
and the chief Point of this Splendor consists in that of their Maids of
Honor, who, being Daughters of great Lords and Gentlemen, the veneration of
all Men gives them new Authority, by themselves preserved in such manner, that
they find respect and applause wherever they appear: For there needs nothing
else to make it a Festival Show at any time, than that they will permit
themselves to be looked upon. And now on this Occasion to Solemnize the Kings
Birthday, and Wait upon the Queen, they excelled themselves in bravery, both
of Clothes and Carriage.

These Representations, which refuse the vulgar Name of Comedies, and aspire to
that of Opere, to describe how they were performed by the Court (the Eclipse,
rather than Imitator, of the Ancient Stage, upon which Italy values it self at
this day) would require a better Pen than mine: But to stay to seek one could
worthily Write it, were to Damme it to perpetual Silence; since the most exact
and elegant must claim a part in my diffidence: Another Command (not my
Presumption) embarks me in this Narrative, though not witty, yet true; and now
I write it with jealousy that I shall wrong the Story: But nothing can set it
forth like a punctual telling it.

Many Circumstances-make me suspicious of my self, and two amount to fear; the
poverty of words to describe the brave Clothes, which are distinguishable only
by their Colors, and here all being reduced to Gold and Silver, that falls out
to be rich, which a Revalation would have various ***

THe Court was divided into two Squadrons, to make the Festivals distinct; of
the first the Queen was Captain, who with her Greatness rendered it worthy of
her Self; and of the second was Captain the Lady Leonora Pimentel, a Dame of a
transcendent Wit, and who with that alone might promise her self equality, if
it had been possible.

The Fabric of the Scenes.
TO Erect the Scenes for the Opera of Her Majesty came to Aranjuez Captain
Julius Caesar Fontana, chief Engineer and Superintendent of the Fortifications
of the Kingdom of Naples, Son to that so celebrated Artichitect of the Fabrics
of Sextus Quintus, and Artificer comparable with his Father. There was raised a
Theater of 150 Foot long, and 78 in breadth, and seven Arches on each side with
Pilasters, Cornishes and Battlements, of Dorick Work, and on the top of those
certain Galleries with Balasters of Gold, Silver, and Blew, which compassed the
whole, and the same sustained seventy Massy Candlesticks holding white Wax
Torches and Tapers innumerable, with certain Pillars imboss'd at the Corners of
them ten Foot high, upon which was fastened a Canopy in imitation of a clear
Night, when a multitude of Stars break out of a gloomy shadow, and upon the
Stage, two Figures of a large proportion, which served for imaginary Giants;
and to correspond with the Frontispiece, and by the Cornishes of the open
Galleries, many Statues of Brass, and pendant from the Arches, certain Globes
of Crystal, which made great Lights; and round about Benches for Gentlemen,
with a most beautiful Rail to keep out the Common People. In the midst a
Throne, upon which were the Chairs of the King, and of the Princes Don Carlos,
and Don Fernando, his Brothers: Below them again Foot-paces, on which Carpets
with Cushions, for the Ladies and Damsels. There was formed a Mountain of fifty
foot broad, and eighty in circumference, which was made to split it self into
two, and, though it was so vast in bulk, yet one Man moved it with much ease.
It covered the Scene, and was of the same Dorick Work, and it had an Ascent by
many Steps to a spacious Cave, peopled with many wild Beasts. What this
Mountain hid shall be revealed, when we speak of the Scenes, as they served in
their proper places of the Mask.

The Subject was the Glory of Niquea, notorious in the Books of Amadis; it was
written for the height of the Court, as knowing the little liberty which that
affords to the Muses, and the great Caution wherewith these Virgins of
Parnassus must there demean themselves, the want of which knowledge occasions
many absurdities to those Poets (how eminent soever in other respects) who have
been bred far from the severity of that School.

The Festival was appointed for St. Philips Day, but the embroylment of so much
Fabric deferred it till Whit-Monday, by which time all was in perfection. At
the shutting in of day Tapers were lighted, equivocating Night. All took their
places, who had leave to see, which was granted sparingly. For as to have
indulged a general Liberty, would have caused great confusion, by the People
that would have flocked from Madrid, so the Court-Attendance alone, of their
Majesty's, and their Highnesses, was enough, not to want Spectators if that had
been the thing;) yet those who came unlicensed were not excluded, least so
justifiable an Ambition should be condemned, as to desire to see Festivals
prepared by so great a Queen, in Honor of a King so Glorious, and moreover
their own. He being now out of Mourning for his Great Father, which he observed
so religiously, that till the Year was over, even, the last Day, the first of
his sorrow. The Ladies and Damsels, then present at Aranjuez, filled both the
Strado's, the one the Countess of Olivarez, and the Lady Frances Clanit, Wife
of Don Balthazar de Zumiga, the Marchioness of Castle Rodrigo, and the Lady
Margarita de Melo her Daughter, and the Countess of Barajas; the other, the
Lady Jane of Arragon, and the Lady Leonora Pimentel, Donna Anna Bazan, Donna
Maria Land (chief Mother of the Maids) the Lady Margarita de Tabara, and the
Countess of Castro Duennas, i. e. Widows of Honor.

The beginning of the Festival.
A Noise of Trumpets and Sackbuts gave the Sign, when the King and his Brothers
came forth to take their Seats, and presently entered upon the Stage many
Violins, and with them the Court Dancing Master, and (the Minstrels giving
scope to their Instruments) two doors flew open, and there began a Gallant
Mascarade.

The Mascarade.
THe first Couple that sallied, Dancing, was the Ladies Sophia and Luysa
Benavides, in Hungartins of Cloth of Silver, clingcant with Azure, the Seams
laid thick with Passemans of Silver, and two pair of Wings and Kirtles of the
same stuff, the same Passemans covering all the ground, Sleeves of Cloth of
Silver cut upon Azure, Cloth of Silver Mantles hanging on their Shoulders by
three Roses of Diamonds, many Jewels and Flowers in their Head-Dresses,
Pyramided in a Mountain of Plumes of both Colors, black Masks, and white
Torches.

The Lady Maria Coutixio, and the Lady Catherine Velasco, in the same Habit,
save that the Cloth of Silver was distinguished with Orange; and in like manner
the rest of the Squadrons, only differenced by the Colors.

The Lady Anne Sand, and the Lady Margarit Zapata, Cloth of Silver Green.

The Lady Leonora Gusman, and the Lady Anna Maria de Guevara, Cloth of Silver
Carnation.

The Lady Maria de Tabora, and the Lady Constanza de Rybeyra, Cloth of Silver
White.

The Lady Luysa Carilio, and the Lady Anna Maria de Acunia, Cloth of Silver
Black and White.

There Enterings were most sprightly, the Knots of the Mascarade with graceful
Novelty: They Danced it to the admiration of all, and howbeit these Ladies were
of different Squadrons, they agreed in giving a most Illustrious Beginning to
the Festival. They ended the Mascarade, and in the same Habits, accompanied by
the Major-Domo's and Mothers of the Maids, or Duenia's, sat themselves down
upon their respective Strado's.

The Chariot of the River Tagus.
A Second time the Music of the Minstrils gave notice of another Novelty, and
through a wide Arch entered a Crystal Chariot, Crowned with Lights and variety
of Boughs, and therein many Naiades, and Napean Nymphs, Clad after the manner
of the Country, and (seated in a Throne) the River Tagus, represented by the
Lady Margarita de Tavora, Menina to the Queen, and her Habit was this, a
Cassack of Blew Tynsel, and a Mantle of the same watered, and Silver Ribbons,
also embroidered over with Silver Snakes, the Sleeves of Blew Satin slashed,
and drawn through with Cloth of Silver, a bunch of Plumes White and Blew, and
the Mantle sliding from the Shoulders, but held by three Roses of Diamonds, and
a Garland of Flowers upon her Head; she descended from the Chariot, and mounted
the Stage, attended by the Nymphs, and, in the name of the circumjacent Fields,
welcomes the King, rendering His Majesty many humble Thanks for glorifying them
with His Presence.

The Chariot of April.
THe Music returned, through another opposite Arch entered in a Chariot the
Month of April, ushered by the Sign Taurus, with all those Flowers that make
him the the Spring of the Year, and with as much Light as might make him the
Years Morning; and from the top (representing him, and that to the advantage)
the Lady Franscisca de Tabara ( Menina to the Infanta) with a Cassack and
Mantle of rich Cloth of Silver Carnation, sewed with Roses, wrought by hand, of
several Colors, and Sleeves quilted with Roses, and a Veil of Silver, a
Head-dress of Roses, a Sphere of Plumes, Crowned with Flowers, and the Mantle
held upon the Shoulders by three Roses of Diamonds: He drove his Chariot into
the Theater it self, and there (having first saluted the River) with modest
assurance repeated certain Stanza's of much Wit and sharpness, and pronounced
with more, giving a new Soul to the Verses (now the second time excellent) and,
without danger of Flattery, due Praises to the King and his Brothers, April and
Tagus accompanied with their Nymphs retired themselves.

The Flight of the Eagle.
TIme passed over the Stage upon an Eagle of Gold, represented by the Lady
Antonia de Acunia, who by way of Prophecy, in Elegant Verses, reminded His
Majesty of the Glorious Deeds of His Ancestors, and warmed his forward Courage
with so great Examples and desires to imitate them, animating him to follow
their generous steps, already well advanced in by his Illustrious Beginnings.
Proposed to him, that since Africa, Europe, and America, respected his Banners,
he would make Asia fear them, disused for so many Ages past to Christian Arms,
which now began to receive at the Sound of his Name. Thanked him for his early
Valor, and the great Anticipation upon his Age, having already Reigned in One
Year many Centuries, served by two Ministers of State, so zealous of his Glory,
and of the Splendor of his Actions, of whose Virtues and Profoundness the most
ample Relation might savor something of Affection and Love, but nothing either
of Flattery or Error. The accurateness of the Stanza's could not complain of
being discomposed one jot in the Acting, nor did the few Years of the Lady
Antonia apprehend the least scruple in the World to represent Time. The Eagle
ascended above the whole Fabric of the Theater with an Artifice so well
dissembled, that the Flight was seen all the while, but not how it was done.
She vanished; at the instant, on the top of all the Fabric, the Trunks of
three Trees opened, and three Nymphs appeared Singing: They were the Lady Mary
of Arragon (Maid of Honor to the Queen) and the Lady Mariana de Hos, and the
Lady Isabella Salazar, of Her Majesty's Chamber. The Artifice of the Scene, and
the Greatness of Voices, might have served for Ornament and Credit to another
Royal Festival. They ended the Ditty to the notable admiration of All, the
Trees did shut themselves, and the Lady Mary Gusman, Daughter of the Conde of
Olivares, entered through a Wood, her Habit a Mantle of Damask of Gold Green,
trimmed with Gold and Silver, and little Pease-Cods with Pearl in them, a Velvet
Hungarlin of the same color laced long ways with Passemans of Gold Embroidery,
a Green Montera with a Green Feather cast over full of Diamonds and Pearl, and
a Bow and Quiver embroidered with Gold and Silver hanging at her left shoulder.
She spoke the Prologue, vulgarly called the Loa ( i. e. the Praise;) which she
Acted to the Spectators, and they all gave it to her, such was the life,
assurance, and grace, wherewith she pronounced it: She proposed the Argument,
begged no Pardon according to the vulgar custom, Attention she did, and with
great reason they gave it her. The Harmony of all the Music, and the Voice of
the whole Auditory thanked her with one consent, upon the strength of which
Plaudit, the Comedy did (as well it might) venture boldly in: The Series whereof
was in this manner.

The Comedy.
IN the first Scene entered Darinel, Squire to Amadis, who notified to Dantes
(a Shepherd of Tagus) the Occasion that obliged his Master to tread those
Fields: He recounted to him his famous Actions, his Adventures, and that ***
which was ministered unto him by the Enchantment of Niquea, oppressed by the
Arts of Anastarax, the hated Lover of her Beauty, for whom the Magitian Alquile
(her Uncle) reserved her. The Squire reciprocally informed himself from the
Shepherd touching the Borders of that River, whom the Swain courteously
answered, and paid his Narration with another of the Preparations there made
upon so great an Occasion, as to celebrate the Birthday of their King. The
Squire was represented by the Lady Guevara of the Queens Chamber, in a brave
Suit of Clothes, a Sword girded to her, a Hat with a tossing Feather, and Roses
of Diamonds; the Shepherd, by the Lady Bernarda de Bilbao of the Chamber of the
Infanta, in an Hungarlin, and Smock-coat Green and Silver, Budget of Cloth of
the same; the Action and Bravery of them both not yielding to the proudest
Competitors: A Quire of Sirens were heard to Sing. Tagus listens from his
Sphere of Crystal, who despising to be a River has the Ambition of a Sea.

Amadis Enters.
A Trumpet Sounded, and following the Echoes thereof, they entered among the
matted Trees: Presently came out, as amused at the Noise of the same, that
Knight of the Burning Sword. He was represented by the Lady Isabella of
Arragon, joining the Mettle of Amadis to the Beauty of Niquea: Her Habit,
Braces of Cloth of Silver Carnation and Black, with Embroideries of the same, a
Soldiers Cassack with the same trimming, Armor of burnished Silver neatly
Filed, the Clasps and Studs thereof of Gold, and the Murrion Crowned with a
Mountain of Plumes, a Mantle of Cloth of Silver hanging at the Shoulders, and a
Sword girded to her; a Dwarf attended her, who carried the Enchanted Shield
(which was Don Michael Sopilio) who succeeded Bonami in the reputation of
Littleness, and he was sheathed in an old fashion Suit, Black and Silver.

Amadis found upon the Trees various Inscriptions, which put him into a
confusion, and (assaulted by Sleep) demanded quarter of the fatigue of the way;
but (his Spirit complaining of the faint resistance made by his Flesh) whilst
he was yet awake he was scandalized to imagine himself asleep, and quite
overcome at last (as he that is never so much a Lover remains a Man for all
that, and cannot put off Mortality) did stay himself at a Rock; then came forth
Night, represented by a Portugal Black-moor Maid, and a most excellent Singer,
Maid to the Queen, Clad in a whole Kirtle of Black Taffaty, powdered with Stars
of Silver, and a Mantle falling from her Shoulders, thick wrought with the same
Stars --

* * * *

In a resplendent Cloud descended Aurora, represented by the Lady Mary of
Arragon, Clad in a Hungarlin, and Smock-coat, of Gold Cloth lined with
Carnation, and thick embroidered with Pearls, and a Mantle of Cloth of Silver
powdered with the same, who, admirably Singing, accused in Amadis the humanity
of Sleep, and that in him alone were joined amorous Thoughts and drowsy Eyes;
she remembered him how he had both his Glory, and his danger near, and how this
sleeping discredited as well his Love as his Soldiership. Night persever'd to
suspend him in his Lethargy, the Morning pleaded hard to bring him to himself.
Night confessed her self vanquished, and fled; the Morning was victorious, and
Amadis awoke; she in the same Cloud, and with the same Music, returning to
Heaven. Amadis departed in Quest of the Enchanted Wood, and at his coming to
the Rock, heard variety of voices, which in the high Galleries of the Theater
divided themselves into four Quires each opposite to other, which were formed
by the Kings Chapel, with diverse Instruments, some Guitars, some Flutes and
Sackbuts, others Theorbo's, others Viols and Lutes. One Quire sung, and set
before him Dangers, another infused into him Resolution; now this disanimated
him, now encouraged him that; and the wavering Knight listened sometimes to the
horrors of the Enchantment, sometimes to his own Valor: In the end, after a
Battle of Doubts, he proved the Conqueror of them, represented by the Lady
Isabella, so understandingly affected with her part, that she even thought her
self the Person she Acted, and whipping out her Blade withal, clasping her self
close to the Shield, invaded the Rock with so generous a smartness, that it was
all, which it was possible for a Lady to do without discomposing her self. The
Rock opened, and there appeared a Palace of a beautiful Structure, and in the
Portal thereof four Pillars of Thirty Foot high, which at the instant that
Amadis knocked at the Gates sank down to the Center so swiftly, that the Eye
could not overtake them. Four Giants showed themselves Armed with Breast-plates
and Murrions, who grew into Choler at the rashness of the Knight, and with
threatening only presumed to carry the Victory. But Amadis, who had not the
Name given his Sword for nothing, with the first flourishing thereof, and
showing them the Shield into the bargain, put them all four to Coward-flight
(for so the Books of Knighthood will have it:) Represented these were by Donna
Leonora de Quiros, Donna Luysa Ortiz, Donna Catalina de Z^rate, and Donna Ynes
de Zamora, without observing the property of Giants in being ugly and
troublesome, for all thought them handsome and very good Company. Many Nymphs
came-out with Flowers to put upon his Head, and with treacherous fawnings
sought to get him out of the Castle. He knowing their falsehood, showed them the
Shield, at which they fled, Lions rising in their places, into which they
transformed themselves with such natural fierceness, that true ones could not
have struck more terror, and (seeing the Shield) these likewise vanished: He
ascended by the Stairs until he was stopped by this Inscription: This Mysterious
two leaved Door,
Which the Hand of Heaven has shut,
None deserves it open, but
The Love that is on Earth most pure,
And the Sword that best can cut.


Having read it, he passed already victorious over the Theater and place of
Arms, came to the Gates, which in the instant flew open, and (all the variety
of Music joining at once) presented it self the fair Scene of the Glory of
Niquea, who was cypher'd in a most beautiful Sphere of Crystal and Gold, so
that the Roofs and Walls thereof seemed rather one, than many Diamonds,
verifying the Palace of the Sun which Ovid feigns; and in perspective a high
Throne, wherein was placed the Queen, who sat for the Goddess of Beauty, of
whom Amadis begged leave to disinchant Niquea, represented by the Infanta,
seated upon the utmost Stair, and upon the other that were lower (accompanying
Her Majesty and Her Highness) the Lady Anna Maria Manrique, the Lady Maria de
Cardenas, the Lady Antonia de Acunia, the Lady Margarita de Tabara, the Lady
Iuana Boria, the Lady Isabella de Velasco, Donna Isabella de Salazar, Donna
Iuana Pacheco, Donna Maria de Hos, and other Servants of the Chamber, who
represented Nymphs, and at the Foot of the Throne was on his Knees Anastarax,
Acted by the Lady Antonia de Mendoza. And the Habits are these.

The Habits.
THat of the Queen a short Petticoat and Kirtle of massy Tissue with
Plate-Lace, three pair of large Skirts, and the foremost down to the Hem of her
Coat with Scallops, Scrolls written with Diamonds, and set on upon a perfumed
Jupe, French Sleeves slashed, and held together again with Buttons and Loops of
Diamonds, a Head-dress of Silver Purl and Goldsmiths Work with variety of
Plumes a Mantle of of rich Cloth of Silver plain, with three Constellations of
Diamonds which insured it to the Shoulder, falling gracefully over the back,
and at her Neck the Kings great Diamond, with the incomparable Pearl.

That of the Infanta, a Petticoat of massy Cloth of Silver Carnation with
Scallops, trimmed with Silver Passemans and Black Silk, with a Sleeve of
Needle Work, the Mantle of the same Stuff, and to it three Booches of Diamonds,
a Diamond Chain athwart, and her Head-dress of Goldsmiths Work and Roses.

That of the Lady Anna Maria Manrique, a Petticoat of Orange Color Satin
embroidered, with clingcant and flat Pease of Silver both upon the Field and
Trimming, a Hungarlin of Orange Color Taffaty opened upon Cloth of Silver
drawn through the Cuts, with four pair of Scallops Orange Color and White, all
sprinkled with Flowers wrought with the Hand, round Sleeves of Cloth of Silver
smooth, with the same Handiwork Flowers, a Mantle of massy Cloth of Silver,
sewed with Flowers, and hanging by Roses of Diamonds, the Head-Dress of
Diamonds and Pearls, with a Bunch of White Plumes.

That of the Lady Maria de Cardenas, a Petticoat and Hungarlin of a rich Gold
Tabby Orange Color imboss'd with Silver, a Cloth of Silver Mantle, with three
Roses of Diamonds, Plumes Carnation and White.

That of the Lady Antonia de Acunia, a Silver Petticoat Carnation, garnished
with Silver, and an Hungarlin of Black Velvel Laced long ways with Silver
Passemans, a Mantle of Cloth of Silver with Roses of Diamonds, and Plumes
Carnation and White.

That of the Lady Margarita de Tavara, a Petticoat and Hungarlin of Cloth of
Silver Carnation, a Mantle of Cloth of Silver White held by three Roses of
Diamonds, Plume Carnation and White.

That of the Lady Iuana Boria, Petticoat and Hungarlin of Cloth of Silver
Orange Color, with Gathers Trimmed with Silver, Cloth of Silver Mantle with
Roses of Diamonds, Plume Orange and White.

That of the Lady Isabella de Velasco, Petticoat of Cloth of Silver Carnation,
Hungarlin of Black Velvet, with Silver Passemans, Mantle of Cloth of Silver,
with Roses of Diamonds.

That of the Lady Antonia de Mendoza, Cloth of Silver Petticoat Carnation,
Black Velvet Hungarlin Laced long ways with Silver Passemans, the Mode Moorish*
a Turbant of Tynsel upon a Bonnet of Black Velvet sewn with Roses of Diamonds
and other Jewels. Plume Carnation White and Black, a Silver Embroidered Belt,
thereat hanging a Fauchion, an African Cassack, called by those People, an
Albornoz.

The Fable proceeds.
AT the approach of Amadis to the place where the Enchantment appeared
dissolved, Anastarax stood upon his Guard, and with deep fetched Groans
complained of the violence of Fate, and of Heaven, that had given to Morral Man
so great Valor as to that Adventure. Amadis condemned him to the torments of
his own Jealousy, and took Niquea out of the Enchanted Castle. But forasmuch
as the Persons here representing, did exceed the greatness of the represented;
therefore the Verses in the Sequel did not observe the promise of the History,
but the respect due to the Actors. And so when Amadis with all courteous and
lowly submissions imaginable, endeavored to make Niquea more sensible of his
Love than of his Prowess, she (above all those kind of Batteries) would not
allow him in reward of his Affection, so much as to dare to place it upon her,
heightening his diffidences to so great despair, that she left them no safety
but in silence: And the Nymphs seeing the refined Love of Amadis, told him, the
Queen of Beauty received him into her protection; and he (more proud to be a
true Lover, than to be a successful one) thanked Niqu^a for her scorn, and the
Goddess for her pity. These Verses were Penned with such accurate Respect, that
they deserved to be pronounced by Her Highness.

Here Ended the First SCENE: The Instruments Played, which were always in
readiness to fill up the Spaces, and the Second began thus:
The Second SCENE.
A Nymph appearing came forth singing a Sonnet, in which she presented the
Festival to the King; when presently the Squire and the Shepherd, struck with
admiration of what they had seen, hear the rattling of Chains, and grievous
Lamentation with which Anastarax did bemoan himself from the Hell of Love; and
(imagining it was some new Enchantment) had not the courage either to advance,
or stay where they were. Putting aside the Boughs with their hands, forth came
the Lady Mary of Arragon, and the Lady Frances Tabara, in different Habits from
the former, that of the Lady Mary (who Acted Albida) Petticoat and Hungarlin of
Cloth of Silver Grass Green, laid thick with Silver Passemans, Cloth of Silver
Mantle with Roses of Diamonds, Plume White and Green: That of the Lady Frances
(who Acted Lurcano) Petticoat of Cloth of Silver Primrose Color, with
Embroidery of Silver and Gold both on the Field and Border, and a Hungarlin of
Black Velvet uncut, Laced long-ways with Silver Passemans, a Sword and
sprightful Hat, the Brim turned up to the Crown, with a Black Plume fastened on
with a Brooche of Diamonds.

I advertised before, that this which the People would think strange for a
Comedy, and in Court is called an Invention or Opera, is not measured by the
common Rules of a Play (which is a Fable all of one piece) is made up of
incoherent variety; of which the Sight got a better share than the Hearing, and
where the Comedy (if it may be called so) was such to the Eye more than to the
Ear. Lurcano painted forth (in rich, and no vulgar Verses) the Pleasures and
Content of a Country Life in general, and Albida described her Gardens as in
the beautiful Season of May, then her Lover Lurcano imparted to her his amorous
Passion masked in cautiousness and fears, and Albida, not to favor him by
doubting it, nor oblige her self by believing it, answered him according to the
little heed she gave unto other folks torments, living without any of her own:
In this Dialogue (no less than in that of Amadis and Niquea) the Author showed
the Decorum with which Verses should be written for Ladies; those which they
hear, discreet; those which they speak, severe: Where, whatsoever is not
despair, is presumption; all should be Veneration, and nothing Love. It was
superexcellent, and (if it were possible) the Acting of it exceeded the Penning.

Anastarax returned to his Complaints, Cursing the Knight of the Burning Sword
with so hearty a good will, with so melting a voice, with so doleful groans,
that he adorned his pain, and the Lady Antonia Mendoza her Part, so much, that
nothing was ever so applauded, or more worthy to be so. Albida demanded of
Darinel the cause of those Lamentations, but he was as ignorant thereof as her
self. In the mean time the howling went on, and the compassionate Albida had a
longing desire to set Anastarax at liberty. She heard a voice, which (singing)
animated her pity, she read an Inscription, and that incited it likewise; she
followed the Echoes of the Complaints, and advising Lurcano, as a Friend, to
Cure himself with loving some other Beauty (taking him it should seem for a
Man) she had the daring to undertake that which appeared so difficult; Lurcano
endeavored to stay her, and, not being able, followed her to get first to the
danger: And making have to outstrip her, a flying Dragon opposes his passage,
who carried between his Wings Florisbella (represented by the Lady Anxa
Manrique) with whom he, admiring her Beauty, and to verify the Prognostication
of Albida, falls presently in Love, endeavoring to arrest her Perfections by
the force of Sighs and Prayers; he made Love to her most in feeling language,
the Dragon flew away, and the disdainful Nymph would not leave him so much as a
presumption that she had heard his Addresses: Lurcano remained in amorous
Doubts, sometimes he thought himself asleep, sometimes enchanted; he found in
her more Marks of a Goddess, than of a Nymph; he thought his Love much, for so
short a view; little, for so beautiful an Object; The Pen of the Author left me
no gallant thing unsaid in these Verses; and the Lady Franscisca pronouncing
them, added of her own a Spirit, the perfection of Poetry, this being one of
the most admired Strains in the whole Festival.

A Quire of Music bid him not despair, for that he should sometime, and that
soon, behold her again. He demanded Aid of Love in so doubtful an occasion, and
in so sovereign a devotement, when on the top of the Theater, a Balcone opened
it self, in which at the Sounds of many Instruments appeared the Nymph
Arethusa, represented by the Lady Mary Gusman (this second Habit much
surpassing the former) Clad in a Carnation Petticoat, laid thick with flat
Pease, and Embroideries of Pearl and Silver, and a deep Kirtle after the Mode
of France, with Gathers of Cloth of Silver Carnation, wrought with little
Snails or Periwincles of Silver, as it were creeping up from the bottom to the
top, and half Sleeves of Needlework lined with Cloth of Silver White, and
Ermins, a flying Mantle Carnation and Silver, with Roses of Diamonds, and a
Bunch of Plumes Carnation and White, a Bough of Laurel and Myrtle she carried
in her hand, saying, that she came sent from the Goddess Venus to disperse the
Cloud which involved so great Lovers, she bade Lurcano be of good Courage,
since Anastarax himself was now coming out of the Hell of Love: This Scene was
accompanied with great Harmony, and from the midst of the flames (which were
made with various splendor, not causing horror but delight) came forth
Anastarax, handed by Albida, whom Arethusa thanked for her valor, and
Anastarax for his deliverance: Then (the different Quires of Music joining)
forth came the Goddess of Beauty with Niquea, Amadis, and all the Nymphs, and
Anastarax begged pardon of Niquea for his presumptuous Love, and she pardoned
him. The Goddess of Beauty gave to Amadis the name of the most refined Servant,
and valiant Knight, in the whole World, loving without design, conquering
without reward; and Amadis with that, of being acknowledged so perfect a Lover,
rested fully satisfied. Florisbella came forth, to whom Lurcaro fell down upon
his Knees, and begged, in recompense of all his Love, she would not look upon
it as an injury, being the most courteous affront that could be offered to
Beauty. Arethusa celebrated the great Mercy extended by one Sex, the great Love
made good by the other; she gave to Niquea the joy of her disinchantment, and
to the Goddess, the Glory of the Festival. She commanded that with Music and
Dances should be celebrated the Liberty of the Princess, of the Beauty of the
Goddess, and so with a great Harmony of all the Instruments at once, they went
out, concluding the Representation, in which (being the last) the Lady Mary
Gusman carried the first Praise.

All of a sudden the Mountain covered the whole Face of the Theater, and
presently that Bulk opened it self at the sounding of the Instruments, when
with unexpected novelty, that which was a Mountain and a Building, we saw
turned into most beautiful Gardens of Flowers, and natural Fountains, so
ingeniously, and with so great quickness metamorphosed, that though the
Artifice was much, the brevity was the thing admired: And for a decision of a
Wager between the Queen and the Lady Leonor Pimentel (observing an ancient
Pastime in the Spanish Court, which is called Divination, at which they stake a
Jewel for victory, not for avarice) there appeared on the highest part of the
Throne Her Majesty and the Infawa, the Ladies and Menina's seated upon the
Steps thereof making a glorious show, and each of them having tied about her
right Arm a Scarlet Ribbon, all of one length and breadth, and fastened in such
manner that made no distinction; the Preceipt, that shuffling all these
together, the Lady Leonor (to overcome) must light upon that which had hung
upon the Arm of the Queen.

The Lady Leonor approached, and lost only the possibility of gaining, for (to
be an absolute loser) the Law was, the Queen, when her turn came, should light
upon the Ribbon that was fastened to Leonors Arm. The Action was accompanied by
all the Instruments and Singers: For, as Spain is the most proper Element of
the most excellent Voices in the World; so the Center of them is the Kings
Chapel; to whose Master, Music is beholden, for uniting dexterity in the
Tunes, with an excellent Air in Singing, making the Majesty of the Theorbo
comply with the sweetness of the Lute; and to the eminency of whose Art she
owes the Novelty of Palomares, the Delicacy of John Blas, the Spirit of Alvaro,
and all made use of upon this occasion.

The Queen, the Infanta the Lady Anna Maria Ma^^ique, the Ladies Isabella of
Arragon, Antonia de Mendoza, and Diana Franscisca de Tabara, Dancing the
Turdion with Swords and Hats, gave an End to the Festival. Wit, Motion, and
Bravery, were drawn dry and wearied in the Service, nay the Graces themselves
had not any delight, which by this time was not afforded to the Spectators; nor
any thanks, which they returned not to the Actors. If the Expectation had been
infinite, the Performance was more. The admirations and praises paid but a
small part of the sight, for (to go about to measure it that way) Hyperboles
themselves would have made a lukewarm Narration, and of such none were
wanting, and the greatest was none.

The flourishing years of the King (which may they multiply to as many as his
Virtues deserve, and as Spain prays for, and has need of) could by no less
demonstrations of joy be sufficiently solemnized, nor at any time with greater
reason have disengaged the pleasing thirst of seeing more.

The Splendor of the Court had been always admirable, but was never seen
greater than now; having in the first place the Queen (whom God preserve) of
few Years, of much Beauty, accompanied with all those excellent Endowments
which form a Royal Perfection; then the Infanta, of equal Majesty and Beauty;
also the Ladies, who in Bravery, Beauty, and Greatness, were inferior unto
those two only; for they were a Pool of all the Illustrious Blood in the
Kingdom, and being (wheresoever they are) the Lodestone of all Eyes: Imagine
them seen upon the Theater, on the most Tryumphant day of the World, every of
them vying with other, and making a modest ostentation of her Bravery, her
Mien, and her Beauty. No one can be particularly commended without an injury to
all: She seemed the most glorious dressed, upon whom the Eye happened to be; she
the best Actor, who was then Speaking.

The Queen, Foundress and Glory of the Festival, so twice Hers, and justly, for
neither from Her could it be expected less, nor did it deserve a less Mistress,
by her presence did free it from the fear of competition, and from the hope of
being more; who, because, only by Her being of the Company, She gave the Scene
so much Luster, without pronouncing one Verse: In these following was written
in Figures, that which many had not been sufficient to comprehend in words at
length.

The Speaking being the best Thing of the Play,
SHE, who spoke nothing, bare the Bell away.
FINIS.
A DESCRIPTION IN VERSE, DIALOGUE-WISE, OF THE FESTIVAL AT ARANVVHEZ In the
YEAR 1623.
Giant. THe Bounds where wandering Tagus meets
Himself in Gardens and long Streets
Of double Elms, whose Feet he drowns,
And Rains down from their lofty Crowns.
(Every April, every May,
Fair, Green, Flowery, Rustling, Gay.)
BELLZA (twice the Queen of them,
By her Face and Diadem)
With wonder fills; They prouder far
To ponder, whose; than what, they are.
To celebrate the Day of Birth
Of the most Glorious Youth on Earth,
To whom her Greatness, and her Beauty,
Pays a Homage, pays a Duty.
The World she does conjure and summon,
TO invent, and see, what is not common;
And what is thereupon prepared,
Makes things impossible, not hard.
Instead of Quires of Nymphs to friend,
To serve to that Heroic End,
Pressed Goddesses she does inroll,
Soldiers of LOVE! Rivals of SOL!

Genesis What a sublime AMPHITHEATER!
Eclypse of that which Rome did flatter
GREAT POMPEY in: He having (there)
Flattered with it, the WORLD, and HER.
How proudly raised! How richly decked!
That even the learned Architect
Stands posed thereat, and the fair Skies
See in its Lamps their thousand Eyes.

Rif. What Harmony of Seraphins!
Now, now, the Festival begins.
Wipe your Eyes, your Hearing clear,
Other Sense ye need not here.
What a gallant MASCARADE!
The Clothes were by APOLLO'S made:
Rather the same he wore that day,
Whilst he in Bed with Thetis lay.
So fair a preface of her own,
By a near Neighbor to the Throne,
An Earnest gave, of what so great
Expectation did beget.
In a Crystal Chariot (lo!)
The Lady Margarita de Tavara.
TAGUS from the Roof does flow,
Translated to a Nymph, more pure
Than He, out of his golden Ew're:
Now gives she her sweet Voice the reins,
Not, as a little Bird that strains
To sooth the Morn, that dawning is:
But Trumpet of the Sun, that is risse.
Flaunting in tryumphant Green
After him is The Lady Francisca de Tavara.
APRIL seen,
With sensitive Flowers not stuck, but set,
Cherished by two Suns of Jet;
Such a Complexion, such Eyes, Grace,
The Lusitanian Goddess Face:
Fair super of the highest Praise,
Which fears to abase what it would raise:
Her leavy Coach forsaking now,
She acts with Garland on her Brow,
The first Grace giving to the whole,
And to the Lines a second Soul.

Genesis The Air (environed round with Lights)
Some unexpected Object frights:
AN EAGLE it is, with Golden Plumes,
Which through that wandering Region comes.
By a fair The Lady Antonia de Acunia.
NYMPH the Bird is backed,
Who does, above the Danger, Act,
And without any scruple; Time;
"So bold is Beauty in her prime.

Gy. Behold indeed a Primrose here,
La Loa.
The Prologue (as that is) of the year!
How sprightly! The Lady Mary Gusman.
She, for making known
The Praise of others, hears her own.
But not till she has done her do;
There is applause in silence too:
Fortune, when she this Child designed
For so much Greatness, was not blind.
From Trunks of Trees, asunder rent,
A The Lady Maria de Arragon, Don^a Maria de Hos, and Do. Isabella de Salazar.
LEASH OF NYMPHS forthwith present
In harmonious Ditties, rare,
Prodigious sweetnese to the Air.
At a fair Tagan D. Bernarda de Bilbao.
Swains desire
Of AMADIS the Noble SQUIRE
Does courteous News to him afford
Of his brave Illustrious Lord.
Now, does the The Lady Isabella de Arragon.
DAME that Acts him, come,
Gallant, assured, complete, in whom,
Joined to Niquea's Beauty, is,
The Valor of her Amadis.
For the Enchanted Wood she stares,
And in a Civil War of Cares
Quarter his fatigue demands
Of slumber at the courteous hands.
A Black-Moor Maid, Singer to the Queen.
NIGHT (a black Siren) in soft Chains
Of her Voice, his Steps detains,
And his twice captive thoughts does keep
Fettered in the Bands of Sleep.
Bright The Lady Maria de Arragon.
AURORA him does tell
In sweet Accents, he does not well:
"For a Love, that is nobly got,
"Merits Eyes which slumber not.
AMADIS awakes, and sees
How the ones languid Song does freeze
His Spirits; to other, does infuse
Courage with her sprightful Muse.
The Burning Sword he now whips out
With a gallant briskness, stout,
Bold and fiery, as his Blade,
The dreaded Doors he does invade.
Four proud Pillars (sinking) fall
To the lowest pit of all.
Four proud Giants, in their places,
Make four thousand dreadful faces.
They are saucy, on his Blade
His victorious Hand he laid.
Amongst four POLYPHEMES (alas!)
Fear the only Giant was.
Flattering NYMPHS, with purpose base,
Flowers upon his Temple place;
To lose him, for a Wreath of Sand,
The Laurels he had half in hand.
He shows them the Enchanted Shield,
Turned LIONS, when they that beheld;
Being Lions (with new horror struck)
Their ever-curling Manes they shook:
An Illustrious PALACE bright
Rises like a Sphere of Light,
That of Sol was such a one,
Where his rash ambitious Son
Begged the Coach-box, from which hurled
He drowned himself, and burnt the World;
Leaving his Dad to see his Error
Too plainly in that Diamond Mirror.

Genesis What an admirable Scheme!
See upon the Throne Supreme,
That pure The Queen of Spain, Isabella of Burbon, Eldest daughter to Henry the
Great of France.
GODDESS whom Heaven lent
To be Earths best Ornament!
The Greatest Majesty alive,
Even by her own Prerogative!
The summed Perfection of all Faces!
One wonder, and a thousand Graces!
And by her side, that The Infanta, afterward Emperess.
MORNING'S ROSE,
Who, if her Breast did not enclose
A Royal Mind to inform the whole,
Her Body might even serve for Soul.
The Representative, the Idea
Of the most Beautiful NIQUEA,
Who strikes respect before she is seen:
The Knight she thanks with courteous Mien
For disinchanting her, which makes
The Martyred ANASTARAX
Sick of the Ill of others Bliss.
Now, Crowned with Laurel, AMADIS,
Whose Valor was the fear always
Of Monsters, and of Beasts of Prey,
Coward to so much Beauty, and
His own worst Enemy underhand,
Letting in no Light to Hope,
Yet (giving all his Passion scope)
Speaks, but she Audience does deny:
"For, in Affections placed so high,
"You shall always hear Men tell
"There he aspired, and there he fell.
The Lady Maria of Arragon.
LURCANO, and The Lady Francisca de Tavara.
ALBIDA, see!
Who teach the Rules of Modesty:
Show Lovers how to be discreet,
And keep them within Limits meet.
Now, hear The Lady Antonia de Mendoza.
ANASTARAX complain,
Who, in so much fire and pain,
Earns soft pity, praise, and glory,
Even in Lovers Purgatory.
Inclinable to be entreated
By Groans so sensibly repeated,
Albida stopped (but not her Ear)
At the Laments which echoed there.
O how humane, and how brave,
She thrids the must'ring flames, to save
(Only, Adored, is Beauty cruel)
The Wretch that is of those the fuel!
Lurcano left, and in despair,
Peoples with wild Complaints the Air.
When to extremity things come,
Discretion is not always dumb.
On flying Dragon's back (behold!)
A The Lady Anna Maria Manrique.
GODDESS who in DELPHOS old,
Would from the SUN himself have taken
His Adoration, and his Fane!
Without an Ear to those Complaints,
Which poor LURCANO so well paints:
Whose Flame (so fair an Object sought)
No Error is, though it is a Fault,
She flies like Lightning; and the Lover,
To his own Thoughts delivered over,
Feeds upon those, enjoys Despair,
In it, the Ambition of his Prayer.
ANASTARAX refined came
Out of the Bosom of the Flame:
("For it is the Good of Ill, to be
"Acquainted with 't familiarlie.)
AMADIS (in fine disdained
For all the Conquest his Sword gained)
Of the most Sovereign Love, and hard,
Frames to himself his own Reward,
And, bleeding inward bitter Tears
For those tyrannick Scorns of hers,
Counts, not to sit down by the loss,
A Boldness greater than his Cross.
NIQUEA (sole Exception of
Natures General Rule of Love,
And of high Faith the richest Prize,
If the World durst kerve to her Eyes)
Loves his Worth, but hates his Love,
And (praising that, all Men's above,
To other Gifts, than of his Mind,
Is not only dumb, but blind.
The Lady Mary Gusman.
ARETHUSA (Nymph complete)
Slides down from her Starry Seat,
Receipting Pills, in pity wrapped,
To swage the torments so ill hapt.
With what a grace does she set forth
Of ALBIDA the vast worth,
NIQUEA'S Beauty and her scorn
(Which must be kept since it is born;)
Confusions of ANASTORAX
(Of Jealousy and Love the Flax;)
LURCANO'S high divided Flame;
And AMADIS his, still the same?
These Heroic Lovers all
(Paid, in that we them so call)
Marriage, at any rate, eschew'd;
In which your vulgar Plays conclude.
Armies of Minstrels in the Air
(Which to their several Quires repair)
The Elements together dart,
But make them Friends before they part.
The SCENE is changed, and by and by
Those which had been Mountains dry
(Transformed to Gardens) fresh, and green,
As Hyblean Groves, are seen.
In HYERARCHIES of Steps distinct
A Ribbon, on each ANGEL linkt,
Diversifies, with streaks of Red,
The Azure Pavements which they tread.
Approaches an Illustrious The Lady Leonor Pimentel.
DAME,
But could not hit on, when she came,
Of the Great The Queen.
LIGHT, the pendant Ray,
In guessing which the Conquest lay.
Now, the victorious GODDESS, She
The Wonder tryes, but 'twill not be:
'Twas quit, because She likewise mist
The Lady LEONORA'S List.
Dancing, She ends the FESTIVAL;
In its full Glories summing All
That modern Spirits can invent,
Or draw from ancient Precedent.
The CAESAR'S Birth-days (to Grace whom
The Majesty of their own ROME;
With ravished Plumes from Conquered GREECE,
Were often distilled into one piece)
Observed like this were never known:
No Years e're worthier of a Throne,
Or to increase to infinite.
This Triumph, to Hopes, Wishes, Sight,
(By being what, and whose, it was)
Set Pillars which they could not pass.
Astonished, the Spectator stands;
Tearing the Air with Voice and Hands.
What mute attention first commended;
Loud Plaudits Crown when it is ended.

Rif. But, what new The second Festival of the Lady Leonor Pimentel.
Dorick Towers adorn
The The Garden of the Black-Moor.
Garden where the Statues mourn!
What Noise! which (bandied to and fro)
The more we hear, the less we know!
A Second THEATER it is,
Which the perfection if it miss
Of the first, disdains (but That)
All that was ever wondered at.
Now the Music Plays away,
Sign of a new beginning Play!
Erected there, is a new Throne;
Which Golden SOL himself might own.
Of The Mask of four Squadrons, in each the Infanta, the Lady Mary Gusman, the
Lady Francisca.
MASKERS entered a new Band,
Where Lamps to Lamps opposed stand,
And with new Lights the Visage cheer
Of that other HEMISPHERE!
The substance and invention
Of the Clothes they now have on,
In what they bought their Riches shows;
And their Wit, in what they chose.
FAME and ENVY (lo!) at strife
Whether of them, most to the life
The past FESTIVAL shall paint,
Treading the Stage with lofty Plant!
The Golden Fleece.
The Play begins; COLCHOS, the Scene;
The Subject, JASON; HIPPOCRENE,
By Pailsuls, was poured into It;
With Feather of a PHOENIX writ.
O, what sad duplicated Groans
From the hoarse Sea came up at once,
Whence the Center with Blew Waves
APOLLO'S Golden Circles laves!
Frixus and Hell.
Favor, Neptune (Joves next brother)
Cries one Voice, and straight another,
Billows, let us pass in peace,
And your swelling anger cease!
Thou pitying daughter of the Main,
Let not two Mariners pray in vain;
Who, without Sails, the Air cut through;
Who, without Oars, the Ocean plough.
By a curled Bark of Gold unshorn,
To their desired Port are born
The Fugitives, this Prayer that made:
The sweetest Twins the World e're had!
Those, who are placed for Signs in Heaven,
With these in Beauty are not even:
Nor the green Woods have ever known
So much VENUS, and ADONE.
NEREUS'S Daughters, one, and all,
(Beautiful) in Love did fall
With this their GOLDEN BRUTE (a rare
Emblem of a foolish Heir!)
In Coasts by them never seen before,
This pair of lovely Strangers, pore,
Unto a wandering Life, their just
Hopes, of a Royal Scepter, trust.
FRIXUS relates, in Language good,
The Greatness of their injured Blood;
The Poison of an envious Soul;
And an Envy's poisoned Bowl.
In this sad plight, of all forsook,
The Lady Luysa Carillo.
MARS, upon them, pity took:
"For, to Complaints by Earth prefarr'd,
"The Ears of Heaven are not barred.
A Noble Dame makes a Divine
Composition: In Her join
(A Flower less vain, less noxious Star)
NARCISSUS, and the GOD OF WAR.
Her sprightful Body she has dressed
In a strong glittering Back, and Breast:
And, her Temple Walls, with those
Which, won in Fight, you must suppose.
This God, of Honorable Men,
Valiant Wonders tells them then;
Who proved, in spite of Times and Fate,
Famous, though not Fortunate.
He, wished them to the High-lands get:
For Deserts still were a retreat;
A Sanctuary, Coop, and Pen,
As well to Great, as Holy Men.
The GOLDEN FLEECE gives him the Prince;
Worn by so many PHILIPS since
Near their Great Hearts: And by the Fourth,
Who writes the first of all in worth.
His Cheeks with Tears FINEO drowns,
Because his fair MEDEA frowns:
("For hopeless Love is so unwise
"To make it self Fetters of Ice.)
The Ship Argo.
The second Pilgrim of the Water,
First Cause of all the Ills there (after)
A flying Pine, with desperate Braves,
Is the Tyrant of the Waves.
To all succeeding Time's disease
JASON, Jason, etc.
THESEUS, HERCULES,
Wage a new War upon Mankind,
In Fields of Water, and of Wind,
With more of Earth than Nobler Fire,
They break the Sea: "For by the dire
"Thirst of Riches, Gulphs between,
"Nay watery Mountains, are not seen.
To win by Arms the GOLDEN FLEECE,
The aim is of these Peers of GREECE:
The gazing Islanders provide
Arms too, their Furies to abide.
MEDEA, Medea.
and the KING incline
Two ways in that which they design:
He, to defend the Walls he held,
She, to the Foe her heart to yield
The Father's favor, and the Maid's
Seeks JASON, and his bold Comrades:
But false are they, and he that seeks;
For all are Men, and those Men GREEKS.
FINEO, with a jealous Eye,
Stands looking at the Novelty.
Revenge and Anger his thoughts brood.
("Jealousy is prone to blood.)
The Royal Virgin is inflamed,
Whilst her supposed Scorns are blamed
By a young lovely Gardener there, Jason disguised in the Garden.

That sows sweet Henbane in her Ear,
Confiding little in her Eyes,
The force of charms MEDEA tries.
"But charms are Crimes of no avail,
"If those of BEAUTY come to fail.
Her face, the Philtre is must do it;
And, in her curls bound hand and foot,
No other Witchcraft needs: One hair
Can shackle JASON, if it is fair.
He, who was valiant amongst Men,
Was a Woman's Coward then;
Whom, in close walks (of Royal Loves
Old Rendezvous!) MEDEA proves.
In melting Notes, divinely breathed,
The Secret of her Soul is sheathed:
"A sweeter SIREN, then before
"He escaped at Sea, he meets on Shore.
But, what is this! The The Theater fired by accident.
FRAME entire
Is jurisdiction of the Fire.
A Flame (as any Lightning quick)
Catching from dry stick to stick,
Is a tall Plume of Light, and slings
The Tiles, which fly with fiery Wings,
The brave security behold
Of that FAIR YOUTH, who, like an old
COMMANDER, covers his own fears,
Lest thence his Men authorize theirs!
Yet, all Men fear for him; whilst he
The Fire does (unconcerned) see.
(For, in the troubled Thoughts of All,
From his proud height he does not fall.)
Nor, from his side does stir one Inch,
SHE, who from Him will never flinch:
Who scorns all danger but Her Lord's:
Which, in Text Letters, Fame records,
Of the numerous Auditory
He survays the lowest Story,
The Rout; who at the danger quake,
When only it should cause them wake:
The danger, than the fear, is less;
And, of the fright, and of the press,
And, of the Remedy they chose,
All the hazard they compose,
Now, all that Blood, or HYMEN'S Hands
Tied to His Bosom with strict Bands,
In His brave Arms the Illustrious Youth
Snatch out of the Furnace does:
Kinder than he, whose pious Back
Beneath his Aged Sire did crack;
(The Phoenix of TROYS Bloody Flame)
For his lost Wife behind him came.
The undaunted Beauty of the Queen,
Only with so much pale was seen,
As the early Morning does confess,
Whilst yet she smiles in her Night-dress.
Those Goddesses whom Mortals got,
Were left still sprawling on the spot,
Out of fear by the base Sect,
By Nobles out of pure respect;
Till (rude Compassion conquering Awe)
Necessity that, has no Law,
Puts a becoming boldness on,
Then every Don^a has her Don.
As, of Religious Houshold-Gods,
The sweet, and venerable Loads:
These burdens, so, their shoulders meet,
Which had been else profaned with feet.
If any Gallant tardy came
To snatch out of the Fire his Flame,
In this at least he shows he is Hers,
That he would quench it with his Tears.
What high Civilities were foiled!
What Love was in the making spoild!
Incurring, whilst the Fire they fly,
The danger of the water, by.
One, unto whom fair Eyes made suit
For succor in their Language mute,
Not giving either Sigh, or Aid,
(Like cruel NERO) All survay'd.
The Hub-bub ended with the Cause,
And now the Noise served for Applause.
The danger did conclude in Laughter,
And Fear was out of countenance after.
All, that gave reason to be sorry,
Was, what the Eyes did miss of Glory;
Taking that out in Hellish fright,
Which had been Wonder, and Delight.
As 'twas, the Garland it deserved,
And the success for Bon-fire served,
Whilst the blank Poets Baies expire,
They blaze and crackle in the Fire.
Fame gave Acquittance (self deceived)
For Sums which she had not received:
And busy Wits, I know not what,
Smelt, of an unintended plot.
The Accident produced some Mirth,
To see how People of course Earth,
By fearing dangers, make them room;
Whilst Kings even those, which are, overcome.
The Rising of the Spanish SUN
Was thus solemnized: May he run
(Endless in Fame, though not in Age)
Like a tough Giant a long Stage.

FINIS.

