A DEFENSE OF THE Humble Remonstrance, Against the frivolous and false
exceptions of SMECTYMNVVS.

WHEREIN The right of Leiturgie and Episcopacie is clearly vindicated from the
vain cavils, and challenges of the ANSWERERS.

By the Author of the said Humble Remonstrance.

Seconded (in way of appendance) with the judgment of the famous Divine of the
Palatinate, D. ABRAHAMVS SCVLTETVS, Late Professor of DIVINITY in the
UNIVERSITIE of HEIDELBERG: Concerning the Divine Right of EPISCOPACIE, and the
No-right of LAY-ELDERSHIP.

Faithfully Translated out of his Latin.

LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL BUTTER in Paul's Churchyard at the pyde-Bull
near St. Austins gate. 1641.

TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
Most dread Sovereign,
YOur Majesty was pleased to cast a gracious eye upon a late Humble
Remonstrance, made to the High Court of Parliament, bemoaning the lawelesse
frequence of scandalous Libels, and modestly asserting the true right of
Liturgy and Episcopacie. I little thought that so meek and gall-lesse a
Discourse could have irritated any the least opposition; But now, I find to my
grief, that even to move for Peace, is quarrel enough; and feel many fists
about my ears, ere I could imagine to have offended. Occasion is taken from
those quiet lines, to combine forces against the Cause I maintained. The
quarrel is insolently managed by many unknown hands; Yet, the riot of these
impotent Assailants should not easily have drawn me forth, had I not perceived
that their confident ostentation and proud carriage in this affray, has won
them some (how undeserved soever) opinion of skill, with their credulous
Abettors; and thereby, some disadvantage to my just cause. As one therefore
that hates to betray the truth by an unfaithful silence, I do cheerfully
enter these lists; rejoicing to hope that Your Majesty's Eye may be the Judge
and Witness of my success. Neither shall it be displeasing to Your Majesty,
that Your most honorable Peers, and most faithful Commons, now assembled,
shall see the injustice, and ungroundednesse of that bold Appeal, which was
made to them, by my daring Answerers; whose Abilities I tax not, but their
Fidelity I must; as those who have sought foulely to abuse their implored
Judges with false shows of mis-alledged Antiquity, and merely colorable
pretenses of proofs: Which if I do not make good to them and the world in
this ensuing Discourse, let the blemish of reputation lead way to the sharpest
censure upon the person of

Your Majesty's zealously-loyall Subject, The most humble Remonstrant.

A DEFENSE OF THE Humble Remostrance.
SECT. I.
MY single Remonstrance is encountered with a plural Adversary that talks in
the style of We, and Us: Their names, persons, qualities, numbers, I care not
to know; But, could they say, My name is Legion, for we are many; or were they
as many Legions as men, my cause, yea Gods, would bid me to meet them
undismaid, and to say with holy David, Though an host should incamp against
me, Psalm. 27.3.
my heart shall not fear: The truth of God, which I maintain, shall bear me
up against the discouragements of my confessed weakness; In which just
confidence I do gladly fly to the Bar of this high and honorable Court,
craving no favor but justice.

Besides number, these men think perhaps to carry it by bulk; for those that
spare not to condemn the multitude of my few words, lash out into so tedious
an Answer, that if I should return them a Reply in the same proportion, the
Readers eye would be tired with the very prospect, and his tongue could not but
say, Quis leget haec? But, though they have had so little mercy on him, as to
put him to the penance of their long-some Volume, I dare not abuse his leisure
in following them in every step of their loose and superfluous discourse; but
shall so contract their lavish sheets, as that whiles I save time, I shall not
lose ought of truth.

Acts 17* 22. Areopagus Mars-hill, or The C^urt of Areopagites.
And first, these brief men complain of the length of my Preface; and fetch
their grounds afar off, from the admired sons of Justice, the Areopagi: The
Areopagi? who were those? Truly my masters, I had thought this had been the
name of the place, not of the men. It is an ill sign, they say, to stumble at
the threshold. And what say the admired Areopagi, the grave Judges of Athens?
They condemn Prefaces, and Passion; neither of which can be justly charged
upon the Remonstrance: For the Passion, let any Reader judge, whether ought can
be more calmly, more mildly written; and for the Preface, brethren, your
censure is palpably mistaken; for that which you mis-call the Preface, is one
of the maine pieces of the substance of that intended Discourse, which was a
too just complaint of the shameful number of Libels, lately dropped from our
lawless Presses; A point no less considerable, nor less essential to that
proposed Remonstrance, then those, which your peremptory Analysis makes the
only subject thereof. I beseech you brethren, spend your Logique upon your own
Works, let mine be such as I contrive them.

Branded, and mislik't, etc.
Those trifling cavils which you are pleased to make at some phrases of this
mis-named Preface, are not worth notice; It is not for us to run after the
spending of every mouth: Belike, it angers you, to hear of the honesty of my
moderate Paper, out of the conscience of your own guiltiness. Feign would you
excuse that which the world cries shame on, the multitude of the late seditious
Pamphlets; whereat you might well blush in silence; when an honorable person
in open Parliament could reckon up no less then sevenscore, that had passed
the Press since the beginning of this Session.

Page 4.
Those other verbal exceptions are but light froth, and will sink alone; that
scum may be worth taking off, which follows; wherein I shall desire all
indifferent eyes to judge, whether these men do not endeavor to cast unjust
envy upon me, against the clear verdict of any knowing man's conscience: In
comparing of Governments of Churches and States, I had said, that if Antiquity
may be the rule, the Civil Polity (as in general notion) has sometimes
varied, (as that of the state of Rome had done to seven several forms) the
Sacred, never; The Civil came from arbitrary imposers, the Sacred from men
inspired: these gracious Interpreters would needs draw my words to the present,
and particular Government of our own Monarchy, as if I employed that to be
variable and arbitrary; and are not ashamed to mention that deadly name of
Treason; Whereas no man that is not wilfully blind, but sees that I speak of
the common forms of Government, that are in the several States and Dominions
in the world; whereof some are ruled by an Aristocracie, others by a
Democracie, others by a Monarchy, whether limited, or absolute, others by a
mixed form of all these; which were in the first beginnings, in the free
arbitrament of their Founders; not aiming at the settled Government of any one
Kingdom, much less of our own.

Brethren, whiles you desire to seem godly, learn to be less malicious. In
the mean time, God bless all good men from such charity, and our sacred
Monarchy from such friends. The form of the Episcopal Government of the
Church has, contrarily, been ever one and the same, without any considerable
variation; and if it have anywhere invaded the Civil administration and yoked
Monarchy, it is the insolence of the persons, not the fault of the Calling: And
if William Rufus, a Prince noted for grossly irreligious, oppressed by
tyrannical Popish Prelates, did let fall this choleric word, that he would
have the Jews confute them, and that rather then fail, England should turn
Jewish, on this condition; Is this an argument for any Christian to use, for
the confuting of godly, and loyal Protestant Bishops? which are ready to be
censured rather for too great observance of Sovereignty? Let any but a Jew
judge, whether this be a fit instance for a Christian. Any thing serves against
Episcopacie; The testimony of a Pope, (whom these men honor highly) Pius 4. is
also brought in as irrefragable, against the Divine right of Bishops. And what
says Antichrist? He tells the Spanish Ambassador, that his Master, suing for
the Councels declaration of this truth, knew not what he demanded; for Bishops
so declared, would be exempted from his Regal power, and as independent as the
Pope himself. Tell me, brethren, Do ye like, or believe this assertion,
because a Pope said it? Or can ye blame him (who would have all Episcopal
Jurisdiction derived merely from himself) to be unwilling that their right
should be yielded to have the same grounds which he pretends for his own? And
if there might be this danger in those Kingdoms where the Clergy challenges
an exemption from the power of all Secularity; why is this enviously upbraided
to those of ours, who do gladly profess, notwithstanding the Apostolical,
that is, Divine right of their calling, to hold their places and exercise of
their Jurisdiction wholly from His Majesty?

Not less spiteful, nor more true, is your observation of the comparison made
between the endeavors of alteration in our neighbor Church, by our
Episcopal faction, and that which is now justly desired by the humble
Petitioners to the honorable House. It is a foul sclander to charge the name
of Episcopacy with a faction, for the fact imputed to some few. Fie brethren,
are ye Presbyters of the Church of England, and dare challenge Episcopacie of
faction? Had you spoken but such a word in the time of holy Cyprian, whom you
frequently cite, as a pattern of good discipline, what had become of you?
Neither is the wrong less, to make application of that which was most justly
charged upon the practices, and combinations of libelling Separatists, to
humble and peaceable Petitioners; the one railing downright upon an
established and holy Government, whom I deservedly censured, the other modestly
suing for a reformation of the abuses of Government: Surely, whiles the worst
are thus patronized by our indulgent answerers, it is an hard question, Whether
the Libellers themselves, or these their mis-zealous Advocates, are more justly
to be branded for Incendiaries.

SECT. II.
AFter this overflowing of your gall, you descend to the two maine subjects of
this quarrel, Liturgy, and Episcopacy. I had truly said that our Liturgy has
been hither to esteemed sacred, reverently used by holy Martyrs, frequented by
devout Protestants, as that which has been confirmed by Edicts of religious
Princes, and our own Parliamentary Acts. And has it so? say you; Whence then
proceed so many* Additions and Alterations, that have changed the face, and
fabric thereof? Additions and Alterations? What in the present Liturgy? where
or what? tell me, I beseech you brethren, are they visible, or are they not? If
not, how come ye to see them? if so, why cannot we? perhaps somewhere in stead
of Priest, there is Minister; perhaps Absolution is interpreted by a Remission;
perhaps in private baptism, there is mention of a lawful Minister; perhaps in
stead of Purification of women, there is Thanksgiving; And can ye know the Book
when ye see it again, after these Alterations, these Additions? Is it not now
with this mis-altered Liturgy, as with the disguised Dames, mentioned of old
by D. Hall, (whom you name, I dare say, for honors sake) so misshapen by their
monstrous fashions, that their redivived Grandsires could not now know them?
Can ye but blush at this envious and groundless suggestion?

And why should not I speak of Martyrs, as the Authors and users of this holy
Liturgy? why should not we glory in their name and Authority? slight you them
as you please, we bless God for such Patrons of our good cause: What a poor
return is this? Whiles I tell you what our holy Martyrs did, You tell me what
one of our Bishops said; As if we were bound to make good every word that falls
from the mouth of every Bishop: Even of the best man we may say as the Psalmist
does of Moses, effutiit labiis, he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; As for the
words themselves; If a Bishop have said, that our Liturgy has been so wisely
and charitably framed, as that the Devotion of it yields no cause of offense
to a very Popes ear, as only aiming at an uncontroversory Piety, I see not
what heinous fault can herein be imputed to the speech, or the Author: Would
you think it requisite that we should chide, and quarrel when we speak to the
God of Peace?

It is no little advantage therefore both to our cause and Piety, that our
Liturgy is taught to speak several Languages, both for use and example; and
thereby our Church has gained much justification and honor: As for that sharp
censure of learned Mr Calvin's, Tolerabiles ineptiae, how ever it might well
have been forborne by him, In aliena republica; and by you, to press it upon
our own; we honor the name of that noble instrument of Gods glory in his
Church, yet withal, we fear not to say, without any disparagement to his
worth, That our Liturgy both in the frame, and survay of it, passed the
judgment of no less reverend heads then his own: Neither would you think it
could become any of our greatest Divines, to meddle with the wafers, or
Lord's Day markets of his charge; let every Church take care of their own
affairs.

As for that unparalleld discourse of mine, concerning the Antiquity of
Liturgies; Unparalleled, you say, because no man, that you have seen, ever drew
the line of Liturgy so high as I have done; I must tell you, that perhaps
there may be some things in the world, that may have escaped your
not-omniscient eyes, and perhaps this may be one; I cannot help your wonder,
but I shall justify my own Assertion. In the mean while, ye do almost yield
the question, ere you argue it; If by Liturgy (you say) this Remonstrant
understand an Order observed in Church assemblies, of praying, reading, and
expounding the Scriptures, administration of Sacraments, etc. Such a Liturgy
we know, and acknowledge, both Jews and Christians have used; This yielded,
what stick you at? That there were prescribed, and stinted forms composed by
particular men in the Church, and imposed upon the rest, this will not down
with you; Wherein I cannot see, how ye will avoid your own contradiction; For I
demand; Is this order of praying and administration set, or no? If it be not
set, how is it an order? and if it be a set order both for matter and form (for
you cannot, I suppose, under the name of an order, intend a mere Table, or
Rabrick) how can it be other, then prescribed? if the forms were merely
arbitrary, to what use was the prescription of an Order? and, if they were not
arbitrary, certainly they were in some sort stinted and imposed.

But what a poor exception is this? that they were composed by some particular
men; Was it ever heard that a whole Church together framed a form of prayer?
Can one uniforme expression be the original act of many thousand brains, and
tongues? Certainly, some one, or few, must mold that, which all shall both own
and use. It is a silly ostentation of Antiquity, that these men bring against
these prescribed forms of Liturgy.

Tertullian in his Apol. Chap. 30. says, The Christians of those times did in
their Assemblies pray for the Emperor, If we may not rather take it to allude
to the manner of the Heathens, who because their gods were multinomines,
according to their several powers and virtues, had certain monitors to put the
suppliants in mind of the appellations of their Deities, as Desiderius Heraldus
thinks; and to this purpose brings that of S. Augustine, cited out of Seneca;
as he reads it, Alius numina Dei subjicit; or as Lipsius, nomina; however it
cannot give the least color to the sense intended by the Answerers.
Sine monitore, quia de pectore; that is, not being urged by any superior
injunction, but freely out of the loyal inclination of their own hearts: (You
mis-english it, Without any prompter but their own hearts.) What is this to a
prescribed form? Or if they will needs so take it, why do they not as well
argue, That because our Ministers do ordinarily in their Pulpits pray for the
King in their own expressions, therefore there is no form of Liturgy
enjoined? As for their other testimony, it is less to the purpose; Who ever
denied that some things are to be asked according to every man's occasion? Do
we abridge this liberty by ordaining a public form? And if the Lords Prayer
be yielded for an ordinary and stinted form, why not others? Since the
opposers of stinted forms, do, upon the same grounds, decrie that also. Aug.
Ep. 121
S. Austin says, it is free to ask the same things that are desired in the
Lords Prayer, aliis atque aliis verbis, (in other ways of expression) who ever
doubted of it? Aug. de bon. persever. c. 22. Vtinam tardi cord sic audirent
disputationes nostras ut magis intuerentur orationes nostras, quas semper
habuit, and habebit Ecclesia ab exordiis suis, usque dum finiatur seculum.
Yet themselves will not dare to hold, that in S. Austins time, there was no
public Liturgy; this is but to mock the Reader.

Just. Mart. Apol. 2. The words are, (...): That is, with all intention; and
implied in that of the same Justin Martyr, (...).
If Justin Martyr said, that [(...)] (whom they somewhat guiltily translate, The
Instructor of the people) prayed (as they falsely turn it) according to his
ability: It is true; So do ours, and yet God be thanked we have a Liturgy,
and so had they. Neither is this liberty of pouring out our selves in our
prayers ever the more impeached by a public form, since both those may, and
do well stand together.

It is somewhat magisterially said by these men, that Set and imposed forms
were not introduced, till the Arrian and Pelagian heresies did invade the
Church; Conc. Laod. c. 19. First the prayers of the Catechumeni preceded, then
those of the Penitents followed, then those of the Faithful concluded.
And as Clerkly do they immediately confute themselves, by their own
testimonies cited out of the Council of Laodicea, which was before their
limited time, as being before the Nicene: and betwixt that and the Neocesarean.
Nothing can be more full then the Canon of that ancient Synod, (...). Con.
Laod. c. 8
That the same Liturgy of prayers should be always used both in morning and
evening. Yet to mend the matter, This (say they) was a form of a man's own
prescribing: Were it so, wherein is that the better? But how appears it? By
another Canon in a following Council, which was the third Council of
Carthage, cap. 23. As if Carthage meant to tell what was before done at
Laodicea. And what say the Fathers at Carthage? That in assisting at the Altar
(so are their words) the Prayer should be directed to the Father, and quicunque
sibi preces aliunde describit: That is, whosoever shall offer to make use of
any other form then is prescribed, should first confer with his more learned
brethren: Plainly implying the contrary to that, for which the Answerers
allege it, That the usual and allowed form was not of his own composing; and
his own must not be at his own choice. Council. Milev. 2. cont. Celest. and
Pelag.
That of the Milevitane Council is shuffled up by the Answerers, not with too
much fidelity, for where they pretend the only drift of the Council to be,
That none should use set prayers, but such as were approved of in the Synod,
The words of the Council are full and affirmative, Placuit ut preces, It is
ordered that the prayers or orisons which are allowed in the Synod, etc. shall
be used or celebrated by all men; nec aliae omnino dicantur, and that no other
shall be used in the Church, then those, etc. approved in a Synod; adding a
sound reason, ne forte aliquid, etc. Lest perhaps something may be composed by
them, through ignorance, or want of care, contrary to the Faith.

Nothing can be more plain then that our Savior prescribed to his Disciples
(besides the rules) a direct form of Prayer, whiles he says, Pray thus: Much
of which form I find cited, as of ancient use, out of the Seder Tephilloth of
the Jews of Portugal, the Antiquity whereof, as not knowing how I might avow, I
expressed my self (within three days of the first impression) in the safe
terms of the immediate edition; which these men will not be pleased to take
notice of, lest they should find their mouths to be stopped beforehand; and so
they should have lost their dear quarrel. Howsoever, that it may not seem
too strange, that our Savior should take up the forms, and usages, that had
formerly obtained; surely, that he was pleased to make use, in the Celebration
of his last, and heaven-by banquet, of both the fashions, and words which were
usual in the Jewish feasts, Cassander has well showed in his Liturgica.

The set forms of prayer, that were used at the Mincha, and other the several
occasions of the Jewish sacrifices, I find specified by learned Capellus in his
Spicilegium, to whom I refer the reader.

In the mean while, since they make such wonder of a set form, used by Gods
people, ever since Moses his time, I shall give them such a hint thereof, as
perhaps they have not heard of before: In the Samaritane Chronicle, now in the
hands of the incomparable Primate of Ireland, the Lord Archbishop of Armach, by
him procured out of the Library of the famously learned Ios. Scaliger, thus
they shall find, Post a mortuus est Adrianus (Cujus Deus non misereatur)
obiitque cum luctu magno, etc.
After relation of the death of Adrian the Emperor (whom these Jews curse
with a Deus conterat ejus ossa) which in their computation falls upon the year
4513. from Adam; Quo tempore abstulit, etc. At which time say they, ( viz. the
high Priest then living)
he took away that most excellent book which was in their hands, ever since
the calm and peaceable times of the Israelites, which contained those songs,
and prayers, which were ever used before their sacrifices; For before every of
their several sacrifices; they had their several songs, still used in those
times of peace; all which accurately written, were transmitted to the
subsequent generations, from the time of Moses, (the Legate) unto this day, by
the ministry of the high Priest; This Book, did that high Priest embezell,
wherein was contained their Genealogies, to the days of Phineas, together with
an historical enarration of the years of their generation, and life; Then
which book, there is no history besides the Books of Moses, found more
ancient; Thus that ancient Record.

Buxtorfius tells us that the Creed of R. Ben Maimon was taken out of the Jews
Liturgy.
That there were such forms in the Jewish Church we doubt not, but that they
should be deduced to the use of the Church Evangelicall, to save the labor of
their devotions, is but a poor and groundless requisition.

Those forms which we have under the names of St. James, (who was, as
Egesippus tells us, the first Bishop and Leiturgus of Jerusalem) of Basil, and
Chrysostom, though they have some intersertions which are plainly spurious,
yet the substance of them cannot be taxed for other then holy, and ancient: And
the implication of the ancient Council of Ancyra is worthy of observation,
which forbids those Presbyters that had once sacrificed, (...) to offer, or to
preach, or to serve in the holy Liturgies, or administrations; Howsoever, I
persuade my self every ingenuous reader finds reason and authority enough in
this undeniable practice of antiquity, to outface an upstart conceit, of some
giddie heads, that condemn all forms of prayer, (be they never so holy)
because such.

Now what should a man do with such sullen and crabbed pieces as these? If he
cross them in plain terms, he is false? If he comply with them in good
words, he Rhetoricates? What have I professed concerning conceived prayers, but
that which I ever allowed, ever practiced, both in private, and public? God is
a free Spirit, and so should; ours be* in pouring out our voluntary devotions,
upon all occasions; Nothing hinders, but that this liberty, and a public
Liturgy should be good friends, and may go hand in hand together; and
whosoever would forcibly sever them, let them bear their own blame; I
perceive, this is it which these techy men quarrel, and dislike, that I make
the applause of conceived prayer, but a vantage-ground to lift up the public
form of our sacred Church-Liturgy the higher; which they are indeed loath
should stand upon even terms, yea above ground, professedly wrangling, first,
at the Original, then the confirmation of it: For the first, I had said our
Liturgy was selected out of ancient modells; including in a parenthesis, [not
Roman, but Christian] and thereby signifying (as any ingenuous reader would
construe it) that our said Liturgy had no relation either to the place, or
religion of Rome, but only to the Christian and holy matter of those godly
prayers. Now these charitable men fly out into high terms, and beseech your
Honors to consider, How ye may trust these men, who sometimes speaking, and
writing of the Roman Church, proclaim it a true Church of Christ, and yet
here, Roman and Christian stand in opposition* Ignorantly, or maliciously? when
any man may see here is not an opposition meant, but a different modification:
As when the Prophet says, I am a worm, and no man, Or; the Apostle, It is no
more I, but sin, Or; I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me: Neither is any
phrase more common in our usual speech. In what sense we hold the Roman, a
true Church, is so cleared by the unanimous Suffrages of unquestionable
Divines, that this iron is too hot for their fingers. Being then thus
qualified, our Liturgy needs not be either ashamed of its original,
(published in King Edwards proclamation) or blankt with their unjust
aggravation.

The composers of it we still glory to say, were holy Martyrs, and Confessors
of the blessed Reformation of Religion; and if any rude hand have dared to cast
a foul aspersion on any of them, he is none of the Tribe I plead for, I leave
him to the reward of his own merits: Thus composed, and thus confirmed by the
recommendation of four most religious Princes, and our own Parliamentary
Acts, they dare not absolutely discharge it; but they do as they may, nibble
at it in a double exception, The one of the over-rigorous pressing of it, to
the justling out of Preaching, and conceived Prayer, which was never intended
either by the Lawmakers, or moderate Governors of the Church; The other, that
neither our own Laws, nor K. James his proclamation are so unalterable as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians. Which bold flout, how well it becomes their
gravity, and pretended obedience, we leave at either Bar.

After an over-comprehensive recapitulation of their exploits in this mighty
Section, they descend to two main Quaere's, whereof the first is, Whether it be
not fit to consider of the alteration of the present Liturgy; Intimating
herein, not an alteration in some few expressions, excepted against, but a
total alteration in the very frame of it, as their reasons import. Yes
doubtless, Sirs, ye may consider of it; it is none of the Laws of the Medes
and Persians. What if the weak judgment of K. James, upon some pretended
reasons, decreed all forbearance of any farther change? What if that silly and
ignorant Martyr, Dr Tailor, could magnify it to B. Gardner, and others, as
complete? What if great Elogies and Apologies have been cast away upon it, by
learned men, since that time? What if Innovations in Religion be cried out of,
as not to be endured? yet consider of the alteration* Neither need ye to doubt
but that this will be considered by wiser heads then your own* and whatsoever
shall be found in the manner of the expressions sit to be changed, will
doubtless be altered accordingly; but the maine fabric of it, which your
reasons drive at, my hope is we shall never see to undergo an alteration: Yet
still do you consider of this your projected alteration, whiles I consider
shortly of the great reasons of your consideration.

First, it symboliseth much with the Popish Mass* Surely neither as Mass, nor
as Popish: If an holy Prayer be found in a Roman Portuise, shall I hate it for
the place? If I find gold in the Channel, shall I throw it away because it was
ill laid? If the Devils confessed Christ the Son of God, shall I disclaim
that truth, because it passed through a damned mouth? Why should we not rather
allow those good prayers, which symbolize with all Christian piety, then reject
those which dwell amongst some superstitious neighbors?

It was composed, you say, into this frame, on purpose to bring Papists to our
Churches. Well, had it been so, the project had been charitable, and gracious.
What can be more thank-worthy, then to reclaim erring souls? But it failed in
the success. Pardon me, brethren; if it had done so, it was neither the fault
of the matter, or of the men; but it did not: In his speech at Norwich Assizes,
published.
Sir Edward Coke can tell you, that till the eleventh year of Qu. Elizabeth, all
came to Church: Those times knew no Recusant then: At last, the Jesuitish
Casuists, finding their great disadvantage by the inoffensive use of our
Liturgy, determined it utterly unlawful to join in Church Service with
Heretics. Hence came this alienation, hence this distraction, that we have
not won more; it is not the fault of our public devotion, why do you not
impute it to the want, or weakness in preaching rather? But that our Liturgy
has lost any to the Popish part, it is not more paradoxe then sclander.

M. Fisher.
whose eie-lesse head directed how to avoid those blocks, which these
quick-sights will needs see how to stumble at. But if there be found ought that
may endanger a scandal, it is under careful hands to remove it.

It is Idolized, they say, in England; they mean at Amsterdam; some Separists
have made it such; never any just Protestant: Others say rather that too many
do injuriously make an Idol of preaching; shall we therefore consider of
abandoning it? and if some one have passed an hyperbolicall praise of it, must
it therefore be marred in mending?

Multitudes of people (they say) distaste it; more shame for those that have so
mistaught them; (would God too much multitude did not, (through ill teaching)
distaste the truth of wholesome doctrine, and abhor Communion with the true
Church of Christ) shall we to humor them, abandon both?

There is a vast difference, (they say) between it and the Liturgies of all
other reformed Churches. A difference? wherein? not in the essential points,
but in some accidents, and outward formalities; Whose fault is that? ours was
before theirs; why did not they conform to us; rather, then we come back to
them? I may boldly say, ours was, and is the more noble Church; and therefore
more fit to lead, then to follow: But indeed since our Languages, and Regions
are different; what need is there, our Liturgies should be one? and why should
we be more tied to their forms, then those of all other Christians, Grecians,
Armenians, Cophs, Abassine, Arabian, Egyptian? all which differ in no less
from each other, then we from them: Consider now, brethren, whether these
reasons of a change be worthy of any consideration.

The second Quaere is so weak, that I wonder it could fall from the pens of
wise men; Whether the first reformer of religion did ever intend the use of a
Liturgy, further then to be an help in the want, and to the weakness of the
Minister; Brethren, can ye think that our Reformers had any other intentions
then all other the founders of Liturgies, through the whole Christian, yea and
Jewish Church? the least part of whose care was the help of the Ministers
weakness, and their main drift the help of the peoples devotion, that they
knowing beforehand, the matter, that should be sued for, and the words
wherewith it should be clothed, might be the more prepared to join their hearts
to the Ministers tongue, and be so much more intent upon their devotion, as
they had less need to be distracted with the doubtful expectation of the
matter, or words to be delivered.

It is no less boldly then untruly said, that all other Churches reformed,
though they use Liturgies, do not bind their Ministers to the use of them;
[Binding] is an ambiguous word; I beseech you tell me brethren, how you
construe those words of Calvin which he wrote to the Protector of England. Anno
1548. Oct. 22. Quod ad formulam precum and rituu^ Ecclesiasticorum, valde prob^
ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus discedere non liceat infunctione sua; tam
ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and imperitiae, quam ut certius ita
constet omnium inter se ecclesiarum consensus; postremo etiam, etc. That is, As
for a form of prayers, and of rites Ecclesiastical; I do greatly approve that
there be a certain one extant, from which it should not be lawful for the
Ministers in their function to depart: both that by this means provision may
be made for the simplicity, and unskilfulnesse of some, and the consent of all
Churches amongst themselves may more certainly appear; Lastly, that thus there
may be a remedy for the desultory levity of some men that affect still certain
innovations; as I have showed that the Catechism it self serves for this
purpose. So therefore there ought to be a set form of Catechism, a set form
of administration of Sacraments, and of public Prayers.
I am sure both the French, and Dutch, Churches (in both which I have been
present) require their prescribed forms, to be used both in Baptism, and in
Celebration of the Lords Supper, and in solemnization of Matrimony: And in what
rank will they place the Lutheran Churches? And if the Reformed Churches use
this liberty, what a poor handful are they to that world of Christian
Churches abroad, which do both use and enjoin their Liturgy, in that first
form we have seen urged in the Melevitane Council?

Edwards book is mis-construed, which only out of respect to the peoples ease,
and their more willing addiction to the hearing of Sermons, (which were then so
much more long as they were more rare) gave that liberty to Ministers in the
use of the Liturgy, which diverse Ordinaries at this day (upon my certain
knowledge) have often yielded unto: That Rubric imports no more then our
practice; neither of them disparages our Liturgy.

The Homilies are left free (they say) to be read or not, by preaching
Ministers; why not then the Liturgy? And if it can be thought no less then
sacrilege to rob the people of the Ministers gift in preaching, and to tie him
to Homilies, it can be no less to deprive them of their gift in Prayer. Did we
utterly abridge all Ministers of the public use of any conceived Prayer, on
what occasion soever, the argument might hold force against us; but, that being
yielded* our Liturgy is untouched: Neither were it a lesser sacrilege to rob
the people of a set form, by the liberty of a free expression: And how does
this argument more strike us then all the Churches of the Christian world,
whose preaching is out of their conception, whiles their Liturgy is enjoined?

may well stand with the freedom of a Prayer conceived: The Desk is no
hinderance to the Pulpit: He is wanting to his duty, that slackneth either
service.

then avoid them. But why more here (they say) then in other Reformed Churches?
The difference is evident, Our Churches have never been but used to a settled
Liturgy, which the ears and hearts of our people look for; Theirs, perhaps,
began without it: Yet so, as I doubt not but if any man should now refuse to
conform to their estabilished forms, he should soon feel the dint of their
censures. The like answer serves for their objected Homilies; Surely were they
enjoined to all, by lawful authority, and made so familiar to the ears of
every congregation, as the Liturgy is, some few could not forbear them
without offense; whiles withal, they should be allowed the helps of preaching:
As in this case it is done, the use of the set Liturgy being seconded by
prayers conceived. But the project is singular, That if any Ministers should
prove insufficient to discharge the duty of Prayer in a conceived way, it may
be imposed upon him as a punishment to use set forms, and no other. Never
Confessor enjoined such a penance; Never Lawmakers imposed such a mulct:
Certainly it were a more just and needful motion, that many who take upon them
to preach, (with so small abuse of Gods sacred Word) might (as in way of
correction) be enjoined only to read Homilies: But who sees not in this
overture, an utter cassation of that Liturgy which is pretended to be left
free? For if the freedom of a sole conceived prayer shall depend upon the
supposed sufficiency of the Minister, show me the man amongst five hundred of
the forward Artizans, that Will confess, or think himself insufficient for
the act, or unfurnished with the gifts of Prayer. Away then with the Book,
whiles it may be supplied with a more profitable nonsense. Surely, where God
has bestowed gifts, it is fit they should be employed, and improved to the
best advantage of his people: But where there is nothing but an empty
overweening, and proud ignorance, there is great reason for a just restraint.

SECT. III.
THus their cavils concerning the Liturgy are vanished, we descend to the
longer quarrel of Episcopacie: Where it is their ill hap to stumble again at
the entering into these Lists: beginning their answer (pardon good Reader) with
a manifest leasing; whiles they dare say, that whatsoever has been either
spoken, or written by any, either learned Divines, or well reformed Churches,
is taxed by me, as no other then the unjust clamours of weak, or factious
persons: Certainly, had I done so, I had been no less worthy to be spit upon,
for my saucy uncharitableness, then they are now for their uncharitable
falsehood: After my complaints of the many railing invectives, and scandalous
Libels published of late, I came now to bemoane my self to that high Court of
Justice, in these words; As for that form of Episcopal government which has
hitherto obtained in the Church of God, I confess I am confounded in my self
to hear with what unjust clamours it is cried down abroad, by either weak or
factious persons; Abroad (I say) in relation to both Houses, lest any malicious
person should have traduced my words, as reflecting upon any free speech, made
in either of them, against some of that calling; alluding to that impious
licentiousness of our frequent Libellers, both in the City and Country, which
shamefully revile Episcopacy, as wicked and Antichristian; Now come these
brotherly slanderers (sure the terms can be no better) and would needs
Wier-draw my words as far as France, Germany, or Geneva it self; and cry out
of my Arrogance; as condemning all Divines, all Churches; which the God of
heaven knows never came within the verge of my thoughts; Yea, if I could have
been so abominably presumptuous as to enlarge my [ abroad] to other Nations;
yet I beseech you, readers, see how well this follows; Episcopal Government is
with unjust clamours cried down abroad, by either weak or factious persons,
therefore, whosoever speaks or writes against Episcopacy, is either weak or
factious: Brethren, if you have any remainders of modesty, or truth, left in
you, cry God mercy for this egregious and palpable calumny.

Quanquam descessu veteris confusus amici,, Juvenal.
Of the same strain is their witty descant upon my confoundednesse; I made use
of the phrase, as that which is taken up by the most elegant Greek and Latin
Authors, to express extreme sorrow, these deep Philologers, (as not seeming
to know other sense) take it of a confoundednesse, through distraction; sure
the man is not in his rightwits* (...); And how so, trow we? Hear how he
raves; He talks of all peaceable and right affected sons of the Church, and
craves an admittance in all their names, whereas all could not take notice of
his book; doubtless a deep frenzy; Brethren, I am still, and shall ever be
thus selfe-confounded, as confidently to say, that he is no peaceable, and
right affected Son of the Church of England, that does not both hate Libels,
and wish well to Liturgy and Episcopacy; both which sum up my humble
Remonstrance.

But this flip, they confess, is small, that other is worthy of a large Dos of
Ellebore; that I say, Episcopal govermnent, that is, government by Diocesan
Bishops, derives it self from the Apostles times; this (they say) they cannot
but rank amongst my notorious -- speak out Masters; I would not have that word
stick in your teeth, or in your throat; And why is this truth so notorious;
Because there were no Diocesans of above an hundred years after Christ. Now
Readers, I beseech you, cast back your eyes upon those, Lines of mine, and see,
whether I make any mention at all of Diocesans, but only of the sacred
government by Episcopacy; Wanton wits must have leave to play with their own
stern; Brethren, what needs this importunity? Even selfe-confounded men do not
always speak false; What the joynt-confession of all reformed Divines is
concerning the derivation of Episcopacy from the Apostolic times, I have
elsewhere showed from some, in the name of all; and shall do again in the due
place; to what purpose were this unseasonable anticipation? Indeed no true
Divine did ever hold otherwise: The question never was, Whether Bishops were
derived from the Apostles, But what kind of Bishops they were: For us, if we
not deduce ours from them in respect of all the essentialls of our calling, let
the shame be ours. Whereas I say the government has continued without any
interruption, they ask jeeringly, What at Rome? and tell me of some places of
the world, as Scotland for example, wherein this government was never known for
many years together. Brethren, what means this, whether simplicity, or scorn?
Could ye imagine me to mean, that every place through the whole world has
had a continued Line of Bishops ever since the Apostles? sure you cannot so
wrong your own judgments; Alas, we could tell you of China, Iapan, Peru,
Brasil, New England, Virginia, and a thousand others, that never had any
Bishops to this day: Yet it is never the less safe to say, that the form of
Government by Bishops in the Christian world, derives it self (without
interruption) from the Apostles times; for as much as there has been no time
or age since them, wherein there has not been this form of Episcopal
Government continued. You tell me, that In ancient times the Scots were
instructed by Priests, and Monks, and were without Bishops two hundred and
ninety years. I acknowledge the words of Johannes Major, I wish they had not
been without, either before, or since; but what is this to my assertion? There
could be no interruption of that, which had as yet no being* neither did I ever
say that Bishops were every where.

You come to England, there you think to have me sure; you desire to know of
the Remonstrant, Whether God had a Church in England in Q. Mary's days or no?
And if so, who were then Bishops? Sure, brethren, you cannot be so ignorant as
you make your selves; Have you not seen Mr Foxes Acts and Monuments? Have you
not seen Mr Fr: Masons Vindication of our succession? Or do ye make no
difference betwixt an intermission and an interruption? Do ye not know that
even the Sea of Rome, (which would feign boast of a known succession) has yet
been without a Bishop longer then the whole reign of Qu. Mary; if we may
believe Damasus himself, after Marcellinus, for 7. years, 6. months, and 25.
days? And if after the Martyrdom of our Orthodoxe Bishops, revolted, or
Popish governors held those Sees, they were corrupt in their places, judgment,
and practice; there was not an utter abolition of their calling, which their
repentance restored to its first vigor. Where I justly aver this continuance
to have been without the contradiction of any one congregation in the Christian
world, you vainly think to choke me with a story from our own darling, Heylin,
which tells us of the furious violence of the people of Biscay against the
Bishop of Pampelona, reported also by the Spanish history: to which you refer
us; concealing yet, that which the same history relates, that this was done
upon some attempts and wrong conceived to be offered them by the Clergy.

A goodly instance, and fit for the gall of your ink, and as good a
consequence. The Biscainers upon a private quarrel are enraged against the
person of their Bishop, You might as well have told us out of the same Author,
of the strange conditions that are in use amongst them, which they impose upon
their King, if ever he come into their coast; of his riding with one leg bare,
and their mocking of him with their Maravedis.
and for his sake (for the time) against his fellows; therefore some Christian
Congregation denies the succession of Episcopal Government, from the times of
the Apostles. Of the like validity and judgment is your instance of French,
Scottish, and Belgic Churches: Who doubts of either their Christianity, or
their contradiction to Episcopacy? But if you did not wilfully both shut your
own eyes, and endeavor to blind the eyes of your Reader, you could not but
see, that I limit the time until this present age. Good brethren, whiles you
object bold falsehood to me, learn to make some conscience of truths. To let
pass your untrue suggestions concerning my assertion, of one and the same
form of Prayer continued from Moses to the Apostles, and by the Apostles, etc.
I cannot but wonder with what face you can reckon it amongst my untruths, that
Episcopal Government has continued in this Island, ever since the first
plantation of the Gospel. I challenge you before that awful Bar, to which you
have appealed, name but one year ever since Christianity had footing in
England, (which was under the British o^ Roman Government) wherein there were
no Bishops in this Land; If you can name neither year nor Author, be ashamed
to say this truth has had any contradiction, or else I hope the Readers will
be ashamed of you. What a poor shift is it to tell me of the contradiction
that Episcopacie has had since the Reformation? I can tell the world that your
selves oppose it; what of that? You mislike the Government, you cannot deny
that it has so long continued; so as my assertion continues inviolable, that
the form of this government has, without contradiction, continued here ever
since the first plantation of the Gospel.

The man runs on still, you say, and as thinking to get credit to his untruths
by their multiplication, dares boldly say, that except all Histories, all
Authors, fail them, nothing can be more certain then this truth: and here you
cry out, Os durum! and aggravate the matter enviously, by the instance of
Divine truths, concerning the maine points of our holy Creed: But, good sirs,
do ye bethink whom you speak to? Could you suppose to meet with so mean
readers, as should not know that no phrase is more ordinary in our hourly
discourse, Yet the words of the Remonstrance are not, nothing can be a more
certain truth, but, nothing can be more plain then this truth.
then this; when we would co^fidently affirm any truth, to say, It is so true
as nothing can be truer? Not to enter into any metaphysicall discourse
concerning the being, or degrees of truth, (wherein some that would be wise,
may perhaps have lost themselves) would any man think it reasonable, that upon
such an ordinary and familiar assertion he should be called to account for the
articles of his Creed, and be urged to compare his truth with Gods? Away with
this witless and malicious intimation: Pardon me Readers, that I have spent so
much time and paper, in following these triflers so close; their uncharitable
suggestions drew me on, Judge ye now whether of us have more just cause of
indignation.

SECT. IIII.
HItherto they have flourished, now I hope they will strike; against the
Libellers importune projects of innovations, I urged that were this Ordinance
merely humane, or Ecclesiastical, if there could be no more said for it, but
that it is exceeding ancient, of more then 1500. years standing, and in this
Island of the same age with the Gospel it self, this might be a just reason to
make men tender of admitting a change; an argument which I seconded with so
rational inforcement, as will I doubt not prevail with all unpartiall
judgments: Now my witty Answerers tell me this is an argumentum Galeatum (and
that the Reader may know they have seen a Father, cite Hierome, who gave that
title to a Prologue, but never to an argument) and as if arguments were
Almanacks, tell us, It was Calculated for the Meridian of Episcopacy, and may
indifferently serve for all Religions. Truly brethren, you have not well taken
the height of the Pole, nor observed a just zenith; for could you say so much
for the Presbyteriall government, had it continued here so long, I should never
yield my vote to alter it; an uninterrupted course of so many years should
settle it still: So as you are plainly deceived, the argument is not calculated
for the Meridian of Episcopacy; but for whatsoever government; if so long time
have given it peaceable possession, there had need to be strong reasons of Law,
for an ejection; But that it may serve for all Religions, it is but an envious
suggestion; unless you add this withal, save where the ground of the change
is fully convictive, and irrefragable; in which cause both the mouths of Jews,
and Heathens, and Papists, and your own may be justly stopped.

As for that overworne observation of Cyprian, that our Savior says, I am the
way, the truth, and the life; but does not say, I am custom, it is no less
plausible then useful, but if we regard soundness of ratiocination, it is an
Illustration merely negative: so we may say, he says not, I am reason, I am
experience, I am authority; and yet authority, experience, reason are worthy
to sway with us, in all matters of question: and withal, He that said, I am
the way, said, that the old way was the good way: and if Custom without Truth
(as that Father said well) be nothing but a gray-hair'd Error; or, as Sir
Francis Bacon wittily, Antiquity without Truth is a Cipher without a Figure;
yet where Custom and Antiquity are backed with Truth, there they are Figures
multiplied with many Ciphers.

As for the time wherein their learned Ancients affirm, The Church not to have
been governed by Bishops, but by Presbyters, and for the difference pretended
to be betwixt the Primitive Bishops and ours, we shall meet with it in such
due time and place, as shall be justly occasioned: What needs this frivolous
waste of unseasonable words? wherewith unless these men desired to swell up
this their windy bulk, why do they tell us yet again, of that already
answered, and groundless exception; against both their own eyes, and
conscience; where I say, that this government has continued in this Island;
ever since the plantation of the Gospel without contradiction; when as they
cannot name any man in this Nation that ever contradicted Episcopacie, till
this present age, or that ever contradicted this truth, that Episcopacy has so
long continued in this Island; which is the only drift of my words; For alas,
could I be so simple as not to know that this age has bred opposition enough
to the present government? could I doubt whether these very men oppose it? Yet,
let the boldest forehead of them all deny that it has continued thus long in
this our Island, or say that any till this age contradicted it; so as that my
assertion is just, their exception false; and vain: As for that supply of
accessory strength, which I did not beg, but raise and evince from the light of
nature and rules of just policy, for the continuance of those things, which
long use and many laws have firmly established, as necessary, and beneficial;
it will stand long enough, against the battery of their Paper-pellets; If some
statute Laws, which seemed once necessary, and beneficial, proving afterward,
in process of time, noxious and burdensome, have been justly, and wisely
repealed; Let them tell me, whether the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
upon any man's abuse, may be subject to alteration, or whether rather their
Wisdoms would not think fit to determine that the Laws must stand, and the
abuses be removed; such is the cause we have now in hand, and if we shall go
less: I speak not against an impossibility, but an easiness of change, the
question being so stated (which their guiltiness would willingly overlook)
that things indifferent, or good, having been by continuance and general
approbation well rooted in Church and State, may not upon light grounds be
pulled up.

SECT. V.
I Justly fetch the pedigree of our holy calling from no less then
Apostolical (and in that right, Divine) institution, and prove it from the
clear practice of their immediate successors, and justly triumph in that
confidence. They tell me of one scruple yet remaining; It is well, if there be
no more: And what may that be? That in Original authority of Scripture,
Bishops and Presbyters went originally for the same. Alas, brethren, what
needed this to be a scruple in your thoughts, or your words, when it is in
express terms granted by us? That there was at first a plain Identity in
their denomination; here is one page, and that not without some labor of
proofs, idly lost.

It is true, that the Remonstrant undertakes to show a clear and received
distinction of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, (out of the undeniable
writings of those holy men, which lived in the times of the Apostles, and after
them) with an evident specification of their several duties: And what say my
Answerers to this? Yet, say they, Let us tell him, that we never find in
Scripture these three Orders, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons. Brethren, ye might
have spared to tell me that which I had told you before: I speak of the
monuments of immediate succession to the Apostolic times; Ye, of the writings
of the Apostles themselves: How then do you either answer, or oppose my
assertion? Although I must also tell you, that though in the Apostolic
Epistles there be no nominall distinction of the titles, yet there is a real
distinction and specification of the duties, as we shall see in due place.

That ye may seem not to say nothing, and may make your Readers believe you are
not quite forsaken of Antiquity, ye call Hierome, Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Irenaeus, and Cyprian, to the Book: And what evidence will they give for you?
That the names of Bishops and Presbyters were not at first distinguished, but
used (...), in a promiscuous sense, and that some succeeding Bishops of Rome
were styled Presbyters; This is all: but that your trifling may appear to all
the World, Name but any one of our Writers, who have hitherto stood up in the
cause of Episcopacie, that has not granted and proclaimed this which you
contend for: Although withal, let me tell you, that you could not have brought
a stronger argument against your selves: for hence the world shall see how
little force can be drawn from the name to the thing, since the mentioned
Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, Bishops of Rome, are so famously known to
have been in an height of elevation above Presbyters; And since Cyprian, who is
styled by his Presbyters, Frater, is never found to style his Presbyters,
Bishops; And being an holy Bishop himself, in many Epistles, stiffly maintains
the eminence of his superiority; And is some-whiles honored with the title of
Beatissimus Papa Cyprianus, which I suppose was never given to a mere
Presbyter: But what do I here follow them who confess themselves out of the
way? At last acknowledging, that their adversaries confess, that which they
would needs spend time to prove; let the names pass; All the question is of
the distinction of their offices, which they will follow as tediously as loosly.

And first they would feign know what we make the distinct office of a Bishop,
wherein they fall somewhat unhappily, upon the very words of that branded
Aerius; Is it, say they, to edify the Church by Word and Sacraments? Is it to
ordain others to that worked? Is it to rule, to govern by admonition, and by
other censures? any, or all of these belong unto the Presbytery. Compare now
the words of Aerius, as they are related by Epiphanius, whom that Father brings
in speaking thus, concerning Episcopacy and Presbytery, There is one order of
both, one honor, one dignity; the Bishop imposes hands, so does the Presbyter;
the Bishop does administer Gods worship or service, so does the Presbyter; the
Bishop sits on the throne, so does also the Presbyter: See reader and
acknowledge the very phrases of that man, whom holy antiquity censured even in
this point both for a frantic man, (...). Epiph.
and an heretic; Brethren, God speed you well with your Question; As for the
first, which is edifying the Church by Word, and Sacraments, we make no
difference, your distance may; we both hold it our work and make it so; and if
any one have been slack herein, the fault is personal, we neither defend, nor
excuse it. The maine quarrel you grant to be in the second, which is the power
of Ordination; impropriated (as you enviously and untruly speak) to our
selves: This you say was in former times in the hands of the Presbyters, and
undertake to prove it from 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift which was given
thee by Prophecy, and by laying on the hands of Presbytery, a place that has
received answer (...); which I wonder ye can so press, when Calvin himself,
(as you well know) in his learned Institutions, even in his last, and ripest
judgment, construes it quite otherwise; taking it of the office, and not of
the men; (however elsewhere otherwise) wherein he also follows the judgment
of Jerome, Primasius, Anselme, Haymo, Liranus, Erasmus, and others; as our
learned Bishop Downam has largely showed.

To countenance this sense of yours, you tell us, you find (...), so taken in
Scripture; and cite Luc. 22.66. and Act. 22.5. Wherein you do merely delude the
reader; you find indeed the Elders of the people so called, but the Elders of
the Church never; to make good your own construction therefore, you must
maintain that Laymen did and must lay on hands in Ordination, which Calvin
himself utterly abominates.

Neither need we to give any other satisfaction to the point, the^ that which
we have from S. Paul himself, 1 Timothy 3.6. Stir up the gift of God which is
in thee by the imposition of my hands; mine, not others: I ask then, Was
Timothy ordained more then once? once surely S. Paul's hands were laid upon him,
when therefore the Presbyters? Yes, you say, this was a joint act of both, else
the Harmony of Scripture is not maintained; Pardon me Brethren, if I think Mr.
Calvin was more skilled in the harmony of Scripture then our selves, yet in his
ear it sounded well, that (...), should be the Office to which Timothy was
ordained by Paul, and not a company of men that ordained him; Yet give me leave
to marvel how you can have the boldness to say, This power is communicated to
Presbyters, when you know that not only other Antiquity, but even Hierome
himself and that Council of Aquisgrane which you cite, do still except
Ordination, which yet we do not so appropriate, as to lay our hands alone upon
the head of any Presbyter.

The third part of our office consists in Ruling; which though our Bishops (you
say) assumed to themselves, you will discover to have bin committed to, and
exercised by Presbyteriall hands. For evidence whereof you cite Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, for they watch for your souls. Brethren,
what an injurious imputation is this? Do we not give you the title of Rectores
Ecclesiarum? Do we not in your institution commit to you regimen animarum? Why
will ye therefore bear your Readers in hand, that we herein rob you of your
right? It is true, that here is a just distinction to be made, betwixt the
government of souls, in several Congregations, and the government of the
Church, consisting of many Congregations; that task is yours, this is the
Bishops, wherein their rule yet, is not Lordly, but brotherly, or paternall;
your argument reaches not home to this, and yet you strain that place of 1
These. 5.12. beyond the due breadth, whiles you tenter it out to either a
paritie, or community of censure.

Enjoy now what you have so victoriously purchased, but give me leave to sum
up my reckonings also. Since then (how ever the name was at first promiscuously
used, yet) the Office of Bishops, and Presbyters differed, even by Apostolic
Institution: and the Acts pertaining thereto, of Ordination, and power of
ordinary government and censures, were in that very first age of the Church
manifestly differenced; therefore Bishops and Presbyters were not one.

SECT. VI.
THE practice of the Apostles is so far from contradicting their rules,
(which your brotherly charity would fasten upon my assertion) as that it is a
most clear proof, and illustration of it; Their practice is irrefragable in
the charge, which they gave to Timothy, and Titus, as we shall prove in due
place: Now if to this we shall add the unquestionable gloss of the more
clear practice of their immediate successors, I know not what more light can
be desired for the manifestation of this truth. Whereto ye boldly answer, If
this gloss corrupt not the text, we shall admit it; implying therein, too
presumptuously, that the universal practice of the whole Primitive Church
succeeding the Apostles, may prove a Burdeaux-glosse to mar the Text.

Brethren, go you your own way, let me err with such guides: But ye are
disposed to be liberal; somewhat ye will grant us, besides that which we grant
you. It is agreed, that the name of Bishops and Presbyters were at first
promiscuously used; It is yielded by you, That in process of time, some one was
honored with the name of Bishop, and the rest were called Presbyters. But
what, I beseech you, was this process of time? Here lies your either error, or
fraud: We do justly and confidently defend, that this time had no process at
all; it was in the (...) of the living Apostles, which we shall plainly make
good in the sequel. It is also yielded, that this was not [ nomen inane,] but
seconded with some kind of imparity. What then is the difference? All the
question, you say, is of divine right, and Apostolical institution of this
imparity. Let me beseech the Reader to consider seriously of the state of this
difference, in the mistaking whereof I have, not a little, unjustly suffered;
And to remember how I have expressed it in my Remonstrance, fetching the
pedigree of Episcopacy from Apostolical (and therefore, in that right, Divine)
institution: And interpreting my self not to understand by [ divine right] any
express Law of God requiring it, upon the absolute necessity of the being of a
Church, but an institution of Apostles, inspired by the holy Ghost, warranting
it where it is, and requiring it where it may be had. Now whether it may be
thus Apostolical, or a merely humane and Ecclesiastical invention, is the
question in hand.

On your part, you say, stand Jerome, and Ambrose. Two stiff champions indeed.
And surely I must needs confess, this is the only countenance of your cause,
which yet has been blanked more then once. Jerome tells us, you say, right down
in Tit. 1. Ide^ est ergo Presbyter, etc. Out of whose testimony you in sum
collect, That A Presbyter and a Bishop were originally one: That the imparity
was grounded upon Ecclesiastical custom: That before this priority, the
Church was governed by the common Council of Presbyters, and that Bishops
ought still so to govern: And lastly, that The occasion of this imparity, was
the division, which through the Devils instinct fell among Christians. You look
now that I should tell you that the Book is of uncertain credit, or that Jerome
was a Presbyter, and not without some touch of envy to that higher dignity he
missed; or that wiser men then your selves have censured him in this point, for
Aerianisme: I plead none of these, but whiles you expect that I should answer
to Jerome, I shall set Jerome to answer for himself. For the first, I cannot
but put you in mind, that the same Father citing the words of the Bishop of
Jerusalem, That there is no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter,
passes a Satis imperite upon it: but let it be so.

At first, he says, Bishops and Presbyters had but one title. So say we too;
But when began the distinction? Ye need not learn it of Saravia, he himself
tells you, When divisions began: And when that? When they began to say, I am
Paul's, I am Apollo's, I am Cephas; which was (I think) well and high in the
Apostles time: But this you would cleanly put of, as spoken by Jerome in the
Apostles phrase, not of the time of the Apostle: This is but a general
intimation of contentions arisen (though later) in the Church. Excuse me
Brethren, this shift will not serve your turn: Then, belike, there should have
been no distinct Bishops till after-ages, upon this ground, that till then
there were no divisions: Or if so, why should the remedy be so late after the
disease? Or how comes he elsewhere to name Bishops made by the Apostles, and to
confess that before his time there had been many successions? Besides, he
instanceth in the peculiar mis-challenging of Baptism, which only S. Paul
specifieth in his own time: And Clemens seconds him in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, in taxing the continuance of those distractions; so as by Ieroms
own confession, Episcopacy was ordained early within the Apostles times.

But then, say you, It was not of Apostolical intention, but of Diabolical
occasion: Weakly and absurdly; As if the occasion might not be devilish, and
the institution divine: As if the best Laws did not rise from the worst
manners. Were not the quarrels betwixt the Grecians and Hebrews for the
maintenance of their widows, an evil occurrence? yet from the occasion thereof
was raised the Ordination of Deacons in the Church.

Yea but Jerome says, This was rather by the custom of the Church, then by
the truth of the Lords disposition. True, it was by the Custom of the Church,
but that Church was Apostolical; not by the Lords disposition immediately: for
Christ gave no express rule for it, but mediately it was from Christ, as from
his inspired Apostles. Let Jerome himself interpret himself, who tells us
expressly in his Epistle to Euagrius, this superiority of Bishops above
Presbyters, is by Apostolical tradition; which is as much as we affirm. And
whiles he says, ( toto orb decretum est) that in the time of those first
divisions, it was decreed all the world over, that Bishops should be set up; I
would feign know, by what power (besides Apostolical) such a Decree could be
so soon and so universally enacted. But Jerome says, The Presbyters governed
the Church by their common Counsel: So they did doubtless altogether, till
Episcopacy was settled; who dares deny it? Yea, but he says, They ought to do
still: So say we also, and so in some cases we do: Church Government is
Aristocraticall. Neither is any Bishop so absolute, as not to be subject to the
judgment of a Synod: Yea in many matters it is determined by our Laws, that
he must take the advice and assistance of his Ecclesiastical Presbytery.

So then, S. Jerome is in his judgment no back friend of ours, but in his
History he is our Patron. With what forehead can they persuade their Reader,
the Original of Episcopacie was not in Ieroms opinion so early, when they
cannot but confess that the same Father has, in flat terms, told us, that
James was Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy of Ephesus, Titus of Crete, that ever
since the time of Mark the Evangelist, (who died five or six years before
Peter and Paul, and almost forty years before S. John) at Alexandria, (till the
days of Heraclas and Dionysius) the Presbyters have always chosen one to be
their Bishop.

As for those poor negative arguments which follow, palpably begging the
question, they are scarce worthy of a pass; were it not, that by them they
go about to confute their own Author, affirming, That upon occasion of
divisions, Episcopacie was constituted: but he stands so close to his own
grounds, as that (contrary to their mis-allegation of Dr Whitakers) he plainly
tells them, Episcopacie is so proper a remedy for this evil, that unless the
Bishop have a peerlesse power, there will be as many Schisms as Priests; the
woeful experience whereof we find in the miserable varieties of Separatisme,
at this day. Go on, Brethren, since you are so resolved, to strike that
friend, whom you bring in to speak for you; teach your advocate S. Jerome, how
unlikely it is, that the Apostles should give way (as he professes they did) to
such a remedy, as might prove both ineffectuall, and dangerous; and that their
holiness should make a stirrup for Antichrist.

We looked for Ambrose to come in next; and, behold, you bring in a foisted
Commenter; a man by the convictions of Whitakers, Spalatensis, Cocus, Rivetus,
Bellarmine, Possevine, Maldonate, (as has been elsewhere showed) of not a
suspected only, but a cracked credit: If it mattered much, what he said, I
could out of his testimony pick more advantage then you prejudice to my
cause: But, if you will hear the true Ambrose speak; Amb. de dignit^ Sacerd.
c. 3.
he tells you; There is one thing which God requires of a Bishop, another of a
Presbyter, another of a Deacon; As for the persons who brought in this
imparitie, you tell us out of the same Authors, The Presbyters themselves
brought it in? Witness Jerome ad Euagrium. The Presbyters of Alexandria did
call him their Bishop, whom they had chosen from among themselves, and placed
in an higher degree: But, brethren, what means this faithless and halved
citation? Had you said all, the place would have answered for it self; the
words are, Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelistausque ad Heraclam and
Dionysium Episcopos, Pr^sbyteri semper unum ex se electu^, in excel siori gradu
collocatum, Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat, etc.
Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista, etc. For at Alexandria ever since
Mark the Evangelist, until the times of Heraclas and Dionysius, Bishops, the
Presbyters have always called one (chosen out of themselves, and placed in an
higher degree) Bishop, as if an army should choose their General. Why did you
avoid the name of [ Mark the Evangelist] but that your hearts told you, that he
dying many years within the time of the Apostles, this election, and
appellation, and distinction of degrees of Bishops and Presbyters, must needs
have been in the life time of the Apostles; and not without their knowledge and
approbation? The Presbyters then chose their Bishops: who doubts it? The holy
Ghost made you Bishops, or Overseers.
But upon whose order, and Institution save that which S. Paul to the
Superintendents met at Miletus, Acts 20. Spiritus sanctus vos constituit
Episcopos? I marvel Brethren, with what face you can make Jerome say, that the
Presbyters themselves were the Authors of this imparity, when as himself has
plainly ascribed this to Gods own work; when reading that, Esaias 60.17. I will
make thy Officers peace, (according to the Septuagint) (...), etc. I will give
thy Princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righteousness, he applies this to the
Governors of the Evangelicall Church: and the blessed Martyr and Bishop S.
Cyprian, to the same purpose; The Deacons (says he) must remember that the
Lord himself chose Apostles, that is, Bishops, but Deacons were chosen by the
Apostles themselves.

And when ye cannot but know, that the Apostles themselves were the immediate
actors in this business; if at least ye will believe the Histories, and
Fathers of the Church; Irenaeus tells you plainly, that the Apostles Peter and
Paul, delivered the Episcopacy of that Church to Linus: and, that Polycarpus
was by the Apostles made Bishop, in Asia, of the Church of Smyrna: and
Tertullian particularly, that Polycarpus was there placed by S. John.

And S. Chrysostom clearly says, that Ignatius was not only trained up with
the Apostles, (...).
but that he received his Bishopric from them; (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
Edition. Savil. p. 499.
and emphatically, that the hands of the blessed Apostles touched his holy head.

And lastly, the true Ambrose, (to the shameing of that Counterfeit, whom you
bring forth under that name) tells you, that Paul saw James at Jerusalem,
because he was made Bishop of that place, by the Apostles: your slip may talk
of a Council, wherein this was done: but this is as false, as himself: It is
well known there never was any such Council in the Christian world: since, the
first general Synod was the Nicene. And Ieroms [toto orb Decretum] as we have
showed, could import no other, then an Apostolical act: Aug. F p. 19.
As for S. Augustine, Is it not a just wonder, Reader, that these men dare cite
him for their opinion, (upon occasion of a modest word concerning the
honorable title of Episcopacy) when as they cannot but know, and grant, that
he has blazoned Aerius for an heretic, merely for holding the same Tenet
which they defend?

Lastly, if Gregory Nazianzen in a pathetick manner have wished the abolition
of Episcopacie, (as he never did) what more dislike had he shown to it, then he
did to Synods, when he said ((...), etc.) that he never knew good come of them?
But reader, it will be worth the while, to inquire into the fidelity of these
men's allegations; Do but consult the place of Nazianzen, and thou shall ^^nd
that he speaks not particularly of Episcopacie, but of all (...), or
precedencie, and of all quarrelsome challenges of place, and all tyrannical
carriage of one man toward another, Greg. Naz. Orat. 28. (...), etc. (...),
etc.
wishing that there were no standing upon points of precedence, but every man
might be respected according to his virtue: and adding at last ( Nunc autem
dextrum hoc, et sinistrum, et medium latus, etc.) But now (says he) the right
hand, and the left, and the middle place, and the higher and lower degree, and
going before, and going cheek by jole, what a world of troubles have they
brought upon us? Thus he. See then, Reader, what a testimony, here is for the
utter abolition of Episcopacy, from a man who was so interessed in the calling,
that he was wont to be styled by his adversaries (...), The Bishop of three
Sees: By this judge, reader, of the rest. So then, after all the clamours, and
colorable pretenses of these men, this imparity and jurisdiction was conveyed
from the Apostles hands, and deduced in an uninterrupted Line, through all
following ages to this present day.

How can this be (say they) unless our Bishops will draw the Line of their
pedigree, through the lines of Antichrist, and join issue, and mingle blood
with Rome? For shame, Brethren, eat this word; What? are there no Bishops but
at Rome? Is the whole Church all the world over Antichristian, even those,
which are no less angry at Rome then your selves? Has not Episcopal
imparitie continued in them, all this while? Is there no distinction to be had
betwixt the calling, and the abuse? If the Antichristian Church have had
Bishops; so it has had Churches, Scriptures, Baptism, Learning, Creeds;
Because we have all these with them, will ye say we deduce them from the loins
of Antichrist? Away with this impotent spite, and uncharitableness; and
learn to be more modest and true in your assertions, and less confident in
your appeals.

SECT. VII.
LEt me balk your idle words; the question is of the difference betwixt our
present Bishops, and the ancient, this you will spread forth in three
particulars; The first is the manner of Election, to these places of eminence;
which was, of old, ordered, by the privity, consent, and approbation of the
people, which you eagerly seek to prove out of Cyprian: neither can it be
denied that he is full, and punctual in this point: Holy Athanasius seconds
it; And the old rule was: Electio clericorum, consensus Principis, petitio
plebis; that a Bishop came in by the suite of the people, the Election of the
Clergy, the consent of the Prince. Ye might well have in this case spared the
fetching in of the good Emperor Constantine: doubtless this was the manner of
old; what variations followed afterward in these proceedings, our learned Dr.
Field has well showed; but sure, this interest of the people continued so
long, even in the Roman Church, that Platina can tell us, Platina in vita Greg.
7.
Gregory the seventh was elected by Cardinals, Clerks, Acoluthites,
Subdeacons, Priests, Abbots, Bishops, Clergy, and Laity: The inconveniences
that were found in those tumultuarie elections, and the seditious issue of them
(which Nazianzen and Eusebius have laid before us in some particulars) were, I
suppose, the cause why they were (in a sort) laid down; But an imitation of
this practice, we have still continuing in our Church, wherein upon the vacancy
of every See, there is a Conge-d'eslire (that is, a leave to elect) sent down
from the King, to the Presbyters ( viz. the Deane and Chapter of that Church)
for an ensuing election of their Bishop; and, if this were yet more free, we
should not like it the less: But, in the mean time, Brethren, how are you
quite beside the Cushion? Where the objection was, That the Apostles Bishops,
and ours were two, in respect of managing their function; And my defense is,
that our Bishops challenge not any other Spiritual power, then the Apostles
delegated to Timothy and Titus, you now tell us, of the different manner of our
Elections; What is this ad Rhombum? we speak of their actions, and exercise of
power, you talk of others actions to them; Were it so pleasing to his Majesty
and the State, to decree it, we should be well content to submit to this
ancient form of Election; the forbearance whereof, is neither our fault, nor
our prejudice: so as you might well have bestowed this breath to a better
purpose, and rather conclude, that notwithstanding this form of different
choice, our Bishops and those of former times are not two.

SECT. VIII.
WE follow you into the execution of our Episcopal Office, wherein you will
show ours, and the Apostles to be two; so clearly, that he who will not
wilfully shut his eyes, may see a latitude of differences, and that in three
points: The first, in sole jurisdiction, which you say, was a stranger, yea a
monster to former times, and will make it good by the power of (that, which in
all wise writers was wont to be contra-distinguished) Ordination.

For this maine point, let my Answerers know, that the Ordination is the
Bishops, but the sole (in their sense) is their own: neither did our Bishops
ever challenge it, as theirs alone, without the Presbyters, but as principally
theirs, with them: so, as if the power be in the Bishop, the assistance is from
them, the practice in both: so is it in the Bishops, that ordinarily and
regularly it may not be done without them, and yet ordinately, it may not be
done without them by the Bishop: which has bin so constantly, and carefully
ever observed, that I challenge them to show any one instance in the Church of
England to the contrary; Say Brethren, I beseech you, after all this noise,
what Bishop ever took upon him to ordain a Presbyter alone, or without the
concurrent imposition of many hands? Cypr. Ep. 33.
They, no less then Cyprian, can say, Ego and collegae; Although I must tell
you this was in the case of Aurelius, made a Lector; And in that other
testimony, which you cite out of his Epistle 58. he speaks only of the
fraternities consent, and approbation, not of their concurrence in their act;
this is small game with you.

Neither is it less the order of the Church of England then of the Council of
Carthage, Cum ordinatur Presbyter, etc. When a Presbyter is ordained, the
Bishop blessing him, and holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters
that are present, shall likewise lay their hands upon his head, with the hands
of the Bishop: With what conscience can ye allege this, as to choke us in our
contrary practice; when you know this is perpetually, and unfailably done by
us? But now, that the Readers may see how you shuffle, show us but one instance
of a Presbyters regular and practiced ordaining without a Bishop, and carry the
cause; else you do but abuse the Reader with an ostentation of proving what was
never denied.

But here, by the way, brethren, you must give me leave to pull you by the
sleeve, and to tell you of two or three foul scapes, which will try whether
you can blush. First, Fi^mil Cyp^ian. Epist. 75.
that you abuse Firmilianus in casting upon him an opinion of Presbyters
ordaining, which he never held; He, in his Epistle to Stephen Bishop of Rome,
speaking of the true Church in opposition to heresies, describes it thus, ( Vbi
praesident majores natu, qui and baptizandi, and manum imponendi, et ordinandi
possident potestatem: under this name expressing those Bishops; who presiding
in the Church, possess the power of Baptizing, Confirming, Ordaining; you
injuriously Wire-draw him to Presbyters, and foist in [ Seniores et
Praepositos] which are far from the clause and matter. Be convinced with the
more clear words of the same Epistle, Apostolis, et Episcopis, qui illis
vicaria Ordinatione successerunt.

Secondly, that you bewray gross ignorance in translating Ambroses [Presbyteri
consignant] by Presbyters ordaining; Who, that ever knew what belonged to
antiquity, would have been guilty of such a solecisme: when every novice
knows, that, consigning, signifies confirmation, and not ordaining?

Thirdly, you discover not too much skill in not distinguishing of the
Chorepiscopi: some whereof had both the nature and power of Episcopacy to all
purposes, and therefore might well by the Bishops license in his own charge
impose hands, others not; And less fidelity, in citing the Council of
Antioch, can. 10. and the 13. of the Council of Ancyra, if it were not out of
our way, to fetch them into trial.

Lastly, I cannot but tell you that you have merely cast away all this labor,
and fought with your own shadow; for, how ever it were not hard to prove, that
in the first times of the Church it was appropriated to the Bishop, to Ordain,
(which you cannot but confess out of Jerome, and Chrysostom) yet, since we
speaking of our own time and Church, do both profess and practice an
association of Presbyters with us, in the act of Ordination, whom have you all
this while opposed? It is enough that you have seemed to say something, and have
shown some little reading, to no purpose.

SECT. IX.
YEt still, you will needs beat the air very furiously, and fight pitifully
with your selves; Alas, brethren, why will ye take so much pains to go
wilfully out of your way, and to mis-lead the reader with you? Who ever
challenged (in that sense which you feign to your selves) a sole Jurisdiction?
Why will you with some show of learning confute that, which you yield us to
confess? we confess this [ sole] cried down by store of Antiquity; we do
willingly grant that Presbyters have, To this purpose is that which you cite
out of Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 5.
and ought to have, and exercise a jurisdiction within their own charge, in
foro conscientiae; we grant that in all the great affairs of the Church, the
Presbyters, whether in Synodes, or otherwise, ought to be consulted with;
Alluded to in that usual allegation of Ambrose.
we grant that the Bishops had of old their Ecclesiastical Council of
Presbyters, with whose advise they were wont to manage the greatest matters,
and we still have so; for to that purpose serve the Deanes and Chapters; and
the Laws of our Church frequently make that use of them; we grant, that
Presbyters have their votes in provincial Synods: But we justly say that the
superiority of jurisdiction is so in the Bishop, as that Presbyters neither
did, nor may exercise it without him; and that the exercise of external
jurisdiction is derived, from, by, under him to those which execute it within
his Dioces. Thus, it is to Timothy that S. Paul gives the charge concerning the
rebuke of an Elder, or not receiving an accusation against him; It is to Titus
that S. Paul leaves the ((...)) correction of his Cretians; Thus, the Canons of
the Apostles; (...), etc. Thus the blessed Martyr Ignatius in his undoubted
Epistle to those of Smyrna, (...), etc. Let no man do any thing, (...).
in matters belonging to the Church, without the Bishop. Thus the Council of
Antioch orders, that whatsoever belongs to the Church, is to be governed,
managed, and disposed, by the judgment and authority of the Bishop, Council.
Antioch. c. 24, 25.
who has (...), the power of those things which belong to the Church.

It were easy to surfeit the readers eyes, with the clear testimonies of
Fathers, and Counsels, to this purpose. Our learned Bishop Downam has given a
world of instances of the several acts of jurisdiction, appropriated to
Bishops by antiquity, B. Down. def. l. 3. chapter 5.
exercised upon both Laics, and Clergy: to him I remit my reader; So as, you
may easily set antiquity together by the ears, in this point, if you please;
but surely, the advantage will be so far on our side, that if you have not
ten for one against you, I will yield my cause.

There is great difference of times, and in them of fashions: In those
persecuted times, when the Church was backed with no Christian Magistrate, it
was no boot to bid the guides of the Church to combine their Councels, and to
give strength to their mutual actions: when a general peace once blessed
them, and they had the concurrence both of sovereign and subordinate authority
with them, they began so much to remit of this care of conjoyning their forces,
as they supposed to find less need of it. From hence grew a devolution of all
less weighty affairs to the weilding of single hands. For my part, I persuade
my self, that the more frequent communicating of all the important business
of the Church, whether censures or determinations, with those grave assistents,
which in the eye of the Law are designed to this purpose, were a thing not
only unprejudiciall to the honor of our function, but very behovefull to the
happy administration of the Church.

In the mean while, see brethren, how you have with Simon fished all night, and
caught nothing. My word was, that ours were the same with the Apostles Bishops,
in this, that they challenge no other spiritual power then was by Apostolic
authority delegated to Timothy and Titus: You run out upon the following times
of the Church, and have with some wast quotations labored to prove, that In
after ages, Bishops called in Presbyters to the assistance of their
jurisdiction; which is as much to me, as Baculus stat in angulo.

SECT. X.
YOur next Section runs yet wilder: I speak of the no-difference of our Bishops
from the first, in the challenge of any spiritual power to themselves, other
then delegated to Timothy and Titus; You tell me of delegating their power to
others. What is this to the nature of the calling? Does any man claim this as
essential to his Episcopacie? Does any man stand upon it, as a piece of his
spiritual power? If this be granted to be an accidental error of some
particular man, (for it cannot be fastened upon all) what difference does it
make in the substance of the function? As if some monster suddenly presented it
self to you, you ask, Was ever such a thing heard of in the best primitive
times? that men which never received imposition of hands, should not only be
received into assistance, but be wholly entrusted with the power of spiritual
jurisdiction? Let me ask you again, Was ever such a thing heard of, either in
the Primitive, or following times, that Laymen should be so far admitted to
the managing of spiritual jurisdiction, as to lay their hands upon their
Ministers in their Ordination? Howsoever it is now in some Reformed Churches
laid down.
Yet this is both done and challenged by too many of your good friends. Why do
you object that to us, wherewith the Presbyterian part may be more justly
choked? But herein, Brethren, you do foulely overreach, in that you charge
our Bishops, as in a generality, with wholly-intrusting the power of spiritual
jurisdiction to their Chancellors, and Commissaries: The assistance of those
which are learned in the Law, we gladly use, neither can well want in the
necessary occasions of our judicature; but that we do either wilfully or
negligently divest our selves absolutely of that power, and wholly put it into
Laick hands, it is a mere sclander.

For want of better proofs of the illegality of this course, you bring a
negative authority from Cyprian, telling us, what that holy Martyr did not,
That he did not send Complainants to his Chancellor or Commissarie: It is very
like he did not, nor yet to the Bench of a Lay Presbytery* But if he did not
commit the hearing of his Causes to a Layman, we find that some others did:
Socrates can tell you of Silvanus the good Bishop of Troas, Socrat. l. 7. c. 37.
(...), etc. perceiving that some of his Clergy did corruptly make gain of
Causes, would no more appoint any of his Clergy ((...)) to be a Judge, but
made choice of some faithful man of the Laity to whom he committed that
audience, and was much honored for it.

What Bishop Downam yields concerning the Ordinaries, Vicars, and Chancellors
of former times, (till Ambrose's days) that they were only Clergymen, you
reject witn scorn, and challenge any man to produce the names of any
Clergie-man that was Vicar to Ambrose, or Chancellor to Augustine, etc. What a
poor brave is this? I challenge you to produce the name of any Secretary, or
Actuary that Ambrose, or Austin had: because you cannot, shall I conclude they
had none such? That instance of Sylvanus, not long after Ambrose, is evidence
enough: But the antiquity of Chancellors, which were the same with
Ecclesiecdici, or Episcoporum ecdici, is proveable enough, (if it were for this
place) and their necessary use, beyond the power of your confutation; But I had
rather refer my reader to S. Thomas Ridley, and others that have labored in
that argument; and appeal to all men's judgment how soundly you have (upon
this ground) proved that our Bishops and the former were two.

SECT. XI.
HOw justly may I say, Readers, of these men as the King of Israel said of the
King of Syria: 2 King. 5.7.
See I beseech you, how they seek a quarrel against me? My just defense was,
that our Bishops are the same in substance, and effect, with those which were
ordained by the Apostles: they come now, and tell me, of an oath ex officio,
used in the high Commission, and in our Consistories; as if every particular
manner of Proceeding in our Courts, and judicatures must either be patterned by
the Apostolic, or else they are utterly unjustifiable; why do they not as well
challenge us, that we give men the book to touch, and kiss, in taking an oath?
Why do they not ask, how we can prove that those Apostolical Bishops had
Notaries, Registers, Advocates, Consistories? what frivolous and delusory
exceptions are these to all wise men; and how strangely savouring of a weak
judgment, and strong malice? As for your cavil at the oath ex officio, since
you will needs draw it in by head and shoulders; how little soever it concerns
us, I return you this answer* That, if any of our profession have in the
pressing of it exceeded the lawful bounds, I excuse him not, I defend him not;
let him bear away his own load; but in these, surely there is more to be said
for it, then you will seem to take notice of. You ask for any precedent of it,
in good antiquity: I give a precedent as ancient as Moses, Exodus ^2.10, 11. and
that other oath and real imprecation, in the cause of jelousie, Number. 5.19. But
perhaps it will fit you better, Calvin Epist f 421.
that I instance in M. Calvin's case, who together with the Consistory of
Elders, appointed the said oath to be given to Camperell a Minister of Geneva,
and to the other parties accused of an offensive dancing in the house of widow
Balthazar, in which corporal oath three interrogatories being put to the
deponents, two of them are said to be concerning their purposes and intentions.
If yet you call for other precedents, I call your eyes home, and will you to look
into our Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Star Chamber, wherein
the defendant is ordinarily put to answer the bill, and interrogatories, upon
oath. As for that old Maxim of Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, you may (if it
please you) object it as well to Moses, to Calvin, to our Courts; it is easily
thus satisfied, that no man is bound at the suit of a party, so to answer
criminous Articles, or such as are Propinqui actus, (as Lawyers interpret it;)
But as Petrus de Ferrariis well determins it, Proditus per famam; tenetur
seipsum ostendere, and purgare; when a fame accuses him he may clear himself
by an oath; it is to be presupposed, that a man is brought into question by
some of those Lawful means, which open a way to a further inquiry; Aquin.
and then (as Aquinas well) if there be a Semi-plena probatio, or a strong
fame, or evident tokens, an oath is seasonably imposed: But sure, the intention
of the oath is quite mistaken, for it is meant to acquit and justify, not to
accuse; neither is any man pressed to answer further, then he is bound in law:
neither are the Compulsions simple and absolute, but only Causative, as the
learned Apologist has fully declared. If then a Dioclesian or Maximilian (as
you call him) shall enact, that the adverse party shall not be required to
exhibit such evidences as should create troubles to themselves, it is no other
then is every where practiced in all Courts of Judicature, and may well stand
with the oath ex officio, as it is formerly limited. Be advised therefore (til
you understand the case better) to forbear to talk of the Lamp of nature, in
the night of Eth nicisme but know, that the light of the law of God, and rigt
reason and common practice, give sufficient alowance to that which your
misprision cavills at, in those, whom ye ought to acknowledge the Fathers of
the Church. You tell us of the custom of the Church, and proceedings in the
time of Athanasius, and the rule of Gratian; as if we disallowed those just
courses, where there is a direct and manifest accusation and evident proofs to
be had; but what does this hinder, that in case of a justly grounded
suspicion, and a complaint of a halfe-proved offense, a man should manifest his
innocence by oath? That ye might seem to have seen the Canon Law, you tell us
that in some cases, it allows trial without witnesses, namely, where the
crime may be justly called notorious and then deeply expound notorium, by
manifestum, therein plainly contradicting your selves; for, if that be manifest
which is lawfully known, by confession, or by probation, or by the evidence of
the thing; what probation can there be, (besides confession and evidence)
without witnesses? But this error is as trifling, as your accusation; and
after all this wast of words, notwithstanding some personal abuses of Officers
in undue processes of their Courts, our Bishops and the former are not two.

SECT. 12.
YOur next Section has more pomp of reading in it, then the rest, but to as
little purpose, I shall trouble you with neglecting it; we cannot anger a gay
man more then in passing by him unseene; my ground was, that our Bishops differ
not in respect of any spiritual power, from that, which was delegated from
Apostolic authority, to Timothy and Titus; you spend your time, in proving
that they differ in their employment, in secular and state affairs; but, I
ask, is this difference, or fault universal, or not; sure, you cannot say
they are all thus misimployed; and if not, why is this blame cast upon al? why
should the calling, and others innocence suffer? My cause shall yield you your
postulate herein, and be no whit the worse, it is true the ordinary managing of
secular affairs, is not proper for a Bishop: Chrysostoms counsel, Julians
practice* Constatines bounty, Cyr^lls insolent pomp, the Roman Bishops
degenerating, into a secular principality, Cyprians grave limitation, the just
inhibitions of many Canons, are of an undoubted truth; and we could easily (if
need were) ad many more to these, and tell you of those (...) that must upon
the Apostolic Canons be avoided by sacred persons, and the rigorous charge of
Cyprian, Pro dormit^one victioris non fiat blatio, a uto depre, catio
aliquanomine ejus in Ecclesia frequentetur. Cypr. Rogatiano fratri l. 3. Ep. 9.
against Geminius victor, for ordaining Geminius Faustinus, a Presbyter, but
the Executor of his last will; with many other the like instances; but what are
these to the work in hand? Two exceptions must necessarily be admitted; the
one of extraordinary ocsicaons, and services, as, when a Prince, or state,
having had good proof of the abilities of an Ecclesiastical person, shall
think fit, (as now it is done in this great Northern negotiation) to call for
his Counsel, or to employ his present agency, for a time, in some main
business that may import the public good, and safety of the Church, or
Commonwealth, so St. Chrysostom once; so St. Ambrose twice, was employed in
Embassy, from the Emperors: The very trade of Tent-making did as much take up
St. Paul for the time, as a state-imployment might have done; and how many have
we known, that have (not unprofitably) professed Physic both for soul and
body; and done much good in both? The other, of a charitable interposition in
matters of difference for peace and reconciliation; and composing of the
unkind quarrels of dissenting neighbors,, wherewith St. Ambrose and St.
Austine were so extremely taken up, Aug. Ep. 110.
that the latter makes no little complaint of the importunity of those
continual interpellations; such, as both his morning studies were distracted
by them, and the afternoon wholly spent in them: and professes, he could not
have the opportunity of opening his estate, and heart to Bishop Ambrose, by
reason of that continual audience of causes, daily brought before that great
Prelate: surely, if the charity of more of ours have not rendered them more
guilty of secularity, in this kind, than the supposed ambition of others, there
will be no cause why our Bishops, and the Bishops of former times should be two.

SECT. 13.
IT is true the Remonstrant soars above these aftertimes, even as high as the
Apostles: As if you knew not this before; when as all this while, you have
endeavored to show that the Apostles Bishops, and ours are two. We do again
profess, that if our Bishops challenge any other power, then was delegated to,
and required of Timothy and Titus, we shall yield them usurpers: you kindly
tell us, so we deserve to be, if we do but challenge the same power; and why
so, I beseech you brethren? because Timothy and Titus (ye say) were
Evangelists, and so moved in an higher sphere; Liberally and boldly spoken; but
where is your proof? For Timothy, ye say the Text is clear: but what Text,
what the least intimation have you for Titus? surely not so much as the least
ground of a conjecture; yet how confidently you avow for both: and even for
Timothy your gloss is clear, not your text: St. Paul bids him do the work of
an Evangelist, what then, that rather intimates that he was none: for he does
not say, do thine own work: but the work of an Evangelist: when I tell my
friend, that I must desire him to do the office of a Soliciter, or a Secretary
for me; I do herein intimate, that he is neither; but so for the time employed;
why is it not so here? And what I beseech you is the work of an Evangelist,
but to preach the Evangell, or good tidings of peace? So, as St. Paul herein
gives no other charge to his Timothy, then in 2. Tim. 4.2. Preach the Word, be
instant in season and out of season: And this you say and urge, to be the work
of a Bishop too; well, therefore may Timothy, notwithstanding this charge, be
no other then a Bishop: what need these words to be contradistinguished? St. 2^
Tim 1.11.
Paul says of himself, Whereto I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and
a teacher of the Gentiles; what shall we say St. Paul was an Apostle, he was
not a Preacher, or not a Doctor, but an Apostle? You distinguish of
Evangelists; the word is taken either for the writers of the Gospel, or for
the teachers of it, and why then was not St. Paul an Evangelist, who professed
to be a teacher of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, These teaching Evangelists,
you dream to be of two sorts; the one, those that had ordinary places and
gifts; the other extraordinary: but tell me sirs, for my learning; where do you
find those ordinary-placed, and ordinary-gifted Evangelists? unless you mean
to comprse all Preachers under this name? and then a Bishop may be an
Evangelist also; so, as the difference of a Bishop and an Evangelist vanishes.
The truth is, these ordinary Evangelists are a new fiction; their true
employment was to be sent by the Apostles, from place to place, for the
preaching of the Gospel, without a settled residence upon any one charge: upon
this advantage, you raise a slight argument, that St. Paul besought Timothy to
abide at Ephesus. 1. Tim. 1.3. which had been a needless importunity if he had
the Episcopal charge of Ephesus; for then he must have necessarily resided
there: whereas you recite several proofs and occasions of his absence, which
will appear to be of little force, if a man do duly consider the state of
those times: the necessity whereof in that first plantation of the Gospel, made
even the most sixed Sars planetary, calling them, frequently, from the places
of their abode, to those services which were of most use for the success of
that great work: yet so, as that either after their errands fully-done, or
upon all opportune intermissions, they returned to their own Chair: The story
therefore of those journal computations might well have been spared.

Your argument from Paul's calling the Elders of Ephesus to Miletus, how ever
you lean upon it, it will prove but a Reed.

Your selves confess (I know not upon what certain ground) that Timothy was
at the meeting, Acts 20. with St. Paul: Had he been Bishop there, the Apostle
(you say) in stead of giving the Elders a charge to feed the flock of Christ,
would have given that charge to Timothy, and not to them: Besides, the Apostle
would not have so forgotten himself, as to call the Elders Bishops, before the
Bishops face; and would have given them some directions, how to carry
themselves to their Bishops: In all which, brethren, you go upon wrong ground;
will ye grant that these assembled persons were Presbyters, and not Bishops?
under some Bishop, though not under Timothy? otherwise, why do you argue from
the want of directions to them, as inferiors? but if they were indeed Bishops,
and not mere Presbyters, (as the word it self imports) your argument is lost:
(...):
For then the charge is equally given to Timothy, and all the rest; and it was
no forgetfulness to call them as they were, you are straight ready to reply,
how unpossible it is (according to us) there should be many Bishops in one
City; and here were many Presbyters from Ephesus: but let me mind you, that
though these Presbyters were sent for from Ephesus, yet they were not said to
be all of Ephesus: Thither they were called to meet St. Paul in all likelihood,
from diverse parts, which he seems to imply, when he says; Ye all amongst whom
I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God; intimating the super-intendents of
several places; so as, notwithstanding these urged probabilities, Timothy
might have been, both before this time and at that present Bishop of Ephesus;
after which, if Paul took him along with him to Jerusalem, this is no
derogation to his Episcopacy: And if Timothy were yet, after this, prisoner
with St. Paul at Rome, (as you argue from Hebr. 13.23.) this is no derogation
from his Episcopacy at Ephesus; but to cut the sinews of all this strong
proof of your computation; it is more than probable, that, whereas the whole
history of the Acts ends with Paul's first being at Rome, that Apostle survived
diverse years, and passed many travells, and did many great matters, for the
plantation, and settling of churches, whereof we can look for no account from
Scripture, save by some glances in his following Epistles; into which time
these occurrents concerning Timothy and Titus, his ordination did fall, as may
be justly proved out of the Chronologicall table of the experienced Jacob
Cappellus, compared with Baronius: Now then, the Reader may take his choice,
whether he will believe all antiquity, (that have meddled with this subject)
affirming Timothy to have been bishop of Ephesus, or whether he will believe a
new hatched contradiction of yesterday, raised out of imaginary probabilities:
Shortly, it is far enough from appearing, that Timothy was no Bishop, but a
Minister, an Evangelist a fellow laborer of the Apostles, an Apostle, a
Messenger of the Church; it rather appears that he was al these in diverse
senses, and upon several occasions.

The like yea say of Titus, whom you are pleased to create an Evangelist, not
being able to show, that ever God made him so; save in that general sense that
might well stand with Episcopacy; you tell us a story of his perigrination in
the attendance of Paul, wherein you shall not expect any contradiction; but you
shall give me leave to take you tripping in your own Tale: from Cilicia, you
say, Paul passed to Creet, where he left Titus for a while to set in order
things that remain: this ( for a while) you put into a different Character, as
if it were part of the Text; and guiltily translate ((...)) things that
remain, whereas ours turn it (in a more full expression of an Episcopal
power) things that are wanting, or left undone; but this is not the matter, you
do yet again repeat the ( for a while) urging the short time that Titus could
be left at Creet, and yet, in your own marginall computation there is no less
distance of time, betwixt this placing in Creet, and sending for him to his
next remove, unto Nicopolis, tha^ betwixt the year 46 and 51. the space of five
years, which was a large gap of time, in that unsettled condition, and manifold
distractive occasions of the Church; If afterward he were by Apostolical
command called away to tend the more concerning services of the Church; this
could no whit have impeacht the truth of his Episcopacy; but the truth is, he
was ordained by St. Paul after all those journeys mentioned in the Acts, (and
as Baronius with great consent of Antiquity computes it) a year after Timothy;
so, as you may well put up your conclusion, as rather begged than enforced, and
cast it upon the Readers courtesy to believe you against al antiquity, that
Titus was an Evangelist and no Bishop; where as these two may well agree
together, he was an Evangelist when he traveled abroad; he was a bishop
afterward, when he stayed and settled at home.

You object to your self the authority of some Fathers, that have called
Timothy and Titus Bishops: Some? name, if you can, that Father that has called
them otherwise: away with these envious diminutions, when yea have a cloud of
witnesses of much antiquity, which aver Timothy and Titus to have both lived,
and dyed Bishops, the one of Ephesus, of Creet the other: yea but so some
Fathers have called them Archbishops and Patriarchs too: What of that? therein
they have then acknowledged them bishops, paramount; and if Titus were Bishop
of Creet, which was of old ((...)) the hundred-cityed Island, and Timothy of
Ephesus, the Metropolis of Asia, the multitude of the territories under them,
whiles it inlargeth their charge, does detract nothing from the use of their
office.

Secondly you tell us from learned D. Raynolds, that the Fathers, when they
called any Apostle Bishop, they meant it in a general sort, aad signification;
because they did attend that church for a time, and supply that room in
preaching the Gospel, which Bishops did after not intending it, as it is
commonly taken for the over-seer of a particular Church, and Pastor of a
several flock: but, what is this to Timothy and Titus? you say, the same may
be said of them, but the Doctor gave you no leave so to apply it; neither do
we. Although to say truth, all this discourse of yours is ((...)) needless and
extravagant: whether Timothy or Titus were Evangelists, or no, sure we are,
that here they stand for persons charged with those Offices, and cares which
are delivered to the ordinary Church governors, in all succeeding generations:
And we do most justly take them, as we find them; and with our first
confidence maintain, that we challenge no other spiritual power, then was
delegated unto them, and unto the Angels of the Asian Churches; you mean to
confute us by questions; and those so poor and frivolous, as are not worth
answer; fastening that upon some particular abuse, which we disclaim from our
calling; as if under this claim, we were bound to justify every act of a
Bishop. To answer you in your own kind: when, or where did our bishops
challenge power to ordain alone, to govern alone? when (though you ignorantly
turn an Elder in age, to an Elder in Office) did our Bishops challenge power
to pass a rough and unbeseeming rebuke upon an Elder? Where did our Bishops
give Commission to Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, to rail upon
Presbyters, or to accuse them without just grounds, and without legal
proceedings? As for your last question, I must, tell you it is no better raised
then upon an ignorant negative. Did the Apostle say, reject none but an
Heretic? Did he not wish would to God they were cut off that trouble you? Is
it not certainly proved true, that some Scismaticke may be worse then some
Heretic; which I speak not so, as to traduce any of our unconforming
brethren, whose consciences are unsettled in the point of this mean difference,
as guilty of that hateful crime: but to convince the absurdity of our
questionists; after whose ill raised cavills, thus fully answered, we have no
cause to fear, upon their suggestions, to be disclaimed as usurpers.

From Timothy and Titus you descend to the Angels of the seven Asian Churches;
which no subtilty at all, but the common interest of their condition, has
twisted together in our defense.

In the generality whereof I must premonish my Reader, that this Piece of the
task fell unhappily upon some dull and tedious hand, that cared not how often sod
Coleworts he dished out to his credulous guests; I shall (what I may) prevent
their surfeit.

Your shift is, that the Angel is here taken collectively, not individually: A
conceit, which if your selves, certainly no other wise man can ever believe;
for if the interest be common and equally appertayning to all, why should one
be singled out above the rest? If you will yield the person to be such, as had
more than others, a right in the administration of all, it is that we seek
for: Surely, it did in some sort concern all that was spoken to him, because
he had the charge of al: but the direction is individual, as Beza himself
takes it; as if a Letter be indorsed from the Lords of the Counsel to the
Bishop of Durham or Salisbury, concerning some affairs of the whole Clergy of
their Diocese, can we say that the name Bishop, is there no other then a
collective; because the business may import many? verily I do not believe that
the Authors of this sense can believe it themselves. To your invincible
proofs; In the Epistle to Thyatira you say it is written ((...)) I say to you,
and to the rest: where ( by you) must (as you imagine) be signified, the
Governors; Rev. 2.24
by the rest, the people: but what if the better Copyes read, ((...)) I say to
you, the rest in Thyatira, without the copulative, as is confessed by your good
friends; where then is your doughty Argument? Here are no divisions of parties,
but the Pastor and Flock. And truly thus it is; and my own eyes have seen it,
in that noble Manuscript, written by the hand of Tecla (as is probably
supposed) some 1300. years ago, as Cyrill, the late renowned Patriarch of
Constantinople avoweth; your goodly proof therefore is in the suds. But to
meet with you in your own kind, if you will go upon diverse Readings; what
will you say to that verse 20 where the Angel of Thyatira is encharged: Thou
suffer (...) ( thy wife Iezebell) (for so it is in very good Copies) to
teach and seduce; yea so it is in that memorable Copy of Tecla, forementioned,
which is to be seen in the Princes Library, under the custody of the
industrious and learned Mr^ Patrick Young, as my own eyes can witness: and
thus St. Cyprian reads it of old: Cypr. l. 4. ad Antonianum Epist.
What? shall we think she was wife to the whole company, or to one Bishop
alone? I leave you to blush, for the shame this very proof alone casts upon
your opinion: Secondly, you tell us, it is usual with the Holy Ghost, even in
this very book, to express a company under one singular person: as, the Beast
is the Civil state; the Whore, and the false Prophet, the Ecclesiastical
state of Rome: But what if it be thus in visions, or emblematicall
representations? must it needs be so in plain narrations, where it is limited
by just Praedicates? or because it is so in one phrase of speech, must it be
so in all? Why do you not as well say, where the Lamb is named, or the Lion
of Juda, this is a collective of many; not an individual subject: The seven
Angels, you say, that blew the seven trumpets, and poured out the seven
phialls, are not to be taken literally, but synecdochically; perhaps so, but
then the synecdoche lies in the seven, and not in the Angels, so I grant you
the word Angel, is here metaphorical; but you are no whit nearer to your
imagined synecdoche.

The very name Angel, (you say) is sufficient proof, that it is not meant of
one person alone, as being a common name to all Gods Ministers, and Messengers:
As if he did not well know this that directed these Epistles* and if he had so
meant it, had it not been as easy to have mentioned more as one? Had he said,
the Angels of the Church of Ephesus, or Thyatira, the cause had been clear:
now, he says the Angel (...) the denoted person must be singular; for surely
you cannot say that all the Presbyters at Ephesus were one Angel: The same
reason holds for the Stars: had he said, to the Star of Ephesus, I suppose no
body would have construed it of many, but of one eminent person: Now he speaks
of so many Stars, as Angels, to wit, seven in those seven Churches.

Your fourth Argument from the Text it self, is no better then ridiculous:
poorly drawn from what it does not say: Lo, he says, Revel. 1.20.
the 7. Candlesticks which thou saw are the 7. Churches: but he does not
say, the 7. Stars are the 7. Angels of the seven Churches: but, the Angels of
the 7. Churches. Forbear, if you can, Readers, to smile at this curious
subtilty: because, the seven is not twice repeated, in mentioning the Angels,
there is a deep mystery in the omission: what Cabalisme have we here? Had he
said, the seven Stars are the seven Angels of the seven churches, now, all had
been sure; but he says not so, but only thus; the seven Stars are the Angels
of the seven Churches, It is plain, that every Church has his Angel
mentioned; and there being seven Churches how many Angels, I beseech you, are
there? now because he does not say expressly in terms, seven Angels of the
seven Churches, we are foiled in our proof; judge Reader, what to expect of so
deep speculations.

Lastly, it is evident (you say) though but one Angel be mentioned in the
front, yet the Epistles themselves be dedicated to all the Angels and
Ministers, and to the Churches themselves; who ever doubted it? the foot of
every Epistle runs ( what the spirit says unto the Churches) not to one
Church, but to all seven: If therefore you argue, that the name Angel is
collective, say also that every of these seven Angels, is the whole company of
all the seven Churches; which were a foul nonsense; you might have saved the
labor both of Ausbertus, and the rest of your Authors, and your own; we never
thought otherwise, but that the whole Church is spoken to; but so, as that the
Governor or Bishop is singled out, as one that has the maine stroke in
ordering the affairs thereof, and is therefore either praised, or challenged,
according to his carriage therein; although also there are such particularities
both of commendations, and exceptions, in the body of the several Epistles, as
cannot but have relation to those several Overseers, to whom they were
endorsed, as I have else where specified; Had all the Presbyters of Ephesus
lost their first love; had each of them tried the false Apostles? Had all those
of Sardis a name to live, and were dead? Were all the Laodicean Ministers of
one temper? these taxations were no doubt of individual persons, but such as
in whom the whole Churches were interessed.

As for those conjecturall reasons, which you frame to your selves, why the
whole company of Presbyters should be written to under the singular name of an
Angel, if ye please your selves with them, it is well, from me they have no
cause to expect an answer: they neither can draw my assent, nor merit my
confutation.

Take heed of yielding that, which ye cannot but yield to be granted by D.
Raynolds, and Mr. Beza, Doctor Fulke, Pareus, and others, that the Angel is
here taken individually; but still if you be wise, hold your own; that our
cause is no whit advanced, nor yours impaired by this yieldance: Let him have
been an Angel, yet what makes this for a Diocesan Bishop? much every way: For
if the Church of Ephesus (for example) had many Ministers or Presbyters in it
to instruct the people in their several charges, (as it is manifest they had)
and yet but one prime Over-seer, which is singled out by the Spirit of God, and
styled by a title of eminence, the Angel of that Church, it must needs follow,
that in St. John's time there was an acknowledged superiority in the government
of the Church: if there were many Angels in each, and yet but one that was the
Angel, who can make doubt of an inequality?

It is but a pitiful shift that you make, in pleading that these Angels (if
Bishops) yet were not Diocesan Bishops; for that Parishes were not divided into
Diocesses (I had thought Dioceses should have been divided into Parishes
rather) in S. John's days: for by the same reason, I may as well argue, that
they were not Parochial Bishops neither, since that then no Parishes were as
yet distinguished: As if you had resolved to speak nothing but Bulls, and
Soloecismes; you tell me, that the seven Stars are said to be fixed in their
seven Candlesticks; whereas those Stars are said to be in the right hand of
the Son of God: But (say you still) not one Star was over diverse Candlesticks:
Truly no; who ever said, that one Angel was over all the seven Churches? but
that each of these famous Churches were under their own Star, or Angel; but
those churches (you say) were not Diocesan: How does that appear? Because
first Tindall, and the old translation calls them seven congregations: for
answer, who knows not that Tindall, and the old Translation are still wont to
translate the word church, wheresoever they find it, by Congregation, which
some Papists have laid in our dish: Learned Doctor Fulk has well cleared our
intentions herein from their censure: Tindall himself professes to do it out
of this reason, because the Popish Clergy had appropriated to themselves the
name of the Church; but however, they rather made use of the Word; yet not so
as that hereby they intend only to signify Parishionall meetings. So
Ephesians 3. To the intent that now to the Rulers and Powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the Congregation, the manifold Wisdom of GOD; Do
we think this blessed Revelation confined to a Parish, or common to the whole
Church of God? So 1. Corinthians 15. they turn, I am not worthy to be called
an Apostle, because I persecuted the Congregation of GOD: Do we think his
cruelty was confined to a Parish? So Matthew 6.16. Upon this Rock will I build
my Congregation: was this a Parish only? So Acts 11. Herod the King stretched
out his hands to vex certain of the Congregation: Was his malice only
Parochial? but secondly, ye tell us, that in Ephesus, which was one of those
Candlesticks, there was but one flock. Acts 20.28. Yea, but can you tell us
what kind of Flock it was, whether National, or Provincial, or Diocesan?
Parochial (I am sure) it could not be: you have heard before, that those
Elders or Bishops were sent for from Ephesus: But that they were all of Ephesus
it cannot be proved; when all of them then are bidden to take heed to the
Flock of Christ, whereof they are made overseers, each is herein charged to
look to his own; and all are in the next words required to feed the Church of
GOD, which he has purchased with his own blood. So as your second argument is
fully answered in the solution of the first, and in the former passages of this
Section. The advantage that you take from Epiphanius, affirming that diverse
Cities of that time might have two Bishops, whereas Alexandria held close to
one, can avail you little, when it shall be well weighed; first, that your
Tenet supposes and requires that every Presbyter should be a Bishop, and
therefore (if your cause speed) there should be no fewer Bishops than parishes.
Secondly, that the practice of the whole Church, both before and after
Epiphanius, is by such clear testimonies convinced to be contrary: famous, and
irrefragable, is that Canon of Nicen Council, (...), etc. Conc. Nic. can. 8
that in one City there might not be two Bishops: so before this, Cornelius
writing to the Bishop of Antioch objects it scornfully to Novatian, that he
did not know (...), etc. that in a Catholic Church there ought to be but one
Bishop; And it is a known word of the Confessors of old, in Cyprians time, one
GOD, one Lord, one Bishop: Make much (if you please) of this conceit of yours,
that Epiphanius his Neighborhood might acquaint him well with the Condition
of the Asian Churches: But let me add, that you shall approve your selves
mere strangers to all the rules and practices of antiquity: if you shall stand
upon the general plurality of Bishops in the same City, or Dioces: And last of
all, remember, that Epiphanius reckons up Aerius as an Heretic, for holding
Presbyters equal with Bishops.

Your third argument, that there is nothing said in these seven Epistles, that
implies a superiority, is answered by the very Superscription of each Letter,
which is, (...) To the Angel: and much more by the matter of the several
Epistles: For what reason were it for an ordinary Presbyter to be taxed for
that, which he has no power to redress? That the Angel of Pergamus should
be blamed for the having of those which hold the Doctrine of Balaam or the
Nicolaitans, when he had no power to proceed against them? or the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira, for suffering the Woman Jezabel, (if it must be so read)
to teach, and seduce, when he had no power of public censure to restrain
her? But what need we stand upon conjecturall answers, to convince you in this
plea, as likewise in the supposed Decision of the kind of superiority, which
you urge in the next paragraph; when we are able to show both who the parties
were, to whom some of these Epistles were directed, and to evince the high
degree of their superiority; Ignatius the Martyr (besides Tertullian) is
witness for both, Ignat. ad Ephesians (...) etc.
who tells us that Onesimus was now the Angel or Bishop of Ephesus, Polycarpus
of Smyrna; and as commenting upon this very subject, often ingeminates the duty
of subjection owing to the Bishop; and the diverse degrees of those 3 several
stations in the Church; as we already instanced; away then with those your
unproving illustrations, and unregardable testimonies, which you (as destitute
of all Antiquity) shut up the Scene withal: And let the wise Reader judge,
whether the Remonstrant has not from the evidence of Timothy and Titus, and
the Angels, of the Asian Churches, made good that just claim of this sacred
Hierarchy, against all your weak and frivolous pretentions. From the
Remonstrant (least your discourse should not be tedious enough) you fly upon
some other Defenders of the Hierarchy, and fall upon the two post-scripts of
Saint Paul's Epistles (to Timothy and Titus, wherein Timothy and Titus are
styled the first bishops of Ephesus, and creet) which I am no way engaged to
defend: You say they are not of canonical authority; so say I too; but I say
they are of great antiquity, and so you must confess also.

Feign would I see but any pretense of so much age against the matter of those
Subscriptions: the averred Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, cited by these
confident antiquaries: surely he were senceles, that would imagine the
Post-scripts as old as the Text, or as authenticke; but we may boldly say they
are older then any Records of the gainsayers.

Where these Subscriptions are not seconded by authority of the ancient Church,
there I leave them; but where they are so well backed, there is no reason to
forsake them. The Exception therefore which you take at the Postscript of the
Epistle to Titus, is not more stale than unjust. You say peremptorily, it was
not written from Nicopolis; neither was Paul then there: how appears it?
Because he says in the body of the Epistle, come to me to Nicopolis, for I
am determined there to winter: He says not, Here to Winter, but there: as
speaking of a third place: but how slight this ground is, will be easily
apparent to any man that shall consider, that Saint Paul was in perpetual
journying from place to place: And therefore, though now at that instant at
Nicopolis, yet how soon, occasions might call him away, and how long, he knew
not: Therefore it was most fit that he should pitch upon a certain place,
whither Titus should direct his way toward him: Notwithstanding your guess
therefore, since holy Athanasius plainly tells us, that S. Paul wrote this
Epistle from Nicopolis; and is therein followed by Oecumenius, and Theophylact,
and in that famous ancient Manuscript, sent by the late Patriarch of
Constantinople; I find it plainly dated (...) It must needs follow, that
either this Subscription was before Athanasius and Teclaes time; or else that
they went upon some other good ground of their assertion.

Lastly, it may well go for a reason of your own making, that the Postscript
styles Titus Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; whereas it would be said of
the Churches of the Cretians; for the Christian Churches, of any Nation, are
called by Luke and Paul Churches, and not Church: Who would not yield you this
truth, that the Christian Churches are called Churches? What can they be
called else, when they are mentioned in their several diversities; but when
they are upon some entire Relation, conjoined and united, as these of Creet,
under one Government, they may well be called not the Churches, but the
Church. That flash of Wit might well have been forborne, wherein you make an
envious Comparison Betwixt the Authority of these Subscriptions, and Episcopal
authority, of urging Subscription to their Ceremonies: And why theirs, I
beseech you? Have you been urged to subscribe to any other Ceremonies, than
have been established by the Laws of this Realm and Church? Was it Episcopal
power that enacted them? Had you been but as obedient, these Ceremonies had
been equally yours: Now out of pure Love you impose that upon us, which you
repined that the Laws should impose upon you: Go on thus Charitably and
prosper.

Because you wanted Work from the Remonstrance, you will cut out some for your
selves: An Objection of your own must be answered; That is, From the
inequality that was between the Twelve Apostles, and the seaventy Disciples:
And well may you shape and fashion your own Answer unto your own Objection:
It cannot be prooved, (you say) that the Twelve had any Superiority over the
Seaventy, either of Ordination, or Jurisdiction. What? have you forgotten,
brethren, that the Apostles ordained the Decons, Acts 6.6. by Prayer and
imposition of hands? That the Apostle Paul laid his hands on Timothy? Have you
forgotten how by virtue of his Apostleshippe he charges, Commands,
Controllers, Censures? What is, if this be not Ordination and Jurisdiction?
But (say you) suppose it were so; yet a superiority and inferiority between
Officers of different kinds, will not prove a superiority and inferiority
between Officers of the same kind. Deeply argued; Surely hence you may
infer, that one Bishop is not superior to another; nor one Presbyter above
another; but that a Bishop should not be superior to a Presbyter, were an
uncouth consequence: If the twelve Apostles therefore were superiors to the
70. Disciples, So Cyprian, Epicopis loquens, etc. Qui Apostolis vicaria
ordinatione succedunt. Ep. 69. Vnitas per Apostolos novis successoribus
tradita. Ep. 41 Meminisse debent Diaconi quoniam Apostolos i. e. Episcopos and
prapaesitos Dominus clegit. Ep. 65.
and Bishops (as your own Jerome tells you) succeed those Apostles, and
Presbyters come in the room of the seventy, where is that identity or
samenesse of kind which you pretend? All Antiquity has acknowledged, (...)
three several ranks in the Church-Hierarchy; and if you have a mind to
jumble them together, take away the difference betwixt Presbyters, and Deacons,
as well as that betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, Jam sumus ergo pares.

And now we appeal to the same Bar, how far you have been from
disproving the Divine right, or Apostolical institution of Episcopacy; and
whether your relyance upon Hieromes Authority in this point has been grounded
upon any other reason, but your own weak presumption. Yet still like (as I
have heard) some beaten Cocks, you dare crow; and tell your Reader, that though
Scriptures fail us, yet we support our selves by the indulgence and
munificence of religious Princes: surely, if GOD should have withdrawn
himself, in vain should we make flesh our arms: Our calling we challenge
from God: some accessory Titles, Dignities, Maintenance, we thankfully profess
to have received from the bounty of Royal Benefactors: What of this? Herein,
you say, the Author acknowledges a difference, between our Bishops, and the
Bishops of old. Yes verily, so he gladly does, with all humble thankfulness
to God, and good Princes: make your best of this concession. Suddenly you fall
fair, and profess your well-pleasednesse, with the liberal maintenance of
the Church, although somewhat yet sticks with you: When the Ministry came to
have agros, domos, locationes, vehicula, as you say from Chrysostom, then
Religio peperit divitias, Religion brought forth riches, and the Daughter
devoured the Mother; and a voice was heard from heaven Hodie venenum: and then
You tell us of wooden Priests, and golden challices But, Brethren, take no
care for this danger; our last age has begun to take sufficient order for the
redress of this Evil: and if in time You shall see Wooden Chalices, and
Wooden Priests, thank your selves.

However, you grant there is not an incompossibility betwixt large Revenues,
and an humble Sociablenesse; yet You say, it is rare; and tell us, That the
rich Provision of Bishops has ushered in, both neglect of their Ministry, and
Pompous attendance, and insultation over their Brethren: And You instance in
the pride of Paulus Samosatenus, and shut up with the grave complaint of
Sulpitius Severus. It is not to be denied, Brethren, that some such ill use
has been made, by some, of their abundance: but surely, in this ablative age,
the fault is rare, and hardly instanceable; both the Wings and train of many of
ours have been so Clipped, that there is no great fear of flying high. But if
it be so, the fault is fixed to the person, who with more grace might
otherwise improve the blessing. Cast your eyes upon others, even your own
great Patrons, and tell me if you do not epsy the same ill use of large
means, and flattering prosperity; yet you desire not to abridge their store,
but to rectify the employment of it: Learn to be so charitable to your
spiritual superiors.

And now at last you give a vale to your Remonstrants Arguments, and shut up
with a bold recollection, concerning which, let me say thus much; Truly,
Brethren, had you as good a faculty in strewing, as you have in gathering,
there were no dealing with you: but it is your ill hap to tell the reader in
your recapitulation of great feats that you have done in your former
discourse, when as he must needs profess that he sees no such matter. I appeal
to his judicious eyes, whether in all this tedious passage, you have proved any
thing but your own bold ignorance, and absurd inconsequences.

SECT. XIV.
MY satisfaction to objections comes next to be scanned; Objections, which
would to God they were only of my own framing.

In the first, That Episcopacy is no prejudice of Soveraigntie, I justly prove,
for that there is a compatiblenesse in this case of Gods act, and the Kings. It
is God that makes the Bishop, the King that gives the Bishopric: what can you
say to this?

You tell us you have already proved that God never made a bishop, as he
stands in superiority over Presbyters, so you told us; and that is enough, we
were hard hearted if we would not believe you: When as we have made good by
undeniable proofs, that (besides the grounds which our Savior laid of this
imparity) the blessed Apostles by inspiration from God, made this difference in
a personal ordaining of some above the rest, and giving express charge of
Ordination and Jurisdiction to those select persons, in Church government, the
Bishops have ever since succeeded.

Tell us not therefore, that if we disclaim the influence of Sovereignty into
our Creation, and assert that the King does not make us Bishops, we must have
no being at all; For, that the Reader may see you stop your own mouth; answer
me, I beseech you, Where, or when ever did the King create a Bishop? name the
man, and take the cause. It pleases his Majesty to give his Congedelier for a
Bishops Election to his See, to signify his Royal assent thereunto; upon
which the Bishop is solemnly ordained by the imposition of the hands of the
Metropolitan, and other his Brethren; and these do, as from God, invest him in
his holy Calling, which he exercises in that place, which is designed and given
by his Majesty: What can be more plain then this truth? As for that unworthy
censure which you pass upon the just comparison of Kings in order to Bishops,
and Patrons in order to their Clerks, it shall be acknowledged, well deserved,
if you shall be able to make good the disparity; When he shall prove (you say)
that the Patron gives Ministerial power to his Clerk, as the King gives
Episcopal power to the Bishop, it may be of some conducement to his cause:
Shortly, brethren, the same day that you shall show me that the King ordained
a bishop, the same day will I show you that a Patron ordained a Presbyter: The
Patron gives the benefice to the one, The King gives the bishopric to the
other: neither of them do give the Office, or Calling to either. Go you
therefore with your Friar Simon, to your Cell, and consult with your Covent for
more reason and wit, then you show in this, and the next scornful Paragraph;
wherein whiles you flout at my modest concession with an unbeseeming frump, you
are content silently to balke that my second answer, which you know was too
hot, or too heavy for your satisfaction.

In the second; the Imputation pretended to be cast by this Tenet upon all the
reformed Churches, which want this government, I indevoured so to satisfy,
that I might justly decline the envy, which is intended to be thereby raised
against us: For which cause, I professed that we do love and honor those our
sister Churches, as the dear spouse of Christ, and give zealous testimonies of
my well wishing to them.

Your uncharitableness offers to choke me with those scandalous censures, and
disgraceful terms which some of ours have let fall upon those Churches, and
their eminent professors, which I confess, it is more easy to be sorry for,
then (on some hands) to excuse; The error of a few may not be imputed to all.

My just defense is that no such consequent can be drawn from our opinion; for
as much as the Divine or Apostolical right, which we hold, goes not so high,
as if there were an express command, that upon an absolute necessity there
must be either Episcopacy, or no Church; but so far only, that it both may and
ought to be; How fain would you here find me in a contradiction? Whiles I
one-where reckon Episcopacy amongst matters essential to the Church, another
where, deny it to be of the essence thereof; Wherein you willingly hide your
eyes that you may not see the distinction that I make expressly betwixt the Being
and Well-beeing of a Church: Affirming that those Churches, to whom this power
and faculty is denied, lose nothing of the true essence of a Church, though
they miss something of their glory, and perfection.

No, Brethren, it is enough for some of your friends to hold their Discipline
altogether essential to the very being of a Church; We dare not be so zealous.

The question which you ask concerning the reason of the different
intertainment, given in our Church to priests converted to us from Rome, and to
Ministers, who in Qu. Mary's days had received Imposition of hands in Reformed
Churches abroad, is merely personal; neither can challenge my decision; Only
I give you these two answers; that what fault soever may be in the easy
admittance of those, who have received Romish Orders, the sticking at the
admission of our brethren returning from Reformed Churches, was not in case of
Ordination; but of Institution: they had been acknowledged Ministers of
Christ, without any other hands laid upon them, but according to the Laws of
our Land they were not, perhaps, capable of institution to a benefice, unless
they were so qualified, as the Statutes of this Realm do require; And
secondly I know those, more then one, that by virtue only of that Ordination,
which they have brought with them from other Reformed Churches, have enjoyed
Spiritual Promotions and Livings without any exception against the lawfulness
of their calling.

The confident affirmation which you allege of the learned bishop of Norwich
is no rule to us; B. Montague
I leave him to his own defense; You think I have too much work on my hand to
give satisfaction for myself in these two main Questions which arise from my
book.

What high points shall we now expect trow we?

First, whether that Office, which by divine right has sole power of
Ordination, and ruling all other Officers of the Church (which he says
Episcopacy has) belong not to the being, but only to the glory, and
perfection of a Church: Can we tell what these men would have? Have they a
mind to go beyond us in asserting that necessity, and essential use of
Episcopacy, which we dare not avow? Do they not care to lose their cause, so
they may cross an Adversary? For your Question, you still talk of sole
Ordination, and sole jurisdiction; you may ( if you please) keep that pair of
soles for your next shoes: We contend not for such an height of Propriety,
neither do we practice it; they are so ours, that they should not be without
us, as we have formerly showed; That therefore there should be a power of
lawful Ordination and government in every settled Church, it is no less then
necessary, but that in what case soever of extremity, and irresistible
necessity, this should be only done by Episcopal hands, we never meant to
affirm: It is enough that regularly it should be their Act.

Your second Question is, There being (in this man's thoughts) the same jus
Divinum for Bishops, that there is for Pastors and Elders, whether, if those
Reformed Churches, wanted Pastors and Elders too, they should want nothing of
the essence of a Church; but of the Perfection, and Glory of it: The answer is
ready: If those Reformed Churches, wanting those whom you call pastors and
Elders, did yet enjoy the government, by Bishops, Priests and Deacons, they
should be so far from wanting ought of the essence of a Church, that they
should herein attain to much glory and perfection: And so much for your deep
questions.

The presumptuous Remonstrant would seem to know so much of the mind of those
Churches, that he says, if they might have their option, he doubts not but
they would gladly embrace Episcopal government; a foul imputation which your
Zeal must needs wipe off; for which purpose you bring the confessions of the
French, and Dutch Churches, averring the truth, and justifiablenesse of their
own government; For which they have good reason: neither shall you herein
expect my contradiction; nor yet my present labor of reconciling their
government, and ours in the maine and material points of both, This condition
they are in, and they do well to defend it, but they did not tell you they
would not (if opportunity were offered) be content with a better; I am deceived
if their own public Constitutions be not still concluded with the power of a
Change; and I have elsewhere showed out of Fregevillaeus, that this Order of
Government was in their Churches at first only provisionall; and instanced in
those testimonies of approbation, which their learned Divines have freely given
to our form of Administration; which I shall not now stand either to repeat,
or multiply: Let it be enough for the present to say, that upon my certain
knowledge, many eminent Divines of the Churches abroad have earnestly wished
themselves in our condition, and have applauded and magnified our Church, as
the most Famous, Exemplary and glorious Church in the whole Christian World: So
as I wanted not good reason, for that which you are pleased to style
presumptuous assertion.

But the reason of my Assertion is yet so more offensive, that you Wonder how
it could fall from my Pen:

That there is little difference in the government of other Protestant
Churches and our own, save in the perpetuity of their Moderatorship, and the
exclusion of Lay Elders; A passage, belike, as you say, of admirable absurdity.
But soft, brethren, I am afraid, first, least you speak of what you know not;
I speak not only of the next Churches of France, and the Netherland, I speak
of them in a generality, as one that (if this place would bear it) could give
a particular account of them all: Neither can your cavills work my repentance.
You tell me of the Moderatour in Geneva (as if all the Church of God were
included in those strait walls) I could tell you of the superintendents of the
Churches of Germany, of the Prepositi in the Churches of Weteraw, Hessia,
Anhalt, of the Seniores, in Transylvania, Polonia, Bohemia; But what of the
Moderator in Geneva? He is not of a Superior Order to his Brethren; But let
me tell you, when Master Calvin was Moderatour there, as he constantly was
for many years, no Bishop in England swayed more, then he did in that Church:
And even in the Low Countries how much the Deputati Synodi, after they had
been frequently employed in those services, (as for instance, my ancient and
truly reverend friend Mr. Bogermannus) prevailed) and with what authority they
carry the affairs of the Church, it is not hard to understand; for those
other circumstances, which you are pleased to mention, were the moderatorship
perpetual; they would soon accordingly vary; and if not so, yet you may
remember, that I said not, no difference at all, but, little, whereof your well
affectednes to our Government can make this use, that then the Abrogation of
Episcopacy will be wrought with the less difficulty, and occasion the less
disturbance; The old word is; welfare a friend in a corner; still you are for
the destructive; none but the Babylonian note sounds well in your ear, Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground: But the God of Heaven whose cause
it is, will, we hope, vindicate his own ordinance, so long perpetuated to his
Church, from all your violent and subtle machinations, and prevent the utmost
danger of your already sufficiently raised disturbance.

SECT. XV.
COncerning the Lay Presbitery I said, and say still most justly, that it never
had footing in the Church of God till this present age: These wits cry out in
great sport, See, see, how like the man looks to Doctor Hall, in his
irrefragable Propositions? Truly, brethren, as like him, as ye are like your
selves: who are still scornful and insolent: but though ye be commonly
spightful, yet you are so seldom witty, that we may well bear with you for
once: be he like whom he will; Dr. Hall will sufficiently defend both those
Propositions, and this Remonstrance against all your impotent cavils: For this,
concerning the questioned Lay presbitery, You make a fair flourish to little
purpose: You do wisely to omit those three known Texts, which the world knows
have been so thoroughly canvased and eluded, and that famous Text of an
acknowledged counterfeit, Ambrose, so often exploded: we shall have now new
stuff from You, but of as little worth: Surely had the foregoing Patrons of
your Lay-Eldership found that they could have received any color of protection
from these places of Antiquity, alleged by you, they had not, after the raking
of all the channels of time, forborne the utmost urging of these Your
Testimonies, in their favor and defense; but they well saw how little reason
there was, to press those unproving evidences, which you will needs urge as
convictive.

Your testimony from Origin cannot but shame you, if yet you can blush; Orig.
contra Celsum c. 14.
you feared to cite the Chapter, that in so long a book, you might not be
discovered.

But the scope of the place is clearly thus, Origin is upon comparison of the
Philosophers and Christians in their care of teaching; Nam illi (scil.
Philosophi) propalam apud vulgus disserentes non sunt curiosi in descernendis
auditoribus, etc. For the Philosophers, says he, in their public discourses
to the people are not curious in the differences of their Auditors, but every
one that lists, comes and hears them at pleasure: But the Christians do, what
they may, carefully pre-examine the minds of those that desire to hear them:
and first they do privately so to those which are bewitched (with Paganism)
before they be received into the Congregation; And when they seem to have
come on so far, as to be desirous to live honestly, then do they bring them
in; but in distinct degrees; the one of those which are newly admitted, but
have not yet attained (the cognizance of their Purification,) Baptism; the
other of those which are now come on so far as to profess the Christian
Religion; in this latter rank are appointed some, which do inquire into the
lives and manners of those that come; that they may be a means to keep off
such Candidates of Religion as do carry themselves amiss, from their
Assemblies: And the rest that are like themselves, they may gladly receive: In
which passage it is most evident that Origin speaks of those which are newly
admitted into the Church, who by reason of their late knowledge and
acquaintance with those which they left behind them in Pagan superstition,
might be fit Monitours to know, and notify the condition of such Candidates
as did offer to come into the Church; Now these trusty Answerers would make the
World believe, that this is spoken of some Sage Elders, that were to govern
the Church; and (to deceive the Reader) unfaithfully turn the words, Nonnulli
Praepositi sunt, as if they were some ruling Elders indeed; (...)
Whereas the word signifies, and intends only a designation of such Novices as
were well approved, to an Office of Monitorship concerning those which would
profess to be Converts. And now to return your own words, we would gladly
know whether these were not, as it were, Lay Elders.

As for those other testimonies, which you have drawn hither out of Augustine,
Optatus, and the Letters of Fortis, and Purpurius out of Baronius; I could, if
need were, double your files in this kind, might that do you any service,
Vide Justellum, in notis ad Canon. African.
I could tell you out of the acts of the Purgation of Foelix and Caecilianus,
of Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, Seniores; out of the Synodal Epistle of the
Cabarsussitan council (as mentioned by Saint Augustine in his Enarration upon
the Psalms) Necesse nos fuerat Primiani causam Seniorum literis ejusdem
Ecclesiae postulantibus, audire atque discutere; which is a more pregnant place
then any you have brought; and could reckon You up yet more, out of the Code of
the African Canons, Can. 91. Out of Gregory Turonensis, who speaking of the
Bishop of Marselles brings him in to say, Nihil per me feci, etc. I did nothing
of my self, but that which was commanded me a Dominis nostris, and
Senioribus: Out of Gregory the great in his Epistles more then once, I could
weary you with supply of such authorities: But, Brethren, I shall sadly tell you,
that you do herein nothing but abuse your Reader, with a colorable pretense:
For all those places you allege, are nothing at all to the purpose in hand.
Who can make question but that Carthage and Hippo, and other African Cities,
had old and grave men in them? Who can doubt that they had Magistrates and men
in authority? Such, as we still are wont out of the ancient appellation, to
style Aldermen? Who can doubt that they did in all great occasions of the
Church take the advice, and assistance of these prime men? But will it hence
follow that in the sense you contend for, they had a Settled Lay Presbytery? Was
their Church ere the more (according to your construction) governed by Pastors,
Elders, Deacons? That these forecited were such, as we have intimated, is most
evident; in the Affrican Canons ( Can 100) they are called (...) the old men;
And in the 91 Canon, we find as a Commentary upon this point, Debere
unumquemque nostrum in civitate sua convenire Donatistarum Praepositos, aut
adjungere sibi vicinum Collegam, ut pariter eos in singulis quibusque
Civitatibus per Magistratus, vel Seniores locorum conveniant That is, That
every one of us should in our own Cities meet with the chief Governors of the
Donatists, and take with him some neighbor as his Colleague or Assistant, that
they together may give them a meeting by the Magistrates or Elders of the
places.

But you will say, there were those which were called Seniores Ecclesiastici;
ecclesiastical Elders also; (...). Can. Afr. 91
True, there were such, Iustellus confesses so much, and learned Isaacus
Causabonus (whose manuscript notes I have seen,) and his worthy Son, Mericus
Causabonus in his notes upon Optatus, yield no less, but these they do truly
say, were but as our Churchwardens; men that were trusted with the utensils,
stock, and outward affairs of the Church; or, as I may more fully compare them,
our vestrymen: who are commonly and of old designed under the name of the eight
men, or twelve men, in every great parish (as I am sure it is in the Western
parts) to order the businesses of Seats, Aug. contra Crescon. l. 3. Omnes vos
Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, and Seniores scitis, etc. where against your own
knowledge you translate Presbyteri (Elders) to bleare the Readers eyes, with a
show of a double sort of Elders, whereas Presbyteri are there manifestly
distinguished from Seniores.
and rates, and such like external occasions; now that those places which you
have cited intend no other Elders, then these, you shall he convinced out of
your own testimonies.

The place which you bring out of Saint Austen co^tra Cresconium Gra^maticum,
runs thus; Omnes vos, etc. All you Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Elders, do
know, etc. where you see plainly that the Elders which he means are below
Deacons, and so you shall find them, wheresoever they are mentioned; now those
that you contend for, are by your own claim, in a Key above them. Optatus whom
you cite is clear against your sense; whiles he makes only quatuor genera
capitum only four sorts of me^ in the Church; Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and
the faithful ( Laity) And in his first book against Parmenian, Quid commemore^
Laicos, etc. he reckons up, mere Laics, Ministers, Deacons; Presbyteros
secundo sacerdotio constitutos, Presbyters in the second degree of Priesthood,
and principes omnium Episcopos, and the chief of all Bishops. Shortly,
brethren, that there were in the Church of old ruling Elders, which were in a
rank above Deaco^s, and had together with the pastors a settled power of
government, in the Church, it is an opinion no less new, then unjustifiable;
and I do here solemnly profess, that if any one such instance can be brought,
I will renounce Episcopacie for ever. Do not the^, against the light of your own
knowledge set a face on proofs of those things, which never were, but give
glory to God in yielding to so undoubted and clear a truth.

SECT. XVI.XVII.XVIII.
THe rest that remains is but mere Declamation, not worthy of any answer, but
contempt and silence; It is most true that the religious Bishops of all times
have strongly upheld the truth of God against Satan and his Antichrist.

What can you say to this? You tell me of some irreligious ones, that have as
strongly upheld Satan and his Antichrist against the truth of GOD; What is this
to the calling? can not I tell you of some wicked and irreligious Presbyters,
shall the function it self therefore suffer? You tell us What an unpreaching
Bishop once said of a Preacher; I challeng you to show any unpreaching Bishop
in the Church of England this day? it is your slander, this, not their just
Epithete: the scandalls of our inferior Ministers, I profess I could not but
bleed to see, but withal desired to have had them less public; your charity
accuses me of excusing them, and blaming my humble motion of Constantines
example, profess to desire the blazoning of them to the World; Whether of us
shall give a better account of our charity to the God of peace, I appeal to
that great Tribunal.

In your next Section, like ill-bred sonns, you spit in the face of your
mother; A Mother too good for such sons; The Church of England; and tell us
of Papists that dazzle the eyes of poor people with the glorious name of the
holy Mother the Church; If they be too fond of their Mother, I am sure your
Mother has little cause to be fond of you; Who can and dare compare her to
those Ethiopian strumpets, which were common to all comers; For your whole
undutifull carriage toward her, take heed of the Ravens of the valley: As if
we were no less strangers, then you enemies to the Church of England, you
tell the World that we know not who she is; and that we wonder when we are
asked the question; and run descant upon the two Archbishops, Bishops,
Convocation; Even what your luxuriant wit shall please* and at last you make up
your mouth with a merry jest, telling your Reader that the Remonstrant, out of
his simplicity, never heard, nor thought of any more Churches of England then
one Ridiculum caput! Sit you merry, Brethren but truly after all your sport,
still my simplicity tells me there is but one Church of England; There are
many Churches in England; but many Churches of England, were never till now
heard of; You had need fetch it as far as the Heptarchie; And to show how far
you are from the objected simplicity, ye tell us in the shutting up* that
England, Scotland, and Ireland, are all one Church. Nullum magnum ingenium sine
mixtura dementiae.

But now take heed of Obelisks: You profess, you for your parts do acknowledge
no Antiprelaticall Church: I am glad to hear it; nor I neither; but I beseech
you, if you make and condemn a Prelaticall Church of England, what shall be
the other part of the Contradistinction?

The Remonstrant tells you of further divisions, and subdivisions, which upon
this ground you must necessarily make of the Church, your deep wisdoms take
this, as of his upbrading of the divisions in the Church, in mere matter of
Opinion, and fly out into the censures of the Prelaticall party, as the cause
thereof; and would have them say, Mitte nos in Mare, and non erit tempestas;
The truth is, the severalties of Sects, and their separate Congregations about
this City are many and lamentable; I do not upbraid, but bewail them; The
God of Heaven be Judge where the fault rests, and (if it be his holy will)
find some speedy redress, but in the mean time, one casts it upon faction,
another upon ungrounded rigor, wheresoever it be, Woe be to those by whom
the offense comes; Lay you your hands on your hearts onwards, and consider
well Whether your fomenting of so unjust and deep dislikes of lawful
government have not been too much guilty of these woeful breaches.

As one that love that peace of the Church which you are willing to trouble, I
persuading an unity, ask what bounders you set, what distinction of Professors
you make, what grounds of Faith, what new Creed, what different Scriptures,
Baptism, means of salvation are held by that part which you mis-call the
Prelaticall Church; You answer according to your wonted Charity, and Truth.

What bounds? Those (you say) of the sixth Canon* from the high and lofty
Promontory of Archbishops, to the Terra incognita of an etc. Witty again. Alas,
brethren, if this be all, the Lists are too narrow. Here are but four ranks of
Dignities, and few in each; put if that inclusive, [etc.] reach far, yet what
will you make of all this?

Do you exclude Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. from being members of the
Church of England? sure you dare not be so shamefully unjust: If therefore,
that they have an interest in the Prelacy, cannot exclude them for their
interest in the Church: What becomes of your bounders? This is fit work for
your Obelisk.

What distinction? you say, worshipping to the East, bowing to the Altar,
prostituting (perhaps you mean prostrating) themselves in their approches into
Churches: and are these fit distinctions, brethren, whereupon to ground
different churches? if they difference men, do they difference Christians?

What new Creed? you say, Episcopacie by divine right is the first article of
their Creed. For shame brethren, did ever man make this an article of faith?
who will think you worthy to have any faith given you in the rest of your
assertions? you add; absolute and blind obedience to all the commandments of
Bishops; Blush yet again, Brethren, blush to affirm this, when you well know
that the words of the oath of Canonical obedience run only, In omnibus licitis
and honestis mandatis, in all lawful and honest commands.

You add, Election upon faith foreseen; What? nothing but gross untruths? Is
this the doctrine of the Bishops of England, have they not strongly confuted it
in Papists, in Arminians; have they not cried it down to the pit of Hell? What
means this wickedly false suggestion? judge Reader, if here be not work for
Obelisks.

What Scripture? you say, Apocrypha, and Traditions unwritten; Mark I beseech
you, unwritten Traditions are Scriptures, first: then Apocrypha; and why, I
pray you, is it more our Apocrypha, then yours? Are all our Bibles Prelaticall
too? Shortly all those Churches and houses, and persons that have the Apocrypha
in their Bibles belong to the Church Prelaticall, what have we lost by the
match.

What Baptism? What Eucharist? You tell us of the absolute necessity which
some Popish fools have ascribed to the one; and of an Altar and table set
Altarwise in the other What are these to the Church of England? does the error
of every addle head? or the sight or posture of a Board make a different Church?

What Christ? You answer, (near to a blasphemy;) A Christ who has given the
same power of absolution to a Priest that himself has: This can be nothing
but a slanderous fiction; No Christian Divine ever held that a Priests power of
absolution was any other then ministerial; Christ's Sovereign and absolute. If
you know the man bring him forth that he may be stoned.

What Heaven? you say, such as is receptive of Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers.
Brethren, take heed of an Hell, whiles you fain such an Heaven* and fear lest
your uncharitableness will no less bar you out of the true Heaven above, then
you bar Prelaticall sinners from their access thereinto: but, if you had
rather, go on still in your own way, separate your selves from us that
profess we are one with you; Charge upon us those doctrines and opinions
which we hate no whit less then your selves, fasten upon the Church of
England those exoticall positions of unsound teachers, which it self has in
terminis condemned; and say as you are not ashamed to do, We thank God we are
none of you; we forgive you, and pray for your repentance.

Your Quaeres, wherein I see you trust much, are made up of nothing but spite
and slander: If I answer you with questions shorter then your own, and more
charitable, you will excuse me. In answer then to your first, I ask,

Iure bumano, then it was in Master Calvin?

James himself of blessed memory that said, No Bishop, no King; and if it were
he, whether that wise King did not mean to prejudice his own authority?



or grace to understand the true meaning of the Ius Divinum of Episcopacie? or
if they did, whether they could possibly be so absurd, as to raise so senseless
and inconsequent inferences upon it?



Beza have not heard foundly of his distinction of the three kinds of
Episcopacie, in the full and learned answer of Saravia: and whether he might
not have been better advised then in that conceit of his, to cross all
reverend antiquity: and whether the Painter that dressed up his Picture after the
fancy of every passenger, do not more fitly resemble those, that frame their
discipline according to the humor of their people, varying their projects
every day, then those which hold them constantly to the only ancient and
Apostolical form.



Peter the promise of the Keys, did therein intend to give it (in respect of
the power of public jurisdiction) to any other save the Apostles; and their
Successors the Bishops; and whether ever any Father or Doctor of the Church
till this present age, held that Presbyters were the Successors to the
Apostles, and not to the seventy Disciples rather.

Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest of that sacred order; men which had
as little to do with Antichrist, as our answerers have with charity.

Aerius, in that for which he was censured of the ancient Saints, and Fathers
of the Church; and whether the whole Church of Christ ever since his time till
this age have not abandoned those very errors concerning the equality of
Bishops and Presbyters which they now presume to maintain.

Rome do, or did consist in maintayning the order of government set by the
Apostles themselves; and whether all the Churches in the whole Christian World
(even those that are professedly opposite to the Church of Rome) do let in
Antichrist by the door of their Discipline, since they all maintain
Episcopacie no less constantly then Rome it self;



Episcopacie (which has labored strongly to oppose it) and whether the
multitudes of Sects, and professed slovenlynesse in Gods service, (in too many)
have not bin guilty of the increase of profanesse amongst us.

England one of the most famous Churches of Christendom, separate it self
from that form of government, which all Churches through the whole Christian
World have ever observed, and do constantly and uniformely observe and
maintain; and why should not rather other less noble Churches conform to that
universal government which all other Christians besides do gladly submit unto.

allow you to be Bishops all will not be well.

Whether since both God has set such a government in his Church, as
Episcopacie, and the Laws of this Land have firmly established it, it can be
lawful for you to deny your subjection unto it; and whether it were not most
lawful and just to punish your presumption and disobedience in framing so
factious a question?

And thus I hope you have a sufficient answer to your bold and unjust demands,
and to those vain cavills which you have raised against the humble
Remonstrance.

God give you Wisdom to see the Truth, and Grace to follow it, Amen,

To the Poscript.
THe best beauty that you could have added to your discourse, brethren, had
been honesty and truth both in your allegations of Testimonies, and inferences
of argumentation; In both which I must needs say (and I speak it in the
presence of God to whom I must shortly give an account) that I never saw any
Writer that would dare to profess Christian syncerity, so foully to overlash; as
if ye made no conscience by what means you uphold a side, or win a proselyte;
God touch your hearts with a true sense of that whereof you cannot be but in
this discourse convinced.

Now you think to garnish your work with a goodly Pasquin borrowed (for a
great part) out of Sion's Plea, and the Breviate consisting of a rhapsodye of
Histories, concerning the pride, insolence, treachery, cruelty, and all other
the deadly sins of popish prelates, but especially of those, who swayed the Sea of Canterbury, in those days of Darkness and Renish Tyranny. Whereto I
suppose you expect no answer as being a thing utterly unconcerning us; and
that, whereof I might say (setting aside the ill intention of an application)
as Huntingdoniensis said of the Cardinals adultery, Celari non potuit, negari
non debuit. But tell me brethren what can be your drift in this your tedious
relation? Is there any man that offers to undertake their patrocination? or is
it any advantage to you to make their memory yet more odious? Let them have
been as foul as ill will can make them; Let them have been in their times
Devils incarnate; what is that to us? They were Bishops you say. True, but
they were popish bishops; limbs of that body, whose head we abjure; the fault
of their wickedness was in the Popery, not in the Episcopacie, in the men, not
the calling, why should you think to choke us with these hateful instances If
I should go about to rake together all the insolences, murders, incests,
treasons, and villainies, that have been done by Popish Presbyters in the time
of that lawless ignorance, and superstition, would you think these could be
any blemish to you? why will you then be so miserably uncharitable, as to cast
upon us the crimes of those whom we equally condemn, and to feoffe their
faults upon their chaires? what one profession is there in all mankind, which
if we should go about to ransack, would not yield some persons extremely
vicious, shall the vocation be condemned, for the crimes of the men? At last
to make up the mouth of your admirable charity, You tell us of the gracious
practices of the Prelates from the beginning of Queen Elizabets Reign to this
present day; whose great design, you say, still has been to hinder
reformation, to further Popery and Arminianisme, to beat down preaching, to
persecute zealous Professors, and some such other noble projects of Episcopal
piety: Tell me Brethren, as you will answer it before the just Judge of all
the World; Have these been the main designs of Bishops? Are they all guilty
of these woeful enormities, or are they not; If ye say they are, the World
will cry shame on your falsehood; If they are not, the World will cry no less
shame on your injustice, in taxing all for the fault of some: What? are these
the only remarkable works that your eyes could discover to fall from the hands
of Bishops? could you see no Colleges, no Hospitalls built? no Churches
re-edified? no learned Volumes written? no heresies confuted? no seduced
persons reclaimed? no hospitality kept? no great offenders punished? no
disorders corrected? no good offices done for the public? no care of the
peace of the Church? No diligence in preaching? No holiness in living? Truly,
brethren, I can say no more, but that the fault is in your eyes, and not in your
object: Wipe them, and look better; Yea, I beseech God to open them rather,
that they may see good, as well, as evil.

As for that base and scurrilous Proverb, to which you say it is now comne
(whereas the World knows it is elder then your Grandsires, and was taken up,
in the popish times) it were more fit for a Scurra in trivio, or some Ribald
upon an Ale-bench, then for grave Divines.

How easy were it for me to reckon up an hundred of such spightfull Adages
which vulgar envy has been wont to cast upon the rest of the Clergy, worthy
of nothing but scorn? and so had this bin, if your wit and charity had not bin
alike; But surely, Brethren, if whatsoever is spoiled, they say, The Bishops
foot has been in it; I doubt not but they will say, The Bishops foot has
been in your Book, for I am sure it is quite spoiled by this just confutation.
Afier your own pottage (for your Proverb sapit ollam) you tell us of Boner's
broth; I should have too much wondered at this conclusion, but that I hear it
is the fashion in some Countries, to send in their Keal in the last service,
and this, it seems, is the manner amongst our Smectymnuans.

Well; to shut up all, let them of their Boners beef and broth, make what
Brewesse they please for their credulous guests: Learned and worthy Doctor
Moulin shall tell them, that the restoration of the English Church, and
eversion of Popery, P. Moulin. Epist. 3. ad Episcop. Winton, etc.
next under God, and our King, is chiefly to be ascribed and owed to the
learning and industry of our Bishops; some whereof being crowned with
Martyrdom, subscribed the Gospel with their blood; Thus he; Neither doubt I
but that many of them (if occasion were offered) would be ready to imitate them
in those red Characters.

In the mean time I beseech the God of Heaven to humble you in the sight and
sense of your own grievous uncharitableness, and to put (at last) into your
hearts and tongues, the Counsels of Peace.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER.
KNow Reader, that whereas in one of those many angry Pamphlets, which have
been lately published, there is an intimation given of some disgraceful
language that fell from Dr. Voetius, the learned professor of Vtrecht,
concerning the person of Doct. Hall B. of Exeter; there has been serious
inquisition made into the truth of that report; and that the said D. Voetius
disavowes (to the party that inquired of it) any such words of under-valuation,
by him spoken, as it is testified under the hand of Sir William Boswell Knight,
his Majesty's Lieger with the states: And, if, upon the sight of a displeasing
title of a Book (contrary to his own judgment) any learned Divine, should
have passed a censure upon the work; there was small reason for the reporters
to reflect upon the person of the author. Yea, I am confident that many of our
worthy brethren at home, who are differently minded concerning this tenet of
the right of Episcopacie, if they would be pleased to inform themselves
thoroughly of the state of the question, as it is defended by the Author of
that treatise, would find small cause of scruple in this opinion. For whereas
there are three degrees of truths, and holy institutions (as they are commonly
distinguished) Humane, Apostolic, Divine; The first from mere men; The second
from men Apostolical; The third from God himself immediately; The Author
desires to go a Midway in this difference; holding it too low to derive
Episcopacy from a merely humane, and Ecclesiastical Ordinance; holding it too
high to deduce it from an immediate command from God; and therefore pitching
upon an Apostolical institution; rests there: but because those Apostles were
divinely inspired, and had the directio^s of Gods spirit for those things which
they did for the common administration of the Church, therefore, and in that
only name is Episcopacie said to lay claim to a Divine right; howsoever also
it cannot be gainsaid that the grounds were formerly laid by our Savior in a
known imparity of his first agents; Now surely this truth has so little
reason to distaste them, that, even learned Chamier himself can say; Res ipsa
coepit tempore Apostolorum, vel potius ab ipsis profecta est. And why should
that seem harsh in us, which sounds well in the mouths of lesse-interessed
Divines? but because the very title of that book has raised more dust then the
treatise it self; Be pleased, Readers, to see, that this very question is in
the very same terms determined by that eminent light of the Palatinate; Dr.
Abrah. Scultetus; whose tract to this purpose I have thought fit to annex.

Peruse it, and judge whether of those two writers have gone further in this
determination; And if you shall not meet with convincing reasons to bring you
home to this opinion; yet, at leastwise find cause enough to retain a
charitable and favorable conceit of those, who are (as they think, upon good
grounds) otherwise minded; and whilst it is on all parts agreed by wise and
unprejudiced Christians, that the calling is thus ancient and sacred; let it
not violate the peace of the Church to scan the original, whether
Ecclesiastical, Apostolical, or divine. Shortly, let all good men humbly
submit to the Ordinance, and heartily wish the Reformation of any abuses.

And so many as are of this mind, Peace be upon them, and the whole Israel of
GOD.

AMEN.
THE DETERMINATION of the question, Concerning the Divine Right of EPISCOPACY.

By the famous and learned Divine Dr. Abrahamus Scultetus, late Professor of
divinity in the University of HEIDELBERG.

Faithfully translated out of his Observations upon the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus.

LONDON Printed for NATHANIELL BVTTER. 1641,

The Question.
Whether Episcopacie be of Divine right? That is, whether the Apostles ordained
this Government of the Church, that not only one should be placed over the
people, but over Presbyters and Deacons, who should have the power of
Imposition of Hands, or Ordination, and the direction of Ecclesiastical
Counsels.

THis was anciently denied by Aerius, as is related by Epiphanius, in his 75
Heresy, and by John of Jerusalem, as appears by Hierome, in his Epistle to
Pammachius. And there are not wanting in these days many learned and pious
men, who, although they acknowledge Aerius to have erred, in that he should
disallow of that manner of Ecclesiastical government, which had been received
by the whole World; yet in this they agree with him, that Episcopal government
is not of Divine Right. From whose opinion why I should sever my judgment, I
am moved by these strong reasons, famous examples, and evident authorities.

My judgment is this;

First, in the Apostles Epistles the name of Bishop did never signify any
thing different from the office of a Presbyter. For a Bishop, Presbyter, and an
Apostle, were common names, as you may see Act. 20. Phil. 1. v. 1. Tit. 1. 1.
Pet. v. 12. Act. 1.20.

Next. In the chief Apostolical Church, the Church was governed by the common
advice of Presbyters; and that for some years in the time of the preaching of
the Apostles. For first of all, companies must be gathered together, before we
can define any thing concerning their perpetual government.

Then, the Apostles, as long as they were present or near their Churches, did
not place any Bishop over them, properly so called, but only Presbyters,
reserving Episcopal authority to themselves alone.

Lastly, after the Gospel was far and near propagated, and that out of
equality of Presbyters, by the instinct of the Devil, Schisms were made in
Religion, then the Apostles (especially in the more remote places) placed some
over the Pastors, or Presbyters, which shortly after, by the Disciples of the
Apostles, Ignatius, and others, were only called bishops, and by this
appellation, they were distinguished from Presbyters and Deacons.

Reasons moving me to this opinion? First, Hierome upon the 1. Chapter of the
Epistle to Titus, writes, that a Presbyter is the same with a Bishop, and
before that, by the instinct of the Devil, factions were made in Religion, and
it was said among the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, but I of Cephas, the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of Presbyters: afterward it was
decreed in the whole world, that one chosen out of the Presbyters, should be
placed over the rest.

From whence I thus argue.

When it began to be said among the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, but I of
Cephas, then one chosen out of the Presbyters, was placed over the rest.

But whiles the Apostles lived, it was so said among the people. As the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, besides other of St. Paul's Epistles, puts it out of
doubt. Therefore, while the Apostles lived, one chosen out of the Presbyters
was placed over the rest.

Again, There can be no other term assigned, in which Bishops were first
made, then the time of the Apostles; for all the prime successors of the
Apostles were Bishops: witness the successions of Bishops in the most famous
Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome, as it is in Eusebius,
therefore, either the next successors of the Apostles, changed the force of
Ecclesiastical government, received from the Apostles, according to their own
pleasure, which is very unlikely, or the Episcopal government came from the
Apostles themselves.

Besides, even then in the time of the Apostles, there were many Presbyters,
but one Bishop, even then in the time of the Apostles, (...), he that was
placed over the rest, which afterward was called Bishop, did impose hands, or
ordain Ministers of the Word, which Presbyters alone did not presume to do.
Even then, therefore, the calling of Bishops was distinct from the Office of
Presbyters.

If any desire the examples of Apostolical Bishops, the books of the ancient
are full of the Episcopal authority, of Timothy and Titus, either of which,
howsoever, first performed the office of an Evangelist, yet notwithstanding,
ceased to be an Evangelist, after that Timothy was placed over the Church of
Ephesus, and Titus over the Church of Crete; For Evangelists did only lay the
foundations of faith in foreign places, and then did commend the rest of the
care to certain Pastors, but they themselves went to other Countries, and
Nations, as Eusebius writes in his third Book of Ecclesiastical History, and
34. Chap. But Paul taught sometimes in Ephesus and Crete and laid the
foundations of Faith there; therefore he commands Timothy to stay at Ephesus,
and Titus at Crete, not as Evangelists but as governors of the Churches.

And indeed, the Epistles, written to either of them, do evince the same; for
in these, he does not prescribe the manner of gathering together a Church,
which was the duty of an Evangelist, but the manner of governing a Church,
being already gathered together, which is the duty of a Bishop; and all the
precepts in those Epistles, are so conformable hereunto, as that they are not
referred in especial to Timothy, and Titus, but in general to all Bishops, and
therefore in no wise, they suit with the temporary power of Evangelists.

Besides, that Timothy and Titus, had Episcopal jurisdiction, not only
Eusebius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrosius, Hierome, Epiphanius, Oecumenius,
Primasius, Theophylact, but also the most ancient writers, of any that write
the History of the new Testament, whose writings are now lost, do sufficiently
declare: Eusebius without doubt appealing unto those, in his third book of
Ecclesiastical History and 4. chapter, Timothy (says he) in Histories is
written to be the first which was made Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, as
Titus was the first, that was made Bishop of the Church of Crete.

But if John the Apostle, and not any ancient Disciple of the Apostles, be the
author of the Revelation, he suggests unto us, those seven new Examples of
Apostolical Bishops: For all the most learned Interpreters interpret the seven
Angels of the Churches, to be the seven Bishops of the Churches; neither can
they do otherwise, unless they should offer violence to the text.

What should I speak of James, not the Apostles but the Brother of our
Savior, the Son in law of the Mother of our Lord: who by the Apostles, was
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, as Eusebius, in his 2d. book of Ecclesiastical
History, and 1 chap. out of the 6. of the Hypotyposes of Clement, Hierome
concerning Ecclesiastical writers, out of the 1. of the Comments of Egesippus,
relate, Ambrose upon the 1. chap. unto the Galatians, Chrysostom in his 23
Homily upon the 15 of the Acts, Augustine in his 2d. book and 37 chap. against
Cresconius, Epiphanius in his 65, Heresy, The 6. Synod in Tullo, and 32 Canon,
all assenting thereunto. For indeed, this is that James that had his first
residence at Jerusalem, as an ordinary Bishop, whom Paul in his first, and last
coming to Jerusalem, found in the City; almost all the Apostles preaching in
other places, Gal. 1.19. and that concluded those things, which were decreed in
the assembly of the Apostles, Act. 21. For he was with Chrysostom Bishop of
the Church of Jerusalem, from whom when certain came, Peter would not eat
with the Gentiles. Galat. 2.12.

From examples, I pass to authorities, which Ignatius confirms by his own
authority,

Whose axioms are these. The Bishop is he, which is superior in all chiefty,
and power. The Presbytery, is a holy company of counselors, and assessours to
the Bishop. The deacons are the imitators of angelical virtues, which show
forth their pure, and unblameable ministry. He which does not obey these, is
without God, impure, and contemnes Christ, and derogates from his order, and
constitution, in his Epistle to the Trallians.

In an other place, I exhort that ye study to do all things with concord. The
Bishop being president in the place of God. The Presbyters in place of the
Apostolic Senate, the Deacons as those to whom was committed the Ministry of
Jesus Christ, in his Epistle to the Magnesians.

And again, Let the Presbyters be subject to the Bishop, the Deacons to the
Presbyters, the people to the Presbyters and Deacons, in his Epistle to those
of Tarsus.

But Ignatius was the Disciple of the Apostles, from whence then had he this
Hierarchy but from the Apostles?

Let us now hear Epiphanius in his 75. Heresy. The Apostles could not
presently appoint all things: Presbyters and Deacons were necessary; for by
these two, Ecclesiastical affairs might be dispatch. Where there was not
found any f^t for the Episeopacie, that place remained without a Bishop, but
where there was need, and there were any fit for Episcopacy, they were made
Bishops. All things were not complete from the beginning, but in tract of time
all things were provided which were required for the perfection of those things
which were necessary, the Church by this means receiving the fullness of
dispensation.

But Eusebius comes nearer to the matter, and more strongly handles the cause,
who in his third book of Ecclesiastical History, and 22: chapter, as also in
his Chronicle affirms that Erodius was ordained the 1. Bishop of Antioch in
the year of our Lord. 45. in the 3. year of Claudius the Emperor: at which
time, many of the Apostles were alive. Now Hierome writes to Evagrius, that at
Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclius and Dionisius the Bishop,
the Presbyters called one, chosen out of themselves, and placed in a higher
degree, the Bishop. But Mark dyed, as Eusebius, and Bucholcerus testify, in
the year of our Lord 64. Peter, Paul, and John, the Apostles, being then
alive: therefore, it is clear, that Episcopacie was instituted in the time of
the Apostles, and good Hierome suffered some frailty, when he wrote, that
Bishops were greater then Presbyters, rather by the custom of the Church, then
the truth of the Lords disposing; unless perhaps, by the custom of the
Church, he understands the custom of the Apostles, and by the truth of the
Lords disposing, he understands the apointment of Christ, yet not so, he
satisfies the truth of History. For it appears out of the 1.2. and 3. Chapters
of the Revelation, that the form of governing the Church by Angels or Bishops,
was not only ratified, and established, in the time of the Apostles, but it was
confirmed by the very Son of God. And Ignatius called that form the order of
Christ.

And when Hierome writes, that it was decreed in the whole World, that one
chosen out of the Presbyters should be placed over the rest. And when I have
demonstrated, that in the lifetime of the Apostles, Bishops were superior to
Presbyters in Ordination: and that each Church had one placed over it, do we
not without cause demand; where, when, and by whom Episcopacie was ordained?
Episcopacie therefore is of divine right. Which, how the Prelates of the Church
of Rome, for almost 300. years, did adorn with the truth of Doctrine,
innocence of life, constancy in afflictions, and suffering Death it self for
the honor of Christ; and on the other side, how in succeding times, first by
their ambition, next by their excessive pragmaticall covetousness, scraping up
to themselves the goods of this world, then by their heresy, last of all by
their tyranny they corrupted it, that the Roman Hierarchy, at this day, has
nothing else left but a vizard of the Apostolical Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and the lively image of the whore of Babylon, our Histories both ancient and
modern do abundantly testify.

Wherefore all Bishops are warned from hence, that they thoroughly weigh with
themselves the nature of Apostolical Episcopacie, of which they glory that
they are the successors.

That Episcopacie had two things peculiar to it, the privilege of succeeding,
and the prerogative of ordaining: all other things were common to them with the
Presbyters. Therefore both Bishops and Presbyters, should so exercise
themselves in godliness, should so free themselves from contempt by their
conversation, and so make themselves examples to their flock; not neglecting
especially the gift of prophesying, received from above, but being wholly
intent, to reading, consolation, and teaching: to meditate on these things, to
be wholly conversant in them; and so perpetually employed in this holy
function, and divine affairs, with this promise, that if they shall do these
things, they shall both save themselves, and their Auditors, but if after the
custom of some great ones, they follow the pride and luxury of this World,
they shall both destroy themselves, and them that hear them.(*)

FINIS.
THE JUDGMENT OF The learned Divine, Doctor Abrahamus Scultetus, prime
professor of Divinity at HEIDELBERGE, Concerning Lay Elders.
OBSERVATIONS Upon 1 Timothy, by Abraham Scultetus. Cap. 27. Concerning 1. Tim.
5.17.
THere are some that think this place of Scripture is of force enough to make
good a Lay-Presbytery* for their eyes and judgments are dazzled with. that
distinction of Elders, which they suppose, to be clearly intimated here by S.
Paul: But, if they shall have diligently scanned the place, and compared it
with other Texts of Scripture, they shall soon find that the defense of Lay
Elders out of this place, is both contrary to the signification of the Word
((...)) i e. those that rule, and contrary to the signification of the Word
Presbyter; and that it is quite against St. Paul's perpetual Doctrine, and it
is against the judgment of all the Fathers, that have expounded this speech of
Saint Paul.

It is contrary to the signification of the Word ((...)) for ((...)) or
Ecclesiastical rule or government is an honor wherewith only Ministers of
Gods word are invested in the new Testament, and not any Lay Persons: We
beseech you brethren says the Apostle, 1 These. v. 12. That you know those that
labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and that admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake: upon which words, says
Calvin, it is worthy to be observed; what titles he gives to Pastors. First he
says, that they labor, and then he sets them forth, by the name of rule, or
governance. And Beza upon the place it appears from hence, that the Church was
governed by Pastors in common, and that the degree of a Bishop was not thought
of, and therefore ((...)) to rule, is the same with ((...)) to lead, because
the shepherds are wont to go before their flock. But the Apostle Heb. 13.7.
and 17. calls the Ministers of the Word Leaders. Therefore, according to Beza,
we must acknowledge those that are over the people, are the Ministers of the
word: neither does Justin Martyr in his Apology to Antonius call the ((...))
any other then the pastor and teacher of the Congregation.

Moreover, the defense of Lay Elders out of this present text of St. Paul, is
contrary to the signification of the word Presbyter, which when it is used,
concerning the polity of the new Testament, does always signify the Ministers
of the word: Acts 11.30. They sent their collection to the Elders by the hands
of Barnabas, and Saul, that is to the Ministers, of whom it is said, Acts
14.13. (...) They ordained them Elders in every Church: And Acts 15.2. A main
question of faith is propounded to the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem; but
what? to be decided by Laymen? for the Elders met with the Apostles to
consider of this matter, Acts 15.6.

And the Presbyters are joined together with the Apostles Verse 22. and are
distinguished from the whole Church, as also v. 23. and chap. 16.4. Again in
the 20. of the Acts the Elders of Ephesus verse 17. are said to be made Bishops
to feed the flock of Christ, ver. 18. and in Acts 21.18. and the verses
following, the Presbyters or Elders of Jerusalem instruct the Apostle Paul what
he is to do; and therefore were no Laymen. In this very Chapter, when Timothy
is commanded to receive no accusation against an Elder, the Elder there is a
teacher, as shall be showed in the next chapter. Titus 1.5. that thou may
ordain Elders in every City* what kind of Elders? surely, teachers; for he
adds, if any be blameless. etc. for a Bishop must be unreproveable, etc.

And James 5.14. The sick are bidden to send for the Elders of the Church, that
they may pray over, and anoint the sick with oil in the name of the Lord,
which is no Lay-mans duty: 1 Peter 5.1. The Elders I exhort who am also a
fellow-Elder, feed the flock; How is he a fellow-Elder, but because he is a
teacher as they?

And they are charged to feed the flook, therefore Pastors, 2, John 1. and 3
Ioh. 1. John the Apostle without all question is called an Elder. Ignatius
makes often mention of Elders, or Presbyters in his Epistles, but never of
Lay Elders. And in his Epistle to those of Tarsus describing the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of his time, he says ((...)) Let the Presbyters be
subject to the Bishops, and the Deacons to the Presbyters, and the Laymen to
both Deacons, and Presbyters: and to the Magnesians As the Lord says he does
nothing without the Father: so neither do you without your Bishop, neither
Presbyter, nor deacon, nor Laick. Where observe that the very Deacons did not
sit in the Presbytery Apostolic, much less Laymen.

Thirdly, the defense of Lay Elders out of the 17. verse of Chap. 5. of the 1.
Tim. is against the Perpetual doctrine of St. Paul: for to give honor to the
Presbyters, or Elders, is to honor them with maintenance, out of the public
stock of the Church; for so the Apostle, before, commands these that are indeed
Widows to be honored, that is to be designed to public attendances and
allowances; And the reason which the Apostle gives, confirms this explication
of the honor required; When he says thou shall not muzzle the Ox that
treads out the corn. And in Matthew the honor of Parents is chiefly to be
taken of meat and maintenance, which signification is very familiar and proper
to the word ( Kabud) used in the fifth commandment, and so the word is
expounded by Mark 7.12. But maintenance, out of the stock of the Church, the
Apostle would not have to be given even to such poor widows, as could be
otherwise provided for; as before verse 16. And he himself labored with his
own hands, that he might not be burdensome to others, much less would he
have the chief of the Laity who abound with wealth to be maintained of the
common store; and that more liberally then others: For, if by those that rule
well, you shall understand both Lay Elders and sacred also, you must needs
conclude, that they are all worthy of double honor, both those which rule, and
those which labor in Doctrine: which conclusion the Apostle is against
elsewhere; whilst he says, those which serve at the Altar, must partake of
the Altar. And the Lord himself who has appointed that those which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1. Corinthians 9.13.14. Whereupon Hierome in
the same place; he would says he, have them to yield carnal things to those
of whom they receive spiritual things, because they being taken up in teaching,
cannot provide necessary things for themselves. Yea, I say yet more, if St.
Paul had, by those that rule, understood Lay Elders, certainly he would
some-where have put them in mind of their duty, or, at least have made mention
of them, 1 Timothy 3. where he does not omit to give charge even of Deacons, and
Deaconesses: But he does neither of the two, but presently after the mention of
Bishops, or Presbyters that were Pastors, he falls into the speech concerning
Deacons, and their wives; so as it is a plain proof that Lay Elders were
utterly unknown to him.

Fourthly, the defense of Lay Elders out of this place is utterly against the
judgment of the fathers, so many as ever have expounded this text of the
Apostle: Neither indeed is there any necessity at all, that because the Apostle
says, those especially that labor in Word and Doctrine, therefore we should
devise new Elders to be taken out of the common people: For it was well
known, that those of the Clergy, which are over the Lords flock, have their
distinct Offices, and employments. There are of them, which administer
Sacraments, make public prayers, privately admonish faithful people, and
withold them from sinning; there are others, which being endued with
excellent gifts of speaking, employ themselves in being teachers and guids to
men's souls in the way to heaven, and the labors of these men, which are taken
by them, in word and Doctrine, are justly preferred before the service of them,
which administer the sacraments, and make prayers for the Church; even by the
testimony of the Apostle himself, who says; Christ sent me not to baptize,
but to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.17. He was sent for both purposes, but the
chief end of his mission, was, the preaching of the Gospel.

Whosoever therefore, thus rule the people, whether they do administer the
Sacrament, or only preach the word, or whether they do both, are worthy of
double Honor; where a certain number is put for an uncertain, double honor,
that is greater and more then others; although some are of opinion, that here
by Apostolic authority there is a greater portion assigned to the Governors,
then to others that appertain to the Church, others interpret it of that double
Honor which is fit for governors to have; one, of an awful reverence and
command, the other of more largeness of maintenarce; that they be, both,
observed, and respected above others, and, that they have a more liberal
provision of necessaries for their livelihood; but the first of them is the
more simple exposition of the words. He therefore holds those, that are set
over the people worthy of double honor; And why double? A little before he had
given them order about the honoring, that is maintaining of their Widows, at
the charge of the Church: from the Widows, he passes to the Elders, or
Presbyters; whom, if they rule well, he would have honored with a double
alowance, that is greater then that of the Widows, both by reason of their
office, and by reason of their family; and amongst those that rule, yet again,
he would have those most regarded, who are employed not so much in
administering the Sacraments, as in preaching the Word. I doubt not but this is
the most true Explication of this place

FINIS.

