AGNOIA (...), OR, THE INABILITY of the Highest Improved NATVRALL MAN to
attain a Sufficient and Right Knowledge of INDVVELLING SIN. Discovered in
three SERMONS, Preached at St MARIE's in OXFORD.

By HENRY HURST M.A. and Fellow of Merton Coll. in OXON.

1 Cor. 2.14. But the Natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall Printer to the University, for Richard Davis.
1659.

TO THE REVEREND AND Learned my Honored Father Mr HENRY HURST, Minister of the
Gospel at Mickleton in Glouc:shire.
Much honored Father,
BOoks claim a just title to a Dedicatory commendation, whether this title be
just jure naturali, or by Prescription, I intend not to dispute with this small
piece which calls it self mine, and claims the same portion which others have
been sent into the world with; I will not deny it is request, though I might
have so done, since it appears in the world without my plenary consent) it
shall have it is Due: Nor will I be unjust, or unthankful to you who have the
clearest, and fairest title to this Homage; for if either Greatness or
Goodness be a just claim, yours is the justest; if Greatness of obligations
be a good title, None may contend with you; a Father's obligations on a Son
are confessedly greatest. If Goodness, and Beneficence be the best claim, I
must tell the world, your right to this is such, There cannot be a better
Patron then a Good Father. If I add no more to set out your worth, (besides I
prevent the losing my self in the Dedication, and the disproportioning the
Frontispice to the building,) I shall cut off the jealous surmises of an
uncharitable world (which will suspect there is none so good, because they are
so few.) And (which I most intend) reserve more room for the Practicke part of
that honor and obedience which I owe you. I cannot more doubt your reception
of this, then I can your reception of my self, and to entreat for this, (I
think) were to detract from the repute of a tender Father which you deserve.
What it wants of worth, in it self, will be more fully, and easily made up,
whilst it has the rising advantage of a Sonne's affections, (whose
willingness makes his lest essay of thankfulness worth accepting,) and
whilst it has the grains of allowance which a Fathers kindness will cast in
to make up the weight.

Sr, these first fruits being judged ripe sooner then I thought, and so
gathered (much against my will.) and having been offered first in the Temple
for the honor of God, and the service of his spiritual Temple, are now in
this handful left to you, as that portion which I might not withhold from you,
and as the first fruits duly offered did procure a blessing on the offerer, so
I hope it will fare with your Son, who nothing doubts your blessing will be
on his head, and doubts it will, as Jacob's, prevail above the blessings of
your Progenitors, for the abundant increase of Grace, Mercy, and Peace on

Your Obedient Son HENRY HURST.
From Merton Coll. July 6. 1659.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
MY request is to thee (least I deceive thy expectation) not to expect from me,
(who affect plainness of speech and actions) any tedious Apologeticall
Preface, much less any superfluous flattering Panegyricks. Only let me
acquaint thee with the engagement that lies upon me, to premise a few things
concerning the publication of this Learned and elaborate Work. The Author
sufficiently known to my self and many others, to be a Godly, Learned, and
Orthodox Divine through his modesty and low opinion of himself, denied for a
long time his consent to the making of these Sermons of public use, and had
suppressed them altogether but that through importunity I prevailed with him.
That ancient relation I have, as of a Tutor to a Scholar (which in him and such
who prove so well is my glory and rejoiceing) and those dear affecti^ns I
bear toward him at length made him to yield to my frequent solicitations,
that this work might be Printed for the public good. And I never had yet
(neither do I think ever shall) entertain the least repenting thought for
causing such choice Sermons to be made of common use and benefit.

Concerning the Sermons having heard two of them from the Pulpit, and since
deliberately read them all over: two or three particulars I observe in an
especial manner, as appears by the account that follows.

1. The seasonablen^sse of the preaching on this subject against the blindness
of a natural man, and concerning the sinfulness of Sin, both Original and
Actual both which are words spoken in season, considering that now adays
Pelagius, Arminius, Socinus, and other Heretics of the same litter are revived
and their followers (as if they had get a faculty in the Court of
augmentation) ^strip and gee beyond their masters in errors and heresies. But
as in Zacharies Vision there were four Carpenters to fray the sour horns
which scattered Judah: so God raises up many valiant Champions of his truth
who Zech. 1.21.
cry aloud and spare not lifting up their voices like Trumpets against the
abomination of the times. What was judicious Carthwrights Motto for Zion's sake
I will not hold my peace abides upon the hearts of the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel: They dare not be silent in God's cause: but they make it their
business (as the Ap^stle exhorts) Tit. 1.9.
to convince Gainsayers: Tit. 1.11.
To stop their mouths, Ti. 1.13 (...).
to rebuke them sharply or cuttingly: Which Scriptures do not in the least
countenance a Toleration, nor any other Scripture that I know of: now the Lord
has raised up the spirit of this Learned Brother, to lop off the Hydra of
Heresies to stand for the truth at such a time as this is, I cannot let pass
without special Observation. When Original sin is denied by some with great
confidence, natural men's abilities too highly advanced, the Pagan's debt and
dowry pleaded for, and charity lavisht upon such beyond all Scripture rule
surely a confutation now must needs be beautiful in its season, and a word so
fitly spoken may be esteemed like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver.

2. Add h^reunto the singular usefulness of the Doctrine delivered That men
of greatest acuteness and ability for natural parts, and of best improvement
by education cannot make a right and full discovery of indwelling Lust without
the Spirit of God revealing it by the Law. This Doctrine is of great use, and
serves to pluck down the cr^st of the proud^st Scholar who is a stranger from
the life of God. Men may attain unto as great parts as Aristotle and Plato,
and yet be mere ignoramussesses in Original sin; How Adam's sin is ours, how
we were in his loins, and that sin committed in his person was likewise
committed in our nature, and propagated and derived upon all his posterity:
This no man can learn in Aristotle or Platoe's School. We must have recourse
unto the Law of God The Apostle's determination is infallible For I had not
known Lust except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Romans 7.7.


3. Upon perusal of the whole there is dexterity of judgment: This Author gives
a rational acof the truth by evidence of reasons solid and sinewous as 1.
Because a Natural man makes use of a crooked rule: His own reason is his rule,
and that perverted and blinded: And if the blind lead the blind both must fall
into the ditch, 2. Because this sinfulness of indwelling lust consists much of
spiritual wickedness, and the natural man in his highest improvement
remains carnal and sensual. A natural man wants his eyesight: He is Ephesians.
5.8 (...)
darkness it self in the abstract: and 1 Cor. 2.14.
receives not the things of the spirit of God.

Other more weighty Arguments are urged: But by these mentioned you have a
taste of the rest: And I will not praeoccupate my Reader.

4. In the fourth and last place, I take notice of the Candor, Modesty, and
Moderation of the Author Though he is zealous in Gods cause, yet meek in his
own as Moses was. I see not in any particular where he gives ground, or
relinquisheth his colors: But as far as I can apprehend, he has beaten his
adversaries out of the field: yet he has learned from the Apostle to Ephesians. 4.14.
speak the truth in love, and to Gal. 6.1.
restore, such as are overtaken, in the spirit of meekness. He uses soft
words, and hard Arguments, as knowing that a flint is sooner broken upon a
pillow then on an anvil. Upon a serious review of the whole I find no
bittern^sse, no revileing language nor personal reflections: He discardeth all
such ways of arguing, fearing least such dead flies might mar the whole box
of ointment.

Wherefore upon this consideration of the Premises (I commend to thee Reader)
a serious Perusal of these excellent Sermons following. And if I mistake not
(unless it be thy own fault) thou will reap much spiritual advantage, and
wilt be more established in the truth. I must profess what I think (be it to
the disparagement of none) that by reading these Sermons and another in Latin
Homogeneous to this subject, of a Reverend Doctor eminent for Godliness and
Learning, Dr Edward Reynolds Sermon entitled Animalu Homo
I have found more satisfaction, and confirmation, then by other Sermons or
Treatises I have yet met with upon that Argument. I add no more but commend
thee (Reader) to the gracious providence of God, heartily desireing that thy
soul may thrive the better for what is here published, so prays,

Thy servant for Christ's sake HENRY WILKINSON.
OXFORD From Magdalen Hall July 6, 1659.
SERMON I.
Romans 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not known Lust, except the Law had said
Thou shall not Covet.


THe Great Doctrine of our Gospel freedom from the Law (which the mistaken
Jew did dangerously stumble at) being laid down by the apostle, in that apt
similitude of a woman freed from the Law of her husband, to which she was
obliged during his life, in the five first verses of this Chapter^ and being
summarily concluded in that positive assertion of the Apostles, in the 6.
verse, former part of it, Now we are delivered from the Law: The Apostle might
here have ended his Sermon, and the Chapter, but that it was necessary he
should vindicate this Doctrine of our freedom from the Law, from two great
objections, which the Jew thought he might reasonably, and which he did
continually cast in the Apostle's way against this Doctrine. The first of these
objections, is intimated Proleptically, and answered solidly, in this 7. verse
of the Chapter: so that the Text read is the Jews objection against the
Apostle's doctrine, and the Apostle's solution of it; The Objection is thus
proposed, If we are (as you Paul aver) delivered from the Law, then the Law
is evil; for deliverance is only from that which is evil, were we removed
from a good, it would not be a deliverance, but a loss and damage; if then
the Law be evil, what evil is it? Is it sin? Here is the Objection,
intimated in the former part of this 7. verse. The Apostles answer is full of
holy indignation at the impiety, and wickedness of the Objection; God forbid;
and full of clearness and solidity against the seeming strength of it, The Law
cannot be sin, and why.
discovering the right use of this Law which cannot be sin, though Sin took
occasion from the Law to be exceeding sinful. And this the Apostle confirms,
because, 1. The Law discovers and manifests this work of darkness, I had not
known sin, but by the Law, says Paul. 2. The Law prohibits all sin, even
Lust it self, it says, Thou shall not Covet:
In this latter part of the Apostle his answer, assigning the right, proper,
and genuine use of the Law, lies my work; and ere I can set to it, I must
premise three or four things by way of Explication, or at least point them
out, (for they are very obvious of themselves.)

Paul.
1. Who speaks, I Paul, a man of ripe natural parts, and of as well improved,
acquired parts, as any, yet still a Pharisee, and Zealous of the Law, according
to their principles, and interpretation of the Law.


2. How he expresses himself, I had not known; in a tense that look's
somewhat more then to what is past, having an eye to the future, and what would
have been; it carries in it 1. His Past ignorance, I did not then know. 2. His
future ignorance, he should not yet have known, if the Law, etc.



3. Had not said, i. e. if it had not at last, spoken in other language then the
Scribes, and Pharisees made it speak in, they made it speak in the literal
sound; but now God has made it speak, and has made Paul hear, in the
Spiritual sense and meaning of it; in that voice which God causes a
convinced, and converted soul to hear; in other kind of speech then any of
the Pharisees (who made void the Law) would hear, Paul had often (no doubt)
read the Law, and this very prohibition too, yet now he understands what then
he did not, that the Law said,


Thou shall not Covet: The Apostle uses first a word of more General
signification, I had not known sin. and then Exegetically, and proleptically
adds, what might illustrate his meaning, and prevent an objection: for sin is
discoverable by the light of nature, that Star light which they had who yet
were darkness.

Q.
How then is it appropriated to the Law?

A. 1.
1. Sin in the full extent, and compass of it, as actual, is only discovered
by the Law; for many sins they accounted virtues, and many they excused with
harmless indifferency, which yet the Law condemned.


2. But indeed the Apostle principally intends the sinning sin in first
motions, and workings, and in it is indwelling: That corrupt principle of lust,
and sin, which is rooted in the soul and work's in our life, and is ordinarily
known by the name of Original sin, or corruption of nature, thus (...)
peccatum vocabit vitium originis peccatorum aliorum sontem and mortis causam
Pareus in Loc. Doctrine.
Pareus on the place: this praemised I gather up the Doctrine from the words,
That men of greatest acuteness, and ability for natural parts, and of best
improvement by education, cannot make a right, and full discovery of Original
sin, of indwelling lust, without the spirit of God revealing it by the law.

Lust or sinning sin is a mystery of iniquity, which the most peircing
natural eye, with best humane advantages never did, never could yet, or ever
will be able to discover.

Concupis^ence is sufficiently discoverable by no other eye, nor by other light
then that the holy spirit of God gives us to see with: The knowledge of sin
as here Paul knew it, as a Regenerate soul does know it, is not within the
compass of the highest improved natural man; he cannot take the height, nor
mete out the length, and breadth, nor fathom the depth of that corruption
which is in our natures; he cannot tell how this old man was conceived formed
and produced in us he cannot derive the Pedigree of this ancient infamous
house. It is only and peculiarly the work of the spirit, and word of God to
discover this to a man. Method of Proceeding.
In handling this truth I will Paul before conversion, and a regenerate
sanctified soul, as Paul after conversion, has of this sin. And then


1. This is the Doctrine of the Text and other Scriptures.
1. I say then that this is the Doctrine of the text, That the best natural
parts, highest improved without the spirit of God enlightening him by the law
cannot now, could not ever, nor ever will be able to discover the corruption of
our natures. I must then evidence this whole matter from Paul's example, and
clear confession, I said

[The greatest acuteness, and ability of nature,] such was Paul's natural
ability, he was a man of most pregnant, and ripe parts, for he assures us that
he profited above many his equals: Gal. 1.14.
his outstripping them (if any doubt it) assures us, he was befriended with a
large portion of natural abilities, he had not so outrun those who started
with him in the race; if a greater strength and speed had not fitted him for
the race.

If I farther said that such parts [with best improvement,] I said no more then
I might well warrant from Paul's example, for he wanted not the advantage of
education; he had a Master whose learning had set him high in the esteem of
the people, Acts 5.34. and at his feet Paul was brought up, nor was he a dunce
in this school, he made such progress that he was eminent for his learning,
whence Festus charitably interprets the Apostle pleading his own cause, (...)
and the truth (which Festus understood not) as the discourse of one to be
pitied for overstudying himself; and who had more learning then he could
manage, Acts 26.24.

Did I say such parts so improved [never did?] I say but what Paul says of
himself, for time past he did not, if I add [nor ever can] I ground it on the
Apostle his expression, which includes more then the past time, I had not
known, and looke's to time to come for it is in the Plusquam perfectum. If I
add [Without the spirit enlightening the soule] none I hope will doubt it: but
if I say [without more then common illumination] I have proof from Paul, who
had no doubt the common illumination of the spirit while a Pharisee, yet, did
not then understand, as now he does, the corruption of nature: He did while
unregenerate hear the law, but now regenerate he heare's the voice of the law,
and spirit, jointly informing, and instructing him; and without this the best
parts, with the best improvement, though both equal to Paul's will never fully
discover sinning sin.

Doctrine proved from other Scriptures.
Nor do we want other testimony from Scripture: The Law and Prophets bear
witness to this truth, view what was Ezekiel's message and errand to the Jews.

Ezekiel. 16.2,3,4. He must declare to them, that their Birth and Nativity was of
the land of Canaan that their father was an Amorite and their mother an Hittite
etc. In which allegory, the sinfullnesse, and cursednesse of their natural
state is set forth as is the opinion of Interpreters, and others: So Junius on
the place on those words thy navell was not cut, verse. 4. Thou wast by nature
dead, defiled with the pollution of sin, full of weakness and vanity. A natura
in morte, in Sordibus peccatorum, infitmitate and vanitate eras. Jun. in loc.
And much to this purpose Peter Martyr in his common places: Never did man
marry such a wife, so much below, so much unworthy of him as did Christ when he
married the Church: for her state, and what she was before she came into
Christ's hand, is described by Ezekiel in the 16. chap. 1] Nec ullus uxorem
unquam ram disparem, and suo conjugio indignamduxit arque Christus Ecclesian:
cutusmodi enim ea fuerit, antequam Christo in manum conveniret, ab Ezech.
describitur 16. cap. Pet. Martyr loc com. cl. 2. cap. 17.
I add to this Essenius contra Crellium de satisfact. l. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3.
Causa procatarctica una est miseria nostra quae Dei misericor diam movit -- Huc
pertinet graphica illa descriptio Ezech. 16.3,6. Their sinful and wretched
state until grace timely prevent, freely act, and powerfully change it, is
that which is represented by this Allegorical description of a wretched,
helpless, infant borne in it is blood, and cast out to the loathing of its
person. And all this the prophet must declare to Jerusalem, and he must declare
it, as a man declares what before was not known, or not sufficiently known;
therefore the Lord sends him with this command make them know ((...)) as if he
had said they are ignorant, it must be told, and declared to them, they will not
know it else; nay farther they are incredulous, they will not believe it,
unless thou prove it to them; so much the Caldee Paraphrast intimates in his
gloss on the text ((...)) (...) Disceptavit probavit, radarguit.
Now it is Jerusalem, says the Hebrew text, they are the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, says the Paraphrast, persons which lived where God was known, where
the testimony of the Lord was, whither the Tribes did go up; they were the
persons who professed to know God, and which boasted in the law, which were
Jews instituted in the knowledge of the Law (as Paul was before conversion)
yet these persons are ignorant, and know not; are incredulous, and believe not,
until the Prophet declare that they may know, and prove it that they may
believe their birth to be of the land of Canaan: So the Prophet Jeremiah c. 17.
roundly assert's that the Sin which is graven on the table of their heart,
verse. 1. which makes the heart desperately wicked. v. 9. makes it also
deceitful above all things, It is a riddle which none can read; who can know
it? the Prophet challenges the whole world of men to say whether any among
them can understand it? Again St Paul who understood this Doctrine as well as
any, lays down the sinfulness of our natures, Romans 3.10. there is none
righteous no not one, none that understands or that seeks after God, etc. A
very high charge such as proud Philosophy will not bear, and weak eyed
Philosophy cannot see: How then is this known? how is it proved? why it is
written, v. 10. former part, And by the Law is the knowledge of sin, v. 20.
surely what David says of that providence which suffer's ut sit been malis and
male bonis, Ps. 73.16,17. is very eminently true of this sin; when men think to
know this without going into the Sanctuary of God, it is too painful for them:
Nay if they go into the Sanctuary, and enquire as the Pharisees, as the
carnal Jew, did enquire, they will come out as very fools, and as ignorant as
they went in: Erant enim Pharisaei in illa opinione, tantum illos in peccato
conceptos and natos esse, quo^ natura insigniter notasset Chem. Harm.
and it is a measuring cast, they will proudly boast that others were borne
altogether in sin, but not they, John 9.34. For the Pharisees were of opinion
that none were conceived or borne in sin but such as nature had Branded. The
same does Aegidius Hunnius in loc. observe too: Ab agnata pravitate se pulch e
Immunes esse sentiebant Phari saei, Hunnius in loc.
and Joh: Hoornbeck Sum: controvers. l. 2. which is against the Jews, and
their Judaisme has ranked this Question, An Peccatum Adami primum fuit commune
totius naturae humanae, unde omnes homines nascuntur cum peccato originali?
among one of the controversies between us and them in which they defend the
Negative, and we maintain the Affirmative.

Thus will every man mistake who has not the spirit of God whose office it is
to convince of sin, John 16.8.
especially of those sins which are not easily discerned. It is more then
evident, that before conviction we do not see, or consider of many notorious
and habitual sins; such as formal and loose profession, profane and secure
Libertinisme, Gross Idolatry in the Heathen: How much more evident is it then
that we shall never be able to discover secret, heart sins, the underground
and deep fountain and spring of them.

In a word, David a man well acquainted with his own heart, who was much in the
search of it, who was wont to commune with it, Psalm. 4.4. diligent to hide the
word in it, Psalm. 119.11. taken up with meditating on that word which discovers
sin, Ps. 119. v. 97. Wiser then his teachers, Psalm. 119. v. 99. used to learn
of his reins in the night seasons, when others were either securely sleeping,
or (if awakened) Politiquely contriving the speediest and surest way of
accomplishing their secular, and worldly designs, then was David lighting his
candle, i. e. his understanding at the Lamp of God: then was he searching the
dark recesses, and deep vaults of that heart which he knew was profound to
devise and do wickedly. And now, one would think that such diligent search
should leave nothing undiscovered, and that a man after this might say, that
there was no guile in his heart, but his eye saw it and watched over it; But
however a bold: and ignorant foul might possibly so think, and say; yet David
dares not think, nor say so, but after all this distrusting his own heart
(which he knew too well to trust it much) he brings it to God the searcher of
hearts, and tryer of Reins with earnest suits that he would deliver him from
his guilefull heart, Psalm. 139. v. 23,24. Search me O God, and know my heart,
try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any way of wickedness in
me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Note David's earnestness, five times
together he prays that God would discover himself, his heart to himself,
and deliver himself from himself: for after all this diligence he is jealous
there is, he knows possibly there may be, some what of this guile, and
hypocrisy. And now having heard such witnesses, what farther need have we?
Christian, does not thy soul hear it self confessing this truth? Say, if it
be so difficult for David, a man enlightened, by the Spirit of God internally,
by the word of God externally, and awakened by both jointly, to find out his
sinful heart, and nature, can it be less then impossible for men who are
Blind spiritually, having no eyes, In the dark, having no light, Securely
sleeping in sin, not awakened,
to discover, and find out sufficiently that indwelling sin, this universal
pravity inhering in his nature? Let it then stand a truth according to
Scripture, that indwelling concupiscence, this sinning sin, is a mystery of
iniquity which the best natural parts, highest improved cannot now, has not
yet, never will be able to discover; which is the first thing proposed: next
let us come to the second which will be another confirmation of this truth,
when we see all sorts of best improved natural men have mistaken in it.

2 General proposed, Best improved Natural men are mistaken in this knowledge.
1. Heathens mistake the knowledge.
1. Then, as for the Gentile and Heathen world, when it was at its height of
learning, and most noted for inquisitivenesse after, and acuteness (with
success) in new discoveries, yet never came to the discovery of this sin;
Indeed they did discern a very great Ataxie, and disorder; they knew there was
much a miss in their life, and that this also had infected the mind, and
soul; but that deep silence which every where may be observed among the crowd
of their moral Writers, who speak very little of the spring and fountain of
vice, when they have spent many sheets on the streams and branches of it, is
an undoubted witness of their ignorance, and if it were not a work too great
to be dispatched within the compass of a Sermon, I might bestow some more
labor, then now I will, to evince this by undeniable instances, yet take one
or two. How little does Homer speak? or is he not wholly silent in this? and
yet he is preferred to some of the best moral Philosophers, Stoics, or
Academicks, for in Horace's judgment he better tells us Quid sit Pulchrum, quid
Turpe, quid Vtile, Quid non,
Before and melius Chrysippo aut Crantore dicit.
He that should read Homer, and hope to find any fatisfactory account of this,
will surely cast him off at last; and say, he has lost his labor, and knows
now as little as Horace himself did of this by his reading, and revolving
Trojani Belli Scriptorem. Well Chrysippus the second Stoic Philosopher for
eminency, Qui fulcire putatur Porticum (as Cicer. Acad. l. 4. quoted by Mr
Gataker in Praelog. ad Annot. in M. Antonin.) and of whom Laertius says (...).
Laert. l. 7.
He has fallen short of Homer in the Discovery, Quid Pulchrum, Quid Turpe etc.
Crantor also, who was no small babe in morality, if either our Poet may be
judge, who cites him as one very eminently before others in his discouse of
virtue and vice, or if Cicero and Panaetius (Master or friend to Tubero) may be
judge, who tell us of a book of this Crantor, which was, Non magnus at
Aureolus -- and qui ad verbum est ediscendus, and yet Homer speaks, Before
and melius, Quid Pulchrum, Quid Turpe, etc. So that now we may hope either
Homer, or Horace from Homer is able to give us the best account of this matter:
either of which I assure you, are far from a competent measure of knowledge,
and from any considerable progress in the enquiry and discourse of this
matter. What these menk^ew is breifely mentioned by Mr Auth: Burgess of
Origin: Sin. part. 2. cha. 20. which I met with since this was finished.
And where these, or such as these do speak of this (besides that it is
little) they do generally resolve it into a pronesse springing from worser
constitution of that matter, of which we are formed, or a pronesse soonest to
imitate what is worst: A Doctrine which may pass with the favorable name of
an excusable error in these men, (who were without the Law,) but is no less
then Abominable heresy in Pelagians, who (as right sons of erring Fathers)
have walked in the same way of folly, and approved these men's sayings.

From this first sort of well improved men, let us next consider.

2 Pelagians mistake this knowledge.
2. The well improved natural man in a Pelagian dress, and on Pelagian
principles, proceeding in the enquiry, and pretending to have made the
discovery of this indwelling concupiscence, and boasting themselves as who
rightly know it; But how much they were mistaken, a very brief recounting of
the opinions, and Positions concering this matter will evince. Chemnitius (then
whom scarce a more learned divine can be found among the Lutherans) tell's us
that the Pelagians deny the whole doctrine touching Original sin, and blot out
the very name of it also: Nor is he single in this report of them. Pet: Martyr
tel's us as much: Pelagiani universam doctrinam de Peccato originali negant,
ncmincetiam sublato. loc. com. de Peccat. orig. Pet. Martyr loc. com. cl. 2
nay who is there that send's us intelligence from the Armies of the living
God, that does not assure us, that this is one, a principal strong hold, which
these men have fortified against Grace, and the truth of Christ; but let us
give you a transient view of what they teach their disciples, and would obtrude
on us.

Pelagius at Rome (whither he came, after he was discovered in the East) began
to maintain the opinion of Sinlesse perfection, Histor. Pelagian. l. 1. c. 3.
Defendere Coepit (...), says Vessius: A Doctrine which flows from a proud
heart, which know^s not its own sinfulness, a corrupt stream which ran through
the stoicke Philosophers, tainred Origin, and overflowed Pelagius and his
followers, as Hiereme has observed (as he is cited by Joh:Ger:Vossius) and the
evident connection of the conclusions to the principles of those men, and the
undeniable conformity of their dictates, which any one may see, who will be at
the pains to compare them, in their Paradoxes gathered together by Justus
Lipsius, Just. Lipsius in sua man^duct. ad stoicam Philosopham.
with the Doctrine of the Pilagians, mentioned and refuted by St Augustine,
collected into one by the learned pains, both of Vossius and Cornel: Jansenius
in his large and learned Book called Augustinus, seu Doctrina St Augustini etc.
In a word it is well known how highly these men advanced nature, cried up the
sufficiency and power of it which cannot be but where first there is a great
degree of ignorance or error and mistakes in the doctrine of Original sin:and
what these mistakes (if heresy may be so called) were, beside, the Authors
mentioned. Dr Featly will give us an account in his Pelagius Redivivus etc. to
which Authors I refer Scholars who can examine and compare these together,
and hope others will take it on the word of one, who is willing to be tried by
such as are able to judge in this cause, and therefore cannot be suspected of a
purpose to impose upon them, briefly when we read that these men taught their
Disciples. Pelagian Haeresies.
That there was no Original sin or corruption of humane nature. That Adam's
sin endammaged himself only properly; us only if we imitate him. That we are
borne as perfect (age only excepted) as Adam was created, etc.


When we read these, and such like Doctrines, we evidently see and need no
farther proof to demonstrate, that these men have not discovered this sinning
sin, and yet they were men of natural, and improved parts: so was Pelagius,
a man excellent for learning, as August: cited by Vossius. Augustin-Epist. ad
Paulinum subinitio.
So was Caelestius a man of acute Judgment and well improved; for he wrote
whilst young, three Epistles, of which Gennadius affirms they were omni Deum
desideranti necessariae so was Julian Ingenii, doctrinae, facundiae
praecellentis, says Vossius, a man acer ingenio says Gennadius, yet how
brutish were these Pastors in their understanding of this point!

3 Semi-Pelagians mistake in this knowledge.
3. Neither are they more happy in their discovery, who in succeeding ages were
somewhat more refined in their heresy, such as the elder and later
Semipelagians, whose ignorance of this enough appeare's in that which they
oppose against efficacious Grace, for an account of which I refer you to
Cornelius Jansenius his Parallel of the errors of the Massi^ians and some late
teachers, in the second chapter of that Parallel, and the third chapter which
is annexed to his Augustinus, etc.

With these are to be ranked Arminians, who consent with these erring Doctors,
Socinians, and some of our Anabaptists too, as is evident from that which Mr
Stephens cite's as one of the Doctrines owned by the 30 separate Congregations
in their confession (these I add not for their eminency in parts, or learning,
few of them that I have met with being such, but as witness of the universal
mistake and error into which the natural man with his highest pretenses does
inevitably run) nor is Pigghius better acquainted with this doctrine, as is
evident from his Controv. de Peccat. originali; And our English confident Dr
Tailor, both in his unum necessarium, and in his Answer to the Reverend Bishop
of Rochester's letter, with the whole heard of Jesuits that follow Lewis
Molina in his opposition to the Dominicans, and whosoever will consider what is
taught by these men will see how little they are acquainted with the true
nature of this inhering concupiscence, and whosoever will consider who they are,
what kind of Persons, will see they are men of notable natural, and improved
parts and so see notable evidence to this truth, ignornace in the Doctrine of
Original sin, or indwelling lust, like a thick cloud lying on the minds of men
of such natural and improved abilities, that we may rationally suppose, if
any could, these had been the men who would have discovered it: and seeing
they have not, we may by a warrant from a logical argumentation conclude a
f^rtiori others cannot, nor will ever be able; for some of these have been men
(I will not say) of the highest natural and improved parts possible; but I
may, and will say of the highest probable; and yet they have not attained a
right discovery of this Sin, of this mystery of iniquity: These men speak of it
in such a manner as evidenceth they never, either Romans 6. Nor


Now if there be after so long tampering with it, so little harmony and concent
in the Doctrine of these men with the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the
experience of regenerate sanctified souls concerning this sin: we may very
justly conclude they know not withal their skill to set their doctrines in
tune with the Scriptures, nor make a spiritual, Scripturall discovery of this
sin: but pass we on to another sort of natural improved men, who if reason
could have reached this, would have bidden fair for it, These are

4. Schoolmen mistake in this knowledge.
4. The Schoolmen whose notions, though sometime very sublime, and daring, as
if they would presently discover the very height of all that is knowable, yet
in this very point, as in many others, are very jejune, and empty; very
uncertain, and in many things unsound, especially those among them who have
proceeded upon that unsound foundation of pure naturalls, and thence stated our
fall and sinful state to be the reduction of us to our pure naturals, the
letting loose of the reins to a high me^led courser, which was before curbed
and not the laming, and spoiling of a sound one, or as the stripping off a
man's clothes, leaving him naked who before was clothed. This way Bellarmine,
and the Papists (who have gone a step farther then the bounds prescribed by the
Council of Trent) have generally gone. Chemn. loc.com. de Peccat. Orig. p.
202. b. edit Francof. 1653.
And sure on this it was that Recentes, ut Occam, and multi alii nomen retinent
Peccati Originalis, rem extenuant: This extenuating of this sin, was in that
they denied it to be an evil repugnant to the Law of God, Nec culpam esse, nec
poenam as Lombard 2. did. 30. c. 5. Scotus in 4. did. 14. q. 1. art. 1,
boldly averre's that which will infer necessarily (if what he affirms were a
truth) that this original sin is but the guilt of Adams first transgression;
so Biel, Durandus, and others; farther when you shall find many of them as Hugo
Victorinus, Thomas 2.4. did. 28. art. 4. Biel. 2. did. 28. and Bonaventure 2.
did. 28. etc. Assert nature preparing it s^fe for grace and professedly
teaching that a man may ex naturae viribus love God above all, and do his
commandments, Quoad substantiam actus: is not this an evidence that they did
not understand how corrupt our natures were? How weak and unable to Good? How
full of enmity to God? I fear not to aver it, That man knows not the
sinfulness of his nature, that dares say a man may by the strength of nature
love, quoad substantiam actus, God above all; He understand's not that his
natural mind is enmity to the law of God, who says he can love God above all
by the power of nature, nor knows he that his carnal mind is not subject to
the law of God, who dares say he can viribus naturae obey the Law of God. He
has not a right knowledge of Original sin, who dares affirm either of these:
And Dr Whitaker in that piece de Peccato origin. l. 2. c. 4. Cajetan, Scotus,
Richard Durandus Bellarmine cited by Dr Whitaker in that l. 2. c. 4.
against Thom. Stapleton who affirms Scholasticos tribuere humanae naturae
vires integras ad diligendum deum super omnia and ad facienda praecepta Dei
secundum substantiam actuum. And adding farther that some other of the
Schoolmen taught praeparationem esse in homine ante gratiam, and homini
facienti quod in se est non deesse Gratiam passes this censure on both jointly
Quod nunquam dicerent, si originalem naturae depravavationem intelligerent. But
I leave these men and next come to an other sort of men, who though greatly
improved, yet have not rightly understood this sin: They are such, Who

5. Some plead an exemption of the Virgin Mary from Original Sin.
5. Have pleaded an exemption for some from the common calamity of mankind to
be borne into the world full of sin, and stained with Original corruption;
though the greatest part by far, nay though all except one be tainted with
this sin, Bellarm. de amiss. gri. l. 4. c. 15.16. and 17.
yet one at least (and this is the Virgin Mary) must needs be exempted from
this common lot, of whose conception and birth with this freedom from
Original sin, a zealous Dominican will by no means hear, and a Franciscan is
(to him) little less then an Heretic for affirming it; Ch^ier loc. com. de
Vivgi^ l. 4. c. 14.
in this difference of judgment, it is evident that the Franciscans (and they
are not few, nor yet contemptible for their parts, or learning) grossly err
in this Doctrine, and yet a whole council viz. that at Basile 1431 give their
approbation to this error, Session the 36. And since that the juggling Concell
of Trent has thought it fit to leave it indetermined, as in their Appendix, to
the fifth session of that Council. So that now either these must be accounted
men not learned, nor of natural parts, or else that they did not understand
this Doctrine, which is that we affirm of the best natural man, or else if
learned, and such as knew but did not own it, but chose rather to dissemble it,
their practice condemne's them, and every one who shall so dissemble, proves
that he has not a right knowledge of that or other divine truth, if it be of
such import and concernment as this is: he does not know the truth of Christ,
and the Doctrine of the Gospel aright, who is ashamed of either Christ or the
Gospel.

6. The best parts and Learning of Papists are ignorant in this particular.
6. I might add and enlarge on this, that the best parts, and greatest
learning of the Papal world, did bewray their ignorance of this important
truth, when they did purposely contrive the decree concerning Original sin,
so, that, it might be free for any man to think what he would concerning it, as
Andradius, a man well acquainted with the Council, does very ingeniously
confess concerning the Fathers, and Divines of the Council of Trent, as
Chemnitius does report in his Examen Concilii Trident: ad sess: 5. de Pecc:
Origin: Nor will I pursue the discovery of this Councill's mistake of the
remainders of concupiscence after Baptism, which would be a full proof that
they did not rightly apprehend and understand this lust the Apostle here
speaks of.

7. Where the word is plainly preached amongst us many are ignorant of this
truth.
Neither is this to be (though we could wish it might be) confined within the
bounds, either of the heathen world, or the Papal apostate Church, and that it
were not true, (which, yet it is, and we lament the certainty of it,) that
among us where the word of God is permitted to every one, so that every one may
enquire into the truth, by direction from the word, among us, where the word
and Law of God is so plainly preached, and so frequently, yet many thousands
among us do evidently declare by their unaffectednesse with this sinful state
that they have no right knowledge of it. Are not the greatest part of men stupid
and senseless under a Sermon of Original sin? where are their affections? how
few groan? where is he that cries out with Paul? O wrethed man that I am etc.
And can you think these know aright the very great sinfulness of our nature?
if a Soldier should tell you he had lost the day to a mortal enemy, and yet
rejoice in it, or not be troubled for it, would you not conclude he knew not
the worth of a victory, the danger of a captivity, the misery of a captive? you
have as little reason to believe our hearers rightly understand this sin, while
they say they do, and are yet merry and jocund in the loss of their liberty,
and under the captivity of this sin.

Then you may suppose a man rightly knows his disease, when apprehension of
the danger makes him look after a remedy; and fears under the danger, and
groans under the pain make him earnestly desirous to be cured, and recovered,
but that man knows it not, who looks not out for hea^ing, who is not affected
with it. No more are our hearers acquainted with this dangerous disease of the
soul, who if they will bear us down in it that they know it, yet consesse to
us at least by their security and deadness, if not in words, that they are not
grieved or troubled at it. These are another sort, the best of our hearers, as
to natural parts, and highest Improved by Education remaining Carnal and
unregenerate are not affected, because not truly acquainted with this sin: and
yet I suppose our hearers ordinarily of as good ripe parts as any, and as well
helped with outward advantages.

8. The experience of Saints is witness to this.
Lastly, in a word or two, the experience of Saints, Real Christians, sincere,
and well improved Christians, is witness to this. Their experience of the
difficulty of first getting a due sense of this sin: How many convictions, how
many serious meditations, How many prayers upon their knees, that God would
discover it, and show them how vile they are, ere they have gotten any measure
of abiding Knowledge, any degree of soule-affecting knowledge of this sin? How
often are the promises pleaded to God, wherein he has promised to give his
Spirit, and to enlighten? and before this has been done, no due and right
knowledge of this sin has been gotten: and when they have gotten it, how much
have they to do to keep up due apprehensions of this sin? how prone are they to
relapse into slight thoughts of it? how soon and easily do they many times
lose that tenderness of heart, that melting frame of spirit, that mourned over
this sinful nature? All that a regenerate soul can do, is little enough to
keep open, all that the best improved natural man can do, is not enough to lay
open and disclose this indwelling sin, this mystery of Iniquity.

These do then make Good the charge of the natural man's actual and invincible
Ignorance and unacquaintednesse with this indwelling lust: and I hope by these
it appears to be a truth. But yet for farther satisfaction, I proposed to
enquire what in particular they never did, or ever could discover of this sin:
and now to that.

3 General proposed.
1 The improved natural man cannot discover the exceeding great sinfulness of
the habitual frame of his naturell heart.
1. The best Improved natural man cannot discover the exceeding great
sinfulness of the habitual frame of his natural heart: the sinfulness of
the heart disposed and bent toward unrighteousness and sin, the uncleanenesse
of this Leprosy, the loathsomeness of this putrefying wound, this he cannot
see, who sees with the best natural eye. As for men without the law, no
wonder if they understand not this spreading scab to be a leprosy, they have
not the Law, and rule by which they might discern it: no wonder if they paint
over the Sepulcher, and neither see the rottenness, nor smell the stench of
that which is within: for they have neither eye to see, nor sense to discern
it. I know none can be ignorant who have ability and can, who have opportunity
and do, read, or have read, the Partial and unequal judgment they make of,
the favorable and smoothing words they give, to hide this sin. The better and
softer name of their Genius must be the name of this sin; Their making
provision for the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof was with them
nothing but curare Genium. Their living in the height of sin, was with them
nothing but Piare Genium vino and floribus. And a severer course of life was
accounted a fraud put upon their Genius. Thus the whole sinful frame of the
heart passed under the name of Genius: now if their Mythologists understand
them, Occulta vis, qua ad singulas res gerendas impel. limur. Not. Com.
This Genius was A secret or occult power, by which we are moved to each thing
we do. And if you enquire what this Power or virtue is, some of them will tell
you it is the Symmetry of the Elements.

So that in brief, the sinfulness of the frame or disposition of the heart of
man with these persons, is no more then an unhappy temperature of the Elements,
compounding the body, and swaying the mind according to their prevalency. Now
who ever did, or justly could apprehend much sinfulness in this, that our
bodies are compounded of the Elements, or that such or such a temperature does
most prevail? whoever thought it an exceeding great sin that he was of a
Sanguine Complexion? or how much blame worthiness is there in a Phlegmatic
Constitution? barely as such. I know the different tempers do differently
promote and further sin, do much facilitate the workings of this sin: but this
is an effect ex accidenti, no direct natural effect of this or that
constitution, but it is an effect of that sin which dwells in us, and which
observing that the temper of the body does sway us more one way, then other,
takes hold of that advantage, and works powerfully by this constitution, to
the hurrying of the sinner on to sin. In the mean time, while they thus put all
upon their Genius, and resolved this into the Symmetry of the Elements, they
must be thought to have had no right knowledge of the exceeding sinfulness of
their heart propending, and inclining to sin: but I dwell too long with these
persons, who might be men of choicest natural parts, but wanted the best
Improvement; being without the Church, and so without the external advantages
and helps, which might heighten their reason to a clear and full discovery of
this: but did not Best improved natural men within the Church ordinarily, or
at least might they not (by the improvement of Reason and parts, though they
remained unregenerate, and natural men) have come to a sight of this sinful
frame of heart in its great sinfullnesse? well, view we, and observe the
Pharisees (and consider what may be judged, and ought to be answered to this)
choicest men for learning and education before Christ his coming in the flesh;
yet they took a view of this sinful frame with a false glass, which
represented scarce the one half of this body of sin, and what was so
represented was varnisht over with colors of their own mixing, that it
appeared, not what it was, but what they would have it be: as is evident from
their corrupt exposition of the Law, which our Lord notes and condemns in the
5 th. chapter of Matthew. They saw not the sinfulness of a malicious heart, or of
a heart ready to boil with causleste anger: witness their gross corrupting
that precept, thou shall not kill, either saying it was a prohibition of
murdering an Israelite, or that only murder which was done prepria manu.
Hear what they say in their Talmud, ( as I find it in Dr. Lightfoot's Epistle
to the Reader of his Harmony of the New Testament.) A murderer is he that
kills his neighbor with a stone, or with Iron, or thrusts him into water or
fine, out of which it is impossible to get our again, he is guilty: but if he
thrust him into fire, or water, out of which it is possible to get out again,
though he die, yet is he quit. If he sets a dog or a serpent on him, he is quit
etc. of like nature with this. And now can you suppose these generations of men
to know the sinfulness of a murtherous frame of heart, who so foully mistated
the external act, and acquitted that as no murder, which is one of the
highest degrees of it? will you say that the man knows, or believes any
sinfulness in a bloody revengefull disposition? who can say That he who hireth
another to kill his neighbor, or sends his servants, and they kill him etc. is
Guilty as a blood-shedder, to be punished by the hand of heaven only, not by
man? yet this was ordinarily a received doctrine among them, as appears by
what is farther added by Dr. Lightfoot in the forecited place. Their
Expositions of the rest of the Law are much of the same nature. Actual
external uncleanness, and defiling their neighbors wife they thought to be a
sin, but never accounted the habitual bent, and propension of the heart to
this, to be a sin, or forbidden in that Law. They were not troubled at the
thoughts of any secret reluctance to the holy commands of God: It was nothing
with them to have natures full of 1. Unholinesse, and opposition to God's
holiness. 2. Rebellion, and contradiction to the Law of God. 3. Dislike, and
backwardness to every good. 4. Pronenesse to, and delight in every evil. 5.
Folly, and inability to do that Good they ought. 6. Craft, and subtilty to
consummate that evil, which the Law of God forbids,


These and such like abominations, rivetted in our natures, they took no notice
of, therefore of the Pharisees and Scribes, those Improved natural men (though
within the Church) we doubt not to say they knew not the sinfulness of the
habitual frame of the heart. The same must be granted of men in succeeding
latter ages, let the endless disputes maintained by the Orthodoxe against
Corrupt teachers, be witness to this; and of latest years these, and such
like Positions.

That men are not disabled to Good, by the fall of Adam, which the six
Disputants men of parts and learning asserted, and owned at the Hague. And
others (much of the same stature for their parts, and learning) have owned the
same position, as Secinus Praelect. Theol. c. 4. f. 13. 14. (cited by John
Peltius) where among other passages, he quoteth this) Nec vis naturalis Liberi
Arbitrii ab eo tempore imminuta fuit. And in his second Epistle to Dudithius,
page 18,19. where I read this passage. As concerning the wickedness of men;
this is all that may be said, that God wills that man by his own free will
should be no less able to be good then bad. de malitia hominum nibil aliud
dicendum venit -- vult deus, ut homo pro suo ipsius arbitrio non minus improbus
quam probus esse possit. Cum posse^t dagitiose vivere virtuti studere
maluerunt. Soc. 2 Ep. ad Dudith.
And here he speaks of the fallen state of men, affirming it in their power to
be Good, and as easily if they will themselves, as to be bad, and devolving all
the goodness of those who are good in a bad world to this, That when they
could have lived Flagitiously rather chose to follow virtue. And as the Master,
so the Scholar Valent Smalcius, both in his Racovian Catech: c. 10. at once
denies all the vitiousnesse which we affirm to be in us, proudly averring,
Peccatu^ originis nullu^ pror. sus est. resp. ad 2 Quaest.
there is not any such thing as Original sin, and that this has not depraved
our Free will. And in his Disputations against Frantzius. 2. disput. which is
de peccato Originis: calling it Commentum humanum and peccatum confictum, so
page 60. where by the way he seems to intimate what he thought to be in us
(instead of that Original sin which we affirm) viz. Proclivitas (quaedam) ad
peccatum. I add quaedam, for this Author supposes it to be such, as yet
possibly a man may not actually sin, though he be prone to sin. Potest fieri,
ut is qui ad peccandum proclivis est, ramen non peccet.


Whosoever has such apprehensions of our inhaerent proclivity to sin, has not
a full acquaintance with, nor discovery of the sinfulness of the frame of the
natural man's heart. Nor any who dare, as these men do, assert. 1. That the
will of man is not vitiated by the fall: or else who dare to contend 2. That
what is now a more vehement was before the fall a more moderate inclination to
evil; as these, and others who are Roman Catholics. Becanus opusc. 6. de
institia operum.
3. That Concupiscence is not properly a sin, or not after Baptism, or a very
little sin, as some in the Schools, and many among the Romanists.


Now these and such like disputes and assertions do plainly bespeak these men
unacquainted with the great sinfulness of a natural heart, and the universal
opposition which is in the flesh to the spirit: Catholici docent
concupiscentiam in actu primo non esse peccarum originis:sed natura e^ quandam
pronicatem, quae pet se enlpabilis non sit. Becanus opusc. 6. de justit. operum.
and yet they are men of great parts, and great learning, and within the
Church, but discern not, because they are natural, this sin, which the spirit
of God convinces of, and which is not discerned, till the soul be enlightened
with more than common illumination. But next

2. The best Improved natural man cannot discover the sinfulness of the
first, secret, unpublished, and unformed ^tions of this corrupt nature.
The best Improved natural man cannot discover the sinfulness of the first,
secret, unpolished, and unformed motions of the corrupt nature. The sinfulness
of those motions (which by the Schoolmen are called primo primi) was never
discovered by all the light that nature, and education, have at any time
afforded to the most quick sighted of Adam's offspring. They never did detect
the sinfulness of the first ebullitions, and anomalous workings of that Lust,
which dwells in us. Indeed, when this corrupt sountaine has so stirred, that
some of the grosser vapors have risen up with a stench offensive to the
natural conscience they have discovered, and acknowledged an uncleanuesse in
the fountain, and in these grosser eruptions of lust: If the irregular
passions did obtain from the will an assent, or approbation, to somewhat that
was dissonant to the more sober, and resined precepts of reason; and if these
motions were so far formed, that either a convenient opportunity or an
assurance of impunity, would immediately, and with ease, midwise them into the
world by an actual patration of that, which Passion had suggested, the will
had somented, and Reason had disliked; then they would perhaps (as many have)
acknowledge the irregularity of them, and be troubled at it though mostly the
trouble was this

That convenience of executing did less favor their desires, and you may
write on the doors of this nursery -- Lateat malim, dum tempera dentur
latitiae mistos non habitura metus. Ovid Epist. Paridead Helen.



But alas all this is far from a right sight of these first motions in their
sinfulness, far from a sight of hatred against them, repentance for them,
opposition to them, destruction and mortifying of them, and cleansing the heart
from them, far from such a sight as convinced them, that death was due for
these first motions, that they defiled, and rendered best actions sinful, and
such as need pardon, this they have not seen; I doubt this is too true of these
men, and the knowledge of sin in the motions, and passions of the mind.

That if at any time a word has dropped from them, which seemed to condemn the
extravagancy of their thoughts, it is to be referred Either to Thoughts
perfected, and consented to, Or To a Rhetorical eloquence, which showed us,
how well they could speak, not how well they did think.


Neither were they the only men, thus persuaded of the innocence of these
first motions of a depraved heart, but also that generation of men, the
scribes, and Pharisees, were so persuaded whose traditions made the Law of God
void, whose dictates, and expositions of the law, never did endanger or
affright a secret lust with a probability of discovering it; the speculative
Murderer, the lascivious wanton fancy, never did fall under the lash of their
Sermons, on those command's, which forbid murder, and Adultery.

None of their doctrines were shuts to the eye, that it should not behold; nor
checks to the fancy, that it should not hover about, or sit hatching this
Cockatrice. It was one of the Rabbines who did bewray the prevalency of his
secret speculative uncleanness In that speech, he delighted to contemplate
handsome women that he might praise God; a fair excuse for his foul fault, and
I cannot persuade my charity to mistake the man so much, as to think he spoke
the whole truth: Besides this sort of men.

The generality of the Schoolmen making to themselves an inadequate, and
uncertain rule, or standard for the measuring of sin, have also inevitably
entangled themselves in a great mistake, and gross ignorance of the
sinfulness of the first motions of concupiscence: For laying aside the Law of
God, or at least interpreting it according to their own apprehensions, and
applying it only to what may voluntarily be done by us, have at last shifted
aside the Law, and substituted voluntarium into its place, by which they will
measure, and judge of sin, both determining what is sin, by what is voluntary;
and how great sin is, by how much of voluntarinesse there is in it: Hence such
conclusions as these concerning concupiscence. Motus appetitiss circa rem
illicitam, non accedente consensis voluntatis, non est peccatum. Gregor: de
valent. in prim. sec.
Ratio non tenetur reprimere primos motus. Thom. dis. 6. q. 2. pu. 2


Says Alexander Alensis Q. 125. memb. 7. whose short sight could not see how
little there is in his distinction of direct and indirect prohibition, and that
concupiscence (I suppose by what he says memb: 6. and 7. that he takes in
these first motions, as well as concupiscence whence they rise) is not
directly, but indirectly forbidden.

If the heart (both frame, and first motions of it) were not open to the eye of
God, and if he were not searcher of reins, if he either could not judge the
heart, or else would not: I then would begin to think there were some
likelihood it might so be, but he that has a purpose directly to judge, has
surely given a law directly to him, whom he will judge; and will not God thus
judge the secrets of the heart? To these men

We may add (and though we do them no credit yet we do them no injury in
adding them) Lindanus. Panopl. l. 4. c. 34. Alphonside castro her. 4. Tapper in
Expl. art 2. Gregor: de valent, etc. Becanus opusculo sexto de Justitia operum.
Bellarmine, with others among the Papists, who have not seen the vileness of
the first motions of a natural heart; hence it is that these are accounted by
them. The grief of a wounded nature, but not the guilt of a sinning nature;
let Becanus be heard Catholici docent, motus concupiscentiae rationem
praevenientes non esse peccata, nec prohiberi hoc praecepto, Non concupisces,
sed solum consensum. He speake's it as the Doctrine of the Papists, and not as
his own private opinion Docent Catholici etc. says he and well he might when
he sees the Trent Council own this, both its their fifth session de Pecc:
origin: and in their sixth session de justific: and de bonis operibus. And the
rest of this society are (no doubt) of the same mind, they have very charitable
thoughts of the innocence of these first motions, but we cannot so judge, and
yet will hope, we have the mind of the Lord.

These are pregnant instances of the ignorance of great Scholars in this point
of greatest concernment, but they are Foreign, I wish we had no domestic,
examples: but indeed how many among us either plead with argument, or affirm
by practice, that they judge the first Motions of concupiscence to be innocent?
and who are they? what kind of men? I mistake much, if they ^re not usually,
the men of great parts, and of considerable improvement by learning ^oo, who
persuade themselves, and others also that nothing is a sin, or a great sin, but
what is explicitly voluntary. They are mostly the wise men of the world (whom
God passes by while he chooses the foolish, 1 Cor. 1.27.) who will lodge,
retain, and delight in these thoughts of vanity notwithstanding convincing
demonstrations of the sinfulness of such thoughts, In a word the 1. Seldom
and superficial confession of this in most, 2. Little degree of contrition,
and sorrow of heart, 3. Difficulty of keeping the heart contrite for this 4.
Frequent, and renewed relapses into almost habitual insensiblenesse of this,
which the


Regenerate observe in themselves (though they have all external advantages to
help them, with saving Grace and internal helps also) do undeniably
confirm, that it is impossible for best improved natural parts to attain
this sight of the sinfulness of first motions.

3 Best improved natural parts cannot discover the guile of this sin.
3. As their knowledge reaches not to a sufficient discovery of these two, so
neither can best improved natural parts discover the policy, and wisdom:
the deceitfulness, and cursed guile, of this sin, the superlative craft of
this lust runs in veins that lie too deep for any natural eye to discover.
It Is policy and wisdom cannot be discovered by any that is not wise, and
exercised in counter-working to its wisdom; as in laying, and carrying on a
plot at chesse or a stratageme in war, none can discover the handsome
contrivance of it, but one who is well skilled in them, so it is here, none but
he which is well skilled (by exercise of that wisdom which is from above,)
and this skill is only gotten by a constant, and wise exercise of it against
this sin, and its wisdom, (none but such a one) can discover this part of
it is nature.

We observe that he, who shall be able to discern the policy in which a wise
man acts, and carries on his designs, must be either equal, or at least
not very much inferior to him, in wisdom: a fool, or any one over matched in
politics, can never find out the right key, nor read the characters in which
he writes who very much outgoeth him.

This is the case before us, the natural man is wise to do evil, very
subtle, and politic to frame mischief, but he has no underestanding to do
good; he is of weak intellectuals, indeed a very fool as to any good to be
done; he is ever contriving, promoting, and perfecting evil, and does it
craftily; but he cannot discern this craft, for he cannot either prudently
design, or propose, or promote, or perfect that which is good.

Sin rules, and reigns by ways of profoundest policy, over the hearts of
natural men, and they perceive not the mystery of its government; In this sin
you shall observe the wisdom of one who plodds and contrives the framing of a
lie, or falsehood into a seeming truth, that a Judge may not find it out, who
lays a lie closely and cunningly together as a false witness does; whence it
has one name in the Hebr: (...) from (...) cogitavit machinatus est whence
(...) the ordinary name of a forger of a lie, to the prejudice of truth, and
justice; as the learned John Buxtorfe observes in his Lexic. Rabbin. in (...).
It is a plotting evil as (...) is rendered in Psalm. 37.12, It is wise, as one
who undermines, and circumvents by fraudulent ways, (it is (...) Ps. 10.7.) as
under pretense of friendship Lam. 1.19. as Israel was deceived by his lovers,
or as a man is deceived by his neighbor; Prove. 26.19. Albeit the regenerate
soul make these crafty Gibeonites Hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
spiritual temple, and its service, yet they still retain the Policy, and wily
disposition of Gibeonites, as ready, and subtle to deceive after, as before
they were subjugated to the Law of the Spirit of life.

This sin is wise, as one who seduceth with the craft of an harlot, or the
subtlety of a crafty disputer there is (...) Romans 8.7. there are (...) 2 Cor.
10.4. Mark 7.21.

It deceives, with baits there is (...) James 1.14. and there are (...), Ephesians.
4.22. which I doubt not is an Hebraisme much the same with that of Jer. 7.9.
setting forth the superlative fraud of this sin, by reason of which the heart
is unsearchable to any but the Lord: briefly whilst that little good which
survives our fall is as a negligent, remiss, and careless, raw soldier, this
indwelling lust is as an old experienced commander, resolute, and vigilant also
in carrying on what he has politiquely contrived. Now look over the life of a
man wise in his generation, and consider what he thinks of that the Apostle
calls wisdom of the flesh, and whether he apprehends there can be any great
sinfulness in it, whilst he judges it a desirable and high part of
perfection; so that part of this wisdom of the flesh, which is subservie^t to
his covetousness, and provides satisfaction for that lust, is accounted by him
a very good qualification, an excellent ability to improve his estate: though
Ephraim be a merchant, in whose hands are the balances of deceit, yet he sees
no iniquity in it, nor will he believe it is any. Hos. 12.7.
That fleshly wisdom which is subservient to Revenge, and sinful, returning
evil for evil, and doing this secundum artem too, may not (with the natural
man's good leave) be judged by us, and he will never judge it, a sin, and
culpable; but it, must be accounted, and called a good, and excellent fitness
to live in an injurious world, a necessary requisite to secure, and protect our
selves: that devilish wisdom which subserveth to Ambition, (proud in it is
aims, and insatiable in it is acquisitions,) is reckoned by such men an
excellency, fitting them for noble employments, to manage the affairs of
great States, and to raise their families: but it never was truly stated by any
other then the holy Law of God, and a renewed heart: None other but such a
rule, and such a hand applying it, ever discovered the sinful crookedness,
and perverseness of this wisdom. Other instances I forbear, since you may
make a judgment of the rest by these, and I will not insist on the particulars
in which much of this wisdom is seen to a spiritual eye; as it is crafty the
loss of a penny, that it may get advantage of gaining a pound, Or


These are the methods (though but few of those many) which continue, and
improve the kingdom of sin but are not discerned, nor can be discerned, by the
sinner how well soever improved in his natural parts; Again fourthly

4. Natural parts can never discover the strength and power of this sin.
Best natural improved parts never did or can discover the strength, and
power, of this sin the unregenerate, (though as excellent for naturals as
Paul was, and as well improved as he, yet) cannot make a discovery of the
strength of this body of sin, of the power of it, swaying to sin, and carrying
him captive, and deteining him captive to his sinful passions, and lusts. It
must be granted indeed, that such a one may find out, and easily demonstrate a
very high degree of strength; and power in all natural inclinations: So great
a strength, that none can conquer, or change it but by destroying the subject
of it, or changeing it in it is being. You may moulder a clod to dust, or grind
a stone to smallest sands, you may scatter it into the air, and force it
upward, but in the mean time you have not, nor can you turn the stream of its
affection, nor alter the natural inclination, of the least of those sands, or
dusts that they shoud not propend, and hasten to their rest, you may destroy
the greatest quantity of fire you ever saw but you cannot alter the least
spark of it, that it should not fly upward.

So invincibly strong are natural affections; and such like strength natural
light may now (for it formerly has) discover, in the passions of men, in whom
they are so strong that they cannot be dispossessed of their hold, though they
may be reduced to some moderate exercise of their power: upon which discovery
many very excellent discourses have been raised by some of these men, many
Moral Treatises of the Rise, Nature, Manner of working, strength, etc. which
are, in the various passions, of men, yet all these are far short of a full
enarration of the sinful strength which is in these Passions (to use their
common language) in these lusts to use the Scripture words, nor is this spoken
without book: for this is evident from

Passions, which, they boasted were subjugated to their Reason; this is the
case of our carnal professors, generally they boast of a conquest over those
sins, which are not yet broken in their strength, but only abated a little
in their violence; as in all our loose, and profane livers upon their
civillizing, and growing less notorious in sin. But that man has not
knowledge of his enemies power that triumphs upon repelling some few of his
straggling, extravagant parties: Thy lust it may be broke out, and disturbed the
more sober Moral part of the neighborhood, and now thou have repelled them,
and taught them to keep closer in, but yet their strength remains entire: And
can thou upon this reasonably suppose thou have tried the utmost power of
them?

this mighty power of indwelling lust, from those slight, contemptuous
thoughts they have of the strength of this sin; they are bold, and confident
that they can soon subdue it, that they may be in this expedition a Caesar and
at once, view and conquer them; Did that commander ever truly know thestrength
of his enemy who contemned, and slighted his match? who made nothing in his
thoughts of such an enemy who will make nothing of him in the encounter? And
can the natural improved man, who is every way inferior to, and overmatched
by, his lusts, who is worsted (with ease) in the encounter, with a single lust,
yet sleights the combined force of all his lusts, can he be thought to know the
power, and strength of them? Yet



Can strong holds be battered down with an empty sound, or with Pot-Guns? can
you hope he knows his enemies strength who is persuaded to venture his
thousands against the enemies ten thousands? yet such is this mistake of the
natural man concerning the strong holds of sin, which he attempts to reduce by
weak, moral directions, which at best do but better discipline his natural
lusts, no way destroy their power.



might so, if he had help from another to undertake for him, but that he has
not, neither seeke's it; Now the case standing so, Who sees not that the
natural man how ever improved knowe's not the strength of indwelling sin?

View farther and consider in the work of mortification, how sadly our
teachers who are carnal (though excellently improved) have mistaken in their
doctrines, our hearers in their apprehensions, and both hearers and teachers in
their practice, and exercise of mortification. It is very hard to persuade them
there is more strength in this sin then in a habit, or custom; they will believe
that an unhappyer imitation of what was worst has twisted a cord which
strongly fetters them; but they see not, nor consider, they were borne
captives, and the chains are strong as natural affections, and inclinations.
The most of our carnal Hearers, will venture, so desperately, upon giving
their natural lusts advantage against themselves that we cannot but conclude:
That their Running on many, dangerous, and strong temptations Provoking and
awaking (even sleeping) lusts Casting away their arms, as faith, love, fear,
the Word etc. Refusing that aid which is offered to them in the Gospel Praying
seldom, faintly, cursorily against this sin Neglecting to watch over each
other etc.


Are I say, (and you cannot but say they are) evidences clearer then can be
excepted against, that they see not the strength of this Powerful adversary,
which wars against our soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Triumphing conqueror, which leads
us captive, Romans 7.23. Ruling Lord, to whom we yield our selves servants, Romans
6.17. Law of our members which we obey, Romans 7.23. King which rules in our
mortal body, Romans 6.12.


In a word, He only knows what his enemy can do, and the utmost strength of
him, who enters the lists, who declares an irreconcilable war against his
enemy, who resolves to be victorious in the utter ruin of his enemy: Now this
the natural man never does, he never so encountreth with sin.

Others may hear of Carthag's strength it was Rome that best, and fullyest
knew it: or as a man who swimmes with the stream may guess at it is strength,
but he knows it who swimmes against it: so here the best natural man with all
his improvements resist's, and opposes this sin but very little, and therefore
cannot know much of its strength for this is a fruit of an experienced soul
that is exercised in warring against his fleshly lust, whilst Sampson slept
bound in the twists of his own hair he knew not that strength, which he found
in them when he was awakened: secure natural men are thus ignorant of sin's
strength.

5. The best improved naturallman can never discover the first rise Original
and spring of Lust.
5. The best improved natural man with all the helps you can suppose (except
the law, or divine revelation) never did, or ever will be able to discover the
first Rise, original, and spring of that lust, which does dwell in the
natural man, and reigns over him. I will not enquire how long the men before
the flood (who lived without the Church, and were not among those that were
accounted the sons of God, and who called on his name) might retain some
broken traditions concerning the fall of Adam: nor will I now consider, how
long the degenerating sons of Cham might retain some confused, traditionall
knowledge of this: sure it was not long, but in succeeding ages, it was quite
forgotten, and the best improvements of the heathen, who were (...), could
never recover it. Dr Kellet Misces. l. 1. c. 6. p. 104.
Search their Archives, analize their profoundest disquisitions, revolve their
natural Theologists, observe whether they ever came near the discovery of this
sin, in its first spring and fountain. The Question unde malum? puzzelled all
the Philosophers, and though some of them enquired only the original of the
evil of suffering, and affliction, (which is more easily found out then the
evil of sin, and whence it springs) yet were at a losse^ Maximus Tyrius the
Platonic Philosopher in his 25 sermon: thus enquires, (...); which he
principally states (as appears by what he there says) in reference to the
evils we suffer, which he calls (...). In discoursing of which he much
mistaketh, though of an easier discovery then the original of moral evil.
Affectus (and you must note these speak of affections which need to be
rectified and moderated by virtue) sunt a natura, was the opinion of Plato,
Aristotle, and their followers: and they generally concluded Perturbationes seu
affictus a natura dari, and ad virtutem esse utiles. Lips. manuduct, ad stoic.
Phil. l.3. disser. 7.


The best and soberest wits among them, after a long and successelesse enquiry,
have prudently defisted from farther enquiry, resolving to content themselves,
that the cause of all evil in man was to be sought only in man; though how to
find out which was the first cause of the inordinate passions of the mind they
knew not particularly, and distinctly, but a confused, and general notion they
had, that it was from man himself. How little did the Manichees understand of
this? whose irrational absurd conceptions of this tell us they infinitely
mistook the truth. It was a foul mistake of the Pelagians too, which they
formerly, and others of late have fancied touching the irruption of sin into
the world. That which cruciated Augustine: so much Quoniam Deus fecit omnia
haec, bonus bona, majus quidem, and summum bonum minora fecit bona; sed tamen
and creans, and creata bona sunt omnia: unde malum? confess. l. 7. c. 5. 2.
which place he bestows on the disputes, which were ordinary in this matter,
concluding nothing there; but else where he concludes, Non erat exitus,
quaerebam aestuans, unde malum? quae illa tormenta parturientis cerdis mei? qui
gemitus? Deus meus! l. 7. conf. c. 7.. 1. This I say which so troubled him, was
undiscovered to them without the Church, they could not, and it is much
undiscerned by natural men within the Church, because they will not see the
truth: so when Pelagians might have known the original of sin from Romans 5.12.
they chose rather to corrupt the text (as Chemnit. observes Chemnitius Loc. de
peccat, orig: p. 213. b. et p. 214 a fol. edit. 1653.
) and so has Pighius declined from the truth in this point, as who will may
observe in his controversy de Peccat: origin: passim.

And the Papists know not, or else they would profess it, sure: (for right
knowledge of such a truth, in a council, and gathered for such an end as a
council should be, would have engaged them to own the truth, and openly
declare it.

What ever they think of it, I know that God, and our Lord Jesus, (who will be
ours, and their Judge) will account such knowledge to be no knowledge. In a
word, the Endless disputes of men who enquire into this beyond what is
necessary, and in the enquiry lose what knowledge they seemed to have had, and
grow either skeptics, or heretics, are sull proof that they cannot with
best improved natural parts discover the spring and fountain of that
sinfulness which is in our nature. But

6. The best improved natural men could never discover the finfull frame of
beart in its deserts.
6. Lastly (though I might add more) the best improved natural man never did,
or ever could he discover the desert, of this sinful frame of his heart; it
was a thing they never could persuade themselves to believe that such a
punishment might be justly inflicted on them so soon as ever they were borne
into the world: Indeed on their principles it was impossible they should
discover this for they acknowledged not the sinfulness of nature, or else that
this was not great, and therefore no obligation to punishment, or but to a
small punishment. It is an unquaestioned part of Justice to proportion the
penalty to the crime, and true state of it, ut in parvis leviora in magnis
graviora supplicia irrogentur: Justitiae distributivae est suu^ cuique tribuere.
So that they who accounted this a small fault could not think it worthy of so
sore a punishment as we know it deserves: if you should hear a Philosopher
reading a lecture of the innocence of man, of the blameless, (though weak)
state of an infant, and it should be told him, that yet, there were who held
this opinion that such might be justly condemned for ever, and cast into that
place of misery where offenders suffer for their offenses, he would dispute the
case and deny the justice of the proceedings. Thus do very many within the
Church, view the Schoolmens determination, that infants shut out of Heaven lie
under the Punishment of loss, not sense, that they only miss of the
enjoyment of God, but fall not under a punishment of Pain, and Grief, a
determination which savours much of a nescience and ignorance of the desert of
indwelling lust: on the same general mistake do

Both Socinians, Remonstrants, and Anabaptists deny that any are, or justly may
be punished for that sin we call original sin, or ingenite lust which dwell's
in us: hence they load the orthodoxe with many reproachful exclamations of
curelty, and injustice, and brand the truth with unheard of harshnesse, with
incredible severity and Adamantine mercilesnesse against poor innocents, such
like charges we know are laid upon the teachers of the Doctrine, touching the
demerit of our sinsull nature: and it is no wonder for they judge by the
mistaken nature of the cause, and erring in their apprehensions of the merit of
the cause, do as widely err in their assigning the punishment due to it. But
we who are taught by the Law, and enlightened by the spirit of God, so that we
can see, and do know that we are all transgressors of that Covenant, which
promised life to perfect obedience, threatened death to the first sin (which is
ours, and brought death into the world) that we are children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. Under the curse having not continued in all things written in the Law to
do them, Gal. 3.10. that in Adam we all died, 1 Cor. 15.22. that we are borne
so, that Joh. 3.3.
unless we be new born we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven; we who are
instructed by the spirit in such truths, as these which are confessedly above
the reach of the best natural eye, do see that desert of hell, and eternal
separation from the presence of God, which is due to this sinful nature of
ours: though others do not discover it nor will believe it: we see that by
reason of this Lust our life is sull of sin and our persons (from the womb)
obnoxious to the wrath of God.

SERMON II.
Romans 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not known Lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not Covet.


4 Generals propounded, viz. a Rational account of this truth.
I Now come to the Fourth General proposed, viz: a rational account of this
truth; However proud selfe-admiring men do think that Wisdom is with them;
And such perfect wisdom too, that a matter of such import and weight, as this,
cannot be hid from them; yet certainly if they will consider, and duly weigh,
what reason suggesteth, in such like cases,) they will see, that as truth
affirms they cannot, so reason shows us why they cannot discover this Sin. For,

Look what reason suggesteth, a cause of difficulty, or impossibility
hindering us in the enquiry, and fearch, after the full discovery very of what
we do but imperfectly, and obscurely know in things of another nature: The
same, (proportionably applied to this business in hand,) will evidently
manifest the Difficulty of Getting any considerable measure, and the
impossibility of attaining any full, and perfect knowledge of this sin, by
the best improved Natural man in the world: And this I hope to make Good to
you:

Reas. 1. Because a Natural man makes use of a crooked Rule.
1. Because in that enquiry which the natural man makes into sin in the
General, and in that enquiry he makes into this in particular, he proceeds
to make the discovery by a Distorted, and Crooked Index, or Rule, indeed there
is both a distorted and crooked faculty which judges, and a crooked rule by
which it judges: The Reason or judgment of a natural man is perverted by
sin; So the Scripture which is the truth of God, and speaks ouely truth,
assures us one while that natural men are a crooked and perverse generation,
Phil. 3.15. of reprobate mind, Romans 2.28. And froward in their paths, Prev.
2.15. that They have no understanding, Psalm. 14.2. no rectified understanding
to seek, apprehend and judge of the things of God, and to walk with him: but
a perverted understanding (which turns them aside) they all have as is
intimated in the third verse.

Otherwhile the Scripture says they are of a froward heart, Prove. 11. v. 20.
wise and crafty in their Councels, (...)
but yet these Councels are still froward, Job 5. v. 13. and they are (to a
man) of a perverse heart, Prove. 12.8. (...)
whose conceptions and disputes are perverse also, they are (...) 1 Timothy 6.5.
There is a crookedness and obliquity in the understanding of this natural
man, which (not the Scriptures only, but) reason it self also confirms to
us, and complains of; both which are with admirable, yet Aenigmaticall
ingenuity expressed Tabula Cebetis.
by a beautiful woman, sitting within, or by the Gate, at which we enter into
this life, who deceives with a fair show, and her name is (...).

(...), in her hand a Cup, in which the drink, (...) (as my Author recites it)
and of this (...), whence it is (says the Author) that they (...). But why do
I put you to the trouble of ghessing at the truth from Riddles, when Max.
Tyrius Sermon. 34.
others speak plain, (...). It is no easy thing to find out truth, the soul
of man is in danger to miss it by it is over readiness to judge or doubt of
that it apprehends; like a warpt or shaken beam in a balance, never gives an
exact difference of weights, so reason Peccatum perturbatio rationis atque
ordinis Vid. Fr. Picum Mirand. de vanit. doct.
disturbed or distorted by sin. Humanum est errare, nescire labi, is a
testimony we need not be ashamed of in a Pulpit, though we first learned it in
a Grammar Schole. Indeed the many errors of the best Philosophers in many
plain cases; the many Assertions of the Peccatum perturbatio rationis atque
ordinis Vid. Fr. Picum Mirand. de vanit. doct.
uncertainty of all things (whence it came to pass that some undoubted truths
were censured for the Bold determinations of rash men.) These I say are proof,
that the most indulgent Fathers, and strenuous Patrons of Nature's ability, did
see and confess an uncertainty at least, or a perverseness and crookedness in
the mind of man. Now if there be such an obliquity in the mind, it cannot be,
that it should rightly and fully discover this sin, for a crooked and oblique
thing can never be fully discovered by that which is crooked, and this stands
on this bottom, Rectum est Index sui and obliqui. The mind then of a natural
man best improued, most refined, and rectified, remaining still in greatest
part vitiated and corrupted with such a pravity can be at best but a partial,
weak, and inadequate discerner of the vitiousnesse and evil of this sin.

Every sin is (...) an unrighteousness, and every natural man's mind is
(...), or he is (...) and unrighteousness, does not unvaile unrighteousness:
every sin is (...) an irregularity, and every natural man is (...) without a
perfect rule, and he is called (...) in respect to that part in him which is
capable of, and subject to a Law; which is either solely the Rational part, or
principally at least; the sensual and brutish being under a Law by
concomitance or affinity to the rational. The rational directly, immediately,
and per se: The sensitive indirectly, remotely, and per accidens. The best
improved (...) cannot possibly be a sufficient judge of that which is (...),
because both are irregular; you ever lost your labor, and missed finding the
obliquity of that line which you measured by a crooked line, indeed if your
measuring line be somewhat straiter then your measured line you may find out
somewhat of its crookedness but not all, you may find a degree of obliquity
more in the one then in the other

But not justly how much more: as you cannot find out justly the capacity of an
unknown vessel by measuring it with a less vessel, once to be filled, whence
you will soon see that the unknown conteines more, but you remain uncertain how
much more, so some

Natural improved men walking by a straiter line then the loose and viler sort
of them, bringing these men to be tried by their better and straiter life have
found a crookedness and deflection from rectitude, but have not found how
great this deflection is. A Scipio,

A Cato or a Drusus Germanicus parallelling themselves with a lascivious Poet,
with an incontinent Clodius can see there is much of this sin, indeed much more
of the fruit of this sin (but they cannot see absolutely or certainly how much
more) in these persons, then in themselves.

C. Fabritii continentia M. Curiitenuites victus Cicer. Parad, 1.
The examples of some eminent among them for gratitude and temperance may
convince and shame others ungrateful and intemperate men, but such examples
(...) disclose all the ingratitude and intemperance which lies in such breasts;

The Piety, and religious observance of the Deities in such as Lucius Albanus
who preferred his Country Gods and their Priests to his own wife and Children.
Val. Maxim l. 1. c. 1.


Or in a Metellus who forbad the consul to go out of the City toward Africa
before he had sacrificed and so began his journey with the good leave of the
Gods, etc. The Piety of such men being made the standard to measure some others
who contemned all religion did find out some what, (but not how much) of
Atheism and irreligion was in these men.

In a word the Scribes, and Pharisees (who sat in Moses chair and thought it
easier so to do then to walk in Moses his Law) judging the life of a Publican
or barlot by the strictness of a Pharisaicall holiness, soon saw much wanting
in these persons, and so judged them sinners with a witness; but they could
neither declare how great sinners they were, nor could they detect their own
inhaerent wickedness, because their judgment perverted already could not give
a right sentence; as an uncertain balance into which you cast different
weights may show there is a difference, the one lighter then the other but
cannot show how much difference, how much one is lighter then the other: So here

The best improved understanding while natural only is an uneven balance,
into which cast you the natural heart and life at one end and the law at the
other. It will discover a want of weight in the heart and life bui because it
knows not exactly how much the law outweigheth them there cannot be a certain
discovery what and how great want of weight there is in such a heart and life
let this then stand, the first demonstration, Rectum est index sui et obliqui,
whatever is not perfectly strait cannot be a perfect measure to find out the
obliquity of that which is crooked, but now the best improved natural man is
not strait, nay he is very crooked, (his unsanctified improvements make him
more perverse, and crooked) and the natural heart is (by it is sinfulness)
distorted, which should be measured therefore I doubt not to conclude, this
perverted understanding cannot discern fully the sinfulness of a perverted
heart.

2. Reason, because there is much spiritual wicednesse in this sin.
2. The best improved natural man cannot attain a right and full discovery of
the sinfulness of his nature, or carnal heart; because this sinfulness
consists much of a spiritual wickedness and the natural man in his highest
improvement remains carnal and sensual.

There is indeed a spiritual deformity or wickedness in every sin, though not
equally in every sin, some sins are more sensual, and brutish as riot, in use
of meats, and drinks; uncleanness in the abuse of our bodies, and such like
sins which are committed by us principally with the parts, and appetite which
in us is common with the bruit beasts called by Hierocles (...)
unreasonablenesse of those who are wholly immersed in matter.

Other sins proceed from more sublimated affections, and those which are
refined from the dross, and lees of matter and sense; as being immediately
from the rational soul without the intervention of bodily organs as Atheism,
Idolatry, etc.

The first irregular passions of the minds which are not only spiritual
wickedness because originally springing from the mind which is a spirit, but
also because contrary to a holy spiritual law, for so the Apostle speaks of
the Law, that it is spiritual and if sin be a transgression of this law there
must needs be somewhat of spiritual wickedness in every particular sin, were
it needful to confirm this it might be fully confirmed from.

Sin's contrariety to a Lawgiver who is a spirit and commands spiritual
obedience to every command, and also in every act of obedience, as also from

Sin's affecting, or inhaering in a spiritual substance as in the prime,
immediate and proper subject of it which is the rational soul.

This then is certain that there is a high degree of spiritual wickedness in
the frame of our carnal hearts, now a natural man highest improved in his
parts can never be more or better then Natural or Carnal in his Apprehension,
and judgment of things; his understanding proceed's in a carnal manner, is
indeed, as now weakened by sin proportioned only to a low, sensual, and
carnal object, or if it lift up it self toward what is spiritual it is not
in a spiritual manner, view and consider well the Notions which Reason (left
to it self) has framed of a Deity its Being, Attributes, Providence, and
Happiness, Religious worship of the Deity both as to things it self and
manner of it, Future world and just judgment with the Consequences of it, etc.
how have,

These spiritual objects been debased in the apprehensions of these men, and
presented to us in either absurd, or (at best) in a manner suited to our
senses? a sufficient discovery of the carnal and sensual faculties of a
sinful mind.

Had we no other evidence to prove this, it were enough, and more then enough,
which we have from their Poets concerning the just punishments of souls for
sin, which being spiritual substances, and convicted and condemned for
spiritual offenses (as sins are) should be supposed punished with spiritual
punishments by that judge who is a spirit, but will you hear what the
Punishments are? How described?

Primis in faucibus Orci
Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae.
Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus, etc. Virg. 6. Aen^d.

And another Poet who is beholding to the charity of some one or two that would
report him a Christian converted from Heathenish ignorance (though there be
more charity in their good wishes then there is of truth in their story,) This
Poet as others became vain in his imagination of future judgment, and is right
only in this General that the judge Exaequat damnum meritis in the
particulars how vain and carnal!

Muta ferarum
Cogit vincla pati, truculentos ing^rit ursis.
Praedonesque lupis; fallaces vulpibus addit, etc.
The best improved natural man then, is very carnal in his judgment and
apprehension; therefore not able to judge of, or find out, that spiritual
wickedness which is in it self; and this I bottom on these two undoubted
truths.

Mensura and mensuratum sunt ejusd^m Gen^ris Extensions must be measured by
Extension else you will never find them out. Likewise

Sense must be tried by sense, and reason cannot be judged but by reason.

Spirituall's whether in gener^ Boni as faith, hope, love, repentance; all the
graces of the spirit, or whether in Genere mali as unbelief, despair etc.
which are contrary to grace can be discerned by none but a spiritual faculty
for

Inter objectum and organnm proportio sit oportet which is the other undoubted
maxim on which this second demonstration is grounded: Now the evil to be
discerned is a spiritual object, the best organ, a Natural improved man can
possibly use to dis^erne it, is Carnal, and Sensual and as there is no
proportion between this object, and this organ, so there will be as little
proportion between the real true nature of the object and this Judgwent which
is made of it.

In one word as we know certainly that the natural man does easily find out,
strongly convince himself, (to an ingenuou acknowledgment and deep resentment)
of that part in this sin which is proportioned to his apprehensions so we know
he cannot find out the other (which is the greater) part of it being so much
above his apprehensions.

3 Demonstration. The best improved natural man can make no further discovery
then the light of his received maxims reach.
Thirdly, the best improved natural man without a divine revelation, can make
a discovery no farther then the light of his received maxims diffuse
themselves, as a man of quickest sight cannot see at any time beyond that space
which is enlightened; and though many times he does not see to the utmost bound
of it, yet he never sees beyond it; though many times, he fall short and his
sight is overrun by the longer race which the Sun beam run's, yet it never
out-runs the shortest ray of light; but keeps even with it, taking up where the
Ray first withdrawes it is light.

So the natural man walking in his search after this sinful frame of nature
by a light that runs not far enough to discover this whole mystery of
iniquity, must needs give over his search, and fall so far short of the
discovery, as his light fal's short of penetrating the dark corners, and
recesses o^ this sin: Now the greatest and clearest light with which these
natural men entered this profound deep heart, was this, Omne peccatum est
contra naturam So some of the Schoolmen Peccare nihil aliud est qua^recedere ab
eo, quod est secundu^naturam. Aq. 1.2. q. 109. art. 8. c.
. And having lighted up this lamp, they made some shift to discover some
little, and indeed it was comparatively but little to what lay hidden, they
could tell us that Bonum was secundum naturam, Senec. Epist. 118. and
elsewhere others could tell us, Bonum est quod natura est absolutum, Cicer. de
finib. citing Diegen. Babylon. And Laertius (...). Hence indeed it follows,
that since contrariorum contraria est ratio; Malum, must be, quid prater vel
contra naturam. (...). Now let us take up this dark Lantern, and see how
far this could likely guide them in this enquiry^ I say it could guide them
but very little in judging of any, but less in judging of this sin; for this
Maxim of theirs occasioned their mistakes, as is evident.

The early springing of corruption occasion of the natural man's ignorance of
this sin.
1. The very early springing of this bitter root was an occasion of their
error in judging of this sin, though they proceed by this undoubted maxim,
for be it, Peccatum est ^ontra naturam; yet what is contra naturam is also
later then nature, and of some after seed time, and springs up afterward. The
Gardner sowes good seed, the weeds spring up afterward; the Statuary
beautifieth the Statue, worms and blemishes are the unwelcome birth of
injurious time, and rougher usage: Diseases are the rust of the body, and a
rust is contracted by some after malign influence.

In this manner then, the natural man best improved, seduced, and drew
himself into an error touching this sin: He looks to the early budding of
nature observes what the first fruits are: And finding them so early, concludes
they are not (...) but (...). And so rather acquits them as innocent or
commends them as laudable, then suspects them as culpable, o^ condemns them
as guilty. He knows and there is much truth in it, that primum i^ quovis
genere est maxim conform producenti^ if Nature then lying open to his view,
and observation first produces such effects (as we by the Law know to be
sin.) If the workings of this sinful frame be judged the first fruits of
nature, as indeed they are apprehended, and judged by some men, no wonder if
they conclude them as far from being contra naturam, and blame worthy in
their moral consideration, as they observe they are before others in their
natural spring and birth.

This indeed is the (...) of the Natural best Improved man, that these motions
are s^undum naturam (which is true only of corrupted nature to which these
motions are consonant) therefore not vicious in themselves, nor from a Vicious
fountain.

In one word this light Omne vitium est contra naturam could not discover what
that nature is which thus is made the law condemning vice; but it needed
another light to discover that, viz: the word, and spirit of God, by which we
know what that nature is to which sin is a contrariety, and so we can discover
by this rule more of its sinfulness, because we know more of the holiness of
primitive created nature in a contrariety to which it is true that sin
secondarily does consist, (I say secondarily) for sin is primarily a
contrariety to the holy nature of God, and so far as this is copyed out in
us, and remains in our nature so far it is true to say Qu^d c^ntra naturam,
est pe^atum, but the truth is

A natural man can no more discover the deformity of this sinful frame by
comparing it with his notion of nature, then a man can discover the great
unlikenesse of a picture from the first pattern of it, by comparing it with a
draught of the same picture taken by the copy that is already greatly defaced.

Could the natural man come to a sight of that excellent frame in which our
nature was first modelled, he might probably discern how much we are unlike
our selves, how much contrariety there now is, to that holiness which once we
had, and so how much sinfulness there now is in us, but He cannot do so, the
glass in which he beholds this natural frame is full of spots, and dark
pieces which hide, and dissemble the greatest part of those spots and blemishes
which are in us. But beside this mistaken notion of Nature, and its first
visible actings.

2. Graduall increase of this sins strength is occasion of natural man's
ignorance of this sin.
2. There is another thing that occasions the natural man's error and renders
it impossible he should discover this sin fully; That is, the Graduall
increase, and constant growth in the soul which keeps even pace with his
improvement in his natural, and acquired abilities.

It is a sin that loses not it is strength by its long continuance; its vigor
abates not in old age; and this occasions this conclusion that it is not contra
but secundum naturam and the natural man thinks his conclusion rational, I
see says he

All preternaturalls are still in the waine and lose as much of their strength
as they get of age.

A winter flood is not (after a month or six weeks fair weather) like what it
was before, But I see a fair river increases its stock by running and the
same bears up a gallant ship, before it loses it self in the ocean, which
would hardly bear the smallest fishers boat a mile, or two from its spring head

A Glaring Comet shines brighter then, Venus, or any of the brightest stars;
but it grows dim and fades quickly; Because these are not from natural
causes working orderly and per se but are the effects of a cause that acts per
accidens to the production of them.

And by this piece of Sophistry deceives himself arguing from the graduall
increase of this sins strength to a denial or a diminution of it is
sinfulness, and he will not entertain at any hand a thought that it can be
sinful which he apprehends to be natural.

But it is so much the more sinful for this, as those are greater diseases
which increase by their continuance on us, or those deadlyest poisons whose
violence awakeneth and strengthens it self by its own working. This being a
truth and unquestionably certain that this sin is still on the increasing hand
and though the natural man sees it not as a sin, yet he does see it and its
growth as a Natural affection or Passion; and the best of natural men that
ever lived or boasted himself of perfection never did, or could diminish the
strength of this sin, or do any more in order to this, then a rider does
break, and diminish the strength of the horse which he intends to man for his
service.

I know that this stream did not run, nor now does it run, with equal
violence, and impetuousnesse in every channel: but I know withal, the calmer
stream was ever the deepest, and strongest to bear a burden, and has
gradually increased: so it is here, some natural men's lusts have been violent,
and run like an Eager to the overwhelming all that was like to impede them from
satisfying their lusts: others have made less noise, but their lusts have
run with more sober strength and borne up the vessel that was laden with a
weightier fraught and carried them strongly to seek themselves, and their own
glory.

Briefly then the Natural man best improved takes this for his principle quae
indies auges^unt sunt a natura next observes that these Passions do grow daily,
and if not in violent rage: yet in even strength: and therefore passes them for
the genuine offspring of nature, both lovely and commendable far from that
sinfulness which the law assures us is in them. And how should such a one
ever discover the sinfulness of that he so strongly imagines to be of no worse
origin then nature.

3. Universal extent occasion of the natural man^s ignorance and error.
3. Beside there is a third consideration evinceth the impossibility of the
Natural man's discovering the sinfulness of this sin, viz: It Is universal
extent over all men persuades him to an opinion that it is secundum naturam, if
this were in some few, not in the most of men, or if in the most yet not in all
men; perhaps improved reason might suspect, and discover it is unwarranted In
being, and that this were preternaturall and culpable: diseases (I see) are not
the same in all men, but reason and risibility are, (I observe also that)
learning is not equally dispensed to all, but it is not questionable what all
(to a man) have is to be accounted natural, of such nature are those motions
and their principles which the Scripture calls lusts of the flesh; but
Philosophy and a Natural man would call Passions of the mind.

If there were no other veil upon the eyes of the natural man, but this, it
would be too thick for him to see through it the foulness of this sin. He
knows too, beside this universality of subject that there is an universality
of time also, according to which it is evident that it comes near to a
likeness with natural causes and effects which are perpetually the same in
all times, and ages.

The Sun ever shined and warmed in the same manner it now does, the nearer
access to us ever wrought the same change in the season, etc.

Now if in all ages the same passions have appeared in man's nature, how can it
be (says the natural man) they should be preternaturall or sinful here he
stumbles, falls, and is not able to rise and recover himself.

4. Uniformity of its acting in all occasion of this ignorance and error.
4. To these three a fourth thing being added makes yet the third demonstration
more clear and discovers farther the impossibility of a discovery of this
sin by improved nature, now this is, the uniformity of the actings of this
sinful frame of nature, which is such, that there is no variation at all in
its actings, unless from some accidental circumstances: as to the maine of
its actings they are now, as they have been formerly, and they will be (while
men are borne the sons of Adam) uniforme to themselves in those men who are
in other cases equal, and alike.

Indeed the temper, strength, and health of body (in some greater, in others
less,) may somewhat alter the visible part of this sin, or perhaps

Birth, Education, and Company, may somewhat heighten the unlawful projects,
and designs of the natural man, and be occasion to this sin to attempt
greater things; and Satan may possibly adventure to tempt one to a greater
wickedness then he will another, and so in these extrinsecall considerations,
there many times is a great unlikenesse, and difformity in men's sins: but in
those very men which now were so unlike, you shall observe as great a
likeness, if you will give them the same opportunity, the same means etc. and
make them equal in their advantages to execute, as they are in their natures
to contrive.

And if we could see the inside of men's plots we should see it may be the same
contexture in the Ambition Of him that aims at a Crown, And Of him that aims
at a petty Constable's place only the design is greater, and the materials
different, but the mind of each equally bent upon them, and alike contriving
how to get them.


5. Unwea^ied and perpetual delight in this sin, and it is actings occasion of
this ignorance.
5. To these take in that delight wherewith unweariedly the natural best
improved man provideth for his lusts and satisfyeth them and you shall observe
how greatly this occasioneth his error and mistake in this enquiry: Thus he
argues, were the natural man's heart so sinful as the Scripture bespeaks it
to be, it seems not likely that so much delight could be taken in serving it,
in all its projects, and designs: for what is praeternatur all, as all sin
is, must be burdensome and irksome too, and could not be with pleasure and
delight constantly followed, though sometime a more violent exercise for a
quarter of an hour be a delight, and p^easure to us: yet a longer time would
make us weary of it, because all violence is against nature: if the natural
inclinations of the heart were sinful, and preternaturall the man would be
weary of the pursuit, but unweariednesse argues naturalnesse of the motion to
the movent: And delight bespeaks suitable faculty and object; so that In this
manner the best improved Reason deceives it self, and by a misapplication of a
truth, which he understands not, entangles himself in an impossibility of
finding out what he enquireth after as is evident in the particulars mentioned.

He that supposes his own Notion of nature to be the genuine and adaequate
notion of it, but leaves out a maine part of it, and then measures and judges
all to be good which suits with that Notion; and that only evil which is
contrary to it must needs greatly mistake in his judgment both of good and
evil. Thus the natural man frames a notion of his own, and represents
nature, but considers not its corruption, and thereby calls evil good, and
judges that small or none, which is an exceeding great sin.

4. Reason. Because (...) is unwilling to appear otherwise then as he may
beast, and glory in himself.
A natural unwillingnesse that he should, and a strong resolution that he will
not appear in other colors, then those he can delight in, and which he
judges beautiful: The natural man is unwilling to walk abroad in his own
clothes, which are filthy, and to be set forth in his own colors: He hates
the light, Joh. 3.20. because his nature, and his works are indeed, and will
appear in the light to be evil. He is a crafty, and deceitful tradesman, who
will not show his indifferent, and bad wares, but with the advantage of a dark
shop: if there be a parcel better then other, he persuades you to take the^ to
the light; he is willing to own the^, they will prove enough to his intended
advantage: so let what seems good, and such as he thinks may approve it self
upon a trial, be done by a natural man, And the neighborhood shall ring of
it, he will walk abroad in that dress, in it he admires Sinners dote on their
sins Ezekiel. 23.5,7.
himself, and hopes others will do so too, for he would feign be (...).
Therefore he will stand it out with Preachers, and dispute the conviction, and
maintain while he can, with Saul, 1 Samuel 15.20. I have obeyed the commandment
of the Lord, my ways are equal, as the proud self justifying Jew said, Ezekiel.
18.25. Natural men trust they are righteous, and seek this righteousness in
themselves, Luke 18.9. they establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3.
they will either find or make room for boasting: the multitude of Pharisees in
our Savior's time, and all men before and since (of this stamp) servants to
their' lusts, and estranged from the life of God, all our proud merit mongers:
all our selfe-charitable, lazy, professors who do not indeed so much as
others, but they think as well, for they themselves are persuaded, that God
loves them, accepts of them, and in this clothing they will appear to us (I
say) the multitude of such persons, are very evident, and undeniable arguments
of the Natural man's unwillingnesse he should, and resolution that he will not
appear (if he can help it) in his right colors: and this indeed is both a
fruit of sin, and a punishment of it: that though the sinner loves, and
embraces it, yet he would not see the thing he loves; He would not court that
with eye which he adores with his heart, He will not part with his sin, for
price better then all the world, he will not leave it for heaven; and yet he
would not for all the world have a full sight of it, though the enjoyment of
his sin be dearer to him then Heaven, the sight of it is unwelcome to him as
hell. A clear testimony of the baseness both of sin, and of the sinner. Now
certainly he will rather turn his eye from prying after sin, then by a
farther search discover what he is unwilling to find. So that could you suppose
him able to find out; yet his unwillingnesse would hinder him, that he never
should put forth that ability to the utmost, nor make any discovery of sin,
farther then his unwillingnesse would give him leave; for never did any sinner
see more of his sin then he was willing to see of it, unless when God
brought him to suffer in some kind or other for his sin, then he sees more
of it indeed: but let him be quiet, and secure from the hand of the Almighty,
and he sees no more then he is willing to see of it. Hell hereafter, and
punishment now, will convince a sinner, and make him look on sin, and see
somewhat more then he could desire to see in it: but in the case before us, in
an ordinary enquiry after sin, in order to detect it, and in order to a right
knowledge of it; His sight of sin is never greater then his willingness: Nor
will be ever see more then he desires to see of it: if the spirit of renovation
powerfully change the sinner, and make him a Saint, it will change this frame
of heart, and make him earnestly desirous, and truly willing to see his sin,
and to have a full, and clear sight of it: The sinner who is enamoured with,
and espoused to his sin, will deal well with his Beloved in the search, as
Michal did with David, when her father sent to apprehend him, 1 Samuel 19.16,17.
when a messenger from God in his Word, or providence is sent to search for the
beloved lust of a sinner, then it is either sick, (as one that needs not now be
feared it is dying) or if this serve not, but the lust must be brought out, and
so endangered: then it is conveyed away, and secured from the stroke of the word
and rod, Natural men will deny the abode of their sin, as Rahab the Spies:
And they have a deep and dark well to hide their lust in when it is enquired
after, as the woman had to hide Jonath: and Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel 17.21. and
Bread-corne to spread over it, a fair pretense, that, what (we suppose) is a
sinful lust and working to sin, is but a necessary provision for the life,
and welfare of the man.

Nor does the Scripture only tell us that men are thus self admirers, and
unwilling to appear to themselves in any cloud which might darken this luster:
but also Reason, or Nature. Hence the proud boasts of our vain Philosophy,
Neque est ullum bonum de quo non is qui id habeat honest possit gloriari:
Cicer. Pado^. 1.
and yet higher then this, they boast of a soul that trusts to his own good
and abilities Animus suis b^nis viribusque fidens, Seneca cited by Lipsius
Stoic. Phil. l. 1. dis. 5.
and else where Benum mansurum-nullum est nisiquod animus ex se sibi invenit
Senec. 27. Epist.

Best improved nature seeks after what good may be gotten hold on arising from
its own soil, and manuring, for the quieting and satisfying of it is mind, and
willingly hears no other language then that the Stoics were wont to speak in,
that the wise man (and he is that wise man for every natural man though vain
would be accounted this wise man) is to be reputed 1. (...) without passion,
the soft name which they give to a sinful and inordinate principle of the
soul and so the man must be thought not diminutively bad, but perfectly good
as Senec, 85. Epist: And Zeno. referente Cicerone 1. Academ. 2. (...) too so
much elevated in his own opinion that he thinks himself infallible in judging.
3. (...) undesectible in acting, so steady in his aim, and drawing the bow
that he never misseth the mark and yet this were little unless he were, 4.
(...) in the possession and enjoyment of himself, and so equal to a deity, as
who so will may see if he will but observe the proud dictates of these vain
men and their swelling Paradoxes, gathered together by Lipsius. Lipsius Stoica
Philos. l. 3. tot.

Now can it be supposed rationally probable or possible? that men so strangely
possessed with an opinion of such high perfections, should ever be willing to
own, or able to discover, such a redundancy and fullness of evil in their
nature. But fifthly and lastly,

5 Reason. The best improved natural man cannot reflect upon his soul
according to the Law of God.
5. Therefore the best improved Natural man cannot discover the sinfulness of
his nature because this discovery must be made by a due reflection of the soul
on it self according to the Law of God, now the natural man cannot reflect
thus duly on his nature or on the frame of his heart, for sin under which the
Natural man is (however highly improved) seiseth on that part of the soul
which should reflect thus, and slupifies it, and so impedes it; Not from all
kind of reflection, and reciprocal observation, on it self, but from such a
reflection as might produce this knowledge of concupiscence in the Apostle's
sense.

It is true a Natural man may look back upon his outward actions, in
particular, or general, and discover much of the irregularity of them, he may
also reflect upon himself in a froward fit of violent passion, or when his
heart has been disordered by somewhat that opposed, chwarted, and rebelled
against his reason, though his opposition were more calm and sedate: thus he
may reflect, but he cannot turn his eye inward so as to see that close enmity,
universal opposition, and innate dislike, which his heart bears to every
spiritual good, in which consists much the truth, and reality of this
knowledge.

Sin is a disease that strongly affects both the head, and the heart at once,
and so, (a^ such diseases usually do) it depriveth the sinner of all sense of
his Danger and Sickness It is not seldom compared in Scripture to these
diseases: It is a spirit of slumber, Romans 1.8. It is a Delirium, or aotage,
Ezekiel. 23.5.7. whereby they are continually entangled in the thoughts, and
desires of the sinn^ they love: sinners are lovesick, and perpetually
meditating on the pleasant part esinne, are not able (in this like love-sick^
persons, to note and observe the faults, an^ blemishes of that they are
enamoured with thus the understanding, and mind are disabled to judge aright.
It is a Frenzy, o^ madness in them, Eccles. 9.3. which causes them to do
not like men but fools, Ps. 94.8. and Jer. 10.8. like creatures that are acted
by sense, and by principles which cannot reflect on themselves. They have no
heart, Hos. 4.11. for sin, which is spiritual whoredom, takes away the heart,
robs the sinner of his understanding, which is a reflexive power; They have no
knowledge Ps. 53. to say is there not a lie in my right hand, Isa: 44. Nor does
the Scripture only say this, but you shall find this verified by humane
testimonies touching the malign influence of sin: so the Poet, Sophoc.
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
speaking of the issue of sinful pride in Ajax, it bereft him of his wits.
Likewise Tully tells us Peccatum est perturbatio rationis, Cic. Parad. 3.
and what he says of pleasure is true of every sin, mentem e sua sede and
statu demovet. 1 Parad.
And however you may doubt the truth of the story, yet the moral of it is very
full and to purpose, that Bacchus struck Lyeurgus with blindness, (...)
because Lycurgus had contemned him, I say the moral is good. Such a story
tells Leon Hebraeus, of Homer and S^chorus for conte^ning God Love or, Cupid.
Sin which is a contempt of God, blinds the sinner, and he having lost his eyes
can neither see the stains of his garment, or the blemishes in his face. In a
word you may as soon expect, and receive a sober account from a madman of his
distractednesse, as from the sinner a good account of his sinful state.

Reason will tell us, that every sin is the turning of the mind from the light,
either of Reason within us, or from the light of that supreme reason which is
without us, which is the fountain of all that Reason which is in us; and be it
from either, still we are turned from it, and so in the dark, and how should
darkness discover darkness?

It being then certain and an acknowledged truth according to Scripture and
reason also, That sin has a very malign, and strong influence on the mind, to
the stupifying and blinding it, to the destroying the ability (it otherwise
might have) to bring it self to a trial and examination of it self. It
cannot be reasonably denied, that an unregenerate man who is altogether under
the power of sin, is also under this inability, and unfitness to be a judge of
himself in a matter, which will require such exactness and strictness as
this will; for it lies deep and (as has been intimated) seems like that
which is not culpable; seems to come near to that nature, which is not
blameworthy, and it must be a good eye which distinguishes Colors of near
likeness; a good taste that discerns meats that seem to be the same for
favor. Well be it so, Reason improved to the highest, cannot discover this
sinful sin without the Law of God: but may not that reason which (besides the
improvement of Education, and learning) has the Word, and Law of God, to
heighten it, though not renewed by the spirit of Sanctification and
regeneration, attain to some knowledge of this sin? Have not many learned
men within the visible Church, come to great measures of knowledge of this
sin? Do you think that all who have been able to dispute about it, to defend
the truth, and to overthrow the contrary errors, have been Regenerate, and
borne again, and seen with the eye of Saint Paul, the sinfulness of their
natures? Do not we hear Sermons and discourses stating this point from men
that are sensual, and carnal, who live to that Lust, which in the Pulpit, in
their discourses they condemn?

5 th General propoposed. The difference between a learned regenerate* and a
learned unregenerate man's knowledge etc.
Therefore to prevent this objection, or at least to satisfy it by answering
to it, I proposed a fifth thing, viz: What is the difference between a learned,
unregenerate improved Scholar his knowledge of this sin; and the knowledge of
a regenerate, spiritual sanctified soul: For this doubt must be answered, not
by Denying these men to have any or but little knowledge of this sin; I
think I should manifestly injure the truth, and be unjust to their memory, and
unthankful to their labors, who have written for the truth in this
particular, and I might easily be convinced of a falsehood, if I should deny
them to be knowing men, and well studied in these Questions. An sit? Quid sit?
Quale and unde sit, etc. which they are able to determine according to truth,
and defend when they have determined it. And for ought I know in this they may
go farther then some enlightened sanctified fowls, who have not the helps of so
much learning, or such acute judgments and Insight into controversies. But yet
for all this there is a vast difference between these two knowledges, the one
may be termed, and will one day appear to be an Ignorant knowledge, (pardon the
expression) a knowledge, and yet as good as no knowledge, when the other
knowledge will appear the only right, and true knowledge: and at present we
may observe a great deal of difference in these, as

1. The knowledge of a Regenerate soul is a spiritual knowledge.
1. The Knowledge of a regenerate soul is a spiritual knowledge, that of the
highest improved unregenerate man is but Rational at best, and so they differ
toto genere; there is not, nor can be a more wide difference between things and
things, persons and persons, then that which is thus founded in what is
spiritual and its opposite, and such is the difference in these two sorts of
men, one does see the spiritual wickedness of this sin, the contrariety that
is in it to a spiritual Law, to spiritual obedience, to the spiritual manner
of performing it. The other sees the unreasonable wickedness of this sinful
nature, the contrariety and incongruity of such a frame of heart to refined
Reason; Reason tells the man that there is but one God, that he is only to be
worshipped: hence he discovers how unsuitable to reason it is to have more, or
worship more Gods: the spiritual regenerate soul sees the spiritual as well
as the unreasonable wickedness of such Idolatry etc. the like may be said of
all the commands of the law, which have both a conformity to reason (all God's
precepts are highly rational) and to that which is higher then now reas^nis,
and which the Scripture calls spiritual. All the precepts are of a
spiritual nature. Now the learned unregenerate man compares this frame of the
heart with that part of the Law which is thus proportioned to reason, and sees
how far this frame is dissonant to it, and concludes it so far out of order; it
is reasonable he sees, that the law which is just, and should rule the whole
man, should also bind the whole man to be readily disposed, and duly framed to
the observance of that Law, and if a part, or the whole frame be not so
disposed, he concludes it Peccant and culpable. It is but a reasonable thing
that the Law which is so just and good, should be uniformely observed, as well
in the first forming of our thoughts, as in the ultimate, and last perfecting
of them, and so^ concludes some unreasonablenesse in the swerving of the first
motions. In a word these Learned, Improved natural men in this whole matter see
nothing, but what is the object of their reason, either to be approved, or
disallowed, The regenerate foul sees and considers, that this law is very
spiritual, and measures the sinfulness of his heart, and the sinfulness of
its first workings by this law as spiritual, and so concludes that there is a
wickedness in it, which is of a higher nature then a bare contrariety to
Reason. As an Artist sees the excellency or the rarity of a discourse which he
hears, or of an experiment which he feeth, and accordingly judges the one
consonant to, the other dissonant from the natural, regular, and certain
consequences of the Principles and Hypotheses of his art; which discourse a man
who is no artist hears, and understands the Grammatical construction of
the whole, sees the materials of the experiment, and the effect wrought, yet
falls exceedingly short of that knowledge which the artist has, and he gets
but a Grammatical knowledge, or such as his sense (with which he perceived the
experiment) can help him to, while the Artist has gotten a clear, certain,
artificial knowledge: it is not much unlike in this case, and as the objects of
their knowledge thus differ, so likewise the faculties, disposition, or
qualification differs, the one knowing by common illumination, the other by a
special and more then common illumination of the spirit: but I will not insist
on this, it being for ought I know a matter which we cannot so evidently and
clearly state, as to make of this any plain discriminating note, by which we
may cause others to see and understand what the difference is. I know that
there is such a difference, and that it is great; I know that one sees with an
eye enlightened by especial light from the spirit, the other does not, but I
know it is not easy to describe these; and what might be gathered from the
effects of each, by which alone they can be discerned, will fall in my way,
before I have done with these particulars, therefore I say no more of this now.
The first difference is in the General laid down by the Apostle in that of 1
Cor. 2.12. for the pardon of, and deliverance from this sin, is one of those
things which are (...), and understood by him only who has the spirit of God,
and being spiritual compares spiritualls with spiritualls. Who has the
spirit of the world does not so understand them, because he cannot spiritually
discern them. v. 14. And it is plainly enough intimated to us by the Apostle
in this very chapter, Romans 7.14. I know (says he) that the Law is spiritual,
though whilst I was carnal and judged carnally of the Law I thought of my
self as righteous, as blameless, Phil. 3.6. because I had not failed of the
strictest outward observance of the command, Phil. 3.5. yet now I see the law
is spiritual and so there is a spiritual obedience due which I carnal could
not give and in defect of this obedience there is a spiritual wickedness
which while I was a Pharisee (though learned and as much improved as any) I did
not see; Thus St Paul and the experience of every Saint will confirm to us,
how great a difference there is, between the sight and knowledge he now has,
and that he once had of sin as it is contrary to the Spiritual Law of God.

2. An unregeueraie man's knowledgeis a logical conclusion from soeculative
principles: The regenerates is from practical premises.
2. A second difference between the knowledge which an improved reason with the
help of the letter of the Law may have of this sin, and the knowledge which a
regenerate sanctified soul has of this sin, is this, The knowledge of the one
is the result, or conclusion which arises from speculative principles and
truths compared with their natural, and necessary consequences or deductions:
The knowledge of the other, is a conclusion from the same truths compared with
their consequences, and with his own heart and conscience; The regenerate soul
knows this sin by a Practical and experimental observance of himself
compared with those truths in the word which do contain this doctrine; The
unregenerate man know's it by a bare Logical and Rational deduction of a
conclusion from such premises which he apprehends to be truths in his
judgment, though he never found them confirmed by any observed correspondence
to his conscience, or Practical judgment. The whole Syllogism of the one is
made up of premises which do only float in the head and do not affect the
heart: The other makes up the Syllogism with one proposition at least from
his own heart, from that which he has noted in himself, and which he can
experimentally aver, this may be seen in these different Sillogismes. The
unregenerate man thus proceeds to evince first motions, or frame of heart
propending to Atheism, or unbelief etc: To be a sin, because it is of the
same species or kind, and differs only gradually from Atheism, or unbelief
in it is perfected fruit, and product: and therefore concludes it a rational
inference that Motions first irritated are breaches of the same (...) Pythag.
Sanae mentis ruio dictat, ^u babere in me convenit ca (...) Volkel. l. 4. c. 20.
precept of which the motion perfected is, and so a sin. The regenerate soul
goes more practically to work: what hinders or abates my love to, or faith on
God, and disposes me to either staggering in my says or flagging in my
affections is sinful, but now I find says the regenerate soul) that such
motions such a frame of heart do thus shake my dependence on God, they abate
and quench my affections to him, and therefore I know they are sin. As the
knowledge of a redeemed captive who (...) the weight of his chains, the misery
of his state, the drudgery he was put to, the continual danger he was in;
differs much from the knowledge which another man who never was in slavery,
and captivity has, (or may have) upon report or reading the story. It is one
thing to sit and hear (as Di^lo the Carthaginian Queen) the story of fallen
and wasted Troy, another thing to see and behold it with Aeneas, querum pars
ma^na fu^t, yet both she knows it as well as he, but how different is their
know^edge! The children and grandchildren of Captive Jews in Babylon knew, but
yet not equally and alike with their Fathers or Grandfathers the misery of a
strait and tedious siege, of a sore and long famine; My Physician knows my
disease which yet he never felt, but I know it in an other manner, he can talk
more of it in general, but I can tell more feelingly what I suffered and what
is the pain: So is it in this case. The learned scholar destitute of Grace,
and the spirit of God, can discourse of a blind understanding, of an erroneous
judgment, of an inadequate apprehension: So likewise a regenerate soul can
speak of these, and when he does mention them his own heart bears him
witness, and enformeth him what these sinful imperfections are, he is
acquainted with the dimnesse of his best sight, the mistakes, or pronenesse to
mistake, in his clearest, distinctest, and certainest apprehension and (though
these apprehensions are not false, yet) he knows how inadequate, how far
they are from commensurate apprehensions of those things he should be better
acquainted with, and all this from a heart affected really, and exercised
constantly with the working of this erroneous, blind, rash and heady mind. The
selfe-observing experienced soul sees this when he hears a Sermon of Heaven
and the things of it: when they are laid as open to the view as those things
can which were never seen by that eye which could return to tell us what they
are, when they are thus set before us: How little is it we see of them? how
prone are we to judge carnally of them? to measure them by two short a rule? In
a word such a one thinks certainly either his knowledge of these is the least
of any ones or else that few know less then he does and is mostly troubled he
cannot know more, it is not so with one who discourses of these things as of
things at distance not within him. In a word the unregenerate man's knowledge is
a Logical discovery of what he can prove by an Artificial improvement of
argumentative discourse, not what he is acquainted with by experience: The
Regenerate (if a scholar) can do that, plead for and confirm the truth by a
syllogisticall arguing and so convince a gain sayer; beside this, He can also
by his experience of the indwelling of this sin, by his experience of its
wisdom and power in working (to the impeding him from good and the provoking
him to evil) affect himself with it. Again

Differ. 3. A regenerate man sees this sin intermixed in his duties: An
unregenerate man does not.
3. You shall observe there is this difference farther between the knowledge o^
these two forts of persons in this thing, That the sanctified regenerate soul
knows this sin in such manner that he sees, b^rveth, and consider's it is
perpet^a^ and uncessant intermixture in all his duties. The ^nr genera^
natural man knows this sin but in such National, general way, that he never
observ^ or sees how it intermixeth it self with his d^ties: he notes not how
it overspreads all h^ actions, and if the more studied knowledge he has of
this sin do inform, that it do^ not lie sleeping while he is doing duty, b^
acts to the impedeing and perverting (...) duty yet he is not able to see
really, and particularly how it has stirred, and acted i^ this and that duty,
s^ill he keeps in the general persuasion comes not to the particula^
application. The unregenerate man prays, hears, gives aims, deals
justly pays even to the tithe of Mint, Anise (...) Cummin, and though he is
confessedly a ^ner in his own speculative apprehension, a^ judgment, yet when
he comes in particula^ to the Temple to pray or hear, He thanks G^ he is not
as other men, and his duties are no^ as theirs, whereas the regenerate soul
see^ and observes how each particular part of his services are certainly
unworthy acceptance according to the holiness of the law, and he fears they
are not as other men's, not so spiritual, not so pure as theirs; he tastes the
bitterness which renders his sacrifices unsavory to himself, and how much
more to God; he smells the leven which sowreth the whole mass, he sees 1.
The distracting, wandering, worldly thoughts that crowd in upon him, and press
on him for admission, and will disturb him, (if they cannot get entertainment)
while he prays and hears, 2. The coldness, deadness, and formality of the
heart in prayer, in reading, in hearing, in all he does. 3. The misplaced order
giving earthly, dying, empty things the precedence to heaven^y, eternal,
satisfying objects, and either seeing first in time, what might well, be either
not sought, or last sought; or first in affectio^ate desire of them in highest
prizing of them, and in ardentest love to them, though all these be mixed with
the prayer, or indeed though the Prayer of a natural man be nothing else but
an abominable heap of such ^isordered and sinful suites, yet he does not see
or observe it.
Shall we view him in hearing? and observe how he differs from a holy
sanctified knowing person in this also? though the unregenerate man knows
much, as has been said, of this sin yet he sees not how it either makes him
deaf, and stops his ear, or dull and slow to hear or erroneous and
mistaken in hearing he sees not how it fills him with prejudices against the
word, with dislike of it, and opposition to it, nor will he be made sensible of
it, but the regenerate though perhaps he has less of that speculative direct,
he has more of an observing, reflex and particular knowledge, and he observes
all these in his duties: he observes how this sin dasheth his Most Perfect
knowledge of God with ignorance. Most Steadfast faith in the promises with
unbelief. Most Sincere love to the Lord with self love Most Pervent zeal for
the Lord with in differency. Most Strong desires after Christ with
carelessness. Most Sweet enjoyments of the hope set before him with some
bitterness o^ other.
In one word he sees that it is by this sinning sin that neither habitual
grace in the scule, nor actual grace in the life can be perfect, but, as Paul,
Romans 7.21.23.
so he sees another law in his members which leads him captive, and that
when he would do good evil is present with him that what good he would he
cannot do, and in that good which he does, he does also that evil which he
neither would, nor should do: but this the most knowing scribes, meriting
justiciaries and formal professors do not observe.

4. Differ. The regenerates knowledge is a soul a baseing knowledge so is not
that of the unregenerate.
4. The regenerate soul's knowledge, and the knowledge an unregenerate man may
have of this sin differ in this, that the knowledge of the one is a soul
abaseing, humbling knowledge he cannot look on this sin, but it lays him low
in his own eyes, the other looks on this sin and yet keeps up as high thoughts
of himself as ever, he is proud and beasteth both of his duties and of his
person: He is not as other men, neither yet are his works as other men's works
are, the one as an ingenuous and relenting child looks on this sin, the root
of all that rebellion he has acted against his Father, and blusheth at the
sight; what such a heart in me still! is there yet remaining any thing of that
treasenable disposition? Does my heart still entertain any part of that enemy
which would pull the crown from my father's head? Oh wretch! undutiful and
disloyal soul! can thou think of this and not loath thy self? can thou
see this and see any thing to boast of? Have tho^ but one thing in which God
delights, which he chiefly desires, and is that so defiled so polluted with
sin? that his glorious and holy eyes cannot delight in it? wherewith will thou
the^ come before God? what can thou offer to him? Think on it thou who
castest thine eyes on these lines, and seriously consider it. The regenerate
soul (and so thine if thou art borne again) which longs to have the match
consummate between Christ and i^ self, which longs to be married to the Lord
in an everlasting Covenant is, and cannot but be, ashamed to see that her
dearly beloved spouse, her Highly honored her only desired Lord should find
her ever, at all time in such defiled garments, with such rags, polluted rags
hanging upon her; it is a^ humbling consideration, that its best dress^ is a
menstruous cloth, that its cleanest hand is leprous; this affects the heart
with grief and sorrow, whereas the knowledge which the Pharisees had of this
sin, and the knowledge which the unregenerate man now has of it, does not
either affect the heart with sorrow, or abase it with holy shame, for it. If
that hellish fire which burns inwardly, do violently break out and send up
such thick and black clouds as do darken the luster of their Credit, and
benight their fame, and glory among men; if it do beesmoot and discolor a
natural conscience; that the man cannot confidently converse with men, least
they upbraid him; nor peaceably converse with himself, because conscience
dares not look on it self, then he is grieved and troubled, he is a fool
then in his own judgment because he has so lost his credit, or his peace: and
so he is ashamed of the sad effect, not grieved for the sinful cause; sorry
for his loss, not ashamed of this sinning sin, which I might set forth by this
familiar Similitude: As an adulterous wife which has not cast off all sense of
honor among her neighbors, nor all desire of peace with her husband, has
some kind of trouble and shame too, upon her spirit in the discovery of her
loose, and wanton practices; but her trouble and shame is for her dishonor in
the eyes of those she would have think well of her, and for her loss of peace
with him she would seem to love; but not for a treacherous heart whence all
that wantonness and unfaithfulness did arise: so it is in this case there is
a sense of honor, and desire of peace in the natural heart, and the breach of
either affects it, but not the cause of this breach. In one word the
regenerate man is constant in his grief for, and in his abasementon thought of
this: That a mixture of water with his best wine, that an alloy of dross with
his purest gold, that a misty darkness with his clearest light, should debase
them upon an examination and trial; the unregenerate man upon trial casts
all off with such like recrimination, there are none without their faults, no
grape but has or had his sharpness, no wheat ever grew without its chafe,
men are but men and can be no more then men, and this is all he cares for in
dwelling sin, he hides himself in the crowd of men like himself and is not
ashamed to be as they, if he appear not worse he dares to boast in himself.

5. Differ. A regenerate man opposes sin vigorously so does not an
unregenerate man.
5. Again in the next place the difference lies in this, That the knowledge
of a regenerate soul awakeneth, and excites the soul to a vigorous opposition
of it; the unregenerate learned man knows, but this knowledge does not engage
him to oppose it vigerously with all his power; The sanctified soul's
knowledge, and opposition of this sin, do equally thrive and grow; it is not so
with the unregenerate his knowledge is greater then his opposition of it; if he
be acquainted with the power, or wisdom of this sin, and if he do apprehend
it an enemy to be opposed, yet he thinks it enough to repress, and abate it,
he intends not an exterminating and destroying of it. Whereas the regenerate
soul presently proclaims an open war, and makes it a mortal war a
bellum internecinum which shall end upon no other terms then the utter ruin
of one party: sin, this sinning sin shall have no capitulation no terms of
peace whereas a truce is soon granted by the natural man how learned or how
well improved soever, and if a divided kingdom will satisfy this sinning sin,
there is presently a reconciliation and peace between them, if this sin will
content it self with those limits and bounds which either a natural
conscience (of what is honest and to be done or of what is evil and to be
avoided) prescribes: or with those bounds, which a more civil education and
happyer improvement of reason has prescribed, if this sin will neither break
out and waste the peaceable possessions which natural conscience would
willingly maintain: nor make an inroade and spoil the beauty, and glory of
his credit: nor demolish the stately structure of his external, visible,
seeming Piety: he is content that the Kingdom be sin's. The unregenerate
improved man is ever on the defensive war, and cares only to keep this sin
within the limits, and bounds which he willingly allotteth it, Now it is no^ so
with the regenerate soul, he is ever engaged in an offensive war against
this sin: and though he cannot cast it out of his soul, yet he will be sure to
cast it out, and keep it out of the throne: though he knows, it will have a
footing in him, yet it shall not keep this footing, but with danger of loseing
it by the continual attempts which grace makes upon it; it will dwell here
with us while we dwell in houses of clay, but it dwells in the unregenerate
as the master in a family, with respect, and rule: but it dwells in the
regenerate as an unwelcome guest, who shall receive no favor, nor bear any
sway in him: when this sin prevails or is likely to foil him, he cries
out as Paul, who shall deliver me? Not as a carnal man what terms of peace?
how should I satisfy this or that Lust? A man who knows this sin as Paul
knew it, takes thought how he may destroy it: a man that knows it as an
unregenerate man, does ^ast about with himself how he may patch it up. The one
labors to cast out that rottenness, and loathsomeness which lies hid in
the Sepulcher: the other contriveth and studyeth rather how to bedeck the
sepulcher and paint the outside that it appear not, not offend the eye of more
refined morality.

In a word all the opposition the unregenerate make, is against the violent
excursions of this sin, not against the Being of it. And their aim is to
manage these passions of this indwelling sin, as a Horseman would manage an
unruly colt, which he curbeth and aweth with bit and voice, that he may
readily, safely, and with delight use him. The regenerate man's opposition is
like that of a man against a devouring Lion which he knows cannot be brought
to good service, and is harmless but only when he is dead, therefore he
knows the sinfulness, and determines the death of this sin at once.

6th. Difference. A Regenerate man hates the sinful frame of heart, so does
not an unregenerate man.
Another difference between the Knowledge of these men is this, The one knows
and hates this sinful frame of heart, the other knows, but neither does
exert any true perfect hatred of it, nor does he see, or believe there is any
such cause to hate it. The unregegenerate man thinks, that it is connate,
close, and inseparable manner of Being in him, may be good excuse for his not
hating it. Hatred where ever its terminated to that which it cannot utterly
destroy, is no better then a self disturbing vanity and weakness, is the
thought of a natural man: and in many cases it proves true, that he does
disquiet and torment himself, who hates what he can by no means rid himself
of. And on these principles he judges it unreasonable to profess or
entertain hatred against this sin: he is persuaded it will adhere to him, so
long as he lives, and therefore will contentedly permit it to live. The
regenerate man does perfectly hate it, and makes that very reason one
incitement to more perfect hatred of it, which the unregenerate would have
accounted a good reason to repress, or abate his hatred. Indeed here is seen
the most absolute and irreconcilable hatred, which a created Being can exert
on just grounds, because it does so soon defile our persons, and so soon render
us unfit, and unworthy of communion with God, who is our life; so soon rob us
of our only treasure, make us beggars so soon as men, therefore we in reason
ought to hate it, and the sanctified soul does abhor it. Because it so
closely adheres to us, that whither so ever we go, it is our troublesome
attendant, which we cannot shift our selves of, its company is most unwelcome
to us, yet most unavoidable: and this moves our Indignation against it, because
it is so inseparable from all we undertake and engage in for performance of our
Duty, and service due to our God; because what we most heartily wish we could,
that we most certainly find we shall not be rid of; because in our best
performances, when we are best prepared for them, and hope to be employed
without much disturbance from this enemy to all good, because then we find it
cannot be cast off, it will not be so dispossessed of its hold, or suppressed
in its actings, we do the more irreconcileably hate it: for, these and such
like considerations heighten the regenerate man's hatred of this sin, whereas
the Natural improved man rather hence resolves not to trouble himself for
that he could not prevent, nor spend his thoughts on that he cannot remove. He
accounts it scarce prudence to be troubled at that he cannot be handsomely
eased of; what cannot be cured must be endured. Just like a man that will
rather express a seeming welcome to a troublesome guest, then let him know he
is a debtour for that only which could not be with holden from him But now the
frame and disposition of a regenerate soul and his behavior is quite
contrary, he hates the more for this inseparable close adhesion of this sin.
This may be evidently seen in St Paul, Romans 7.15. who hated that which he did,
and surely if he hated what he had done, he could not do less then hate that
which had already, and continually would, put him upon doing the same. When a
man reflects on what is done, and justly hates it, he cannot but hate that
person, those abettors and counsels, which did designedly engage him to it,
and will farther prompt, and solicit him to do the like. If undutifull
Absalom had lived to see the hatefulness of his unnatural rebellion, and been
in any measure recovered to a childlike dutifulness and obedience, he would
doubtless have hated both his former rebellion, his counselor Achitophel,
and the abettours of it. So when a man is renewed, and through Grace acquainted
with, and sensible of, his forepast rebellions against the Lord, when he is
reduced to the right disposition of a Son and Dutiful child, he does entirely
hate his former courses, and especially that which entangled him, and engaged
him in them. The soul renewed to holiness, and received into the favor of a
son, begins to consider the hatefulness of that corrupt nature which engaged
him against the Lord, and will not be reconciled to it. But an unregenerate man
will not hate nor dislike it.

7 th. Difference. A regenerate man loves the law, which discovers, forbids,
and condemns lust, so does not the unregenerate.
7 Another considerable difference between the knowledge of this sin in a
regenerate soul, and the unregenerate how highly so ever you can suppose him
improved, lies in this, That the sanctified, Regenerate soul has a strong,
entire, and constant love to the command, by which this sin is discovered and
forbidden, attending on, and flowing from the knowledge of this sin: whereas
the unregenerate man in his best improvements cannot well relish that Law which
forbids the sin, and discovers the sinfulness of it. The one loves that Law
from which this sin takes occasion to be more sinful, and to orke more
violently, and his love to the Law grows, as does his knowledge of the
abominable contrariety in this sin to the Law, whereas the other loves his
lust, and dislikes the law which condemns it, and could heartily wish there
were no Law to restrain the power of his sin, or to condemn the sinfulness
of it. The one rejoices that Sin cannot rule without control, the other
wishes that there might be an uninterrupted exercise of it is power in him. The
unregenerate, though best improved with natural and moral helps, do boldly
(though secretly) wish there were no Law to forbid the sin, or no justice to
punish the sinner; if any of the Learned worldlings would speak out their
observations of themselves, which either they do, or might gather from the
workings of this sin, we should have them confessing this a truth.

The learned Atheist, reading the first Commandment, sees that as he should
have but only the true God for his God, and that he should only love, delight,
and serve him, not his own lusts, will sooner be induced to wish there were
not, or to flatter himself, that there is not a God, and that he is not so
obliged to duty toward him. The same might be observed in the rest of the
Commands, still the unregenerate man's love is toward his natural sinful
inclinations, in dislike of the spiritual, holy and just Law of God. But the
Regenerate and renewed soul is well pleased, and in love with the holy
Commandment in opposition to his natural lusts and corruptions: Just like as
it is with a chaste wife and faithful, so is it with a gracious renewed heart:
as it is with a treacherous and lewd wife, so is it with an unsanctified and
natural heart. The chaste and loyal spouse highly valueth, dearly loves, and
entirely closes with that law which binds her to fidelity and constancy in
her affections to her husband. The Adulterous and unfaithful disliketh,
quarrels with, and secretly wishes the law were not yet in being which
confines her affections and embraces to that single person whom she calls
husband, whilst the regenerate soul loves that law which makes his choice
duty and disliketh only the boundless, and unreasonable freedom which lust
aims at: the best improved natural man in the mean time has an adulterous
soul and complains of the strictness of that Law which requires that all his
strength, and all his soul, and all his might should entirely and solely be
terminated to God, and his will: It is too severe a precept to the natural man
to cast off every rival lust, and cleave to the Lord alone and his best
improvements by education or learning without renewing grace do not alte^ this
frame of his heart, but it is an easy, a^ equitable a very excellent Law to the
saint which bind's the saint to choose that which he would not for ten thousand
worlds refuse. Me thinks I see this in Paul (so evidently that I need no other
instance,) who did heartily and sweetly close with that perfect holy Law which
he seigne would have perfectly obeyed though he could not, He accounts it
good in the, Romans 7.12.13. assenteth to the beauty and comeliness o^ it verse.
16. what the Law commends he^ approves, what the Law commands he^ would
perform, not as a task and unpleasant work, but as that in which he
delights: For that which the Law commands, is that which he would do and
what it forbid's is that he would not do, and so he^ delights verse. 22.
(...) (says Paul) (...) Hoc desiderio manifest se ab incontinentibus
Philosophorum discernit (says Pareus in loc.) is there in a carnal, in an
unregenerate man such a complacency in the Law of God? Oh! nothing less, there
is an unsuitablenesse in the heart of every carnal man, and he judges the
ways, and the laws of God unaequall, too strict and he cannot, nor will he
close with them. A traitor may know what is treason and by what law, enacted
such a session of Parliament in such a King's reign, and wish there never had
been any such made, A loyal and obedient subject may know this too and love
the law approve the Justice and wisdom of his Sovereigne. Who now see's not
the palpable difference between these two men in their knowledge of the same
thing? just so it is in this case: But in the last place.

8. Differ. There is a difference in the certainty evidence and assurance of
their knowledge.
8. These two sorts of men have a knowledge of this same sin very much
differing in the certainty, assurance, evidence, and firmness of their assent
to the conclusion of that demonstration in which it is proved a sin. The
unregenerate man looks on it as a Problematicall Question which may be disputed
and brought into the Schools in an affirmative or negative state of the
question, so did that conventicle gathered together at Trent in the year 1545
in the 5th Session on the 17 of June 1546. Leave it to every man's liberty to
think or teach what liked him touching this Provided he thought and maintained,
that it was, and that it was propogated, and what were the effects of it. But
an experienced Christian is more firmly and immoveably settled in his
knowledge, and apprehension of it, he will never be beaten out of this That it
is an evil allwaies present, impeding what is good and impelling and putting
us upon what is evil, that it is a law of our members warring against the law
of the mind; and though all the world withal its learning and skill, should
conspire, and club wits, and reason to overthrow this truth; yet they should
never persuade him to a belief, that possibly there may be no such thing as
evil Concupiscence, or Original sin. His experience is instar mill testium,
and he would repe^ all their arguments with this answer, that he sees the plots
and contrivances, that he feels the power, and strength of this sinning sin
withholding him, and drawing him back from that good, which he desires he may,
which he knows he ought to do. The world may as soon persuade him that fire
is not hot, which has burnt his fingers, as persuade him that lust within is
not a fire of Hell which inflames him, and sets him on fire with rageing
passions, or wanton desires. Let this old man appear under what vizard he
will, for the deceiving purblind nature, let him plead his original, ex
condition materiae and appeal to Pelagian, or Semipelagian or Socinian
Heralds to assert his pedigree; yet he cannot so escape a regenerate savingly
enlightened soul; who sees and knows that it is of the Devil, and our own
abuse of free will. Though this old man walk up, and down among us, and
expatiate it self in the larger walks of a Sceptick, and seem only to
enquire rationally touching the Being, and Providence of a Deity, and in this
garb pass for a more penetrating inquisitive head, and judgment with an
unsanctifyed Scholar; yet the regenerate soul know's (and is so persuaded that
he will never be brought to think the contrary) that this is a branch of
Atheism, sprouting out of this bitter root. I think I need not hesitate in
pronouncing it. An unregenerate man improved to the highest pitch that
external, moral advantages can raise him to, never did or ever will be able
to come to such a degree of certainty in his Knowledge of this, as the
experienced soul which observes the stirrings, and motions of this sin in
himself does come to; I am sure there is a great difference between the
certainty to which the one attaines by speculative principles and discourses,
and the certainty t^ which the other atteines by experience you may possibly
persuade a man to ta^ Poison who only knows the nature of i^ from his book
and speculation and perhap^ you may prevail with him to hope, and believe it
is not deadly, because his knowledge is not confirmed by experience; but do you
think it possible? to persuade that man into an opinion that it may not, or
into hope^ that it is not, or into an adventurous tryal^ whether that be deadly
poison which had undoubtedly destroyed him long before if the admirable skill
of some eminent Physician had not cured him and prevented the working of the
Poison? so it is, in one word* The regenerate soul knows he had dyed of this
deadly poison, if the compassion o^ an infinitely merciful, and the skill of
an infinitely wise Physician, had not healed him, he knows he was sick unto
death, and he is as certain of it, as experience can make him and will not
doubt it though all the world deny it, here he sixeth immovedly, I Know that in
me dwells nothing good, Romans 7.18. Find evil present when I would do good 21
See an other law leading me captive, 23.


The unregenerate finds it not experimentally in himself for he is blind and
sees not, he is dead and feels not, the workings of this sin; and therefore
is not so immovable in his knowledge as the regenerate soul: not so constant
in his belief of it is indwelling and overspreading the whole man.

SERMON III.
Romans 7. v. 7. latter part. For I had not known Lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not Covet.


THE Inabilitie of Nature, best improved by learning and education, or what
other means you will suppose; (short of Grace and the renovation of the heart
by the spirit of God,) to make a right discovery of the sinfullnesse of our
nature, that indwelling sin, (which here the Apostle calls, Lust;) being
observed as one of the Doctrines the Apostle lays down in this verse, and
being confirmed, and prosecuted so far, that nothing farther remains of what
was proposed, but an application and close of the whole: I now proceed to that,
and so first

Use. 1. Insormation.
If the best improved natural man be not able to discover the sinfulness of
his nature, we may hence learn, and inform our selves.

Sin of very dangerous consequence to all but specially to Scholars on account
that it blinds their under standing.
1. That there is in sin that which is of a very dangerous tendency, to all,
but especially to Scholars. It is not to be sported with: we never dally with
this serpent, but it sting's and empoyson's us: we never come into the hands of
these Philistines, but they put out our eyes; If we had our eyes before, we
lose them after, our closeing with a temptation to sin: This is the cause why
we are not able (so long as we are carnal) to see our sinfulness, because we
are sinful as there need no other reason be given, why we are not acquainted
with the pollutions of our garments; but this, because we are blind: so neither
needs there any other reason be demanded why a sinner is not acquainted with
his sinfulness, after you have once said and proved that he is a sinner: For
sin is a violence offered to the soul, Prove. 8. ult. verse. It is a violence by
which the soul is wounded, and maimed, as it were with the stroke of a sword,
or other instrument of cruelty as I observe (...) signifys, now the soul is a
tender thing like the eye: it bears not a wound, without loss of its sight
and being once wounded by sin it cannot any more rightly discover sin: or if
you read that (...) his life still it speaks that danger danger which is in sin
on the account of its disableing the sinner from seeing it, that wound that
reaches the life that reaches the heart kills dead, and bereives the man of
the sense of his condition: he knows not, nor can he, that he is dead, so it
was with the first sinners among the creatures, Angels sinned and lost that
perfect knowledge in which they were created, and had not known their sinful
state if an immediate, and winged vengeance had not overtaken them if the
weight of those fetters the dismal noise of those chains in which they are
reserved to the Judgment of the great day had not awakned them, they had surely
continued unacquainted with that sinfulness, which, their just punishment
convinced them of: though it may perhaps admit a doubt, whether the fallen
Angels may not have an adequate, speculative knowledge of their sinful
natures: yet it is beyond a doubt, they have not a Practical, and right
knowledge of it, whilst they add to the number of their sins and treasure up
wrath to the day of wrath. Non contemnenda Quaestio de Daemonum cognitione post
peccatum proponi solet, nempe, an penitus post peccatum excaetati sunt and omni
cum Dei and Christi, aequi and iniqui^tum aliarum rerum cognitione destituti an
vero adhue aliquam harum omnium teneant Cognitionem Hieron; Zanch: de oper: Dei
l. 4. c. 7. part. 1.
It is no contemptible question which is usually propounded concerning the
knowledge of Devils since they sinned viz: whether they are not quite blinded
as to have no knowledge of God and Christ, of equity and iniquity, or whether
they yet retain some knowledge of all these, though they know much, so much as
convictions of the being, and justice of a Deity extort from them a belief of
both, and strike them with terror of the latter: yet it is undoubtly true,
Daemones ita post and propter pec catum excaecati sunt ut neque eam omnem ^amve
^eru^ omnium re^ineane sa^ient^am qu^m and quaruman ^e pece^ tum babuerunt.
They are since they sinned and for their sin so judicially blinded that they
have not all that knowledge which they had before their sin. The just judge of
all the world through his infinite wisdom has made darkness, and the
blackness of darkness, chains to fetter them, who would not walk at liberty
in the knowledge and obedience of the Father of lights: whosoever will please
himself in the farther discussion of this, may consult the learned Author
cited; The commentators on Thom pri. m^p^imae Q 64. Lombard Sent l. 2. Q. 7.. 14
Thom^ and Lomb: this the ill consequence of Sin in these. It was no less on
Adam and his sinful offspring, if we will perpend, and view the sad change
which was introduced immediately upon his sinning: how soon did this spiritual
Apoplexy seize on his understanding? how soon did he fall into a deep sleep,
out of which none but the voice of the son of God can awaken him! Scholars (for
you should most consider this, you are most concerned in it) I press you
especially with this consideration to take heed of sin; other considerations of
equal concernment to others, as well as to you, and of highest concernment to
both, as Certain ruin of their immortal souls. Enkindling the fury and
displeasure of the Almighty. Heaping up wrath against the day of wrath. Dear
rate you, and all who hear of Christ sin at etc.
I pass over, my discourse leads me directly to consider this peculiar
malignity which is in sin. For having proved that the best Improved natural
parts cannot make a discovery of Lust, and having given some answer to the
Enquiry why, or whence it is that he is so ignorant of it? and seeing it is
because it has so overspread him, Nothing could be more genuine and proper to
the precedent discourse, then to mind you, that sin is extremely dangerous to
such whose excellency is to know more then others. Nothing should be a more
rousing and awakening consideration to such an Audience then this, would you be
content to spend your time, to wast your strength, to lay out your moneys, to
disapoint the hopes of the Church, to sadden the hearts of your friends, to
break the hearts and shorten the life of Parents, to gratify the Devil,
dishonor God, and lose your own soul for ever? Scholars would you be thus
contented? I am persuaded better of you, and therefore hope to prevail on some
of you, to cast off sin, and to make have so to do, because it is an evil
which directly leads to a disappointment of you in your professed aims, in
your principal end, and in your peculiar excellency; you are Scholars, and you
professedly aim at knowledge, therefore you came hither; you profess to aim
at the best knowledge too, therefore you spend your time in comparing the
several pretenses which are made, that you may find out which are (...), (as
the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.20.
calls all knowledge, which is not an effect of Gospel light, and useful to
Gospel ends) and that on this discovery you may make the wisest choice, that
you may avoid those which are (...), and employ your thoughts on the more
excellent way, Phil. 3.8.
viz. on the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. Now it is
sin alone which will disappoint, it is sin alone that will befoole you, for
this only at first did, this only now does, obscure the mind, infatuate the
judgment, and delude poor mistaken mortals to the embraces of an empty shadow
of knowledge. Believe it Sirs, for at last it will appear, that the largest
extended knowledge of a sinner under the power of sin (however he may boast of
it, as the fruit of a long and diligent search) is but the longer shadow of
one, who lives in a vicinity to the Sphere, in which the Sun of righteousness
shines gloriously, and enlightens others, whilst no more light shines on him,
then serves to cast the shadow, and this, because his espoused sins keep him
at a distance from the true light. The farther we are from the Sun, the greater
shadow we cast, but the lesser we see, so the more we are distant from God
shining on us in the face of Christ, The greater shadow of knowledge we may
seem to cast, but really we see so much the less; our knowledge is still but a
shadow, dark, and vain, only fitted to seduce, and make us lose our ways,
like a dark and misty day to a traveller; only fitted to increase our sorrow
and vexation, like an empty cisterne to a thirsty traveller in a tedious
drought and heat. If you will be Scholars indeed, and know much, and if you will know
with best knowledge too, you must not be sinners, i.e. not live to this sin. If
you will be thriving merchants in these intellectual treasures, you must take
heed you 1. Craze not your vessel, and make it unfit for so long a voyage, as
you are to make. 2. Clogge it not, and make it sail slow; your greatest speed
will be too little. 3. Straighten it not, and make it capable of holding
little, when you come to lade it, so you must take heed of sin.
It crazeth, and weakens, it clogges and retards, it straiteneth and contracts
the understanding. This dangerous malignity of sin should, and I hope it will
provoke you to abhor it; you shall see farthest in a clear and fair day.
Let your days be clear from the black clouds of sin, and you shall see what
others cannot

2. Inform. The natural man's inevitable ruin and misery, because he cannot
know his danger and disease.
2. If the best improved natural parts cannot discover the sinfulness of that
nature in which Lust dwells: Then see the certain and inevitable misery of
the natural man, how well soever he may be accomplished with external and
common endowments. If you would suppose him to know as much as all the
Philosophers did, and if you add to this all the knowledge of these carnal
men, who have now, or ever had a form of knowledge in the Law; and suppose all
this centring in the breast of one man; yet this man (without a spiritual
saving illumination from the holy Ghost) would remain inevitably miserable
(because unacquainted with his sinful state) a dying man, as much without hope
of recovery, as he is without sense of his disease. And this misery appears in
that such a one

1. A natural man obnoxious to wrath, but knows it not.
1. Is now obnoxious to wrath, and liable to the just sentence of God, but
knows not, or considers it not. He is guilty before God, but believes it not:
he is in danger of Hell, ready to drop into the lake of sire, and sees not his
danger: he considers not that a weak, single thread of life already scorch't,
and that has felt the fire, is the surest hold he yet has to keep him out of
unspeakable misery. Nay he never will believe this, for he cannot discover his
sin, which has brought him into this condition: and if mercy (preventing
mercy) do not give him (...) sight of it here, (timely) for his escape,
Natural and Improved parts cannot before it be t^late to hope for an escape.
If you know a traitor guilty of a piece of treason against a King, who can
convict him, who will arrest, arraigne, and condemn him, an^ then execute the
sentence; and yet the man all this while secure and careless, neither able to
discover his danger by himself nor willing to see, and believe it discovered
by another: would you not conclude him a lost man, without recovery? There Is
both the vileness, and uncleanenesse of treason and the guilt and
obnoxiousnesse of it unto punishment, radicated in our natures, and we are to
answer it to a King, who known the heart, and can convince us; who rules the
world, and will judge us; who proceeds with justice, and must condemn us; who
governe^ the world in truth, and does execute his sentence: for his Government
is no scare-crow^ but a real one; no scenicall Pageantry, but a solid
constituted regiment, in which all his judgments are truly and really executed.
And how then can such escape the condemnation of this judge, or the execution
o^ this sentence? Farther yet

2. Natural man ignorant of this sin, adds sin to sin, runs farther into debt,
and ruins himself.
2. This Natural man in his best Improved abilities is inevitably miserable if
left to himself, because this undiscerned sinful nature is still proceeding
to farther wickedness, is ever adding sin to sin, and the man is not sensible
of it: like a man that blows the fire, which burns the house over his head in
stead of quenching it, enrageth it: Nor is it a small degree of unhappiness at
this present, But the time will come, when it will be found in truth the
saddest unhappiness of the grossest self murderer; if you should see a poor
distracted man stabbing himself, or cutting himself with swords, and laying
at such as offer their skill and pains to cure him: what would you suppose
were like to be the end of this man? would you not give him over for a lost
man? what hope could you have that he might be preserved? And this is directly
the case of the best Improved natural man, who not seeing his sinful state,
nor knowing his sinful inclinations, does securely rest in the one, and
uncessantly follow the other. Needs must he dye, who flies in the face of his
Physician: and best improved natural men never yet acted more soberly and
orderly to their own safety, they know not the misery of their state yet are
adding to it, and this in a word

3. Improved parts miserable, because they sin more pertinaciously and soberly.
3. With more pertinaciousnesse then other men, with more resolved, fixed, and
sober madness, such do cum ratione insanire. Poo^ men! they take themselves
(and seem to others) to be the men, whose state should deserve admiration, not
need pity, wh^ should rather be our Patterns for our imitation, then objects
of our compassion; and thence it is they are fortified against those convincing
Demonstrations, which conque^ others, but scarce shake them. He is inevitably
lost, whose Improvements do render him more obstinate in his opposition to his
own safety, this is the case of a Natural^ man in his highest Improved
naturalls without grace. The more these unsanctified accomplishments are
increased in him, the more firmly he bottomes himself upon them, and stands
out against renewing grace. It is a work for omnipotence to conve^any, but it
is a work both of omnipotence an^ infinite wisdom to convert an Improved man,
or a Scholar. Grace seems to conquer an Ignorant sinner only by Power, a
Powerful light shines on the understanding, and he receives the light, a
powerful heat fal^ on the hard heart, and melts it, a Powerful hand then
frames the heart to a right mould, without any long, rational, or subtle
dispute against the work: but a learned sinner, an improved natural man,
seems to put grace to an exerting; as well its wisdom, as it is power for
subduing him. He is ready to oppose, and dispute every beam of light, to
harden himself against every softning consideration, in all which through this
Ignorance he is wise and crafty to undo himself, his carnal wisdom so
disposing his opposition, that his pertinacy seems to him a well ordered and
rational constancy to his principles.

Inform. 3. Highest improved parts cannot dispose themselves to seek and prize
Christ.
3. If the best improved natural man cannot discover his sinful state, as
has been already proved, Then it cannot be, that he should dispose himself to
desire, seek, or prize Christ and that grace which is dispensed in the Gospel.
He can never strongly desire, who does not apprehend he needs the good he
desires. Desire seems the firstborn of the needy and apprehensiue soul.
When a mortally sick man is fast asleep, though he need a Physician, yet he
desires him not, because he is not apprehensive of his need. The poor man who
knows his debts, and what he needs to pay them has strongest desires of a
surety sufficient to prevent hi^ Imprisonment, and these desires are
proportioned to his apprehended need. Now so it is, that our sinfulness is the
real ground of our need of Christ, and grace, our knowledge of this
sinfulness is the immediate ground (...) our desire: we therefore need him,
because we are sinful, we therefore desire him, because we know we are
sinful. Now where we cannot come to a due and right knowledge of our
sinfulness, it is not possible we should come to a right or due desire o^
Christ, who is precious only to the soul that needs, and is sensible he
needs grace Whence it is that the spirit of God in drawing the sinner to
close with Christ, does still manifest and exert his power in illuminating and
convincing the soul. All tru^ desires of Grace are wrought in the soul by the
spirit of God, showing, and clearing it up to (...) that we need grace. If the
best Improved natural man cannot see how sinful he is, he cannot see how much
he needs a Jesus and he never desired him entirely and enough, who knew not
this. Naaman had never desired to make a trial what the Prophet could do for
his recovery, if he had not been apprehensive of his urgent necessity to be
healed of his leprosy. That man who knows not that his nature is disposed and
stands bent to depart from God, and to leave the way of holiness, cannot
prepare himself to seek after that Grace which may powerfully change this
sinful nature. There is both a merall and natural impossibility in it: a
moral impossibility on this account, that he believes there is no need of such
a change. Now it is Morally impossible that a man should apprehend his
condition, such, as needs no change, and yet dispose himself to the change of
it. Indeed a man may have wavering, unconstant, and imperfect apprehensions
that his state is indifferently good, and there is no absolute necessity of a
change; yet that it might be better if it were changed. And such a man may at
once seem content and persuaded that he needs not change, and yet attempt it:
but where a full, constant, and fixed apprehension in the mind, that there is
no need at all to change, and that (it is doubted by him) the change will not
better him, it is morally impossible he should dispose himself to change it:
which is the case of a well improved carnal man, whose apprehensions of his
self sufficiency and present perfect condition are fixed and constant: and
though he desires an addition of more degrees of natural excellencies, yet he
is unwilling to that change, which now would alter the very nature of them, and
make his carnal wisdom, spiritual; his common rational perfections,
especial, saving conversion, his earthly, worldly mind, Heavenly, and suited
to the Gospel. There is also a Natural cannot, or Impossibility in this
thing. A highly improved natural man remains natural still, and stands
entirely bent toward this his natural estate, much delighted in it, and
satisfied with it: and it is naturally impossible that nature should desire
that change which will destroy it: and since sin has so incorporated it self
into our natures, that it is in a sense become natural to us, and we cannot
savingly receive grace but with the destruction of naturalized sin, it will be
a truth that it is naturally impossible, that a natural man, however well
improved, should dispose himself to a desire of heart-changing and renewing
grace. Though the carnal mind know not its need of Grace to desire it, yet it
knows there is a contrariety in grace to sin, to destroy it, and therefore he
opposes it; as a man in a Phrensy, through the violence of a fever does not
know his need of suitable applications to desire them, yet may know the smart,
trouble, and bitterness of the applications to rage against them, and thrust
them from him; or as we observe it in children more frequently, the knowledge
of that sensible unpleasantnesse which is in Physic makes them strongly
dislike it, so the natural man knows by report so much of the nature and
working of grace, so much of apparent unpleasantnesse to the flesh, as to
reject it, but he knows not so much of his own need, as to desire it. Nor can
the Natural man raise himself to an esteem of Christ and Grace through him;
which appears most evidently from the consideration of his utter inability to
discover his need of Christ and grace. Need enhaunceth the price of every good
and apprehended need, raises our value of it. These two, sense of want, and
apprehension of worth go hand in hand, equally increasing in us; and when the
former abateth, the latter cannot but sink also. How does the hungry Esau prize
a mean dinner, when his sense is so prevalent, that it suggests a necessity of
a present, speedy supply, or an inevitable certainty of death, sense of his
want raises a contemptible dish of Pottage to a value equal to his
Birthright. Profane Esa^! How meanly would thou have thought of such a
charity (in the midst of thy venison feast) at another time, if thou might
have had it of gift then^ thou would not have accounted it worth thine
acceptance: now in want upon sale, thou think it worth thy choicest
excellencies: surely as each suppe abated somewhat of his hunger, and the sense
of his need, s^ it abated his esteem and value of the purchase, and the last
of his dish was least (...) value to him. It is much so in all present outward
good we stand in need of, our use of them abates our need, and this sinks the
price of them. Now though the more we have of Christ and grace, the more we
prize them, and reasonably may, justly ought to improve our value of them. In
which respect there is a difference between our value o^ external, common
good, which decreaseth o^dinarily as our use of them is free, continued, and
full, and these spiritual and heavenly goods, whose value Improves upon their
use, and is raised as we are acquainted with them. The more free, continued,
and full our enjoyment of Christ is, and the Improvement of grace is, the more
we shall prize them: but though here be a difference in the issue, or event of
Enjoyment, yet there is a very great likeness and agreement between them in
the motive and enducement to value and esteem them. Though the event of a full
meal, and the event of a full communication of grace be so different, that the
hungry one filled loathes the sweetness of a honey comb, refuses and sleights
it, whilst the gracious soul so filled desires more, and Pray's to be
continued in this, or taken into fuller banqueting rooms, and highly prizeth
such farther spiritual feastings: yet both were induced by the same general
and common argument at first to value, and prize these different Goods. An
apprehension of our need, and a sense of the suitableness in these to our
need, raises our esteem of them. So that if best improved parts cannot see
sin, nor can they see their need of grace, nor the high value and price of
Grace.

Inform. 4. (...) highest imparts cannot purify, and make themselves really
holy.
4. If the natural man with best Improvements and advantages, short of saving
renewing grace, cannot discover that mystery of iniquity which dwells in his
nature, Then certainly it is not a thing possible for him by all his natural
improved parts to purify and cleanse himself, to make himself holy in the
esteem, and judgment of the heart-searching God; when he has done what he can
(and it may be done very much in our account) yet still his work is short of
effecting any true real holiness; sanctification and renovation of sinful
nature is the work only of one who is acquainted aright with his own heart
which is to be cleansed and the word of God by which it is to be cleansed; and
it is his work not originally, and principally, as an efficient, first
producing cause of it, for this is the spirit of God, powerfully changing the
heart and continually promoting and carrying on the change to perfection; yet
it is the work also of the quickened, renewed soul, which having received
principles of life and a power to act spiritually does coworke with the spirit
to the perfecting of that holiness which is begun: in the first mighty change
of the heart, God gives a power, and actuates it to the finishing of this
glorious work. Through grace we are what we are; what we are of Saints, all
that being which we have as new creatures is the product of a cause infinitely
greater then the highest, and best improved nature. Improved parts may indeed,
lop off some luxuriant boughs, and cut off the outermost branches which would
prove hurtful to himself, improved parts may bind up the more straggling
branches, that they should not impede, and offend others and yet the tree will
be still corrupt and bring forth no better fruit then what is the fruit of
Sedome and clusters of Gomorrah, it is not the neat triming of the thorn that
will make it a figgetree, the root and stock must be changed, or it abide; the
same, and brings forth fruit like it self: useless and corrupt vessels must
have an other kind of cleansing then an outside washing, or wipeing them. If
you did see a man painting a Sepulcher, and so doing should tell you he hoped
to make it clean, and fit for another tenant then rottenness, and dead men's
bones, would you not soon tell him that if he drew all the goodly colors that
art could surnish him with, yet he would never be able to do this since he
either knows not, or else does not consider that there is unseen rottenness
within, which must he cast out: He that knows not how sinful the frame of his
heart is, will not make it his business to purify his heart, And an unclean
heart never yet was accounted by a righteous judge consistent with holiness
much less can it b^ a principle of holiness: Now then so it is that after all
the pains a natural well improve^ man has taken in pursuance of his seeming
holiness, there remains in him an unclean heart which is the spring of all
his actions and how can they be clean or holy then the method which Christ
prescribes Mat. 11*33. is this to begin with that which is hidden from the
natural man, to make a bad hea^ good, and then a bad life will be good. Until
this be done there will be no true real^ holiness, All the glorious
appearances, an^ outsides without arenewed heart are in account of God nothing,
better then glittering sins, so far then, as the natural improved man i^
from holiness of heart so far is he from truth of holiness, and so far as
he is from knowing his sinsull heart, so far is he from purifying it, for
cleansing of the heart is that work which requires a knowing of the heart in
order to the cleansing it. There i^ never more sanctity of heart, then there is
knowledge of the heart, though there is many time^ more knowledge, then there is
sanctity: Now i^ it be, (as has been proved,) a work greater then a natural
improved man can do to know, it is certainly a greater work to purify the
heart then his best parts can either beginor ever finish, this wound must be
thoroughly searched ere it will be soundly cured, Natural men do but skin it
over, when they have applied all the healing playsters they can. I beseech you,
Scholars (you are most in danger to be deceived with this seeming holiness)
consider this, your ripe parts, your advantages of learning, and education are
not of themselves sufficient to make you holy: but they may be dangerously
managed by a deceitful heart, and a malicious Devil to cheat you and make you
rely on a broken ^reed which will assuredly pierce you through instead of
supporting you: I am persuaded friends, who ever you are that either hear, or
read the proof and confirmation of the Doctrine, you believe it is a truth,
and I doubt not, you do see how closely these two are knit together, ignorance
of our sinfullnesse and inabilitie to cleanse our selves, as ignorance of the
disease and inability to cure it: I therefore desire you but to consider it,
with this seasonable admonition, that if thou who viewest these lines art a man
of parts, and education by which a blameless morality has been thy more
constant course (if thou are such a one consider) thou art in very great danger
of concluding this to be real holiness, and sufficient to the end thou
intendest, and thy danger is the greater seeing thy parts and education make
thy life come nearer and seem liker to real holiness: and it is he cheates
most unavordably who does counterfeit most exactly: the greater thy parts are,
the better thy education is, if still thou remain carnal, the more
artificially thou may play the hypocrite, and the more certainly deceive thy
self, and assuredly thou do so, if thou will be thine own Physician, and
heal a spiritual disease with a course of Physic so disproportioned to it,
this disease has seized the heart, it affects the most inward, and vital
parts primarily, and it does thence affect the outward parts the tongue indeed
is affected, as appears by the oaths, curses, railings of some, by the
lascivious, wanton, and unsavory discourse of others, the impertinent, vain
and unprofitable words which we daily hear, so are all m^bers of the body
affected with this disease, which the Apostle calls by the name of yielding
them weapons of unrighteousness and servants unto sin, yet the root, and
spring of it, is in the most secret and inward of the man which must be cured,
or else we lose our labor as he certainly does whose sickness is seated in
the vital and inward parts, but he uses only external and outward
application of medicines for his cure.

Use. 2. For Caution.
A second use, of the Doctrine of natural men's ignorance of their sinful
nature and their utter inability of discovering it by the best improvement of
parts, without renew ing grace, shall be a caution and warning to all but
especially to Scholars that they takeheed.

1. Caut. 1. Attempting to discover or concluding you havediscovered it by
mere natural light.
1. Lest they attempt, and set upon the discovery of this sin by mere Natural
improvements, and lest they conclude they have made a discovery of it by such:
beware of the attempt as you would beware of that which is certainly
unfeiseable in the course that is taken, as you would beware of venturing on an
impossibility; loss of labor (which I foretell you will be the end of your
attempt) me thinks should warn you of this, take heed of concluding you have
discovered it as you would take heed of being mistaken in a matter of weight
and moment: If you rest upon it, and determine that you have discovered this
when indeed you have not what an error will you run your souls into? How
dangerously will you deceive your selves? How inevitably do you undo your
selves? If thou who read these lines should as clearly see it proved to
thee that thou could not discover a false title from a true one, as it has
been prove^ thou can not discover a desperately deceitful heart, a very
sinful nature, would thou venture on a great purchase? and lay out all thy
wealth on it? and run the hazard of being deceived? would thou examine the
title by no better helps then thy own natural wit and sagacity? would
thou do so? I know thou would not And yet will thou run this hazard? and
venture all the happiness thou expectest? and ar^ capable of thus? do thou
dare to lay the stress^ of thy eternal welfare on such a foundation a^ is sure
in nothing but to deceive thee! O^ that all would, and I beseech you Scholars
(whose parts I highly prize and value whose danger in this I partly know) that
you will consider a while. Can you go to Heaven with unclean hearts? with
sinful natures? can any thing that is unclean? or that defiles enter there?
shall any who works iniquity dwell in the holy hill? And how can such
unclean things as the natural heart enter? How shall that which defiles the
whole life? that Polluteth every action? whose w^rke is nothing else but to
increase abomination? how shall this dwell in his presence who hates sin with
an infinite hatred who knows, and will judge, in another kind of manner th^n
now men judge themselves? I confess if God never would rip up the breasts of
men, if he would never anatomize them, nor turn their inside outward, if he
would never search the heart, and try the reins, then might I have spared this
Admonition, for it were then no great matter whether men did enquire into
themselves, or upon enquiry whether they discovered any thing, or not: But
since God has purposed to try, and discover the very secrets of the heart,
since his judgment will be according to truth, (be our judgment of our selves
what it will) it is of highest concernment to us, that we proceed in judging
our selves (so near as we can) by the same rule, and make the same discovery,
which God will make when he judges. And this he never will, or can do who
makes no farther enquiry then his best improved parts can discover. In a word
thou who make this enquiry, and restest satisfied in it, wilt find thy self
as far mistaken, as that malefactor, who in the prison makes a slight
business of his selony, and examines it with a voluntary hideing of that which
his judge knows and which is undoubtedly enough to hang him, and upon this
pronounces himself guiltless. Tremble at the thoughts of that soul's
amazement which here deceives it self with such insufficient search; which
relyeth on this deceit, and finds the greatness of it at last, when God
discovers it to him, that he is not fit for an undefiled inheritance who has
so defiled a heart, and unclean nature: be not deceived thou must be cleansed
or eternally perish, if thou will be cleansed thou must know thy uncleanness,
and vileness, in other manner then yet any natural, (though improved) man
ever knew upon inquiry into it by his best natural abilities, and therefore
as thou tenderest the issue of thy soul, which will be of eternal and
infinite moment to thee, beware of this light which cannot discover, beware of
resting in this partial and false knowledge which thou may possibly get by
more refined naturals. Take heed thy knowledge be no more then of the
unreasonablenesse of thy sinful frame, and motions: endeavor to get a
knowledge of the spiritual wickedness of them, and of that contrariety that a
natural heart has in it to a spiritual law: Hell is full of the knowledge of
sin's unreasonablenesse, and the way to bell may be full of this knowledge too,
and I would not thou should r^st in that knowledge which is not the direct
and certain way to escape hell, take heed of resting in that knowledge of this
sin to which the improvement of natural parts may carry thee, in the general,
whilst thou do not in particular see how it intermixeth with every duty, so
that thou need grace to pardon and accept it, and a mediator to procure
both: it is a dangerous mistake which the natural man runs himself into
when he sees not the iniquity which is in his duties when he sees not how
sinful he is in all his religious services: it is a mistake, that exposes him
to proud thoughts of himfelfe, and of his duties, that excites him to rest in
himself, that canseth him to keep at greater distance from Christ, to
undervalue pardoning mercy, and free grace, to increase his sins (for resting
on duty redound's much to the increase of sin,) to render him hateful in the
account of God, who is a professed enemy to every proud person: Now such are
the fruits of this knowledge we warn you of, take heed of it.

2. Caution. Against relying on the opinion of men in their assertions contrary
to the experience of Saint, and witness of Scripture.
2. The^ we have very good reason to beware how much we give to the judgment
and opinions of learned and improved men in this point which never any of them
whilst natural couldfully discover, and in which they have ever been prone to
advance nature, and debase grace, in which they have generally set the crown
on Nature's head which they admired, in the mean while robbing grace which
they knew not. Me thinks I need not say much to advise you in this, would any
of you rely much on the judgment of a boasting ignoramus? when thou art sick
thou advisest (not with one that never did, or ever will be able to find out
that disease but) with one who is known, either to have already discovered it,
or that is known to have skill so as to do it, if any can. When thou
travellest, and need a guide, thou will not take him, thou art sure will
mislead thee, but cannot direct thee; it is no whit less folly to rest on the
opinion of those learned men who speak of this without an experienced
observation of this sin in their hearts, it is of much moment in this point
that we have somewhat of assurance, that the man is a Saint and renewed in the
Spirit of his mind whose judgment we take concerning this, it is I hope so
fully proved that great measures of unsanctifyed learning and gross ignorance
of this sin may be both in the same person, that I do not need insist on
farther proof; I only desire you not to trust to the opinions of them in
matters they do not understand; I do not dissuade you from valuing them, and
expressing your value of them by giving what is due to their opinions, in the
things they are learned in. But I warn you to take heed, that you do not rely
on their judgment, and opinions though seemingly backed with strong
probabilities, and reasons in this and other points which are known aright
only by a sanctified and regenerate soul. Many of those who have erred in
this doctrine have been men of great parts and abilities, so are many of those
who at this day do mistake this whole doctrine and it is (beside what we have
said already) to be accounted among the hidden things which are not revealed
to the wise and prudent. Math. 11.25.
For whether you refer the relative (...) to the whole chapter, or to the
20th verse, and those which follow only: yet still you will find that the
doctrine of Repentance, and Remission of sins: the doctrine of Salvation, and
redemption from wrath which we deserve, from sin under the power of which we
are by nature: compriseth the things here intended. And if re^tance and the
doctrine thereof in its full extent, and latitude be the comprehensive sum
which is here aimed at, and which is hidden from the wise, and prudent then we
have ground to beware how far we rely on the opinions and assertions of these
men, who cannot discover the truth which lies hidden under a veil which 1.
Their impotence and inability has drawn over it, (they are not able to
discover it) 2. Their unwillingnesse to know, has brought on them (they are
loath to be acquainted with it) 3. Judicial blindness has drawn over it (that
they shall not, because they will not)


It is safer much to hear the opinion of a saint experienced in his own heart,
and well versed in the Scripture, touching this then any of the learned
natural men, who are unacquainted with the continual opposition their
natural hearts do make against the Law of God: I had rather hear a soldier
who was not only an eye witness but a chief combatant give the relation of
the fight, then one who (though never so well skilled in the speculative part
of military discipline) speaks only according to the rules of his art, I shall
rather trust a conflicting soul, and believe his relation, both that, there is
such an enemy, and that, he is within us continually levying war against us:
then trust the seeming reasons of learned men against it, or the determinations
of those who speak only their speculations. The seeing eye is to be trusted
in the judgment of Colors, before the learned head which only discourses
over his blind studies: the enlightened soul sees what it reports and is to be
credited. The learned natural man wants eyes to see and speaks by hearesay
what this sin is, the right knowledge of which is one of the things of the
spirit of God, which he receives not, nor can he until changed from natural,
to spiritual.

In a word the whole doctrine of the cross of Christ (i.e.) our deliverance
from sin, and the consequents of sin, by the death of Christ: The doctrine of
our fall, and misery: of our sinfulness, and inability to good: of our
restoration, and renovation, etc. are in the whole contexture of them
accounted foclishnesse by the wise among the Greeks and Jews (i.e.) by the
choicest men for natural Parts, and the improvement of them, both within and
without the Church, And can it be expected? that a man who thinks himself a
wise man should strictly enquire into that, which he accounts folly, or care
to have an insight in any part of that, which he esteems as much below him and
his thoughts, as a fool is below a wise man? and solly it self, below
excellent wisdom and understanding? if you would then choose you a master to
teach you more fully this doctrine leave the Schools of Pharisees, Seribes,
disputers of this world (whose wisdom God has infatuated) and go to the
convinced, humbled, and sanctified soul, and ask him concerning it. Scholars
whose business lies among the volumes of writers, whose various positions, and
doctrines divide from the truth, as well as from each other, be you especially
advised to try, before you trust, every thing you meet with in men's writings,
which are accounted profound and learned; and be persuaded to enquire what
experience, (arising from the conflict between grace and corruption, between
holy principles and remaining lusts,) will inform you in this weighty truth:
Prize and keep close to the sound Doctrine which holiness and learning jointly
improved have delivered to us from the Scriptures, and which you may meet with
up and down in the writings of our English Practical Divines, whom you may
trust whilst you must dissent from others that are accounted more learned.

3. Caution. Learned men's slighting grace be a stumbling block to us.
3. Then let it not be a stumbling block to us, that so many men, of choicest
parts, of highest improvements, do so little regard, so little desire, and
labor after: So little value, and esteem sanctifying, and renewing grace: take
not an offense at the thinness of learned men, that they crowd not toward the
fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness to the house of Judah and to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Zec. 13 1.
were no other reason at hand which might be given, this which arises from
their ignorance, and unbelief of the sinfulness, and uncleanness of their
nature were abundantly sufficient to satisfy us why they do not throng after
that Grace, which might cleanse, and purify them. Why should thou wonder
that blind men walk up and down in garments all over foul, and dirty and
never go to the river where they might be washed? And why should thou
wonder then, that blind souls, possessed with opinion of their own purity, and
holiness; being ignorant of that mass of corruption, which lies hidden in
their heart should stand at distance, far off from Christ, and grace, which
might cleanse them. Thou would not be offended to see a company of desperate
sick persons insensible of their danger go by, and neither call at, or go into
the Physician's house to be healed. This should not (I am very confident) beat
thee off from going thy self to be healed since thou know thy disease. Now
then why should it be a scandal? or a discouragement to thee? because few
learned men go to Christ, especially now that thou art warned of it, and have
heard this reason given thee; thou hear, that they cannot see their need of
Christ with the best helps of nature, and education, and therefore they keep
off from him. But observe it, Who do more readily? more speedily close with
grace then these men when once they are enlightened and savingly convinced? I
think no men make more haste to the city of refuge then these men, when once
the spirit of God does convince them, that justice pursues them, and when the
conviction is set home, so that they have real apprehensions of their dangsr;
and there is a good reason for this haste they make before others viz: Usually
they have clearer, distincter, and deeper apprehensions of their state, and
condition then other men, and the cleerer and deeper our apprehensions are the
speedier our attempt will be to escape those dangers which we apprehend are
likely to fall on us. Now there are two things which do render these men's
apprehensions more clear and distinct viz:

1. Greater measure of light shining into the understanding, and overpowring
all its false lights which the man (proud once of his parts) did before set up,
for as a man who walk's by a weak, and glimmering light would refuse that
light for his guide which another that was wholly in darkness and knew himself
so to be in the dark, would readily embrace; so is it here, many that have
great parts and abilities shining in them like stars, or comets in the night
will put off that weaker convincing light of the truth, which one who finds
himself all benighted rejoices to see though but a star, the least degree
of light, and is convinced soundly; whereas more and stronger light is needful
to convince a learned sinner thoroughly and savingly. Hence it is that they so
much differ in so little time in their apprehensions of impending danger, the
natural learned man had apprehensions of the excellency of his soul, of the
power of a God to punish, of the great misery and unhappiness, which the soul
must needs lie under, if this God proceed to punish: he can discourse of the
insupportable pain which Immateriall souls endure, this he can do upon
maxims of Reason, so that the man does see somewhat before the saving
illumination of the spirit of God does enlighten him with a better light, but
so soon as this shines in upon him, he does with the advantage which the other
affords him, see much more of these things, and his own danger: and accordingly
hasteneth his escape from it. Thus acquired Improvements under a through work
of conviction hasten men from the danger they were in. Again

2. Improved parts lie usually in a soul that is of larger and vaster
capacity, so that it sooner receives much of spiritual light, and has larger
and more extensive apprehensions of the excellency of Grace and mercy in a
Jesus. And so upon through Convictions flies more speedily to Christ, and
rises higher in it is value of Christ. So that if you needs will eye, and take
example by learned men, then look on those who are under a saving work of the
spirit of God, and judge by their apprehensions and value of Grace Now, what
will be the apprehensions and value which the rest so enlightened will have of
the same grace: if you will resolve to weigh Grace in the scales of learned and
improved men, then borrow St: Paul's scales and weights, which be used after
conversion, or under the work of conviction, and judge as he did of Grace,
when he 1 Timothy 1.14,15.
had obtained mercy through exceeding abundant grace in our Lord. When he came
to judge of things aright, and esteemed what was once his gain now Phil. 3.
to be l^sse and dung for the excellency of Jesus his Lord. There are none can
better esteem grace, then learned Saints, and yet none more vilify it then
learned ungodly men, stumble not at these, but be persuaded to follow the other.

Use 3. of Trial. Try then what your knowledge of this sin is.
3. If the best improved parts cannot discover the sinfulness of our polluted
natures, and if there be so different a knowledge of this in the regenerate and
unregenerate, as we have already endeavored to evince, Then, I entreat you,
try what is your knowledge of the sinful nature you carry about you. Put the
Question to your selves, Do I know this indwelling lust as Paul knew it? if I
might at any time press this use, I may now, for no men are so much in danger
of taking a false and insufficient knowledge of this for true and sufficient,
as are Scholars who know much, as of other things so of this also, in the
speculative part of it. And I know a deceitful heart is apt to suggest to us
scholars, that what we know of this is enough. But we must not trust our own
hearts much in this, or in any thing else of weight and moment: and therefore I
take the boldness to renew my request, to reinforce the advice to you
scholars, try your knowledge. And I do this, (beside the weighty considerations
equally obliging us with others) on some more special considerations obliging
us Scholars more then others, and I in treat you to weigh them.

1. Greater pronesse to mistake.
1. You are in a more apparent danger of being deceived with a common
superficial knowledge of this then others are, whose employments do not engage
them to a search after all knowledge. We are prone to aim at knowledge for its
own sake, and think it enough that we know, though this knowledge have no
influence upon our heart and life; when we have attained some knowledge of
this, we haste many times to the attainement of some farther knowledge; and so
by an eager pursuit of what is not yet attained, we are in danger of contenting
our selves with a general speculative knowledge of this, that we may speed on
to the discovery of other things, whereas other men once getting a discovery of
this sin are usually, or may be more intent, and dwell longer on the
consideration of it. Many things make it more easy for us to be mistaken in
the knowledge of this: as 1. Pronesse to measure the knowledge of this by that
we have of other things, which are not of such weight and moment, and that have
not so much influence on our souls in the matters of grace and holiness. 2.
Frequent temptations with which Satan fallows us, to render this knowledge
unprofitable, and useless to us. If this doctrine be well understood and
soundly preached, it shakes the very foundations of his Kingdom, therefore he
will corrupt it. 3. Precellence and greater measures of speculative knowledge,
then others have of it. A scholar is able to discourse more largely in the
whole doctrine of it, perhaps than another, and tell you what apprehensions
heathen Philosophers had of it, what doctrines the Pelagians delivered in this
matter, what the Schoolmen, Remonstrants, Socinians, Anabaptists, or others
teach concerning it; yet who knows none of these, but only the naked truth of
this doctrine, and improves it to holiness, knows more truly then such a
learned scholar. 4. A Scholars knowledge is usually a more common and general
work of the spirit of God in carrying him on in his ordinary and professed
intendment of getting knowledge; whereas in others, there is more of the
special work of the spirit of God, now it is more easy to mistake under a
common, then special work of the spirit of God. 5. Farther yet scholars may
more easily mistake in their Knowledge of this then other men, in regard they
apprehend many times more strength in the opposition men make to the truth,
then indeed there is, and so do with less certainty and with more wavering
hold this truth. Let us then bring our knowledge to the trial, lest we
certainly be deceived, where we so easily may be deceived.


2. Greater danger to themselves in mistakeing.
2. Let us do it next the rather, because if we be deceived in this; it is of
dangerous consequence to us, and to our eternal concernment, of much more
dangerous consequence then unto others, for it exposes us scholars to a
greater danger of continuing in a formal, superficial, external, and
insufficient course of obedience, and seeming purity. And who is engaged in
this with any competent measure of knowledge to hide, or defend, or excuse
himself, is in one of the greatest dangers of undoing himself; is armed most
unhappily against convictions of the word and spirit of God, and is like to
stand out against all means of a real, heart, spiritual, and saving change
and sanctification. We may in all likelihood sooner convince a profane, loose,
and wicked sinner, that is as yet ignorant of his sinfulness by nature, than
we can a Moral, temperate, and sober scholar, who knows much of this with a
speculative knowledge, and suppresseth much the working of this sin by his
moral principles and advantages. Scholars who are outwardly blameless, but
not inwardly sanctified, and who have somewhat of the knowledge of this sin in
their heads, but nothing of the experienced heart knowledge of it in their
souls, are the men most in danger to live and dye in a formal seeming
holiness, in an outside glorious show, with insides full of corruption and
rottenness: they are most in danger to pas^e among men, and with themselves
for Saints, while there is nothing at all of the saint in their heart, nor any
thing, but the hypocrite, and painted Sepulcher in their life. Your danger is
greater, let your search be stricter then other men's.

3. Greater endangering of others.
3. Try your knowledge of this, because it is a truth of General influence on
the heart and life of men: and either does much promote their real holiness,
when it is rightly unfolded and set home upon them, or else much impede and
retarde it, when it is not rightly apprehended by us, and unfolded to them. A
learned man erring in this, endangers his hearers, and though I intend not
particularly to insist on these dangers, yet this I say in the general, That
the preacher who has no other knowledge of this sin, then the Pharisees had,
shall have no better disciples then they had. If you would not then expose them
to the dangerous mistakes of seeming holiness, of counterfeit regeneration
etc. look to it, and see that your knowledge be right in this particular,
Consider the safety and welfare of precious souls is concerned in this, they
may perish through a mistake of their natural condition, into which mistake
yours may lead them, and it is dreadful to have blood of souls lying on your
head. Scholars seldom are single in their errors, and the more eminent they
are, the more dangerously do they err: and I know not a point, wherein there
is much more danger attends our mistake, then does attend our error in this,
and the doctrines depending on it. What more dangerous and destructive, then
that error which leads us from powerful and irresistible Grace? then that
which has direct tendency to undervalue Grace? what more pernicious then that
mistake which leaves a heart secretly corrupt and unholy? and rends to the
binding up the soul under this until the heart-searching God discovers and
judges it? It is a soule-damning error, which does ensnare the soul in a
partial, outside, and insufficient renovation. Now of such tendency is this to
our persons, and of such sad consequence will it be to others who may possibly
be hearers, blind leaders of the blind until both fall into the ditch, will be
the final and last issue of us, and our followers, if we mistake such weighty
necessary truths as these are.

4. Expected eminence before others in holiness.
4. Consider next, if you have not cause to enquire and examine your knowledge
of this, whether you had not need be more diligent by much then others, on
account of more eminent and exemplary holiness expected from you Men do (and
reason good they should) expect more perfect and exact holiness from you then
from others. You know more of your master's will then they, you know more of
the excellency of holiness, you know more of the reward to holiness, you know
more of the vileness of sin, of the unsuitablenesse of sin to your admired and
noble soul, and reason etc. on these and many other accounts it is expected
that you should be more holy then others. Now if you mistake in this doctrine,
which rightly understood has notable influence on the soul in order to
exemplary holiness, you will certainly fall far short of your Duty, and your
friends expectation. Now an ingenious spirit is very solicitous not to fall
short of his friends rational and just hopes, I speak to many such now I hope,
and therefore I promise my self of you a serious trial of this.

5. Mistaken knowledge cannot lie still and do no harm: it will mischief us by
5. Lastly that I may persuade you to try consider your knowledge mistaken
through want of due trial and examination, will be an consider your knowledge
mistaken through want of due trial and examination, will be an advantage which
Satan and your own corrupt hearts will take, and improve to further hardening
you in sin, and estranging you from conversion. Mistaken knowledge will not
remain a thing of indifferent nature, but it will eventually prove a great 1.
Emboldning us to sin.
1. Ewholdning you to cherish and foster those thoughts, that frame of heart,
which should be mortified and subdued, and the Devil will be ever animating
you to venture so far, as your doubts or mistaken knowledge can suggest you,
possibly may venture, 2. Enabling us to color over our fins, and so improve
this.
2. Beside the Devil will improve your mistaken knowledge in this point to a
craftiness and subtlety of improving this sin, under a staken knowledge in
this point to a craftiness and subtlety of improving this sin, under a
pretense and color of innocence and sinlesse pleasing or humouring our
natural desires, we must not neglect the search after one, who lurkes in our
family, and cannot but cut our thtoats, if we suffer him under any disguise
whatever; this old man mistaken will murder sonles, therefore etc.
Try whether you have discovered him, be diligent in the trial of your
knowledge concerning your sinful natures. But you will enquire, how may we
discern the nature of the knowledge we have of this sin? How may we find
whether our knowledge be true, right, and such as the enlightened soul, such as
St Paul, had? well then, hoping thou who so inquire art in good earnest, I
will refer thee to the differences which are assigned already, by which thou
may know what kind of knowledge the unregenerate has of this sin, and what
the regenerate man has, and then comparing thy knowledge with those
differences, thou may most certainly judge what thy knowledge is. Consider,
is it a spiritual knowledge? can thou discern the spiritual iniquity, as
well as the unreasonable iniquity of thy sinful nature? Can thou make out
the sinfulness of thy nature, and prove it by Practical and experienced
premises? Can thou discern how it intermixeth it self with all thy duties?
do thou really see this? can thou heartily grieve for thy sinful nature?
do thou see real cause of humbling thy soul for this? Can thou set thy
self with all thy soul to oppose this sin? can thou spend thy time, and lay
out thy pains to throw him out of doors, which will (in spite of thee) keep
possession, until the house be pulled down? Does thy knowledge of this
indwelling lust provoke thee to hate and detest it? can thou truly say, thou
do loath it, that it is that which thou can not on any account be
reconciled to? And tell me what are thy affections to that holy law which
forbids this sin? do thou heartily embrace that commandment which prohibits
thy soul, lest it should fulfill the inordinate desires of this lust? or
could thou wish there were no law to forbid thee? consider what certainty
thou have in thy knowledge? do thou waver, or art thou fixed in thy judgment?
and feast what all the proud world will not see or believe? do thou as St.
Paul, see another law in thy members? and is this seeing thy believing? Answer
these Queries in singleness of heart, and do not either deceive us, or flatter
thy self, and thou may come to know what thy knowledge is of this sinful
frame of heart. For farther examination, I refer you to the perusal of those
differencing and distinguishing notes laid down already, to which I will add
two or three more now, and so

1. Note of Tryill. Right knowledge of this advances grace.
First, Observe what tendency thy knowledge has to the advancement of Grace,
to the exalting free and powerful Grace; or what tendency it has toward the
debasing of Grace; by this thou may give a good Guess at thy knowledge; so
much as in it is working to the exalting of Grace, so much there is of the true
and right kind of knowledge, the more thou give of glory to the grace of
Christ, the more thou demonstratest thy thorough acquaintance with thy sinful
nature. Do thou with Paul see cause to praise God through Jesus Christ, for
setting thee free from this spiritual bondage? do thou see thy unclean
nature with an eye which prizeth and valueth that Grace, which has in part
already, and will in full and perfect manner ere long cleanse thee. The leper
under the Law never knew his leprosy aright, until this knowledge made him
seek the remedy for cleansing, and thankful that he was cleansed from it. So
likewise it is never right Knowledge of our spiritual leprosy, until it tend
to an applying our selves to Grace for healing it, and end in admiration and
praise of Grace, that we are healed.

2 Note. Right knowledge relyes on powerful grace to oppose lust.
2. Next look well whither does thy knowledge send thee for power and strength
to oppose and subdue thy strong lusts? If thy Knowledge of thy sinful nature
be such, that it does convince thee of thine inability to conquer thy lusts, of
thine insufficiency to perfect any good change wrought in thee, it is a very
good sign thy Knowledge is a right, and sufficient Knowledge of this Lust. And
if this conviction tend to a serious application of thy soul to Christ, for a
present supply of strength to oppose it; thou may surely conclude, that thou
know more, then any unregenerate man in the world does, of this sin: for if
he can truly say, that he sees a disclosure of so much sinfulness in man's
nature, that he concludes man cannot conquer it is power, yet he never seeks,
or goes to Christ for strength, by which he may conquer it; but all his
attempts are made in his own strength Now then deal truly and faithfully with
thy own soul, and consider whose strength thou usest, and in what power thou
hopest to subdue thy lusts: for by this it may appear what thy Knowledge is.

3. Note. True right knowledge directs to the right method of subduing it.
Thirdly, thou may know, whither thy Knowledge be right, by observing what
course and method it puts thee ^on in order to a holy and blameless
conversation. How does it direct thee in order to mortification, and crucifying
thy lusts and sins. True and right Knowledge of this lust does incline and
guide the soul, to set to a work of reforming the soul first. Who knows the
uncleanenesse of the streams aright, and would cleanse them, set's to the
cleansing of the fountain first; and who has right knowledge of a disease,
endeavors a cure by taking away the cause of it. Well then, tell me, do
thou know that this sinful nature is the cause of all thy sinfulness in thy
life? do thou then see those polluted streams do run from this polluted
fountain? Perhaps thou will say yes, (and with truth enough too,) but man
(tell me) in thy attempts to cut off these streams, to reform and purify
this life, where have thou begun? have thou cleansed the spring? He that begins
not sanctification in the heart, knows not aright the sinfulness of his nature.

4. Note Right knowledge aggravates particular fins by this.
4. Right knowledge of our sinfulness will allwaies account it, an
aggravavation of every sin. If thou know this sin aright, thou will see
really a great deal of heinousness, inexcusablenesse, and vileness in every
sin which thou examinest, on account of thy extreme sinful nature. Consider
then with David's words in thy mouth I was conceived in sin, and ask thy soul
can thou (as he did) see how much, this aggravates thy particular
transgressions? how it add's weight to the^? this make's the^ voluntary,
delightful, per petuall? this makes them stronger, and enraged, when the holy
law of God does restrain and forbid them: Try then by these notes, who can
truly, and experimentally answer to these queries, may certainly conclude his
knowledge of indwelling lust is a knowledge better and far above, the highest
degree of knowledge in men merely carnal, though of highest improved parts. And
here I might have advised them to give glory to free grace which has revealed
this unto them for flesh and blood could not, and so have closed the Sermon,
but then I sear, I should leave some unsatisfyed, who would gladly get a right
knowledge of this sinful frame of their nature, and would be willing to see
more of it. For their sakes I add

Use 4. A fourth Use of Direction.
If thou would get, and keep up a more full and clear knowledge of this
sinful frame of thy nature, then let it be thy care

Direction 1. Directi: Study thoroughly, and and affect thy heart with, the
nature and extent of Gods Law.
First, To study well the nature of the Law of God, endeavor to know much of
this perfect Law, and then thou will know much of thy imperfect heart; Study
thoroughly, and determine clearly the maine Questions touching the obligatory
power of the Law of God, by which it binds the very mind, and soul in its
habitual disposition, and first motions; he that does not steadfastly, believe
that the Law of God does lay an engagement on the inward frame, and bent of the
heart will never steadfastly believe there is so much wickedness in the frame
of the mind; as he sees there is, who has well and clearly stated this
point: It is the Law by which we have the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. (so the
Apostle assures us) when we know the just extent of the Law of God, we do
discover the extent of that Lust which is contrary to it, and so when we see
the Law extends to the frame of the heart, and first motions we shall see what
sinfulness there is in both. When we know the holiness of the Law of God; we
then shall discover the sinfulness, and vileness of sin, of this sin: the
known purity of God's Law, will disclose the unknown impurity of sin, and lust.
Study well the spiritual nature of all the commands of God, when the soul
sees (as Paul) that the Law is spiritual, it will also be able to see the
spiritual wickedness, which is in lust that is contrary to it. And remember,
in thy studying of these points, that thou do not only store thy head with
demonstrative arguments, that the Law is thus perfect in the extent, and
holiness and spirituality of its precepts; but with demonstrative arguments
join also affecting motives, that may work on thy heart, as well as inform
thy head. Want of these two, (I persuade my self,) are the great cause (at
least they are one great cause among others) of the sad learned, ignorance and
mistake of great improved parts; For whilst learned men mistake in the extent
of the Law of God, and determine that it binds no more then outward acts, or
perfected, consented to, and deliberate Motions and purposes of the mind, it is
impossible but that they should presently acquit both the frame and first
motions of sinful hearts, and pronounce them under no law, therefore contrary
to none, and therefore not sinful.

This is the grand fundamental error on which the rest are built, and which
necessarily induces us into many, and great both Practical, and speculative
errors; This is the (...) of the several learned erring men, and parties
which I have reckoned up in the confirmation of the Doctrine; if therefore thou
would avoid a dangerous error and get a true right knowledge touching thy
sinful nature, be diligent to understand the truth, of the affirmative state,
of that Quaestion whether the inward, habitual, and secret frame of the heart,
and the first, unformed, indeliberate, and unconsented motions be, and ought to
be under the Law of God? to this add the second part of this direction viz:
the affecting moving considerations that work upon the heart, the defect
whereof, has been the cause of the useless, and unprofitable knowledge of this
Lust in those unregenerate learned men among us, who have been sound in their
opinions, and determinations of this doctrine, and who have maintained in their
disputes the contrariety of the Natural heart, and it is first motions to the
holy Law of God, and consequently the great sinfullnesse of them, so that they
have been in part right in their knowledge, Even so far as a speculative
judgment was to act, they have acted their parts aright; but then they have
failed in that other, which is the practical part of this knowledge, which
should work upon the affections, and heart; and endline the heart to close
with the Law of God in opposition to the stirrings, and actings of this sin;
which should engage the heart to love the Law, and to hate that sinful frame,
those sinful projects, and tendencies which are contrary to the Law. In a word
then, right knowledge of this sinful nature consists in such a thorough, full,
and adequate, discovery of it, and its workings, together with a hearty,
affectionate, and well grounded dislike of it and opposition to it; the first
part of it thou will attain by a thorough studying of the speculative part of
the question, touching the Law of God its nature and extent; The other part
thou will get, by engaging the affectionate part of the soul, with those
moving considerations which will persuade thee to close practically with the
Law, as understood in it is full extent.

2. Be dilgent in comparing thy heart, its frame and inclinations with the Law
so known.
2. If thou would get, and keep a right and due knowledge of the sinfulness
of thy nature: Then be often, diligent, and humble too, in comparing thy heart
and its tendencies with the Law of God. Let not thy selfe-examination be only
taken up with the outward, visible part of thy life: she may appear neat and
cleanly abroad who may possible be found a very slut at home, within doors:
follow thy self into thine heart and search well the secrets of thy soul,
neither be thou seldom in this work, do it often, for there is danger in
little intermissions of our watch, the waters which silently glide from this
fountain will rise to an undiscerned depth in a little time. He that seldom
searches, hardly ever comes to a just discovery of his heart: It is an often
repeated search that is likelyest to discover a notorious cheat: and when thou
tryest be not negligent, and careless in it, do it diligently, make it thy
business, and then thou will find what now lies hidden out of sight, a
dangerous Fistulating tumor, must be searched with much diligence, or the
surgeon will never know either it is depth, or danger: This spiritual
corruption of our natures has many, and very deep pipes: and all our skill is
little enough to find out its secret conveyance, and therefore in thy search be
not slothful, and slight. And remember to take humility along with thee in
the trial, for pride will never be content to let the heart appear as it is,
a proud man is never an upright judge of himself, he ever accounts himself
better in the scales, then he is: whereas the humble man either judges
exactly, or wisely suspects himself to be defective, and wanting of weight.
Whosoever has gotten such knowledge of the nature of God's Law, and does thus
search, may hope, that, he shall in due time discover this sinfulness, which
appeare's in it is fruits, not all at once, but some time more, sometime less,
as provocations, and opportunities set it on work. Now thy frequent search
will discover it in this part of it: The enemy that makes his excursions often
must be as often observed and watched: and if thou would know him thoroughly
thou must not sleep securely and let him make inroades upon thee at his
pleasure. This sinfulness is wise and politic it does not allwaies appear
in the same garb in the same method, it varies it is manner of working, and
thou must enter the search after it with wifedome and diligence both, or it
will be too crafty, and subtle for thee: The more various it is, the more
diligent thou ought to be, and deave with this as men do with cunning
cheaters, that shift their lodgings, change their habits, alter their carriage
and Proteus like appear to you in a thousand shapes, keep your eyes on them,
follow them to their very lodgings, and retiring rooms, so do you keep your
eye diligent in the watch of your sinful nature, that you may see it in it is
retiring room where it prepares to change it is shape.

Men, that stand without, see not what base fellow act's the part of a King on
the stage, or how unclean a villain act's Joseph's part, but he that goe's
off' the stage and see's them behind the courtaine in their retiring place
discover's all this, so may we by a diligent observance of this.

3. Direction Keep thy heart tender and easily affected with sin as it is
contrary to God and his Law
3. Thirdly, if thou would get and keep more clear apprehensions, and
knowledge of the sinfulness of thy nature; Then be careful to get, and keep a
tender heart, that soon feele's, and is easily grieved for sin as it bears
a contrariety to the Law of God, and the holiness of his nature: what ever
thou do, be sure to take heed thy heart do not grow hard, and insensible;
least it contract a brawny and callous hardness under sin, it must be a
considerable cut that bring's blood, or paineth a man in that part of his body
which is much hardened, whereas the least scratch will draw blood, and bring
grief with it to one who has a tender cuticle. A hardened heart will not be
sensible of sin, unless it be some great one, which wound's deep, and then
perhaps it may be somewhat sensible of it, but yet not duly affected with it.

Naturallists tell us that those creatures which are (...) are not so perfect
and acute in their sight, they cannot see so well and clearly. It is most
undoubtedly true of the soul, that soul which through sin has it is eye
either darkened, or thus affected with dura lippitudine It Is disease marring the
sight through a horny filme growing on the eye.
can never clearly, and fully discover sin. Look abroad into the crowd of men,
who call themselves Christians, see how they differ in their account of sin,
proportionably to their different degrees of tenderness of heart: Real Saints
under a defect of this have (and I wonder not at it) fallen into a defect of
judgment concerning the greatness of sin, they have accounted that a little
sin, when their hearts have been somewhat hardened which in a tender frame of
spirit they more rightly esteemed a great sin. And observe it, as you have
lost of your tenderness, so your sin has lost of it is heinousness in your
account: recovered backsliders among Saints will bear me witness to this
truth.

Tell me did thou rightly see the great sinfullnesse of an earthly mind of
a formal and hypocritical heart, of a careless and loose heart, of a vain
and foolishly wanton heart? Did thou not think there was less evil in
them when thy heart was somewhat hard, and had lost of it is wonted tenderness?
How has thy boldness to sin, and thoughts that it was but a little sin
which thou art now about to commit, gotten ground on thee upon such a decay?
time was, when thou who art a tradesman saw a great deal of sin in a lie,
or equivocation to cheat, in a little too much gain; Time was when thou who
art a Scholar saw a great deal of sin in mispending a day, or a few
hours of thy time; what is now the cause thou do not so judge? Is the sin
changed? Or is the Law changed? No, but thou art changed, thou wast then of a
tender frame of spirit, but now have lost it, and thence it is thou so
misjudgest: once thou could not step a step in those rough and thorny ways
but thou did bleed, and smart for it: why do thou without sense of smart
now run long in them? is not this the cause? thou have hardened thy self in
them, and can not see the evil of them. In a word our sight, and knowledge of
the sinfulness of our nature, is a knowledge of Spiritual sense, and very much
resemble's our knowledge which have by our bodily sense in this, that due, and
just tenderness is a very necessary, and convenient disposition of the organ
to discern the object; so let our spiritual senses be exercised in judging of
sin with this convenient disposition in the faculty, and we shall certainly
judge more rightly of it.

Direct. 4. Oppose sin, especially begin the oposition against first stirrings
of it.
4. In order to which farther, take this as a fourth direction, Give a vigorous
opposition to sin universally, and begin your opposition at the very first
spring, and root of it; let no sin dwell peaceably in your sonles, and let
not any sin have a season to grow, but cut it off' so soon as it sprouts
forth; No man ever came to a right knowledge of sin by indulging it, for it
still appears other then what it is to him, who is unwilling to suppress it.
As to the power, and strength with which it works, and as to the wisdom,
policy wherein it contrive's it is works, it is more then evident, that the best
way to discover them is by opposeing our selves to them; the encounter of an
enemy is a means to draw forth his power, and craft which had otherwise lay
hidden. And it will appear also a very suitable, and congruous way to discover
both the sinfulness and the guilt; the uncleanesse, and the danger of sin,
both in the branches and in the roots of it by a timely and vigorous
opposition of it. For whilst we oppose it in the power of the spirit of God,
and by the word which is holy and directs us in an opposition, there is an
increase both of an internal light in the mind, and of an external light in
the word, the one as the light of the eye which sees the other as the light of
the sun by which it sees, the foulness and blackness of sin. The word and
law enlighten the soul which before was in the dark, and blind; and then the
more the enlightened soul adheres to this word in opposition to sin, the
more it sees of the purity of the word, and the vileness of sin. There is in
the word a native fitness to produce this effect, and a kind of natural
connection between these terms. Contraries illustrate, and disclose each other,
and whilst we lay the word of God before us commanding one thing and our
sinful hearts suggesting an other, sin becomes in our sight exceedingly
sinful, so it did to Paul, Romans 7.13. Beside this, God does delight to
discover how sinful a natural heart is to those, who would really have a
deliverance from it, and blessed them in this opposition to this end; and
farther, thy opposition to it will be a means to take off the temptation to
like and plead for that which thou should, but have not disliked and
opposed; and it is a dangerous temptation to overlooke somewhat of evil in
that we have done when it is done, since we opposed it not when it was in
doing; men would feign be found not so guilty, where they are sure to be found
somewhat guilty. Thou will be the more willing to see the sinfulness of a
natural heart, when thou so opposest it, because thy opposition to it make's
it cease to be thine in a great measure, no more I, but sin that dwells in
me, no more I, but Satan that take's advantage of a sinful heart, etc. Thou
who can oppose sin vigorously, and heartily, need not be so much ashamed
of it, and thou will the more certainly discover that fully which thou may
without shame, when another will not (if he could) because he cannot but with
shame. But why stay I on these? Christian who ever thou art that hear or
read these lines, tell me did thou ever see the sinfulness of thy heart
propending to sin so clearly, as thou have upon a victory over it? presently
after a strong opposition to it? In a word either thy resistance has foiled
sin, then on serious view of it, with all its circumstances, thou have seen
what vileness was in it; or if thy resistance has failed of the success thou
desiredst, and thou have fallen, yet upon recovery thou have seen, and abhorred
that sinning sin which has so defiled thee, who falls unwillingly into the
mire, usually sees the more, and is the more affected with that uncleanesse
which he has contracted.

4. Direct. View it with a weeping eye, and mourning heart.
5. Would thou know aright the sinfulness of thy nature? then be not a
stranger to, nor seldom in a serious and deep humiliation, and sorrow for this
sinful frame; though he cannot see bodily objects well, whose eyes are full of
tears, yet he sees these spiritual objects best, who sees them with eyes
filled with tears. He that was never duly grieved at an unkindnesse done by
him to his friend, never knew how great that unkindnesse was: and he that never
grieved, that he carries about him a sinful heart, never knew yet how sinful
his heart is which he carries in his breast. For these well regulated
affections and passions are very sagacious, and quick-sighted in the discovery
of that which is their proper object. Thus well guided sorrow (such as I now
speak of) can find out the nature and aggravations of that, for which the soul
grieveth: and if once thou can bring thy soul to weep in secret over this
sinning sin, thou may be assured thou already have some degree of true right
knowledge of this sin, and ere long (holding on thus) wilt get greater degrees
and measures of it. Every tear thou sheddest will be a glass to represent
somewhat more of it, and every sigh will be a blow at the door of this charnell
house, or house of corruption, until it be broken open, that thou may see
and cleanse it. Christian, view all the remarkable seasons in which thou have
had any sight and knowledge of this sin more then ordinary, thou that have seen
much of it in thy reading the law, in thy hearing the law preached, in thy
meditating on it, or whilst thou have been conferring about it. Did thou
ever see more of it at such times, or ever so much, as when thy soul has been
ready to melt into tears for it, whilst thou have fixed thine eye upon it and
wept? Call to mind what Improvements thou have gotten to thy Knowledge at any
times, I know little, if thou say not that Mourning times have been the
seasons, and weeping eyes have been the organs which have made the fullest
discovery of this sin, and added the most considerable improvement to this
Knowledge. Job was a mourner when he saw, and left it for our instruction, that
Job. 14.4.
none can bring a clean thing out of an unclean: And David was
brokenhearted, wholly immerst in tears, when he breathed out that confession,
that full and clear description of our sinful natures, which are shapen in
iniquity etc. In a word, get thee a vessel of Crystal tears, if thou will
see how great the unhappy Eclipse of thy glory is. Men who would see the
Eclipse of the Sun, choose to see it in a vessel of clear water, and
enlightened souls see the greatness of their Eclipse best in the vessel
filled with tears of Godly sorrow.

6. Direction. Join lear ning and experience together, study it jointly in thy
heart, and other men's books.
6. Would thou get, and keep up a right Knowledge and apprehension of this
sinning sin, of this indwelling lust? then join the Practical Divine, the
experienced Christian, and thy own observation to thy study of those authors
who are accounted highly for their great learning. Do not seek a right
Knowledge of this only from the learned, nor yet promise thy self a full
Knowledge of it without them. I know others may have a Knowledge full and
sufficient for them (because they are not Scholars, nor must be preachers)
without enquiry into it, by the directions of learned men, but you are
Scholars, who may possibly be teachers of others, you must in order to a full
discovery examine what learned men have said in this: but yet consider that
somewhat else beside learning is requisite to make them meet guides to you:
join therefore Learning and Experience together in those Authors you study
touching this, their Learning enables them to discover the truth in the more
speculative, and notionall parts of it; their Experience enables them to
discover the truth in the more Paracticall part, which has most influence on
the life. And if thou can, (as I am sure thou may) find both Learning and
Grace happily meeting in the same persons, and sweetly flowing from their pen,
in what they have wrote touching this matter, Prize and study them: but forget
not to study thine own heart at the same time, who so wisely joins these
together for the information of a teachable soul, is not (I think) in much
danger of mistaking a false, and unprofitable for a true and advantageous
Knowledge of this doctrine. In which there are some things difficult and not
obvious to every one, which must be sought in the Schools: and other things
Experimental, and spiritual, which must be sought at the mouth of a gracious
and sanctified person. Their learning will be a glass to represent the one,
their Experience will be a glass to represent the other part to you. Their
learning will inform your judgments, and their experience will discover your
hearts to you, while you shall observe that your hearts answer to theirs in
those Motions and Pronesse to sin, which are now the matter of your daily
exercise and complaints, as they once were the matter of their daily exercise
and complaints. In one word, in such a combination, thou have the skill of a
Physician, and the experience of a sick recovered patient to inform thee, and
direct thee in the very same case and disease. His skill can tell thee the
cause, with the danger, and cure: His experience can tell thee the manner of
this disease in its workings, and the sure method of applying the means, that
will not fail to heal thee. And thou will say, who so knows his disease
thus, knows it aright: Be you then diligent in using their learning as
Scholars, and their Experience as Saints, and you may well hope to get a
sufficient insight into this, both as it is a knowledge Profound and deep, fit
to be searched after by Scholars, and as it is Spiritual, Experimental, and
practical in its nature and right tendency, only obtained by Saints.


FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis at his shop
near Oriell College in Oxford.
A Paraphrase, and Annotations on the whole Book of Psalms, by Hen: Hammond,
D.D. in folio. -- A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon all the Books of the New
Testament, in folio: the second Editition. -- The Practical Catechism, with
all other his English Treatises, in two volumes in 4o. -- Differtationes
quatuor quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate
adstruuntur, contra sententiam Blondelli and aliorum, 4o. -- A Review of the
Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament. 8o. -- Some profitable
directions both for Priest and People, in two Sermons. 8o. -- A Collection of
several Replies and vindications. Published of late most of them in defense of
the Church of Engl: in 4 volumes 4o. -- The Dispatcher dispatched, in Answer to
a Roman Catholick's book, entitled, Schism dispatched. 4o. new. -- A Letter of
Resolution to six Quaeries, 12o, -- Of Schism. A defense of the Church of
England against the exceptions of the Romanists. 12o. -- Of Fundamentals in a
Notion referring to Practice. 12o. -- Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation
to all true sons of the Church of England, 12o. A view of the Threats and
Punishments recorded in Scripture, Alphabetically composed, with some brief
Observations upon several Texts, by Zach: Bogan of C.C.C. in Oxon. 8o. -- The
Mirt^ of a Christian Life, and the sorrows of a Wicked Life, 8o. Fides
Apostolica, or, A Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority of the
Apostles Creed: together with the Grounds and Ends of the Composing thereof by
the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of Faith etc. With a double
Appendix, 1. Touching the Athanasian, The Nicene Creed: by George Ashwell, B.D.
8o. Ailmeri Musae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni, and Daniel Graece redditi
carmine, 8o. Ad Grammaticen ordinariam supplementa quaedam. Editio 2. multis
auctior. 8o. A Guide to to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an Holy
life, by John Reading B.D. 4o Theses quadragesimales Philosophiae Novae, in
Scholis Oxonii Publicis, a Carolo Potter. 12o. Contemplationes Metaphysicae,
Authore Georg. Ritscheli Bohemo, 8o. Aditus ad Logicam, Authore Samuele Smith,
8o. Elementa Logicae, Authore Edwardo Brerewood, 12o. Johan. Buridani
Questiones in octo Libros Politicorum Aristotelis, 4o. Robert Baronii
Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, Edit. nova. 12o. Rob: Baronii Metaphysica.
Edit:nova, 12o. The hurt of Sedition, by S. John Cheek, 4o. The Christian Race,
a Sermen on Heb. 12.1. by Tho. Barton, 4o. A Sermon on 2 of Timothy, chap. 3.
v. 1,2,3,4,5. by Will: Chillingworth, 4o. A funeral Sermon on Phil. 1.23. by
John Millet, 4o. A Funeral Scrmon on 1 Cor. 7.29,30,31. by Tho: Hauskins. 8o.
A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been printed or translated
into English upon any place or book of the Holy Scripture, now to be had in the
Public Library in Oxf. by Jo. Vernevill. 12o. The Vaulting-Master, or the Art
of Vaulting, illustrated with Sixteen brass figures, by William Stoaks. 4o.
Ramus Olivae, Concio habita ad clerum in Templo Beatae Mariae Oxon, 8o. Junii
pro inchoando Termino. A Joh. Wall, T. D. and Col. Aedis Chirsti Praebendario.
8o. A brief Treatise touching the preservation of the Eyesight by Walter
Baley, sometimes Fellow of N. College, Regius professor in Physic, and
Physician to Queen Elizabeth. 8o. Essaies and Observations, wherein many of the
humors and diseases of the age are discovered and characterized, by a student
in Theology. 8o. Porta Mosis, sive Dissertationes aliquot a R. Mose Maimonide.
Nunc primum Arabice prout ab ipso Autore conscriptae sunt, and Latin editae.
Una cum Appendice Notarum Miscellanea, opera and studio Edvardi Pocockii,
Linguae Hebr: and Arab: in Acad. Oxon. Professoris. 4o. Idea Trigonometriae
Demonstratae. Item Praelectio de Cometis. Et Inquisitio in Bullialdi
Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta, Authore Setho Wardo, in Acad. Oxon.
Astronomiae Professore Saviliano. 4o. -- In Thomae Hobbii Philosophiam
exercitatio Epistolica, 8o. Delphi Phoenicizantes, etc. Authore Edm.
Dickinsono, Med. Doc. and Mertonensis Colleg. Socio, in 8o. Logicae Artis
Compendium, Authore Rob Sanderson, Coll. Lincoln. in alma Oxoniensi quondam
Socio, and in Eadem Academia Sacrae Theologiae postea Professore Regio, Edit.
5a. 12o. A Paraphrase on Habbakuk, by Dr. Stoakes. 4o. A Christian Legacy; viz.
1. A Preparation for Death etc. 2. A Consolation against Death etc.
by Edw. Hyde, D.D. 12o. Christ and his Church: or Christianity explained under
7. Evangelicall and Ecclesiastical Heads: with a Justification of the Church
of England according to the true principles of Christian Religion and Christian
Communion. 4o. 1658. -- A Christian Vindication of Truth against Error,
concerning 7 Controversies; most between the Church of England, and the
Romanists, in 12o. new. Ric: Gardener Herefordensis, Specimen Oratorum. 12o.
The City Match. 4o. The Amorous War. 4o.
both long since written by I. M. St: of Ch: Ch: Oxon. Ovid's Invective against
Ibis, translated into English Verse, and the Histories therein briefly
explained, with Natural, Moral, Poetical, Political, Mathematical, and
Theological Applications: by Jo: Jones, Teacher of a Private School in
Hereford. 8o. Two Assize Sermons, preached at Reading and Abingdon in Berks:
with two others preached at St. Mary's in Oxford: by Jo: Hinckley, Minister of
the Gospel at Colsehill in Berks. 12o. The Devil of Mascon, or a true
Relation of what an Unclean Spirit did and said at Mascon in Burgundy,
attested by several persons of Eminency, both for Learning and Piety: the 3d.
Edition. 8o. Burgesditii Metaphysica. 12o. Directions for a Godly Life:
especially for Communicating at the Lords Table, by H. Tozer: the 6th. Edition.
12o. Hen: Savilii Oration coram Regina Elizabetha Oxoniae habita, etc. 4o.
Juelli Apologia Ecclesiae Anglican: Graecolat. 8o. Enchiridion Botanicum: or a
Complete Herball, containing the sum of what has been hitherto published
either by Ancient or Modern Authors, both Galenicall and Chymichall, touching
Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Fruits, Flowers, etc. in an Alphabeticall order, in
which are distinguished all that are in the Physic Garden in Oxford, showing
their Place, Time, Names, Kinds, Temperature, Virtues, Use, Dose, Danger, and
Antidotes, etc. by To: Lovell, St: of Ch: Ch: Oxon. in 12o. The Circles of
Proportion, and the Horizontall Instrument etc. both invented, and the uses of
both written in Latin by W. Oughtred, Aetonensis. Transtated into English, and
set forth for the public benefit by W. F. And now by the Authors consent
revised, corrected, and freed from all mistakes in the former edition: and also
much amplified and explained by A. H. Gent. with brass figures. 8o. New. A
Treatise proving the necessity of a Learned Ministry, by H. Th. St: Ch: Oxon.
8o. New. Exercitationes duae. Prima de Hysterica Passione: secunda de
Affectione Hypochondriaca. Authore Nathaniele Highmoro, Artium and Medicinae
Doctore. 8o. New.

