Loves Companion, OR, A SHORT TREATISE Of the Nature, Necessity, and Advantages
of MODERATION, Being the substance of two Sermons preached at Ousburne, by J.
H. M. A. and Minister of Ousburne.

Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self overwise, why should thou
destroy thy self?

7. Ecclesiast. 16. (...).

Aristot. lib. 2. Ethic. capit. 6. LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach, 1656.

To the Worshipful THOMAS DICKINSON Esquire, and a worthy Member of the Honorable
House of Parliament
SIR,
IT is the observation of a learned man out of Tertullian, that Christ is
always crucified between two Thieves, that is, Truth suffers between two
extreme Errors: and I have observed, that the moderate man is ever crushed
between two extreme parties, who because he would have them both friends, is
looked upon by both as an Enemy. Yet methinks, now, if ever, a Treatise of
Moderation should be acceptable, after we have had such sore and sure
experience of the evils that arise from its contrary. I know it would have been
to as little purpose, to have presented to public view a subject of this
nature, in the times of our busy wars, as it is to give advice to a man in the
heat, and height of his passion: but now that things after so many years of
confusion, are grown more calm and composed; I hope likewise, that men's spirits
are accordingly tempered; especially having proved by trial, that because they
would suffer nothing before, they are now forced almost to suffer every thing;
this is a sharp remedy, but Pride, Uncharitableness, and Hypocrisy, are sore
diseases; if the Lord shall hereby cure us of these sins, and afterward
restore, and settle us, we shall have cause to acknowledge his dealing with us,
not only just, but merciful.

One great enemy unto moderation, are deep and dangerous engagements unto a
party, which make men of that desperate humor, as to resolve according to the
Proverb, That because they have gone over Shoes, they will over Boots too.
There is but one thing required to make a wise man, that is, Consideration; yet
that Consideration is twofold, either before or after the fact; the former
tends to prevent a mischief before it come, the latter to remove and heal it,
when through inadvertency it is come; the former is better, yet the latter is
good, if not out of season; for as we say, Better late wise than never: But
such is the proud humor of deeply-engaged persons, that they refuse to put in
practice the latter, because they would not be thought to have neglected the
former; and resolve rather to continue fools even ad delirium and insaniam,
than they will be thought, once not to have been so wise as they might have
been. These men are of the Forlorn hope, and their Word is, Go forward, but
their forwardness is frowardness, and if not seasonably repressed by Authority,
will precipitate themselves and others into destruction. I confess that to
backslide in matters of Religion is both base and sinful; but if a man has
over-shot himself, and gone too far, it is both his wisdom and safety in time
to look back. God forbid, that any who professes himself to be an Israelite,
should think of returning back to Egypt; no, farewell all cringing, and
crossing, and bowing, with such like dregs of refined Popery, that they may
never return again, till his Holiness by the help of his Catholic Son reduce
the Church of England, is my Prayer unfeignedly. But in things that tend to the
order and well-being of the Church, which are at present, together with the
other, utterly demolished, there is no doubt but Authority will give us leave
to look back to the Constitutions of the Primitive Church, and the
Constitutions of our own Church formerly (so far forrh as agreeing with them,
and not repugnant to the Scriptures) except we should depend upon an immediate
Revelation for our direction.

A second enemy unto Moderation is Hypocrisy, and self-endedness, these make
men that they do not so much desire public settlement, as private safety, and
causes them altogether to hold off from engaging themselves to take up the
quarrels of the Church, lest if their endeavors should prove unsuccessfull,
they might suffer by it. Such as these may be observed to stand not in medio,
but in bivio, expecting the event, that they may apply themselves accordingly.
Pelago se non ita commissurum esse, qui^ quando liberet pedem refer posset,
Melch. Adam in Vit. Bez.
As King Henry the fourth of Navarre told Beza, who urged him to show himself
in the quarrel of the Protestants Religion, that he would keep upon the shore,
and not launch too ar out into the deep; but so that if a storm should arise,
he might soon get to land again: A Lesson that, it seems, Baldwin, a man in
great esteem among the French, but a very Ecebolus in Religion, taught him. It
was once the Speech of a deep Politician, that it was good to follow the truth,
but not too near at the heels, lest it should dash out his brains: But if all
men were of this mind, when would the quarrels of our Church be taken up?
certainly not till the day of judgment, if out Church should continue so long.

A third Enemy unto Moderation is Pride and popularity, I join them both
together, because they seldom go asunder: A man cannot be moderate, who is not
settled in his judgment, and humble in his apprehension: now Pride makes a man
stiff, where compliance is necessary; popularity makes him base in
condescension, where fixedness of resolution is required.

Lastly, there are some that live by quarrels and dissentions, who are of all
others the greatest Enemies unto Moderation. These are of his mind, that bade
when the sword was drawn, throw the Scabbard to the Devil. We read in Plutarch
of one Demades, by profession a maker of Coffins, that was banished out of the
City of Athens, for wishing that he might have good trading; that Wise State
truly interpreting the language of his wish; as desiring some Epidemical
disease, his private profit being inconsistent with the public flourishing of
the Commonwealth: so those people, who are undone, and cannot live but by
undoing of others, certainly wish no good to our Church or Nation; but must
needs be State Barretours, to keep the sore always raw between Magistrates and
Ministers, between Governors and their people.

Sir, besides all these, I have observed two great evils under the Sun, and
they are these. That if a man be zealous he shall presently be accounted
immoderate by profane persons, and if he be moderate, he shall be thought to
be lukewarm by hot professors: So that between profaneness and indiscretion, it
is almost impossible for a man to maintain his reputation; for those which
condemn zeal (that keeps it self within its own circuit) under the pretense of
immoderation, they are scarce worth the answering: Ahab accused Elijah for the
troubler of Israel, and Tertullus St. Paul for a pestilent fellow, and a mover
of sedition, and Michol despised David as a vain person, when in his zeal he
danced before the Ark; yet the Holy Ghost commends all these for their zeal;
but no where condemns them of Immoderation. For such as condemn Moderation for
lukewarmnesse, if they be observed in the general course of their lives to be
conscientious, they are to be pitied and directed; but if they be carnal and
Time-serving Professors, they are to be sharply dealt with, and detected, as
those whom we may justly suspect for Hypocrisy, and the driving on some
privare design. I will only add this, that of all men, they who plead for a
Toleration, have the least reason to accuse moderate persons of lukewarmness.

SIR, I might have added much more to what I have said concerning the Enemies
of Moderation. Give me leave to say a little in vindication of men of mine own
function, the Priests (as the Sectaries and Stargazers call them) who lie under
the Odium of Immoderation. I do freely confess, that if the Lot should be
cast, I fear many of our Tribe would be taken; yet even for them I think, I may
safely say this, that many speak Against them, for speaking but that, which
they themselves think. But for others, who does not see, that therefore they
are accounted immoderate, because they do zealously declare against the
Heresies and Corruptions of the times, and the giving of Credence to the
predictions of every vain Sooth-sayer and Astrologer, falsely so called? Again,
I may subjoyn this, that many Ministers are more strict than otherwise they
would be, because they see, that people are Generally more loose, not only in
their practice, but their opinions, than they have been; herein imitating a
careful Father, who holds a more strict hand over his child, than otherwise he
would, because he sees that his natural inclination, together with the
temptations of evil company, provoke him to break out into such disorders, as
are not only sin in him, but shame to his Father. Thirdly, therefore it may be,
some Ministers are the more stiff, because they know, when they come to a
debate, they must be forced to abate something, and cannot with safety abate
too much; as a Chapman will ask full as much, as his commodity is worth,
because else he knows, that he shall be bidden less than it is worth; all the
danger is, that if a man ask too much, perhaps he shall be bidden nothing at
all. Lastly, people expect zeal from Ministers, though they care not for it
themselves; as many that care not so much for preaching, as to come constantly
once on a Lord's Day, who yet would be ready to Article against their Minister,
if he did not preach twice. That which Luther said sometimes, Nunquam
periclitatur Religio, nisi inter Reverendissimos; the Vulgar are ready enough
to take up as a Maxim, or an Oracle. It is observed, when Christ was crucified,
Pilate the Civil Magistrate absolved him, Caiphas the High Priest condemned
him, Judas, his own disciple, betrayed him: people are willing to wash their
hands, as Pilate did, and think they have done all well enough, if they can
with any color lay the blame at the Ministers door. Sure it is, cold Ministers
make bold sinners; and all the blame will be laid upon the unfaithful
Ministry, that should have been burning and shining lights, if Atheism or
Heresy grow to an height.

Sir, I know you bear honorable respects, out of conscience, to all
conscientious Ministers, however traduced and maligned by some Apostatical
persons. And this (set aside my private engagement, the public recital whereof
would not make others more to wonder, than your self to blush) has induced me
to dedicate this Sermon to you, as a testimony of that honor which I bear to
you, and cannot otherwise to the world express. It was intended for you by the
unworthy Author, when the other Sermon (concerning Mutual Love) was put forth,
if the Printers slacknesse had not prevented, and I am sure, I have no reason
to alter my intentions. For my self, I wish, that the Sermon were but in any
respect worthy of your patronage, as you are in every respect worthy of its
dedication. For you, I wish, that you may indeed show, that you patronize it by
practicing it. And that your Zeal may not burn up your Moderation; nor your
Moderation choke your Zeal, is the prayer of,

Sir, October 25th 1656. Your Worships humbly devoted, Josiah Hunter.

To the Moderate Reader.
THat I am not ambitious of being seen in Print, this is no small Argument,
that I have suffered this Sermon (though ready for the Press) to lie beside me
these seven months, when I know, it was expected by diverse, to be made public
every week: That which has been a great encouragement, now at last, to expose
it, is not hope of gain or credit, but the present calmness and serenity of the
times, wherein a Sermon of Moderation shall not be so bold to look out, but it
shall be as acceptably taken in. When one presented a Treatise of Justice to
Antigonus (at that very time besieging a City) he told him, that he came out of
season; And it was the saying of a King, when a Treatise of Happiness was
offered to him, that he was not at leisure; And perhaps if this Treatise should
have been presented to public view, whilst we were in the heat of our civil
wars, it might have been thought to have come out of season, and few or none
would have been at leisure to read it: But now, after such a blessed cessation
of war, insomuch that Councels of War are turned into Councels of State, I hope
this subject will come in season, and even the Soldier will have leisure
enough to read it.

I know it is a very nice and tickle point, which whosoever undertakes to
handle, it will be expected from him, that he should find out the maximum quod
sic, and the minimum quod non: and that he should be like those men of
Benjamin, who could sling stones at an hair-breadth, and not miss, Jud. 20.16.
Antoninus Pius, for his desire to search to the least differences, was called
(in a by word) Cumini Sector, a Carver of Cummine seed. But a man cannot be too
exact in a subject of this Nature, in dividing (if it were possible) to an
hairs breadth between the two extremes of Moderation: wherein (I should be most
vainly conceited of my self) if I did not suspect, that I had failed. Yet this
I have to plead in way of Apologye for my self, that it is a subject whereof
few have written professedly; None that ever I saw, except Mr. Fuller in his
Holy State, of whom I think it no discredit to be a borrower, and so far as I
remember, I have not concealed any thing that was borrowed.

The reason why I entitle this Sermon (Loves Companion) is, because that
Moderation is always a Concomitant of Love, and likewise because I intended at
first, that it should have been printed with, and joined to that Sermon of
Mutual Love. If there be any thing else which I have promised, and thou
expectest, I shall (as God gives assistance, and this finds acceptance)
endeavor, according to my poor ability, to answer thine expectation; but for
the present I have engaged my self to add unto these something concerning the
Enemies of Love and Moderation, the greatest part whereof is at present ready.
In the mean time, if thou receive any benefit by this, Bless God, and pray for
the unworthy Instrument, who is

Thine to serve thee in our Lord Jesus, JOSIAH HUNTER.

Loves Companion.
Philipp: 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto all men: the Lord is at hand.
Text:



THere are two things, Beloved, which were never more needful to be pressed
than now; and they are Moderation and Zeal. Perhaps some may judge this at the
first reading to be a strange paradox, but it is a real truth; and if there be
any thing strange, it is in the times, into which we are fallen, that do at
once require both a great measure of Zeal, and a great deal of Moderation; for
who does not see, that in things of less concernment, mere notions and
speculations, how hot we are? here therefore is need of Moderation. But on the
other side, who sees not, that in things of weighty importance, both for matter
of doctrine and practice, faith and love; how cold we are? here therefore is
need of Zeal. How hot many men are in defending an opinion, and yet cold in
opposing an heresy? how hot many men are in opposing a ceremony, and yet
lukewarm in the maintenance of things of greater concernment? and the truth is,
I never knew the violent prosecution of speculations and politics, but it was
ever accompanied with a coldness and looseness in piety and practice. I shall
make choice of another opportunity to speak concerning Zeal, for the present
my subject shall be Moderation.

And for the right understanding of these words, you must Consider, that these
Philippians, to whom the Apostle directs his Epistle, were in a suffering
condition; as appears out of 1 Phil. 27. Only let your conversation be, as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, standing fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
salvation, and that of God; for unto you it is given on the behalf of Christ,
not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake, having the same
conflict, which you saw in me, and now hear to be in me. Upon these suffering
Christians therefore it is, that the Apostle lays this injunction, Let your
moderation be known unto all men; adding also a reason to enforce it, the Lord
is at hand: how at hand? that is, either for your present succor, as it is in
Psalm. 46.1. God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble. Or
he will come shortly to judgment, and put an end to all your sufferings, and
revenge all the wrongs offered to his people; as you have it, James 5.8. Be ye
also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. So
that though it be many years off in your account, yet it is not many days in
Gods account, with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.

Let your moderation be known to all men. The Vulgar Intetpreter renders it
Modestia vestra, your Modesty; which though it be an effect of Moderation yet
it is not moderation it self; no more than blushing can properly be said to be
modesty, because it is an effect of it; but as blushing proceeds sometimes
from modesty, so does modesty from Moderation. In the Original it is (...),
your equity, or rather equabilitie, or equal carriage, being neither too much
lifted up in wrath, clamor, or evil speaking, because of the sins of your
adversaries; nor too much dejected and cast down be cause of the oppressions
and sufferings, which you sustain from your adversaries. Let this your
moderation, or equal carriage (...) be known, that is, let it be such, that it
may be manifest; (...) to all men; not only your friends, but your enemies; not
only to the godly, and such as are well-affected to you, but likewise to the
wicked, and such as are ill-affected to you. Hence I might give you the
observation, That it is not enough, for a Christian to have grace, but he must
also in his conversatio^ manifest it, that it may be known to others, even all
men. But that which I intend is this,

That Christians ought to carry themselves so at all times, but especially in
suffering times, Observe.
that their Moderation may be manifest to all men.

For the improvement of this point, I will endeavor these three things, 1. To
show you what this Moderation is. 2. Why it is the duty of a Christian to
express it. 3. Why especially in suffering times. First, What this Moderation
is? to which I answer, first negatively, what it is not; where I remove three
things. 1. Moderation is not an halting between two opinions, when the through
believing of one of them is necessary unto Salvation. Elijah said unto the
people, How long will you halt between two opinions? If the Lord be God, then
follow him, but if Baal, follow him. 2 Kings 18.20. Such were they we read of 1
Zeph. 5. That worshipped, and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by
Malcham. This halting argues at the best, great weakness and instability both
of judgment and affection; if not a corrupt and rotten judgment and
affection. Contrary to this halting is upright walking, which is so often and
so much commended to us in Scripture. The integrity of the upright shall guide
them. Prove. 11.3. As for the Upright he directs his way, Prove. 21.29. And the
way of the Lord is strength to the upright, 10 Prove. 29. Though a man be weak,
yet if he be upright, the way of the Lord shall be strength to him, and his
uprightness shall guide him and direct him in the way. Halting therefore comes
from Hypocrisy, at the least, from unsettledness. We read in Mr. Fuller in his
Holy State.
Act. 27 12. of an Haven, that lay toward the South-west, and toward the
North-west. It is strange that it could have part of two so opposite parts,
North and South; sure it must needs be very winding: Yet there are some men's
Souls in such intricate postures, that they lie toward the Papists, and
toward the Protestants; and among Protestants there are many that lie toward
Anabaptisme, Judaisme, Arminianisme, etc. such as these we account not of a
moderate judgment, but of an immoderate unsettledness; or indeed, the
falseness of their hearts is rather to be feared, than the mere fickleness of
their judgments. Peter (and therefore no such wonder of other men, though in
these times eminent) was not altogether free from this halting between the Jews
and Gentiles, and therefore Paul withstood him to the face, and told him openly
of his dissimulation. 2 Gal. 11, 12, 13. Only observe what I say; I say that
Moderation is not an halting between two opinions, when the thorough believing
of one of them is necessary unto Salvation: Otherwise, if the thing be not
necessary unto Salvation, it may be Wisdom sometimes in a moderate man, to
suspend his judgment in himself, at least the declaration of his judgment
unto others.

The like also may be said in matters of practice: he is not a moderate man,
but a Newter, that holds off from both, when the Glory of God, and the good of
the Church or State does require him to engage himself on one side. Curse ye
Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, 5
Jud. 23.
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. verse. 18.
Whereas Zebulun and Naphtali are highly commended, because they jeoparded
their lives unto the death in the high places of the field. Such a one we
account not a moderate man, but an immoderate lover of himself, and his own
private interest, who stays in his Tent, when God calls him into the field; and
cannot be drawn from the smoke of his own Chimney to quench a public fire.
This is baseness of mind, as far below Moderation in the defect; as a proud and
ambitious adventuring of a man's self beyond his calling, and without a call, is
above it in the excess. He cannot be taxed therefore for a man that exceeds the
bounds of Moderation, who being fully assured and convinced of the lawfullness
in the general, and the present necessity in particular, does freely engage
himself, though it be to the hazard of his life, in the defense of the truth of
the Gospel, and the cause of God, against Papists, Socinians, Anabaptists,
Atheists, and profane persons, or whomsoever else of that same coin or stamp.

By what has been said, it is apparent, that upright Moderation differs from
halting Neutrality in two things, in Sincetity, and in Settledness: the latter
flows from the former; for therefore is a moderate man settled, because he is
sincere; for Truth is uniform, and always like to it self. The Philosopher
says of a just man, that he is like a Dye, which is every way even and like it
self, turn it how you will, it falls upon an equal botttome: the like might be
said of an upright man. But the Newter is like an unballasted ship, that toples
up and down in the Sea, and bends sometimes to one Shore, sometimes to another,
but Lands no where not but that the Ground is good to land on, but he is not
resolved yet, on which side he had best to land: and therefore he sails between
both, and to keep both in fair hopes, he salutes them sometimes on one side,
sometimes on the other, but he will Land on neither, till he see he can make
his own advantage. The moderate man is not afraid or unwilling to interest
himself in the necessary quarrels of the Church; the Newter, like a profane
Atheist, will engage himself on neither, but stands by and laughs at the
dissentions of both parties, and cares not much on whose side the Victory fall,
so it do but end in peace. He much weighs not whether Truth get the better of
Error in this quarrel, so that Peace do but get the better of Dissension, that
he may lead a quiet, for whether he lead a godly life or no, he does but little
regard.

2. This Moderation is not a Lukewarmness in those things, wherein Gods glory
is concerned; here it is a true Rule, Mr. Fuller loc. supr. cit. Turpe est
contra ardeuter perversa asserentes, nos pro veritate frigidiores inveniri.
Rust. Diac. lib. adversus Acephalos cited by Dr. Plafere in his Pathway to
perfection.
Non amat qui non zelat, and they that are thus lukewarm here, shall be too hot
hereafter in that Oven, wherein Dough-baked Cakes shall be burnt. And a great
shame it is for us to be cold in defending the Truth, when our Adversaries are
so hot in opposing it. Saint Paul's spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the
whole City given to Idolatry, Acts 17.16. How earnest also was our Savior,
when he drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple? then his Disciples
remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine House has eaten me up, John
2.15, 17. was not Nehemiah zealous when he contended with the Rulers, and said,
Why is the House of God forsaken? and in those days (says he) I saw men
working, and bearing all manner of Burdens on the Sabbath day, so I testified
against them, and I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them,
what evil thing is this, that ye do, and profane the Sabbath? And when diverse
Merchants came and brought ware to sell on the Sabbath day, I testified against
them, and said unto them, why lodge you al out the Wall? If you do so again, I
will lay hands on you. In those days also (says he) I saw Jews, that had
married wives of Ashdod, Ammon and Moab; and their Children spoke half in the
Speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews language; and I contended
with them and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their
hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your Daughters to
their Sons, etc. Nehem. 13.11, 15, 18, 21, 24, 25. How zealous also was Asa in
his Reformation, where he spared not his own Mother, but removed her from being
Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, and Asa cut down her Idol, and
stamped it and burnt it at the Brook Kidron? 2 Chronicles. 15, 16. And the same
Apostle that enjoins moderation in the Text, tells us also, That it is good to
be zealously affected always in a good thing. Galat. 4 18. and Nullum
omnipotenti deo tale est sacrificium, quale est zelus animarum. Paulo post;
sunt mnita bona, quae aguntur sacrificia, sed holo caustum non sunt, quia totam
mentem in amore spirituali minime incendunt. Greg. super Ezechiel homil. 12.
Gregory says, That the zeal of the Soul is the most acceptable Sacrifice to
God, and makes other Sacrifices to become whole-burnt-offerings unto the Lord.
God can less endure Lukewarmness, than if a man were altogether cold; for,
speaking after the manner of men, says he to the Church of Laodicea, I would
thou were cold or hot, so then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16. Will you say, he is a
moderate man, who can hear the Glorious name of God and his Son Jesus Christ
blasphemed, and yet his Spirit not boil within him, with a mixture of anger
and grief thereat? is he a moderate man, that shall suffer himself to be drawn
away to heresy or idolatry, without making any resistance, when Enticers to
Idolatry, how near soever, were to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 13.1. Or am I
moderate man, if being a Parent, Master of a Family, or a Minister, shall
permit an Anabaptist, an Arrian, Arminian or Papist to come and sow their seeds
of Errors in my Family and Parish, thereby to seduce my people? Certainly, in
such cases as this, a great measure of zeal is necessary, and some
extravagancies are excusable, as being errors ardentis amoris: to this purpose
that of Moses is observable, who having been in the Mount with God, and
received from him the Law in two Tables, coming down and beholding the
Idolatry of the people, his anger waxed hot, and he cast the Tables out of his
hands and brake them beneath the Mount, Exodus 32.19. wherein thongh Moses was
blameworthy yet the Scripture does not blame him, so well does God like of
zeal in such cases. Joel. 2.13
Rending of Garments were in use amongst the Jews at the Report of blasphemy,
and no where that I find condemned; only we are warned to rend the heart more
than the Garment, and if any one should censure a man for rending his Garments,
or such like action in these days at the hearing of blasphemy, I think he
were no less to blame than Eli, for passing the censure of drunkenness upon
sorrowful Hannah; 1 Samuel 1.13, 14.
remembering that of the Apostle, that if a man in this case, to outward
appearance, be besides himself, it is for God, 2 Cor. 5.13. Will ye call him a
moderate man, who living amongst vicious persons, given to drunkenness,
swearing, profanation of Gods day, and such like gross impieties, is nothing
affected therewith? then Lot was an immoderate man, whose righteous soul was
vexed from day to day with the unlawful deeds of the Sodomites: 2 Pet. 2.8.
much more David, whose eyes ran down with Rivers of tears, Psalm. 119.136.
because men did not keep Gods Law. That therefore is not moderation, but
lukewarmnesse, which the Lord does highly abominate and abhor.

Only mistake me not; I say, a moderate man is not lukewarm in those things,
wherein Gods glory is concerned; Otherwise, if the thing be indifferent, he is
also indifferent, and where the thing is neither good nor evil, he is neither
cold nor hot; but in matters of weight and importance, there is none more
zealous than he: For indeed, he thriftily treasured up his spirits against such
a time, who if he had formerly spent his Lungs about every trifle, would have
wanted breath to plead for things of greater concernment. Moderation therefore
and luke-warmness do exceedingly differ; the lukewarm man eyeth his own ends
and particular profit, the moderate man aims at the Good of others, and the
unity of the Church: the moderate man is indifferent in things which are
indifferent; but the lukewarm person is indifferent in things which concern
the glory of God: the moderate man is full of charity, which makes him
lukewarm in things which are mere circumstantial; the lukewarm person is
empty of piety, which makes him lukewarm in things which are altogether
substantial.

3. Moderation is not a toleration of things which are destructive unto the
essence or foundation of the doctrine and worship of true Christian Religion.
In things of lesser moment there is no man more suffering than he, he will
suffer others to use their liberty, yea he will abridge himself of his own
liberty, rather than be an occasion of casting any man's conscience into
straits. In such things he says, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man seem
to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. If ye
look at the pedigree from whence Contention is extracted, you shall easily
perceive, that Moderation is nothing a kin to it. I think W. Q. in a Sermon on
1 Cor. 11.16.
he spoke not amiss, who said; There was a bastard begotten by anger, nursed by
pride, and maintained by wilful contradiction, and when they came to give him
a name, they called him Contention. And, as was the name of the child, so was
his nature, for as soon as ever he began to go, he went backward, like the
Sea-crab; as soon as ever he began to read, he read backward, like the Hebrews;
as soon as he began to row, he rowed backward, evermore against Tide and
Stream. If this be the nature of Contention, it is altogether contrary to
Moderation, which in matters of indifferency will yield far to, and comply
much with others.

But if it be a thing that tends to the subversion of the substance and
foundation of Religion derogating from the person or office of Christ, the
mediator between God and Man; Gods free Grace in him; that full redemption
wrought, and salvation purchased by him; that exact obedience and abundant
thanks, which we owe to him for this work; or any other fundamental principle
of the doctrine of Christ; this a moderate man will by no means tolerate, for
he can do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. and for that faith, which was
once delivered to the Saints, he will earnestly contend, Jude, v. 3.
against all that creep in unawares, bringing in damnable heresies, ungodly
men, 2 Pet. 2.1.
turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the Lord Jesus
Christ, that bought them. He thinks a toleration in this sense, to be so far
from Religion, that it is against the very light of nature; as is apparent from
Moses his reply to Pharaoh; when Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and
said, Go ye sacrifice to your God in the land; Moses said, it is not meet so to
do, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our
God: shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and
will they not stone us? Exo. 8.25, 26. I have a few things against thee, says
Christ, to the Church of Pergamos, because thou have there the doctrine of
Balaam, thou have also the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate,
Rev. 2.14, 15. So says he to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, I have a few
things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel to teach and to
seduce my servants, Rev. 2.20. A toleratio^ of such doctrins and manners, as
the Lord hates, is most intolerable. We read in Ezekiel. 24.6. of a Woe to the
pot, whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it; But where
there is a toleration, I cannot see how the scum can be purged out; and
certainly, where Magistrates and Ministers will not be at the pains to take off
this scum, the Lord himself will do it, but it shall be in a fearful manner.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Woe to the bloody City, I will even make
the pile of fire great, heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and
spice it well, and let the bones be burnt: then set it empty upon the coals
thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness
of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed, Ezekiel. 24.9, 10,
11. Andronicus, though in other things bad enough, yet in this was good and
imitable, that he would not abide to hear any fundamental point of Religion
brought into question; insomuch, that when once two Bishops began to contend
about the meaning of that noted place, My Father is greater than I; Andronicus,
suspecting that they would fall foul upon the Arrian heresy, vowed to throw
them both into the River, except they would be quiet. A way (says my Mr.
Fuller.
learned Author, to quench the hottest disputation, by an inartificial answer,
drawn from such authority. That is a very remarkable passage, which Ammian.
Marcell. in vita Juliani, quoted by Mr. Baxter in his Eternal rest, part. 1.
chapter 7. sect. 14.
Ammianus Marcellinus makes mention of concerning Julian, the greatest Apostate
from, and Enemy unto the the Church of God in those times; when he could not
bring about his desired ends by a violent persecution, he proclaimed Liberty
(says he) for every party to profess and preach their own opinions, because
he thought this would make Christians fall out one with another, and ruin
themselves, which he by all his persecutions could not effect, so long as they
held and strove together with one mind for the faith of the Gospel; And so by
Liberty of Conscience (says he) and by keeping their children from the
Schools of learning, he thought to have rooted out Christianity from the
earth. It is an observable passage, and I shall only give you this Comment upon
it; that it is a very sad thing, when we shall make use of the most exquisit
and deep-studied plots and projects of our greatest enemies, to raise the
Church, which they made use of to ruin it: God, I know, can by his infinite
power and wisdom, bring order out of confusion, and light out of darkness; but
however, this course is in it self neither pious, prudent, nor safe: for not
Gods unknown power, but his known will is the rule that we must walk by. Thus
you see, what Moderation is not, it is neither Neutralitie, Luke-warmness, nor
a Toleration, in that sense I have showed you. I presume, that all these will
pretend, and boldly challenge kindred with Moderation; but it wholly disclaims
them, as the base offspring and brood of carnal policy; and not the true
children issuing from a sound judgment in matters of faith, sincere piety
toward God, and unfeigned charity toward our Brethren, as Moderation does. As
well may ye call prodigality liberality, covetousness good husbandry, and
pride neatness; as call either Neutralitie, Lukewarmness, or a toleration, by
the name of Moderation.

Having showed you, what Moderation is not, I come now to show you, as near as
I can, what it is; and ye may take this description of it in the general. What
Moderation is.
It is a grace, whereby we are enabled in all quarrels, causes and Conditions,
so to carry our selves, as not to offend God, or give any unjust offense to
men. A Grace that keeps us from extravagancies and extremes. Now this
Moderation may be considered three ways, in the judgment, in the affection,
and in the Conversation.

1. In the judgment.
1. Moderation in the Judgment is a mixture of discretion and charity in ones
judgment. Discretion (says Mr. Fuller) puts a difference between things
absolutely necessary to be done and believed unto Salvation, and those which are
of a second sort, and lower form, wherein more liberty and latitude is allowed,
in maintaining whereof the stiffness of the judgment is abated and suppled,
with charity toward his neighbor. A moderate man has his senses exercised to
discern of things which are formal, 5. Heb. 14.
and things which are fundamental, and knows that it is the maintaining of a
fundamental eror, which mak^rs a man a heretic, nor is it the mere
maintaining, but the obstinat maintaining such an error, that givs a man the
odious name of Heretic: Obstinacy is the dead flesh, which maks the green
wound of an an error, to fester into the old sore of an Heresy. The moderate
man considers that some differences of opinions are, as Lord Bacon in his
Advancement of learn.
one elegantly expresses it, as the striving of one Israelite with another,
and these Moses quiets, and parts them fairly; but other viz. Heresies fighting
against the foundation, are like the Egyptians fighting with the Israelite,
whom Moses smites down. 2 Exodus The moderate man distinguishes of Schismatical
and erroneous persons, as Mr. Fuller in his character of a good Bishop.
Physicians do of leprous people; some are infectious, others which have the
Leprosy called Elephantiasis, are not infectious; some are active to seduce
others, others quietly enjoy their opinions in their own consciences; the
latter by his mildness he easily reduces to the truth; whereas the Chirurgions
rigorous handling of it, often breaks the bone quite off, which formerly was
but out of joint: Toward the former he uses more severity, yet endeavoring
first to inform them aright, before he cause them to be punished; for to use
force first, before people are fairly taught the truth, is to knock a nail into
a board, without wimbling an hole for it, which then either not enters, or
turns crooked, or splits the wood it pierces.

A moderate man does not, like the two Disciples, presently call for fire from
heaven upon an Heretic; he would not have him presently punished, much less
put to death; yet he would have him restrained, that he may not seduce: for ye
will not suffer a man that has a running plague sore, to go abroad to infect,
though his shutting up be not in way of punishment, as if he were punished,
because he has the sore, but in way of prevention of contagion, as the
restraint of the Leper was under the Law; and if he will not be restrained, but
obstinately persist in his error, laboring to seduce others, then the moderate
person thinks, he is not any longer gently to be forborne, but more roughly
dealt with; for he will not be so charitable to the person of an heretic, as
to countenance his error, and prejudice the truth of Christ, which is of more
value than any man's life. Charity suffers long, and is kind, yet it rejoices
not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. 1 Cor. 13.4.6. Mr. Vines in a
Sermon, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Some argue against the punishment of Heretics with death, because it is
merely an intellectual error: Now, say they, you would not hang a Physician for
a murderer, who upon a mistake gives his patient a potion of poison instead of
good medicine, nor a madman that breaks out, and slays and kills such as he
meets with, because this proceeds from the laesion of his understanding: Now
(says Mr. Vines) though I do not concur with this supposal, that heresy is
a mere act of the understanding, for it has its denomination from (...) an act
of the Will choosing the error; yet thus far I go with it, that such pretended
Physicians, as hold that to be poison which is wholesome, and on the contrary,
are not to be licensed to practice, nor such mad men suffered to exercise their
fury. And if such a Physician shall, after he is forbidden to practice, yet go
on, and in the exercise thereof kill a man, I see no reason at all why he
should not be put to death, as one guilty of murder; for tho it proceed from
ignorance, yet it is a pertinacious ignorance.

In a word therefore, a moderate judgment is a judgment well-weighed with
truth and love, one that is neither credulous nor censorious. A moderate man
will not have any man's person in such admiration or estimation, as thereby to
be drawn to an approbation of his errors; for so he shall wrong the truth, and
wrong his own judgment; yet however he hate the error, he has a charitable
opinion of the person that holds it, and walks according to it, so it be not
with obstinacy, and a desire to seduce, conceiving that he is misled through
ignorance, and upon better information will recant: And if the error be in
things of less moment, that are merely circumstantial, he bears with him
altogether, being willing that he should speak as a child, and understand as a
child, and think as a child, till he come to more maturity of understanding, 1
Cor. 13.11.
remembering that of the Apostle, That the strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please themselves, Romans 15.1. Contrary therefore to
this moderate judgment, I say, is first a credulous judgment in the defect,
which is apt upon the good opinion it has of such a man's person, with better
liking to entertain his errors, whether in Doctrine or practice, and to think,
certainly there is not so much poison in them, because administered by such a
person. This though it does argue much honesty, yet it does also argue much
weakness. Charity is commendable, but not this credulity; I will never be so
charitable to any, as to wrong my own judgment and the truth, out of a good
affection that I bear to any man's person. Cypriani literas non ut canonicas
habeo, sed ex canonicis considero, and quod in iis divinarum Scripturarum
autoritati congruit cum laud ejus accipio, quod autem non congruit, cum pace
ejus respuo. Aug. adv. Crescon. lib. 2. ca. 32.
St. Augustines practice in this is worrhy our imitation; I do not hold (says
he) the writings of Cyprian (though a famous, godly, and learned Martyr) for
canonical, but I compare them with those that are canonical, and what I find in
them agreeable to the authority of divine writ, I do with his praise receive,
but what I find does not agree with the Scripture, I do with his leave refuse.
2. Contrary to this moderate judgment, is a censorious judgment, and this
respects a man's person, as the other did his error. A credulous man is apt too
much to like the Error for the Person sake; the censorious too much to dislike
the Persons for the Errors sake: now the moderate man goes between both; he
likes not the Error one jot better for the Persons sake, no more than he would
poison presented in a Golden Cup; neither does he at the first much more
dislike the Person for the Errors sake, till he see him proudly obstinate in
his Error after admonition, and take up a loose and carnal course of life in
patronage of his Error, then indeed he shakes hands with him, as one departed
from the Church, yet with Prayers, that he may rerurn again. A censorious
judgment therefore I call that, which is too rash, too harsh. 1. Too rash,
Judging things before the time. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Judging what men will be, before
they profess themselves to be so, and what they will do, before they do it. A
wisely suspicious judgment is commendable, but a rashly censorious is to be
condemned. 2. Too harsh, in judging of men's affections and conditions toward
God by one or two unjustifiable actions. 2 Kin. 9 and 10 cha.
For I am so charitable as to think, that as Jehu destroyed Ahabs house, and
the Idolatry thereof, which was a good action, with a corrupt intention; so may
good men sometimes do unjustifiable actions, yet with a sincere and upright
intention. Now as he errs in the one hand, that should go about any way to
justify their actions; so he erres no less in the other, that does rigidly
censure and condemn their persons and their affections, before they profess
themselves to be such. Hence it is, that we are in Scripture so much warnd to
to take heed of judging. Judge not, that ye be not judged, Mat. 7.1. Why do
thou judge thy Brother, let us not judge one another any more. Romans 14.10, 13.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the
heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. For though some men's sins are open before hand going before
to judgment, yet some men's they follow after, 1 Timothy 5.24. They are so secret
or else so specious, that they must be referred wholly to the judgment of the
last day. The sum of all is this, a moderate man, though he be not so judicial
or judging as to wrong others; yet he is so judicious as not to wrong himself,
or wrong the truth, and therefore I say, this Moderation in the judgment is a
mixture of discretion and charity.

2. Moderation in the affections.
2. This Moderation may be considered in the Affections, and that is, when a
Christian is seriously sensible of, and thereupon does hate and grieve for the
evils and errors practiced and professed by others, yet with much meekness.
First, I say, when he does hate the evils and errors practiced and professed
by others. Ye that love the Lord hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. I hate the works of
them that turn aside, says David, Psalm 101.3. I hate every false way, Psalm.
119.104. And the Church of Ephesus, how ever she was in some things defective,
having left her first love, yet says Christ, this thou have, that thou hate
the deeds of the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate. Rev. 2.6. Again, I say, a
moderate man, as he hates, so he grieves for the evils and errors of others,
When I came to Jerusalem, says Nehemiah, and understood of the evil that
Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a Chamber in the Courts of the house
of God, it grieved me sore, and I cast forth all the Household Stuff of Tobiah
out of the Chamber. Nehe. 13.7.8. Every Christian may be thus grieved, as
Nehemiah was, when such evils are done, though perhaps they have neither power
nor authority to rectify them. I beheld the transgressors and was grieved
(says David) because they kept not thy word, Psalm. 119.158. and Psalm 139.21.
Am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? There is but little love
in that man to God, who does not grieve at that which grieves God. But then in
the last place, I say, the Moderate man, though he do seriously hate and grieve
for the evils and the errors done and declared by others, yet it is with much
Christian meekness, without wrath and rancor, so far as humane infirmity will
permit. I know thy works (says Christ to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus)
and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them which are
evil, and have born, and have patience, and for my name sake have labored and
have not fainted. Rev. 2.2, 3. This is a most notable place to our purpose; I
know thy Labor and thy Patience, how thou have born, and have Patience, and
yet can bear them which are evil. This might seem to be a manifest
contradiction; but it is not; for it becomes a moderate Minister or Christian
with all his might to strive to redress such evils, as are within the compass
of his power and calling, and what he cannot redress, patiently to endure,
being sensible of them, hating them, and grieving for them, but not moved
thereby unto a fretting impatience, either against God or man. Thou can not
bear them which are evil, and yet have born, and have patience, and for my
name sake have labored and not fainted. The Lord will render unto every man
according to his work, to them who by patient continuace in well doing seek for
glory and honor and immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrightousnesse, indignation
and wrath. Romans 2.6, 7, 8. So the Apostle James having declared the wickedness
and oppression of rich men, which was not in the power of poor men to redress;
Be patient therefore, (says he) brethren, unto the coming of the Lord, be ye
also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh;
Grudge not one against another, lest ye be condemned; behold the Judge stands
before the door; take the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord,
for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience; behold, we count them
happy which endure, James 5.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. If when you do well, and suffer
for it patiently, this is acceptable unto God 1 Pet. 2.20.

Contrary to this Moderation in the Affections, in the defect, is 1. when men
are not sensible of, nor do they cordially hate and grieve for the evils and
errors of others, how loud and clamorous soever they are against them. So I
observe many, who are very invective against the corruptions, innovations and
heresies of the times, who yet are nothing affected with the dishonor that is
done to God by them, and the decay of religion. As in that uproar, which
Demetrius raised, some cried one thing, and some another, and the assembly was
confused, for the more part knew not wherefore they were come together, Acts
19.32. So is it among our people, generally they are confused, some cry out
against the Sects, heresies, and corruptions of the times for one thing, some
for another, and the greater part know not wherefore, only because that they
hear others. Some there are again, who profess to detest and be grieved at the
corruptions of the times, but it is out of a politic respect, as the Jews, Jo.
11.48. opposed Christ, If we let him thus alone, Timemus ne subvertamur, de
ignominia vero Christi omnium minime dolemus, Musc. super Joan. cap. 2. v, 17.
say they, all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away
both our place and nation. So they, if we let these Sectaries alone thus, not
the truth of God shall fall in the Streets and be trodden under foot, the
Church rooted out, Gods worship destroyed; no, but they will gather to an head,
over-runne us, take away our estates from us, and exercise tyranny over us.
This is the Ground of the grief of knowing worldly Politicians, not that they
care for the promotion of the Church, or the propagation of the Gospel; yet now
they profess to stand for them; the reason is, because the present interest of
the Church, is something linked with their own interest, and they do but
contend for the former with relation to the latter: For were the Church and
they at rest from the present disturbers of our peace, ye should have it as
much vexed and grieved with the scoffings and profaneness of these men, as now
it is with the schisms and heresies of the other. 2. Contrary to this
Moderation of the Affections in the excess, is wrath and swelling. Though
others do evil, yet that is no warrant for us to do evil. Fret not thy self,
because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass, cease from anger, and
forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise to do evil, for evil doers shall
be cut off, but those that wait upon the Lord, shall inherit the earth, Ps.
37.7, 8, 9. wrath and envying are numbered among the works of the flesh, as well
as seditions and heresies, Gal. 5.20, 21. and we are commanded to put off
wrath, anger and malice, as well as blasphemy, they being no less deeds of the
old man, and members of the body of death, than the other, Coloss. 3.8. Sure it
is, the wrath of man does not work the righteousness of God, James 1.20. And
therefore is meekness so much commended in Scripture, as an ornament of great
price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. And we are commanded, in evil times,
when the fierce anger of the Lord is breaking out, to seek righteousness, to
seek meekness, if that we desire to be hid in the day of the Lords wrath,
Zeph: 2.2, 3. Unto meekness it is, that so many promises are made, the meek
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
(inward, if they want outward) peace, Ps. 37.11. The Lord lifts up the meek,
Psalm. 147.6. He will beautify the meek with salvation, Psalm. 149.4. The meek
also shall increase their joy in the Lord, Isa. 29.19. It is a great honor to
our profession, and stops the mouths of false accusers, 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye
suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their
terrors, neither be troubled, but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence, that whereas they speak evil
of you, they may be ashamed, who falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

3. Moderation in the Conversation.
3. This Moderation may be considered in the Conversation, and that is, when a
man out of zeal to Gods Glory, keeping himself within the compass of his
calling, does speak and act against the evils and errors of the times he lives
in, and the persons he lives amongst, be they never so great; yet with much
modesty and reverence, especially if they be great. Now contrary to this, 1. in
the defect is, when men do not or dare not, according to the duty of their
general or particular callings, declare their dislike and detestation of the
evils and corruptions of the times and places they live in. This proceeds from
base pusillanimous fear and cowardice of spirit; whereas we are commanded not
to fear their fear, neither to be afraid, but to sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be our fear, and let him be our dread, and he shall be for
a Sanctuary. Isa. 8.12, 13. The fearful and unbelieving shall have their part
in the Lake, that burns with fire and brimston, Revel. 21.8. This Christ takes
for no better than a denial of him, as appears by the opposition, Mat. 12.32,
33. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my
father, which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my father, which is in heaven. Not openly to confess Christ
therefore, is to deny him, and if we deny him, he will also deny us, 2 Timothy
2.12. It is said of those that received the mark of the beast, that they
received it in their right hand, Rev. 13.16. a place which they might either
open or shut; and so either cover or discover the mark, when they pleased: but
those that receive the mark of the lamb, Christ Jesus, have it in their
foreheads, a place open and obvious to the view of all men, in testimony that
they are not ashamed of Christ, and will not either for fear or favor
dissemble him. For this you have an excellent place, Isay 44.5. One shall say,
I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel: Such shall be their undanted courage and resolution for God,
that they shall not be afraid to make profession in so many words, I am the
Lords, and to subscribe their name to it, when they had done. Now, this does
especially concern Ministers, who are purposely set up by God, To cry aloud, to
lift up their voice like a Trumpet, and to show the people their sins, Isa.
58.1. Whom God has set over Nations and Kingdoms, to reot out, and to pull
down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to plant, Jer. 1.10.
Whom God has deputed in his stead to judge, yea to judge whole Nations for
their wickedness, and to cause them to know their abominations, Ezekiel. 20.4. And
therefore they of all others should not be afraid of, or dismayed at the faces
of men, lest the Lord confound them before the people. Jer. 1.8, 17. They
should not be afraid of the words, nor dismayed at the looks of men, be they
never so rebellious, be they as sharp as thorns and briars, and stinging as
Scorpions, Ezech. 2.6, 7. but should, with Peter, testify and exhort, saying,
save your selves from this untoward generation, Act. 2.40.

And as it does concern Ministers especially, in respect of their particular
calling, so it does concern all men, in respect of their general calling, to
declare their dislike of the corruptions and evils of the times and places they
live in; having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reproving them, Ephesians. 5.11. withdrawing themselves from all such, as
are of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, as we are commanded, 1 Timothy 6.5.
2 Timothy 3.5. marking them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which they have learned, and avoiding them, for they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.17, 18. That so they
may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of
a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom they shine as lights in the world,
Phil. 2.15.

2. As fearful cowardice is contrary to Moderation in defect, so Turbulency is
contrary to it in the excess: and that is twofold, either in words or actions.
1. Turbulency in words: It is noted by St. Peter of those Heretics and
Enthusiasts, which he speaks of, that they speak great swelling words of
vanity, 2 Pet. 2.10. and Jude notes the same thing of them also, That their
mouth speaks great swelling words, and utters hard speeches, v. 15.16.
these hard speeches and swelling words are for the most part uttered against
Magistrates and Ministers; as Korah, with his company, gathered themselves
together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much
upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord
is among them; wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord, Numb. 16.3. This is the direct language of turbulent and
schismatic persons; and indeed it is the Lord Verulam's note, that if any
new sect has not two properties, it is not to be feared that it will spread;
the one is the supplanting or suppressing of Authority established; for nothing
is more populous than that; the other is, giving license to pleasures, and a
voluptuous course of life. And therefore let those, which profess themselves
such enemies to Sectaries (not their persons, but their opinions) take heed
that by their practice they do not approve of them in this particular.

Sure it is, the tongue is a most unruly member, and is not so easily tamed, as
the stomachfull horse, or guided as the unweildy ship; it boasts great
things, and is full of deadly poison, no man can tame it, Jam. 3.3.4. And it is
strange to see, what liberty some men (who pretend conscience) will assume unto
themselves in this; whereas it is said that Michael the Archangel, when he
contended with the Devil about the body of Moses, durst not bring a railing
accusation against him, but said, the Lord rebuke thee, Jude 1.9. The truth is,
railing is one of the last and basest unworthy shifts of a needy person, and it
is to be feared, he who uses it, has no better weapon. Therefore Paul gives
Titus charge, to put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers,
to obey Magistrates, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness to all men, Tit. 3.1, 2. That was as moderate, yet a
resolute answer, which the three Children gave to Nebuchadnezzar: If it be so,
our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of this fiery furnace, and he
will, but if not, be it known unto thee, O King (not O Tyrant, or Persecuter)
that we will not serve thy God, nor worship the graven Image which thou have
set up, Dan. 3.17, 18. Alike moderate, and yet resolute, was the answer of
Frederick the Electour of Saxony, who being prisoner to Charles the fifth,
was promised enlargement, and restitution of dignity, if he would come to Mass,
Summum in terris Dominum agnosco Caesarem, in Coelis Deum; In all earthly
matters I acknowledge Caesar as supreme, but in heavenly God. We are not to
revile any, much less the Gods of the people; such hot tongues as are
blistered with this venom, surely are set on fire of hell, and are far from
this Moderation.

Again, certainly, so much bitterness even in the just prosecution of the Sects
and errors of our times, must needs be condemned; and yet what a deal of it may
one meet with in the Press, and sometimes in the Pulpit: so much virulency and
bitterness, Romans 3.13, 14.
as if the poison of Aspes were under their lips, their mouths are so full of
cursing and bitterness. This does more inrage, but nothing more reclaim them,
who are given to schism and innovation, who are more proud, the more proudly
they are opposed, and come to increase, and be well liked of amongst ignorant
people, as persecuted men, because of such bitter opposition. A fool must not
be altogether unanswered; yet he must not be answered foolishly, for then we
are like unto him, Prove. 26.4, 5. Now there is nothing wherein a wiseman does
more bewray folly, than in being bitter, when he is in just contention with a
fool; it is but a sorry victory that a man gets by conquering of a fool, but if
whilst he strive with a fool, he can but rule his own spirit, that is a victory
indeed, more considerable than the taking of a City, Prove. 16.32. otherwise, be
the cause never so strong that a man defends, if he be passionate, he is weak;
and his weakness will his adversary (though without cause) be ready to cast as
an aspersion upon his cause; and ignorant people who have but little skill of
controversy, are in their opinions led for the most part by the actions of the
persons, their Logic lying altogether in inartificial arguments; as Jovinian
said to the Arrian and orthodox Bishops, contending for the faith, Of your
learning and subtle disputations, I cannot so well judge; but I can well mark
and observe, which of your behaviors is most peaceable and fruitful: So your
ordinary people are not so able to judge of men's parts, nor of the question
that is in dispute; but they can easily see whose carriage is most sober,
peaceable, and plausible; and their rule, most what is to judge of the cause by
the persons. Passion is one mark of a fool; Anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Eccl. 7.9. and Prove. 27.3. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a
fools wrath is heavier than them both. As a man that is light in his head with
drink, or with a disease, if he chance to fall, goes so much more sadly and
heavily to the ground, not able to stay or succor himself in his fall; so it
is with a fool, the reason why his wrath is so heavy, is because his head is so
light, and he has not reason to counterpoise his passion. When a wise man
therefore contending with a fool, shall break out into unseemly passion, what
can one say? As Demonax, when he saw one cruel in the beating of his servant,
Fie (says he) forbear, lest by the world you be taken for the servant: So it
may be said to a wise man, in rage striving with a fool; fie, forbear, lest by
the world you be taken for the fool. Nothing does so befool a man, as extreme
passion, this does make men fools, that otherwise are not, and show them to be
fools that are so: if we cannot tame violent passions; that they may yield to
our ease, we should labor at least to smother them by concealment, that they
may not appear to our shame. I confess indeed, a wise man dealing with a fool,
goes upon much disadvantage one way; he shall be sure to have many provocations
unto passion, his irrational reasons, incongruous answers, and groundless
distinctions, with his tedious Circumlocutions, must needs be very irksom and
unpleasing to a judicious man: and when a fool propounds a question, and it
come to be discussed, he shall, as most what he does, fly from the matter,
refusing to be kept within any limits, this is a very great provocation; and
his extravagancie in the Action, makes his Opponent sometimes extravagant in
his passion: but a wise and moderate man, knowing that he must expect no fair
dealing from a fool, should therefore arm himself accordingly beforehand with
humble prayer to God, and strong resolution within himself; saying that he
will, and praying that he may, take heed to his ways, that he sin not with his
tongue, but keep his mouth as with a bridle, whilst the wicked is before him,
Psalm. 39.1. I do not see how a wise man, when he flies from the matter he is
contending about, to fall upon the person that he contends with, can clear
himself before God or sober men. When a man contends with a fool, he does not
so much contend against him, as his error, for who, else, would trouble
himself with a fool? When a wise man therefore in the heat of contention shall
so far forget himself, as to leave the prosecution of the question, to fall
upon the person, surely this is more distempered heat than zeal; for he has
now strayed and gone from the business; and he, that makes the fool, and not
his folly, the Butt that he shoots at, does undoubtedly miss the mark: so he
may wound the person and make the fool rage, but leaves the error untouched.
Again, when a man's passion boiles so within him, as to send forth the scum of
evil language, or the froth of uncivil taunts against his adversary,
undoubtedly he has transgressed the bounds of Moderation. Neither railing nor
lightness become a wise man, any more than a grave parable does a fool. A fool
will rage and rail, but what then? do ye expect any better from a briar, than
that it should scratch? Wickedness will proceed from the wicked, as says the
proverb of the Ancients, but a wise man will keep off his hand, and keep up his
tongue, 2 Samuel 14.13. knowing, that if reason will not convince his adversary,
raising will but more exasperate and obdurate him. To shut up this, the
moderate man (if God see it good) desires life, and loves many days, that he
may see good, (and do much good) and therefore keeps his tongue from evil, and
his lips from speaking guile, Psalm. 34.12, 13. not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that he is thereunto
called, that he may inherit a blessing, 1 Pet: 3.9. For so did our Savior, he
left us an example behind him, that we should follow his steps, who, when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23.

2. Contrary to this Moderation, is turbulency in actions, and that is,
briefly, when men, 1: will be stepping beyond the bounds of their lawful
Callings, invading the Magistracy or Ministry, and attempting to reform abuses
and corruptions in Church and State, when they have no lawful call to it. In
his coal from the Altar, p. 244.
Mr: Ward wittily calls these men, Fires that cannot keep themselves within
their own hearths, Spirits that cannot keep themselves within their own
Circles. Such as these, if ye observe them, shall have many corruptions in
their own Families unreformed, which lie within the Compass of their duty and
ability to reform; and yet they, who have not the skill or will to reform
abuses in their own families, will be very hot in talking of reforming the
Church, and amending things amiss in the State. So ye never knew any men, that
would be presumptuously adventuring upon things, for which they have no
command, but they did grossly neglect other things most manifestly commanded.
Such men as these, are of most troubled and troubling Spirits; and I know not,
whether they trouble others or themselves more: Sure it is, they do trouble
others, and they do also trouble themselves, but with little thanks from
others. But what is the reason, that many among us should thus run out and
forget themselves? Surely they think, that if they should not censure others,
and find fault with something (says In his E^^position on Romans 12.3.
Mr: Parre) they should be accounted no body, and to be blind, and to have
little profited in knowledge, when rather this practice shows them to be blind
or ill-sighted: for if they did see well and perfectly, they would see reason
to persuade them to judge charitably of the State, in which they live, and to
keep themselves in their own Callings. When an old man takes a book to read, he
holds it far from him; I take it, not for the strength and goodness of his
sight, but for the weakness and dimnesse: So when our Schismatical and
contentious Spirits see so well afar off, and so ill near at hand, it argues
them to be dull and thick-sighted. When Peter enquired of Christ, What John
should do? What is that to thee? says our Savior, follow thou me, Joh. 21.21,
22. If things be thus and thus ordered in the Commonwealth and Church by the
wisdom of thy Governors, what is that to thee? follow thou Christ, by walking
conscionably in thine own calling: Tantumne abs re tua otii est tibi, aliena ut
cures? want thou work at home, that thou art so busy abroad? study to be
quiet, meddling with thine own business, as the Lord commands thee, 1 Thessalonians:
4.11. 2ly, As he is turbulent who goes beyond his calling: so he that carries
himself turbulently in his calling, opposing government, whether in Church or
State, settled by Authority, sowing divisions, and thereby laboring, as Judas
and Theudas, to draw away much people after him, Acts 5.36, 37. The moderate
man meddles little with Civil Government. Suppose it be usurped, let them look
to it that are the Usurpers; if he can but lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.
he is thankful to God, and obedient to man. It is not a kingdom, or any such
thing that he strives for, but only the kingdom of Heaven, and this he steals
from the world, whilst they are all busy, and in an hurly-burly about the
kingdoms, and government and greatness of this world. He loves not to make
parties, and draw away people after him; his principal care is, to draw his
family, and then his Neighbors, by a godly life and Christian exhortations,
and as many as he can by this means, unto heaven. In a word, the moderate man
is not ambitious, and therefore not turbulent, he had rather enjoy the Gospel
with quietness, than enjoy a Kingdom with tumult. He passes silently through
the world, without making any noise, or being pointed at with the finger, as he
goes along the streets; and if little, that is notable, be said of him; he is
sure, that there is nothing notorious done by him. So I have dispatched the
first particular, and showed you, as exactly as I could, what this Moderation
is, both in the Judgment, Affections, and Conversation. I hasten to the second
thing.

Why we are to express Moderation.
Why it is the duty of a Christian to express Moderation. 1. Because Christian
Religion does enjoin, and not only so (but where it is in truth and in power)
does serves religion, but to guide and govern our affections and Actions?
Therefore we are so much Christians, as we can rule our selves, the rest is but
form and speculation. If any man among you seem to be religious, and brideleth
not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain, James
1.26. It is but a vain religion and unprofitable, that does not at once both
teach a man, and enable him to rule his tongue, to bridle his passion, and to
keep himself within compass. Does the doctrine of Christianity, which is a
doctrine of the Cross and Self-denial, teach men to be immoderate?

2. As Christian Religion enjoyneth Moderation, so puts to shame such as speak
evil of us, and falsely accuse us, 1 Pe^: 3.16. Moderation puts a luster upon
all graces, and therefore is well called by Bishop Hall, the silken string
running thorough the pearl-chain of all virtues. What were Anger without
Moderation, but madness? What were Zeal without this, but a fury? as the lower
spheres of the heaven would soon set the whole world on fire, if they should
not be staid by the contrary course of the highest sphere in the firmament: so
the inferior affections of the mind, if not regulated by a moderate judgment,
and the mild motions of the Spirit of God, will soon over-heat and overthrow
all that a man goes about. The Poets shadowed out this, in Minervaes golden
bridle, wherewith she managed her winged Pegasus. Toll hanc and virtus vitium
erit, ipsaque affectio naturalis in perturbationem magis convertetur,
exterminiumque naturae. Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 49. Et fervor d^scretionem
erigat, and discretio fervorem dirigat.
Bernard calls Discretion or Moderation, Moderatrix and auriga virtutum: and
take away this (says he) and virtue will become vice, and natural affection it
self will turn into perturbation, and overwhelm nature. And therefore says
one, (quoting Bernard, but I cannot find the place) as zeal must erect our
discretion, that we be not too slow: so discretion must direct our zeal, that
we be not overhasty.

3. That known and generally received Maxim, which Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, Mat. 7.12. does strongly engage us
unto Moderation. For we would have others moderate to us, why should not we
then be moderate to others? David hit himself a foul blow, when he was so angry
against the rich man, that had violently taken away the poor man's lamb, and
resolved, that he should die; not considering what he had done to Uriah, 2 Samuel
12.5. How sparing men are of themselves, and how sparing would they have their
Brethren to be toward them, and yet how rigid they are to others? Some, says
Alii tam vehementer contra aliorum delicta zelantur, ut videri possent esurire
and sitire justitiam, si esset apud eos de suis quoque peccatis idem judicium;
sed nunc pondus and pondus utrumque abominatio apud deum. Nam contra alios tam
impudenter, quam inutiliter aestuant; seipsos tam incipienter, quam inutiliter
palpant. Bern. de advent. Dom. sermon. 4.
St. Bernard, are so zealous against the faults of others, as if they did
hunger and thirst after justice; which were very commendable, if they were
likewise as zealous against their own Sins, but says he, Pondus and pondus,
diverse weights are an abomination to the Lord; and they who do so impudently
and vainly censure others, do as foolishly and unprofitably flatter themselves.

4. The good of others and the peace of the Church do strongly engage us unto
moderation; Si virtutum finis ille sit maximus, qui plurimorum spectat
profectum, moderatio prope omnium pulcherima est; Ambros. de paenitent. lib. 1.
adv. Novat. ca. 1. If that be the chief end of virtue (says he) to respect the
profit of many, Certainly moderation is the most excellent. The answer of
Apollonius to Vespasian was full of excellent instruction; Vespasian asked him
what was Neroes overthrow, he answered, Nero could tune and touch the Harp
well, but in Government, sometimes he used to wind the Pipes too high,
sometimes to let them down too low; Nero we could never yet hit of the Golden
Mean, but have either been too high or too low. When I consider into what a
distracted estate our Church is brought through our mutual and immoderate
contentions, I cannot but think of the Prophets earthen Bottels dashed one
against another, Jer. 13.12, 13, 14. and of Philip Duke of Burgundy his
Emblem, Flint and Steel beaten one against the other, till both be wasted,
affording no other issue but Fire. Between our Yea, and your Nay said Inter
licet nostrum, and non licet vestrum, mutant and remigant animae Christianorum.
Optat. adv. Parmen. Mr. Ward in his coal from the Altar. p. 254.
Optatatus to the Donatists, the Souls of Christians waver and are unsettled.
And have not we brought it to the same pass by our immoderate quarrels among
our selves, that many a Christians soul staggers and is unresolved, others leap
aside into the Tents of Popery and multitudes perverted and become they know
not what themselves. We have made the Devil but too much sport already, who
has thrown in Bones to set us together by the ears, whilst he lets in the
common Enemy upon us. Moderation and Charity are the Builders of Churches;
strife about Trifles has wasted many famous ones, and placed the Temples of
Mahomet, where the Golden Candlestick was wont to stand. We pity the former
ages, contending about levened and unlevened bread, keeping of Easter, fasting
on Sundays, etc. the future ages will do the like for us. Oh that the Lord
would put into the hearrs both of Governors and parties to these quarrels, once
to make an end of these Midiniatish wars; that we might jointly pour out the
vials of our zeal upon the Throne of the Beast. God knows, the Church has not
lost, but the Adversaries of it have gotten as much by our immoderate
Domestical dissentions; a foreign Enemy cannot wish us a greater mischief, or
themselves a greater advantage, than this. This makes the Turks pray to God to
keep the Christians a^ variance, and encouraged one of their Emperors to say,
when his Council diswaded him from a war against the Germans by reason of their
multitude, that he feared them not, because sooner would his fingers be all of
one length, than their Princes be all of one mind. As (...) more grievous, and
less easy to be borne; for if we mingle sin with our sufferings, it is, as if
a man should put poison into some wholesome physic; besides, it is by patience,
that we possess our souls in all sufferings, Luke 21.19. and if through
immoderation and impatience, we shall be dipo^sest of our Souls in a time of
suffering, what a sad condition are we in then?

Use of Exhortation.
The use of all that has been said, shall be to exhort us unto Moderation, a
grace so excellent, and yet so much out of Grace with the times. I know indeed,
that moderate men are commonly crushed between the extreme parties on both
sides, and in this world (generally) they get the least preferment; it faring
with them as with the guest that sat in the midst of the Table, who could reach
to neither Mess, above him, nor beneath him. But to overballance these
temporal inconveniences of Moderation, I shall offer unto the Readers thoughts
the benefits of Moderation, as I find them to my hand, in an author eminent for
learning and Moderation. The benefits of Moderation.
And

1 A sound judgment.
1. A well-informed judgment is of it self a great preferment; which a man that
wants Moderation seldom has: for they that have so much heat, usually have but
little light, or else their light is no better than darkness, the mist of their
passions dims their eyes, that they cannot see clearly. Now what is of more
value next to truth, than a judgment well informed with truth? Certainly
(says the Lord Bacon) it is Heaven upon Earth, to have a man's mind move in
charity, rest in providence, and turn upon the poles of truth; all which a
moderate Christian has. It is the greatest folly in the world, for any man in
matters of Religion, to entertain a lie, or to possess himself of falsehood;
and therefore it requires the greatest care of a Christian, that in Religion he
be not found to receive any thing, which is not sound and grounded upon truth.
It is royal and noble liberty to be under the command of truth, and the more
subject a man is to truth, the more free, noble and raised he is: and of choice
a man should deliver himself up absolutely, without any reservation to truth;
it is a man's height and excellency thus to do. But it is a man's greatest
debasement to enslave his conscience to an error; there is not a greater slave
among the Turks than he that does charge his conscience with a falsehood. For,
for any man to lay stress, where God has laid none, or more than God has, is
to be superstitious; and Superstition is something worse than nothing, the more
it grows in being, it is worse than if it had no being, for it is a lie. A
superstitious man seems to serve God, when either he does not serve him at all,
or else according to his own fancy, and to observe God superstitiously is
worse, in some sort, than to neglect God, for it does abuse him. That which a
man takes for truth in Religion, he submits himself to it, lets it have
dominion over his conscience, frames his conversation so, that all his actions
may consist with it: and if a man entertain an error or a falsehood in this
manner, does he not then part with all his liberty, does he not make himself the
worst slave in the world? and as it is the greatest cruelty to die by a man's
own hand; so it is the basest slavery for a man to submit himself to an error
of his own forging. And again, it is the greatest wrong to God; for this is the
utmost capacity of a creature, for a creature to entertain this Maxim so, as
to say, I will submit my self and all my designs, and my will, will I submit to
it, and live by it; I say, thus for a man to receive an error, is the greatest
wrong to God, that can be; for no more can be given to God, and so much is to
be given to none but God and his truth. And shall a man serve an error thus? it
is much better to be no body, than to be somebody thus. That man is not true to
his own ease, who charge himself with any thing, whereof he has not
assurance. We should never stand deeply charged with any thing but truth,
falsehood is a barren thing, and affords no strength or comfort to him, that
suffers for it.

This is very necessary to awaken men, for we are very careless about right
information; all, but moderate men, take things upon trust, and pin their faith
to this or that man's sleeve. We must not build any other thing than the
foundation will bear, if we would have it abide a fiery trial by God or men, 1
Cor. 3.15. Good men's fancies, opinions and conceits, built upon Gods
foundations will not endure Gods fire. We should lay no more stresse upon any
thing, Superstitio, supra quod Stacutum.
than either Scripture or reason has put upon it. Religion has two very bad
neighbors in the world, on the one side profaneness, on the other superstition
(for so I choose to call it according to the notion of the word, though men
think otherwise) profaneness denies religion altogether, takes no notice of God
in the world; superstition adulrerates religion: profaneness strives to loose
man from God, by cutting him off from God altogether; and the superstitious man
thinks to bind men to God with things of his own devising, in doctrine,
worship, or discipline. This is that therefore, which Divines call Self-denial,
as to the understanding, when we deliver up our minds as a fair sheet of paper,
to be enstamped upon, and written with the finger of God alone. Any one that
steps out of the way, out of affectation or affection to a party, is wanting in
this part of Self-denial. Therefore superstition is a piece of folly under a
fair appearance of wisdom. The superstitious man thinks he observes God, but
his observance is a neglect, yea an abuse of God; he thinks he has made sure
of God, when he has bound him only, as Delilah did Sampson, with cords, which
will break, because God never submi^ted to them; he imagines such and such a
thing, but it is all nothing. We should have a care of error therefore; for a
man may be superstitious in the seeming good use of Scripture, yea where he
seems to be most for God, if he extend a place of Scripture beyond its sense,
or if he graft notions upon a Scripture, which neither that Scripture nor
another place will bear, he is superstitious; he is not an Interpreter of the
Scripture, but makes new Scripture; yea, though those notions pretend to
holiness, and have the zeal of holiness written on their foreheads: this very
thing is to lie for God, it is but pia fraus, an holy deceit, and so much the
worse, because it carries with it such a pretense; and it were better that any
truth of God were exposed to hazard, than that we should come in with a lie to
maintain it, for by thus doing a man makes himself the Master of truth, and
not a Subject to it.

Now this benefit has a moderate man, for the most part above others, a well
informed judgment; For he takes more deliberation to consider of things, than
hasty and hot spirits do; and whilst the two Adverse parties are wrangling and
scuffing about the question, he stands by, and gets the truth from them both;
and by his careful observance of them, better than they in their heat can
observe themselves, he is able to convince them both of error, if they be but
willing to refer their Controversy to Arbitration.

2. A quiet mind is another advantage of Moderation. 2. A quiet mind.
He that is immoderate is far from this inward tranquillity; for he is always
in an hurrie, and his immoderation arises from the weakness of judgment, and
the strength of violent and inordinate passions in him: and how can such an one
enjoy true quiet of mind? especially if you think upon that of Augustine, which
is most true, That God has so ordained it, that every inordinate affection
should be a punishment to it self. Any one but a moderate person, seeks for
quiet of mind by ratifying, and not by subduing his passions and affections,
which when he has done, his passions grow more by yielding, and he becomes a
slave to the forest Tyrant. If a man yield to his passion, is he any more
quiet? is he not much more troubled and distracted? is he not himself the
instrument of his own vexation, and suffers more violence in his own spirit,
than he offers to another? If a man's Covetousness or Ambition has made him
immoderate, and by the sale of his distempered zeal, he has purchased to
himself great revenues and promotions in Church or State, do ye think that this
man is now at quiet, does he not yet thirst after more, or else his wounded
conscience bleeds within him, and refuses to take any content in what he has?
true inward peace arises from the subjection of the judgment to the word of
God, and the subordination of the affections to such a judgment. And if so, I
will be bold to affirm, that inward peace is the sole privilege and prerogative
royal of a moderate mind, that has learned how to rule its self. The
immoderate person through the continnal mutinies of his passions, cannot but be
subject to perpetual unquietness, and like the troubled sea casting out mire
and dirt.

And that which adds to the inward quiet of a moderate person, Mr. Fuller.
is his outward security, for as his temporal hopes are not great, so his
fears are the less. He fears not to have the splinters of his party, when it
breaks, fly into his eyes, or to be buried under the ruins of his side, if
suppressed; that disgrace, which does usually attend the conquered party in this
kind, never troubles him. Thus, if he have not much Credit in the world, yet he
has much security in himself, which is far better; for if he have no hopes to
rise, he has no fears to fall. Yet farther.

3. A Conscience clear from Schism.
3. A moderate man's conscience is clear from raising Schisms in the Church, and
so is not in danger of that woe of our Savior, Luke 17.2, 3. Woe to him, by
whom offenses come, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck
and he cast into the sea. And in this he has more comfort, than they that rise
in this manner have credit. Woe to those Ministers that make unnecessary
divisions and parties among the people, that they may get themselves a name,
and be cried up by many followers. Certainly some men have a sad account to
give to God for the Rents which have been made in the Church. And if any godly
men have had an hand in them, I profess, I do even tremble to think, what a
sharp Conflict they shall have with themselves, when they come to die, and cast
their eye back upon the Church, which they have (though not intentionally)
miserably rent, and is not now in their power to heal; they shall be saved, but
vix, agree duriter, hardly, even as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. And for other men,
Ostendant quod volunt de Religione and fide digladiantes Theologi, etc. says
one, Let your Swashbucklers or Fencing-Divines pretend what they will for Faith
and Religion, they love neither Peace nor Truth truly, if they do not love
both. If we would have the waters of piety and verity to be clear, the way is
not to stir them and trouble them, but to let them settle in peace, and run
down in practice. 4. Constancy in Religion.


4. The Moderate man is a great deal more constant and durable in his Religion,
whilst violent men reel from one extremity to another. Mr. Fuller.
For being here in his way to Heaven, and jogging on a good Travelers pace, he
over-takes and out-goes many violent men, whose hot and ill-grounded zeal, was
quickly tired. The Moderate man is always going on in hi^ Journey toward
Heaven, whereas the other tumbles up and down, but rids no way.

Lastly, once in an Age it goes very hard, Universal applause and approbation
in the Conclusion
if the Moderate man be not in fashion, each extreme courts him to make them
friends; and surely he has a great advantage to be Peacemaker between two
opposite parties. Time-servers are ofttimes left in the lurch, if they do not
only give their word for the times in their constant discourse, but also give
their Bond for them, and write in their defense: such when the times turn
afterward to another extreme, are left in the briars, and as Mr. Fuller says
wittily, come off very hardly from the Bill of their own hands. And therefore
that Council, which he gives is (as every thing else, that he has written)
most excellent. He that intends to meet with one in a great Fair, and knows not
where, may sooner find him by standing still in some principal place there,
than by traversing it up and down: so take thy Stand upon some good ground in
Religion, and keep thy Station in a moderate, yet fixed posture, never turning
after the times to follow them, and an hundred to one, they will come to thee
once in thy life time, and be as glad to meet with thee, as thou would be to
meet with them.

Unto these inducements to Moderation, I will add only some directions,
Directions to make the word of God our Rule.
and that is this, If ye will be Moderate, make the written word of God your
Rule, for the written word is uniform and invariable, and so will he be (so far
as humane frailty will permit) that makes the word his Rule; he that keeps
close to the word will be uniform and always like to himself; not Proteus
like, ever appearing in a new shape. The word of God will balance and settle
the Judgment, and teach a man to get the Mastery over his own affections. The
word is called a Line, In Com. loc. de S. Scriptur.
Ps. 19.5. The Hehrew word (as says Gerrard) does signify the Tongue of a
Balance, Juxta quam aequilibrium constituitur, that makes the Scales even and
equal. As we desire Moderation therefore, and to be exact in it (because the
more exact it is, the nearer it comes to an exact aequilibrium) study to know
the word in its own sense, then submit to it, and make it your rule. For the
improvement of this direction, observe the following particulars.

1. Make the Word your rule, not the Times. A man cannot be truly moderate and
a Time-server; 1. Not the Times.
the times change so frequently, so suddenly, and sometimes so violently from
one extreme to another. The times under Dioclesian were Pagan; under
Constantine Christian; under Constantius Arrian, under Julian Apostate; and
under Jovian Christian again; and all within the Age of one man, the Term of
seaventy years (as says my Author) Could he have been a moderate man, that
should have been always of the Religion for the time being? Our English
History gives us an example of such an one, viz. A Bishop of our own Nation,
Dr. Kitchen, who for Covetousness could dissemble all Religions with the times,
so as to be the Popes sworn Servant, while he was an Abbot; an half Papist,
when King Henry had cast off the Pope; A Protestant under King Henry the sixth;
a downright Papist with Queen Mary; a Parliament Protestant again, when he
took the oath of Supremacy under Queen Elizabeth. Was this a moderate man? No,
but Cambden calls him rightly, the Calamity of his See: And such unsound and
unsettled men are the Calamity of this age. Dr. Playfere in a Sermon entitled
The Pathway to Persecution, having his Text out of Phil. 3. I press forward
toward the mark; says, that Temporizers run besides the mark by going about
in a Circle; they go about many things but bring about nothing; they do omnia
pro tempore, nihil pro veritate, all things for the Times, nothing for the
Truth; they make a period, but never a full stop; they are always learning,
but never come to the knowledge of the Truth. The Times are inconstant and
variable; How can that man's carriage then be equable and uniform, who makes
them his Rule to walk by, and not the Word? Religion has two great Enemies,
Superstition and Innovation; he that would not be an old Time-server, or a new
Time-server, must walk between these two, if he would make straight paths unto
himself, and his Guide must be the Word. My Son (says the wise man) fear thou
the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove.
24.21. Then we must meddle little with the times; for what is more given to
change than they? the Scripture bids us instead of serving the times, to save
our selves from them, Acts 2.40. to beware of them, See that ye walk not as
fools, but as wise, because the days are evil, Ephesians 5.16, 17. And then
the Apostle adds immediately, Wherefore be not unwise, but understanding what
the Will of the Lord is. We must labor therefore ye see (espec^ally in evil
times) to know what the will of God is, out of the Word, that we may follow
what is pleasing unto him, not that which is pleasing unto the times: otherwise
we are not wise; for the greatest wisdom is to comply with God, as I think,
and not with the times. The times that we live in, are evil and perilous
times; he that shall bind himself Apprentise to serve them 7 year, shall find it
very difficult to serve them, so as always to please the times; and impossible
always to serve them, and please God, and remain idem homo. 2. Not divine
Providence.


2. Make the Word you rule, not divine Providence. We may make dangerous
constructions of providence, if we rest in them, and do not compare these
Revelations of God in his works, with, and interpret them by the Revelation
that he has made in his word. When David had spent some time and serious
thoughts upon the study of that great point touching the outward visible
prosperity of wicked men, and the outward seeming infelicity of the godly, he
professes, Ps. 13.16, 17. when I thought to know this it was too painful for
me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end. It was
evident from the event, that it was the will of God, the Israelites should be
worsted in that war, which they upon just grounds undertook against the
Benjamites, Jud. 20. but if any should from hence have concluded, that the
Israelites quarrel was not good, because their success was bad, he would have
made a dangerous mis-construction of Gods providence in that particular case.
Therefore we must always make such a construction of the various works of Gods
providence, as may consist with the verity of the standing and invariable rule
of his word: otherwise we shall lose, and incautelously engage our selves to
justify any unwarrantable opinion or practice, which God in his just
providence, and for ends at present unknown to us, permits to spread and
prosper, when he does nothing less than approve of them to be true and just.
The judgments of the Lord are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out,
Romans 11.33. We must not think therefore to trace him here. If we can parallel
any passage of providence with the like instance out of Scripture, then we may
probably conjecture what the mind of God is in it; and what disposition of
heart, and frame of life the Lord does expect from us; otherwise we cannot; nor
are we to fashion our lives and hearts according to the providence of God, but
according to his word, which teaches us rightly to interpret providence. For
providence (generally) is a Revelation of what God had, unknown to us, decreed
from eternity that he would do, not a revelation of what he would have us do;
unless we know the mind of God in that Providence; which if we cannot gather
from the Word, our own fancies are but incompetent Judges, and long enough may
we conjecture ere we make a right conclusion. How many strange, and almost not
to be paralleld occurrences of Divine Providence have we in this Nation, within
a few years met withal? if any one now should have steered his course not
according to the Compass of the Word, but every present and sudden apparition
of Providence, I do not see how he could keep a straight path; but either he
must walk in crooked and by-ways, and ways not cast up; or else in Circulo, and
so for diverse years have rid no ground in his journey toward the heavenly
Canaan.

3. Make the Word your rule, 3. Not the examples of men.
not the judgment or practice of any man, be he never so learned and godly,
further than ye see them to be agreeable unto the Word. Christ's example we must
follow, for he left us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet.
2.21. But we may not write after any other Copy farther than we see it to agree
with the original. Be ye followers of me (says Paul) as I also am of Christ, 1
Cor. 11.1. So far as we see any man to follow Christ, we may follow him, but no
farther. I presume none of you will say, that we are bound to follow Peter,
though a Disciple and Apostle of Christ, in denying his Master. The best men
have had their errors and their failings, which we have therefore recorded, to
teach us that we should make the examp^^ of no man, how godly soever, our rule
to walk by: for there is not the best man living, but may and does sometimes
tread awry; and I am persuaded, the Lord suffers men of great parts many times
to fall into errors of judgment, and men of much grace to fall foully in their
conversation, lest others might have their persons in admiration, if not
adoration. Were I a man of the greatest learning, and holiness of Conversation
in the world, I think, I should as earnestly pray to God, that others might not
trust to me, as that I might not trust to my self; for when I once saw people
begin to applaud me, and imitate me, ex industria, I should then be very
fearful that the Lord would leave me to my self, as he often does the most
able and Godly men, that people may see they are men of like passions and
infirmities with themselves. The Psalmist, (says Bishop Hall) compares the Law
of God to a Lantern, Psalm. 119.105. Good example bears it. It is safe following
him, that carries the lighr; but if he walk without the light, he shall walk
without me. For that a man should be so wedded to any man's person, that he must
make no separation from his infirmities, is both absurdly servile and
unchristian.

And that for which I do the rather urge this so much is, because I see in
these times, wherein godly men are of such different opinions, many religious
persons judge themselves most secure from falling, by leaning unto the examples
of some eminently learned and Godly Ministers: but the safest way is to have
recourse to the word; examine by sound reasons, and plain testimonies deduced
from thence, whether their opinions or practices be good; and if ye find that
the Scripture approves of them, then make use of their example for imitation
and encouragement. As a man in a ship has his hand upon the rudder, and his
eye upon the Star: so it is good to have your eye upon the examples of godly
and judicious men; but let your hand be always upon the Scripture, let go your
hold of that, and ye will run the hazard of making a shipwreck of your faith. I
dare confidently say, that there is no truly godly man (though never so
learned) will presume so much upon himself, as to impose upon others his
example or practice, farther than he can prove the necessity thereof by
Scripture; why then should any man take a yoke upon him, which is not laid upon
him? I exhort you (says Vos hortamur, ut non quod vobis placet, aut nobis,
audire quaeratis; sed quod domino complacet and consonum est Scripturis, Basil.
in Hom. adv. Sabellian.
Basil) not so much to enquire what pleases you, and what pleases me, but
what is pleasing to God, and agreeable to the Scriptures. To what
inconveniences Augustine had bound himself, if he had strictly tied himself to
the Fathers before him (though very holy and of great learning) is well enough
known. But Alios Scriptores praeter Canonicos ita lego, ut quantalibet
sanctitate, doctrinave perpolleant, non ideo verum putem, quia ipsi ita
senserunt, sed quia mihi vel per alios auctores Canonicos, vel probabili
ratione, quod a veritate non abhorreat, persuadere potuerint. Aug. Epist. 19.
ad Hieron.
says he) other Writers, besides those that are Canonical, I so read, that
however they may excel in learning and piety, yet I do not think any thing to
be true, merely because they have thought so, unles they can persuade me by
certain testimonies of the Scripture, or probable reasons, that what they say
is true. But was Augustine willing that other men after him should deal with
his Writing, as he did with the Fathers before him? Yes, For Negare non possum,
nec debeo, sicut in ipsis majoribus, ita multa esse in tam multis opusculis
meis, quae possunt iusto judicio ac nulla temeritate culpari. Aug. ad Vincent.
Victor. lib. 2.
(says he) I neither can nor ought to deny, but as in the Ancients, so
likewise in my works there are many things which may justly and without any
rashness be blamed. Neminem velim sic amplecti omnia mea, ut me sequatur, nisi
in ^is, in quibus me non errata perspexerint. Nam propter^ae nunc facio libros
Retractionum, ut nec meipsum in omnibus me secutum suisse demonstrem. Aug, lib.
de Bon. perseverantiae, cap. 21.
And I would not have any man so to embrace all my writings, as to follow me in
all things, unless he see that I have not erred in them; for therefore do I
make my book of Retractations, to show that I my self have not in all things
followed my self. Above all,

4. Take heed of making crooked the rule, and wresting it to the maintenance of
any ertoneous or self-Conceit. This is a dreadful sin, and he who does it
knowingly, speaks lies in hypocrisy. It was a fearful evil for Lucifer to
say, I will ascend up and be like the highest; is it not as great a sin for any
to seek to make the highest become like Lucifer? so do they, that drag down the
Scriptures to patronize any erroneous opinion of their own heads, or any evil
of their own hearts; they go about to make the blessed God, and the Holy Ghost
the Father of lies, than which, what can be more abominable? It is accounted a
capital crime in a Commonwealth to put the States stamp upon false Coin; and to
put the stamp of the Spirit of God upon an error, upon a conceit of a man's own,
is certainly a great evil before the Lord. We do with one consent blame the
Papists, for making the Scriptures a nose of wax, that a man may writhe which
way he pleases; let not any Protestant practice that, which he so severely
condemns in a Papist, be his pretense never so plausible. Yet alas, who does
not see, and cannot but be grieved to see how horribly we wrest the Scriptures?
I should not have said it, but that it is too manifest to be hid. For it is but
usual, when men's opinions do not agree with the Scriptures, to wrest the
Scriptures to make them agree with their opinions. The reason of it is this,
Men receive opinions, before they have well examined them by the Scripture; and
having once entertained them out of weakness, the strength of their pride
causes them to use this means for the maintaining of them; and though it be
but some additional point in Divinity, yet now it must needs be fundamental in
Religion, because it is fundamental to his reputation. Optimus Scripturae
lector est, qui dictoru^ intelligentiam ex dictis expectat, potius quam
importat et retulerit magis quam attulerit, nec cogat id videri dictis
contineri, quod ante lectionem praesumpserit intelligendum. Hilar, lib. 1. De
Trin.
Hilarie has an excellent saying, with which I will shut up this head. He is
the best reader of the Scripture (says he) that carries away the sense of any
place of Scripture, after he has read it, not he that brings (...) with him,
and so even after a forcible manner, labors to make that appear to be in such
a Scripture, which he presumed was to be found there before he came to read it.
Men that do thus, may not unfitly be compared to Camels, that diink not of the
fountain (as Historians tell us) till they have pudled in them with their feet.

But what if the Scripture in some things be silent, prescribing only rules in
the general, as that 1 Cor. 14. Let all things be done decently and in order,
(not peremptorily enjoining any thing in particular to be observed in such a
Church) what is most convenient for a moderate man to do in such a case? To
this I answer, according to mine own judgment.

Fifthly, That it is most meet, where the Scripture is silent, we should
hearken to the voice of the Church; in the first place the Primitive Church,
and next to that, the Church wherein we live. Where the Scripture speaks, I
would have the Church only our Comment; but where the Scripture is silent, I
would have the Church our Text, and judge it most fitting that men should
follow the great Wheel of the Church, and move by that, not reserving any
proper poles or motions from the Epycicles of their own brains. It argues
monstrous pride in any man, in things of indifferency (for in things of
absolute necessity, I presume the Scripture is resolute) to lean unto his own
judgment, or the opinion of a party, against the general assent of the Church.
I see no reason, why our own Church should be slighted by them, that cannot
deny themselves to be her children; much less the Primitive and Ancient Church
from the Apostles times. Where the Scripture is silent, let us hearken and
adhere to her testimony. I knew that Novelty has much prevailed against
Antiquity in this last age, but I see little hopes of Moderation, till
Antiquity come into more estimation, than at present it is. In the mean time,
(for so I choose to break off abruptly) Consider what has been spoken, and the
Lord give you understanding and Moderation in all things.

FINIS.

