The first part of THE YOUNG. CLERKS GUIDE: OR, An exact Collection of choice
ENGLISH PRESIDENTS, accordig to the best forms now used.

For all sorts of Indentures, Letters of Attorney, Releases, Conditions, etc.

Very useful and necessary for all, but chiefly for those that intend to follow
the Atturney's practice.

Compiled by R. F. Counselor.

And Revised by an able practitioner.

LONDON, Printed for Humphry Tuckey, at the Black Spread-Eagle in Fleet Street.
1649.

THE TABLE.
Indentures.
AN Indenture of Annuity for forty years, if the party to whom it is granted
live so long. Page 1 An Indenture of Lease of a Message and Lands, with
extraordinary Covenants. 5 A Lease of a house and Land, made in consideration
of a sum of money, paying a Peper corn yearly, the fee simple being in the
Lessor. 11 An Indenture for justifying of actions, upon setting over a Statute
staple. 45 An Indenture between the Scavenger and Raker, for clensing the
streets. 47 A Lease made (in consideration of the surrender of a former Lease)
to continue for three lives, with good covenants. 54 A grant of an Extent,
penned by Mr Tho: Bromley then Scolicitor. 61 A short Lease of Tithes. 66 An
assurance of a Jointure to a wife, with remainder in tail. 73 A Lease of a
Fee-farme and certain Lands, with necessary covenants. 75 A Lease of diverse
lands, with a covenant to pay Heriots upon deaths, with many other necessary
Covenants. 110 A Jointure with diverse limitations, with a provisoe for
revocation. 117 A sale of the moity of a Rent reserved by Lease. 134 A charter
party for a ship voyage. 154 An Indenture of a Bargain and Sale of a Manor,
with necessary Covenants. 158 An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine. 164 An
Indenture of demise of diverse lands for a 1000 years, paying a pepper corn
yearly. 166 A Re-demise of the former demised premsses, to the same parties,
reserving the rent of 240 l. with a provisoe, that the same rent, etc. shall
cease, on the payment of 3000 l. for which this and the former demise are
securities. 169 A Lease of a house in London. 173 A Defeazance upon a Bond sued
to a Judgment. 177 An Indenture of partition, where one has a greater share
then the other, for which a sum is paid. 178 A Grant of a rent reserved by
Lease, during the term therein mentioned. 180 An annuity or yearly
Rentcharge. 181 An Indenture of apprentiship. 184 A Bargain and Sale of a
Manor. 185 An Indenture of defeazance for making void all former Statutes,
payment of a sum of money, and performance of Covenants. 189 A Conveyance of a
house and Lands in fee simple. 192 A Jointure made to a wife before Marriage.
196 A Lease to try a Title. 199 A Bargain and Sale of a house in London. 200
A Short Lease of a house in London. 205 An Indenture of Covenants for passing a
Recovery in the Common Pleas to cut off an entaile. 207 A Defeazence upon a
Statute. 264 A Defeazence upon a Judgment. 265 A Defeazance upon a Morgage of
Lands formerly forfeited. 266 Another Defeazence upon a Statute. 268 A Bargain
and Sale of household stuff. 271 A Bargain and Sale of Leases and goods, on
condition to pay debts and Legacies. 272 An Indenture for suing forth a Writ of
Entry of a Manor, to the intent a recovery may be had. 332 A Bargain and
Sale of Trees by Indenture. 334 An Indenture of Lease, of a house and Lands in
the Country, with extraordinary covenants in the same. 335 An absolute Bargain
and Sale of a house and lands, very strongly penned. 342 A Conveyance of a
Manor and lands, in consideration of a Marriage, etc. 347 An assurance of a
Jointure made before Marriage, with special covenants concerning children by a
former husband. 357
An Assignments.
AN assignment of a Lease of a house and lands to a third person upon
condition, that if a sum of money be not paid at the time appointed for
payment, then the assignment to be void. 15 An assignment of a Judgment, with
a Letter of Attorney therein incerted. 17 An assignment of a house and lands,
from one who had the same in Morgage, and was forfeited to him. 20 An
assignment of a Lease in nature of a Morgarge, for indemnity of certain
sureties bound in an Obligation, made to another in trust, for their use. 22 An
anssignment of a Recognizance, with very good covenants therein incerted. 35 An
assignment of a Bond, for performance of covenants. 62 An assignment of two
several Obligations. 80 An assignment of two apprentices, and their years to
come. 82 An assignment of a Lease of particion, wherein three are Lessours to a
third person. 88 An assignment of a wharfe-stock of wood, poles, lighters, etc.
with a general release, and covenants for quiet enjoying. 94 An assignment of a
Lease of a Message, diverse plats of ground, with buttals and boundals, wherein
is recited several former Leases of the premises. 97 An assignment of a
Lease, reciting diverse Leases with several covenants. 104 An assignment of a
Lease, with a provisoe to have the same again upon payment of a sum of money.
148 An assignment of lands taken upon extent. 151 An assignment of a Lease. 209
An assignment of the moity of a house and goods, with good covenants. 212 An
assignment of a Lease in trust, where the assignor is to take a further estate
in the premises. 216 An assignment of a Judgment. 217 An assignment of an
Annuity. 219 An assignment of a Judgment. 275 An assignment of a Statute. 278
An assignment of an Annuity. 281 An assignment of a Lease. 283 An assignment of
an Annuity. 329
Releases.
An Indenture of release of Lands mortgaged, the money being paid, and the
Lands sold to a third person. 27 A general Release. 39 A Release from one that
has lost his Counter-part of a Lease, from all breach of covenants therein
contained. 40 A Release of fines and forfeitures due to the King, and to the
Informer, upon the Statute of Recusancy. 42 A Resignation or release from one
used in trust of all the benefit he might reclaim by virtue of any covenant in
the Iedenture. 44 A general Release. 51 A Release of an Annuity. 64 A Release
of a Dower. 70 A release made where one has lost his articles of agreement. 71
A revocation of a pretended contract of Matrimony. 150 A Release of Lands on
performance of articles. 191 A Release from one used in trust, in an Indenture
of bargain, etc. 220 A Release for wast done. 223 Release of Errors. 224 A
general Release. 259 A Release of Errors. 259 A Release of Errors concerning
a Judgment. 260 A Release upon the receipt of a Legacy. 260 A Release of
Lands. 261 A Release of Lands, with a Covenant to lead the use of a Fine. 262 A
Revocation of uses. 263
Letters of Attorney.
A Letter of Attorney to receive debts only. 49 A Letter of Attorney general
to receive debts, etc. and to enter upon Lands, etc. 50 A short Letter of
Attorney to receive money due upon a Bond. 52 A Letter of Attorney to enter
upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease made to another. 85 A Letter of Attorney to
enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease. 86 A Letter of Attorney to take the
benefit of the forfeiture for breach of Covenants in a Lease. 147 A Letter of
Attorney to receive money due upon Bond. 225 A Letter of Attorney to enter upon
Lands, and deliver a Lease. 226 Another Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands,
and deliver a Lease. 227 A Letter of Attorney upon a Specialty being not due,
with Covenants to justify actions. 228 A Letter of Attorney general to
receive debts and rents. 231 A short Letter of Attorney of a Bond not due. 232
A short Letter of Attorney for setting over a Bond forfeited. 233 A Letter of
Attorney to take possession of Lands delivered by a Sheriff upon an extent.
235 A Letter of Attorney of a Bond. 277 A Letter of Attorney, or an Assignment
to receive and keep money due upon a Bond, wherein is a forfeiture, or nomine
penae upon discharge, without consent. 318 A Letter of Attorney to receive
rents. 319 A Letter of Attorney to demise, survey or sell a Manor. 321 A
Letter Attorney to delivera Lease upon the Land. 322 A Letter of Attorney to
keep Courts. 324 A Letter of Atturny to take pessession of lands, newly
purchased. 324 A Letter of Attorney for a Steward of a Manor, to receive
rents, with authority to impound and distrine. 325 A Warrant of Attorney to
confess a Judgment. 327 A Warrant of Attorney to acknowledge satisfaction.
328 Another Warrant of Attorney to acknowledge satisfaction. 328
Covenants.
A Provisoe that if the Lessor be minded to surrender his grand Lease, to take
a further state in the premises, then the demise to be void, nevertheless, on
condition to grant a new Lease for the remainder of the term within three
months after. 84 A Covenant that after default of payment, the possession of
Lands in Morgage, shall be delivered to the Morgagee, and all Deeds and
writings concerning the same. 146 A Covenant for leavying a Fine. 236 A
Covenant to surrender a Copyhold at the next Court. 237 A Covenant for further
assurance. 238 A Covenant that the premises are discharged of Incumberances.
239 A Covenant that he is lawfully seized in fee-simple or fee-taile, and has
power to demise. 240 A Covenant that the Lessee shall not cut down, or fell the
trees without consent. 241
Deeds.
A Deed of gift made to one, of all the goods and estate personal, and real,
of the giver, to save harmless from all Bonds. 9 A Deed of revocation of
certain uses specified in two several Indentures formerly made. 30 A Grant of
the revertion of certain Lands. 33 A Deed of Gift. 67 Another Deed of Gift. 68
A surrender of a Lease for lives, for the obtaining of a new Lease. 221 A
Revocation of a Suite. 222 A Discharge of an Apprentice from his Service. 225
Morgages.
A Lease of lands by way of Morgage, in confideration of a sum of money. 140 A
Morgage of lands for years, upon money lent. 156 A Surrender of Copyhold lands
by way of Morgage. 274
Bills and Wills.
A Bill of Sale. 26 The form an Award. 53 A form of a Will. 72 A plain Bill
of Debt. 258 A Bill Obligatory. 258 A Bill of Sale with a provisoe, that if the
money, with allowance, be paid by a day, then to be void. 270 The form of an
Award. 273 A Protection in time of Parliament. 273 The Peamble of a Will. 286 A
Revocation of a Protection, in time of Parliament. 333
Conditions.
A Condition to pay a sum of money, at two several payments. 48 A Condition to
pay money within 14 days after, if the parties bound in an obligation, pay it
not at the day. 87 A Condition to pay a sum of money to children at their
several ages, according to the Will, by which it was given, the Bond made to
the Executors. 92 A Condition for payment of money to a child when he comes to
age, and in the mean time to find it, and bring it up. 93 A Condition to pay
rent yearly for Lands, held from year to year, at the pleasure of the Leasor.
133 A Condition of arbitrament special and general. 241 A Condition for the
truth of an Apprentice, and to restore the value of all such goods, as by proof
shall appear he has imbeziled. 242 A Condition to acknowledge satisfaction on
a Judgment. 243 A Condition to make assurance of Lands upon request. 244 A
Condition to find one his Diet by the year. 245 A Condition to pay all such
charges as the Tenant shall be at, by reason of payment of his Rent, there
being controversy, concerning the title of the house. 246 A Condition to
discharge the Churchwardens and parishioners of a child, born in the parish.
247 A Condition for the surrender of Copyhold lands, and to cause the obligor
to be admitted Tennant. 248 A Condition for quiet enjoying a Manor, according
to an assignment. 248 A Condition for assurance of Lands. 249 A Condition to
pay a sum of money quarterly. 250 A Condition to lend a sum of money at a day
nominated, for certain time then following without interest. 251 A Condition
for a payment of an Annuity. 251 A Condition to pay a sum of money at a day,
and then to put in another surety for payment of another sum at a day then
following. 252 A Condition for performance of an award, concerning
co-partnership. 253 A Condition to save harmless from a Recognizance, taken
for ones appearence. 253 A Condition to save one harmless, for the bailing of
one at two several actions. 254 A Condition for payment of money, if a man be
nonsuited. 255 A Condition for performance of Covenants. 256 A Condition for
passing a Fine. 256 A Condition concerning Marriage. 257 A Condition to pay
money at the day of Marriage, or day of Death. 287 A Condition to deliver Hay
and Oats at a day. 287 A Condition to perform covenants. 288 A Condition for
the truth of an apprentice. 288 A Condition to stand to the award of
arbytrators, if they make arbitrament, and if not, then to stand to the
umpirage of an umpire. 289 A Condition that one shall not demise or aliene
without consent. 291 A Condition to justify all such actions, as shall be
co^menced by reason of a Letter of Attorney. 291 A Condition for payment of
money yearly with a clause to find new sureties upon death of any of the
former. 292 A Condition to save harmles from Legacies. 293 A Condition not to
molest, trouble or sue, for any matter or cause before past. 294 A Condition to
seal a counter-part by a day. 295 A Condition for acknowledging a Fine. 295 A
Condition to deliver an obligation by a day. 296 A Condition to pay money
during life. 296 A Condition to assign over a Lease by a day. 297 A Condition
for quiet enjoying of a Message. 298 A Condition not to do any act, to
prejudice the estate of the obligor, in a Lease, etc. 299 A Condition to pay
rent during a Lease paroll, and at the end to depart, leaving the goods and
household stuff mentioned, etc. 299 A Condition for quiet enjoyment of a
Message, etc. without interruption of any, during a Lease paroll. 300 A
Condition where money is given by Will to a wife and her children, and the
money being paid by the Executors to the husband, to be employed for their
benefit, the husband is bound to employ it well. 301 A Condition to save
harmless an Executor, he not meddling with the Executorship. 302 A Condition to
discharge an Executor from an Orphans portion in London, being received without
consent. 304 A Condition to justify all such actions as shall be commenced, by
reason of assignment of a Bill obligatory. 305 A Condition for the truth of an
hired servant. 306 A Condition to pay Rent reserved upon a Lease. 307 A
Condition to discharge Executors from the payment of Legacies to non-ages. 307
A Condition to save harmless from a Letter of Attorney. 308 A Condition to pay
money at the expiration of an apprentiship. 309 A Condition of an obligation,
wherein one Executor stands bound to another, to do his diligence in the
execution in a Will, and from time to time, to give a just account. 310 A
Counter-condition for performance of Covenants. 311 A Condition that the Lessor
shall pay money back, upon the Lessees dislike of a farm. 311 A Condition for
building and setting up a frame of a house. 312 A Condition to save three
harmless, which are bound for one by Recognizance to the Chamber of London,
for Orphans money. 313 A Condition from an Undersheriff to a High Sheriff, for
saving Harmless. 315 A Condition to save harmless a Surety, from a Bond of
arbitrament. 316 A Condition if money be not paid at a day, then to surrender
certain Copyhold land. 317
An Indenture of Annuity.
THis Indenture made the twentieth day of, etc. in the, etc. between I. S. of
Skipton in the County of York Esquire of the one part; and C. P. of London Esquire one
the other part, witnesses, That the said I. S. for, and in consideration of
the sum of, etc. to him before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
well and truly contented and paid, whereof and wherewith, he the said I. S.
does acknowledge and confess himself to be fully satisfied, and thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said
C. P. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them for ever by
these presents: Grant.
Has given granted and confirmed, and by these presents does give, grant and
confirm, for him and his Heirs, unto the said C. P. his Executors and
Assigns; One Annuity and yearly Rent charge of two hundred pounds of Lawful
money of England, to be issuing and going out of al those the Manors and
Lordships of Stanton, etc. withal and singular their rights, members and
appurtenances, in the said County of York: and out of all and singular the
Messuages, Cottages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, pastures, Commons, Moors,
Marshes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with the appurtenances, the several Manors, or any
of them had used, reputed, occupied or enjoyed; And also, out of all other the
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said I. S. within the said County of
York: To have and to hold, perceive, receive, and take the said Annuity or
yearly Rent charge of, etc. unto the said C. P. his Executors and Assigns,
from the day of the date of these presents, for, and during the full term and
time of forty years now next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended if the
said C. P. and R. P. Esquire Nephew to the said C. P. or either of them shall so
long live; To be paid at four most usual Feasts or Terms in the year, That is
to say, at the Feast of, etc. by even and equal portions, At or in the Church
porch of the Parish Church of, A Covenant to pay 10 l. for every day after
default, in payment of the Rent, and to re-enter.
etc. And the said I. S. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for and every of them, does covenant, promise, and grant to and
with the said C. P. his Heirs and Assigns, that if it shall happen the said
yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, over or after
any of the said Feast days, in which the same ought to be paid being Lawfully
demanded, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, That then
he the said I. S. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will not only forfeit, and
loose unto the said C. P. his Executors or Assigns, for, or in the name of a
pain or penalty, the sum of forty shillings of lawful money of England, for
every day that the said yearly Rent shall happen to be behind and unpaid, in
part or in all, over or after any of the said Feast days, wherein the same
ought to be paid as before mentioned: But also that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said C. P. his Executors and Assigns, and to and for every of
them from time to time, from and after every the said Feast days, wherein the
said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, should or ought to be paid as before is
mentioned, into all and singular the said Manors, and into every of them, and
into all other the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments to the said Manors or
any of them belonging, and into all other the premises, with all and singular
their appurtenances, and into every or any part or parcel thereof, at his or
their or any of their free wills and pleasures, to enter and distraine as well
for the said yearly Rent, as for the said sum or sums of money, which shall
or may happen or become forfeited or lost for or in the name of a pain as is
aforesaid; and for arrearages of them and either of them, if any shall happen
to be until the said C. P. his Executors or Assigns shall be fully satisfied
contented and paid And the said I. S. for himself, his Executors, Covenant
that he is seized in Fee, and has power to charg the premises with the
Annuity.
etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said C P. his exec. etc. that he
the said I. S. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these present
Indentures is solely rightfully, and absolutely seized in his demeasne, as of
Fee-simple to his own proper ^se and behoof, without any manner of condition
or limitation, or any use or uses, to alter, change or determine the same, of
and in the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenemens, and Hereditaments, and all
other the premises above named, with their appurtenances, and of every part
and parcel thereof: And that he now has full power and lawful authority, to
charge all and singular the same premises, with the appurtenances and every
part thereof, to and with the said Annuity or yearly Rent, etc. in manner and
form above declared; And also that the same Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and all other the premises now are, and so from time to time, and
all times, for and during the said term of forty years (if the said R. and C.
or either of them, shall so long live) shall and may remain and continue
liable, sufficient and avert to and for distress, and and distresses of the
said A. and of his Executors and Assigns, as the cause in that behalf shall
require, for and concerning the said yearly Rent, and other the premises, and
every parcel thereof; And the said I. S. for himself, etc. That he the said I.
S. his Executors and Assigns, shall and will from time to time and at all
times hereafter, for and during the space of five years next ensuing the date
hereof, at the reasonable request of the said C. P. his Executors and Assigns
or any of them, at his or their or any of their proper costs and charges in
Law, do make, knowledge, suffer, cause and procure to be made knowledged and
suffered, al and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing
and things, devise and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the further more
perfect and better assurance, surety and sure making of the said Annuity or
yearly Rent charge of, etc. to the said C. P. his Executors or Assigns, for
and during the said term of forty years, it the said C. and R. do so long
live, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, as by the
said C. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or by any of them, or by
any of their Council learned in the Laws, shall be reasonably devised, advised
or required. In witness whereof, the parties aforesaid to these present
Indentures, have not only interchangably set their, etc. but also the said J.
S. has given and delivered C. P. ten shillings current English money, in the
name of seizin of the foresaid Annuity or Yearly rent, charge, etc. before
mentioned. Dated the day and year first above-written.

An Indenture of Lease, with extraordinary Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. between C. B. of, etc. of the one part; and J. S. of
Stretton, in the County of, etc. Witnesses, that the said C. B. for and in
consideration of, etc. has granted, set and to Farm-let unto the said J S. all
that his Message or Tenement set, lying and being in, etc. aforesaid, Together
with all Houses, Barns, Buildings, Yards, Orchards, Crofts, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Commons, Profits and Commodities whatsoever, to the said Message or
Tenement of right, in any wise, belonging, lying within the Town or Fields of
Stretton, aforesaid; All which Message or Tenement, with all other the
premises, are now in the occupation of the said, J. S. (except and always
reserved) out of this present Lease, all manner of Trees growing or being in or
upon the said premises, or any part thereof. To have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, with all Houses, Barns, Buildings, Yards, Orchards,
Crofts, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Commons and Profits, with their
Appurtenances, as is aforesaid (except before excepted) unto the said J. S. and
his Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, unto the full end and
term of twenty and one years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended: Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said Term, unto the
said C. B. and to the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such issue to the right Heirs inheritable to the premises, the yearly rent of,
etc. At the two Feasts in the year, That is to say, at th'Annunciation of our
Lady, and Saint Michael the Archangel, by equal portions, and doing service to
the Court of the said C. B. his Heirs and others aforesaid, at his or their
Manor of S. aforesaid, and as often as it shall be kept there, at or upon
reasonable summons or warning, as other tenants of the said Manor do, or
should do; And at the decease of the said J. S. and such his Assigns, as
hereafter by him shall be nominated or appointed dying Tenants of the
premises, to pay his or their best Beast unto the said C. B. and to such as
the remainder or reversion of the said Manor shall come unto, in the name of
a Heriot: And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, etc. to be behind or
unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of, etc. next after any of the said
Feasts at which it ought to be paid (if it be lawfully demanded) That then, and
from thenceforth, it shall be lawful unto the said C his Heirs, and all and
every other the persons above named, to whom the right thereof shall appertain,
as aforesaid, into the said Message or Tenement, and all other the premises,
with th'appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain
and re-possesse, as in his or their former estate, this Indenture or any thing
therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And also it is
covenanted and agreed, that it shall and may be lawful unto the said J. S. and
his Assigns, to lop the trees growing upon any parcel of the premises
heretofore lopped at all times convenient, for the necesssary fencing of the
hedges: For reparatitions.
And the said J. S. does covenant and grant for him, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, to and with the said C. B. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them: That he the
said J. S. and his Assigns, shall make and do, or cause to be made or done, at
his and their own proper costs and charges, all and all manner of reparations
in and upon the premises before by these presents granted and letten from time
to time, when and as often as need shall require, during the said term of, etc.
and so well and sufficiently repaired, shall in the end of the said term, or
other sooner determination of this present Lease, yield up and leave the same.
To do suit belonging to the Mils of the said Manor.
And further shall from time to time, during the said term, do his or their
suit to the Mill or Mils of the said C. B. within the said Manor of S.
aforesaid, all such Corn and other grain whatsoever, as the said J. S.
aforesaid, does or may accustomarily use, to grind or cause to be ground, to be
at the same Mill or Mils ground: And it is further covenanted and agreed
between the said parties, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
C. B and his Heirs, or any to whom the right thereof shall appertain, as
aforesaid, if it be their pleasure at any time hereafter, during the said term,
to make any exchange of parcel or parcels of the Lands or Meadows, or any part
or parcel of the premises belonging to the said Message or Tenement, to take
and to have the same at his or their will and pleasure, giving and allowing
unto the said J. S. and his Assigns, as much land in quantity and goodness
for the same, in such place within the Fields of S. aforesaid, as by the
judgment and discretion of four of the Tenants of the said C. B. and his Heirs,
or any to whom the right thereof shall appertain, as aforesaid, then dwelling
in S. aforesaid, shall be adjudged, nominated and appointed: And the said J. S.
covenanteth and grants, etc. That he the said J. S. or his Assigns, shall
yearly during the said term, at seasonable times, due and convenient in the
year, plant or set in and upon the premises, six handsome young trees or
saplings of Oak, Elm or Ash; and them so planted and set, shall from time to
time, yearly cherish, preserve, sustein and suffer to grow and increase to the
most profit, use and behoof of the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.
Provided always, and it is fully conditioned and agreed between the said
parties, that the said J. S. shall not at any time hereafter, demise, grant,
let, set, assign, or by any other ways or means, put away or depart with the
said Lease, Term of Years, Message or Tenement, and other the premises, with
the appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, or do procure or suffer to be
done, any act, deed or thing whatsoever, whereby the same, or any part or
parcel thereof, shall or may at any time hereafter, revert, descend, or come
unto any person or persons whatsoever, other then unto his Wife and Child at
any time during the said term, without the consent of the said C. B. or his
Heirs, and other the persons aforesaid, first had and obtained in writing under
his or their hands and seals, upon pain of forfeiting of his Indenture of
Lease, any thing herein contained to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said C. B. covenanteth for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to warrant and defend the said Message or Tenement, and all
other the premises above letten, unto the said J. S. and such his Assigns as
are above expressed, against all persons pretending any title to the same,
from, by or under him the said C. B. his Heirs or Assigns during the said
term, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. In witness
whereof the parties first above named, to these present Indentures
interchangably have set their hands and seals Yeoven the day and year first
above written. Annoque Dom. 1636.

A Deed of Gift made to one to save him Harmless from all Bonds.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I. I.P. of
etc. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Know ye, that I the said I. P.
as well for the imdempnity, discharge and saving harmless of R. B. of etc. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators and every of them, off and from all manner
of Bonds and writings obligatory whatsoever, wherein the said R. B. is and
stands bound for me the said I. P. in any sum or sums of money to any
person or persons whatsoever; as also for diverse other good causes and
considerations me hereunto especially moving, Have given granted, Grant.
bargained sold, and confirmed, and by these presents do give, grant, bargain,
sell and confirm unto the said R. B. All and singular my Leases, goods and
Chattels whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what kind, nature, quality
or condition soever the same are or be, and in what place or places soever the
same shall or may be found, as well in my own custody and possession as in the
hands, custody and possession of any other person or persons whatsoever, To
have and to hold all and singular the said Leases Goods and Chattels, and all
other the premises with the appurtenances to the said R. B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and
behoof for ever: And I the said I. P. and my Heirs, all and singular the said
Goods and Chattels and other the premises unto the said R. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use as aforesaid,
shall and will warrant and for ever defend, by these presents. Provided
always, that if I the said I. P. my Executors Administrators or Assigns or
any of us, do or shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter clearly
acquit and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmles the said
R. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all his and their Goods
Chattels, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, and every of them, off and from
all and singular bonds and writings obligatory whatsoever, wherein, or whereby
the said R. B. at the request and for the debt of me the said I. P. is and
stands bound to any person or persons whatsoever, in any sum or sums of
money, and off and from all manner of Actions, Suits, Charges, troubles,
expenses and demands whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise hereafter
happen, come, grow or be to or against the said R. B. his Executors or
Administrators or any of them, for or by reason or means of the same
obligations or writings Obligatory, or any of them, or any thing in them, or
any of them mentioned or contained, that then this present Deed or Grant and
every thing herein contained, shall be utterly void and of none effect, any
thing herein before specified to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; In witness whereof etc.

A Lease of a House and certain Lands made in consideration of a certain sum
of money, the Feesimple being in the Lessor.
THis Jndenture made etc. Between M. C. of etc. Gentleman, And Anne C. his wife
on the one part, and T. E. of etc. Esquire on the other part, witnesses that
the said M. C. and Anne his wife, for and in consideration of the sum of etc.
of lawful money of England to them in hand paid, before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by the said T. E. whereof and wherewith they the
said M. C. and A. do acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied, contented
and paid; and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit
and discharge the said T. E. his Executors, Admistrators and Assigns, All that
his Manor house with the Rights members and appurtenances thereof situate,
lying and being in Arlescot, in the parish of N. in the County of W. And all
that Close of pasture commonly called or known by the name of etc. containing
by estimation forty Acres be it more or less; And also all that Close of
pasture, commonly called or known by the name of the middle pasture, containing
by estimation twenty Acres, be it more or less: And all that close of pasture
etc. All and singular which said closes and other premises are, or late were
in the tenure or occupation of the said M. or of his Assignee or Assignees; And
are situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid in the said County of N. and also
all other Messuages, Houses Edifices, Buildings, Dove-houses, Orchars, Gardens,
Tenements, Meadows, pastures, feedings, woods, underwoods, Commons, wast
ground, Moors, Marshes, Rents, Reversions, services, profits, Commodities and
Hereditaments whatsoever of them the said M. C. or A. C. or either of them
situate, lying and being in Alescot aforesaid or N. or in either of them in
the said County of N. To have and to hold the said Mansion house, Closes of
Meadow pasture and errable, and all and singular other the premises with their
and every of their appurtenances, before by these presents demised, and every
part and parcel thereof unto the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns from the Feast day of etc. last past before the date hereof, unto the
full end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete
and ended, yiedling and paying therefore Yearly during the said term unto the
said M. C. and A. his wife and their heirs and Assigns, one pepper corn at the
Feast of, etc. if the same shall be lawfully demanded; And the said M. C. for
himself, and for the said A. his wife, their Heirs Executors Administrators,
and Assigns and for every of them, does Covenant promise and grant, to and with
the said T. E. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every
of them by these presents in manner and form following, that is to say, That
he the said M. C. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents
stands and is lawfully seized in his Demeasne as of Fee, of and in the said
Mansion house, several Closes, and of and in all other the premises before,
by these presents, demised or mentioned to be demised with their and every of
their appurtenances, without any manner of condition or limitation of use or
uses, to alter change and determine the same: And that they the said M C. and
A. or any one of them now have or has full power and authority to demise and
grant the said Mansion house, and other the premises, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said T. E. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form as aforesaid. And
also that the said Mansion house, Closes, and other the premises before by
these presents demised or meant, mentioned or intended to be demised, and every
part and parcel thereof now are, and by and during the said term of, etc. by
these presents granted shall be, remain and continue unto the said T. E. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns of the clear yearly value of, etc. at the
least over and above all Charges and reprises; And further that he the said T.
E. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, under the Rents, Covenants,
Grants, and Agreements in these presents contained, shall and may at all times
hereafter, and from time to time during the term hereby granted and demised or
meant, mentioned or intended to be granted or demised quietly, and peaceably
have, hold, use, occupy and enjoy the said Mansion house, Closes, and all other
the premises, and every part and parcel of them, with their and every of
their appurtenances: And the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, shall or may
receive, perceive, and take to his and their own proper uses and behooss,
clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of, and from, all manner of former
Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Statute-merchant, and of
the Staple Recognizances, Intrusions, Judgments, Executions, Rents,
Charge-Rents, Seck-Arrerages of Rents, Debts, and duties to the Kings Majesty;
And of and from all other Charges, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had made, committed, done, or suffered by the said M. C. and A. or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other
person or persons whatsoever; And moreover the said M. C. for himself, and for
the said A. his Wife, their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and for every
of them, does Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said T. E. his
Executors and Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by
these presents, that he the said M. C. and A. his Wife, their Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during
the time and space of five years next ensuing the date hereof, upon all and
every reasonable request and requests to him or them, or any of them, to be had
or made by the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of
them, and at the costs and charges in the Law of him the said T.E. his
Executors, or Assigns, or some of them, do make, knowledge, execute and suffer,
or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed and suffered all and every such
further lawful act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the Law
whatsoever, for the better confirmation of these presents. And for the better
and further assurance, surety, sure making and conveying of the said
Mansion House, Closes, and other the premises, and every or any of them, with
their and every of their Appurtenances, for and during the said term of years
hereby granted, or mentioned to be granted unto the said T. E. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, as by the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or by
his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of the same Lease and premises to a Third person in Trust, upon
condition, that if the money be not paid, the Assignment to be void.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between T. E. of, etc. on the one part; and T.
C. of, etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas M. C. of, etc.
Gentleman; and A. C. then Wife of the said M. by their Indenture of Lease,
bearing date the, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did demise,
grant and to farm-let unto the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all that his Mansion House, with the rights, members and appurtenances
thereof, situate, lying and being in Arlescot, in the Parish of N. in the
County of N. and all that Close of pasture, commonly called or known by the
name of the Great Close, containing by estimation, forty Acres, be it more or
less: And also all that Close of Pasture, commonly called or known by the name
of the Middle Pasture, containing by estimation, forty Acres, be it more or
less: And all that Close of Meadow, etc. All and singular which said Closes,
and other the premises, then or late were in the tenure or occupation of the
said M. his Assignee or Assignees, and are situate, lying and being in
Arlescot aforesaid, in the said County of N. And also all other Messuages,
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Dove-houses, Orchards, Gardens, Tenements,
Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods, Commons, Wast-ground, Moors,
Meadows, Marshes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits, Commodities and
Hereditaments whatsoever, of them the said M. C. and A. C. or either of them,
situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid; and N. or in either of them in the
said County of M. To have and to hold the said Mansion House, Closes of Meadow
Pasture and errable, and all and singular other the premises, with their and
every of their appurtenances, by the said Indenture of Lease, demised or
mentioned to be demised; and every part and parcel thereof unto the said T. E.
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. then last
past, before the date of the same Indenture of Lease unto the full end and
term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended,
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said Term, unto the said M.
C. and A. his Wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said M. One Pepper
Corn only at the Feast of, etc. if the same shall be lawfully demanded, as in
and by the same Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants,
Articles, and Agreements therein contained more fully and at large it does and
may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said T. E. for and
under the proviso or condition hereafter in these presents mentioned and
expressed has bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents
does fully, clearly and absolutely bargain, sell assign and set over unto the
said T. C. his heirs and Assigns, all the estate, right, title, interest,
property, possession, term of years, Claim and demand whatsoever, which he the
said T. E. now has, may, might, should or in any wise ought to have or claim,
of, in or to the said Mansion house, closes of Land and other the premises,
with the appurtenances by the said Indenture of Lease demised; and in and to
every or any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, provided always, that if the said T. E. his Heirs
Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall not well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T. E. his Executors Administrators
or Assigns, the sum of etc. without fraud, etc. That then this present
Indenture, and all and every Covenant, Grant, Article and Agreement therein
contained, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect; any thing
herein before specified to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding,

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Judgment, with a Letter of Attorney therein inserted.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, we I. H.
Clerk, Parson of, etc. and Oliver Buck of, etc. son and Executors of I. B.
late of, etc. Gentleman deceased send greeting: Whereas there is a Judgment of
400. l. depending in the Court commonly called the Kings Bench at Westminster,
against E. S. of F, etc. Esquire and R. S. of F. aforesaid Gentleman, at the Suit
of me the said I. H. and of the said I. B. Deceased, as by the Record thereof
remaining in the said Court of Kings Bench, more at large may appear, upon
which Judgment, there has been. Execution lately prosecuted and taken forth
Now know ye that we the said I.H. and G.B, for diverse just causes and valuable
considerations, us hereunto especially moving, Have granted, transferred
Assigned, and set over, and by these presents do clearly and absolutely Grant,
Transfer, Assign and set over unto Anthony H. of Lincolnes Inn, in the County
of Middlesex Gentleman, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, as well the
said Judgment of 400. l. aforesaid, as also all the Benefit, Commodity, Sum
and Sums of Money, profit and advantages whatsoever, that now is or hereafter
shall be obtained or gotten, by reason or means of the same Judgment, of any
Execution, or Extent thereof, or thereupon, to be had, sued, executed or
obtained; And all the Estate, Title, Interest and Demand whatsoever, which we
the said I H. and O. B. or either of us have, or ought to have, or claim of,
in and to the said Judgment of 400. l. or any sum of Money, Lands,
Tenements, or other things, which by virtue thereof, or of any Execution,
Process, or proceedings thereupon sued, shall be recovered, obtained or
gotten; And further, we the said I. H. and O. B. do by these presents make,
ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint the said A. H. to be our true and
lawful Attorney for us, and in our names, or the name of either of us, to Sue
and Prosecute the Execution, upon the said Judgment, and upon satisfaction
given, of any other end, Composition or Agreement made concerning the
premises, to acknowledge satisfaction, or to make and do any other Release and
discharge for the same; and all and every other Actor Acts, thing or things,
whatsoever, as shall be requisite and needful to be done, in or about the
premises, which we Covenant, promise and grant to allow, ratify, establish
and confirm by these presents; And we the said I. S. and O. B. for us and
either of us, our Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant
to, and with the said I. H. his Executors Administrators and Assigns by these
presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, that neither the said
I. B. in his lifetime, nor we the said I. H. and O. B. nor any of us have
heretofore made, done or committed any Release or other Discharge of the said
Judgment, or of any Extent or Execution which has been thereupon Sued or
Executed, nor we the said I. H. and O. B. or either of us, our Executors or
Administrators, at any time hereafter shall, or will make, commit or do any
Release, or other Act or thing whatsoever, whereby the said Judgment, or any
Extent or Execution which has been thereupon Sued or Executed, or which shall
be thereupon sued or executed at any time hereafter, by the said A. H. or his
Assigns, shall be in any manner of wise hurt, hindered, disabled, debarred or
extinguished, without the consent of the said A. H. his Executors or Assigns
thereunto first had and obtained in writing under his or their hands and seals,
And further, that we the said I. H. and O. B. our Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and every of us, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time
to time upon request made and at the costs and charges of the said A. H. and
his Assigns, maintain, justify, allow and confirm all such lawful actions,
suits, process, Extents, Executions and proceedings whatsoever, as have been
or hereafter shall be brought, sued forth or prosecuted against the said E. S.
and R. S. or either of them, their Executors or Administrators, or their, or
any of their Lands, Tenements or goods, upon, or by reason of the said
Judgment of four hundred pounds above mentioned; And that he the said A. H.
his Executors and Administrators, shall and may peaceably and quietly have and
hold, receive and enjoy, to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, all such
benefit, sum and sums of money, Lands, Tenements and other things, as by virtue
of the said Judgment or any Extents, Execution, Process or proceedings
thereupon brought or to be brought, sued or prosecuted, shall be recovered,
obtained or gotten, without the let, suit, trouble, eviction or disturbance of
us the said I. H. and O. B. or either of us, our Executors or Administrators,
and without any Account or other thing to us, or any of us to be therefore made
or given.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a House and Lands from one, who had the same in Morgage, and
was forfeited to him.
THis Indenture made, etc. between W. B. of. etc. on the one part, and G. H.
of, etc. on the other part: Witnesses: That whereas B. C. of, etc. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. (and so go forward with the recitals) And whereas
in the said recited Indenture of Assignment, there is a proviso or condition
contained for redemption of the premises, upon payment of one hundred pounds
of, etc. on the sixth day of, etc. which then should be, and since has been in
the year of our Lord God, etc. At or in the etc. as in and by the said Proviso
or Condition whereunto relation being had more fully, and at large it does and
may appear, which said sum of one hundred pounds, etc. or any part thereof was
not paid or tendered to be paid to, or for the said W. B. at the day or place in
the Proviso of Redemption limited for the payment thereof, and yet remains
unpaid, by reason and means whereof, the said Message and other the premises,
and the whole estate, Lease, right, title and interest of the said B. C. in and
to the same, became forfeited unto the said B and he thereby was and now is,
and so shall be lawfully interessed and possessed in the same premises and
every part thereof, during all the residue and term of years which then were,
and yet are to come and unexpired of the term granted to the said C. B. in and
by the said Indenture of Demise abovementioned. Now this Indenture further
witnesses, That the said W. B. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to
him in hand paid by the said G. H. at and before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, whereof and wherewith, etc. Has given and granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and
absolutely give, grant, etc. unto the said G. H. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, as well the Message, Yards, Gardens, Orchards and Closes to the
same adjoining and belonging; Together also with all and every the errable
Land, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said Message belonging, or in any wise appertaining: And
all other the premises, with the appurtenances whatsoever, in and by the said
Indenture of demise granted to the said B. as aforesaid: As also all the
estate, right, title, interest, property, possession, term of years, claim and
demand whatsoever, which he the said W. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, now have, has, may or might, should or in any wise ought to have or
claim of, in or to the said Message, and other the premises, with
th'appurtenances, and every or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, by
force and virtue of the said Indenture of Morgage or Assignment above recited,
or either of them, or any thing in them, or any of them mentioned or contained,
or by any other ways or means whatsoever: together with the same Indenture of
Demise and Morgage aforesaid, and all and every other Writings and Minuments
concerning the same. To have and to hold the said Message, Yards, Gardens,
Orchards, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Indentures of Demise and Morgage,
Writings and Minuments, estate, tight, title, interest and term of years, and
all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, before by these
presents bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said G. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to
his and their own proper uses and behoofs, in as large, ample and beneficial
manner and form to all intents, constructions and purposes, as he the said W.
B. now has, may, might, should or in any wise ought to have and enjoy the
same, by force and virtue of the same Indenture of Lease or Demise, or the said
Indenture of Morgage aforesaid, or either of them, or any thing in them, or any
of them mentioned, expressed or otherwise howsoever (A Covenant for discharge
of Encumbrances) In witness whereof, etc.

A Morgage of a Lease for Indemnity of certain sureties bound in an obligation
made to another in trust, for their use. 16 13.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between H. H. of, etc. Gentleman, on the one
part, and R. M. of, etc. I. N. and R. D. of, etc. Gentleman, on the other part:
Witnesses, That whereas, etc. as in and by the said Indenture of Lease amongst
other things more fully and at large appears. And whereas the said I. N. and
R. D. at the request, and for the debt of the said I. H. together with him, in
and by one Obligation with Condition endorsed, bearing date with these
presents, are and stand jointly and severally bounden unto R. S. of etc. in the
sum of, etc. for the true payment of, etc. on the, etc. at or in the, etc. As
in and by the said recited Obligation and Condition thereof more at large it
does and may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the said I. H.
for the Indemnity and discharge of R. and D. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and every of them, of and from the said recited Obligation, and
all sum and sums of money therein mentioned and contained, and from all
actions, Consideration.
suits and demands concerning the same: Has given, granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely
give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said R. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said Message or Tenement,
and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part thereof by the said Indenture of Lease demised, and every part and parcel
thereof; as also all the estate, right, title, interest, property, term of
years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said H. H. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, now have, may, might, should or in any wise ought to
have or claim of, in and to the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, with the appurtenances, and every or any part or parcel thereof, by
force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein
contained, or by any other ways or means whatsoever; together with the said
recited Indenture of Lease. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement,
Habend.
Indenture of Lease, estate, right, title, interest, term of years, and all and
singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, before by these presents
bargained, or sold, or meant, mentioned or intended, to be hereby given,
granted, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof, unto
the said R. M. his Executors, and Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of
these presents forwards, for during and until the full accomplishment of all
the residue of all the said Term of, etc. now to come and un-expired, granted
by the said Indenture of Lease, in as large, ample and beneficial manner and
form, to all intents, constructions and purposes, as he the said H. H. now
has, may, might, should or in any wise ought to have and enjoy the same by
force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein
contained, or otherwise howsoever. Nevertheless upon special trust and
confidence, that he the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and every of them, shall stand and be interessed and possessed of and in the
said Message or Tenement, and all other the before bargained premises, with
th'appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, to the only proper uses
and behoofs of the said I. N. and R. D. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. And the said H. H.
for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant
to and with the said R. M. his Executors, etc. and to and with every of them by
these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say, That the said
recited Indenture of Lease at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, is a good, perfect sure and indeficible Lease in the Law of or for
the said Message or Tenement and premises thereby demised, and so shall
stand, remain and continue unto the said R. M. his Executors and Assigns to the
uses before mentioned, for and during the term of years thereby granted and
un-expired: And that he the said H. H. now has full power, And that he has
power to demise.
good right, true title and lawful authority to give, grant, bargain, sell and
set over the same premises and every part thereof unto the said R. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns to the use aforesaid, in manner and form
abovementioned, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents (A
Covenant for quiet enjoying, and from Encumbrances) Provided always, That if
the said H. his Heirs, Executors, Proviso.
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said R. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns the said sum of etc.
on the etc. at the place aforesaid, for and in full and clear discharge of the
said recited Obligation and Condition abovementioned; that then this Indenture
to be void and of none effect: this Indenture or any thing herein contained to
the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Bill of Sale.
KNow all men by these presents, I. W. of etc. for and in consideration of the
sum of etc. of lawful money of England to me in hand paid by I. S. of etc.
Goldsmith, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
wherewith I confess my self to be fully satisfied and paid; by these presents
have bargained and sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely
bargain and sell unto the said C. S. in plain and open market within the City
of London, one Chain of Gold with round links unsoothered, weighing twenty
ounces of gold weight; and one gold ring enameled, set with a small table
Diamond. To have and to hold the said Chain of Gold and Ring, to the said R. S.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs for ever. And I the said W. G. my Executors and Administrators, and
every of us, the said Chain and Ring unto the said R. S. his Executors and
Administrators, against all people shall and will warrant, acquit and for ever
defend by these presents. Provided always, That if I the said W. G. my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, etc. or any of us, do well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full
sum of etc. on the etc. at or in the etc. without fraud or Coven: that then
this present Bill and the bargain and sale of the said Chain and Ring, shall be
utterly void and of none effect, or else to stand and abide in full force and
virtue.

A Release of Lands Morgaged.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between A. N. of etc. Esquire, on the one part;
and Sir M. H. of etc. Knight, on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the
said A. N. by his Indenture bearing date the etc. for and in consideration of
the sum of etc. by I. H. of etc. well and truly to be paid in manner and form
as in and by a Proviso contained in the said Indenture, is mentioned, limited
and declared; did bargain and sell unto the said I. H. and to his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that his Grange or Farm of etc. with th'appurtenances in
the Parish of A. in the County of S. parcel of the possessions of the late
dissolved Monastery of W. in the County of etc. and all other his Mannours,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods,
Leets, Courts, Liberties, Franchizes and Hereditaments whatsoever they be
withal, and singular their appurtenances situate etc. all and singular which
said premises the said A. W. late bought and purchased to him and his Heirs of
the said I. H. Together with all and singular Messuages, Houses, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, etc. and Hereditaments whatsoever they be, to the said Grange or Farm
of etc. and other the premises before mentioned, or any part thereof belonging
or in any wise appertaining or accepted, reputed, taken or known as part,
parcel or member thereof or heretofore used, occupied, demised, letten,
possessed or enjoyed as part or parcel thereof. To have and to hold all and
singular the premises to the said I. H. and his Heirs for ever; in which said
Indenture there is a proviso contained, that if the said I. H. his heirs
Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some of them should fail in the
payment of the sum of, etc. unto the said A. W. his Executors or Administrators
at the day or place in the said Indenture specified, that then the said
Conveyance should be void, as in and by the said Indenture more at large it
does and may appear, And whereas the said J. H. has conveied and assured all
and singular the premises unto the said Sir N. H. and his heirs before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents Now this Indenture Witnesses, That
the said A. W. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to him the said A.
W. in hand well and truly satisfied and paid by the said W. H. before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents; And also in consideration of the full
discharge and release of the condition and proviso aforesaid, and at the
special Instance and request of the said I. H. has demised, released and
quite claimed, and by these presents does for himself and his Heirs Remise,
Release and quit Claim unto the said Sir N.H. and to his Heirs for ever, the
Condition and proviso abovementioned, and also all the Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, Claim, Reversion, Condition, Proviso and Demand whatsoever, which he
the said A. N. now has, or by any manner of ways or means hereafter shall or
may have of, in or unto any part or parcel thereof; and also of, in and unto
all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which the said A. W.
has at any time purchased to him and his Heirs, of him the said I. H. To have
and to hold the said Grange or Farm, and all and singular the premises, with
the appurtenances unto the said Sir N. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to
the only proper use and behoof of the said Sir N. H. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever absolutely without any Condition or Limitation whatsoever: and the
said A. N. for himself, his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, does
Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said Sir N. H. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents in manner and form following (viz.) That he the
said Sir N. H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may from time to time and at
all times for ever hereafter, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said Grange or Farm, and all and singular the
premises, with the appurtenances conveyed and released, or meant, mentioned or
intended to be conveyed or released by these presents, without the let, suit,
trouble, disturbance or Eviction of the said A. W. his Heirs or Assigns; and
without the lawful let, suit, trouble, disturbance or Eviction of any other
person or persons, lawfully claiming any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, in,
out of, or into the premises, or any part thereof, from, by or under the said
A. W. his Heirs and Assigns, or by his, their, or any of their means, act,
consent, assent, privity, agreement or procurement, other then of the said I.
H. his Heirs and Assigns, claiming from the said A W. by virtue of the
assurance aforesaid, and also that all and singular the premises, and every
part and parcel thereof, shall and may from time to time, and at all times for
ever hereafter continue and remain unto the said Sir N. H. his Heirs and
Assigns, free and clear, and freely, and clearly exonerated and discharged of,
and from all and all manner of former and other gifts, grants, bargains,
sales, etc. had made, done, or committed by the said A. W. his Heirs or
Assigns, or by his, their, or by any of their means, Act, Assent, Consent,
privitie, agreement or procurement (except before excepted) And the said A. N.
does further for himself, his Executors etc. That he the said A. W. his heirs
and assigns shall and will from time to time and at all times before the Feast
of etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at the proper costs and charges in the
Law of the said Sir W. H. Do and execute or cause to be done and executed, All
and every such further Act and Acts, thing and things, device and devises as
shall be reasonably devised, advised, or required by the said Sir H. H. his
heirs and assigns, or by his or their council learned in the Law; for the
better assuring, and sure making of all and singular the premises with the
appurtenances unto the said Sir N. H. his heirs and assigns, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents; Be it by Fine or Fines, Feoffement
or Feoffments, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, Recovery or Recoveries,
with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, release, confirmation warrantie, or
by any other ways or means whatsoever:

In witness whereof etc.
A Deed of certain uses of Revocation
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come R. R. of
London Esquire sends greeting, whereas the said R. R. in and by two several
Indentures or Deeds bearing date the etc. whereo^ the one is made between the
said R. R. and G. W. of etc. and I. H. of etc. Gentleman on the other part; and
the other of them is made between the said R. R. of the one part, and the said
G. W. an^ and I H. of the other part; whereupon a fine was afterward in due
form of Law acknowledged by the said R. R. and A. his wife did assure and
entaile unto the said W. R. and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten,
with certain remainders over and amongst other things; all those Lands, Medows,
Pastures and hereditaments, with their appurtenances in N. in the County of
etc. containing by estimation etc. and lately purchased by the said R. R. of
one etc. and then in the term of etc. or of his assigns, and in and by the
said several Indentures, did likewise assure and entaile unto the said Sir R.
and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, with certain remainders, and
amongst other things, all that the Manor of Lindgate, with the royalties,
rights, members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever in N. and A in the County
of etc. and all Lands Tenements and hereditaments to the same Manor, then or
late appertaining or as part parcel or member thereof, then before had known or
reputed, with the appurtenances in N. and A aforesaid, or either of them
containing by estimation etc. then lately purchased by the said R. R. as in and
by the said several Indentures or Deeds indented (amongst other things therein
contained more at large it does and may appear) In which said several
Indentures there is contained a proviso in these words following, that is to
say, Provided always that if the said R. R. during his natural life; shall by
his Deed or Deeds of revocation under his hand and seal testified by two
witnesses or more, revoke, annihillate make void or declare that he does revoke
annihillate and make void all or any the uses and estates in and by these
presents limited and ^aised of or upon all or any of the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments whatsoever in the said Fine to be
contained, and in these presents mentioned, that then, from and after the
ensealing of such Deed or Deeds of revocation shall be declared to be revoked,
shall cease and be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, and that then
the said Fine of such parcel to be revoked, shall be to the only use of the
said R. R and his heirs for ever, any thing before in these presents contained
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; as in and by the said
proviso, in the said several Indentures mentioned and contained more plainly
may appear Now know ye that the said R. R. as well in consideration that the
uses and estates of and in the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments
in the foresaid Indentures of entaile may remain and be touching the said uses
and estates, revoked and continue unto the said R. R. his heirs and assigns, to
be disposed of at his or their pleasures; and also for diverse other good and
just causes and considerations him hereunto especially moving, and by virtue of
the proviso contained in the said several Indentures above recited or
mentioned, or otherwise, Has revoked, annihillated and made void, and by this
present Deed of Revocation, does revoke, annihilate and make void the several
uses and estates in and by the said Indentures, or either of them raised or
limited of or upon all the said Manor of Lingate, with the Royalties, Rights,
members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever in N. and A. aforesaid, or either
of them in the said County of, etc. and of all the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to the said Manor of Lingate, now, or of late appertaining or
belonging, or as part parcel, or member thereof, heretofore had known or
reputed, with the appurtenances, in N. and A. aforesaid, or either of them
containing by estimation etc. late purchased by the said R. R. of etc. And
further the said R. R. for the consideration aforesaid, and by virtue of the
said proviso contained in the said several Indentures, and otherwise has
revoked and annihillated and made void, and by this present Deed of revocation
does revoke annihillate and make void the several uses and estates in and by
the said Indentures, or either of them, raised and limited of or upon one
Close of land and pasture, called K. Close, containing by estimation etc. and
of or upon one other Close of land and pasture, with the appurtenances,
containing by estimation etc. in N. aforesaid, and of or upon two acres of
errable land, by estimation etc. in N. aforesaid, now in the occupation of etc.
or of his Assigns.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the Reversion of certain Lands.
THis Indenture made etc. between R. W. of etc. of the one part: and C. D. of
etc. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said R. W. for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. has granted, bargained and sold, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain and sell unto the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever; all that his right, title, use,
interest, reversion or remainder of, and in all and singular etc. now or late
in the tenure or occupation of etc. which said Message and other the premises
with the appurtenances, he the said R. W. has, should or ought to have by and
after the decease of A. W. Mother of the said R. Which said Message or
Tenement, Barn, Orchard etc. with th'appurtenances; R. W. deceased, late Father
of the said R. W. party to these parties; By his last Will and Testament,
devised, willed and bequeathed unto the said A. W. for and during the natural
life of the said A. W. the immediate reversion or remainder thereof to the said
R. W. and his Heirs for ever: Together with all the Deeds, Evidences, Charters,
Escripts, Writings and Minuments, which he the said R. W. or any other to his
use, or by his consent or delivery, have or has, touching or concerning the
said Message or Tenement, and other the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof: All and singular which said Deeds, Evidences, Charters etc. the said
R. W. has already delivered at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents. To have and to hold the said reversion and remainder and all the
estate, right, title, interest and other the premises, with the appurtenances,
before by these presents bargained and sold or meant mentioned or intended to
be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part thereof, immediately from
and after the decease of the said A. W the Mother unto the said C. D. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, to the only proper use of the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And the said R. W. for himself, his Heirs etc. That he the
said R. W. at the day of the date of these presents, is lawfully and solely
seized of and in the reversion and remainder of the said Message or Tenement,
and of other the premises with th'appurtenances, immediately from and after
the Decease of the said A. W. of a true and perfect estate of inheritance in
the Law in Fee to his own use without any manner of Condition, Morgage or
Redemption. And further that the said reversion or remainder of the said
Message or Tenement, and of other the premises with the appurtenances, from,
by and after the decease of the said A. W. the Mother, and at the day of the
date hereof, are and be, and so at all times from henceforth shall be and
continue free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged and saved
harmless by the said T. W. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, off and
from all and every former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, statutes,
merchant and of the staple recognizances, joyntures, dowers, wills, entails,
intrusions, rents, charge-rents, seck-arrearages of rents, and off and from all
other charges, titles, troubles, encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had made,
committed, suffered or done by, etc.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Recognizance, with very good Covenants therein incerted.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between T.P. of etc. Gentleman, on the one part;
and C. D. and R. D. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas W. P.
of etc. Son and Heir apparent etc. by one Recognizance acknowledged in His
Majesty's high Court of Chauncery bearing date etc. Has acknowledged himself
to owe and stand indebted unto the said T. P. in the sum of etc. payable to the
said T. or to his certain Attorney, his Executors or Administrators in manner
and form, as by the said Recognizance, together with a certain condition
thereunto subscribed in the said Court of Chauncery enrolled and remaining of
Record, more at large it does and may appear. Now the said T. P. for diverse
considerations him moving, has granted, bargained, assigned and set over, and
by these presents does etc. unto the said C. D. and R. D. the said
Recognizance, and all and every sum and sums of money therein contained, and
all the profits, benefits, advantages and commodities, which shall or may in
any wise hereafter grow, be had, made, gotten, arise, accrue or come to the
said T. P. his Executors or Assigns, upon or by reason of the said
Recognizance, or any thing therein contained. And also the said T. P. does by
these presents authorize and appoint, constitute, ordain and make the said C.
and R. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, his
Attorney and Atturneys irrevocable of and for the said T. P. his Executors and
Administrators, and in his and their name or names, to sue and prosecute all
and every such lawful action, execution, process, actions, executions,
processes, as shall or may be commenced, sued or tried in, upon or concerning
the said recognizance, or any sum of money, debts, duties or demands whatsoever
in the same contained, comprised or specified, or by reason thereof to be had
or obtained: And other Attorney or Atturneys, for or under them or any of them,
or in their or any of their behalfs to substitute, make and ordain, and the
same disallow, change or remove, when and as often as they the said C. and R.
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them shall think good.
And the same sum and sums of money, profits, commodities and demands, and every
of them, or any other thing in satisfaction thereof, to receive, have, take and
enjoy to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. and R. their Executors
and Assigns, or any of them. And therefore or for the same to make composition,
agreement or discharge whatsoever, they the said C. R. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them shall think good: And also the said
T. P. for himself, etc. That he the said T. P. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall and will quietly permit and suffer the said C. and R. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, at their or some of
their own proper costs and charges, to prosecute sue, implead and attempt at
any time or times, and from time to time hereafter. All and every such lawful
and reasonable action, execution, suit, process and demand whatsoever, in the
name or names of the said T. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, as he
the said T. P. his executors adminstr'. or assigns or any of them may, might,
should or ought to have done upon or by force or means of the said
recognizance, or touching or concerning any sum of money, duty or demand
whatsoever concerning the same; or any thing therein contained, comprised or
specified; or any thing thereupon to be had or obtained: And that he the said
T. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will at every time
and times hereafter, and from time to time, at and upon the reasonable request,
and at the costs and charges of the said C. and R. or one of them, their or one
of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, avow, justify and maintain all
the said actions, suits, processes and demands: and that neither he the said T.
P. nor his Executors Administrators, or assigns shall at any time hereafter
revoke, dis-continue, discharge, release or otherwise wittingly and willingly
hinder or delay any such action, execution, suit, process or demand
whatsoever, as shall be so attempted, pursued or had, as is aforesaid or any of
them, without the consent of the said C. D. and R. D. or any of them first had
and obtained; And also that neither he the said T. P. at any time heretofore
has received the sum of, etc. nor has released, extinguished, determined or
in any wise discharged the said Recognizance, or has at any time done or
committed, or shall hereafter, without the special consent of the said C. and
R. their Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some of them first had and
obtained in writing, willingly do or commit any act or thing whereby or by
reason whereof any such action, execution, suit, process or demand whatsoever
as shall be so attempted, pursued or had by the said C. and R. their Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, in the name of names of the said T.
P. his Heirs Executors or Administrators upon, concerning or by reason of the
said Recognizance, or any thing or demand thereof to be had shall or may be
discharged, released, or barred; And also that they the said C. D. and R. D.
their Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them shall or may at
all times hereafter have, receive and take to their own proper use and behoof,
the whole Execution, benefit and commodity, and all and every sum and sums of
money, and other thing and things whatsoever, as at any time hereafter shall
fortune to be recovered, had and obtained, by reason of the said Recognizance,
or any such action, suit, extent or execution, as shall or may be commenced,
had, pursued, or obtained as is aforesaid without any let, charge, hinderance
or interruption of the said T. P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or
any other person or persons whatsoever, by his or their assent, consent, title,
means or procurement, and without any account therefore to them, or any of
them to be yielded or made; and also the said T. P. for himself, etc. That he
the said T. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns and every of them, at
all time and times hereafter, upon or within convenient time, after every
reasonable request and warning to him or them to be made or given, and at the
Cost and Charges of the said C. D. and R. D. their Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or some of them shall do, knowledge and suffer to be done, all and
every such lawful warrant, and warrants of Attorney, and other lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devises; as by the said
C. and R. or one of them, their Executors Administrators or Assigns, or some
of them, their or some of their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised or required, either for the clear acquitting, cancelling or discharging
of the said Recognizance, or for the better obtaining, having, holding or
assuring to them the said C. and R. their Executors and Administrators, or to
such person or persons, as they or the survivor of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of the survivers of them, shall name or appoint the said
Recognizance, or any sum or sums of money therein mentioned, and of all, every,
or any sum or sums of Money, Goods, Chartels, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and other thing and things whatsoever, which he the said T. P. his Heirs
Executors Administrators or Assigns now are, or any of them is, or at any time
hereafter shall be entitled unto by force, or concerning the said
Recognizance, or any Execution, matter or thing thereupon to be had, sued or
made, at the Election or choice of the said C. D. and R. D. their Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, and shall not release or discharge
the said Recognizance, Execution, matter or thing thereupon to be had, or any
part thereof.

In witness, etc.
A General Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I, A. G. of etc. Gentleman, have remised,
released, and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents do for me my
Executors and Administrators and every of us clearly and absolutely remise,
release, and for ever quit claim unto G. H, etc. his Executors and Assigns,
all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Duties, Bonds, Bills,
Writings Obligatory, Reckonings, Accounts and Demands whatsoever, which against
the said G. C ever I have had, now have, or which I, my Executors or
Administrators or any of us at any time hereafter shall, or may have, for or by
reason or means of any matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, from the beginning
of the world until the day of the date of these presents. Witness my hand and
seal, etc.

A Release from one that has lost the Counterpart of his Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come H. B. of etc.
sends greeting: Whereas T. S. of etc. in and by one Indenture of Lease,
bearing date the etc. for the consideration therein expressed, did demise,
grant, betake, and to farme-lett unto me the said H. B. my Executors
administrators and Assigns (reciting the Grant) In which said Indenture of
Lease, there are diverse covenants, grants, articles and agreements, on the part
and behalf of the said T. S. his Executors Administrators and Assigns to be
observed, performed and kept, as by the same Indenture of Lease, among diverse
other thing and things therein contained, more at large appears. Now know ye
that I the said H.B. for diverse other good causes and etc. have by these
presents remised, released, and always of and for me, my Executors and
Administrators for evermore quit claimed unto the said T. S. his Executors
Adminstrators and Assigns, all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles,
Provisoes, Conditions, Clauses, Sentences and Agreements whatsoever, in the
said Indenture of Lease, mentioned or contained, which on the part and behalf
of the said T. S. his Executors Administ: or Assigns are or ought to be
observed, performed and kept, and also all, and all manner of actions, suits,
quarrels, benefits, commodities and advantages that shall or may happen to
arise or grow, by reason or means of them, or by the breach, or not performing
of all and every the said Covenants, Grants, Articles, clauses and Agreements,
and every or any of them; and also I the said H B. have remised, released
surrendered, assigned and set over, and by these presents do remise, release,
surrender assign and set over from me, my Executors Administrators and
Assigns unto the said T. S. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term of years, Property, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, which I the said H. B. now have, or that I, my Executors
Administrators or assigns, or any of us ought to have, or claim of, in and to
all and singular other the premises, to me the said I. B. in and by the said
Indenture of Lease demised as aforesaid, and of, in and to every or any part or
parcel thereof.

In witness, etc.
A Release of Fines, and Forfeitures, due to the King, and to the Informer,
upon the Statute of Recusancie.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come I. A. S. of etc. send
greeting; Whereas I the said A. S. in or about the first day of etc. did
exhibit and prefer into the Kings Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, one Bill of Information, touching, and upon the Statute of
Recusancy against F. M. of etc. for the supposed Christening of a Child of the
said F. contrary to the said Statute, and the Laws of this Realm, as by the
same information now depending and remaining in the same Court of Common Pleas
more at large appears. Now know ye, that I the said A. S. for and in
consideration of a certain sum of lawful etc. to me in hand paid by the said
F. M. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents; have remised,
released, and quit Claimed, and by virtue of one Indenture to me made and
granted, from the Right Honorable R. Lord Ewre, and E. Lord Morley, for the
prosecution, ending, and compounding for, of all matters concerning the said
Statute, do remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto the said F. M. his
Executors and Administrators, all, and all manner of actions, and causes of
actions, suits, and troubles, now or at any time heretofore by my means or
procurement prosecuted, and depending in His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas or
elsewhere, against the said F. M. touching the Statute before mentioned, and
all Fines, Forfeitures, penalties, sum and sums of money and demands, due and
payable, or which of right ought to be due and payable either to our Sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty that now is, His Heirs or Successors, by reason, or
means of the breach, or nonperformance of the said Statute, or to me the said
A. S. my Executors or Administrators, by virtue of the Indenture aforesaid, or
of any Information in that behalf exhibited, or otherwise howsoever. And I the
said A. S. for me my Executors and Administrators by these presents do
covenant and grant to and with the said F. M. his Executors and Administrators,
That I the said A. S. my Executors and Administrators, and every of us shall
and will at all times hereafter for ever, well and sufficiently maintain,
uphold, make good and defend this present release to the said F. M. his
Executors and Assigns, and every of them, against all persons that shall or
may at any time hereafter deny, oppose or contradict the same, and also save
harmless the said F. M. his Executors and Administrators and every of them,
from all actions, suits, charges and troubles, that may or shall arise, be
prosecuted or brought against the said party, by any other person or persons
whatsoever, concerning the premises.

In witness, etc.
A Resignation, or Release from one used in trust of all the benefit he might
claim, by virtue of any Covenant in the Indenture.
TO al Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I. I. B. of
etc. send greeting, Whereas by one Indenture bearing date the etc. made between
R. O. of etc. on the one party, and the said I. B. and I. H. of etc. on the the
other party, he the said R. O. for himself his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, did covenant and grant to, and with me the
said I. B. and the said J. H. our Executors and Assigns, That he the said R.
O. should and would within the space of etc. next ensuing the date of the same
Indenture, Convey, and assure or cause to be conveyed and assured, to the said
R. O. and E. H. daughter to R. H of etc. with whom the said R. O. was then to
be espoused, and to the Heirs of their bodies lawfully begot ten, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, of the full and clear yearly value of 1000. l. at
the least; as by the said Indenture and Covenants therein contained, amongst
diverse other things more at large appears. And for performance thereof,
according to the said Covenants, the said R. O. by his Obligation dated etc.
became bound with sureties to us the said J. B. and I. H. in the sum of etc. as
by the same Bond may also appear. In which said Indenture and Bond, the name of
me the said I. B. was only used in trust, for the benefit and behoof of the
said E. H. Now therefore know ye, that I the said I. B. in the discharge of the
trust in me reposed, and at the request of the said E. H. have remised,
released, surrendered, resigned and set over, and by these presents, for me, my
Executors and Administrators, do freely and absolutely remise, release,
surrender, resign and set over unto the said E. H. her Executors and Assigns,
all the estate, right, title, interest, use, trust, benefit, privilege and
demand whatsoever, which I the said I. B. have or may have, or claim of, in or
to any sum of money, or other matter or thing whatsoever, in the said
Indenture, Covenant and Bond, contained, mentioned and expressed, or in any of
them: So as neither I the said J. B. my Executors or Administrators, or any of
us, at any time hereafter shall or will ask, claim, challenge or demand any
interest, use, benefit, trust, privilege or other thing, in any manner
whatsoever, by reason or means of the said Indenture, or any Covenant therein
specified, or in or to the said Bond, or any sum of money therein mentioned,
but thereof and therefrom, and from all actions, suits and demands which I, my
Executors or Assigns may have concerning the same, shall be utterly secluded,
and for ever debarred by these presents. In witness etc.

An Indenture for justifying of actions upon setting over of a Statute.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between R. W. of etc. on the one part; and T. C.
of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas I. H. of etc. in and by one
Statute of 800. l. now appertaining the said R. W. as Executor of the last Will
and Testament of the said etc. Now the said R. W. for diverse good
considerations him especially moving has given, granted, assigned and set
over; and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely, give, grant,
assign and set over unto the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as well the said Statute staple aforesaid; as also all the debts of
etc. in the same Statute mentioned or contained to the only proper use and
behoof of the said T.C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever. And
further, the said R. W. covenanteth etc. That he the said R. W. his Heirs and
Executors, and the Administrators that hereafter shall happen to be of the
Goods, Chattels and Credits of him the said R. W. and every of them, at all
times, and from time to time hereafter (upon request) shall maintain, justify
and allow all and every such Action and Actions, Writs, Suits, Bills, Plaints,
Executions and Demands whatsoever, as the said T. C. his Executors or
Administrators, shall commence, pursue or make in the name or names of the said
R. W. his Executors or Administrators, that hereafter shall be of the Goods,
Chattels, Credits and Debts of the said R. W. or in the name or names of any of
them; and that it shall be lawful to and for the said T.C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, to take, receive, have, hold and
enjoy for ever, to the only use of the said T. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all and every such sum and sums of money, costs and
damages, satisfactions, commodities, profits and advantages whatsoever, which
shall be gotten, recovered, obtained or had by reason of any the actions,
writs, bills, plaints, executions and demands aforesaid; or by reason or means
of any of them, without any impediment, denial or contradiction of the said R.
W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, that hereafter shall be of
the Goods, Chattels or Credits of the said R. W. or any of them. In witness
etc.

An Indenture between the Scavenger and the Raker, for clensing the street.
THis Indenture made the etc. between R.C. S. P. And T. R. Citizens of London,
Scavengers of and for the Parish of etc. on the one party; and E.D. etc. on the
other party: Witnesses, That the said E. D. in consideration of the sum of
etc. to him to be paid in such form as hereafter in these presents is
expressed, Covenanteth, promises and grants for himself etc. in manner and
form following (That is to say) That he the said E. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will (at his and their own proper costs
and charges) cleanse and make clean, or cause to be cleansed and made clean in
the said Parish of etc. all the streets, lanes, alleys, and other places
whatsoever, within the said Parish of etc. as the same has been heretofore
used and accustomed to be cleansed and made clean, by any Carter or Raker in
that behalf, appointed from the Monday next after the Feast of Epiphany of our
Lord God, commonly called, Twelfth day, next ensuing the date hereof, until
the Monday next after the Epiphany of our Lord God, which shall be in the year
of etc. three times in every week weekly, during the said term; to wit, on
every Tuesday, Thursday and Satturday: And also at all other such times and
days, as the Lord Major of the said City of London for the time being, the
Alderman of the Ward, His Majesty's Privy Council, or the Common Council of the
said City of London, or any of them, shall appoint or command the same; and
from thence shall carry away and convey all such Channel-dirt, filth, sea-cole,
ashes, sweepings of houses and streets, lanes, alleys and other places of and
within the said Parish of etc. unto some convenient Bastall for the same to be
provided by the said E. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at his or
their proper costs and charges (all Rubbish and Rushes as shall happen to be
laid out of the Parish, Church etc. during the said term, only excepted) And
further, that he the said E. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
and will from time to time, and at all times during the said term, clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, and save and keep harmless the said etc. and
every of them respectively, and their successors, in the said office of
Scavengers, during the said term of etc. and from all and all manner of costs,
charges, imprisonments, expenses and damages whatsoever, by them or any of them
to be had or sustained, or otherwise put unto, during the said term, for or by
reason of any negligence or default of the said E. D. his, etc. in the
premises, or any part thereof. And they the said etc. do covenant for payment
of the money at the days agreed on etc.

In witness, etc.
A Condition to pay a sum of money at two several payments.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden I. C. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the above named R. M. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at or in the now dwelling house of the said R. M.
situate etc. the full sum of 8. l. and 12. s. of lawful etc. in manner and
form following (that is to say) on the last day of May next ensuing, 4. l.
thereof, and on the etc. next etc. the other 4. l. and 12. s. thereof, being
the full remainder of the said sum etc. without fraud or coven: that then this
present Obligation to be void and of none effect: But if default shall happen
to be made in either of the payments aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents: That then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive a debt only.
KNow all men by these presents, That I, E. C. of etc. Gentleman, have
assigned, ordained and made, and in my stead and place by these presents, put
and constituted my trusty and well beloved Friend F. L. of etc. to be my true
and lawful Attorney for me; and in my name, and to my use, to ask, sue for,
levy, require, recover and receive of I. W. of etc. Esquire, all and every such
debts and sums of money, which are now due unto me by any manner of ways or
means whatsoever: Giving and granting unto my said Attorney my whole power,
strength and authority in and about the premises, and upon the receipt of any
such debts or sums of money aforesaid, acquittances or other discharges for me,
and in my name to make, seal and deliver, and all and every such act and acts,
thing and things, device and devises whatsoever in the Law, for the recovery of
all or any such debts or sums of money, as aforesaid, for me, and in my name to
do, execute and perform as fully, largely and amply in every respect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were
there in mine own person present: Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and
stable, all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be
done in or about the execution of the premises, by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney General, to enter upon Lands.
KNow all men by these presents, that I, A. W. of etc. Esquire, have assigned,
ordained and made, and in my stead and place put and constituted my trusty and
well-beloved Friend H. H. of H. etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney for me,
in my name, and to my use, to ask, sue for, levy, require, recover and receive
of all and every person and persons whatsoever, all and every such debts, rents
and sums of money as are now due unto me, or which at any day or days, time or
times hereafter, shall be due, owing, belonging or appertaining unto me by any
manner of ways or means whatsoever: Giving and granting unto my said Attorney,
by the tenor of these presents, my full and whole power, strength and
authority, in and about the premises, and upon the receipt of any such debts,
rents and sums of money aforesaid, acquittances, or other discharges for me;
and in my name to make, seal and deliver, and all and every other act and acts,
thing and things, device and devises in the Law whatsoever, needful and
necessary to be done, in or about the premises, for the recovery of any such
debts, rents and sums of money, as aforesaid, for me; and in my name to do,
execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply in every respect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were
personally present: Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all and
whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done, in or about
the execution of the same, by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A General Release.
KNow all men by these presents, that I, A. G. of, etc. Gentleman, have
remised, released, and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents do for me,
my Executors and Administrators, and every of us, clearly and absolutely
remise, release and for ever quit claim unto G. C. of etc. Gentleman, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and all manner of actions, cause and
causes of actions, suits, quarrels, debts, duties, bonds, bills, writings
obligatory, reckonings, accounts and demands whatsoever, which against the said
G. C. ever I have had, now have, or which I, my Executors or Administrators, or
any of us, at any time hereafter, shall or may have, for or by reason or means
of any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the world
until the day of the date of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A short Letter of Attorney, to receive Money due upon Bond.
KNow all men by these presents, that I, T. A. of etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead and place by these presents, put and constituted my
trusty and well beloved Friend I. B. of etc. my true and lawful Attorney for
me, in my stead and name, and to the use and behoof of him the said I. B. to
ask, recover and receive of W. S. of etc. G. T. of etc. and L. M. of etc. the
sum of etc. due unto me for the non-payment of the sum of etc. of like money,
on the 20th day of etc. last past, before the date of these presents: As by one
Obligation with Condition there underwritten, bearing date etc. in the year
etc. more plainly appears: Giving, and by these presents granting unto my
said Attorney, my full power and lawful authority in the premises, to do,
say, perform, conclude and finish for me, and in my name, as before said, all
and every such act and acts, thing and things, device and devises in the Law
whatsoever, for the recovery of all the debts aforesaid, as fully, largely and
amply in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally
present; and upon the receipt thereof, acquittances or other discharges for me,
and in my name to make, seal and deliver: Ratifying, allowing and holding firm
and stable all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be
done, in or about the execution of the premises, by virtue of these presents.
In witness whereof, etc.

A Form of an Award.
TO all Christian People to whom this present writing shall come: T. M. of etc.
sends greeting, etc. Whereas diverse controversies and debates heretofore have
been had, moved, and yet are depending between H. D. etc. of the one party; and
O. L. etc. of the other party: for the appeasing and determining whereof, the
said parties have submitted themselves, and are become bound each of them to
the other, by their several obligations, dated etc. in the sum of, etc. with
Conditions upon the same Obligations endorsed for the performance of all and
every the Award, Arbitrament, Determination and Judgment of me the said T. M.
Umpire, indifferently elected and chosen as well on the part and behalf of the
said H. D. as on the part etc. To award, arbitrate, determine and judge of and
concerning all and all manner of actions, suits, judgments, executions,
accounts, reckonings, trespasses, strifes, variances, quarrels, controversies
and demands whatsoever, had made, moved, stirred or depending between the said
H. R. on the one part; and the said O L. on the other part, from the beginning
of the World, until the day of the date of these presents. So always as the
said award etc. of me the said Umpire, for and concerning the premises, be
made and put in writing, indented under my hand and seal, on or before the,
etc. as by the said several Obligations, and their several conditions, more
plainly appears. Now know ye, That I the said T. M. Umpire, as aforesaid,
taking upon me the charge of the said Award, and Arbitrament, and having heard
and viewed the sayings and allegations of either of the said parties concerning
the premises, and minding to set an unity and friendship concerning the same,
do thereupon make and put in writing this my award, arbitrament, determination
and Judgment, between the said parties, for and concerning the premises in
manner and form following; that is to say, First, I do Award, Arbytrate,
Determine and Judge by these presents, That the said H. D. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, shall well and truly pay etc. And I the said
Umpeir do also award etc. That he the said H. D. shall on the etc. at the Shop
of etc. Seal and as his absolute Deed Deliver to the said O. L. or to his use,
a Release, Acquittance and Discharge of, and for all and all manner of Actions,
Suits, Judgments etc. from the beginning of the World etc.

In witness, etc.
A Lease made in consideration of the Surrender of a former Lease, for a longer
time, with good Covenants.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between I. B. of etc. C. D. of etc. and I. D. of
etc. on the one part, and T. W. of etc. on the other part Witnesses; That the
said I. B. C. D. and I. D. as well for and in consideration of the surrender of
one former lease dated the etc. made from the said I. B. C. D. and I.D. to H.W.
brother to the said T.W. as also in consideration of the sum of etc. to the
said I. B. in hand, paid before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
by the said T. W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, By these presents
have demised, granted, and to farme-let, and by these presents do demise,
grant, and to farme-let unto the said T. W. all those two Messuages or
Tenements, with the appurtenances, and three yard-land to the same belonging,
situate, lying, and being in the parish of etc. late in the several tenures
of the said H. W. deceased, and of A. P. Widow, and now in the occupation of
the said T. W. and the aforesaid A. P. together with the lops, tops and shreds
of all the hedgrow, and hedges, growing in and upon Eleaven Roods of Land in a
field, called Arzons field, and in a furlong called B. furlong, and also the
lop and top of one hedge, growing in and upon a Close called K. Close, from the
gate by the land side; And together likewise with Common of pasture for twelve
Kine, and one hundred and twenty sheep in the Commons and fields of D.
aforesaid, and all other fields, pastures, lands, meadows, feedings, and
grounds whatsoever, with the appurtenances of them the said I. B. C. D. and I.
D. which late were in the occupation of them the said H. W. and A. P. or either
of them in D. aforesaid, and together also with all Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Back sides, Courts, Ways,
Easements, Profits, Commodities and Advantages whatsoever, to the said two
Messuages, and other the premises belonging or appertaining (except and
always reserved out of this demise, and grant the bodies of all trees of Oak,
Ash and Elm, now growing, and being, or which hereafter shall grow, and be in
and upon the premises, or in and upon any part or parcel thereof, and also
except one Barn, called the Great Barn, and the Yard wherein the same
stands, which late were in the possession or occupation of G. B. To have and
to hold the said two Messuages or Tenements, Habend.
three yardland, Houses, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, and all
other the premises, with their appurtenances before by these presents demised,
and every part and parcel thereof, Except before Excepted) unto the said T. W.
his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast day of etc. before
the date of etc. unto the full end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended (if T. W. son of T. W. party to these
presents, G. W. and A. W. or any of them shall so long live, Reddend.
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said I.
B. his Heirs or Assigns, the sum of etc. at two most usual Feasts or Terms
in the year, That is to say, At the Feast of etc. and the Feast of etc. by even
and equal portions, To re-enter for non-payment of the Rent.
and if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid,
in part or in all, after either of the said Feasts in any year during the said
term, in which the same ought to be paid, by the space of 28. days being
lawfully demanded, and no sufficient distress to be had or found, in or upon
the demised premises, That then and at all times afterward, it shall and may
be lawful to, and for, the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of
them, into all and singular the said demised premises, and every part and
parcel thereof, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, and enjoy as
in his or their former Estate, and the said T. W. his Executors and Assigns,
from thence utterly to expel and put out (this Indenture, or any thing before
specified to the contrary notwithstanding) And the said T. W. party to these
presents, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, during the continuance of this present
Lease, at his and their proper costs and charges, well and sufficiently
repair, uphold, sustain, maintain and keep the said Messuages or Tenements,
and all other the demised premises, in good and sufficient reparations; and
the same so being well and sufficiently repaired, upholden and kept, in the end
of the said term, or other sooner determination of this Lease, shall leave and
yield up unto the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, The said T. W. from time
to time having and taking (by the Assignment and appointment of the said I. B.
his Heirs or Assigns) sufficient Timber upon the said demised premises for
the reparations of the same (if any such Timber be there to be had, otherwise
the said Timber to be found, and reparations done as aforesaid, at the proper
provision, costs and charges of the said T. W. party to these presents, his
Executors and Assigns, and that neither the said T. W. his Executors or
Assigns, or his, or their, undertenants shall commit any waste, or strip any
Trees, hedges, quick sets, mounds or fences upon the premises; And the said I.
B. for himself etc. does covenant and grant to, and with the said T. W. etc.
That the said two Messuages or Tenements, three yard land, That the premises
are discharged of incumberances.
and all other the before demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, now are and be, and so from henceforth, during the
continuance of this present Lease shall be, and continue, clearly acquitted,
exonerated, and discharged of, and from all, and all manner of former
Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Joyntures, Leases, Annuities, Rents, Arrerages
of Rents, Statutes-merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments,
Executions, Wills, Intailes, Legacies, Titles, Troubles and incumberances
whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, or to be had, made etc. by
the said I. B. or by the said G. B. deceased, his Father I. B. his
Grandfather, and R. B. his Uncle, or by any of their Heirs etc. or by any
other person or persons, or by, or through their or any of their means, act,
title, consent or procurement (one Lease heretofore made by the said G. B. of
one Message or Tenement, and other things, parcel of the premises before, by
these presents demised unto the said A. P. for and during the natural life of
the said A. whereupon the yearly Rent of etc. is reserved, and shall be from
henceforth, during the continuance of the same Lease, due and payable unto the
said T. W. party to these presents, his Executors Administrators and Assigns
only excepted and fore-prized; And further, the said I. B. for himself, his
Heirs Executors and Administrators does covenant etc. To exchange a Life
within ten years.
That if at any time hereafter during the space of ten years next ensuing the
date of these presents, The said T. W. or his Assigns shall be minded to
exchange, and put in one other Life in the stead and place of any of them, the
said T. W. the son of G. and A. W. the party put out being then living, That
then within three weeks next after request, in that behalf made, and payment
of etc. to the said I. B. in consideration thereof, He the said I. B. his
Heirs or Assigns, shall and will at the costs and charges of the said T. W.
party to these presents, his Executors or Assigns, make, seal, and deliver in
due form of Law unto the said T. W. party to these presents, his Executors and
Assigns, on other good and sufficient Lease for the residue of the said term
which shall be then to come (if any two of the persons before named, and such
other person as shall be then nominated and put in shall so long live, and
under the like Rents, covenants, and conditions, as in these presents is
expressed, (Mutatis Mutantis) And further, that the said T. W. party to these
presents, his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, under
the Rents and covenants herein before mentioned, shall and may peaceably and
quietly, have, hold, possess and enjoy the said two Messuages or Tenements,
three yard-land, and all other the before demised premises, with the
appurtenances, and every part thereof, during the whole term hereby granted
(if the said T. W. the son G. W. and A. W. or such other person as shall be
hereafter named, with two of them in the stead and place of any of them so
dying, or exchanging shall so long live) without the lawful let, trouble,
eviction, or contradiction of the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of the
Heirs Executors or Assigns of the said G. B. deceased, or of any other person
or persons whatsoever (except only the said A. B. for her Lease before
mentioned) And the said C. D. and I. D. for themselves and either of them
severally and respectively, and not the one for the other, nor the others act,
and for their several Executors Adminstrators and Assigns, do covenant,
promise, and grant, to and with the said T. W. party to these presents, his
etc. That he the said T. W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them shall and may according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, peaceably and quietly have hold and enjoy all the said demised
premises, with the appurtenances and every part thereof free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted and discharged of, and from all, and all manner of
former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills,
Intailes, Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Extents and executions, and from
all other Estates, Titles, Troubles and Incumberances whatsoever, had made,
committed, suffered or done by them the said C. D. and I. D. or either of them,
or by any other person or persons, by their or either of their means, act,
title or procurement. And Lastly, For further assurance.
the said I.B. for himself etc. That he the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns,
and every of them, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time
upon request made, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. W.
party to these presents, his Executors or Assigns or some of them make, do,
and execute, or cause to be made, done, or executed, all and every such
further, and other reasonable act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, for
the further and more better Assurance, Surety, sure making, and conveying of
the said demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part thereof unto
the said T. W. party to these presents, his Executors and Assigns, during the
time aforesaid, and in such manner and form upon such Rents, Covenants and
Conditions, as is before herein mentioned, according to the effect and true
meaning of these presents, as by the said T. W. his Executors or Assigns, or
by his or their Council learned, shall be reasonably devised, or advised and
required. In witness etc.

A Grant of an Extent penned by Mr. Thomas Bromley then Solicitor.
THis Indenture made etc. B. D. of etc. and W. D. of etc. on the one party, and
T. B. G. B. and T. O. of etc. on the other party, Witnesses: That whereas the
Right Honorable E. Lord S. by the name of E. S. Esquire by one Recognizance,
Recital of the Recognizance.
bearing date etc. taken, knowledged, and Sealed before Sir R. D. Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of England, according to the form of the Statute for the
Recovery of Debts in that case provided, stands bound to the said I. D. in
the sum of etc. Payable etc. as by the same Recognizance etc. and whereas also
the said I. D. has extended, and to him is delivered in Execution, the Manor
of N. with the appurtenances, in the County of etc. at the yearly Rent of etc.
for non-payment of the said sum of etc. Now the said I.D. for diverse good
causes and considerations him hereunto especially moving, has granted,
assigned and set over, and by these presents does grant, assign and set over
unto the said W. D. T. B. G. B. and T. O. all his Estate, Right, Title,
Interest and Demand whatsoever, which he has by reason of the said Extent of,
in and to the said Manor of N. with the appurtenances, and of, in and to every
part and parcel thereof, and in and to all and singular Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Meddows, Leases, Pastures, Feedings, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances so extended and delivered in Execution as
aforesaid: And the said I. D. for himself etc. That he the said I. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at any time or times hereafter, shall not
do any act or acts, thing or things, whereby the said extent and extents, or
the estate, title or interest of the said W. D. etc or any of them, or of the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or any of them, by reason of the
said extent, may be in any wise hurt, hindered, impeached, discharged, undone or
made void. And further, that he the said I. D. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, shall and will, at the reasonable request, costs and charges in
the Law of the said W. D. or any of them, do and suffer to be done, made and
acknowledged all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, device and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the further assurance,
surety, sure-making and conveying of the premises, for and during all the time
and term of the said extent and execution, unto the said W.T. B. G. B. and T.
O. as by the learned Council of them, or any of them, shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Bond for performance of Covenants.
TO all Christian people etc. I. I. of etc. send greeting etc. Whereas R. D. of
etc. by his Obligation bearing date etc. became bound unto the said I. I. in
the sum of etc. conditioned for performance of Covenants contained in one pair
of Indentures of bargain and sale of the Inn, called, K. in C. in the etc. with
certain lands thereunto belonging: which Inn and premises are now by the said
I. I. bargained and sold unto M. W. of etc. his Heirs and Assigns. Now the said
I. I. for the better enjoying of the said Inn, and other the Lands and
Tenements thereunto belonging, Has as much as in him is, Assigned and set
over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely assign and set
over unto the aforesaid M. W. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, the said
recited Obligation, and all sum and sums of money therein mentioned, and the
benefit and advantage thereof to be had and made. And the said I. I. for
himself etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said M. W. etc. That he
the said M. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may
in lawful manner, at his and their costs and charges in all things, from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, sue for, levy recover and enjoy all sum
and sums of money, benefit and advantage whatsoever, which shall or may be
gotten by virtue, force or means of the said recited Obligation, in the name of
the said I. I. his Executors or Administrators, without any manner of nonsuit,
release, trouble, denial or interruption of the said I. I. his Executors or
Administrators, unless it be by consent of the said M. W. his Heirs or Assigns
in writing, first had and obtained. And the said M. W. for himself etc. does
Covenant etc. That he the said M.W. his Executors or Administrators, shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, save and keep harmless the
said I. I. his Executors or Administrators, and every of them, off and from all
and all manner of costs and charges, to arise by means of any suit, upon or by
reason of the said Obligation.

In witness, etc.
A Release of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people, etc. We N. B. and A. B. of etc. send greeting.
Whereas Sir I. B. of etc. by his Deed indented, Recital.
bearing date etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did give and grant
unto W. L. and R. P. of etc. one Annuity or yearly rent of etc. to be issuing
and going out of all and singular the Manors, Messuages, Lands, and Tenements,
called H. and L. within the parish of etc. and out of all the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, with th'appurtenances in H. and L. within the said parish of
etc. in the said County of etc. To have, hold, perceive and enjoy all the said
Annuity or yearly rent of etc. to the said W. L. and R. P. their Executors and
Assigns, for and during the natural life of the said Sir I. B. the said
Annuity or yearly rent of etc. to be payable and paid to the said W. and R.
their Executors or Assigns, during the life of the said Sir I. B. at two Feasts
in the year, viz. at the Feast of etc. at or in the etc. as by the same Deed
indented thereof made, more at large it does and may appear. Sithence which
time, the said W. L. is dead, and the said R. P. him survived. And whereas also
the said R. P. by his Deed indented, bearing date etc. for the considerations
therein mentioned, did demise, grant, bargain and sell unto the said N.B. his
Executors and Assigns, the said Annuity or yearly rent of etc. And every part
thereof. To have and to hold unto the said N. B. his Executors and Assigns,
from and immediately after the death of the said R. P. for and during the term
of etc. from thenceforth next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, if the aforesaid A.B. should so long live; as in and by the said
Indenture last mentioned more etc. Now know ye, That we the said N. B. and A.
B. for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of lawful money of
England to us in hand paid at and before the etc. by G.S. and R.G. of etc.
Esquire; whereof and wherewith etc. have remised, released and quit claimed,
and by these presents for us and either of us, our and either of our Executors
and Assigns, and every of us, do fully, clearly and absolutely remise, release
and for ever quit claim unto the said G. S. and R. G. their Heirs and Assigns,
and every of them in their or some or one of their full and peaceable
possession, as well the said Annuity or yearly rent of etc. before mentioned,
and every part and parcel thereof. And all rents, arrearages of rents,
penalties, forfeitures, nomine penes, and distresses whatsoever, at any time or
times heretofore due or forfeited by reason of the non-payment of the said
Annuity or yearly rent of etc. or any part or parcel thereof: As also all the
estate, right, title, interest, property, term and terms of life, lives and
years, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever, which we the said N. B. and A.
B. or either of us, our or either of our Executors or Assigns, now have, may,
might, should or in any wise ought to have or claim of, in and to the said
Annuity or yearly rent of etc. above mentioned, or any part thereof, by force
and virtue of the said several Deeds indented, above recited or mentioned, or
either of them, or otherwise howsoever. To have and to hold the said Annuity or
yearly rent of etc. and the estate, right, title, interest and all other the
beforementioned premises, with th'appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said G. S. and R. G. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, so as
neither we the said N. B. and A. B. or either of us, our or either of our
Executors or Assigns, or any of us, shall or will at any time hereafter, ask,
claim, challenge or demand any estate, right, title or interest, in or to the
said Annuity or yearly rent of etc. or any part thereof. But thereof and
therefrom, and from all actions, suits, titles and demands concerning the same,
shall be utterly secluded, and for ever debarred by these presents. In witness
whereof, etc.

A short Lease of certain Tyths.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between Sir E. S. of etc. on the one part; and M.
D. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That the said Sir E. S. for diverse
good causes and considerations him moving, and especially of the good opinion
he has and conceives of the said M. D. has demised, Grant.
granted, betaken and to farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the
said M. D. and his Assigns, all that the Tyths of Corn, Grain and Hay yearly
coming, renewing and growing within the Township of etc. and within the
Lordship of etc. in the County of G. and now held by E. L. of, etc. To have and
to hold, Habend.
perceive, take and enjoy all the said Tyths of Corn, Grain and Hay, unto the
said M. D. and his Assigns, from and immediately after the date of these
presents, unto the full end and term of 21 years, from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended; and that in as large and ample manner as the
same lately were held and enjoyed by the Reddend.
said E. L. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly During the said term, unto
the said Sir E. S. his Heirs and Assigns the sum of etc. at the Feast of etc.
at one whole entire payment: A nomine penae, for non-payment of the Rent.
And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid in
part or in all, by the space of etc. next following the said Feasts, being
lawfully demanded; That then for every such default, the said M. D. or his
Assigns, shall forfeit and pay unto the said Sir E. S. his Heirs and
Assigns, the sum of etc. over and besides such arrerages, as then shall happen
to be behind and unpaid; And the said Sir E. S. for him his Heirs Executors
and Administr: does covenan etc. That he the said M. D. his Executors and
Assigns shall and may at all time and times from henceforth, for and during
all the said Term hereby granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy, All the said Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay (paying the
Rent before reserved) without any manner of lawful let, eviction, disturbance
or contradiction of the said Sir E. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons, by his or their means, consent or procurement. In witness
etc.

A Deed of Gift.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come I, A. B of etc. send
greeting etc. Know ye that I the said A. B. for, and in consideration of the
sum of etc. which I the said A. B. do owe and am indebted unto T. S. etc. have
Given, Granted, and Sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly, and
absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, and confirm unto the said T. S. all
and singular such my Goods, Chattels, and Implements of household, and
Commodities whatsoever, as are contained and specified in a certain schedule
hereunto annexed: Habend.
To have and to hold, All and singular the said Goods, Chattels, Implements of
household, and Commodities whatsoever as aforesaid, to the foresaid T. S. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs for ever, thereof and therewith, to do, use, and dispose, at his and
their will and pleasure, as of his and their own proper Goods and Chattels,
without any manner of Challenge, Claim, and Demand of me the said A. B. or of
any other person or persons for me in my name, by my cause, means, consent or
procurement: And further, know ye, that I the said A. B. have put the said T.
S. in full possession of all and singular the aforesaid premises, by the
delivery unto him at the ensealing hereof, one Goblet of Silver, in name of all
the said Goods. In witness whereof, etc.

Another Deed of Gift.
TO all people etc. I, B. C. etc. send greeting: Know ye that I the said B. C.
as well for and in consideration of the natural affection, and brotherly love
which I have, and do bear unto my wel-beloved brother P. C. of etc. as also for
diverse other good causes and considerations me at this present especially
moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give grant and
confirm unto the said P. C. all and singular my Goods, Chattels, Leases,
Debts, ready Money, Plate, Jewels, Rings, Household Stuff, Apparel, Utensils,
Brass, Pewter, Bedding, and all other my substance whatsoever, moveable and
immovable, quick and dead, of what kind, nature, quality or condition soever
the same are or be, and in what place or places soever the same be, shall or
may be found, as well in mine own custody or possession, as in the
possession, hands, power and custody, of any other person or persons
whatsoever; To have and to hold, all and singular the said Goods, Chattels,
Leases, Debts, and all other the aforesaid premisse, unto the said P. C. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs, for ever freely and quietly, without any manner of Challenge, Claim
or Demand of me the said B. C. or of any other person or persons whatsoever,
for me in my name, by my cause, means, or procurement, and without any money
or other thing, therefore to be yielded, paid, or done unto me the said B. C.
my Executors Administrators or Assigns: Warrant.
And I the said B. C. all and singular the aforesaid Goods, Chattels and
premises to the said P. C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, to the
use aforesaid, against all people do warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents; and further, Know ye, that I the said B. C. have put the said P. C.
in peaceable and quiet possession of all and singular the aforesaid premises,
by the delivery unto him at the ensealing hereof, one coined piece of Silver,
commonly called two pence, fixed on the Seal of these presents. In witness etc.

A Release of Dower.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, Dame Dorothy Williams,
late the wife of Sir David Williams Knight Deceased, sends greeting etc. Know
ye that the said Dame Dorothy W. for and in consideration of the performance of
a former agreement, had, and made between the said Dame Dorothy W. and the said
Sir D. W. her late husband, before their enter-marriage has remised, released,
and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents does clearly and absolutely
remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto Sir D. W. Knight T. W. and R. W.
sons of the said Sir D. W. and to every of them, all and all manner of Dower,
and Right and Title of Dower whatsoever, which she the said Dame Dorothy W. now
has, may, might, should, or of right ought to have or claim of, in, or out of
all and every the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, which were the said Sir D. W. at any time during the coverture
between him and the said Dame D. Situate and being in the Counties of etc. or
in any or every of them, and all and all manner of Actions, and Writs of Dower
whatsoever, so as neither she the said Dame D. W. nor any other for her, or in
her name, any manner of Dower, or Writ, or Action of Dower, nor any manner of
right or title of Dower, of, or in the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, nor of or in any part or parcel thereof, at any time hereafter
shall, or may have, or claim, or prosecute against the said Sir D. W. T, W.
and R. W. nor any of them, their, nor any of their Heirs or Assigns, but of
and from the same, shall be utterly debarred, and for ever excluded by these
presents. In witness etc.

A Release from one that has lost his Articles of Agreement.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I, E. W. of etc. have
remised, released, and quit claimed, and by these presents do for me my Heirs
Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of us fully, clearly, and
absolutely remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto I. O. of etc. his
etc. all and all manmer of Actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Process, and
demands whatsoever, which against the said I. O. I ever had, now have, or at
any time hereafter shall or may have, by reason or means of any Grant,
Covenant, Contract, Promise, Bargain, Clause or thing mentioned, contained,
expressed, or declared, in or by certain Articles of Agreement Indented,
bearing date etc. made between the said I. O. on the one part, and me the said
E. W. on the other part, touching or concerning the procuring of a Lease of a
Field or parcel of ground, errable, meddow or pasture, called the etc. of the
yearly Rent of etc. lying etc. which said Lease, I do hereby acknowledge is
procured and passed by the said I. O. according to my mind and desire, and of
and from all Bonds, Bills, and writings obligatory, and all and every penalty,
sum and sums of money in them or any of them mentioned, or contained, wherein
or whereby the said I. O. is and stands bound unto me for the performance of
Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements in the said Articles mentioned, or
contained. In witness etc.

A form of a Will.
IN the Name of God Amen: The tenth day of etc. I, A. B. etc. being sick in
body, but of good and perfect memory thanks be to Almighty God; and calling to
remembrance the incertaine estate of this transitory life, and that all flesh
must yield unto Death when it shall please God to call; do make, constitute,
ordain and declare, this my last Will and Testament, in manner and form
following, revoking, and adnulling by these presents, all and every Testament
and Testaments, Will and Wills heretofore by me made and declared, either by
word, or by writing: And this to be taken only for my last Will and Testament
and none other: And first, being penitent and sorry from the bottom of my heart
for my sins past, most humbly desiring forgiveness for the same; I give and
commit my soul unto Almighty God my Savior and Redeemer, in whom, and by the
merrits of Jesus Christ, I trust and believe assuredly to be saved and to have
full remission and forgiveness of all my sins; and that my soul with my body
at the general day, or resurrection, shall rise again with joy, and through
the merits of Christ's Death and Passion possess and inherit the Kingdom of
heaven, prepared for his elect and chosen, and my body to be buried in such
place, where it shall please my Executors hereafter named to appoint: And now
for the settling of my Temporal estate, and such Goods, Chattels, and Debts, as
it has pleased God, far above my deserts, to bestow upon me: I do order give
and dispose the same in manner and form following (that is to say) First, I
will that all those Debts and Duties as I owe in right or conscience to any
manner of person or persons whatsoever, shall be well and truly contented and
paid, or ordained to be paid, by my Executors hereafter named, within
convenient time after my Decease: Item, I give and bequeath etc. In witness
etc.

An Assurance of a Jointure to the Wife, with Remainder in Tail.
THis Indenture made etc. between H. U. of etc. on the one part, and L. L. etc.
and G. L. etc. on the other part, Witnesses: That as well for, and in
consideration of a Marriage had and solemnized, between the said U. and A. now
Wife to the said H. U. and Sister of the said L. and G. for the great good
will, love and affection, which the said H. has and bears to the said A. his
Wife; and to the intent, that the Messuages, Lands, and Tenements hereafter in
these presents specified, shall come and continue in the issue of the said H.
and A. in such sort, manner and form, as hereafter in these presents is
expressed, mentioned, and declared; It is Covenanted, Granted, Condescended,
Concluded and fully agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents,
in manner and form following: And the said H. U. for the consideration
aforesaid, does Covenant, grant and promise for himself etc. to and with the
said L. L. and G. L. their etc. by these presents, That he the said H. U. his
Heirs and Assigns and all, and every other person and whatsoever, shall stand
and be seized of, and in all and singular those his Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Meddows, Leasowes, Pastures and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all
and singular their appurtenances, in the Parish Town and Field of C.
aforesaid, in the said etc. which late were parcel of the possessions of the
late dissolved Monastery of etc. and now be, or late were in the several
Tenures or occupations of etc. and their Assigns, and the reversion and
reversions of the premises, and every part and parcel thereof, to the uses,
purposes and intents hereafter in these presents expressed and limited, and to
no other use, purpose, or intent whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and
behoof of the said H. U. for the term of his natural life without impeachment
of, or for any manner of waste, and after his decease, to the use and behoof of
the said A. U. now Wife of the said H. U. for the term of her natural life,
and after the decease of the said H. and A. his Wife, then to the use and
behoof of etc. between them lawfully begotten, as the said A. by her last Will
and Testament, or other writing to be signed and subscribed by her the said A.
in her lifetime, shall limit, nominate and appoint; And if no such limitation,
nomination, or appointment, shall be made by the said A. in her lifetime, then
to the use of the Heirs of the bodies of the said H. and A. between them
lawfully begotten, and for etc. to the use of the right. Heirs of the said H.
U. for ever: And further, the said H. U. for himself etc. does Covenant etc. to
and with the said L. L. and O. L. their Heirs etc. That he the said H. U. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and will permit and suffer the said A. V. and all
and every other person and persons to whom the said Message Lands, Tenements
and other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof shall happen to come, or
of right ought to come, by reason of these presents peaceably and quietly to
have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments before by these presents expressed and mentioned
without any manner of let, trouble, eviction, disturbance, suit, vexation or
expulsion of the said H. V. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other person or
persons whatsoever, lawfully having, claiming or pretending to have any estate
or title, from, by or under the said H. V. his Heirs or Assigns, according to
the intent, form and true meaning of these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of a Fee-farm, and certain Lands, with necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture made etc. Between C. B. of etc. on the one part: and T. W. of
etc. on the other part: Witnesses; That the said C. B. for diverse good causes
and considerations him thereunto especially moving, Has demised, granted and
to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise etc. unto the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all that his Message, Tenement or Farm
house called W. with th'appurtenances, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, Profits and Commodities whatsoever, to the said Message Tenement or
Farm-house now belonging or appertaining, and being now in the tenure or
occupation of the said T. W. or of his Assignee or Assignees, situate, lying
and being in the parish of etc. Exception.
(Except and always reserved unto the said C. B. his Executors and Assigns,
all and all manner of woods and under-woods, hedges, rows and timber trees, now
standing, growing and being, or which hereafter shall stand, grow or be in and
upon the demised premises, or in and upon any part or parcel thereof; and also
except and always reserved unto the said C. B. his Executors and Assigns, by
the space and for the term of one whole year next before the end and expiration
of the term of seven years, and one half year here under-granted, the said
Message, Tenement or Farm-house, and one Close or parcel of ground, called W.
containing etc. be it more or less; Together with free liberty of ingresse,
egresse, abiding and dwelling into, out, of, from and upon the said Message,
Tenement and Farm-house, and one Close, called W. by and during the said space
and term of etc. next before the end and expiration of the said Term of etc.
Habend.
To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement or Farm-house, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, and other the demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof
(except before excepted) unto the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast day of etc. for and during the term of etc. and fully
to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said
term, unto the said C. B. his Executors and Assigns, the rent of etc. at four
Feasts or Terms in the year most usual (That is to say) at etc. by even and
equal portions. Re-entry for non-payment.
And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. or any part or parcel
thereof to be behind and unpaid, by the space of etc. next over or after any of
the said Feast days, in which the same ought to be paid, being lawfully
demanded: That then and from thenceforth, and at all times after, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said C. B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, into the said Message, Tenement or Farm house, Houses, Edifices,
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all the demised premises, with the
appurtenances, and into every part and parcel thereof, wholly to re-enter, and
the same to have again repossesse and enjoy, as in his or their former estate.
And the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all other the
Tenants and Occupiers of the said demised premises, or any part or parcel
thereof; thereout, and from thence, utterly to expel, amove and put out: this
Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. For Reparation.
And the said T. W. for himself does covenant etc. in manner and form following
(That is to say) That he the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the said Term of etc. by these
presents granted when and as often as need shall require, well and sufficiently
repair, support, sustain, maintain and amend the said Message, Tenement or
Farm house, and all the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns and Stables
thereunto, belonging or appertaining, with the appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all manner of needful and
necessary reparations whatsoever: And also shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, during the said term, at his and their like
costs and charges, well and sufficiently hedge, fence, ditch, enclose and amend
all and singular the hedges, fences, ditches and enclosures belonging to the
said demised premises, in, by and with all and all manner of hedging, fencing,
ditching and enclosing, when and as often as need shall require, during the
said Term; And as well the said Message, Tenement or Farm house, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns and Stables, with th'appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, so well and sufficiently repaired As also the hedges,
fences, ditches and enclosure aforesaid, well and sufficiently supported and
amended in the end of the said Term, or other determination of this present
Lease, shall leave and yield up into the hands and possession of the said C. B.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns. A Covenant for planting an Orchard.
And the said T. W. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
does covenant etc. That he the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall permit and suffer the said C. B. and his Assigns, to plant and
make in and upon some convenient place of the demised premises, and Orchard,
not exceeding the number of two acres of land, with such store of fruit trees,
and other trees, as the said C. B. or his Assigns shall think meet; and the
same Orchard and fruit trees so made and planted, shall fence, preserve and
keep so much as in him shall be, from spoil and hurt of Cattle, and from all
other harm and destruction. And further, that the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall at all times hereafter, and from time to
time, during the said term of etc. find and allow unto G. B. Widow, A Covenant
for finding meat, drink, lodging, apparel, and other necessaries.
Mother unto the said C. B. competent and sufficient meat, drink, lodging,
apparel, and all other necessaries whatsoever, meet and convenient for her
degree; and shall from time to time, and at all times, clearly acquit exonerate
and discharge the said C. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, of, for and concerning the keeping of the said G. H. during all
the said Term of etc. before by these presents granted. Not to plow up the
Meadows.
And Lastly, the said T. W. for himself does covenant etc. That he the said T.
W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, nor any of them, shall not at any
time or times hereafter during the Term, before, in and by these presents
granted, plow up or otherwise deface or spoil the Meadow ground belonging to
the said demised premises, or any part or parcel thereof: And also that he the
said T. W. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and will in the end
of the said Term of etc. before by these presents granted, or other
determination of this present Lease, deliver and yield up the quiet and
peaceable possession of all and singular the before demised premises and of
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said C. B. his Executors etc. And the
said C. B. for himself etc. does covenant etc. in manner and form following
(viz:) That he the said T. W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them for and under the yearly rent before by these presents reserved,
and other the Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements in these presents
contained, shall or may peaceably, lawfully and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the said Message, Tenement or
Farm-house, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Meadows, Orchards, Gardens and
all other the before demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof
(except before excepted) for and during the said Term of etc. before by these
presents granted without any manner of lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction,
disturbance or contradiction of the said C. B. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, by his,
their or any of their means, act, title or procurement. A Proviso.
Provided always, and it is meant and intended by and between the said parties
to these presents, That this Indenture or any thing herein contained, shall not
extend to charge the said C. B. his Executors or Administrators by or with any
action of Covenant or other action whatsoever, saving only for such estate and
interest as the said C. B. or any other claiming by, from or under him, now
have, has or may have of, in or to the demised premises or any part thereof,
and not for any other better or former estate, right or title, which shall or
may precede or extinguish the grant by these presents made. In witness etc.

An Assignment of two several Obligations.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come: F. D. of etc.
Gentleman, sends greeting: Whereas R. D. of etc. Gentleman, in and by one
Obligation or writing Obligatory, with condition thereupon endorsed, bearing
date etc. And whereas also M. E. of etc. Esquire in and by one other Obligation or
writing Obligatory, with Condition thereupon also endorsed, bearing date etc.
do stand bound to the said F.D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, in
the several sums of etc. as by the said several Obligations, relation being
thereunto had, may appear. Now know ye, that the said F. D. for diverse good
causes and reasonable considerations him hereunto especially moving, Has
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely bargain, sell, assign and set over unto R. B. of etc. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said two Obligations; as
also the several sums of money in them, and either of them, mentioned or
contained: To the only proper use and behoof of the said R. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and without any account or other thing therefore to
be yielded, paid or done unto the said F. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or to any of them. And the said F. D. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said R. B. his Executors, Admininistrators and Assigns by these presents in
manner and form following: That is to say, that he the said R. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the sum and sums of money
whatsoever, contained in the said several Obligations: And also the benefit,
commodity, penalty and advantage whatsoever, which shall or may happen, come,
grow, or be by reason of the said several Obligations or Writings Obligatory
above recited or mentioned, without any manner of let, suit, trouble,
gainsaying, means, consent or procurement of the said F. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or of any other persons or persons whatsoever. In
witness etc.

An Assignment of two Apprentices, and their yaars to come.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come: I, A. M.
Citizen and etc. send greeting, in our Lord God everlasting. Recital of the
Indentures.
Whereas my Apprentices I. S. and G. R. have certain years yet to come and
unexpired of their several Apprentiships, to wit, the said I. S. one whole
year and a half, from the Feast of etc. last past; and the said G. R. the space
of two years and a half, from the same Feast, as by their several Indentures
thereof unto me the said A. M. made and sealed, at large it does and may
appear. Now know ye, Considerations.
that I the said A. M. for diverse good causes and Considerations me especially
moving, and the rather for that it stands with the good liking and pleasure of
my said Apprentices: Have given, granted, assigned and set over, and by these
presents do fully and absolutely give, grant, assign and set over unto my well
beloved Friend R. H. Citizen and Habberdasher of London, all such right, title,
duty, term of years to come, claim, interest, Apprentiships, services and
demands whatsoever, which I the said A. M. have of, in or to the said I. S. and
G. R. my said Apprentices, or which I might or ought to have of and in them, or
either of them, by force and virtue of the above recited Indentures of
Apprentiships: (That is to say) the true and faithful service of I. S. for and
during the time and space of one whole year and a half from etc. as aforesaid;
and the like honest and dutiful service of G. R. for and during the time and
space of two whole years and a half etc. from the Feast day, as is before
declared: Giving, Grant of their Terms.
and by these presents granting unto the said C. B. my full power and lawful
Authority for the having, keeping and enjoying of my said Apprentices, I. and
G. before mentioned, for and during their several times yet to come and
unexpired. And moreover, I the said A. M. do by these presents Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said C. B. his Executors and Assigns, That
the said I. and G. my Apprentices, shall, during their several times, well and
truly serve the said C. B. as their Master, and his commandments lawful and
honest every where shall do; and from the service of him they nor either of
them shall not absent or prolong himself by day or night, during the said
several Terms of their aforesaid Apprentiships, yet to come and unexpired.
Provided, That the said C. B. their Master, shall well entreat and use the said
I. and G. as becomes Apprentices in such case to be used; finding unto them
and either of them, meat, drink, linen, woollen, hose, shoes and bedding, and
all other necessaries during the said Terms.

In witness, etc.
A Proviso, That if the Lessor be minded to surrender his Grand Lease, to take
a further estate in the premises, then the Demise to be void.
PRovided always, and be the Demise under and upon condition, That if the said
I. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time during the
Demise, be minded to surrender his Grand Lease by which he has and holds the
aforesaid demised premises (amongst other things) to the intent to get a new
Lease, or any larger or further estate of, in and to the same: And thereof
shall give or leave notice in writing to and for the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at the said demised Mansion house: That then at the
day and time of such notice given, and from thenceforth for ever, this Demise,
Grant and Term of years, shall cease, determine and be utterly void and of none
effect, to all intents and purposes; any thing herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said I.B. etc. does Covenant and
grant to and with the said A. B. his etc. That he the etc. or Assigns,
notwithstanding the surceasing and determination of this Demise, Grant and Term
of years of the said A.B. to be had, claimed and enjoyed as aforesaid: Shall
and will not only peaceably and quietly permit and suffer the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns: To have, hold and enjoy the said demised
premises under the yearly rent aforesaid, by and during the Term of three
months from thence next following: but also before the end and expiration of
the same, shall at his and their own proper costs and charges, make, seal and
deliver or cause etc. And sufficiently tendered at the said demised
Mansion House unto the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, a new Lease or
Grant in writing of all the said demised premises, for so much of the said
time of etc. as shall be then to come and unexpired, and for and under such
Rents, Covenants and Conditions as are contained in this present Lease.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease made to
another.
KNow all men by these presents, that I, R. R. of etc. have made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute
and appoint T. C. of etc. my true and lawful Attorney for me; and in my steed
and name, to enter and come into and upon the Farm and Lands of T. in the
Parish of etc. now in the tenure or occupation of R. T. or of his assigns, or
upon any part thereof, then and there for me; and in my steed and name to
deliver as my act and deed, unto H. M. of etc. or to his assigns, one
Indenture, whereunto I have already sealed, bearing date etc. made between me
the said R. R. of the one party, and the said H. M. of the other party;
purporting a Lease of the same Farm and Lands, unto the said H. M. his
executors, administrators and assigns, for the term of four years next ensuing:
as in and by the said Indenture more at large appears: which Iudenture after
the same shall be so delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R. R. do promise
by these presents, shall be my effectual deed in Law to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as if I the said R.R. had sealed and delivered the
same then and there my self.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney, to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come: We, T. A. and
R. M. of etc. send greeting. Whereas we the said T.A. and R.M. have signed and
sealed to one Indenture bearing date with these presents, purporting a Lease,
Demise or Grant unto I. H. of etc. of all that our Manor or Farm of etc. with
the House, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, etc. and of all that our Site of
the Rectory or Parsonage of L. in the said County of etc. Together with the
Demeasne Lands to the said Manor and Farm belonging or appertaining: To hold
from th'ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture for the term of three
years then next ensuing; as by the same Indenture of Lease at large appears.
The Letter of Attorney.
Now know ye, that we the said T. A. and R. M. have made, ordained, constituted
and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and in our
steads and places put and appoint our trusty and well-beloved Friend I. H. of
etc. our true and lawful attorney and assignee for us, and in our steads and
names to enter and come into and upon all that the said etc. and other the
Lands aforesaid; or into some part thereof: and then and there (after such
entry made, to deliver unto the said I. H. as our very act and deed, the said
Indenture of Lease above mentioned: To hold according to the tenor of the same
Indenture; and further to do and execute all and every such further thing, and
other act whatsoever, as shall be needful to be done and performed in that
behalf, in as large, ample and effectual manner as we our selves might or
could do if we were personally present.

In witness, etc.
A Condition to pay Money within fourteen days after, if the Parties bound in
an Obligation, pay it not at the day.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, that whereas W. H. and R. B. by
their Obligation, or writing Obligatory, hearing date etc. are and stand
jointly and severally bounden unto the within named I. L. in the sum of etc.
with Condition endorsed, for the true payment of etc. on the etc. as by the
same Obligation with condition endorsed, at large appears. Now if the said W.
H. and R. B. their executors, administrators and assigns, shall make default in
payment of the said sum of etc. on the said etc. in which the same ought to be
paid, as aforesaid: then if the within bounden L. L. his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do within 14 days next, and
immediately ensuing the said etc. well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said I. L. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of etc. or so much thereof as
shall be behind and unpaid in or upon the said etc. at or in etc. without fraud
or coven, that then this present Obligation etc.

An Assignement of a Lease of partition, wherein three are joynt-Lessors to a
third person.
THis Indenture made etc. between H. P. etc. of the one part, and W. C. etc. on
the other part, Recital.
Witnesses: That whereas G. M. etc. and E his wife, H. B. etc. and H. his
wife, and T. P. etc. and M. his wife, in and by their three several Indentures
of Lease bearing equal date the etc. for the several considerations therein
mentioned, did demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said H. P. all that
their said three several Third parts, in three parts to be divided, of all
that their Message or Tenement, situate, lying, and being in etc. then, or
late in the Tenure or occupation of one R. G. or of his Assignee or Assignees
with all Shops, Sellers, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Lights, Easments, Buildings
and Commodities thereunto belonging, with their appurtenances, together with
all their three several Third parts, in three parts to be divided, of and in
such goods, wainscot Implements of household necessaries, and things, as were
specified and contained in three several schedules or Inventories indented,
and to the same Indentures annexed; To have and to hold, Habend.
all their said three several Third parts, in three parts to be divided, of
and in the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the said
demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof
unto the said H. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast
day of etc. then next coming after the date of the said several Indentures of
Lease unto the end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term
of etc. unto the said G. M. and E. his wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of
the said E. etc. and to the said H.B. and H. his wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said H. etc. and to the said T. P. and M. his wife, and to the
Heirs and Assigns of the said M. etc. at four the most usual Feasts in the
year (that is to say) At the Feasts of etc. by even and equal portions as in
and by the said three several Indentures of Lease, amongst diverse other
Covenants, Grants, Articles, Agreements, and things therein contained, more
fully and at large it does and may appear; Now this Indenture further
witnesses, that he the said H. P. for, and in consideration of the sum of etc.
to him in hand paid, by the said W. C. before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, whereof he the said H. P. does acknowledge the Receipt and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and
discharge the said W. C. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them
forever by these presents Has granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over,
and by these presents does clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell,
assign and set over unto the said W. C. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, as well the said Message or Tenement and all other the said
premises, with the appurtennnces, and every part and parcel thereof; as also
all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term of years to come, Possession,
Claim, and Demand whatsoever, which he the said H. P. now has, may, might,
should, or in any wise ought have, of, in, or to the said Message or Tenement
and premises, or of, in or to any part or parccell thereof, by force and
virtue of the said three several recited Indentures of Lease, or any, or
either of them, or otherwise howsoever, together with the said three several
Indentures of Lease: Habend.
To have and to hold, the said Message or Tenement, the said several
Indentures of Lease, Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and all and singular other
the premises before by these presents bargained, and sold, or mentioned, or
intended to be hereby bargained, sold assigned and set over, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said W. C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
for and during all the residue yet to come, and unexpired of the said term of
etc. in the same Indentures of Lease granted, in as large and ample manner and
form to all intents and purposes, as he the said H. P. now has, may, might,
or in any wise ought to have and enjoy the same, by force of the same
Indentures of Lease aforesaid, or otherwise howsoever. And the said H. P. does
covenant, promise and grant for himself, his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, and for every of them, to and with the said W. C. his Executors and
Assigns by these presents, in form following (that is to say) That he the
said W. C. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, under
the Rents, covenants, provisoes and agreements, in the said several recited, or
mentioned Indentures of Lease contained, shall and may, for and during all the
rest and residue now to come, and unexpired of the said term, in the said
several Indentures of Lease granted, lawfully, peaceably and quietly, have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message, or Tenement, and all
other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, without the let, trouble, interruption, molestation, or contradiction
of him the said H. P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by, or under him the said H. P.
his Executors or Assigns, discharged also of, and from all, and all manner of
former and other bargains, sales, grants, surrendors, forfeitures, re-entries,
cause and causes of forfeiture and re-entry, rents, arrerages of rents,
charges, titles, troubles and incumberances whatsoever, had made, committed,
suffered or done, or to be had, made, committed, suffered or done, by the said
H. P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by, or under him, them, or any of
them, or by his, their, or any of their means, act, title, consent or
procurement, the rents, covenants, conditions and agreements, in the said
several recited, or mentioned Indentures of Lease contained, which from
henceforth on the Tenants part and behalf are, or ought to be paid, performed
and kept, only excepted, and always fore-ptized. In witness etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of Money to Children at their several ages,
according to the Will by which it was given. The Bond made to the Executor.
THe Condition of this obligation is such, that whereas the within named A. B.
by his last Will and Testament bearing date etc. did amongst other Legacies and
Bequests, give and bequeath to the Children of his late Brother G. B. Deceased,
to every one of them, that should be living at the time of his Death, to be
delivered unto them by equal portions, at their several ages of one and
twenty years, Forty pounds a piece, and to G. B. by name, one of his said
Brothers Children, the sum of Forty pounds over and beside the said Forty
pounds formerly to him given as aforesaid; And did ordain that the said
several sums so bequeathed to his said Brothers Children, should be delivered
to their Mother, his Sister-in-law, for the use and behoof of the said
Children, she putting in sufficient security to his Executors, for the payment
of the said sums, at their several ages above mentioned, as by the said last
Will and Testament of the said A. B. may appear, the within named M. E. and G.
H. Executors of the said last Will and Testament of the said A. B. have now
paid and delivered unto the within bounden E. W. the Mother of the said
Children, the sum of etc. of etc. for the several Legacies of such, of the
same Children, as are yet under the age of one and twenty years (that is to
say) fourscore pounds for the use of the above named G. B. according to the
Bequest thereof to him made as aforesaid, Forty pounds more for the use of E.
B. Forty pounds more for F. B. and Forty pounds more for A. B. all Children
of the said G. B. Deceased, to be paid unto them at their several ages as
abovesaid; If therefore the above bounden E. B. his Heirs Executors
Administrators ar Assigns, or any of them do or shall well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid, unto every of the said Children before named respectively
(viz.) to G. B. E. B. F. B. and A. B. their said several sums or Legacies
above mentioned, at every of their several respective ages of twenty one
years, according the effect and true meaning of the said Will, without fraud or
coven, That then etc.

A Condition for payment of Money to a Child when he comes to age, and in the
mean time to find it, and bring it up.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden T. C. his Heirs Executors etc.
do well and truly deliver and pay, or cause to be delivered and paid, unto T.
M. son of I. M. late of etc. the sum of etc. within one month next after, that
the said T. shall attain and come to his full age of 21. years; And also
carefully and honestly, according to his calling and degree, keep, educate, and
bring up the said T. during his nonage, with necessary and convenient meat,
drink, lodging, learning, and apparel; and if the said T.M. shall happen to
die and depart this life, before he shall attain his said age of one and twenty
years; Then if the said T. C. his Executors, etc. do within one year next
after the decease of the said T. M. pay, or cause to be paid unto the within
named, etc. his Executors or Assigns to the use of the Children of the said I.
M. which shall be then living, the said sum etc. to be equally distributed
and divided amongst them. That then etc.

An Assignment of a Wharfe stock of Wood, Coals, Lighters, etc. with a General
Release, and Covenants for Peaceable enjoying, etc.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between J. G. of etc. Woodmonger of the one part,
And J. C. of etc. in the same parish and County Woodmonger of the other part:
Witnesses, that whereas the said J. G. being on the sixth day of August, Anno.
Dom 1637. and in the thirteenth Year of his said Majesty's Reign that now is,
lawfully possessed for diverse years then to come, of and in one Wharfe in
Milford Lane in the parish of etc. and of a certain stock of Wood and Coals
thereupon, and in the Lighters at the said wharf Namely of one hundred twenty
and four Chaldron of Coals, valued at one hundred and two pounds two shillings
and nine pence; forty thousand of Oaken Billets, at etc. Six Horses, six Carts
with their furniture, Cole-sacks, Lighters, Planks, Cole measures, and new and
old wheels about the yard valued at etc. All which did amount in the whole to
the sum of three hundred two pounds five shillings and nine pence; and did
commit unto him the said I. C. the use, occupation and mannaging of the said
stock of Wood and Coals, and of the sum of one hundred ninety seven pounds
fourteen shillings and three pence of lawful money of England to be laid out
in buying of wood and coals to make up the whole stock five hundred and two
pounds to be used, managed, employed and supplied from time to time by him the
said I. C. at the said Wharfe for the term of seven years then next ensuing,
if the said J. and I. should so long live, upon such conditions, covenants and
agreements, and in such sort as were mentioned, expressed and contained in
certain Articles of agreement indented, bearing date the sixteenth day of
August 1637. in the said thirteenth year of his said Majesty's Reign made
between the said I. G. of the one part, and the said I. C. of the other part,
as in and by the said Articles at large it does and may appear; And whereas it
is agreed, that the Agreement in the said Articles shall cease and be
determined, and that the said I. C. shall have, hold, retain and keep the said
stock of goods and money to his own use, in consideration of the sum of etc.
of lawful money of England, agreed to be secured to be paid by the said I. C.
to the said I. G. at certain days agreed upon. Now this Indenture therefore
Witnesses That the said I. G. for the consideration aforesaid, Has granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said
I. C. all the said stock of goods and money before mentioned, formerly
delivered into the hands of the said I. C. as aforesaid; and does also remise,
release and for ever quit claim unto the said I. C. all actions, accounts,
claims and demands whatsoever touching or concerning the same stock of goods
and money, or any part thereof; To have and to hold the said stock of wood,
coals, money and other things before mentioned, and every of them unto the said
I. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper
use and behoof, and as his and their own proper Goods and Chattels for ever.
And the said I. G. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every
of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, that he the said I.C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall and may from henceforth for ever, peaceably and quietly have, hold and
enjoy the said stock of goods, and money, and the same and every part thereof,
to dispose and convert to his and their own proper use and behoof, without the
let, suit, trouble, claim or disturbances of him the said I. G. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, claiming by, from or under him, them or any of them, or by, or
under, or by reason of his, their or any of their act or acts, right, title,
interest, means or procurement etc. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease of a Message, diverse plats of Grounds, with Buttals
and Boundals, several Covenants, etc. with an Exception, etc.
THis Indenture made the etc. day of, etc. Anno Domini, 1632. and the eight
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, etc. Between S. H. of etc.
Gentleman, of the one part: and F. L. of etc. Esquire, of the other part.
Whereas Sir John T. late of etc. Knight and Baronet, deceased; and the late
right honorable N. Lord Tufton, and Earl of Thanet, by the name of Sir T. N.
Knight, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir John T. now also deceased; by
their Indenture bearing date the thirtieth day of May, in the fifteenth year of
the reign of our said Sovereign Lord King Charles over England, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did demise, grant and to farm-let unto E. W.
of, etc. his Executors and Assigns, all that the Message or Tenement, shed and
plat of ground, situate, lying and being in Chick-lane, etc. containing by
estimation one hundred foot in length, from the North to the South; and in
breadth forty one foot, from the East to the West: The Message, or Tenement
then in the tenure of I. W. lying on the East side thereof, and the said
Chick-lane on the North side thereof: And the Message or Tenement then in the
tenure of one R. S. on the West and South sides thereof: And also their part of
one Message or Tenement, or shed, and parcel of a Ground lying and being in
Chick-lane aforesaid, containing by estimation fourscore and twelve foot in
length, and in breadth eighteen foot; the Message or Tenement then in the
tenure or occupation of one A. B. on the West side thereof; the said Chick-lane
on the North side thereof; and the Message or Tenement, then in the tenure or
occupation of one H. S. on the South side thereof, and then or late before in
the tenure or occupation of the said A.B. his Assignee or Assignees, and all
and singular the Messuages, Tenements, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Rooms,
Shops, Cellers, Sollers and void ground unto the said Messuages or Tenements,
shed and plats of ground before mentioned to be demised, belonging or in any
wise appertaining. To have and to hold to the said Edmund Weight, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of th'Annunciation of the
blessed Lady S. Mary the Virgin last past, before the date hereof, unto the
full end and term of thirty and one years from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said
Term, unto the said Sir I. T. yearly, during his life; and after his decease,
to the said right honorable N. Lord T. and Earl of Thanet, his Heirs and
Assigns, the full sum of eight pounds of lawful money of England, at two of
the most usual Feasts or Terms in the year: That is to say, at the Feasts of
S. Michael the Archangel, and th'Annunciation of the blessed Lady the Virgin
Mary, by equal portions, as by the same Indenture more plainly may appear. And
whereas by certain other Indentures bearing date the said thirtieth day of May,
made between the said Sir John T. and the said N. Lord T. and Earl of Thanet,
by the name of Sir N. T. Knight, on the one part; and the said E. W. on the
other part: It is covenanted, conditioned and agreed by and between all the
said parties: And the said E. W. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, did covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Sir I.T. and the
said N. Lord T. and Earl of T. their Heirs and Assigns, by the said last
mentioned Indenture; That the said E. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, should well and truly, yearly, during the said Term of one and twenty
years, pay or cause to be paid to the said Sir I. T. during his natural life;
and after his decease, to the said N. Lord T. and Earl of T. his Heirs and
Assigns, the full sum of twenty three pounds of lawful money etc. for and in
the name of a fine or income for the said Lease at the two Feasts aforesaid by
equal portions. And whereas also the said Sir I. T. and the said N. Lord T.
and Earl of T. by the name of Sir N. T. Knight, have by their Indenture bearing
date the said etc. day of May, for the consideration therein mentioned,
demised, granted and to farm let unto I. W. of etc. All that their Message or
Tenement, situate, lying and being in Chick-lane aforesaid, late in the tenure
or occupation of one Agnes W. or her Assignee or Assignees; containing by
estimation from the East to the West, thirty foot in breadth; and in length from
the North to the South, threescore foot; the Tenement then in the occupation of
the said I. W. lying on the East side thereof; the Tenement then of Ralph F.
Gentleman, on the West side thereof; the Tenement then in the tenure or
occupation of the said Ralph F. on the South side thereof: and also all that
Tenement, shed or piece of ground lying and being in Chick-lane aforesaid,
containing by estimation one hundred and twenty foot of Assize in length, and
twenty eight foot in breadth; then, or late before, in the tenure or occupation
of the said I. W. or his Assignee or Assigns: The Tenement then in the tenure
or occupation of one I.C. lying on the East side thereof; and the Tenement then
in the tenure of one I. W. on the West side thereof; and the Tenement belonging
to S. Martins Organs, on the South side thereof; And also one other little
piece or parcel of ground, situate, lying and being near Chick-lane aforesaid,
etc. containing by estimation in length nineteen foot, from the East to the
West; and in breadth, from the North to the South, sixteen foot, late in the
tenure or occupation of R.B. or of his Assignee or Assignees, the Tenement then
in the occupation of the said I. W. on the East side thereof; and the Tenement
then in the tenure of the said Ralph F. on the West side thereof; the Tenement
then in the tenure of R. S. and E.W. on the North side thereof; and the
Tenement then in the tenure of the said. R.F. on the South side thereof; and
also all and singular Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Stables and Back-sides,
Back-houses, Shops, Cellers, Sollers etc. unto the said Message, and several
plats of ground before demised, then belonging or appertaining, or to or with
the said demised premises, then held, used, occupied or enjoyed as part,
parcel or member of them, or either of them. To have and to hold all and
singular the said demised premises, with th'appurtenances, to the said I.W.
his Executors, Administ and Assigns, from the Feast of th'Annunciation of our
blessed Lady the Virgin Mary then last past before the date of the said last
recited Indenture, unto the full end and term of thirty and one years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly, during the said Term, unto the said Sir I. T. during his life;
and after his decease, to the said right honorable N Lord T. and Earl of T.
and his Heirs and Assigns, the full sum of six pounds of lawful money of
England, at the two Feasts aforesaid, by even and equal portions. And whereas
by certain other Indentures bearing date the said thirtieth day of May, made
between the said Sir I. T. and the said N. Lord T. Earl of T. of the one party;
and the said I.W. of the other part: It is covenanted, concluded, condescended
and agreed by and between all the said parties: And the said I. W. for himself,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, did covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said Sir I. T. and the said N. Lord T. Earl of T. their Heirs and
Assigns: That the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, should
well and truly, yearly, during the said Term of thirty and one years, pay or
cause to be paid to the said Sir John T. during his natural life; and after
his decease, to the said N. Lord T. Earl of T. his Heirs and Assigns, the full
sum of seventeen pounds of lawful money of England, for and in the name of a
fine or income for the said Leases, at the two Feasts aforesaid, by even and
equal portions; as by the same several Leases, relation being unto them had,
more at large it does and may appear: Which said several Leases, Estates and
Interests of the said E. W. and I. W. of, in and to all and singular the
aforesaid premises, in and by the aforesaid several Indentures of Lease,
demised, granted and contained, as aforesaid, were by mean conveyances and
sufficient Assurances in the Law, conveyed to John Witherings, Esquire: And the
said I. W. by deed indented under his hand and seal, bearing date the etc. of
etc. 5 Car. has conveyed his estate, interest and term of years in the said
premises, unto the said S. H. for, during and until all the residue of the
time then to come and unexpired of the said several Indentures of Lease
granted, be fully complete and ended, as by the same conveyances and
assurances, relation being thereunto had, it does and may appear. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That the said S. H. for and in consideration of the sum
of three hundred and thirty pounds etc. to him in hand, at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said F. H. well and truly paid,
whereof the said S. H. does acknowledge the receipt; and thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof: does hereby for ever acquit and discharge the said
F.H. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them: Has granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and
absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said F.H. and M.
his Wife, all and singular the said demised premises above mentioned, to be
demised by the aforesaid Indentures, or any of them, demised, letten, or
granted, or mentioned, meant or intended to be in and by the same demised,
letten or granted, with their and every of their appurtenances: And all the
Messuages, Houses, Edifices and Buildings now standing, erected and built; and
all the said Original Indentures of Demise, and all mean conveyances and
Assignments thereof, and of every part thereof, and all the time and term of
years yet to come and unexpired, granted, mentioned or intended to be granted
in or by the said Indentures, or of any them: and all the estate, interest,
right, title, term and terms of years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he
the said S. H. now has yet to come and unexpired of and in the said demised
premises, or any of them. To have and to hold all and singular the said
demised premises by these presents mentioned or intended to be granted,
assigned or conveyed; and all the said Original Indentures of demise, and all
mean conveyances and assignments thereof, and all the term of years yet to come
and unexpired, of and in the said demised premises, or any of them, unto the
said F. H. and M. his Wife, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
immediately from and after the making hereof, for and during all the residue of
the said several terms of etc. years therein yet to come and unexpired. And
the said S. H. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said F. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That he the said S. H. has not before the day of the date hereof,
made, done or committed any act or acts, thing or things, Grant, Lease, Estate
or Encumbrance whatsoever; whereby, or by reason whereof, the said Leases,
Estates and premises before herein assigned and set over, or any part or
parcel thereof, are or shall be frustrated, avoided, disturbed or encumbered:
Except one Lease made by the said F. H. and S. H. unto R. H. of a Message or
Tenement, with th'appurtenances, parcel of the premises aforesaid, now or late
in the occupation of I. S. by Indenture dated etc. now last past, for the term
of sixteen years, commencing from the Feast etc. at the yearly rent of a Pepper
Corn; and except certain Leases in the said Deed from the said I. W. mentioned
to be excepted severally and respectively of several parts and parcels of the
said premises, before the said S. had any estate in the premises, or any part
thereof, by E. W. to G. W. H. G. and T. R. etc. Upon which Leases diverse
several Rents are respectively reserved, amounting in the whole to the sum of
sixty one pounds yearly, or thereabouts: All which Rents shall or may be
hereafter payable to the said F. H. and M. his Wife, their Executors and
Assigns, and except all other Leases and Estates mentioned and excepted in the
said Deed, from the said I. W. etc.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Lease, reciting diverse Leases, with several Covenants.
THis Indenture made etc. Anno Domini, 1633. Between M. F. of etc. and H. E. of
etc. of the one part: and I. W. of etc. and R. H. of the other part. Whereas
the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of Mercers of the City of London, by
their Indenture of Lease under their common Seal, bearing date the etc. day of
etc. 1614. and the twelfth year of King James, etc. for the consideration
therein expressed, did demise, grant, bargain and to farmlet unto the right
honorable T. late Earl of Exeter, deceased, all that their Close or parcel of
pasture ground, called or known by the name of etc. containing by estimation
ten acres, be it more or less, situate, lying and being in etc. which Close
abutteth upon the West etc. on the East upon another lane, then or sometimes
called Stroud-lane, leading from the etc. toward the South, upon a plat called
or known by the name of the Covent Garden; and toward the North, upon certain
lands called the etc. and a Garden plat, sometime in the tenure of W. R. or his
Assigns: which said Close called O. was sometime in the tenure of Sir T. C.
deceased, Father of the said Earl, or of his Assigns. To have and to hold to
the said Earl of Exeter, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said
demised Close or parcel of pasture ground, from the Feast day of etc. last
past, before the date of the same Indenture, unto the full end and term of
thirty years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, at
and for the yearly rent of ten pounds payable, as in and by the same Indenture
of Lease more at large it does and may appear. By force whereof, the said T.
Earl of Exeter entered into the premises, and was thereof lawfully possessed
accordingly. And whereas the said T. Earl of E. (being of the premises so
possessed, as aforesaid) by his Indenture bearing date the nine and twentieth
of October, 1615. and in the etc. year of his said Majesty's reign, for the
consideration therein expressed, did grant, assign and set over all his estate
and interest in the premises, unto Sir W. S. of etc. Knight, his Executors and
Assigns: as by the same Indenture of Lease more at large appears. And whereas
also the said Sir W.B. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date the fifteenth day
of February, Anno Domini, 1625. and in the etc. year of his said late Majesty's
reign, for the considerations therein expressed, did demise, grant and to
farm-let unto C. Cundall of etc. All that piece of ground, parcel of the said
Close or pasture, called and known by the name of E. alias, etc. containing in
breadth throughout the whole length, twenty foot of assize etc. or thereabouts,
adjoining to the Covent Garden, etc. Together with free ingresse, egresse and
regresse, way and passage to and for the said C. Cundall, his Executors and
Administrators, Friends, Servants and Assigns, with Horses, Carts and
Carriages, or without at their wills and pleasures, into and from the said
demised premises, at all fit and convenient times, in, by and through the said
ways set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by the said Sir W. S. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in or upon the same Close. To have and to
hold the said parcel of ground, and other the before demised premises, with
the appurtenances, to the said C. Cundall, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from etc. next ensuing the date of the same Indenture, unto the full
end and term of twenty and eight years from thence next ensuing, and fully to
be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said
term of eight and twenty years, unto the said Sir W. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, the sum of four hundred pounds of etc. at the Feast
of etc. as in and by the same Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse other
Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein contained, more at large
also it does and may appear. By force whereof the said C. Cundall entered into
the said parcel of ground, with th'appurtenances, and was thereof lawfully
possessed accordingly: The estate and interest of which said C. Cundall, of, in
and to the same premises, did afterward lawfully come to the hands and
possession of the said I. W. And the said I. W. did erect and set up certain
Tenements, Sheds and Edifices, in and upon the same parcel of ground so
demised, to the said C. Cundall, as aforesaid. And whereas also the said Sir W.
S. by his Indenture bearing date the etc. last past, for the consideration
therein expressed, did grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over all his
estate, right, title, interest, reversion, claim and demand of, into and out of
the said Close or parcel of pasture ground, called, Elinsfield, alias, Long
acre, with the appurtenances, unto the said H. E. his Executors and Assigns,
for and during all the rest and residue of the aforesaid term of thirty years
then to come and unexpired; as in and by the same Indenture, relation being
thereunto had, more at large it does and may appear; Which Assignment to the
said H. E. was in trust for the use and behoof of the said M. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said M. F.
and H. E. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to the said M. F. by the
said I. W. at and before th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and
truly paid: the receipt whereof the said M. F. does hereby acknowledge, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit, exonerate
and discharge the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them: Have granted, bargained, aliened, sold, assigned and set over,
and by these presents does clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign
and set over unto the said R. H. by and with the consent and direction of the
said I.W. all that their and every of their reversion and reversions, of and in
the said parcel of ground, demised by the said Sir W. S. to the said C.
Cundall, as aforesaid, and of and in all Houses, Edifices and Buildings,
erected, standing or being in or upon the same parcel of ground, or any part
thereof; and the said yearly rent of four pounds reserved due and payable for
the same premises, and all other rents, issues and profits of the said
premises: and also all the estate, right, title, interest, property,
reversion, claim and demand whatsoever, which they the said M. F. and H. E. or
either of them, now have, or has, or may, might or ought to have, claim and
demand of, into or out of the said parcel of Ground, Houses, Edifices and
Buildings aforesaid, or any of them; or of, into or out of any part or parcel
thereof: together also with the counterpart of the said Lease, made by the said
Sir W. S. to the said C. Cundall, as aforesaid. To have and to hold the said
parcel of Ground, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Reversion, Rents, and all other
the premises before in and by these presents granted, bargained, sold,
assigned or set over, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every
of their appurtenances, unto the said R. H. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from henceforth, for and during all the rest and residue of the
foresaid thirty years yet to come and unexpired. And the said M. F. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R.H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, in
manner and form following: That is to say, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said R. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them from time to time, and at all times hereafter, for and during the rest and
residue of the said term of thirty years yet to come and unexpired, peaceably
and quietly to have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said parcel of
Ground, Houses, Edifices and Buildings; And the rents, issues and profits
thereof, shall or may have, receive, take and convert to his and their own
proper use and behoof, without the lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction,
disturbance or interruption of them the said M. F. or H. E. or any of them,
their or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or
of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawful having or claiming, or which
shall lawfully have or claim any lawful estate, right, title or interest of,
in, to or out of the said premises, or any part thereof, by, from or under
them or either of them, or by reason of their act or acts, right, title, means
or procurement, other then such as shall claim by force of the said Lease made
to the said C. Cundall; and also free and clear, and freely and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged by the said M. F. his Executors or
Administrators, or some or one of them from time to time, and at all times,
during the residue of the said term of thirty years yet to come and unexpired,
and well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, for, from, touching and
concerning the said yearly rent of ten pounds reserved upon the said Original
Lease, and by and from the said Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of
Mercers, to the said Earl of Exeter, as aforesaid; as also free of all
Encumbrances had, made, committed, suffered or done by them the said M.F. and
H. E. and either of them, their Executors or Administrators, or any of them, by
their or any of their act or acts, default, means or procurement. And the said
H. E. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and
grant to and with the said etc. his Executors etc. and to and with every of
them by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R.
H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, for and during the rest and residue of the
said term of thirty years yet to come and unexpired, peaceably and quietly to
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said parcel of Ground, Houses,
Edifices, Rents, Reversions and all other the premises, before, in and by
these presents granted, bargained, sold, assigned or set over, and every part
and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, without the
let, suit, trouble, eviction, disturbance or interruption of him the said H. E.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or which shall or may lawfully
claim, by, from or under him, them or any of them; or by, from or under, or by
reason of his, their or any of their act or acts, right, title, interest, means
or procurement.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of diverse Lands, etc. with a Covenant to pay Heriots upon Deaths, etc.
with many other substantial Covenants.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between Sir H. Oneil, of etc. Knight, of the one
part: And G.R. of etc. Gentleman, of the other part: Witnesses, That the said
Sir H. Oneil, as well for a certain sum of money to him paid, as also for
diverse good causes and considerations him thereunto moving, Has demised,
granted, bargained, sold and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise,
grant, bargain, sell and to farm-let unto the said G. R. all those four Town or
Town-lands, commonly called, known or reputed to be known by the several names
of Cashall K. E. F. etc. situate and being within the Manor of etc. in the
County of etc. according as the same are bounded, meated and abutted by and
with the ancient meats and bounds thereof; and as the said Towns or Townships,
and every or any of them, have been enjoyed by the said Sir H. Oneil, or any
other his Farmours, Leassees or Under-tenants, and now or late in the
respective tenures, possessions or occupations of the said Sir H. Oneil, or the
Under-tenants, Farmours, Leassees or Assignees of him the said Sir H. Oneil:
Together with all and all manner of Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Orchards,
Gardens, Yards, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Ways, Waters, Watercourse,
Commons, Profits, Easments, Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said four Towns or Town-lands, them or any of them,
belonging or with them or any of them, used or enjoyed, or in any wise
belonging or appertaining: And all rents, and yearly profits, and other duties
and services reserved or payable upon or by reason of any Lease or Leases,
Demises or Grants heretofore to any person or persons, covenanted or made of
the premises or of any part or parcel thereof; and the Reversion and
Reversions of the said four Towns or Town-lands, and every of them, and of all
and every the before demised premises, depending or expectant or remaining
upon any Demises, Leases or Grants, now in, being or at any time pretended to
be of the said premises, or any part thereof, for term of life or lives, or
for term of years, or otherwise howsoever. Except and always reserved out of
this present Demise and Grant of the said demised premises, unto the said Sir
H. Oneil, his Heirs and Assigns, all Timber trees, Woods and Under-woods, now
growing, standing or being, or hereafter to grow, stand or be in or upon the
said Towns or Town-lands, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof: Together
with all Felons, Goods, Waifs, Estraies, Mines, Minerals, Privileges,
Royalties and Franchises whatsoever, to the said Towns or Town-lands, or any of
them, belonging or in any wise appertaining: And together also with free
ingresse, egresse and regresse for taking, having, digging, receiving, felling,
rooting and carrying away the said Timber trees, Woods and Under-woods, or the
Royalties, Privileges and Freedoms aforesaid. To have and to hold the said
Towns and Town-lands before mentioned, and all other the premises, before, in
or by these presents demised and granted, bargained and sold, and every part
and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, and the
reversion and reversions, rents and yearly profits of the same, and of every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast day of All Saints last past, before the date of these
presents, unto the full end and term of ninety and nine years from thenceforth
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying therefore
yearly, and for every year during the said term unto the said Sir H. Oneil, his
Heirs and Assigns, the yearly rent or sum of etc. of current money of England,
at the Feasts of Philip and Jacob, and All Saints, by even and equal portions,
or within one and twenty days next after any of the said Feasts. And if it
shall happen the said yearly rent to be behind in part or in all, contrary to
the reservation aforesaid; and no sufficient distress can or may be found and
taken in and upon the said demised premises (A demand thereof being by the
said Sir H. Oneil, his Heirs or Assigns first made) That then, and from
thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir H. Oneil, his
Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, into the said four Towns or Town-lands, and
all and singular the foresaid demised premises, with th'appurtenances, or into
any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the whole to re-enter, and the same
to claim, have again, enjoy and re-possesse, as in his and their first and
former estate; any thing in these present Indentures contained to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding. A Covenant for new building three Messuages on the
demised premises.
And the said G. R. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said Sir H. Oneil, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and
with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following: That is to
say, that he the said G.R. his Exe. etc. shall and will within the space of ten
days next ensuing the date of these presents, at his or their own proper costs
and charges, erect, new build and set up in and upon some convenient part of
the premises by these presents demised, three Messuages, Tenements or Houses
fit and convenient for habitation, to be so erected of Timber, Stone or Brick,
according to the most usual manner of building now used within the Realm of
England; and the same being thus built, shall from time to time, and at all
times during the aforesaid Term of etc. years, keep and well maintain in good
repair: And shall and will likewise from time to time, during the said Term,
well and sufficiently repair, amend, maintain and keep all the Houses,
Edifices, Hedges, Ditches, Fences and Enclosures, in and about the said demised
premises, or any part thereof, in good and sufficient reparations, and the
said demised premises, and every part thereof, being well and sufficiently
repaired, maintained, hedged, fenced, ditched and amended in the end of the
said Term, shall and will quietly leave and yield up unto the said Sir H.
Oneil, his Executors, Administrators and Asigns. And that the said G. R. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and his and their Under-tenants, shall
and will from time to time, during the said Term, grind all their several kind
of Grain whatsoever, that they or any of them shall expend in and upon the
demised premises, or any part thereof, at the Mill or Mils of him the said Sir
H. Oneil. A Covenant to pay Heriots.
And the said G. R. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
for every of them, does further covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said Sir H. Oneil, his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by
these presents, That he the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall or will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said Sir
H. Oneil, his Heirs or Assigns, such several and respective Heriots for the
said demised premises as are hereafter in these presents mentioned and
expressed: That is to say, upon the death of the said G. R. his Executors or
Administrators dying Tenant in possession of the said premises, or any part
thereof, his or their best Beast in the name of an Heriot: And upon the decease
of every of his or their Leassee, Farmour or Under-tenant of the said
premises, or any part thereof, one half of the value of the price of his or
their best Beast, in full lieu and satisfaction for the whole Heriot. And the
said Sir H. Oneil for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said G. R. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said G. R. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and his and their Leassees, Farmours and
Under-tenants, from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the said
Term, to have and take in and upon the said demised premises, competent and
sufficient house-boot, plough-boot, cart-boot, hedge-boot and fire-boot, to be
spent, expended and employed in, about and upon the same premises, and not
elsewhere. And the said Sir H. Oneil for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, does further covenant, promise and grant
to and with the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to
and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following: That is
to say, That the said Sir H. Oneil is and stands lawfully seized of and in
the said four Towns, Town-lands or Town-ships before mentioned in these
presents; and of and in all other the demised premises, with their
appurtenances, of such good, perfect and lawful estate of inheritance in
Fee-simple, as that he the said Sir H. Oneil has in himself, good rightful
power and lawful Authority hereby to demise, grant, bargain, sell and to
farm-let the said four Towns or Town-lands before mentioned, and all other the
premises aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said
G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for such term of years, and in
such manner and form, as is herein before mentioned and expressed: And for the
further and better securing and confirming of the said four Towns or
Town-lands, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said G.
R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the Term
aforesaid, and in manner and form as is aforesaid, according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents. The said Sir H. Oneil for himself, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant and
grant to and with the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them by these presents. That the said G. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall or lawfully may from time
to time, and at all times hereafter during the said Term, by these presents
granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy well and
truly the said four Towns or Town-lands, without any molestation or hindrance
wrought by the said Sir H. Oneil, or any claiming by, from or under him; and
also shall and may take receive and perceive all tents and all other profits of
the said four Towns or Town-lands, and all other the premises, before, in or
by these presents granted, bargained, sold and to farm-letten, or mentioned,
agreed or intended to be hereby granted, bargained, sold and to farm-letten,
and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances
under the rents, covenants and agreements in these presents reserved, mentioned
and contained, without the lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction, molestation or
interruption of the said Sir H. Oneil, and the Lady M. his Wife, and of the
Heirs and Assigns of the said Sir H. Oneil, or of any of them, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming or which shall claim by, from
or under him, her, them or any of them, free and clear, and freely and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or well and sufficiently saved and kept
harmless, of, for, from, touching and concerning all and all manner of former
and other Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Estates for years, Statutes
Merchant and of the Staple Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Annuities,
Rents, Charges, Rents seek and all other charges, titles, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had, made, committed, suffered, done or
assented unto by the said Sir H. Oneil (except the yearly rent herein before
reserved)

In witness, etc.
A Jointure, with diverse Limittations, etc. with a Proviso for Revocation.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between V. W. of etc. Esquire, and F. his Wife,
formerly the Wife of G. A. Esquire, deceased, of the one part: And A. B. of
etc. Esquire, I. P. of etc. Gentleman, and I. G. of etc. Merchant, on the other
part: Witnesses, That the said V. W. as well for and in consideration of a
Marriage heretofore had and solemnized by and between the said V.W. and the
said F. his now Wife, and for settling of a competent Jointure for the said F.
if she shall happen to survive the said V.W. and for the settling, assuring and
conveying of all and singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
hereafter in these presents mentioned, with their and every of their
appurtenances, in the name and blood of the said V. W. for so long time as it
shall please Almighty God, and to the several uses, intents and purposes, and
in such manner and form as hereafter in and by these presents is expressed,
mentioned and declared according to and in pursuit of a certain agreement made
between the said V. W. and F. before their said inter-marriage. And also for
diverse other good and valuable considerations him thereunto especially moving,
Has granted, aliened, infeoffed, released and confirmed, and by these presents
does grant, alien, infeoffe, release and confirm unto the said A. B. I. P. and
I G. their Heirs and Assigns, all that the Manor of S.M. with all and
singular the rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging,
or in any wise appertaining, situate and being in the said County of H. And
also all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tofts, Crofts, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Mils, Orchards, Gardens,
Meadows, Leasoes, Pastures, Closes, Feedings, Parks, Warrens, Commons, Waters,
Fishings, Ponds, Pools, Moors, Marshes, Woods, Under-woods, Furzes, Heaths,
Wastes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Views of Frank, Pledge, Courts, Barons,
Perquifits and profits of Leets and Courts, Waifes, Estraies, Felons, Goods,
Goods of Fugitives and Outlaws, Tiths, Oblations, Obventions, Royalties,
Privileges, Jurisdictions, Preheminences and Hereditaments whatsoever of him
the said V. W. situate, lying and being, renewing, growing or coming in S. M.
aforesaid, or elsewhere in the said County of H. And also all that the Advowson,
Donation, Nomination, Presentation, free Disposition and right of Patronage of
the Parish Church of S. M. aforesaid: And all and every the Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments and other Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and
singular the appurtenances of him the said V. W. situate, lying and being,
coming, growing, arising and renewing within the Town, Fields, Parish, Hamlets
and Territories of S. M. aforesaid, or else where within the said County of H.
and all the estate, right, title, interest, property, claim and demand
whatsoever of him the said V. W. of, in and to the same Manor, Messuages,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof: and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof,
and of every part thereof, and all and every the rent and rents thereupon
reserved, due and payable, or any part thereof. All which premises were by the
said V. W. bargained and leased to the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their
Executors and Assigns, by Indenture bearing date etc. for the term of three
months next ensuing the making of the said Indenture, as in and by the same
Indenture, reference being thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear.
To have and to hold the said Manor of S. M. with the appurtenances, and all
and singular the said Messuages, Tofts, Crofts, Lands, Tenements, and the said
Advowson and right of Patronage of the Parish Church of S. M. aforesaid, and
every the profits and emoluments thereby arising and renewing, and all and
singular other the premises hereby conveyed and assured, or meant, mentioned
or intended to be by these presents conveyed and assured, with their and every
of their rights, members and appurtenances, and the reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, unto the said A.B.
I. B. and I. G. and their Heirs and Assigns to the several uses, intents and
purposes, and upon the trust and confidence, and under the several provisions,
conditions and limittations hereafter, in and by these presents expressed,
limited and declared, and to and for none other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever: (That is to say) as for and concerning all the Farm, Message or
Tenement, commonly called or known by the name of Cousin Farm, and all and
every the Houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Gardens, Orchards and
Lands, errable Meadow and Pasture, containing by estimation one hundred acres,
be the same more or less, to the said Message, Farm or Tenement belonging or
in any wise appertaining; with the appurtenances, situate, lying and being in
S. M. aforesaid, and now or late in the possession or occupation of the said A.
B. or his Assigns: And all the Farm, Message or Tenement in S. M. aforesaid;
together with all and every the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Yards, Gardens, Orchards, errable Lands, containing by estimation sixty acres,
be the same more or less, Closes, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments to the
said Message or Tenement belonging or in any wise appertaining, with
th'appurtenances, now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said A. B. or
his Assigns: And also all that Message or Tenement, Houses, Buildings, Barns,
Stables, Orchards, Gardens, errable Lands, containing by estimation a hundred
acres, be the same more or less, Closes, Meadows, Pastures, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, situate, lying and being in S M. aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, heretofore in the tenure or occupation of C. D. and now or late
in the tenure or occupation of T.W. or his Assigns; and all these errable
Lands, containing by estimation thirty acres, be the same more or less; and
all those Closes, Meadows, Pastures, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with
their and every of their appurtenances, situate and being in S. M. aforesaid,
now or late in the occupation of I. S. or his Assigns: And also all those
twenty acres of errable Land, Meadow or Pasture in S. M. aforesaid, now or late
in the tenure or occupation of W. H. or his Assigns: Together with all and
singular Ways, Easments, Commons, Common of Pasture, Profits and Commodities
whatsoever to the said premises, or any part thereof, belonging or
appertaining, or therewith used or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed or taken as
part, parcel or member thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, To
the use and behoof of the said V. W. for and during the term of his natural
life, without impeachment of or for any manner of strip or wast; And from and
after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said F. for and during the term
of her natural life, for her Jointure, and in lieu of and in recompense of her
Dower and title of Dower, and from and after the several deceases of them the
said V. W. and F. his Wife, then to the use and behoof of the first Son of the
body of the said V. W. on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten or to be
begotten; and of the Heirs males of the body of such first Son lawfully to be
begotten; and for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the
second Son of the body of the said V. W. on the body of the said F. lawfully
begotten or to be begotten; and of the Heirs males of the body of such second
Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue, to the use and
behoof of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and
every other Son on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and of the Heirs males of the body of every such to be begotten Son
lawfully to be begotten, the elder Son, and the Heirs males of his body being
always preferred before the younger Son, and the Heirs males of his body,
according to the seniority and priority of birth and age; and for default of
such issue then, as for and concerning all and singular the premises hereby
limited and appointed to and for the Jointure and livelihood of the said F.
with their and every of their appurtenances; and the reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, to the use and
behoof of the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. and their Assigns, for and during the
term of their natural lives, and the life of the longest liver of them, and
from and after their decease, and the decease of the survivor of them, To the
use and behoof of the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the survivor or
survivors of them the said A.B. I.P. and I. G. for and during, and unto the
full end and term of sixty years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, and upon trust and confidence, and to the uses, intents and
purposes hereafter in and by these presents limited, expressed and declared:
(That is to say) from and after the decease of them the said A. B. I. P. and
I.G. and of the survivor of them, and from and after the end, expiration and
other determination of the said Term of threescore years, as aforesaid, then as
for and concerning the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of
the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises so limited, for lives and
years as aforesaid: And as for and concerning all that the Manor of S. M.
aforesaid, Mannor-house or Capital Message, and all and every the Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Closes,
Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Tenements and Hereditaments, commonly called or
known by the name of the Demeasne Lands of the Manor of S. M. aforesaid,
situate, lying and being enclosed and environed with a ring hedge, near about
the said capital Message, and for and concerning all other the Lands, Closes,
Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their and every
of their appurtenances, and the reversion and reversions, remainder and
remainders thereof, whereof no estate, use or uses, is or are herein formerly
limited and declared: To the use and behoof of the said V. W. and his Assigns,
for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any
manner of strip or wast; and from and after his decease, to the use and behoof
of such person and persons, for such estate and estates, and for such use and
uses, and in such sort, manner and form, as the said V. W. by any his Deed or
Deeds in writing, indented, sealed, delivered and executed in the presence of
three credible witnesses at the least, shall declare, limit and appoint, and
until such declaration, limitation or appointment then to the use and behoof of
G.W. eldest Son of the body of the said V. W. and of the Heirs males of the
body of the said G. W. lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and for default of
such issue, then to the use and behoof of R. W. second Son of the body of the
said V. W. begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of the said R. W.
lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use and behoof
of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and every
other Son of the body of the said V. W. lawfully begotten or to be begotten,
and of the Heirs males of the body of every such to be begotten Son, lawfully
to be begotten the elder Son; and the Heirs males of his body to take place,
and be preferred according to their seniority and priority of birth and age;
and for default of such issue, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the said
V. W. lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and for default of such issue, to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said V. W. for ever. And the true
intent and meaning of these presents, and of all the parties hereunto upon the
execution of these presents is, and the special trust and confidence in them
the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns
hereby reposed, is hereby declared and agreed to be, That if in case the said
V. W. shall depart this life, having no issue male of his body upon the body of
the said F. lawfully begotten, or without leaving the said F. with child of a
Son, who hereafter shall be born alive; and having at the time of his decease,
one, two or more Daughters of his body on the body of the said F. lawfully
begotten, then living; or if there be one only Daughter, if she be not
preferred in marriage with eight thousand pound portion; or if there be two
such Daughters, and if they be not severally preferred in marriage with one
thousand pound a piece; or if there be three such Daughters, if they be not
preferred in marriage, with portions of one thousand marks apiece, as is
hereafter mentioned: Or if the said V. W. leaving the said F. with child of one
or more Daughter or Daughters, who shall after be born alive; that then the
said A.B. I. P. and I.G. the survivor and survivors of them, his and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, out of the rents, issues and profits of
the said Messuages, Cottages, Closes, Pastures, Meadows, Tenements,
Hereditaments and other the premises with th'appurtenances so to them limited
and appointed for lives and years as aforesaid, shall raise and levy as soon as
conveniently may be for the portion of such Daughter, if there be but one, the
sum of two thousand pound of lawful etc. to be paid to such only Daughter, her
Executors and Assigns, at her age of eighteen years, or day of marriage,
which shall first happen; or as soon as the said sum of two thousand pound can
be raised: And if there shall be two such Daughters, the sum of one thousand
pound apiece: Or if there be three Daughters, then for the portions of the
three Daughters the sum of one thousand marks apiece of current etc. to be paid
to them, their Executors and Assigns severally and respectively, at their
several and respective ages of eighteen years, or days of marriage, which
shall first happen, or as soon as the same can be conveniently raised: And upon
this further trust and confidence, and to the intent and purpose, that if it
shall happen the said V. W. die, leaving one only Daughter, or two or three
Daughters of his body on the body of the said F. begotten, then living or
afterward to be born as aforesaid. And that the said only Daughter shall
happen to depart this life before she accomplish her age of eighteen years, or
day of Marriage, or if there fortune to be two or more Daughters, then if both
or all the said Daughters die or depart this life before either or any of them
accomplish their several ages of eighteen years, or be married, as aforesaid,
then the said several sums of money intended for their portions and
advancements of such Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid, or so much thereof as
shall be raised or levied out of the rents, issues and profits of all or any
the premises (all charges and expenses being defrayed, wherein full and
liberal allowance shall be made and given) shall be satisfied and paid to such
person or persons as the said V. W. his Heirs or Assigns by any writing under
his or their hand subscribed in the presence of two or more credible witnesses,
shall limit and appoint. And in default of such limittation and appointment to
the Executors or Administrators of the said V. W. and his Heirs: And upon this
further trust and confidence, and to the intent and purpose that the said A. B.
I. P. and I. G. and the survivors and survivor of them, his and their Executors
and Assigns, shall out of the rents, issues and profits of the said Messuages,
Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises so to them limited for
raising of portions, as aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances,
levy and pay, or cause to be levied and paid to and for the maintenance of such
Daughter and Daughters, as aforesaid, if there be but one only Daughter, the
sum of 50. l. per annum; and if there be two or three Daughters, the sum of 30.
l. per annum apiece until such Daughter or Daughters respectively shall attain
to her or their age of eighteen years, or shall be married, and her or their
portions paid, as aforesaid. Provided always, and it is the true intent and
meaning of all the said parties to these presents, That if the said V.W. shall
happen to depart this life without any issue female of his body upon the body
of the said F. begotten, or without leaving the said F. with child of one or
more Daughters that shall be after born alive: That then the estate and estates
so limited, as aforesaid, to the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. for their lives;
and after their deceases, to their Executors and Administrators for sixty
years, shall cease, determine and be utterly void. Provided also, that from and
immediately after such time as the aforesaid A. B. I. P. and I. G. their
Executors and Assigns, shall or might have limited and raised the said
several sums for portions, and present maintenance of such Daughter and
Daughters as aforesaid, that the said estates for lives and years limited to
them in trust as aforesaid, shall cease, determine and be utterly void; and the
said Messuages, Cottages, Lands and Tenements, and all and singular other the
premises so to them limited as aforesaid in trust, shall immediately go and be
to such person and persons to whom the reversion or remainder of the said
Messuages, Lands and Premises shall belong and appertain. And the said V. W.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, does covenant, grant and agree to and with the said A. B. I. P. and I. G.
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of
them by these presents, that the said Messuages, Cottages, Closes, Meadows,
Pastures, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises
before by these presents so respectively limited and appointed for the
Jointure of the said F. now are, and so from time to time, and at all times
hereafter (for and notwithstanding any act or default of the said V. W. his
Heirs and Assigns, or any of them) shall remain, continue and be to the said F.
and her Assigns, of the clear yearly value of, etc. above all charges and
reprizes. Provided always, and upon this further condition, and to the further
use, intent and purpose, That if the said V.W. happen to depart this life,
leaving a Son of his body on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten, and the
said F. do him survive, and afterward do intermarry with any person or persons
whatsoever; that then, from and immediately after the said Marriage, as for and
concerning one full fifth part (in five parts) to be divided of all and singular
the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with th'appurtenances
before hereby specified to be limited and appointed to and for the Jointure of
the said F. aforesaid; that the use and uses, estate and estates thereof
limited to the said F. shall cease, determine and be utterly void; and that
from thenceforth they the said B. W. I. P. and I. G. and the survivors and
survivor of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of
the full fifth part of the said Messuages, Lands and Premises, from and
immediately after the inter-marriage of the said F. to the use and behoof of
the said Son of V. W. on the body of the said F. begotten, for and during the
term of the natural life of the said F. for his maintenance, any thing herein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also, and upon
this condition, and so it is covenanted, granted, declared and agreed by and
between all and every the said parties to these presents, and their Heirs and
Assigns respectively, and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said V. W. at any time
hereafter during his natural life, from time to time, by one or more Indenture
or Indentures under his hand and seal, to lease, demise, set and to farm-let
all and every or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, with the appurtenances, which have been usually,
set and to farm-let, unto any person or persons whatsoever, for the term of
three lives, or for any number of years determinable upon one, two or three
lives, or for the term of one and twenty years, or over or under in possession
and not in reversion, so as upon every such Lease and Demise, the ancient and
accustomed rent or more, or the rent or the rents now payable or paid, or more
(over and besides Duties, Heriots and Services due and accustomed) be thereupon
reserved; and so as such Rents, Duties, Heriots and Services upon such Lease
and Leases, severally reserved, shall and may be and continue due and payable
unto him, her or them respectively and successively, unto whom the reversion
and reversions, and remainder thereof, is hereby limited and appointed as
aforesaid. Provided also, and upon this further condition, and so it is
covenanted and agreed by and between all and every the parties to these
presents, That if at any time from and after the death of the said V. W. the
said G. W. Son and Heir of the said V. W. or such other person or persons as
shall be Heir at Law of the said V. W. shall and do well and truly satisfy and
pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid unto the said A. B. I.P. and I. G. and
to the survivor and survivors of them, his and their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, if H: A. Son of the said F. be then living, the sum
of four thousand and five hundred pounds of current, etc. And if the said H. A.
be dead, the sum of five thousand pounds of like current money, at or in the
etc. To the end, that thereby the said A.B. I.P. and I. G. their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, may be thereby enabled to purchase Lands
and Tenements of the value of etc. or may employ and dispose of the same for
the use, benefit and advantage of the issue of the body of the said F. lawfully
begotten or to be begotten: or if the said G. W. or the said Heir at Law as
aforesaid, or any of them, shall at their own proper costs and charges, settle,
convey and assure, or cause and procure to be conveyed and assured, other
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which shall be of the clear yearly value of
two hundred and fifty pounds per annum, above all charges and reprizes unto the
said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their Heirs and Assigns, and to the survivors and
survivor of them, his and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to the like several uses, intents and purposes, and upon the like trusts and
confidences, and under the like conditions, provisoes, powers and limittations
as are hereby formerly limited and appointed; As for and concerning the said
Message, Lands and Tenements herein and hereby limited to and for the
Jointure of the said F: That then and immediately from and after such payment or
settlement, as aforesaid, the several uses and estates herein and hereby
limited (other then the estate for life limited to the said F. as aforesaid)
of, for or concerning the said Lands and Premises, for the use and benefit of
the issue of the body of the said V. W. on the body of the said F. lawfully
begotten or to be begotten, and every of them, shall cease, determine and be
utterly void. And the said V. W. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant, grant and agree to and with the said A. B. I. P. and I.
G. their Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents;
That for or notwithstanding any act or thing whatsoever heretofore done or
suffered by the said V. W. his Heirs or Assigns, or hereafter by him, them or
any of them, to be done or suffered to the contrary, the said V. W. now is, and
so at the time when the first estate of the said Manor, Advowson, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, shall be
conveyed and assured to the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their Heirs and Assigns,
to the uses aforesaid, shall stand and be seized thereof of a good, perfect,
absolute and indefeazible estate of inheritance in fee-simple, or fee-tail,
without any reversion or remainder in the Crown, or without any covenant or use
to alter, change or determine the same. And also that he the said V. W. for or
notwithstanding any act or thing whatsoever heretofore done or suffered to the
contrary, as aforesaid, has and so at the time of the execution of the said
first estate of the said Manor, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their
appurtenances, to the said A.B. I. P. and I. G. their Heirs and Assigns, shall
have full power, good right and lawful authority to grant, convey and assure
the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Advowsons, Tenements and premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances, to the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their
Heirs and Assigns, to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents. And the said V. W. for himself,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does
covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said A. B. I. P. and I. G.
and their Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That the said V. W. and his Heirs, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, during and within the etc. years next ensuing the date of
these presents, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said V. W. his Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, do make,
acknowledge, levy, execute and suffer, or cause to be made, done, levied,
acknowledged, executed and suffered, All and every such further and other
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devises,
conveyance and conveyances, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for
the further more perfect and better assurance, surety, sure-making, conveying
and assuring of the said Manor, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all and singular the premises, with their and every of
their appurtenances, unto the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. their Heirs and
Assigns, to the uses, intents and purposes, and under the conditions, provisoes
and limittations before mentioned, expressed and declared, and to and for none
other use, intent and purpose whatsoever, Be the same by one more fine or
fines, with Proclamations to be levied and executed in due form of Law,
Feofment or Feofments, recovery or recoveries, with single, double or treble
Voucher or Vouchers, Decree or Deeds enrolled or not enrolled, the enrolment of
these presents, Release, Confirmation with warranty, as aforesaid, or otherwise
without warranty; or by all, every or any of the aforesaid ways or means, or
by any other lawful and reasonable means whatsoever, as by the said A. B. I.
P. and I. G. the survivor or survivors of them, his or their Heirs or Assigns;
or as by his, their or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised or required: Which said Fine or Fines, Feofment or
Feofments, Recovery or Recoveries and Assurances whatsoever, had made and
executed, or hereafter to be had, made and executed by the said V. W. his Heirs
and Assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, touching and
concerning all and every or any the premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof shall be and enure, and shall
be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be and enure to the uses, intents
and purposes before in and by these presents limited, expressed and declared,
and to and for none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; any former or
other Declaration of use or uses to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided nevertheless, and upon the condition, and it is
covenanted, declared and agreed by and between all and every the parties to
these presents, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them respectively by
these presents; That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said V. W. at
any time or times hereafter, during his natural life, by his Deed or Deeds
indented, to be by him sealed and delivered in the presence of three or more
credible witnesses, by and with the consent and approbation of the said A. B.
I. P. and I. G. or of the survivor or survivors of them, his or their Heirs and
Assigns, testified in writing under their hands and seals, to alter, change,
revoke, determine or make void all or any the estate or estates, use or uses,
before by these presents limited and appointed to or for the Jointure of the
said F. as aforesaid, and that from and after such alteration, change,
revocation, determination or making void thereof, or of any part thereof, these
presents and all other assurances in the Law whatsoever, shall be and enure,
and shall be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be, and to enure. And
they the said A. B. I. P. and I. G. and their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs
and Assigns of the survivor and survivors of them, shall stand and be seized of
all and singular the premises, (except before excepted) or so much thereof,
whereof such alteration, change, revocation, determination or making void,
shall be had and made, as aforesaid, to such other use and uses, and to the use
of such person and persons, and for such estate and estates, and in such sort,
manner and form, as the said V. W. by any Deed or Deeds indented, sealed,
delivered and executed in the presence of three or more credible witnesses, by
and with such consent and approbation, shall declare, limit or appoint: And
from and after such revocation, in default of such declaration, limittation and
appointment, then to the uses, intents and purposes before by these presents
limited, expressed and declared, and to and for none other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever; Any thing in these presents, or in any former or other
declaration of use or uses contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. In witness etc.

A Condition for payment of Rent Quarterly for Lands held from year to year, at
the pleasure of the Lessor.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above bounden. T.
H. has and holds from year to year, at the will and pleasure of the above
named I. M. certain Closes and parcels of ground lying and being in the Parish
of S. above written, in the County of Berks, parcel of the Lands belonging to
the Tenement there called B. for and under the yearly rent of etc. to be paid
quarterly. If therefore the said T. H. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
or any of them, do well and truly pay of cause to be paid unto the said I. M.
or to his certain Attorney, Executors or Assigns, the said yearly rent of etc.
at the now dwelling house of the said I. M. in T. above written, in manner and
form, as follows: (That is to say) upon the four and twentieth day of June
next ensuing the date hereof etc. upon the eight and twentieth day of September
next also ensuing other etc. upon the four and twentieth day of December next
also ensuing, other etc. and upon the four and twentieth day of March, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God etc. other etc. and so forth quarterly and
every quarter; the one next and immediately ensuing, the other upon the like
days, the sum of etc. during all the time and term that the said T. H. and his
Assigns, shall so hold and enjoy the said Closes and Grounds at the will of the
said I. M. And moreover do from time to time, during all the said Term, at his
own costs and charges, maintain and keep the same premises in good sufficient
Fences and Bounds; and in the end of the said time, do leave and yield up the
same well and sufficiently fenced and bounded, without any Cavillation: That
then, etc.

A Sale of the Moity of Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between R. B. of etc. Executor of the last Will
and Testament of R. R. late of etc. deceased; and P. R. etc. on the one part;
and A. G. etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the said P. R. being
interessed and possessed by Lease dated etc. made and granted unto him the said
P. R. by and from one W. T. of etc. of all that Message, Tenement or Inn,
called or known by the name or sign of the Black Bell, situate in
Fleet Street, in the parish of Saint Dunstan etc. And of all Cellers, Sollers,
Rooms, Barns, Stables, Hay-lofts, Gate-houses, liberties of passage, Courts,
Yards, Windows, Lights, Watercourse, Racks, Planks, Mangers, and all other
the appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement belonging or
appertaining (except as in the said Lease made to the said P. R. of the
premises, is excepted) did afterward by his Indenture of Lease bearing date
etc. for the considerations therein expressed, demise, grant and to farm-let
unto T.R. Citizen etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all those
Rooms, Chambers, Lodgings, Cellers and Easments hereafter particularly
mentioned, being parcel of the said Message, Tenement or Inn, called etc. and
then in the tenure of the said P. R. or of his Assigns (That is to say) One
Celler lying under the Shop, then and yet in the occupation of the said T.R. or
of his Assigns: One Room or Chamber toward the street, called, The Crown,
being part over the said Shop, and part over the said gate or way leading into
the said Message, Tenement or Inn, called, The Black Bell. One other little
dark Room or Chamber, called, The Faggot Chamber, lying backward behind part of
the said Room or Chamber, called the C. on the same flour, with liberty to make
and contrive convenient light or lights, from the Yard of the said Message,
Tenement or Inn aforesaid, to serve the said room, called the F. Room; and the
same so made, to enjoy during the said Lease. One other Room, Chamber or
Lodging toward the street, called, The Angel, directly over the said Chamber,
called the C. One other Chamber or Lodging, commonly called, The two Bed
Chamber, lying backwards behind part of the said Room or Chamber, called the A.
on the same flour. And also one piece or parcel of the lower room, then in the
occupation of the said T. R. or of his Assigns, to contain by estimation etc.
next behind the West end or side of the said Shop, then in the occupation of
the said T. R. toward the North, for the making and contriving of a pair of
Stairs to lead from the said Shop unto the said demised premises, and also
from thence to make and contrive a convenient way or passage to lead into the
Celler before mentioned: Together with all Lights, Ways, Easments, Commodities
and appurtenances, to the said premises belonging or appertaining. To have and
to hold to the said T. R. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from the
Feast of etc. then next coming after the date of the said Lease last recited
unto the end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended: And for and under the yearly rent or reservation for the
first two years, and one quarter of the same term of one Pepper Corn: And
afterward during the whole Term, for and under the yearly rent of etc.
payable, as in and by the said Indenture of Lease made to him the said T. R.
(amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein
contained, more fully and at large it does and may appear. Recital.
And whereas afterward the whole estate, right, title, interest, term of
years, property, claim and demand of the said P. R. in and to the said
premises before mentioned or recited, by good and sufficient conveyances in
that behalf made) came into the hands and possession of the said R. R. who died
thereof lawfully possessed; and by and after whose decease, the said Indenture
of Lease first mentioned, term of years and premises aforesaid, was lawfully
vested and settled in the said R. B. as Executor of the last Will and Testament
of the said R. R. And whereas the said R. B. being of the premises so
possessed, as aforesaid, by his Indenture or Deed indented, bearing date etc.
for the considerations therein mentioned, did grant, bargain, sell, assign and
set over unto I. C. etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the Moity
or one half part of the Message, Tenement or Inn, called, The Black Bell,
aforesaid; and the Moity of all and singular Shops, Cellers, Sollers, Rooms,
Barns, Stables, Hay-lofts, Gate-houses, liberties of passage, Courts, Yards,
Windows, Lights, Watercourse, Racks, Planks, Mangers, and all other the
appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message, Tenement or Inn belonging or
appertaining; and the Moity of all Houses, Edifices and Buildings then standing
or being upon the premises, or any part thereof; and the Moity of all and
singular other the premises whatsoever, mentioned to be demised, in and by the
said Indenture of Lease first mentioned (except as in the same Indenture is
excepted) To have and hold the said Moity of the said Message, Tenement or
Inn, called the etc. and of all other the premises aforesaid (except before
excepted) unto the said I. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from
thenceforth during the residue then to come and unexpired of the whole term
granted by the said Indenture of Lease first mentioned, made to the said P. R.
as aforesaid; as in and by the last Indenture or Deed indented (amongst other
things also) more at large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said R.B. and P.R. for and in consideration of the sum of
etc. to him the said P. R. by the direction and appointment of the said R. B.
well and truly paid before th'ensealing and delivery of these presents by the
said A. G. whereof they the said R. B. and P. R. do acknowledge themselves to
be fully satisfied, contented and paid; and thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge the said A. G. his Executors
and Administrators by these presents, Have granted, bargained, sold, assigned
and set over, and by these presents do clearly and absolutely grant, bargain,
sell, assign and set over unto the said A. G. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all that the Moity or half part of all and singular the said Rooms,
Chambers, Lodgings, Cellers, Ways, Lights, Liberties, Passages, Commodities
and appurtenances; and of all other the premises demised to the said T. R. by
the said P. R. in and by the said Indenture of Lease before recited, and of
every part and parcel thereof, together with the Moity or half part of the said
yearly rent of etc. reserved by the said Indenture of Lease; and full liberty,
power and authority to receive and take the same from time, at such Feasts and
days as the same shall grow due and payable by the said Lease, during the
whole term thereby granted. To have and to hold the said Moity of all and
singular the said Rooms, Chambers, Lodgings, Rents and other the premises with
th'appurtenances, before by these presents mentioned to be granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof, with liberty,
power and authority to receive and take the said rent, as aforesaid, unto the
said A. G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from th'ensealing and
delivery of these presents, for and during all the rest and residue of the said
term of etc. years, to him the said T. R. granted, as aforesaid) now to come
and unexpired, in such like large and ample manner to all intents and purposes,
as they the said R. B. and P. R. or either of them, might, should, or in any
wise ought to have, take and enjoy the same. And the said R. B. and P. R. for
themselves, and either of them, their and either of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, do covenant, promise and
grant to and with, etc. (That is to say) That they the said R. B. and P.R. or
one of them, at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, are
and stand, or one of them is and stands so lawfully and absolutely possessed
of the premises, as that they the said R. B. and P.R. or one of them, now have
or has good right, full power and lawful authority hereby to grant, bargain,
sell, assign and set over the said Moity of the said several Rooms, Chambers,
Lodgings and other the premises, with th'appurtenances before by these
presents mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said A. G. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid. And further, that he
the said A.G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the rest and residue
of the said term of etc. years, granted to the said T.R. as aforesaid,
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the Moity of the said Rooms,
Chambers, Lodgings and other the premises, with th'appurtenances, before
mentioned to be demised to the said T.R. by the Indenture of Lease above
recited, and every part thereof, and the Moity of the said yearly rent of etc.
by the same Indenture reserved, shall or may receive, take and enjoy from time
to time, as the same shall grow due during the said Term, without the let,
suit, trouble, disturbance, interruption or eviction of them the said R. B. and
P. R. or either of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of
them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from
or under them, or either or any of them; or by, from or under their or any of
their means, act, title, consent or procurement; or by, from or under the said
R. R. deceased; and also acquitted and discharged of and from all and all
manner of former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Statutes, Merchant and of the
Staple Recognizance, Judgments, Executions, Surrendors, Forfeitures,
Re-entries, and of and from all other Titles, Troubles, Charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by the said P. R. and R.
B. and R. R. deceased, or any of them; or to be had, made, committed or done by
the said P. R. and R. B. their Executors, etc. or any of them; or by their or
any of their means, act, title, interest, default, consent or procurement. In
witness etc.

A Lease of Lands by way of Morgage, in consideration of a sum of money.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between the right honorable E. Earl of B. and
the Lady L. his Wife, Countess of B. The right honorable the Lord M. Baron of
R. in the County of etc. Sir F. G. of etc. and E. W. of etc. on the one part:
And I.W. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, Consideration.
That in consideration of the sum of etc. to the said E. Earl of B. and the
Lady L. Countess of etc. in hand paid by the said I. W before th'ensealing and
delivery of these presents, whereof they do acknowledge the receipt, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do hereby clearly and absolutely
acquit, exonerate and discharge the said I. W. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, for ever by these presents: They
the said W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. at and by the special direction and
appointment of the said E. Earl of B. and the Lady L. Countess of B. Have
demised, granted, Grant.
bargained and sold, and by these presents do demise, grant, bargain and sell
unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all those Closes
and Grounds hereafter particularly named, situate, lying and being in the
Hamlets, Parish or Fields of Burley in the County of R. (That is to say) One
Close of pasture and meadow ground, commonly called or known by the name of New
Cow Close, containing by estimation 110 acres, now in the tenure or occupation
of R. I. Gentleman, or his Assigns. One other Close of pasture, called etc.
containing by estimation 170 acres at least, now in the tenure or occupation of
William Dalby, or of his Assigns. Two Closes of pasture etc. Together with all
and singular the ways, passages, profits, commodities, advantages and
appurtenances whatsoever, to the said several Closes and Grounds, and every or
any of them belonging or in any wise appertaining, or with them or any of them,
now or heretofore usually occupied, demised or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed,
taken or known, for or as part or parcel of them or any of them. And the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, rents and yearly profits
whatsoever, of all and singular the said Closes and premises before mentioned,
and of every of them. To have and to hold the said Closes, Fields, Grounds,
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with their and every
of their appurtenances before by these presents demised or mentioned to be
hereby demised, granted, bargained or sold, and every part and parcel thereof,
unto the said I.W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the etc. day
of etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, unto the full end and term of
99 years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended:
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E.
W. their Heirs or Assigns, one Pepper Corn only at the etc. if the same be
demanded. Provided always, and it is fully agreed between the said parties to
these presents, and every of them, That if the said E. Earl of B. the Lady L.
Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E.W. or any of them, their of any of
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said I. W. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the sum of etc. in or upon the etc. at or in the
etc. between the hours of etc. That then this present demise, grant, bargain
and sale, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect; any thing herein
before contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. For
payment of the money.
And that the said E. Earl of B. the Lady L. Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F.
G. and E. W. or some of them, their or some of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum
of etc. in or upon the etc. at or in the place aforesaid, and between the hours
of etc. according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And
further, That the said Closes, Grounds and other the premises, before in and
by these presents mentioned to be demised, granted, bargained and sold, now are
and be, and so during the whole term of etc. hereby granted, bargained and
sold, shall be remain and continue of the clear yearly value of etc. over and
above all charges and reprizes. For the quiet enjoying of the premises upon
default.
And moreover if default be made in payment of the said sum of etc. herein
before in the said proviso mentioned, or any part thereof, at the day, time and
place before mentioned and limited for the payment thereof: That then the said
I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and
may from time to time, and at all times during the said term of etc. peaceably
and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Grounds,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the premises herein before
mentioned to be demised, granted, bargained or sold, with all and singular
their and every of their appurtenances, and every part thereof, without the
let, suit, trouble, denial, disturbance, expulsion or interruption of the said
E. Earl of B. the Lady L. etc. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. and of all and
every other person or persons whatsoever, and discharged of and from all other
bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, statutes, recognizances, extents,
judgments and all charges, estates, titles, troubles and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, or to be had etc. by the
said E. Earl of B. the Lady L Countess of etc. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W.
or any of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever. And further, For
further assurance upon default.
that if default be made in payment of the said sum of etc. or any part
thereof, at the day, time and place aforesaid, that then the said E. Earl of B.
the Lady L. Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all and every other person or
persons lawfully having, claiming or pretending to have or claim any manner of
estate, right, title, interest, claim or demands whatsoever, of, in or to the
said Closes, Grounds, Hereditaments and premises, or any part thereof, shall
and will make, do, suffer and execute or cause and procure to be done, made,
suffered and executed, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act
and acts, thing and things, device and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the
further better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure making and conveying of
the said Closes, Grounds and premises, with th'appurtenances, and every part
thereof, unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, during
the said Term of ninety and nine years, according to the intent and meaning of
these presents; as by the said I. W. his Executors or Assigns, or by his or
their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised and
required. And the said W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. for themselves severally,
and not jointly, nor one of them for each other their several Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them respectively, do
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents; That if
default of payment be made of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof, at the
day, time and place aforesaid: That then the said I. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and may from time to time, and at all times
during the said Term of etc. peaceably and quietly have, hold, possess and
enjoy the said Closes, Grounds and other the premises before mentioned, to be
hereby demised, granted, bargained or sold, without the lawful let, suit,
trouble, denial, disturbance, expulsion, eviction or interruption of them the
said W. Lord M. Sir F G. and E.W. severally, their and every of their several
and respective Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or
persons, lawfully claiming in, by, from or under them or any of them
respectively, as aforesaid; And discharged and clearly acquitted of and from
all former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Statutes, Recognizances, Extents,
Judgments, and of and from all other Charges, Estates, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done by the said W.
Lord M. Sir F: G. and E. W. or any of them respectively, their or any of their
several Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any other person or
persons claiming or to claim in, by, from or under them or any of them
severally and respectively, their or any of their several estate, act, title,
means, consent or procurement. In witness whereof, the parties first above
named to these present Indentures, have interchangeably set their hands and
seals yeaven, the day and year first above written. Annoque Domini, 1634.

A Covenant that after default of Payment, the Possession of Lands in Morgage
shall be delivered to the Morgagee, and also all Deeds and Writings concerning
the same.
ANd the said A. B. for himself etc. That he the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will upon reasonable request to him or them to be made after
default shall happen to be made of or in any of the payments aforesaid (if it
shall happen so to fall out) deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said C.
B. his Heirs and Assigns, the quiet and peaceable possession and seizin of all
and singular the before bargained premises: And shall then also, after such
default of payment within one month then next ensuing, deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, as well all and singular
the Letters, Pattents, Deeds, Evidences, Writings, Escripts and Minuments
before by these presents bargained and sold. As also all the true Copies of all
such other Deeds and Writings, as do touch and concern the before bargained
premises, or any part thereof: Together with any other Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments not before mentioned: The said Copies to be written at the costs
of the said D. his Heirs or Assigns.

A Letter of Attorney upon Covenants.
TO all Christian people etc. I, O. B. of etc. Son and Executor of A.B. etc
Whereas by one Indenture bearing date etc. made between the said A. B. on the
one part; and C. D. of etc. on the other part. There are diverse Covenants
contained on the part and behalf of the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, to be kept and observed, touching a Lease granted to the said A
B. by the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of etc. of a certain
Tenement lying in the precincts of Saint Martins le grand, in London, and
covenanted to be transferred over by the said A. B. to the said C. D. as by the
same Indenture, whereunto relation being had, more at large may appear. Now
know ye, that I the said O. B. for diverse good causes and considerations me
moving, and especially for that it appears by the said Indenture that the
name of my said Father was used only in trust for the benefit of E D. Wife of
the said C.D. and their issue, Have made, ordained, constituted, and in my
stead and place put and appointed my Well-beloved Friend E. H. of etc. to be my
true and lawful Attorney for me; and in my stead and name, if need require, to
sue, implead and prosecute the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, for
or upon the breach or not performance of all or any the said Covenants in the
said Indenture specified; and to have, receive and take for the use of etc.
aforesaid, all such benefit, sum and sums of money, commodity and advantage
whatsoever, which shall be recovered or gotten by means of any such suits,
actions or proceedings to be brought or commenced concerning the same: And all
and every other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which shall be
needful to be done in and about the premises; the same for me, and in my
stead and name, to do, execute and perform in such like large and ample manner,
and form, to all intents and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I
were there personally present. And whatsoever lawful actions, suits, process
and proceedings shall be hereafter commenced, sued or prosecuted by the said E.
H. or his Assigns, against the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators,
touching the premises, I promise to allow, maintain, justify and confirm by
these presents, without releasing or discharging of the said C. D. his
Executors or Assigns, of the Covenants aforesaid, or any of them, or of any
suit, process or proceeding thereupon to be brought or commenced. In witness
etc.

An Assignment, with a Proviso, to have the Lease again, upon payment of a sum
of money.
THis Indenture made etc. between G. B. of etc. of the one part; and W. H. of
etc. of the other part. Whereas one R. G. and A. his Wife, by their Deed
indented bearing date etc. for the consideration in the said Deed indented,
expressed; did demise, grant and to farm-let unto the said G. B. all that the
Moity and half deal of the Manor of D. with the appurtenances, set, lying and
being in etc. and the Moity and half deal of all their Messuages, Dove-houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Mils,
Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Commons, Heaths, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments, to the said Manor of, etc. belonging: set,
lying and being within the Town, Fields, Parishes and Hamlets of C. N. D.
within the said County of G. or accepted, reputed or taken etc. To have and to
hold etc. with diverse Covenants, Articles, Agreements and Reservations in the
said Indenture contained, as by the said Indenture etc. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said G. B. for diverse and sundry etc. Has given, granted,
aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents does etc. as well the
said Moity etc. as also all the estate, right, title, use, interest,
possession, claim and demand whatsoever, of the said G. B. had and made, as is
aforesaid. To have and to hold the said Moity and half deal of the said Manor
of D. with the appurtenances, and all the estate, right, title, use, interest,
claim, possession and demand whatsoever of the said G. B. etc. Provided
nevertheless, and it is agreed between the said parties to these presents,
That if the said G. B. his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, or any of them, do at
any time hereafter pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and delivered unto the
said W. H his Executors or Assigns, or any of them, the sum of etc. of lawful
money of Engl: at one entire payment at or in the Ch: porch of the Parish Church
of C aforesaid, within the said County of G. or at or in the place where the
said Parish Church now stands: that then, and from thenceforth, as well this
present Grant and Assignment, and every Clause, Article and Sentence herein
contained, to be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect: As also, that
then, and from thenceforth, the said Moity of the said Manor of D. and all
other the premises whatsoever, with their appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof by these presents assigned and set over unto the said W. H.
shall come and be to the said G. B. his Executors and Assigns, for and during
all the number of years that shall (at the time of the payment so to be had and
made in manner and form aforesaid) be then to come and unexpired of the said
term of etc. years granted unto the said G. B. his Executors and Assigns, as is
aforesaid; as though this present Indenture of Assignment of the premises had
not been had or made.

In witness, etc.
A Revoking of a Pretended Contract of Matrimony.
LEt all men know and take notice by these presents, That we F. D. of S. and I.
H. of etc. being desirous to have matters cleared between us concerning such
proceedings as have been about treaty of Marriage between us; and that we both,
notwithstanding any pretense of contract between us, may hereby declare and
manifest to all people, That there was no absolute contract or engagement
between us at any time for marriage of each other, but that we are free one
from the other in that kind, and may each of us freely marry with others. We do
therefore freely and without any compulsion, declare, manifest and make known
unto all people, That we the said F. D. and I. H. were never absolutely
contracted together in any contract of Matrimony: neither did we or any of us
profess or declare that we would marry each other, unless (etc. our Friends
etc.) We do therefore hold our selves no ways to be tied or obliged each to
other in any manner of contract of Matrimony, or for marriage each with other;
and therefore we do hereby freely and absolutely release and discharge each
other of and from all and all manner of contracts, of or for marriage
heretofore had or pretended to be had or made between us; and we do hereby
freely and fully release, acquit and discharge each other of us, of and from
all and all manner of actions, suits or claims prosecuted, or which may be
begun or prosecuted in any Court, Ecclesiastical or Civil, concerning the
premises. And in testimony of our free and full consents herein, we the said
F.D. and I. H. have hereunto subscribed our names the day of etc.

An Assignment of Lands taken upon an Extent.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between T. H. of etc. and W. W. of etc. of the
one party; and I. B. of etc. of the other party. Whereas the said T. H. lately
recovered by judgment in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, the sum of etc.
against T. C. of B. etc. and thereupon the said T. H. in Michaelmas Term last,
did take and sue forth execution by Writ of Eligit, directed to the then
Sheriff of the said County of W. Whereupon by Inquisition, and by the Jurors
then and there sworn, taken by the said Sheriff at the City of etc. the day of
etc. Amongst other things it was found, That the said T. C. at the time of the
said Inquisition, was possessed for and during the term of etc. years then to
come, of and in one Message or Tenement, and diverse parcels of Land, Meadow
and Pasture, to the said Message or Tenement belonging or appertaining in C.
in the said Parish of etc. as his proper goods: Which said term and interest of
the said T. C. of or in the said Message or Tenement, the Jury at the time of
the said Inquisition, did apprize and value at etc. pounds: Which said term of
years the said Sheriff the day of the same Inquisition, did deliver unto the
said T. H. at the price and apprizement aforesaid: To hold unto the said T. H.
and his Assigns, as his proper goods and Chattels, according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made; and as parcel of the same debt and damages of the
said T. H. recovered, as aforesaid. And the said Jurors also found, that the
said T. C. was at the time of the said Inquisition, seized in his Demeasne, as
of Fee, of and in one Message, and diverse parcels of Land, Meadow and Pasture
to the said Tenement belonging or pertaining, lying and being in B. etc. found
by particular names and quantities, and then valued by the said Jurors to be
worth etc. yearly: The Moity of which said Messuages and premises in B. by
particular names and quantities, the said Sheriff did then also deliver unto
the said T. H. at the rate and apprizement aforesaid: To hold to the said T. H.
and his Assigns, as his free hold, according to the form of the Statute made in
that behalf, until the residue of the said debt of etc. should be thereby
fully levied, as by the said Inquisition more particularly and at large it does
and may appear. Which said debt so recovered by the said T.H. and the said
execution thereupon, was nevertheless in trust for the said W. W. party to
these presents, and was the proper money of the said W. W. assigned to him by
the said T. H. as part of the Marriage portion of etc. Now Witnesses these
presents, That the said W. W. and T. H. as well for and in consideration of the
sum of etc. paid unto the said W. W. as also for diverse good causes and
considerations them thereunto moving, Have granted, assigned and set over, and
by these presents do grant, assign and set over unto the said I. B. all that
the said Message or Tenement, Lands and premises in C. aforesaid; and all the
estate, interest, title and term of years yet to come; which the said W. and T.
H. has, or either of them has, or have, or might have, of, in or unto the
said Message, Tenement, Lands and premises, and every or any part thereof, by
the said Extent or Inquisition aforesaid, or otherwise. And also all that the
Moity or half deal or part of the said Message or Tenement, Lands and
premises in B. aforesaid; and all the estate and interest which the said W. W.
and T. H. or either of them, have, has or might claim of, in or unto the said
Message, Lands and premises in B. or any part or parcel thereof, in as large,
ample and beneficial manner, to all intents and purposes, as the said W. W. or
T. H. or either of them, have, has or might hold, claim or enjoy the same,
etc. And the said W. W. and T. H. do severally, and not jointly, each one for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise and agree to and
with the said I. B. his Executors etc. that he the said I. B. his etc. shall
and may from henceforth quietly hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the
premises, and every part thereof, free from any former Grants, Charges,
Assignments and Encumbrances of the premises, or any part thereof, made by the
said W. etc. or any claiming from etc. And the said I. B. does likewise by
these presents for himself, his Executors etc. covenant, promise and agree to
and with the said W. etc. That he the said I. B. his Executors etc. shall and
will save, defend and keep harmless the said W. W. and T. H. their Executors
etc. of and from all manner of suits, troubles, charges, expenses and sums of
money which the said W. etc. shall be from henceforth at, put unto, sustein,
disburse or undergo, for or by reason of the said extent, or any matter or
thing therein contained, or that might come or happen to the said W. etc. for
or by reason of the estate which they or either of them had by extent, as
aforesaid, or any the premises hereby assigned, or by any occasion or reason
rising or growing there, from or by occasion thereof. In witness etc.

A Charter-party for a Ships Voyage.
THis Charter-party indented, made the etc. in the etc. Between I. K. Master of
a certain Ship or Bark, called, The Flower de luce of P. in the County of D. of
the burden of one hundred Tuns, or thereabouts, of the one part: And C. W. and
B. S. Merchants, of etc. Witnesses, That the said Master has demised, granted
and to fraight-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant and to
fraight-let unto the said Merchants, their Factors and Assigns, all that the
said Ship or Bark, with her Tackling, appurtenance and her apparel thereunto
belonging or appertaining, for and during one whole Voyage with the same Ship
to be done and made in manner and form following (That is to say) the said
Master covenanteth, grants and agrees to and with the said Merchants, and
every of them, That the same Ship or Bark, named, The Flower de luce, now being
pressed and ready within the Port of the said Town of S. shall with the first
good wind and apt weather (as God shall send) next after the date hereof, make
sail and sails from thence, directly toward and unto the Key of the City of
Roan, under the Dominion of the French King; and there to tarry and abide by
the space of etc. days current: During the which space, the said Master
covenanteth there to receive into the said Ship, Wares and other Merchandise,
such as it shall then best please the said Merchants, their Factors or Assigns,
there to load to the complete and full loading of the said Ship. And the said
Merchants, and every of them, covenant to and with the said Master, to lade or
cause to be laden there, within the said space, Wares and such other
Merchandise, as it shall then best please the said Merchants, or their Factors,
for their most profit, to the complete and full lading of the said Ship, as is
abovesaid. And moreover, the said Master covenanteth, concordeth, bargaineth
and agrees to and with the said Merchants, and every of them, that the said
Ship with her said loading laden in her within the said space, shall, with the
first good wind and apt weather (as God shall send) next after the said etc.
days become and past, make sail and sails from thence directly toward and
unto the said Port of the said Town of S. where the said Ship shall with
convenient speed, after her there arrival, be discharged of her said lading of
Wares and other Merchandise laden in her, as aforesaid: And the same out of the
said Ship there so discharged, shall be delivered unto the said Merchants, or
the Owners thereof, safely and well conditioned. (God sending the said Ship in
safety) And the said Merchants, and every of them, covenant to and with the
said Master, then and there to receive the said loading laden in her, as
aforesaid: And at the right discharge thereof, to pay or cause to be paid to
the said Master, or his Assigns, the sum of etc. And also to bear and pay,
during the said Voyage, Windage, Groundage, Pilatage and Loadmanage, and all
other arrearages, as in English Ships are accustomed. And the said Master
covenanteth, that the said Ship is, and during the said Voyage shall be,
stiff, strong and stauch, well and sufficiently victualled, rigged and
apparelled with sufficient Mariners for the safe conducting of the said Ship,
and keeping of the Merchants goods during the said Voyage. In witness etc.

A Morgage of Land upon money, etc. for years.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between T. A. of etc. of the one part; and T. M.
Vintner and Citizen of London, of the other part: Witnesses, That the said T.
A. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. of lawful money of England in
hand paid unto him the said T. A. by the said T. M. at and before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents; the receipt whereof the said T. A. does hereby
acknowledge; and thereof, and of every part thereof, does hereby also clearly
acquit and discharge the said T. M. his Heirs and Assigns: And for diverse other
good causes and considerations him the said T. A. thereunto moving: Has
demised, granted, bargained and to farm-letten, and by these presents does etc.
unto the said T. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all those three
several pastures or grounds lying in S. within the parts of Holland, in the
County of L. containing by estimation etc. be they more or less, now or late
in the tenure or occupation of one I B. his Assignee or Assignees. To have and
to hold the said three pastures, and every part and parcel thereof, with their
and every of their appurtenances, unto him the said T. M. his Executors and
Assigns, from the feast day of etc. now next ensuing the date of these
presents, for, during and until the full end and term of 99 years from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be computed, complete and ended. Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said T. A. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, one Pepper Corn, if it be lawfully
demanded, at or on the feast day of Saint Michael the Archangel. And it is
hereby concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents:
And the said T. A. does for himself, and A. his Wife, their Heirs, Executors
etc. covenant, promise and agree to and with the said T. M. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said T. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, quietly and peaceably to
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the said three pastures
or grounds and premises, with their and every of their appurtenances from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, during the said term, without the lawful
let and interruption of him the said T. A. and A. his Wife, their and either of
their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming from, by or under them, or either of them; and
also freed and discharged of and from all and all manner of former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Judgments, Executions and other Charges or Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done or suffered by them or either of them. Provided
always, and it is nevertheless agreed and concluded by and between the said
parties to these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning hereof, That
if the said T. A. his Executors, Administrators etc. or either of them, shall
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T. M. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full and entire sum of etc. of lawful money of
England on the day of etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, at or in
etc. That then this present Indenture, Demise and Grant, and every Clause and
Article therein contained, shall cease, determine, be void and of none effect;
any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of a Manor, with necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between I. W. of etc. on the one part; and R. D.
of etc. and B. his Wife, of the other part: Witnesses, etc. Has granted,
aliened, bargained and sold, and by these presents does grant, alien, bargain
and sell unto the said R. D. and B. his Wife, their Heirs and Assigns, all that
the Manor of etc. with the appurtenances, in the County of Essex: And all
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances whatsoever, by what
name or names soever the same, or any of them, be known or called, now in the
tenure or occupation of W. E. or his Assigns: Together with all and singular
the Lands, Tenements, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments to the said Manor
of H. belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or with the same at any time
heretofore demised, used or occupied; or reputed, taken, accepted or known as
any part, parcel or member thereof. And all other his Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying or being in the Parishes of etc.
or in any of them in the said County of E. And all and singular the reversion
and reversions, remainder and remainders of them, and every of them; and all
Rents reserved upon any Demise or Lease of them, or any part of them: And also
all the estate, right, title or interest, use, possession, claim and demand
whatsoever, which he the said I. W. now has, may, might, should or in any wise
ought to have, of, in and to all and singular the said bargained premises, or
any part thereof: Together with all and singular Evidences, Deeds, Escripts,
Charters, Writings, Court Rols, Books of Survey and Minuments whatsoever
concerning the same, as be now in the hands, custody and possession of the
said I.W. or in the hands custody and possession of any other person or
persons whatsoever, to his use, by his delivery, or which he may lawfully get
or come by without suit in Law. And the said I. W. does covenant, promise and
grant for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them, to and with the said R. D. and B. his Wife, their Heirs and Assigns, upon
reasonable request, to deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said R. D. and
B. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, at or before
the feast day of Saint Michael the Archangel, next ensuing the date of these
presents, true Copies of all such Evidences and Writings as concern the said
Lands, together with any other Lands of the said I. VV. to be written at the
costs and charges of the said R. and B. or either of them, Habend.
their Heirs or Assigns. To have and to hold all and singular the said Manor
of H. Lands, Tenements, and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and
singular their Appurtenances before in and by these presents bargained and
sold, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said R. D. and B. his Wife,
their Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said I.VV. for himself, That he is
seized in Fee, and has power to grant.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with
the said R. D. and B. his Wife, their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, in
manner and form following (That is to say) That he the said I.VV. at the time
of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully and
sufficiently seized of such a good, perfect, lawful, absolute and indefeacible
estate of inheritance in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail; and no reversion or remainder
thereof in the Kings Majesty, and to his and their own use and uses, without
any manner of condition or limittation of any other use or uses, to alter,
change or determine the same estate of and in the said Manor, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, and all other the aforesaid premises, before in and by
these presents mentioned or intended to be granted, aliened, bargained and
sold, as he the said VV. I. can and may lawfully and sufficiently grant, convey
and assure all and singular the said Manor of H. Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the foresaid premises, with all and singular the
appurtenances, unto the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents. That the premises are
discharged of Encumbrances.
And also the said I. W. for himself etc. does covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said R. D. and B. his Wife, and either of them, their and either
of their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That all and singular the said
Manor of H. Lands, Tenements and all other the foresaid premises, with the
appurtenances, before in and by these presents granted, aliened, bargained and
sold, and every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, are and be, and at all times hereafter shall be,
remain and continue clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged; or otherwise,
upon request, sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all and all
manner of former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Rents, Charges and
Arrearages of Rents, Duties, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had,
made, committed, suffered or done, or to be had, made etc. by the said I. VV.
his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, by his or
their means, act, titles, consents and procurement; except one Lease etc. And
also, that they the said R. D. and B. his Wife, and either of them, their and
either of their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time for ever, according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents, peaceably, lawfully and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the said Manor of H. Lands,
Tenements and all other the before bargained premises, with all and singular
their Appurtenances, before in and by these presents mentioned to be granted,
aliened, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, without any
manner of lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction or disturbance of the said I. W.
or his Assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming or
lawfully having, or which shall hereafter have any manner of estate, right,
title, charge or interest, of, in or to the said Manor, and all other the
premises, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, by, from or under the
said I. W. his Heirs or Assigns (all such persons as do claim by force of the
Lease before excepted, only excepted.) And furthermore, that the said Manor of
H. and all other the aforesaid premises, or any part or parcel thereof, are
not holden of His Majesty, in capite, whereby any license of alienation shall
be needful to be had or sued forth for the bargaining, sale, conveying and
assuring of the said Manor, and other the premises, unto the said R. D. and
B. their Heirs and Assigns: Nor that the said R. D. his Heirs or Assigns, shall
at any time or times hereafter, be Ward or Wards unto our said Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for or in respect of the said
Manor of etc. And all other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof.
Covenant for further assurance.
And also the said I. W. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
does covenant, etc That the said I. W. and M. now his Wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said I. and all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
now having or lawfully claiming, or which shall hereafter rightfully claim, any
manner of estate, right, title or interest, of, in and to the said Manor, and
all other the aforesaid premises, or any part or parcel thereof, by, from or
under the said I. W. his Heirs or Assigns; except such person or persons as
shall claim by force of the Lease before excepted, shall and will at all times
hereafter for and during the term of three years next ensuing the day of the
date of these presents, do, make, knowledge, execute and suffer; or cause to be
made, done, knowledged, executed and suffered all and every such further lawful
act and acts, thing and things, device and devises, conveyances and assurances
in the Law whatsoever, with warranty against him the said I. W. and his Heirs,
for the further and more assurance and sure making of the said Manor, Lands,
Tenements, and of all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof, to be had and made sure unto the said R. D.
and B. their Heirs and Assigns for ever absolutely, without any manner of
condition or other limittation; be it by fine or fines, with proclamation with
warranty against him the said I. W. his Heirs and Assigns, recovery with double
or single Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds enrolled, the enrolment of this
present Feofment, with warranty against him the said I. W. his Heirs and
Assigns, release, with confirmation with the like warranty, or without
warranty, or by any or as many of the devises, ways and means aforesaid, as by
the said R. D. and B. or either of them, their Heirs or Assigns, or by their or
any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised
and required, at the only costs and charges of the said R. D. and B. their
Heirs and Assigns: so that the said I nor M. his Wife, be not compelled to
travel from his or their homes or usual places of abode, further then the
Cities of London and Westminster about the same assurances. And moreover, If
the buyer be lawfully evicted within 12 years, the sellers to pay 5. l, an acre.
the said I. W. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. D. and B. and either of
them, and to and with the Heirs and Assigns of either and every of them by
these presents in manner and form following (That is to say) That if it shall
happen at any time within twelve years next after the dare hereof, the said R.
D. and B. and either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, to be
lawfully evicted off or from the said Manor, or any of the Lands, Tenements
and other the aforesaid premises, without any fraud or coven of the said R. D.
and B. or either of them, their Heirs or Assigns, by reason of any right,
title, estate or interest to be had or made by R. W. the Grandfather; or I. W.
the Father of the said I. or the said I. or by any other person or persons,
claiming in, by or under their or any of their estates, titles or interest:
That then he the said I. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or some of
them, shall and will within six months next after such eviction so to be had of
the said Manor, or of any other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof,
upon reasonable request to be made at or in the etc. well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R. D. and B. their Heirs and Assigns, for every
acre, 5. l. and so after that rate, and rate like, and that without fraud,
coven or further delay.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture to lead the use of a fine.
THis Indenture made the etc. between F. G. of etc. of the one part; and R. W.
of etc. of the other part: Whereas it is condescended unto and agreed between
the said F. G. his Heirs etc. and the said R. W. his Heirs etc. that the said
F. G. his Heirs, shall from time to time during two years next ensuing the date
of these Indentures, do, cause, suffer and make such assurance of his Manors
of M. and S. in the County of D. and of the Advowson of the Church of A. and of
all his Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments
whatsoever in M. and D. in the County of D. in such manner and form as by the
said R. W. his Heirs and Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law,
shall be reasonably devised, advised or required at the costs and charges of
the said R. W. Now witnesses this Indenture, That the said R. W. has devised,
that the said F. G. at the term of Saint Hillary next ensuing the date above
written, shall levy and acknowledge one fine, etc. of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Advowsons, and all other the premises, to the said R.W. and his
Heirs, in due form of Law: which fine so to be had, levied and executed,
touching and concerning the said Manor of M. etc. And all the Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Leasows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances, to the said Manor of M. etc. belonging. The said F. G. for
himself and his Heirs, does covenant and grant to and with the said R. W. by
these presents, shall stand and be to the use of the said F. G. during his life
without impeachment of wast; and after his decease, to the use of the said R.
W. and D. his Wife, and of the Heirs of the said R. on the body of the said D.
lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, to the right Heirs of the
said R. W. for ever. And which fine so to be levied and executed touching and
concerning all the residue of the premises. The said F. G. for him and his
Heirs, does covenant and grant to and with R. VV. by these presents, That the
said fine shall stand and be to the use of the said F. G. and I. now his Wife,
and the Heirs of the said F. upon the body of the said I. begotten. And for
default of such issue, then to the use of the said R. VV. and D. and of the
Heirs of the bodies of the said R. and D. between them lawfully begotten; and
for default of such issue, then to the right Heirs of the said R. VV. for ever.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of Demise of diverse Lands, etc. in consideration of a sum of
money, paying a Pepper Corn yearly.
THis Indenture made the third day of May, 1639. etc. Between Sir T. B. of D.
in the County of etc. Knight and Baronet; and M. H. of D. aforesaid, Gentleman,
Servant of the said Sir T. B. of the one part; and Sir W.T. of G. in the County
of N. Knight, of the other part: Witnesses, That the said Sir T. B. and M. H.
as well for and in consideration of the sum of etc. of lawful money of England
to them in hand paid before th'ensealing and delivery hereof, by the said Sir
W. T. whereof and wherewith the said Sir T. B. does acknowledge himself
satisfied, contented and paid; and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, does acquit and discharge the said Sir W. T. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents; as also for diverse other
good causes and considerations them hereunto moving, Have demised, granted and
to farm-letten, and by these presents do demise, grant and to farmlet unto the
said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all those several
Closes or parcels of Land, Meadow, Pasture and errable, called or known by
their several names following (That is to say) One Close or parcel of ground,
called D. containing by estimation etc. acres, be the same more or less: And
one other Close or parcel of Land, called E. containing by estimation etc.
acres, be the same more or less: And one Close or parcel of Land, called C.
containing by estimation etc. acres, be the same more or less etc. All and
singular which said Closes and parcels of Land, are situate, lying and being
within the Fields, Parishes, Precincts and Territories of H. alias, H. in the
County of L. and are part and parcel, or reputed and taken to be part and
parcel of the Manor of H. alias, H. aforesaid: And also all and singular
Message, Tenement, Building, Orchard, Gardens, Commons, Common of Pasture,
Waters, Fishings, VVoods, Under-woods, Trees, Bushes, Fences, Free-bords,
Ways, Easments, and all other Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, Profits, Conditions, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever,
growing, arising, being, coming or issuing in, upon or out of the premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, or to the same or any part thereof belonging
or appertaining. To have and to hold all and singular the said Closes and
parcels of Land, and all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances unto
the said Sir VV.T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the first
day of May last past, before the date hereof, unto the full end and term of one
thousand years from thence next immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended: Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the
said Sir T. B. his Heirs or Assigns, one Pepper Corn, at the feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel only, if the same be lawfully demanded. And the said Sir
T. B. and M H. for them, their Heirs and Assigns, do jointly and severally
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said Sir VV. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, by these presents, That he the
said Sir VV. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may
lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and
singular the premises before by these presents demised, and every part and
parcel thereof, with their and every of their rights, members and
appurtenances, without the lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction, expulsion,
interruption or demand of or by the said Sir T. B. and M. H. or the Heirs or
Assigns of either of them, or of or by any other person or persons, lawfully
claiming from, by or under them or any of them, or their or any of their uses;
or by, from or under their or any of their title, estate, means or procurement;
as also acquitted and discharged, or within convenient time, after reasonable
request thereof to be made, well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless of
and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Estates,
former Leases, Titles, Dowers, Rights or Titles of Dower, Joyntures, Uses,
Entails, Wills, Rent, Charges, Rents, Services, Arrearages of Rents, Statutes,
Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Titles, Troubles, Charges and Demands
whatsoever, had, made, done, committed, or wittingly and willingly suffered by
the said Sir T. B. and M. H. their Heirs or Assigns, or any of them; or of or
by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under
them or any of them, or to their or any of their uses, or by their or any of
their titles, estates, means or procurement. In witness whereof, the parties
first above named to these present Indentures, have interchangeably set their
hands and seals the day and year first above written.

An Indenture of re-demise of the former demised premises to the same parties,
reserving the rent of 250. l. with a proviso, that the same shall cease upon
the payment of the sum of money in the former Demise specified.
THis Indenture made the etc. day of etc. Between Sir VV. T. of G. in the
County of N. Knight, of the one part; and Sir T. B. of D. in the County of N.
Knight and Baronet; and M. H. of D. aforesaid, in the said County of N.
Gentleman, Servant of the said Sir T. B. of the other part: Witnesses, That
the said Sir VV. T. as well for and in consideration of the yearly rent here
under reserved well and truly to be contented and paid in manner and form here
under expressed. As also for diverse other good considerations him at this
present thereunto especially moving, Has demised, granted and to farm-letten,
and by these presents does demise, grant and to farm-let unto the said Sir T.
B. and M. H. and the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the said Sir T.
B. All those several Closes or parcels of Lands, Meadows, Pastures and
errable, called or known by the several names following (That is to say) one
Close or parcel of ground, called D. containing by estimation etc. acres, be
the same more or less (and so go on, as in the Demise) All and singular which
said Closes, and parcels of Lands, are situate, lying and being within the
Fields, Parish, Precincts and Territories of H. alias, H. in the County of L.
and are part and parcel, or reputed and taken to be part and parcel of the
Manor of H. alias, H. aforesaid. And also all and singular Messuages,
Tenements, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Commons, Common of pasture, Waters,
Fishings, VVoods, Under-woods, Trees, Bushes, Fences, Free-bords, Ways,
Easments, and all other Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever,
growing, being, arising, coming or issuing in, upon or out of the premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, or to the same or any part thereof
belonging. To have and to hold all and singular the said Closes and parcels of
Land, and all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances, unto the said
Sir T. B. and M. H. and the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the said
Sir T. B. from the first day of May last past before the date hereof, unto the
full end and term of nine hundred ninety and nine years from thence next and
immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said Sir W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, at or in the South porch of the Parish Church of D.
aforesaid, the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds of current English money, at
two usual Feasts or Terms in the year; that is to say, at the Feast of Philip
and Jacob, and All Saints, by even and equal portions. And if it shall happen
the said yearly rent of etc. or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind and
unpaid, after either of the aforesaid feast days of payment, in which the same
ought to be paid, by the space of fifteen days, that then and from thenceforth
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, into all and singular the said
Closes and parcels of Land, and all and singular the premises, and every part
and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, wholly to
re-enter, re-possesse, re-enioy, have again and detain, as in his or their
former estate; this Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, Proviso.
and it is covenanted, condescended unto, concluded and agreed by and betwixt
all the parties to these presents, That if the said Sir T. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, upon half a years warning thereof, by writing under
his or their hands before hand to be given by the said Sir T. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, unto the said Sir W. T. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will at or on any first day of May, or the
Feast of All Saints, during the said term in and hereby demised, at or in the
place aforesaid, pay or cause to be paid unto the said Sir W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, at one whole and entire payment, the sum of five
hundred pounds of current English money, over and beside the said rent above
reserved, at such day or days as before in these presents are limited and
appointed to and for the payment of the said rent before reserved: That then
from and after such payment or payments of every of the said sum or sums of
five hundred pounds, as aforesaid, endorsed upon both parts of these
Indentures, and subscribed by the said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, for every five hundred pounds that shall be paid, as aforesaid,
the full and entire sum of fifty pounds of the said two hundred and fifty
pounds rent reserved, as aforesaid, shall cease and be determined; the said
reservation, or any thing in these Indentures contained to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. And the said Sir W. T. for him, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant, grant and agree to and
with the said Sir T. B. and M. H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents, That he the said Sir W. T. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will within six months next
after the payment of the sum of two thousand five hundred pounds, by such
payment or payments of five hundred pounds, as aforesaid, deliver or cause to
be delivered up unto the said Sir T. B. and the said M. H. their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or one of them, one Indenture of Demise made from
the said Sir T. B. and M. H. unto the said Sir W. T. of all and singular the
premises herein before demised, as aforesaid, bearing date the third day of
May, in the year of, etc. In witness whereof, the parties abovenamed, etc.

A Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between R. R. Citizen, and etc. on the one part,
and N. D. Citizen, and etc. on the other part, Witnesses, that the said R. R.
for diverse good causes and valuable considerations him hereunto especially
moving, Has demised, granted, betaken, and to Farm letten, and by these
presents does demise, grant, betake, and to farm let unto the said N. D. all
that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, lying and being in or near
Fleet Street in the parish of Saint Donstones, in the west, London, between a
Message or Tenement there, called the F. now in the occupation of P. G.
Merchant Tailor, or his Assignees, on the East side, and the Message or
Tenement now in the tenure or occupation of one A. M. widow, on the West side,
and abutting upon the Garden adjoining to the Temple Church, toward the South,
and upon the high street toward the North, together with all and singular
Shops, Sellers, Sollers, Chambers, rooms, ways, entries, yards, backsides,
houses, buildings, gutters, watercourse, easements, profits and commodities
whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement belonging or in any wise
appertaining; and also all manner of Wanscot, Glasse-windowes, doors and locks,
in and upon the same Message or tenement and other the premissies before
mentioned, to be demised belonging; All and singular which said Message and
all other the demised premises, are now in the tenure or occupation of the
said N. D. To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement, Shop, Sellers,
Sollers etc. and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances before in and by these presents demised, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said N.D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
from the feast day of etc. unto the full end and term of etc. years from then
next ensuing, and fully to be completed and ended, Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said R. R, his heirs and
assigns, the sum of etc. at four of the most usual Feasts or terms of
payment in the year (that is to say) at the Feast of etc. by even and equal
portions: And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc, to be behind and
unpaid in part or in all, by the space of etc. next over or after any of the
said feasts or days of payment, in which the same ought to be paid as
aforesaid, being lawfully demanded, that and then from thence forth and at all
times afterward, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R.R. his heirs
and assigns and every of them, into the said Message or Tenement, and all
other the aforesaid premises, with all and singular their appurtenances,
before by these presents, demised or mentioned to be demised, and into every
part and parcel thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again,
retain, enjoy, and reposseed, as in his or their first and former estate or
estates; and the said N. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all
other the occupiers and possessors thereof, thereout and from thence utterly to
expel, put out, and amove, any thing herein before specified to the contrary
in anywise notwithstanding. And the said N. D. for himself, A Covenant to lay
out the sum of etc on repairs and new building the premises within three years
after the date.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does
Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them, by these presents,
in manner and form following (viz.) That he the said N. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some of them at his or their own proper costs
and charges, shall and will within the time and space of three years next
ensuing the date of these presents, expend and bestow in and about the new
building, repairing or bettering of the premises, hereby demised, the value or
sum of etc. of lawful money of England at the least; And also shall and
will, at his and their like cost and charges, well and sufficiently repair,
uphold, sustain, and keep, maintain and amend the said Message or Tenement and
new building to be erected, and al and singular other the premises with
th'appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and
all manner of needful and necessary reparations whatsoever, from time to time,
and at all times heareafter, when and as often as need and occasion shall
require, during the said term hereby granted. And also all the pavements,
privies, seages and widdraughts to the said Message or Tenement belonging,
shall cause to be paved, purged, scoured, emptied and made clean, as often and
when as need shall be and require during the said term of etc. by these
presents granted, and the same premises so well and sufficiently repaired,
supported, maintained, purged paved, scoured, emptied, made clean and amended;
together with the Locks, Keys, bolts, staples, latches, hooks, hinges,
windows, doors and glass of the same premises, so well and sufficiently made,
glased and amended in the end of the said term of etc. or other sooner
expiration or determination of this present Lease, shall leave and yield up
unto the said R. R. is heirs and Assigns. And also that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said R. R. his heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, four times oftener or in every year, yearly during
the said term, to enter and come into, and upon the said Message or Tenement,
and all other the premises with th'appurtenances, and into every part and
parcel thereof, there to view, search and see what defaults, for want of
reparations shall be found defective and necessary to be done in and about the
demised premises or any part thereof, and of all such defaults for want of
reparations then and there found to give or leave notice, admonition or warning
in writing, to and for the said N. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, for the repairing and amending thereof. And further that he the said
N. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns or some of them, shall and will
within one month next ensuing every such admonition or warning, left or given
as aforesaid, well and sufficiently repair and amend the same, and shall also
discharge and pay all Church duties, Scarvengers wages, watchings, wardings,
and all other taxes, impositions, duties, and charges which shall or may at any
time or times hereafter during the said term, be charged or imposed upon him
the said N. D. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, for or by reason of the
premises hereby demised or any part thereof. And lastly, the said R. R. for
himself his Executors, etc. that he the said N. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, for by and under the payment of
the yearly rent aforesaid, above in and by these presents reserved, and under
the Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements in these presents contained,
shall and may for and during all the said term of etc. by these presents
granted, lawfully peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the premises
with th'appurtenances, by these presents demised or mentioned to be demised,
and every part and parcel thereof, without any manner of lawful let, suit,
trouble, disturbance or eviction of the said R. R. his Heirs or Assigns, or of
any other person or persons whatsoever, by or through his means, assent,
consent, right, title or procurement. In witness whereof etc.

A Defezance upon a Bond Sued to a Judgment.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between W. R. of etc. on the one part, and I. P.
and G. A. of etc. on the other part, witnesses, That whereas the said I. and
G. together with one E. A. of etc. by one obligation bearing date, etc. became
jointly and severally bounden unto the said W. R. in the sum of etc. with
condition thereupon made for the payment of etc. as by the same obligation and
condition thereof at large appears; which said sum of etc. or any part
thereof, or any thing in lieu of the same, was not paid unto the said W.R. in
the said obligation named, nor at any time before nor sithence: By means
whereof the said obligation became forfeited: And whereas the said W. R. has
brought several actions of debt in the Kings Majesty's Court of Common Pleas
at Westminster upon the said obligation against the said I. P. and G. A. upon
which said Actions, several Judgments are had and obtained in the said Court:
Yet nevertheless the said W. R. is contented and pleased, and does Covenant
that neither he the said W. B. his Executors Ad. or Assigns, nor any other of
them, Not to take out execution until etc.
shall at any time before etc. take out any Execution, or Executions upon the
said Judgments or either of them. And further, the said W. does etc. that R.
if the said I.P. and G.A. or either of them etc. do pay etc. That then he the
said W. R. his Executors, To acknowledge satisfaction on payment.
or Administrators shall upon request made, and at the charges of the said I.
P. and G. A. etc. acknowledge satisfaction upon Record of and for the said
several Judgments: And shall also deliver unto them the said etc. the said
Obligation to be cancelled: And the said I. P. and G. A. to be thereof, and of
the said several Judgments discharged. In Witness etc.

An Indenture of Partition, where one had a greater share then the other, for
which a sum was paid, etc.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I. H. etc. on the one part, and I. M. etc. on
the other part, Witnesses, That the said I. H. and I. M. are and do now stand
seized in their demeasne as of see in Common undivided of, and in one Message
or Tenement, and one Yard land thereunto belonging; now or late in the tenure
of etc. situate etc. It is (now to the end a perpetual partition and division
shall be had and made between the said parties, of and in the said etc. and
other the premises aforesaid) Covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between
the said parties, to these presents in manner and form following. And first,
the said I. H. for himself etc. that he the said I. M. his Heirs and Assigns
shall from henceforth have, hold, and peaceably enjoy in severalty to him and
to his Heirs for ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof, the one
moity or half part of the said Message or Tenement, and one yard land with
the appurtenances, that is to say etc. And that he the said I. H. nor his
Heirs, shall from henceforth claim or demand any Right, Title, Use or
possession in or to the same or any part thereof, but that the said I. H. and
his Heirs and Assigns, shall at all time and times hereafter, from all Actions,
Right, Title and demand thereof or thereunto be utterly excluded, and for ever
debarred by these presents. And the said I. M. for himself etc. that he the
said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall from henceforth have, hold and
peaceably enjoy in Severalty to him the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever to his and their own proper use and behoof: The other moity or half part
of the said Message etc. And that the said I. M. nor his Heirs, shall not from
henceforth claim etc. (Vt supra) And in consideration of the said portions; and
forasmuch as the part and portion by these presents allotted and assigned to
the said I. H. and his Heirs, were at the ensealing hereof, of more and greater
value then the said part and portion before allotted and assigned to the said
I. M. and his Heirs, he the said I. H. has at the ensealing and delivery of
these presents well and truly paid to the said I. M. the sum of etc. the
receipt whereof the said I. M. does hereby acknowledge, and thereof and of
every part thereof, does acquit, exonerate and for ever discharge the said I.
H. etc by these presents. In witness whereof etc.

A Grant of a Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between W.B. of etc. and A. B. of etc.
Witnesses, That whereas the said W. B. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date
the etc. (reciting the Lease) as in and by the same recited Indenture of Lease,
etc, Now this Indenture further Witnesses, That the said W, B. for and in
consideration of a certain competent sum of etc. Has demised, granted,
bargained and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant and to
farm-let unto the said A. B. the Reversion and remainder of the said Shop,
Warehouse, Chambers and other the premises by the said Indenture of Lease
demised; Together also with the said yearly Rent of etc. thereby reserved, and
the counterparte of the same Indenture of Lease under the hand and seal of the
said etc. To have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Reversion and Rent of etc.
and every part thereof unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents forwards, for and during
all the residue of the aforesaid term of etc. yet to come and un-expired:
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term, unto the said W. B.
his Executors or Assigns, at the Feast of etc. only one Pepper-corn, if the
same shall be lawfully demanded. And the said W. B. for himself etc. that he
the said W. B. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is
the true, perfect and lawful owner and possessor of the said demised reversion
and rent; And is at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, lawfully and
absolutely possessed thereof. And that he the said W. B. has full power, good
right, true title and lawful Authority to demise and grant the said Reversion
and rent of etc. unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for and during all the rest and residue of the said term of etc. in manner and
form aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And
further that he the said W. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
and every of them from time to time and at all times hereafter, during the said
term, shall and will clearly exonerate, acquit, discharge, save and keep
harmless as well the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as
the said demised Reversion and rent, of and from all former and other bargains,
sales, gifts, grants, Leases, forfeitures, titles, claims, demands and
Encumbrances whatsoever. And moreover the said W.B. for himself etc. that the
said yearly rent of etc. shall continue, remain and be from hedceforth, during
the rest and residue of the said Term yet to come and unexpired,
beforementioned, due and payable unto the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, according to the said Indenture of Lease, and the
tenor, effect and true meaning of these presents. In Witness etc.

Note that the Tenant must attorne or nothing passes, etc.

An Annuity or yearly rent charge.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. of etc. Gentleman, one the one part,
and C. D. of etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. to him in hand paid, before the ensealing
and delivery here of, by the said C. D. the receipt whereof he the said A. B.
does acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
acquit, exonerate and for ever discharge the said C. D. his Executors etc. by
these presents has given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents does
give, grant and confirm unto the said C. D. one Annuity or yearly rent charge
of etc. to be had, taken, perceived and received, and to be issuing and going
out of, and in all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever of the said A. B. as well in etc. as elsewhere within
the Realm of England, to be paid at four Feasts or terms in the year, that is
to say, at the etc. by even and equal portions; the first payment thereof to
be made and begin on the etc. To have, hold, receive, perceive, take and enjoy
the said Annuity or yearly rentcharge of etc. unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to be paid at the four Feasts aforesaid,
in form before declared, from the day of the date of these presents, unto the
full end and term of etc. And if it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly
rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid in part or in all after any of the said
Feast days or terms of payment thereof as aforesaid, in which it is appointed
to be paid, That then and so often as the same, or any part thereof, shall be
so behind and unpaid, the said A. B. grants and agrees for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, administrators and assigns to and with etc. that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said C. D. his Executors, administrators and
assigns and every or any of them, into all and singular the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said A. B. as well in etc. aforesaid
as elsewhere within the Realm of England, to enter and distrain both for the
Annuity aforesaid, and the arrearages thereof (if any be) and the distress and
distresses there from time to time so found and taken to bear, lead, drive,
take and carry away, and the same to withold, detain, keep and impound,
until of the same annuity or yearly rentcharge of etc. and the arrearages
thereof (if any such shall be) the said C. D. his etc. be fully satisfied,
contented and paid. And the said A. B. has put the aforesaid C. D. in full
possession of the said Annuity or yearly rentcharge of etc. in form as
aforesaid (to be had, received and taken) by the delivery and payment of the
sum of etc. which the said A. B. has at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents given and delivered unto the said C. D. in name of possession of the
said Annuity; And the said A. B. for himself etc. that the said A. B. his etc.
shall and will from time to time and at all times during the said term of etc.
well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said C. D. his etc. or some of
them, the said Annuity or yearly rent of etc. in manner and form aforesaid, and
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. In Witness whereof
etc.

An Indenture of Apprentiship.
THis Indenture Witnesses, That E. B. Son of I. B. late of etc. of his free
and voluntary will has put himself apprentice to R. W. C. and etc. to the
science or trade which he now uses, to be taught, and with him after the
manner of an apprentice to dwell and serve from the Feast of etc. unto the full
end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing and etc. By all which term of
etc. the said apprentice, the said R. B. well and truly shall serve, his
secrets shall keep close, his commandments, lawful and honest every where he
shall gladly do; hurt to his said Master he shall not do nor suffer to be
done, to the value of twelve pence or more by the year, but shall let it if he
may, or else immediately admonish his said Master thereof, The goods of his
said Master he shall not inordinately wast, nor them to any body lend: At Dyce
or at any other unlawful game he shall not play, whereby his Master may incur
any hurt; Fornication in the house of his said Master, nor elsewhere he shall
not commit; Matrimony he shall not contract: Taverns he shall not frequent,
with his own proper goods or any others during the said term, Without the
special license of his Master he shall not Merchandise, from the service of
his said Master: Day nor night he shall not absent or prolong himself, but in
all things as a good and a faithful apprentice; shall bear and behave himself
toward his said Master and Mistress and all his, during the term aforesaid. And
the said R. B. to his said apprentice the Science or Art which he now uses,
shall teach and inform, or cause to be taught or informed the best way that he
may or can: And also shall find to his said apprentice Apparel, Meat, Drink
and bedding, and all other necessaries meet and convenient for an Apprentice,
for and during the term aforesaid.

In Witness etc.
A Bargain and Sale of a Manor.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I. H. of etc. and R. B. of etc. Esquires, of
the one part: And W. P. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas T.
H. of etc. Father of the said I. H. by his Writing or Deed indented, bearing
date the etc. in the sixteenth year of etc. for the considerations therein
expressed, did demise, grant, set and to farmlet unto the said I. H. his said
Son etc. All those three yard lands, with th'appurtenances, in W. aforesaid:
being or being accounted to be the ancient Demeasne Lands of the Manor of W.
heretofore purchased by the said T. H. of R. S. Esquire: And also all that his
yard and half yard of Land lying in W. aforesaid, then lately purchased of one
H. H. with all Hades, Leyes, Banks, Lot-grasse, Commons, Profits, Ways,
Easements, Commodities and appurtenances etc. thereunto belonging: And all that
Dove-house, Close and new Orchard in W. aforesaid, to the said etc. belonging
or appertaining, or therewith used, occupied or enjoyed, as in etc. (except
etc.) To have and to hold the said three yard Lands, Close, Orchard and all
other the premises (except before excepted) unto the said I. H. his Executors
and Assigns, for and during and unto the full end and term of etc. from
thenceforth next and immediately ensuing, if the said T. H. should so long live,
for and under the etc. payable, as by the said Writing or Deed indented,
relation being thereunto had, more at large it will and may appear. And whereas
further the said T. H. by one other Writing or Deed indented, bearing date etc.
for and in consideration of the natural love and Fatherly affection that he
the said T. H. did bear to the said I. H. and to the Children of the said I. H.
being his Grandchildren, and for the settling of the Manors, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments (in the said Deed indented expressed) in his name and blood
did in and by the said last mentioned Deed indented, covenant and grant for
himself and his Heirs, to and with the said I. H. and his Heirs, that he the
said T. H. and his Heirs, should and would immediately from thenceforth stand
and be seized of and in all that the Manor or reputed Manor of W. in the
County of O. and of and in all that the capital Message of W. in the County
of O. wherein the said T. H. then dwelt; with all and singular their and every
of their Rights, Rents, Quit-rents, Members and appurtenances whatsoever: And
of and in all those three yard Lands, called or known by the name of the
Ancient Demeasne Lands of the said Manor. And of and in all that yard and half
of Land, lying in W. aforesaid, which the said T. H. had lately purchased, as
aforesaid is expressed. And of and in all and singular Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of the said T.H. in W. aforesaid, the Advowson of
the Church of W. aforesaid, (excepted) To the use and behoof of the said T. H.
for and during his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of
wast; and after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said I.H. and his
Heirs for ever: as by the said last mentioned Indenture acknowledged and
enrolled in His Majesty's high and honorable Court of Chauncery, more at large
it will and may appear. By force and virtue of which said recited Indenture of
Lease, he the said I. H. in, to and upon the said premises entered, and was and
is by force of the said recited Indenture, and by force of the Statute made the
etc. in the etc. for the transferring of uses into possessions, as well of the
said term of threescore years, as of the said remainder expectant, after the
death of the said T. H. possessed and seized. And he the said I. H. being so of
the said premises possessed and seized, did afterward by his Indenture
bearing date etc. and enrolled in the high Court of Chauncery, for the
considerations therein expressed, Give, grant, bargain, sell, assign, set over
and confirm unto the said R.B. his Executors etc. all and singular the before
mentioned premises, with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, as in and by the said last mentioned Indenture, whereunto relation
being had, more fully and at large it does and may appear. Which said bargain
and sale was and is upon condition, that if the said I. H. etc. should or did
pay etc. on the etc. at or in the etc. unto the said R B. his etc. That then
the said Indenture of bargain and sale to be void; as in and by one Indenture
made between the said I. H. on the one part; and the said R. B. on the other
part, bearing date etc. to which reference being had, more at large it does and
may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the said I. H. and R.
B. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to them by the said W. P. before
the sealing and delivery of these presents, well and truly in hand paid,
whereof and wherewith the said I. H. and R. B. do acknowledge themselves to be
fully satisfied, contented and paid; and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof etc. Have granted, bargained, sold, assigned, set over and confirmed,
and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell,
assign, set over and confirm unto the said W. P. his etc. not only the said
recited indenture of Lease, and all their estate, right, title, interest and
term of years therein yet to come and unexpired: But also all the said Manor
of W. and capital Message in the said County of O. with th'appurtenances:
Together with the said three yard Land, called by the name of the Ancient
Demeasne Lands of the said Manor: And also all that yard and half of Land in
W. aforesaid, which the said T.H. purchased of the said H. H. as aforesaid: And
also all and singular Outhouses, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Yards, Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Common of pasture, Woods,
Under-woods, Water, Watercourse, Fishings, Ways, Easments, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Manor of W. and other
the premises aforesaid, or to any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or therewithal now used, occupied or enjoyed as part,
parcel or member thereof, and all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said I. H. situate, lying and being in W. aforesaid, and
the said remainder expectant upon the death of the said T. H. and all and every
other reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of the said bargained
premises, and of every part and parcel thereof; and the rent and rents, and
yearly profits whatsoever, reserved upon whatsoever Demise, Lease, Estate or
Grant, Demises, Leases, Estates or Grants heretofore made of the before
bargained premises, or of any part or parcel thereof. Together with all
Evidences, Charters, Escripts, Minuments and Writings touching or concerning
the premises which he the said I. H. has or may come by without suit in Law.
To have and to hold the said Manor of W. Lands, Tenements, and all and
singular other the premises above by these presents bargained or sold, or
meant or mentioned to be hereby bargained and sold, with th'appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof, and all the estate, right, title, interest, term
and terms of years, reversion, remainder, claim and demand whatsoever of the
said I. H. and R.B. and of either of them, or any other person or persons
whatsoever, in and to the same, unto the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to the sole and proper use and behoof of the said
W. P. his Heirs etc. for ever. And the said I. H. and R. B. for themselves
severally and respectively, and for their several and respective Heirs etc.
all and singular the before bargained premises, with their appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to the use and behoof aforesaid, shall and will
warrant and for ever defend by these presents. In witness etc.

An Indenture of Defezance for the making void of all former Statutes, payment
of a sum of. etc. and performance of Covenants, etc.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between A. B. of etc. on the one part; and E. A.
of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the said E. A. in and by
one recognizance or writing obligatory, of the nature of a Statute staple,
lately made and provided for the recovery of debts, bearing date etc. taken,
sealed, acknowledged and entered into before Sir T.R. Lord Chief Justice of
England, is and stands bounden unto the said A. B. in the sum of etc.
payable, as in and by the said Recognizance or Writing obligary, of the force
of a Statute staple, more fully and at large it does and may appear. It is now
nevertheless covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of these presents,
and of the parties hereunto is, and the said A. B. is contented and pleased,
That if the said E. A. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, do or shall at or
before the etc. discharge and duly make void upon Record, as well all and
every Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple; as also all Recognizances
heretofore acknowledged and entered into by the said E. A. either by himself
alone, or jointly with any other person or persons (the Statute above recited
only excepted) And thereof bring, deliver and leave certificates under the
hands of the Clerks of the several Offices, or their Deputies in that behalf,
at or in the etc. to and for the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, at or
before the etc. day of etc. next ensuing. And also if the said E. A. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said A.B. his Heirs or Assigns, or to some or one of
them, the full sum of etc. at or in etc. in manner and form following (That is
to say) the sum of etc. on the etc. and the sum of etc. on the etc. in full
satisfaction and payment of the sum of etc. And also, if the said E. A. his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, do and shall well and truly observe, perform,
fulfill, accomplish and keep all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles
and Agreements which on his and their parts and behalfs are or ought to be
observed, performed, fulfilled, accomplished and kept, comprised and specified
in one pair of Indentures, bearing date etc. made between the said E.A. of the
one part; and the said A. B. on the other part, according to the true intent
and meaning of the said Indentures: That then the said Recognizance or Writing
obligatory above recited or mentioned, shall be utterly void and of none
effect, otherwise the same shall stand and abide in full force etc.

A Release of Lands upon performance of Articles.
TO all Christian people etc. E.I. etc. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Know ye, that I the said E.I. as well in consideration of the full
performance of certain covenants and agreements mentioned and expressed in one
pair of Indentures bearing date etc. last past etc. made between me the said
E.I. on the one part: And Sir H. W. etc. As also for diverse other good causes
and considerations etc. Have remised, released and for ever quit claimed, and
by these presents do for me, my Heirs and Assigns, and every of us, freely,
clearly and absolutely remise, release and for ever quit claim unto the said
Sir H. W. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in his and their full and peaceable
possession, seizin and being all the estate, right, title, interest,
possession, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever which I the said E. I. now
have, may, might or ought to have, or which I or my Heirs at any time hereafter
shall or may have, might or ought to have or claim of, in or to all those the
Rectories of B. etc. And also of, in and to all and singular Messuages, Mils,
Lands, Tenements etc. to the said etc. belonging or appertaining. To have and
to hold the said Rectories etc. unto the said Sir H. W. his Heirs and Assigns:
to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever; so as neither I the said
E.I. nor my Heirs, shall or may at any time hereafter ask, claim, challenge or
demand any right, title, interest, claim or demand whatsoever, of, in or to the
premises before mentioned, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, but
thereof and therefrom shall be utterly debarred, and for ever secluded by these
presents. And I the said E. I. and my Heirs, the said Rectories, and all and
singular other the premises above mentioned, with their appurtenances, unto
the said Sir H. M. his Heirs and Assigns, to the uses and behoofs aforesaid,
against me the said E. I. and my Heirs, and against my Father I. I. and W. E.
my Uncle, their and either of their Heirs and Assigns, or of any other person
or persons whatsoever, claiming by, from or under me, them or any of them,
shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents. In witness etc.

A Conveyance in Fee-simple of a House and Land, etc.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between G.C. of etc. on the one part; and H. H.
of etc. and S his Wife, on the other part: Witnesses, That the said G.C. for
and in consideration of the sum of etc. to him at and before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents well and truly in hand paid by the said H. H. and S.
his Wife, whereof and wherewith he the said G.C. does acknowledge himself etc.
Has granted, aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents do
fully, clearly and absolutely grant, alien, bargain, sell and confirm unto the
said H. H. and S. his wife, All that Message or Tenement, situate or being in
T. in the County of S. now in the tenure or occupation of the said G. C. or of
his Assignee or Assignees, and three Acres of Land or thereabouts, lying on the
backside of the said house, be it more or less; and all Barns, Stables,
Orchards, Gardens, buildings and other hereditaments to the same belonging or
appertaining, or with the said house or Tenement commonly used, occupied or
enjoyed, or which are accepted, reputed or taken to be part, parcel or member
of the same, and now in the tenure or occupation of him the aforesaid G. C. his
Assignee or Assignees, with all Commons, and Common of pasture whatsoever to
the same belonging; and also all those two Cottages or Tenements in T.
aforesaid, standing together, adjoining to the said Message or Tenement, and
one parcel of ground adjoining to the said Cottages, which said Cottages and
parcel of ground last mentioned do contain by estimation, on that side
toward the Kings high street, twenty yards of ground or thereabouts, and on
that side toward the Garden, now or late of the said G. C. thirteen yards of
ground or thereabouts, and now are in the several tenures and occupations of
M. I and F. L. and the Reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders,
rents and yearly profits whatsoever of all and singular the said premises and
every part and parcel thereof, Together with all and singular Deeds, Evidences
and writings touching or concerning only the premises or any part thereof. To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and the said three acres of
Land, and the said two cottages or Tenements, and the said parcel of Land
adjoining to the said cottages and other the premises with their appurtenances
before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be
hereby granted, aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said H. H. and S. his Wife and to the heirs and
Assigns of the said H. H. to the only proper use and behoof of the said H.H.
and S. his wife, and of the heirs and assigns of the said H. H. for ever. And
the said G. C. for himself etc. that he the said G. C. for and notwithstanding
any act done by him the said G. C. to the contrary at the time of the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully and rightfully seized
in his demeasne as of seesimple, in his own right, and to his own right use,
without any condition, limitation or other use or trust to alter, change or
determine the same estate of and in the said Messuages, Lands, Temements,
Cottages and premises before mentioned, to be hereby granted, bargained and
sold, and of and in every part and parcel thereof; and that he the said G. C.
for and notwithstanding any act don by him to the contrary, now has, and at
the time of the first estate to be had and executed to the said H.H. and S.
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents shall have full
power, just right, and lawful Authority to grant, bargain and sell the same,
and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said H. H.
and S. and the heirs and assigns of the said H. H. in manner and form as is
before in these presents expressed. And that the same Messuages or Tenements,
Lands, Cottages, and premises and every part and parcel thereof with
th'appurtenances, shall from henceforth for ever remain and continue unto the
said H. H. and S. his Wife, and to the heirs and Assigns of the said H. H.
freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all and all
manner of former bargains, sales, gifts grants, Dowers, Joyntures, Leases,
Rents, charges, Rents seck arrearages of Rents annuities, uses, intailes,
Statutes, Merchant, and of the Staple Judgments, forfeitures, Executions,
intrusions and encumbrances, whatsoever, and of and from all other charges,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, or
wittingly or willingly, suffered or done by the said G. C. or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by, from or under him the said
G. C. or by his means, assent, privity or procurement (the rents and services
from henceforth to grow due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of
the premises, for and in respect of his or their Seignorie or Seignories only
excepted and fore prized) And further that he the said G. C. and his heirs and
Assigns, shall and will at all time and times hereafter, within the space of
five years next ensuing the date of these presents, upon the reasonable
request, and at the cost and charges in the Law of the said H. H. and S. his
wife, or of the heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. make, suffer, do,
knowledge and execute, or cause to be made, done, knowledged, suffered and
executed, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing
and things, device and devises, conveyances and assurances in the Law
whatsoever, for the further, more perfect and better assuring, and sure making
of the premises before mentioned, to be hereby bargained and sold, and of
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said H. H. and S. his Wife, and to the
heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. for ever. Be it by fine or fines, feofement
or feofements, recovery or recoveries, with single or double Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled; the enrolment of these
presents, Release, confirmation with warranty of the said G. C. and his heirs,
only against him the said G. C. and his heirs, or otherwise, or without
warranty, or by all, every or any of the said ways or means, or by any other
ways or means which by the said H. H. etc. or his or their Council learned
in the Law shall be reasonably devised, advised or required, So as the same do
not contain or extend unto any further warranty, then against him the said G.
C. his Executors or Assigns, or against any further Act or Acts, then as
aforesaid; And so as neither he nor they that make such further assurance, be
compelled or compellable to travel further then the Cities of London and
Westminster, for the doing, making or executing of such further assurances, and
conveiances as aforesaid. And lastly, it is agreed by and between the said
parties, to these presents, That all and every the said assurances and
conveiances so as aforesaid, hereafter to be had of the premises; shall be, and
shall be esteemed and taken to be to the only use of them the said H.H. and S.
his wise, and of the heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. for ever, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, any thing in these presents contained
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness whereof etc.

A Jointure to the Wife made before Marriage.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I. C. the younger of etc. on the first part,
and I. C. the elder etc. on the second part. and R. W. of etc. on the third
part, Witnesses, That the said I. C. the younger, for and in consideration of
a Marriage (by Gods grace) intended, and shortly to be had and solemnized
between the said I. C. the younger, and A. the daughter of T. C. of etc. And
that the said A. may be provided of a sufficient Jointure, in case she shall
survive the said I. C. the younger, and for diverse other good causes and
considerations, him the said I. C. the younger, hereunto especially moving.
Does for himself, his heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said I. C. the elder, and R. W. their Executors etc.
and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said I. C. the
younger, shall and will, before the end of Easter Term now next etc. before
the Justices (of our Sovereign Lord the King) of his Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster, or some other person or persons thereunto lawfully and
sufficiently authorized, acknowledge and levy one Fine (Sur comisance de droite
come ceo que ills ont de son done) with proclamation thereupon to be made
according to the common course of Fines in that behalf made and provided, unto
the said I. C. the elder and R. W. and their heirs, or to the heirs of one of
them, of, in and upon all that Message or Tenement wherein T. B. Vintner, now
dwells, and whereof he the said I. C. the younger, is seized in his Demeasne
as of Fee in his own proper right, commonly called or known by the etc.
situate etc. And of all the Shops, Cellers, Sollers, chambers, rooms,
easements, commodities and appurtenances, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging, or to or with the same use, occupied and enjoyed, or reputed or
taken, as part, parcel or member of the same, or as belonging thereunto, by
such name and names, and in such manner and form, as by the said I. C. the
elder, and R. W. or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised and advised, or required at the only proper costs and charges in the
Law, of the said I. C. the younger, the true intent and meaning of which said
Fine so to be levied and executed of the said premises, between the said
parties is to be, and so shall be construed, intended and adjudged, to be to
the use and behoof of the said I. C. the younger, during his natural life,
without impeachment of or for any manner of wast; and after his decease, to the
use and behoof of the said A. etc. for and during the term of her natural life
without impeachment etc. and after her decease to the use and behoof of the
heirs of the body of the said I.C. the younger, on the body of the said A.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue, to the right heirs of
the said A. for ever, Provided always that if the said Marriage shall not take
effect, nor be had and solemnised between the said I. C. the younger, and the
said A. T. before the etc. next ensuing, etc. That then the said Fine so to be
made, levied and acknowledged of the said Message and premises aforesaid,
shall be, and shall be taken, demised, adjudged and construed to be to the use
of the said I. C. the younger and to his heirs and assigns for ever, any thing
herein contained to the contrary etc. In Witness etc.

A LEASE to try a Title.
THis Indenture made etc. Between T. A. and R. M. etc. of the one part, and W.
M. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That the said T. A. and R. M. for
diverse good causes and considerations etc. have demised, granted etc. and by
these presents do etc. unto the said W. M. all that their Site of etc. and
all houses, Edifices, buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, easements
and commodities thereunto belonging or appertaining, To have and to hold the
said etc. and all other the demised premises with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said W. M. his etc. from etc. unto the end
and term of etc. from thence next etc. Yiedling etc. unto the said etc. their
etc. one P. etc. if it be demanded. In Witness etc.

A Bargain and sale of a House in London.
THis Indenture made etc. Between R. B. of E. in the County of N. Esquire, of
the one part; and I. H. of L. Esquire, of the other part: Witnesses, That the
said R. B. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. of lawful etc. to him
in hand paid before the sealing and delivery of these presents by the said I.
H. whereof he the said R. B. does acknowledge the receipt; and thereof, and
every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said I.H.
his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them for ever by these presents: Has
given, granted, bargained, sold, aliened, infeoffed and confirmed, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, alien,
infeoffe and confirm unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: All
that Message or Tenement, with th'appurtenances, commonly called or known by
the name of etc. now or late in the tenure or occupation of one VV. S. etc. or
of his Assignee or Assignees, situate, lying and being in etc. Together with
all and singular Shops, Cellers, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Entries, Ways,
Passages, Yards, Back-sides, Lights, Watercourse, Easments, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement now
or at any time heretofore belonging or appertaining; or therewith now or
heretofore demised, used, occupied or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed or taken as
part, parcel or member thereof, or of any part thereof: And the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the premises, and of
every part and parcel thereof: And the rents and yearly profits of all and
singular the same premises, and of every part and parcel thereof. And also all
and singular Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Letters, Patents, Exemplifications of
Records, Counterparts of Leases, Writings, Escripts and Minuments touching and
concerning the before bargained premises, and every part and parcel thereof.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellers, Sollers,
Chambers, and all and singular other the premises, with their and every of
their appurtenances, before by these presents bargained and sold, or meant,
mentioned or intended to be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part
and parcel thereof, unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use
and behoof of him the said I.H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. That he is
seized in Fee-simple, and has power to sell.
And the said R. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. H.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them
by these presents, in manner and form following (That is to say) That he the
said R.B. at the time of the ensealing hereof is, and until the first
executing of an estate to the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, by force of
these presents shall stand and be lawfully seized to him, his Heirs and
Assigns, of and in the before bargained premises, and of and in every part and
parcel thereof, of a good, sure, lawful, absolute and indefeazable estate of
inheritance in Fee-simple, without any condition, limittation, use or other
thing to determine, alter or change the same. And also that he the said R. B.
now has full power, good right, lawful authority and true title to grant,
alien, bargain, sell and confirm the before bargained premises, and every part
and parcel thereof, unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, in manner and
form aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.
And the said R. B. for himself, That the premises are discharged from
Encumbrances.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does further
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns by these presents, that the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellers,
Sollers etc. and all other the premises above by these presents mentioned to
be bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, on the day of the date
hereof, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever shall be,
remain and continue to the said I.H. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper
use and behoof of him the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, free and
clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or
otherwise by the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, sufficiently saved and kept
harmless off and from all and all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Joyntures,
Dowers, Leases, Annuities, Rents, Charge-rents, Seck-arrearages of Rents,
Statutes Merchant and of the Staple Recognizances, Judgments, Executions,
Intrusions, Issues, Fines, Amerciaments, and of and from all other charges,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or
done by the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, one Lease heretofore made by T. P.
of etc. unto the before named W. S. of the said Message or Tenement and
premises for the term of etc. whereupon the yearly rent of etc. is reserved:
Which said yearly rent from henceforth during the residue of the said term,
shall be due, payable and paid to the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns (only
excepted and foreprized) And also that he the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
For quiet enjoying.
shall and may from henceforth for ever, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellers,
Sollers, and all other the premises above by these presents mentioned to be
bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof; and the rents, issues
and profits thereof, shall and may receive and take without the let,
interruption or contradiction of the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any
other person or persons, claiming from, by or under him, them or any of them,
or by his or their means, right, title, consent, privity or procurement. And
further, the said R. B. does covenant, promise and grant for him, his Heirs,
For further assurance.
Executors and Administrators, to and with the said I H. his Heirs and Assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents, That he the said R. B. and his
Heirs, and all and every other person or persons, having or claiming or which
shall or may have, claim or pretend to have any manner of estate, right, title
or interest, into or out of the before bargained premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, by, from or under the said R. B. shall and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter during the time and space of etc. next ensuing
the date of these presents, upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, do, make,
acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause to be made, done, acknowledged,
executed and suffered all and every such further act and acts, thing and
things, assurances and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, for the further more
better and perfect assurance, surety and sure making of the said Message or
Tenement, Shops, Cellers, Sollers and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances above by these presents mentioned to be bargained and sold unto
the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever; be it by fine or fines, with
proclamation, recovery or recoveries, with double or single Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds enrolled, or not enrolled, the inrolment or
acknowledgment of these presents, release, confirmation with warranty against
the said R. B. and his Heirs, or without warranty, or by all or any, or as many
of the ways, means and devices aforesaid, or by any other ways or means
whatsoever, as by the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised and
required. And also it is agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, that all and every the said conveyances and assurances so, as
aforesaid, hereafter to be had, made, levied or executed of the before
bargained premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, shall be and
inure, and shall be esteemed, adjudged and taken to be and inure to the only
use and behoof of him the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; any thing in these presents contained
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness etc.

A short Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made etc. Between N. H. of etc. Gentleman, on the one part; and
I. C. of etc. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said N. H. for diverse
good causes and valuable considerations him hereunto especially moving, Has
demised, granted and to farmletten, and by these presents does demise, grant
and to farm-let unto the said I.C. his Executors Administrators etc. All that
Message or Tenement of him the said N.H situate, lying and being in etc.
containing these several rooms following (That is to say) one Kitchen on the
ground, two little rooms or chambers over the same Kitchen, and three other
little rooms over the said two last mentioned rooms etc. together with all
ways, entries, passages, lights, easements, watercourse, profits,
commodities and appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging or in any wise appertaining, or therewith now used, occupied or
enjoyed. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular other the premises before by these presents demised or mentioned to
be demised, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the
said I. C. his etc. from the Feast day of etc. unto the full end and term of
etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and
paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said N.H. his Executors,
Adm^nistrators etc. the rent or sum of etc. of lawful etc. at the four most
usual Feasts or Terms in the year (That is to say) at the Feasts of etc. by
even and equal portions, or within fourteen days next ensuing every of the
same Feasts: And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. to be behind
and unpaid, in part or in all, Re-entry upon non-payment of the rent.
by the said space of fourteen days next ensuing, after any of the said Feasts
on which the same ought to be paid, as aforesaid, being lawfully demanded, that
then and from thenceforth, and at all times afterward, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said N.H. his Executors, Administrators etc. into the
said Message or Tenement, and into every part and parcel thereof, wholly to
re-enter, and the same to have again, retain and re-possesse, as in his and
their first and former estate; any thing aforesaid to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And the said I C. for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said N. H. his Executors and Assigns, and to and with
every of them by these presents, in form following (That is to say) That he the
said I. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, at his
and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times hereafter during the said term of etc. hereby granted, well and
sufficiently repair, support, uphold, maintain, amend and keep the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the premises, and every part
and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all manner of needful and
necessary reparations and amendments whatsoever; And the Pavements, Privies and
Widraughts belonging to the premises, shall cause to be paved, purged, emptied
and scoured: And the same premises, and every part thereof, so well and
sufficiently repaired, upholden, maintained, glazed, purged, emptied, paved,
kept and amended in the end of the said term, or other sooner expiration or
determination of this present Lease, peaceably and quietly shall leave,
surrender and yield up unto the said N. H. his Executors and Assigns. And the
said N. H. does for himself, his etc. covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said I. C. his etc. and to and with etc. that he the said I.C. his etc.
paying the rent and performing the Covenants before in and by these presents
mentioned and reserved, shall or may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all
and singular other the premises, with their appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof, without any manner of let, suit, trouble, disturbance, eviction
or interruption of the said N. H. his etc. or any of them, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by or under him, them or any of
them, or by his or their means, act, title, consent, privity or procurement. In
witness etc.

An Indenture of Covenants for passing of a recovery in the Common Pleas, to
cut off an Entail.
THis Indenture made etc. Between E. C. of etc. of the one part; and W. O. and
I. H. of etc. of the other part: Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents; and the
said E. C. does covenant and grant to and with the said W. O. and I. H. that he
the said E. C. shall and will permit and suffer the said W. O. and I. H. to
purchase and sue out of his Majesty's high Court of Chauncery a Writ of Entery
sur disseism en le post, returnable before the Justices of the Common Pleas at
Westminster, at some certain day of return in Easter Term next coming; by
which Writ the said W. O. and I. H. shall demand against the said E. C. all
that Message, Tenement or Farm, with th'appurtenances, situate etc. and late
were in the possession of etc. and also all that Close of pasture ground,
commonly called etc. containing etc. and all that Close of pasture etc. and
also all and singular Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Commons,
Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and
singular the appurtenances to the premises, or any part or parcel thereof
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, by such name and names, and in such
manner and form, and by such number and quantity of acres, as by the said W. O.
and I. H. or the survivor of them, or the Council learned of them, shall be
devised or advised; to which Writ the said E. C. shall appear personally, or by
Attorney, in the said Court of Common Pleas, and enter into the said warranty
and imparl, and shall after depart in contempt of the Court: so as a good and
perfect recovery shall and may be had in due form and order of Law of the said
Messuages, Lands etc. and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances,
according to the usual course of common Recoveries for assurance of Lands and
Tenements in the said Court of Common Pleas; and that a Writ of habere fac:
seisinam shall be thereupon awarded, executed and returned accordingly. And it
is further condescended unto and agreed by and between all the said parties to
these presents, That as well the said Recovery so to be had and executed, as
aforesaid; As also all and every other Recovery or Recoveries, Conveyances and
assurances whatsoever, which before the Feast of etc. shall be had and executed
by and between the said parties to these presents, or any of them, of the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and every other the
premises, with the appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, by what
name or names soever the same shall be so had and executed; and the full force
and execution of them, and of every of them, shall be and enure, and shall be
construed, adjudged and taken to be and enure to the only use and behoof of the
said W. O. his etc. for ever. And the said W. O. and I H. and the survivor of
them, and the Heirs of the survivor of them, shall for ever from thenceforth
stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof, to the only use and
behoof of the said W. O. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made etc. Between P. S. of etc. and M. his Wife, and Executrix
of the last Will and Testament of I. C. late of etc. deceased, on the one part;
and W. W. of etc. Yeoman, on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas T. M. of
etc. in and by one Indenture of Lease bearing date etc. for the considerations
therein mentioned, did demise, grant and to farm-let unto the said I. C. etc.
(reciting the Grant) as in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease, amongst
diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein contained, more
fully and at large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture further
witnesses, That the said P.S. and M. his Wife, as well for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. to them in hand paid before th'ensealing and
delivery of these presents by the said W. W. whereof they do acknowledge the
receipt; and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do acquit,
exonerate and for ever discharge the said W. W. his etc. by these presents,
Have given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these
presents do give, grant etc. unto the said W. W. his etc. all that parcel of
ground or garden plat, with th'appurtenances before mentioned, and all Houses,
Edifices, Buildings etc. and all the estate, right, title, interest,
possession, term of years to come, claim and demand whatsoever, which they the
said P. S. and M. his Wife, or either of them, now have or has, may, might,
should or in any wise ought to have or claim of, in or to the said parcel of
ground and garden plat, and other the premises, with th'appurtenances, and
every or any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said Indenture
of Lease. To have and to hold the said parcels of ground or garden plat, Habend.
and all Houses, Edifices and Buildings thereupon, or upon any part or parcel
thereof, now standing or being: And also the said recited Indenture of Lease,
and all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years, and all and singular
other the premises, with the appurtenances, before in and by these presents
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, or mentioned or intended to be hereby
given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said W. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, during the residue of the said
term, in and by the said Indenture of Lease granted, and therein now to come
and unexpired, in as large, ample and beneficial manner, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as they the said P. S. and M. his Wife, or either
of them, now have or has, may, might, should or in any wise ought to have and
enjoy the same, by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, or
otherwise howsoever. And the said P. S. and M. his Wife, for themselves, their
Executors, etc and for either of them and either of their etc. does covenant
etc. that the said recited Indenture of Lease etc. at the time of the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, is a good, sure, perfect and indefeazable Lease
in the Law, of and for the said parcel of ground or garden plat, and premises
hereby demised, and so shall stand, remain, continue and be unto the said W.W.
his Executors, etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs for, and
during all the term of years thereby granted, and yet to come and unexpired,
under the Rents and Covenants therein mentioned or contained. And also that the
said W. his etc. and every of them, under the Rents, Covenants, Articles and
Agreements in the said recited Indenture of Lease contained, shall or may for
and during all the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said Term
in the said recited Indenture of Lease contained, lawfully, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said parcel of ground
or garden plat, and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, without the let, trouble, contradiction or
interruption of them the said P. S. and M. his Wife, or either of them, their
or either of their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming or to claim any estate or interest in the
premises, or any part thereof, by, from or under him, them or any of them,
discharged also of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Surrendors,
Forfeitures and Re entry, Rents, Arrearages of Rents, Charges and Encumbrances
done or to be done by the said P. S. and M. his Wife, or either of them, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming from, by or under
him, them, or either or any of them, as aforesaid; or by his, their, either or
any of their means, act, title, interest, forfeiture or procurement, the Rents
and Covenants in the said recited Indenture of Lease herein before mentioned
and expressed, only excepted and foreprized. In witness etc.

An Assignment of the Moity of a House and Goods, with good Covenants.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. R.B. of L etc. Executor of the last Will
and Testament of R.R. late of L. deceased; and P. K. Citizens etc. send
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas W. T. of etc. by his Indenture of
Lease dated etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did demise, grant and
to farm-let unto the said P. K. his etc. all that the Message or Tenement,
called etc. situate and being etc. together also with all the Goods and
Utensils of Household Stuff, then being in and belonging to the said Message
or Tenement mentioned and comprised in a Schedule to the said Indenture
annexed: To have and to hold etc. as in and by the said etc. And whereas the
said P. K. by Deed pole dated etc. for the considerations therein expressed,
did demise etc. the said last mentioned Indenture etc. and all his estate etc.
of, in and to the said etc. unto the said R. R. the estate and interest of
which said R. R. of, in etc. did after come to the said R. B. as Executor of
the last Will and Testament of the said R. R. And the said R. B. being thereof
possessed by the means aforesaid, did by Indenture dated etc. for the
considerations etc. grant, bargain etc. the Moity of the said etc. unto I. C.
of etc. And the said I.C. by Deed pole dated etc. did make over the said Moity
of the said etc. unto A. B. Inn keeper etc. and the other Moity of and in the
same etc. now remaining in the said R. B. and P. K. or one of them; together
with the whole right, title etc. Now know ye, that we the said R. B. and P. K.
for and in consideration of etc. Have given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned
and set over, and by these presents etc. unto the said R. M. the said last
mentioned Moity of the said Message or Tenement, with th'appurtenances, called
the etc. aforesaid: And also all our right, title and interest of, in and to
the said Moity of the said Goods and Chattels before mentioned, thereunto
belonging, and every part and parcel thereof: As also all the estate, right,
title, interest, term and terms of years, property, claim and demand
whatsoever, which we the said R. B. and P. K. or either of us, now have, may,
might, should or in any wise ought to have and enjoy of, in or to the said
Message or Tenement, called etc. and of, in or to the Moity of the said Goods
and Chattels thereunto belonging: Together with all Writings, Leases,
Counterparts of Leases, Escripts and Minuments touching and concerning the same
premises, in as large and ample manner as we, or either of us, now have or may
hold the same, by force and virtue of the said several Indentures before
mentioned, or any thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever. To have and
to hold all and singular the before bargained premises, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said R. M. his etc.
to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, as fully, and in as large and
ample manner and form, as we the said R. B. and P. K. or either of us, now
have, may, might, should or ought to have and enjoy the same. And we the said
R. B. and P. K. for us and either of us, and either of our Heirs etc. and for
every of us, do covenant, promise etc. that we the said R.B. and P.K. or one of
us (at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents) are or is the
very true and right owners and possessors, or owner and possessor of the
premises hereby before mentioned to be bargained and sold, with
th'appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, for and during all the
rest and residue of the said several terms yet to come and unexpired in the
said several recited Indentures of Lease; and that we, or one of us, have or
has full power and good right, true title and absolute Authority to give,
grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over the said premises hereby bargained
and sold, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said R. M. his
etc. in manner and form aforesaid. And also that all and singular the said
premises hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold, with their and every of
their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, are and be, and so at all times
hereafter from henceforth during all the rest and residue of the said several
terms, in and by the said several recited Indentures of Lease granted, shall
be, remain and continue unto the said R. M. his etc. free and clear, and freely
and clearly, acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all and all manner of former
and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Fines, Forfeitures, Rents,
Arrearages of Rents, cause and causes of forfeitures, and re-entry; and of and
from all other Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had,
made, committed, suffered or done by us the said R. B. and P. K. or either of
us, our Executors etc. or any of us, in any manner or wise howsoever, And so
shall be during all the rest and residue of all and so many years as are yet to
come and unexpired of the said several terms, in and by the said several
recited Indentures of Lease granted, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents (the several Rents, Payments, Covenants and Agreements in
the said several recited Indentures of Lease respectively, comprised and
specified; which from henceforth on the Tenants and Leassees parts and behalfs,
are or ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, according to the
true meaning of the said several recited Indentures of Lease; and the Moity or
one half part of the yearly rent of etc. reserved for certain Rooms and
Chambers belonging to the etc. now in the occupation of etc. Which Moity of the
said rent is formerly sold and released unto the said A. B. his etc. only
excepted and foreprized) any thing in these presents contained etc. In witness
etc.

An Assignment of a Lease in trust, whereof the Assignor is to take a further
estate in the premises.
THis Indenture made etc. Between Sir A. C. of etc. on the one part; and E.H.
and C.D. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas Sir I. D. etc. by
his Indenture of Lease bearing date the etc. (reciting the Grant and Habend.)
as in and by etc. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said Sir A.C.
for and in consideration of the trust hereafter mentioned, and for diverse other
good causes and considerations him thereunto moving, has granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does grant, bargain etc.
unto the said E. H. and C.D. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
to the survivor of them the said E.H. and C.D. and to the Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of the survivor of them all etc. (mentioning all
that is assigned and set over) To have and to hold the said Lordship etc. and
all other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances before by
these presents bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said E. H. and C. D. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and to the survivor or survivors of them the said E. H. and C. D.
and to the Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of the survivor of them all
etc ( mentioning all that is assigned, etc.) Nevertheless upon this trust and
confidence in them, and every of them reposed, that they the said E.H. and C.D.
or the survivour of them, or the Executors, etc. of the survivour of them, shall
and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time upon reasonable request
to them or any of them to be made, and at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said Sir A. C. his Executors, etc. resign, convey and assure, all and
singular the before bargained premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
unto such person or persons, their Executors, etc. as by the said Sir A. C. his
Executors, etc. shall be nominated and appointed in such manner and form, as
by the said Sir A. C. his Executors, etc. or his, or their Council learned in
the Laws, shall be reasonably devised, or advised, and required, and upon
further trust and confidence, that they and every of them, shall and will, upon
the like request to be made, do and perform all and every lawful Act and
Acts, thing and things whatsoever, for the extinguishment of this present
bargain, sale, and assignment of the premises above mentioned, as by the said
Sir A. C. his Executors, etc. or by his or their Council learned in the Law,
shall be reasonably devised or advised and required, In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Judgment.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between M. M. etc. of the one part, and R. T. etc.
on the other part, Witnesses: That whereas the said M. M. has recovered a
Judgment, in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster in Hillary
Term, Anno. etc. against E. G. for xx. l. debt, besides costs of suite as by
the Records of the said Court more at large may apear; Now the said M. M. for
good considerations him moving, has bargained, sold, assigned and set over,
and by these presents does bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said R.T.
his Executors, etc. as well the said Judgment, and all and every sum and
sums of money therein mentioned, and contained; As also, all benefit and
advantage, which shall or may be had, obtained or gotten, by reason or means of
the said Judgment, or any process, or Execution thereupon to be had, sued
out, or Executed: To have and to hold, the said Judgment, sum and sums of
money, benefit, advantage and other the premises aforesaid, unto the said R.
T. his, etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, in as ample manner,
as he the said M. M. his Executors or Assigns, might or could have and enjoy
the same, if these presents had never been had or made; and the said M. M. his
Executors, etc. shall and will justify, maintain and avow, all and every
lawful act, and thing, that shall be done in or about the premises, without
relasing or discharging the same: So as there be no further benefit taken, then
only the due debt, interest, and charges; And that all the benefit which shall
be obtained or gotten upon the said Judgment, shall wholly remain and be,
unto the said R. T. his Executors, etc. to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs, without any account or other thing, to be therefore yielded or done
unto the said M. M. his etc.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people, etc. I, I. W. of, etc. Gentleman send greeting in our
Lord God everlasting; Whereas I. G. Citizen, etc. by his Deed Indented, bearing
date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did give, grant and
confirm unto me the said I.W. one Annuity or yearly Rent or pention of etc. to
be issuing and going out of all and singular the Messuages or Tenements, Lands
and premises of the said I.G. situate and being in, etc. for the term of the
natural life of me the said I. W. as in and by the said Deed indented (amongst
diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein contained) more
fully and at large it does and may appear: Now know ye that I the said I. W.
for good considerations me moving, have assigned and set over, and by these
presents do assign and set over unto S.L. of, etc. the said Annuity or yearly
pention of, etc. To have and to hold the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc.
aforesaid unto the said S.L. and her assigns, in as large and ample manner and
form as I the said I. W. may or ought to have and enjoy the same by force of
the said Deed indented, or any thing therein contained (together with the said
Deed indented)

In witness, etc.
A Release from one used in Trust.
TO all Christian people, etc. R. M. of, etc. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting: Whereas C.G. and T. T. for and in consideration of a certain sum
of money to them paid, by I. L. of, etc. by their Indenture of bargain and
sale, bearing date, etc. did grant, bargain and sell unto the said I. L. and
R. M. their Heirs and Assigns for ever; all that their third part in three
parts equally to be divided, of all that their Message or Tenement called,
etc. with the appurtenances situate, etc. late in the tenure of, etc. And also
all that their third part in three parts equally to be divided, of all that
their Mine of Coals opened, or to be opened, or to be gotten, or dug,
within the Grounds or Lands to the said Message or Tenement, called, etc.
belonging or appertining, or in any part or parcel thereof, as by the same
Indenture among diverse other Covenants and Agreements more at large it does and
may appear: all which premises in the said Indenture specified, so fold and
granted to the said I. L. and R. M. as aforesaid, was before and at the
ensealing of the said Indenture, intended and meant to be to the only use and
behoof of the said I. L. and his Heirs, and to no other use or purpose
whatsoever: Now know ye, that I the said R. M. for, and in regard of the trust
and confidence in me reposed, by the said I. L. have remised, released, and for
ever quit claimed, and from me and my Heirs, do by these presents remise,
release, and for ever quit claim unto the said I. L. and his Heirs, All my
right, interest, estate, title and demand which heretofore I have had, or now
have, of and in the said premises, in the said Indenture specified, or in any
part or parcel thereof,

In witness, etc.
A Surrender of a Lease for lives, for the obtaining of a new Lease.
TO all, etc. I, A. S. etc. send greeting, etc. Whereas I the said A. now am
and stand lawfully seized, and possessed of a Lease for term of my life to me
made, and granted by, etc. bearing date, etc. of and in, etc. All which
premises are situate, etc. and are of the yearly value of, etc. as by the
said Indenture of Lease, relation, etc. Now know ye, that I the said A. have
granted and surrendered, and by these presents do fully and absolutely grant and
surrender unto the said, etc. his Heirs and Assigns, the said Message, etc.
demised by the said, etc. to me the said A. by the said recited Indenture of
Lease as aforesaid, and all the estate, right, title, Interest, term for life,
and demand whatsoever, of me the said A. of, in and to the said Message and
other the premises with the appurtenances, and of, in, and to every of them,
and every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease or otherwise howsoever: Together also with the said
Indenture of Lease, To the intent nevertheless, and upon condition that the
said, etc. may by his Indenture of Lease, make a new demise and grant of the
premises to I. H. and C. his wife, and N. their son, for term of their
natural lives, and the life of the longest liver of them successively, or
otherwise, as shall be thought convenient, and for and under the yearly Rent;
and under such provisoes, covenants and articles, as shall be thought fit
therein to be comprised,

In witness, etc.
A Revocation of a Suite.
TO all, etc. I, A. B. send greeting, etc. Whereas an action has been brought
at the Common Law in my name, against P. F. upon a Bond, wherein the said P. F.
and one W. D. became bound unto me in the sum of, etc. on the, etc. as by the
same obligation etc. Now know ye, that I the said A.B. do by these presents,
revoke and withdraw the said action and suite brought against the said P.F.
upon the said obligation, and all proceedings thereupon had in my name; and do
also countermand all Letters of Attorney, and other authorities whatsoever, by
me heretofore made, or given to any person or persons, for the prosecution of
any action or suite upon the said Bond; And do also signify and declare that
my will and pleasure is, that no action or suite shall at any time hereafter be
brought or commenced against the said P. F. and W. D. nor either of them, nor
their, nor either of their Heirs etc. upon the said obligation,

In witness, etc.
A Release for waste done.
TO all, etc. W. S. of etc. sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting:
Whereas I. S. of, etc. being possessed of a Lease of diverse years yet to come,
of and in one parcel of Wood-ground, commonly called, etc. situate, etc.
containing etc. being parcel of the possession of, W. S. etc. aforesaid; And
whereas the said I. S. for the better advantage to himself, and for the
increase of his own yearly profit, to be made of the same Wood-ground, and for
the better and more profitable manuring of the said ground, has for that
purpose cut down, and grubbed up diverse Trees in and upon the said parcel of
Wood-ground, and has converted the same ground into Tillage, whereby a far
greater Annual profit is, and yearly advantage will be made thereof, then if
the same should continue Wood ground, which in time to come, will turn to the
better benefit and advantage of the said W. S. and his Heirs, after the end
and determination of the said Lease, made to the said I. S. yet notwithstanding
the said I. S. is subject and liable to be questioned and troubled by action to
be commenced against him, both for the waste he has committed for cutting down
roots, and for not preserving of the said Woods, according to the Covenants
comprised in his said Lease: Now know ye, that the said W. S. etc. for and in
consideration of, etc. and for diverse good causes, etc. has for himself, his
Heirs Executors, etc. remised, released, and quite claimed, and by these
presents does clearly, and absolutely remise, release, and quit claim unto the
said I. S. etc. All and all manner of actions of waste, and all manner of
Suites for any wastes or spoils done or committed by him the said R. S. in the
said Wood, and Woodground called, etc. aforesaid, until the date of these
presents; And all, and all manner of actions of covenants, and other actions,
suits, or demands, concernings, covenants, provisoes, or agreements for not
cutting down, or grubbing up the same woods, or under-woods, heretofore cut
and grubbed up,

In witness, etc.
A Release of Errors
BE it known etc. That I, A. B. etc. have remised, released, quit claimed, and
discharged, and always for me my Heirs Executors Administrators, and every of
them, for evermore do quit claim, and discharge unto C. D. of etc. all and all
manner of error and errors, cause and causes of error and errors,
misprisions, misentries, and erroneous proceedings whatsoever, had, made,
committed, omitted, suffered or done, in all, every or any plaint, plea,
process, Judgment, and Execution whatsoever, had made, etc. by the said etc.
against me the said A. B. in any of the King's Majesty's Courts of Records at
any time, from the beginning of the world, etc.

In witness, etc.
A Discharge of an Apprentice from his Service.
TO all etc. I, F. W. of etc. send greeting etc. Whereas M. N. by his Indenture
bearing date, etc. did put himself Apprentrice to me for the term of etc.
commencing etc. as by the said Indenture may appear; Now know ye, that I the
said F. W. for good considerations me thereunto moving, do by these presents
clearly and absolutely discharge, and set free the said M. N. of and from my
service, so as neither I, nor any for me, shall or may at any time hereafter,
ask, claim or demand any Service of the said M. N. by virtue of the said
Indenture or otherwise; And also I do hereby remise and release unto the said
M.N. all actions, cause and causes of actions, service and demands whatsoever,
which I now have, or hereafter may have against him, by reason of any act
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date of
these presents, In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, to receive money due upon a Bond.
KNow all men by these presents, that I, T. A. of etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead and place, by these presents, put and constituted my
trusty and wel-beloved friend I. B. of etc. my true and Lawful Attorney, for
me and in my stead and name, but to the use and behoof of him the said I. B. to
take, recover, and receive of W. S. of etc. O. T. of etc. but L. M. of etc. the
sum of etc. due unto me for non-payment of the sum of etc. of like money,
on the twentieth day of etc. last past, before the date of these presents, as
by one Obligation with condition there under written, bearing date etc. in the
year etc. it does and may more plainly appear; giving, and by these presents
granting unto my said Attorney, my full power and lawful authority in the
premises, to do, say, perform, conclude and finish, for me and in my name as
aforesaid, all and every such act and acts, thing and things, device and
devices in the Law whatsoever, for the recovery of all the debts aforesaid, as
fully, largely and amply in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I
were personally present; And upon the receipt thereof acquittances or other
discharges for me and in my name to make, Seal and Deliver, ratifying,
allowing and holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever my said Attorney
shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the execution of the
premises, by virtue of these presents,

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney, to enter upon Lands, and deliver a Lease.
KNow all men etc. that I, R. R. of etc. have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint T. C.
of etc. my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my stead and name to enter
and come into and upon the Farm and Lands of T. in the parish of etc. in the
County of etc. now in the tenure or occupation of R. T. or of his Assigns, and
upon any part thereof, then and there for me, and in my stead and name, to
deliver, as my act and Deed, unto H.M. of etc. or to his Assigns, one
Indenture, whereunto I have already sealed, bearing date etc. made between me
the said R. R. of the one part; and the said H.M. of the other part, purporting
a Lease of the said Farm and Lands unto the said H. M. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for the term of ten years next ensuing, as in and
by the said Indenture more at large appears. Which Indenture, after the same
shall be so delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R. R. do promise by these
presents; shall be my effectual Deed in Law, to all intents, constructions and
purposes, as if I the said R. R. had sealed and delivered the same then and
there my self. In witness etc.

Another Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease.
TO all etc. We T. A. and R. M. of etc. send greeting. Whereas we the said T.
A. and R. M. have signed and sealed to one Indenture bearing date with these
presents, purporting a Lease demised or granted to I.H. of etc. of all that our
Manor or Farm of etc. with the House, Barns, Stables, Orchard, Gardens etc.
and all that our Site of the Rectory or Parsonage of L. in the said County of
N. Together with the Demeasne Lands to the said Manor or Farm belonging or
appertaining: To hold from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture for
the term of six years then next ensuing, as by the same Indenture of Lease at
large appears. Now know ye, that we the said A. T. and R. M. have made,
ordained, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain,
constitute, and in our steads and place put and appoint our trusty and well
beloved Friend I. H. etc. our true and lawful Attorney and Assignee for us,
and in our steads and names to enter and come into and upon all that the said
etc. and other the Lands aforesaid, or into some part thereof; and then and
there, after such entry made, to deliver unto the said I. H. (as our very Act
and Deed) the said Indenture of Lease above mentioned; to hold according to the
tenure of the said Indenture. And further, to do and execute all and every such
further thing or other act whatsoever, as shall be needful to be done and
performed in that behalf, in as large, ample and effectual manner as we our
selves might or could do, if we were personally present. In witness etc.

A Letter of Attorney upon a Specialty being not due, with Covenants to
justify Actions.
TO all etc. to whom this present Writing shall come, Sir T. R. of etc. sends
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas H.F. of etc. Gentleman, in and by
one Obligation with condition thereupon endorsed, bearing date etc. is and
stands bound unto the said Sir T. R. in the sum of etc. of lawful etc.
conditioned for the true payment of etc. on the etc. next etc. at or in the
etc. as in and by the same Obligation and Condition thereof at large appears.
Now know ye, that the said Sir T.R. for diverse good causes and considerations
him moving, Has assigned, ordained and made, and in his steed and place put
and constituted his trusty and well beloved Friend R. D. Citizen etc. his true
and lawful Attorney for him; and in his stead and name, and to the only proper
use and behoof of the said R. D. to ask, require and receive of the said H. F.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum of etc. at the said day
and place aforesaid. And if default be made in payment of the said sum of etc.
as aforesaid: Then he the said Sir T. R. does by these presents make, ordain,
constitute and appoint the said R. D. to be his true and lawful Attorney for
him, in his name, and to the only use of the said R. D. to ask, levy demand,
recover and receive of the said H.F. his Executors and Administrators, the said
sum of etc. so forfeited unto him the said Sir T. R. for non payment of the
said sum of etc. at the day, time and place aforesaid: Giving and by these
presents granting unto his said Attorney, his full power and lawful authority
in the premises; and upon default of payment of the said sum of etc. or any
part thereof, the said H. F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators etc, or any of
them, to arrest, sue, implead, imprison and out of prison to deliver; and pleas
and prosecutions against them and every of them, to sustain and maintain
according to the course of the Law; and upon the receipt of the said sum of
etc. or any part thereof, Acquittances or other discharges for him, and in his
name to make, seal and deliver: and one Attorney or more under him, to
substitute, and at his pleasure to revoke, and all and every other act and
acts, thing and things, device and devises in the Law whatsoever, needful or
requisite to be done in or about the premises, for him, and in his name to do,
execute and perform as fully, largely and amply in every respect, as he himself
might or could do, if he were personally present; ratifying, allowing and
holding firm and stable, all or whatsoever his said Attorney or his Substitute
lawfully authorized, shall lawfully do or cause to be done in or about the
execution of the premises, by these presents. And the said Sir T. R. for
himself etc. that he the said Sir T.R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, at all time and times hereafter, upon reasonable request, or
notice to him given, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said R.D.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will
maintain, justify and avow with effect, all and every such Action and Actions,
Writ or Writs, Pleas, Process, Judgments and Executions whatsoever, which by
the said R. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time
hereafter be lawfully sued, commenced, had or brought in his name against the
said H. F. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of them, upon or by
reason of the Obligation above mentioned, or of any sum or sums of money
therein mentioned or contained. And also that he the said Sir T. R. has not at
any time heretofore; neither he, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them, at any time hereafter shall or will remise, release or otherwise
discharge the said H. F. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of
them, of the said Obligation above recited; nor yet of any sum or sums of money
therein contained, without the special license, consent or agreement of the
said R. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them thereunto
first had and obtained in writing under his or their hands and seals; and that
all the benefit and commodity that shall be recovered, obtained or gotten by
means of any such action, suit, plaint, judgment or execution, shall redound,
come and be to the only use and behoof of the said R. D. his etc. without any
account or other thing therefore to be yielded or done to the said Sir T. R. his
etc. or any of them.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney general to receive debts and rents.
KNow all men by these presents that I. A. W. of etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead and place by these presents put and constituted my
trusty and well beloved Servant H.H. of etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney
for me, and in my name, and to my use, to ask, sue for, levy, require, recover
and receive all and every such debts, rents and sums of money as are now due
unto me, or which at any day or days, time or times hereafter, shall be due,
owing, belonging or appertaining unto me by any manner of ways or means
whatsoever, from any person or persons whatsoever. Giving and granting unto my
said Attorney by these presents, my full and whole power, strength and
authority in and about the premises; and upon the receipt of any such debts,
rents and sums of money aforesaid, acquittances or other discharges for me, and
in my name to make, seal and deliver; and all and every other act and acts,
thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever, needful and
necessary to be done in or about the premises, for the recovery of all or any
such debts, rents or sums of money, as aforesaid, for me, and in my name to do,
execute and perform as fully, largely and amply in every respect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were
personally present; ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all and
every such act and acts etc. In witness etc.

A short Letter of Attorney of a Bond not due.
KNow all men etc. that I, A. B. of etc. have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint R. B.
of etc. to be my lawful and true Attorney irrevokable for me, in my name and
to his use to ask, demand and receive of etc. the full sum of etc. which shall
be due and payable unto me by the said, etc. at the Feast of, etc. next and
immediately ensuing the date of these presents, by virtue of one Obligation to
me made from the said etc. bearing date etc. last past, before the date of
these presents, as by the same Obligation, etc. And for non-payment of the said
sum of, etc. at the day and place aforesaid; I do by these presents authorize
and appoint the said, etc. for me, and in my name, and to the use aforesaid, to
ask, levy, sue for, recover and receive of the said etc. the said full sum or
penalty of etc. to be then due and forfeited unto me for such nonpayment.
Giving and by these presents granting unto my said Attorney, my full power and
absolute privilege, right, benefit and authority in all things whatsoever,
which does, can or may in any wise touch or concern the premises, either for
the receipt of the said sum of etc. on the day above mentioned, or for the
doing and performing of any other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, as
shall be needful and requisite to be done, prosecuted and performed for the
recovery of the same, or the said penalty, in case of forfeiture, as aforesaid:
And that in as large and ample manner in every respect, and to all intents and
purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were in person present. And
whatsoever my said Attorney or his substitute lawfully authorized, shall do or
cause to be done in the premises, I promise to allow of, and confirm by these
presents. In witness etc.

A short Letter of Attorney for the setting over of a Bond forfeited.
KNow all etc. that I, H. H. of etc. have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint my
trusty and well beloved Friend W. M. of etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney
for me, and in my stead and name, and to his own use, to ask, levy, recover,
demand and receive of T. M. and N. L. of etc. Gentleman, and either of them,
their and either of their Executors and Administrators, the sum of etc. which
they have forfeited, and from me unjustly do detain and keep for non-payment of
the sum of etc. at a certain day past, as by one Obligation with Condition
thereupon endorsed, bearing date etc. more at large it does and may appear.
Giving and by these presents granting unto my said Attorney, my full power and
authority in all things touching this my present business, and in my name to
commence and prosecute any action or actions, suit or suits for the recovering
and getting of the said sum of etc. and every or any part or parcel thereof,
And Attorney or Atturneys in that behalf to constistute and make; and upon
receipt thereof, or of any part thereof, Acquittances or other lawful
discharges, in my stead and name to make, seal and deliver; ratifying and
allowing by these presents all, and whatsoever my said Attorney, or his
Assigns, shall for obtaining and recovery of the said sum of etc. or any part
thereof, do or cause to be done in my stead and name. And also I the said H.H.
do covenant and promise by these presents, That I the said H. H. have not
released nor will release the said T. M. and N. etc. of the said Bond, nor of
the penalty therein contained, nor countermand this present Letter of Attorney,
nor the Authority thereby granted, nor any suit, act or proceeding at any time
hereafter, by virtue of these presents to be brought or done. In witness etc.

A Letter of attorney to take possession of Lands delivered by a Sheriff upon
an extent.
KNow all men by these presents, That I, A. B. of etc. Esquire, have made,
ordained, constituted, and by these presents put and appointed my well beloved
Friend C. D. to be my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my stead and
name to enter into the Manor of H. with th'appurtenances, in the County of L.
and now in the tenure or occupation of etc. of the yearly value of etc. and
full and peaceable possession and seizin thereof; for me, in my stead and name,
and to my use, to take, receive, retain and keep, as to him the same shall be
delivered by the Sheriff of the same County of etc. according to the tenor,
purport and effect of His Majesty's Writ of Extent unto the said Sheriff in
that behalf directed. Giving and granting by virtue of these presents unto my
said Attorney, my full power and authority, and all and every thing and things,
needful, necessary or requisite to be had, made or done for or concerning the
said possession, taking, or the retaining of the same to my use, as aforesaid;
the same for me, in my stead and name to do, use, execute and exercise as fully
and wholly, and in as large and ample manner and form, and to all intents and
purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present;
Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done in or about the execution of the
premises, by virtue of these presents. In witness etc.

A Covenant for the Leavying of a Fine.
ANd the said C. D. for himself, his Executors etc. and for every of them, does
covenant and grant to and with the said W. C. and F. W. their Executors
Administrators etc. That he the said C. D. or his Heirs, shall and will, at
and before the etc. at the proper costs and charges in the Law, of the said C.
D. his Heirs etc. according to the usual course of Fines, and recoveries
used, and accustomed, Leavy one lawful and sufficient Fine, and suffer a
lawful and sufficient recovery to be had, and made against him the said C. D.
and his Heirs, unto the said W. C. and F. W. and their Heirs, or the Survivor
of them, or to such other person or persons, as they the said W. and F. or the
Survivour of them or their Hiers shall nominate and appoint, of all that
Message etc. (naming the Lands) with all and singular their appurtenances,
situate and being in C. aforesaid in the said County of B. Which said Fine or
Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, and all other assurances and conveyances to be
had, made, leavied, acknowledged, and executed of the premises, or any part
thereof, by the name or names aforesaid, or by any other name or names, or in
any other manner or form shall be, and the said W. C. and F. W. and their
Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, and the Survivours of them
and his Heirs, to whom the said Fine shall be Leavied or acknowledged as
aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of all and singular the premises, and
every part thereof, to the only proper use and behoof of the said W. and F. and
their Heirs for ever, to the intent a lawful and sufficient recovery may be
had of all and singular the premises, and of every part and parcel thereof,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, which said
recoveries shall be and shall be always deemed adjudged and taken to be, to the
only use and behoof of the said W.C. and F.W. and of the Heirs Males of their
bodies to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said W. C. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever,

In witness, etc.
A Covenant to surrender a Copyhold at the next Court.
ANd the said etc. for himself, his etc. does covenant and grant to and with
the said etc. his etc. that at the next Court holden at the Manor of E. in the
County of W. the said R. I. and his wife shall come and personally appear in
the face of the said Court, of the said Manor, and in the open face of the
said Court, according to the usual custom of the said Manor, shall into the
hands of the Steward of the said Court, or his Deputy, Surrender, Assign and
yield up to the use of the said T. S his Heirs Executors Administrators and
Assigns, all that their right, estate, title, Interest and demand, which they
now have, or by any means may have, of and in the said copyhold, Lands and
Tenements, with the appurtenances, called or known by the said name or names of
etc. or any other Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which are claimed to be
holden by him the said R. I. by Copy of Court-role of the said Manor of W. or
to the same, or to any part or parcel of the same, belonging or so reputed,
esteemed or taken etc.

A Covenant for further Assurance.
ANd the said L. M. for himself, his etc. that he the said L. M. and A. his now
wife, and the Heirs of the said L. and all and every other person and persons
whatsover, having or claiming, or which shall or may have or claim, or pretend
to have any manor of right, title, Interest or other thing, into, or out of
the before mentioned premises or any part or parcel thereof, from or under
the said L. M. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said etc. his Heirs or Assigns, make, do, suffer, acknowledge and execute,
or cause to be made, done, knowledged, suffered and executed, all and every
such further lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and devises,
conveyances and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and
more perfect assurance, surety, sure making, and conveying of all and singular
the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all other the
premises aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said L. B.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, be it by Fine or Fines, with Proclamation,
Recovery or Recoveries, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or
Deeds, enroled or not enroled, the enrolement of these presents, release,
confirmation, with warranty against all and every person and persons, or
without warranty, or by all, any, or as many of the ways, means, and devises
aforesaid, or by any other ways or means whatsoever; As by the Council
learned in the Laws of the said L. B. his etc. shall or may be devised or
required, so as the said L. M. and A. his wife, their Executors etc. be not
enforced or compelled to travel above twelve miles from his or their dwelling
place, or the Cities of London and Westminster, for the making, doing and
executing thereof etc.

A Covenant that the premises are discharged of Incumberances.
ANd the said A. B. for himself etc. That the said Messuages, Lands etc. and
all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances before, in and by
these presents granted, bargained etc. and every part and parcel thereof, at
the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, are and so at all
times hereafter for ever, and from time to time shall be, remain and continue
unto the said T. A. his Heirs and Assigns, clearly acquitted and discharged
or otherwise, sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, and form all and all
manner of former and other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, Leases, Joyntures,
dowers, uses, Wills, Intailes, Rents, charge-rents, seck-arreareges of Rents,
Fines for Alienation, Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions,
Seizures, Intrusions, Extents; and of and from all and and singular other
charges, titles, troubles, incumberances and demands whatsoever, had, made,
knowledged, consented unto, committed, procured, done or suffered by the said
A. B. his Heirs, or Assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever,
the Rents and Services, from hence forth to be due, to the chief Lord or Lords
of the Fee of Fees, whereof the premises are holden, only excepted, etc.

A Covenant that he is Lawfully Seized in fee-simple, or fee-taile, and has
power to demise.
ANd the said G. H. for himself, etc. that he the said G. H. at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully Seized of an
Indefeazable estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, or Fee-taile, of, and in all
and singular the before demised premises with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, without any manner of condition or limitation of use
or uses, to alter or change the same: And also that he the said G. H. now has
full power, true title, and absolute authority, to demise, grant etc. the said
etc. and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances before
demised, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said I. P. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, for the term of etc. in manner and form, as in
and by these presents is mentioned, limited and expressed.

A Covenant that the Less shall not cut down, or sell the Trees, without the
consent of the Lessor.
ANd the said T.H. for himself etc. that he the said T.H. his etc nor any of
them shall not at any time hereafter during the said term, commit or cause,
procure or wittingly suffer to be committed or done, any manner of wilful
waste or destruction, in or upon the premises, or any part thereof, nor shall
cut down, fell, take or carry away any of the woods, underwoods, or Trees
growing, standing or being, or which hereafter shall grow, stand or be, in or
upon the premises before demised, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof,
without the license, consent or agreement of the above named U.R. his Heirs or
Assigns in writing, first had and obtained.

A Condition of Arbitrament General, and Special.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden R. C. and R. A. their etc. and
every of them, do and shall, for their, and every of their parts and behalfes
in all things, well and truly stand to, abide, obey, observe, perform,
fulfill and keep the award, arbytrament, order, rule, determination and
judgment of etc. Arbytrators indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well
on the part and behalf of the said R. C. and R. A. as on the behalf of the
within named R. S. and etc. to arbytrate, award, rule, decree and Judge of,
for, upon, touching or concerning all actions, suits, doubts, and variances
concerning etc. out of the manner of L. in the Parish of W. in the County of
etc. now in question and controversy, between the said parties; And also, for
touching, and concerning all and all manner of other suits, quarrels, debts,
debates, duties, bonds, specialties, controversies, transgressions, offenses,
strifes, contentions, reckonings, accounts, and demands whatsoever, which
between the said R. C. and R. A. on the one part, and the said I. G. the Elder,
and the said I. S. the Younger, and diverse other persons on the other part, at
any time from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date of these
presents, have been had, moved, stirred, or are in any wise depending, so
always as the same award, arbitrament, or determination and judgment of the
parties, in and upon the same premises, be made and given up in writing
indented, under their hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, at or in etc. on or before etc. That then this etc.

A Condition for the truth of an Apprentice, and to restore the value of all
such goods, as by proof shall appear, he has Imbeazled.
THe Condition etc. That whereas I. D. etc. son of etc. by his Indenture of
Apprentiship, to the within named W. G. has bound himself to the said W. G.
with him to dwell and abide, from the feast of etc. unto etc. from thence next
ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, as in and by the said etc. more fully
may appear; if therefore the said I. D. the Apprentice do or shall at any time
or times hereafter, during the said Term of etc. wilfully waste, imbeazle,
consume, spend or make away, or otherwise deliver, or lend upon trust, without
ready money, to any person or persons, without the consent of the said M. G.
his Master, any of the goods, wares, moneys, or Merchandise of the said W. G.
his Executors or Assigns; Then if the above bounden L. M. his Exexcutors or
Assigns, or any of them, do and shall within two months next after request
made, and notice thereof given, from time to time, during the said Term, well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid, to the said W. G. his Executors or
Assigns, the full sum and value of all such goods, wares, money or
Merchandise, as by just and true proofs shall appear, the said I. D. to have
spent, imbeazled, wasted consumed, or lent, without consent as aforesaid, to
the hurt and hinderance of the said W. G. his Executors or Assigns, without
fraud or coven, That then, etc.

A Condition to acknowledge satisfaction upon a Judgment.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden I. P. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do, or before the end of Easter
Term now next coming, after the date within written, by himself, or by his
or their lawful Atturnie in the Kings Majesty's Courts of Common Pleas,
confess and acknowledge, satisfaction of all such Judgments and Executions,
as the said I. P. has recovered in the said Court, against W. L. of etc.
Gentleman, That then etc.

A Condition to make assurance upon request.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden H. S. or his Assigns, shall and
will at all times hereafter, upon reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges of the within named I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, by such lawful act
and acts, thing and things, conveyances, and assurances in the Law whatsoever,
as by the said I.F. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in
the Law, shall be reasonably devised, or required, lawfully and sufficiently
give, grant, convey and assure, unto the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, all that etc. In the Town and Parish of I. in the County of D. now in
the tenure of etc. clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise, sufficiently
saved and kept harmless, of, and from all and all manner of former bargains,
sales, charges, titles, troubles and incumberances whatsoever, had, made,
committed, or done, by the said H. S. or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, That then, etc.

A Condition to find one his diet by the year.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden T.W. his Executors or Assigns,
do and shall, at his and their own proper costs and charges, find, provide and
allow unto I. B. or any Servant of the within named I. B. in his stead, and
place, good wholesome and sufficient diet and victuals of meat and drink, meet
and convenient and in such sort as is now by the above bounden T. W. allowed,
for the time and space of one whole year, from the Feast of the Nativity of
etc. next ensuing etc. at or in the now etc. And if at any time the said I. B.
or such said Servant of the said I.B. so to be dieted for the time being, shall
absent himself from his said Commons by the space of six weeks, or more,
together, at any time or times during the said Term: If then and so often as he
shall be absent, the said T. W. his Executors or Assigns, do and shall find
diet and victuals for the said I. B. etc. for so long time after the end of the
said Term, as they shall have been absent, as aforesaid, according to the true
meaning of these presents: That then etc.

A Condition to repay all such Charges as the Tenant shall be at, by reason of
the payment of his rent, there being controversy concerning the title of the
House.
THe Condition etc. That whereas there is a controversy or question between
the above bound E. H. and others, touching their several rights or interest in
the now dwelling house of the above named T. T. situate etc. And whereas upon
an agreement between the said E. H. and T. T. the said T. T. is contented to
pay the rent of his said House, it being 50. l. per annum, unto the said E. H.
as the same shall grow due according to his Lease. If therefore the said E. H.
his etc. do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T.
T. his Executors or Assigns, all such rent, sum and sums of money, charges and
damages whatsoever, as shall by due proceedings in the Law be adjudged or
decreed, against him the said T. T. his Executors etc. and all other costs and
damages whatsoever, which he the said T.T. shall sustain or be at by reason of
any actions, suits, or forfeitures whatsoever, which shall or may happen or be
unto the said T. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by reason or
means of the payment of the said rent, or any part thereof, unto the said E. H.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns: That then etc.

A Condition to discharge the Churchwardens and Parishioners, of a Child born
in the Parish.
THe Condition etc. That whereas one M. H. has of late been delivered of a
Man-child within the Parish of etc. within written; to the which Child the
within bound E. G. by his one voluntary confession, does acknowledge himself to
be the Father. If therefore the said E. G. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, and
every or any of them, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter, fully
and clearly acquit, discharge and save harmless as well the within named I. B.
and H. L. Churchwardens of the Parish Church of etc. aforesaid, and their
Successors for the time being, and every of them; as also all the Inhabitants
and Parishioners of the said Parish which now are, or hereafter shall be for
the time being, and every of them, of and from all and all manner of costs,
charges and expenses whatsoever, which shall or may in any manner of wise, at
any time hereafter arise, happen, come, grow or be imposed upon them or any of
them, for or by reason or means of the birth, education, nourishing and
bringing up of the said Child: And of and from all other actions, suits,
charges, troubles, impeachments and demands whatsoever, touching or concerning
the same: That then etc.

A Condition for the surrender of Copyhold Lands, and to cause him to be
admitted Tenant.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden I. K. and his Heirs, do and
shall at the next Court to be holden for or within the Manor of H. in the
County of E. sufficiently, and in due form of Law, surrender and yield up unto
or for the use and behoof of the within named L. M. his Heirs and Assigns, or
of such other person or persons, and their Heirs and Assigns, as the said L. M.
shall nominate and appoint; All that his Copy hold, Message or Tenement, and
Lands thereunto belonging, containing by estimation sixteen acres, be it more
or less, now or late in the tenure or occupation of N. O. or of his Assigns,
parcel of the Manor of H. aforesaid; with all and singular Outhouses,
Easments, Commodities and Appurtenances to the same appertaining, clearly
acquitted and discharged of all Dowers and titles of Dower whatsoever; and do
then and there also procure and cause the said L. M. or such other person or
persons by him to be nominated, as aforesaid, to be only and lawfully admitted
Tenant of the same premises so to be surrendered, according to the custom of
the said Manor: That then this etc.

A Condition for quiet enjoying a Manor, according to an assignment thereof.
THe Condition etc. That if the within named R.I. his etc. and every of them,
shall or may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the
Manor of S. with the appurtenances, in the County of O. with all Lands,
Tenements, Profits, Privileges, Rents, Court, Leet and Advowsons, Woods,
Under-woods, and all other Hereditaments thereunto belonging or appertaining,
without the let, trouble, suit, eviction, disturbance or contradiction of the
within bounden W. G. L. G. and M. G. or any of them, their or any of their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or any other
person or persons whatsoever, having, claiming or pretending to have any manner
of right, title, interest, property, claim or demand of, in or to the said
Manor and premises aforesaid; or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, by,
from or under the said W. G. M. G. and L. G. or either or any of them,
according to the tenor, purport, effect and true meaning of one Indenture of
assignment bearing date the etc. made and sealed by the said W. G. unto the
said R. I. of the premises aforesaid, as by the said Indenture may appear:
That then etc.

A Condition for assurance of Lands.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden W. B. shall upon reasonable
request to him to be made by the within named T. H. his Heirs or Assigns, on
this side, and before the Feast day of etc. next ensuing the date within
written, convey and assure unto the said T. H. his Executors and Assigns for
ever, one Close of pasture, containing by estimation one acre, abutting upon F.
toward etc. one other Close etc. All which premises are situate, lying and
being in the Parishes, Towns and Fields of W. and G. or in some or one of them
in the County of B. by such conveyances and assurances in the Law as by the
said T.B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Laws,
shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required (discharged of all
encumbrances whatsoever, the chief rents and services therefore due and payable
to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises, only excepted)
And also if the said W. B. his etc. and every of them, do and shall until the
said conveyance and assurance shall be made and passed, as aforesaid, quietly
permit and suffer the said T. H. his Heirs and Assigns, to have, receive,
perceive and take to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, the rents,
issues and profits of all and singular the premises, and of every part and
parcel thereof, without any manner of let, suit, trouble, disturbance or
contradiction of the said W. B. his etc. or any of them, or of any other person
or persons whatsoever, by his, or their or any of their means, right, title,
interest or procurement, and without any account or any other thing therefore to
be yielded, paid or done unto the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or to any
other person or persons whatsoever: That then this, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of money quarterly.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden B. M. his etc. or any of them,
do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named N. D. his etc.
the full sum of etc. at or in the etc. in manner and form following (viz.) on
the etc. next ensuing the date above written, the sum of 5. l. thereof, at the
place aforesaid: On etc. 5. l. more thereof at etc. On etc. 5. l. more at etc.
And on etc. 5. l. more at etc. and so forth every quarter of a year quarterly
one, next and immediately ensuing another, on every of the quarter days
aforesaid, and at the place above named for payment thereof 5. l. until the
said sum of etc. shall be in such sort, and after such manner, fully satisfied,
contented and paid: That then etc. But if default of payment shall be made of
or in the payment of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof, contrary to the
manner and form above rehearsed: Then it shall stand and abide etc.

A Condition to lend a sum of money at a certain day nominated for a certain
time then following, without interest.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden I. W. and N. Y. or either of
them, do and shall on the etc. next ensuing the date within written, deliver
and lend unto the within named E. P. at or in the etc. the full sum of etc.
upon the single bond of the said E. P. until the etc. day of etc. next
ensuing, without loan, interest or other consideration to be had for the same:
That then etc.

A Condition for payment of an Annuity.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden T. R. and T. P. or either of
them, their or either of their etc. or any of them, do and shall every year,
yearly, from and after the Feast day of etc. next ensuing the etc. well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid to the within named I. S. his etc. one Annuity,
yearly Rent or sum of etc. of lawful etc. at four usual Feasts or Terms in
the year, That is to say, on the Feast days of etc. by even and equal
portions, the first payment thereof to begin on the etc. next ensuing the etc.
That then etc. But if default shall happen to be made of or in the payment of
the said Annuity, yearly Rent or sum of etc. at any of the said Feast days,
on which the same ought to be paid, at any time during the said Term of etc.
contrary to the true intent and meaning of these presents, That then it shall
stand and abide in full force, strength and virtue.

A Condition to pay a certain sum of money at a day, and then to put in
another Surety, for payment of another sum at a day then following.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden I. G. his etc. or any of them,
do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the within named C. D. his
etc. the full sum of etc. at or in the etc. on the etc. and then also do, and
shall procure and cause on other sufficient Surety, to become bound with him
the said I. G. his etc. unto the said C. D. his etc. by either Obligation in due
form to be made, in the penalty of etc. for the true payment of etc. more of
etc. then next following, and which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1649.
at the place aforesaid, without fraud or coven, That then etc.

A Condition for performance, concerning co-partnership of an Award.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden W. D. his etc. do for his and
their parts and behalfes in all things, well and truly stand to observe,
perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Arbytrament, Order, final end,
determination and judgment of A. B. of etc. and C. D. of etc. Arbitrators
indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of the
said W. L. as on the part and behalf of the within named W. I. to Arbitrate,
award, order, judge, determine, and a final end to make, of, upon touching and
concerning all and every action and actions, suits, variances, sum and sums of
money, claims and demands whatsoever, had, moved, depending, or stirring, or
having been, or now being in question, suite, trouble or controversy, between
the said parties, for, by reason or means of any manner of dealing etc. dury
the late co-partnership, between them the said W. and I. in any manner of wise;
so as the same award, arbitrament etc. of the said Arbitrators, of, and upon
the premises, or any part thereof, be made and put in writing under their
hands and seals, ready to be delivered to the said parties, on or before the
etc. next ensuing the, etc. That then etc.

A Condition to save harmless of a Recognizance taken, for ones Appearance.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden I. R. his Heirs etc. do at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, clearly acquit and discharge, or
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named G. S. and B. N. and every
of them, their, and every of etc. against our Sovereign Lord the King's
Majesty, and all others, of and for all and every such recognizances, wherein,
and whereby they the said G. S. and B. N. or either of them, stand charged or
bound to our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty, for the said R. I. or for his
personal appearance, in His Majesty's Court of Record, called the King's Bench
at Westminster, in Trinity Term next, to answer all such matters as shall be
objected against him, and of, and for all and every sum and sums of money,
matter, thing, and things, the said Recognizance and Recognizances, and every
of them, mentioned or contained, and of and from all actions, suits, costs,
losses, troubles, extents, and damages, that shall or may arise or grow,
touching, or concerning the same, or any of them, in any manner of wise, That
then etc.

A Condition to save one harmless, for the Bayling of one, at two several
Actions.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within named I. D. at the special
instance and request of the within bounden W. W. has maine prized or taken to
bail the said W. W. in the Sheriffs Court, holden in the Counter in
Wood-street London, of and for two actions, the one of Trespass, damages xx.
l. at the suit of etc. and the other of Debt, upon the demand of etc. at the
suite of etc. as by the Records of the same Court may appear; if therefore the
said W. W. his etc. and every of them, do at all times hereafter, and from time
to time clearly acquit and discharge, or otherwise, sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said I. G. his etc. and every of them, and all his and their
goods and chattels, and every part and parcel of them, against all persons
whatsoever, of and for the mainprizing and taking to Bail of the said W. W.
and of and for the several actions aforesaid, and of and for all actions,
suits, costs, troubles, demands, executions and damages whatsoever, that shall
or may arise or grow, touching, or concerning the premises, or any of them, in
any manner of wise, That then this present obligation to be void etc.

A Condition for payment of money, if a man be nonsuited.
THe Condition etc. That whereas one E. G. is admitted to sue in Forma
Pauperis, in His Majesty's Court of etc. against W. W. and A. B. for the
recovery of certain Lands, and Tenements, in the County of K. If the said E.
G. shall be nonsuited in the said action, or that the same action shall pass
against him by verdict or otherwise, then if the above bounden R. R. or E. G.
their Executors or Assigns, or any of them, do or shall truly pay, or cause to
be paid, all and singular such costs, charges, and sums of money, as by any the
Justices of the said Court shall in that case be thought convenient or awarded
without fraud etc. That then etc.

A Condition for performance of Covenants.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden H. W. his etc. and every of
them, do well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, accomplish and keep all and
singular the covenants, grants, articles, clauses, conditions and agreements
whatsoever, which on his and their parts and behalfs are, or ought to be
observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, mentioned and comprised in one pair
of Indentures of Lease, bearing date within written, made between the within
named E. W. of the one part, and H.W, of the other part, according to the
tenor, effect, and true meaning of the same Indenture, That then etc.

A Condition for passing of a Fine.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden W. E. and A. his now wife, and
the Heirs of the said W. at the costs and charges in the Law of the within
named R: M: his etc. next ensuing the date etc. shall Leavy one Fine etc. in
the Court of Common Pleas at West: of one Message or Tenement, mentioned to be
demised to the said R: M: in and by one Indenture of Lease, bearing date etc.
made between the said W: E: on the one part, and the said R: M: on the other
part, according to due course of Law, by such name and names, and in such
manner and form, as by the said R: M: his etc. or by his, or their Council
Learned in the Law shall be devised or required, as well for the barring of the
said A: from the title of Dower in the premises, as for the better assuring
and confirming of the premises, unto the said R: M: his etc. for and during
all the said term, by the said Indenture of Lease, granted under the Rent, in
and by the said Indenture reserved against the said W: E: his Heirs and
Assigns, according to the true meaning of the said Indenture, That then etc.

A Condition concerning Marriage.
THe Condition etc. That whereas there is a Marriage (by Gods grace) intended
to be shortly had and solemnised, between the above bounden A. D. and E. B.
daughter of F. B. late of G. in the County of C. deceased; If after the said
Marriage shall be solemnised, between the said parties; it shall happen the
said A. shall dye, and him the said E. shall survive, then if the said A. B.
shall at the time of his death, leave unto the said E. the sum of etc. or the
value of etc. in goods and chattels to be freely taken, had, used, and disposed
of, by her the said E. her etc. at her and their own wills and pleasures,
without any claim, challenge, suit, trouble, disturbance, contradiction or
demand, of, for, in or to the said sum or value of etc. or of any part or
parcel thereof, thereunto to be made by the Executors etc. of the said A. B.
or by any other person or persons whatsoever, That then, etc.

A plain Bill of Debt.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I, A. B. of etc. do owe and
am Indebted unto C. D. of etc. in the sum of etc. of lawful money of
England, to be paid unto the said C D. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, on the etc. next ensuing the date hereof; To the which payment well
and truly to be made, I bind me, my Heirs Executors and Administrators,
firmly by these presents: In witness whereof etc. I do hereunto set my hand
and seal, this fourth day of July, Anno Domini, one thousand six hundred forty
and eight.

A Bill Obligatory.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I, A. B. of etc, do owe and
am indebted unto C. D. of etc. in the sum of etc. of lawful money of
England, to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, on the etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at etc. To the which
payment well and truly to be made, I bind me, my Heirs Executors and
Administrators, in the sum of etc. of lawful money of England, firmly by
these presents,

In witness, etc.
A General Release.
KNow all men by these presents, I, I. K. of etc. have remised, released, and
quit claimed, and by these presents do, for me, my Executors Administrators and
Assigns, remise, release, and for ever quit claim, unto C. D. of etc. his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, all and all manner of actions, and
suits, cause and causes of actions and suits, Bills, Bonds, writings and
accounts, debts, duties, reckonings, sum and sums of money, controversies,
Judgments, Executions and demands whatsoever, which I the said I. K. ever had,
or which my Executors Administrators and Assigns, or any of us in time to
come, can or may have, to, for, or against the said C. D. his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, for, or by reason of any matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date hereof,

In witness, etc.
A Release of Errors.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I, W. A. of etc. for diverse
good causes and considerations me thereunto especially moving, have remised,
released, and quit claimed, and by these presents for me, my Heirs Executors
and Administrators, do remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto E. D. his
Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them, all and all manner of
Error and Errors, and the benefit and advantage thereof, and of all
misprisions of Error and Errors, defects and wrongful pleadings and
proceedings whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered, omitted and done, at
any time or times, before the day of the date of these presents, in any action
or actions, prosecuted and sued by the said E. C. against me the said W. A. in
any Court or Courts of Record or otherwise; And all Error and Errors in the
Judgment or Judgments thereof, so that I the said W.A. my Heirs Executors
and Administrators, and every of us, shall be for ever hereafter debarred and
excluded, to sue forth any Writ or Writs of Error or Errors concerning the
same,

In witness, etc.
A Release of Errors concerning a Judgment.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I I. W. of etc. do by this my
present writing for me, my Heirs Executors and Administrators, remise,
release, and for ever quit claim unto F. L. of etc. Esquire, all and all
manner of Error and Errors and misprision of Error and Errors, which are or
may be in on Judgment remaining upon Record, in his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, against me the said I. W. at the suit of the said
F. L. for 200. l. debt, and 3. l. 13. s. 4. d. charges, or thereabouts, or in
any the premises or proceedings of the said Judgment or suit,

In witness, etc.
A Release upon the receipt of a Legacy.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I, T. B. of etc. have the day
of the date hereof received of I. T. Widow, Executrix of the last Will and
Testament of H. T. of etc. deceased, all that Legacy or sum of etc. to me the
said T. B. by the name of T. B. of etc. given and bequethed; of which said sum
of etc. by me received as aforesaid, I acknowledged my self fully satisfied and
paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit,
exonerate, and discharge the said T. W. her Executors and Administrators, and
every of them by these presents: In witness whereof I have hereunto set my
hand and seal etc.

A Release of Lands.
TO all Christian people etc. Know ye that A. B. of etc. for diverse good causes
and considerations him moving, has remised, released, and for ever quit
claimed, and by these presents for himself and his Heirs, does fully, clearly,
and absolutely remise, release, and for ever quit claim, unto C. D. of etc. in
his full and peaceable possession, and seizin and to his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, all such right, estate, title, interest and demand whatsoever, as he
the said A. B. had, or ought to have, of, in, or to all etc. that the Manor of
etc. and etc. by any ways or means whatsoever: To have and to hold, all the
said Manor etc. unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use
and behoof of the said C.D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever; so that neither he
the said A.B. nor his Heirs, nor any other person or persons for him or them,
or in his or their names, or in the name, right or stead of any of them, shall
or will by any way or means hereafter, have, claim, challenge or demand any
estate right, title, or interest, of, in, or to the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof; But from all and every action, right, estate, title, interest,
and demand, of, in, or to the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, they,
and every of them, shall be utterly excluded, and barred for ever by these
presents; And also the said A. B. and his Heirs, the said Manor, Message,
Lands, Tenements, and other the premises, with the appurtenances to the said
C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and uses, in
manner and form before specified, against their Heirs and Assigns, and every
of them, shall warrant, and for ever defend by these presents, In witness etc.

A Release of Lands, with a Covenant to lead the use of a Fine.
TO all Christian people and. I, E. F. of etc. send greeting; Know ye that I
the said E. F. for good and valuable considerations me moving, have given,
granted, remised, released, and quit claimed, and by these presents do for me
and my Heirs, grant, remise, release, and for ever quit claim, unto T. M. of
etc. (in his full, peaceable and quiet possession, and seisin being) and to his
Heirs and Assigns for ever; all the estate, right, title, interest, use,
claim and demand whatsoever, which I the said E. F. now have, or had, or which
my Heirs Executors or Administrators, at any time hereafter shall or may have,
or claim, of, in, or to, all the Message, Tenement, or Farm, called, etc. in
the said County of etc. or of, and into all and every, or any part or parcel
thereof, by force and virtue of any Fine, or other assurance thereof, or any
part thereof, acknowledged or made by the said T: M: and G: his Wife, to me the
said E. F. And I the said E. F. do covenant and grant, for me, my Heirs
Executors and Administrators, to and with the said T: M: his Heirs Executors
and Assigns, that all Fines, and other assurances whatsoever, heretofore
acknowledged, or leavied of the premises, or any part thereof, by the said T:
M: and S: his Wife, to me the said E: F: shall be for ever hereafter, and shall
inure to the use of the said T: M: and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said
T: for ever: And I the said E: F: and my Heirs, and all and singular the
premises, unto the said T: M: and his Heirs, to the use aforesaid, against me
my Heirs etc. shall and will warrant and defend for ever by these presents, In
witness, whereof, etc.

A Revocation of uses.
BE it known etc, that I, T: C. of etc. do by this my present writing, sealed
with my seal, and subscribed with my name, in the presence of H: S: T: O: C:
B: three credible witnesses, whose names are subscribed, revoke, determine and
make void and frustrate, all and every the uses and estates, mentioned, raised,
created, limited and made, in and by one Indenture of Lease, bearing date the
etc. in the year of the Reign of, etc. made between me the said T: C: of the
one party, and I: B: of etc. of the other party, of and for the House and
Site, and all other the Lands, Tenements, and hereditaments, with their
appurtenances, in the said Indenture mentioned, and of and for every part and
parcel thereof; And I do by these presents absolutely limit, determine and
appoint, that all and singular the Feoffes, parties and persons in the said
Indenture mentioned, and their Heirs and Assigns, shall immediately and from
henceforth, stand and be seized of the Site, House, Message, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned, and of and in every part and
parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of me the said T: C: my Heirs and
Assigns for ever, in a pure and absolute estate in Fee-simple, and to none
other use, intent or purpose, In witness whereof, I the said T: C: have to
this my present writing put my hand and Seal, and subscribed my name in the
presence of the said H: S: T: O: C: B: three credible witnesses, whose names
are likewise subscribed the etc. in the year of the Reign etc.

A Defezance upon a Statute.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between I: I: of etc. of the one part, and W: G:
of etc. of the other part witnesses, that whereas the said W: G: by his
Recognizance in the nature of a Statute staple bearing date with these
presents, taken and knowledged before Sir I: L: Knight, and Baronet, Lord Chief
Justice of His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench Westminster, is and stands
bound unto the said I: I: in the sum of etc. payable, as in the said recited
Recognizance or Statute staple may appear: Nevertheless, the said I: I: is
contented and pleased, and does for himself, his Executors and Adminstrators
covenant promise and agree, to and with the said W: G: his Heirs Executors and
Administrators by these presents, that if the said W: G: his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly content, and
pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said I: I: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, the full sum of etc. on the etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents, at or in the etc. That then the said recited Recognizance or Statute
staple of etc. shall be utterly void and of none effect; or else shall stand and
abide in full force and virtue,

In witness, etc.
A Defeazance upon a Judgment.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between A: B: of etc. and W: C: of etc.
witnesses; That whereas the said A: B: has in Trinity Term last, recovered
against W: C: the sum of etc. besides costs of suit, in His Majesty's Court
of Common. Pleas at Westminster, and thereupon had Judgment against the said
W: C: as by the Record thereof remaining in His Majesty's said Court, more at
large it does and may appear; Nevertheless, the said A: B: is contented and
pleased, and does covenant and grant by these presents, for him his heirs
Executors and Administrators, to and with the said W: C: his heirs Executors
and Administrators, That if the said W: C: his heirs Executors Administrators
or Assigns, do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid, to the said
A: B: his Executors or Assigns, the full sum of etc. at or in the etc. That
then and in the mean time he the said H: B: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall not take out any Execution against the said W: C: his Goods,
Chattels, Lands or Tenements, And that upon payment of the said sum of etc. at
the day and place above named, for payment, the said A. B. his etc. at the
request cost and charges in the Law of the said W: C: his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will acknowledge satisfaction upon
Record, of and for the said Judgment, so as he the said W: C: do make unto
the said H: B: his Executors and Administrators, good lawful and sufficient
releases of Errors, and of all misprisions, defaults, and imperfections, had,
committed, omitted, or perpetrated, in or about the said Judgment, or
Recovery, or any entries, Pleas, Pleadings, Process, proceedings, or other
matters touching or concerning the same,

In witness, etc.
A Defezance upon a Morgage of Lands, formerly forfeited.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between R: T: of etc. of the one part, and E: F:
of etc. of the other party, witnesses; That whereas the said E: F: by his
Indenture bearing date the etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did
give, grant, bargain, sell, and confirm unto the said R: T: his heirs and
Assigns, all that the Manor of etc. with the rights, members, and
appurtenances thereof, in the County of etc. and also diverse other Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the same Indenture specified, in which said
Indenture, there is contained, a Condition or provisoe, to this effect
following, that is to say; That if the said E: F: his heirs Executors or
Assigns, or any of them, do truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R: T:
his Executors Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of etc. at or in etc.
that then, and from thence forth, from and after such full payment, had, and
made in manner aforesaid, the said recited Indenture, and every the Covenants,
Grants, Articles and Agreements therein contained, shall be utterly void and of
none effect, as by the said Indenture, amongst diverse Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements therein contained, may more at large appear. Which said
sum of etc. was not paid at the day and place of payment before limited for
the payment thereof, according to the tenor of the said proviso or condition:
By reason whereof, the said Manor, Lands and other the premises in the said
Indenture mentioned, are absolutely vested and settled in the said R. T. Yet
nevertheless the said R. T. is contented and pleased, and does covenant and
grant to and with etc. that if the said E. F his Heirs Executors,
Administrators etc. or any of them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said R. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the
full sum of etc. on the etc. at or etc. That then (upon the said payment of the
said sum of etc. in manner and form aforesaid) and from thenceforth the said
recited Indenture of bargain and sale made of the said Manor, and other the
premises, shall be utterly void and of none effect; the breach made in non
payment of the said sum of etc. in the proviso of the said Indenture mentioned,
or any other grant or thing therein contained to the contrary thereof, in any
wise notwithstanding. And that also, upon full payment of the said sum of etc.
then at any time or times after, within the space of seven years then next
following; He the said R. T. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will at the
reasonable request, costs and charges in the Law of the said E. F. his Heirs
and Assigns, grant, convey and assure unto the said E. F. for ever, the said
Manor of etc. with th'appurtenances, and all and singular other the premises,
in and by the said recited Indenture granted, as aforesaid, in such manner and
form, as by the said E. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or required; so as in the said
conveyance and assurance so to be made by the said R. T. his Heirs or Assigns,
there be no further or other warranty then only against him and his Heirs: And
so as also the said R. T. his Heirs or Assigns, be not compelled to travel
further then the Cities of London or Westminster, for the doing and executing
of the same assurance. And also, that he the said R. T. his Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, shall and will deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said E. F.
his Heirs or Assigns, within six months next after such payment made, all and
every the Deeds, Evidences and Writings which the said R. T. has, touching or
concerning the premises, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced. In witness
etc.

Another Defeazance upon a Statute.
THis Indenture made etc. Between H. S. of etc. of the one party; and the right
honorable T. Viscount S. of the other party. Whereas the said T. S. together
with G. A. of etc. is and stands bound in and by four several Obligations,
every of them bearing date etc. (reciting the Bonds) as by the same four
several Obligations, and every of them ^y more plainly appear. And whereas the
said T^, by hi^ Recognizance in the nature of a Statu^ ^ple, bearing date with
these presents (recite also the Recognizance) as by the same Recognizance of
Statute staple etc. Which said Recognizance or S^ute staple of etc, is
acknowledged and entered into by the said T. S. for the better securing of as
well the said several sums of money before mentioned, and every of them; As
also of all such other sum or sums of money, as shall hereafter grow due and
payable for the forbearance and interest of the said several sums of money so
already borrowed and lent, or hereafter to be borrowed or lent unto or for the
said T. S. and every or any of them. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the
said H. S. is contented and well pleased, and does for himself, his Executors
and Administrators, covenant, promise and agree to and with the said T. S. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents; That if the said T.
S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well
and truly pay or cause to be paid, at or in etc. as well unto the several
persons before named, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all and every
the said sum and sums of money respectively, due, owing and payable unto them
or any of them, as aforesaid, at such days or times as the said sum or sums of
money shall grow due or payable from time to time, or within the time and space
of three months next after request made unto him the said T. S. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for payment of the said sums of money, or
any of them; As also all such other sum and sums of money as the said H. S.
shall hereafter borrow for, or lend unto or for the said T. S. at such days or
times as the said sum or sums of money, or any of them so hereafter to be
borrowed and lent, shall be due and payable; or within the time and space of
three months next, after request made to him the said T. S. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for payment in of such sum and sums of
money, so as aforesaid, borrowed: Together also with such sum and sums of
money, as shall grow due for the interest and forbearance of the said sum or
sums of money so to be borrowed: That then etc. But if default be made in
payment of the said sum of money, or any of them, contrary to the form
aforesaid; Then the same Statute to remain in full force and virtue. In
witness etc.

A Bill of Sale, with a proviso, that if the money, with allowance, be paid by
a day, then to be void.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I, A. B. of etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of 10. l. to me in hand paid at the sealing and
delivery of these presents by C. D. of etc. Have bargained and sold, and in
plain and open market, according to the custom of the City of London, Have
delivered unto the said C. D. these several parcels hereafter mentioned (viz.)
etc. To have and to hold the said several parcels, and every of them,
bargained and sold, as aforesaid, unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. D.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever. Provided always, that if I
the said A. B. my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly
content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of 10. l. 10. s. of etc. on the etc.
next ensuing the date hereof, at or in the etc. that then etc. And I the said
A. B. for my self, my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do covenant and
grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by
these presents, That if default be made of or in payment of the said sum, or
any part thereof, contrary to the form aforesaid: that then I the said A. B. my
Executors and Administrators, and every of us, shall and will warrant and for
ever defend the said several parcels, and every of them, unto the said C. D.
his Executors and Assigns, against all men by these presents. In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Household Stuff.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I, T. N. of etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of 25. l. of etc. to me in hand paid at the ensealing
and delivery of these presents by A. R. of etc. whereof I acknowledge my self
fully satisfied and paid; and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said A. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, Have granted, bargained and
sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain,
sell and deliver unto the said A. R. all such Goods and Household Stuff, and
implements of Household, and other things mentioned and contained in a Schedule
hereunto annexed, now remaining and being in one Message, House or Tenement,
and the Garden and Yard thereunto belonging, called Dales, situate, lying and
being in Hammersmith, in the County of Middlesex, and now in the tenure or
occupation of the said T. N. or of his Assigns. To have and to hold all and
singular the said Goods, Household Stuff, and implements of Household, and every
of them, before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned to be
bargained and sold unto the said A. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns for ever; To do and dispose of them, and every of them, at his and
their will and pleasure. And the said T. N. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A. R. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents; That he the said T. N
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, all and singular
the said Goods, Utensils, Implements of Household and Household Stuff before
bargained and sold, and every of them, unto the said A. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, against all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, shall warrant and for ever defend by these presents. In witness
etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Leases and Goods, on condition to pay Debts and Legacies.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I, A. T. of etc. have given,
granted, bargained, sold, and by this my present Deed do give, grant, bargain
and sell unto R. T. my Son, all my Leases, or Lands held by Lease for years,
and all my Goods and Chattels both real and personal, both moveable and
unmovable, quick and dead, of what kind soever they be of, and in whose hands,
custody or possession soever they be. To have and to hold to the said R. and
his Assigns for ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof for evermore,
upon condition following (That is to say) that the said R. shall well and truly
content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid all my debts whatsoever, and
also shall pay and perform, or cause to be performed and paid all my Gifts and
Legacies, which I the said A. T. shall ordain and appoint by my last Will and
Testament. In witness etc.

The form of an Award.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing of Award indented shall
come, G. M. of etc. sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas
diverse questions, controversies and suits, have been had, moved, and depending
between I. P. of etc. of the one party, and R. H. of etc. of the other party;
as well for and concerning the interest and profits of the Rectory and
Parsonage of etc. as also for other causes and actions for appeasing whereof,
either of the said parties have elected and chosen me the said G. M. to be
Arbitrator indifferently between them, and to that end have bound themselves
either to other by Obligation, in the sum of 100 l. to stand to and abide the
Award, Arbitrament and Judgment of ye the said G. M. touching the premises.
Now know ye, that I the said G. M. taking upon me the charge of the said Award,
and minding that a final end and agreement shall be had and continued from
henceforth between the said parties touching the premises, do make and declare
this my Award in manner and form following: that is to say, First, I Award etc.

A Protection in time of Parliament.
FOrasmuch as I have special occasions to employ the Bearer hereof, A. B. my
Servant, in and about my service and occasions, during this present Session of
Parliament: These are therefore to will and require you to forbear to arrest,
attach or imprison him the said A. B. but to permit and suffer him peaceably
and quietly to go about his business, at his will and pleasure, during all
this present time of Parliament, without any your suit, arrest or disturbance,
as you will answer the contrary at your peril. Given under my hand and seal
the etc.

A Surrender of Copyhold Land, by way of Morgage.
MEmorandum, That the day and year above-written, E. L. of etc. did out of
Court by the hands of R. G. and I. F. two of the customary Tenants of the said
Manor, surrender by the Rod into the hands of the Lord of the said Manor, two
parcels of Land, with th'appurtenances, containing by estimation seven acres,
or thereabouts, one parcel whereof lies in Hammersmith, within the aforesaid
Parishes of etc. between the Lands of G. L. and R. M. Esquire, on the East; and
the Lands of G. M. Gentleman, on the West; the Common Sewer on the North, and
the Lands of W. H. on the South; and the other parcel of Land, containing by
estimation four acres, being in etc. between the Land of the Bishop of etc. on
the West; the Glebe Lands belonging to the Parsonage of etc. on the East; the
Lands of etc. on the North; and the Lands of the said E. P. on the South: To
the only use and behoof of I. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. To have and to
hold the said parcels of Land, and every of them, with their and every of their
appurtenances, unto the said I. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to
the custom of the said Manor. Provided always nevertheless, and upon this
condition, that if the said E. L. his Heirs or Assigns, do well and truly
content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of one hundred thirty and four pounds
of lawful money of England, on the etc. next ensuing the date within written,
at or in etc. That then this present surrender to be void and of none effect,
or else to stand and abide in full force and virtue.

An Assignment of a Judgment.
TO all etc. A. C. of etc. sends greeting; Whereas T. W. of etc. and H. E. of
etc. by their obligation beaing date etc. in the tenth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles etc. are and stand jointly and severally bound unto the
said A. C. in the sum of etc. with condition of payment of etc. on the etc.
then next following at etc. as by the same obligation may appear, which sum of
etc. was not paid at the day and place before expressed for the payment
thereof, whereby the said obligation became forfeited; Sithence which time, the
said A. C. has commenced her action of Debt upon the said recited obligation,
in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, and has thereupon
recovered and obtained a Judgment of 200 l. and 25 s. costs of suit, against
the said T. W. in Hillary Term last past, before the date of these presents:
Now know all men by these presents, that she the said A. C. for diverse good
causes and considerations her thereunto moving, has constituted and appointed
her well beloved friend T. K. of etc. her true and lawful Attorney for her,
and in her name to demand, ask, leavy, recover, receive and take of the said T.
W. his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, the the said sum of 200 l.
and 25 s. costs of suit, and for default of payment thereof, or of any part
thereof, to sue forth one or more Writ or Writs of Execution, or other lawful
Process whatsoever, and further do, and use all other lawful ways and means
for the recovery thereof, as by her said Attorney or his Council learned in the
Law shall be reasonably devised, advised or required, and the said sum and sums
of money so to be had and received upon the said Judgment, or upon any
Execution thereon to be prosecuted and taken out, to deteine and keep to the
only use and behoof of the said T. K. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, without any account thereof or therefore to be rendered, to her the
said A. C. And the said A. C. does hereby covenant, promise, grant, and agree,
to and with the said T. K. her said Attorney, that at the sealing and delivery
of these presents, the said Judgment is and remains unpaid and unsatisfied,
and that she the said A. C. nor her Executors Administrators or Assigns, nor
any of them, shall or will at any time hereafter release, discharge, or
otherwise do, or suffer to be done, any act or thing whatsoever, to discharge
or impeach the validity of the said Judgment, without the consent and
agreement of the said T. K. in writing under his hand and seal first had and
obtained; Nor shall revoke or countermand the authority and power to him by
these presents given and granted, She the said A. C. hereby ratifying and
approving all and every lawful act and acts, and other proceedings whatsoever,
which her said Attorney shall prosecute, commence or sue forth, for, upon or by
reason of the said judgment: so always that he the said T. K. do and shall at
all times hereafter, and from time to time, pay and bear all such sum and sums
of money, costs and charges of suit, as the said A. C. or her Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall be compelled to disburse for or concerning the
premises; and do and shall also save, defend and keep harmless and
indempnified her the said A. C. her Executors and Administrators, and her and
their Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels and Hereditaments whatsoever, of and
from all and all manner of costs, charges, suits, troubles and detriments
whatsoever, that shall or may happen or come against her the said A. C. her
Executors and Administrators, for or by reason of the said judgment, or any
execution thereupon had or taken. In witness etc.

A Letter of Attorney of a Bond.
TO all Christian people etc. I, W. M. of etc. send greeting. Whereas R. B. of
etc. and I. B. of etc. by their Obligation bearing date the etc. now last past,
are and stand bound unto me the said W. M. in the sum of etc. with condition
for the payment of etc. on the etc. now next following, as by the same
Obligation may appear. Now know ye, that I the said W. M. have hereby made,
ordained, constituted and appointed my beloved Friend H. B. of etc. to be my
lawful Attorney and Assignee for me, and in my name to demand and receive the
said sum of etc. at the day of etc. if the same shall be then paid: And if the
same shall not be then paid, then to sue for and recover the said sum of etc.
being the penalty of the said Bond; and I the said W M shall and will allow and
maintain all and every action, plea and process which he the said W. B. shall
in my name bring or sue for the obtaining and recovery thereof. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Statute.
THis Indenture made etc. Between I. I. of etc. on the one part; and T. W. of
etc. of the other part. Whereas T. M. of etc. by his recognizance in the nature
of a Statute staple, bearing date etc. in the 23 year of etc. taken and
acknowledged before Sir I. K. Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of His
Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, is and stands bound unto the said I. I. in
the sum of 800. l. of etc. with Defeazance thereupon made, That if the said T.
M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators of Assigns, do pay or cause to be paid
to the said I. I. his etc. the sum of 400. l. of etc. on the etc. then next
ensuing the date of the fore-recited Recognizance, at etc. that then the said
fore-recited Recognizance should be void, or else to remain in full force and
virtue; as in and by the said recited Recognizance, with defeazance thereupon
made, whereunto relation being had, more at large appears, which said sum of
400. l. or any part thereof, was not paid at the day and place for payment
thereof; by reason whereof, the said recited Recognizance or Statute staple of
800. l. became forfeited. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said I. I.
for diverse good causes and considerations him thereunto especially moving, Has
granted, assigned and set over unto the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators etc. as well the said recited Recognizance or Statute staple of
800. l. therein mentioned; As also all the estate, right, title, interest,
claim and demand whatsoever, of him the said I. I. in and to the premises: And
the said I. I. does by these presents give and grant unto the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, full power and authority for and in the
name of him the said I. I. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators: But to and
for the only use and behoof of the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, to demand, ask and receive of the said T. M. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, the said sum of etc. mentioned and due in and by the said
recited Recognizance or Statute staple: And if upon demand the said sum of 800.
l. be not paid, that then the Statute staple to prosecute, And sue forth
several Writs of extent and liberate upon the said Statute, out of his
Majesty's Court of Chauncery, according to course, as in such case is used, and
to use all and every other lawful ways and means for the recovery thereof, as
he the said T. W. his etc. shall think fit and convenient: And the same so
recovered and received, to detain and keep to and for the only use and behoof
of the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns. And upon receipt
thereof, or any other satisfaction or composition therefore to be had, made or
given unto the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by the said
T. M. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, to acquit, release and discharge the
said T. M. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, of, for,
from and concerning the said recited Recognizance and Statute staple, and of
and from the sum of money therein expressed. And the said I. I. shall and will
ratify, allow and maintain all and whatsoever lawful act and acts, thing and
things the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall do or
cause to be done in or about the premises, by these presents granted. And the
said I. I. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said T. W. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, that
neither he the said I. I. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, nor any of
them, have, or at any time heretofore has released, acquitted or discharged
the said recited Recognizance or Statute staple, and sum of 800. l. therein
mentioned, or either of them, nor shall nor will at any time or times
hereafter, release, acquit or discharge the said recited Recognizance or
Statute staple, or sum of money therein contained, or any suit writ, plea,
process or action, which he the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall sue, prosecute or commence, upon or by reason of the said
recited Recognizance or Statute staple, in the name or names of the said I. I.
his Executors or Administrators, without the special consent or agreement of
the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first had and obtained
in writing under his or their hands and seals. And also that he the said I. I.
his Executors and Administrators, shall and will at any time or times
hereafter, at the reasonable request, costs and charges of the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, make or cause to be made unto the said T.
W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all and every such further and
other lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and devises, assurance and
assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further better and more perfect
assuring and assigning of the said recited Recognizance or Statute staple, and
sum of money therein contained, or any extent or benefit thereupon, or any
power or authority thereby given or granted unto the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns; As by the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, advised or required. In witness etc.

An Assignment of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people etc. T. D. of etc. sends greeting etc. Whereas T. D.
of etc. late Uncle of the said T. D. party to these presents, in and by one
Indenture bearing date the etc. and in the etc. made between the said T. D.
Uncle to the etc. of the one part; and B. E. and G. C. of etc. of the other
part, purporting certain uses, as in the same Indenture is limited and
expressed: Did give and grant unto the said T. D. party to these presents, one
Annuity or yearly payment of 10. l. of etc. per annum, for and during the
natural life of the said T D. party to these presents, to begin to be paid
yearly to the said T. D. party to these presents, from and after the decease of
A. D. late Wife of the said T. D. the Uncle, as by the said Indenture, among
diverse other things therein contained, more at large appears. Now know ye, that
the said T. D. party to these presents, for and in consideration of the sum of
etc. to him in hand at and before the enfealing and delivery of these presents
by W. P, of etc. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith the said T. D.
party to these presents, acknowledges himself fully satisfied, contented and
paid by these presents. And for diverse other etc. Has given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the
said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said Annuity
or yearly payment of etc. As also all the estate, right, title, interest,
property, claim and demand, which he the said T. D. party to these presents,
has or may, can, might, should or ought to have of, in or to the same, by
force and virtue of the said Indenture of uses, or any thing therein contained,
or otherwise. And the said T. D. party to these presents, for him, his
Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in
manner and form following: That is to say, That he the said T. D. party to
these presents, now has lawful authority to give, grant, bargain and fell the
said Annuity, in manner and form aforesaid: And that heretofore neither he, nor
any other by his appointment, or with his consent, has made any former
bargain, sale, gift, grant, assignment, surrender, extinguishment, charge or
encumbrance of the said annuity of yearly payment of etc. or of any part
thereof: Nor that he the said T. D. party to these presents, nor any other by
or from him, or with his consent, have or has done, nor hereafter at any time
shall do, commit or suffer to be done any act, deed or thing whatsoever,
whereby the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may
be hindered or let of or in the having, receiving and enjoying of the said
annuity or yearly rent, or any part thereof: And that the said W. P. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may from time to time and at all
times from and after the decease of the said A. D. for and during the natural
life of the said T. D. party to these presents, lawfully, peaceably and quietly
have, hold, use, possess, occupy and enjoy the said annuity or yearly rent of
etc. and every part and parcel thereof: To the only proper use and behoof of
the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever, without the
let, trouble, molestation, interruption or disturbance of him the said T. D.
party to these presents, or any other person or persons, by his means, title or
procurement. And further, that the said T. D. party to these presents, shall
and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, at the reasonable
request, costs and charges in the Law of the said W. P. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do or cause, procure or suffer to be done, all such
further act and acts, thing and things, for the further assuring of the
premises to the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and
during the natural life of the said T. D. party to these presents, after the
death of the said A. D. as by the said W. P. his Executors or Assigns, or by
his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised
or required. In witness etc.

An Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made etc. Between H. S. of etc. of the one part; and R. L. of
etc. of the other part. Whereas I. H. of etc. by his Indenture of Lease bearing
date the etc. for the consideration therein expressed, did demise, grant, set
and to farm let unto the said H. S. all that Message or Tenement, called or
known by the name of etc. situate, lying and being in Fleet Street London, and
then in the tenure or occupation of the said I. H. together with all
Watercourse, Lights, Ways, Easments, Commodities and appurtenances
whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the
premises thereby granted, or any of them then made or belonging. To have and
to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the before
mentioned premises, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said
H. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast day of etc.
last past, before the date of the same Indenture, unto the full end and term of
21 years from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended:
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of 21 years, the
yearly rent of etc. at the four usual Feasts or terms in the year: that is to
say, at the etc. or within ten days next ensuing any of the said Feasts, by
even and equal portions, as in and by the said Indenture of Lease, among
diverse Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses and agreements therein contained,
whereunto relation being had, more fully and at large appears. Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said H. S. for and in consideration of the sum
of etc. to him in hand at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents by the said R. L. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith he
acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid; and thereof, and of every part
and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said R. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever by these presents, Has granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does grant etc.
unto the said R. L. all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet
to come and unexpired, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said
H. S. now has, or may, might or ought to have or claim of, in or to the before
mentioned premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, by force and virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, or anything
therein contained, or otherwise howsoever: Together with the said Indenture of
Lease. To have and to hold as well the said premises before mentioned to be
demised, in and by the said Indenture of Lease: As also all the estate, right,
title, interest, use, possession, claim and demand whatsoever of him the said
H. S. of, in and to the premises, unto him the said R. L. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the making hereof, for and during
all the residue and number of years yet to come and unexpired of the said term
of etc, in and by the said Indenture of Lease granted in such like, and in as
large and ample manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as the said H. S.
now has enjoys, or may, might or ought to have and enjoy the premises, by
force, virtue and means of the said Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein
contained, or otherwise howsoever: Together with the said Indenture of Lease,
as aforesaid. And the said H. S. for himself, his Executors and administrators,
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. L. his Executors,
administrators and assigns by these presents, That the said R. L. his
Executors, administrators and assigns, shall and may lawfully, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy the before mentioned premises, and
every part thereof, with the appurtenances, for and during the residue and
number of years yet to come and unexpired of the said term of etc. in and by
the said Indenture of Lease granted, without any lawful let, suit, trouble,
denial or interruption of him the said H. S. his Executors, administrators or
assigns: and that freely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise
well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all other gifts,
grants, bargains, sales, leases, rents, arrearages of rents, forfeitures,
re-entries, cause and causes of re-entries, troubles and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by the said H. S. his Executors,
administrators etc. the rents and covenants in and by the said recited
Indenture of Lease reserved, which on the Tenants or Lessees part and behalf of
the same premises from henceforth are or ought to be paid performed and done
(only excepted and fore prized) Of which said rents and covenants the said R.
L. for himself, his Executors and administrators, does covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said H. S. his Executors, administrators and assigns by
these presents, clearly to acquit and discharge, or otherwise from time to
time, and at all times hereafter from henceforth, well and sufficiently save
and keep harmless and indempnified the said H. S. his Executors,
administrators and assigns, and every of them by these presents. In witness
etc.

A Preamble of a Will.
IN the name of God, Amen, the 16 day of October, 1647. in the 23 year of etc.
I, G. H. of etc. being sick and weak in body, but of sound and perfect memory
(praise be given to God for the same) and knowing the uncertainty of this life
on earth, and being desirous to settle things in order, do make this my last
Will and Testament in manner and form following: That is to say, First and
principally I commend my soul to Almighty God my Creator, assuredly believing
that I shall receive full pardon and free remission of all my sins, and be
saved by the precious death and merits of my blessed Savior and Redeemer
Christ Jesus; and my body to the earth, from whence it was taken, to be buried
in such descent and Christian manner, as to my Executors here after named,
shall be thought meet and convenient. And as touching such worldly estate as
the Lord in mercy has lent me, my Will and meaning is, the same shall be
employed and bestowed, as hereafter by this my Will is expressed. And first, I
do revoke, renounce, frustrate and make void all Wills by me formerly made, and
declare and appoint this my last Will and Testament. Item, I give and bequeath
etc.

A Condition to pay money at the day of Marriage, or day of Death.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the within bounden A. B. his
executors, admistrators and assigns, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the within named C. D. his executors, administrators or assigns, at or in
the etc. the sum of etc. within six months next after the solemnization of the
marriage of the abovesaid A. B. or the day of death and decease of B. C. of
etc. Gentleman, which shall first happen after the date within written, without
fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition to deliver Hay and Oats by a day, etc.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bound I. A. his executors,
administrators or assigns, do and shall well and truly deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the within named T. I. his executors, administrators or assigns,
at etc. five cart loads of good, sweet, well made and well dried Hay, every
load containing etc. and 20 quarters of sound, wholesome and sweet Oats, good
and Merchantable ware, every quarter to contain etc. between the Feast day of
Saint John the Baptist, and Saint James the Apostle, next ensuing the day
within written, frank and free, without any thing therefore to be paid without
fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition to perform Covenants.
THe Condition of etc. that if the within bound L. R. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do and shall at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, well and truly observe, perform, fulfill,
pay, do and keep, all and every the Covenants, Grants, Articles, clauses,
provisoes, payments and agreements, which on his or their parts and behalfs are
and ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled, paid, done and kept, specified
and comprised in a certain pair of Indentures of Lease, bearing date within
written, made between the within named L. R. on the one parry, and N. G. on the
other party, and that in, and by all things according to the true intent and
meaning of the same Indenture, That then, etc.

A Condition for the truth of an Apprentice.
THe Condition etc. that whereas I. R. Son of the within bound E. R. by his
Indenture of apprentiship bearing date etc. last past before the date within
written, has put himself apprentice unto the within named H. S. with him to
dwell after the manner of an apprentice from the etc. next ensuing the date
within written, for and during the term of etc. years from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, as by the same Indenture may appear. If
therefore the said I. shall well and truly serve and dwell with the said H.
during all the said term of etc. years. And if at any time or times hereafter
during the said term of etc. the said I shall by negligence, or otherwise
consume, imbeazle, wast, loose, misspend or unlawfully make away, any of the
moneys, plate, goods, chattels, wares or merchandises of the said H. S. his
Master, or any other person or persons whatsoever, which shall be committed to
his charge and custody then and so often, if the said E. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, shall within three months next
after due proof thereof made, either by confession of the said I. R. or
otherwise howsoever, and notice thereof given either by writing, or otherwise,
unto the said E. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, make sufficient
recompense, satisfaction and payment unto the said H. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, of and for all such moneys, plate, goods, chattels,
wares and merchandises, as shall be so duly proved, as aforesaid, to be by the
said I. consumed, imbeazled, wast, lost, misspent or unlawfully made away: That
then etc.

A Condition to abide the Award of Arbitrators, if they make an Arbitrament;
and if not, then to abide the Vmpirage of an Vmpire.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden A. S. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, for his and their parts and behalfs in all
things, do well and truly stand to and abide, observe, perform, obey, fulfill,
and keep all and every the award, arbitrament, doom, determination, final end
and judgment of Sir T. S. of etc. and H. S. of etc. Arbitrators indifferently
nominated, elected and chosen, as well on the part and behalf of the within
bound A. S. as on the part and behalf of the within named F. L. to award,
arbitrate, determine and judge of, for, upon or concerning all and all manner
of judgments, executions, actions, suits, cause and causes of action and suit,
accounts, reckonings, sum and sums of money, trespasses, strifes, variances,
quarrels, controversies, judgments, executions and demands whatsoever, had,
made, moving or depending, or having being and beginning between the said
parties at any time or times before the day of the date of these presents. So
always that the said award, arbitrament, doom, determination and judgment of
the said Arbitrators, of, for, or upon the premises, be made or put in writing
indented under their hands and seals, and ready to be delivered to the said
parties, or to such of them as shall come and require the same of the said
Arbitrators on this side, or before the etc. and if the said Arbitrators shall
make and put in writing indented no such award or arbitrament, as aforesaid,
for and upon the premises, at or before the said day of etc: If then the said
A. S. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, for his and
their part and behalf in all things, do well and truly stand to, abide, obey,
observe, perform, fulfill, pay and keep all and every the award, umpirage,
arbitrament, determinination, final end and judgment of Sir R. R. of etc.
Umpire indifferently elected and chosen on the part and behalf of either of the
said parties to award, arbiter, determine, and finally to judge of, for, upon
or concerning all and singular the aforesaid premises; so always that the
said award, umpirage, arbitrament, determination and final end and judgment
of the said Umpire, of, for or concerning the same premises, be made or put in
writing indented under his hand and seal, at or on the etc. and ready to be
delivered to the said parties, or to such of them as shall come and require the
same of the said Umpire: That then etc.

A Condition that one shall not demise or alien, without consent.
THe Condition etc. that if neither the above bound R. R. nor his Assigns, nor
any of them, do or shall at any time hereafter demise, grant, bargain, sell or
otherwise do away his or their estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand
either in fee-simple, fee-tail, or otherwise, to any person or persons
whatsoever, of, in or to that the Manor of etc. in the County of etc. with the
rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the said etc. whatsoever; or of,
in or to any part or parcel thereof, which he the said R. R. or his Heirs,
have, has or had, may, might, should or ought to have or claim of, in or to
the said Manor, with the appurtenances, without the consent and agreement of
the above named T. I his Heirs or Assigns, or some of them to that effect,
first had and obtained in writing under his, their or some of their hands and
seals: That then this etc.

A Condition to justify all such actions as shall be commenced by reason of a
Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within bound I. E. by his Deed or Letter
of Attorney bearing date etc. has made and constituted the within named W. D.
his true, lawful and sufficient Attorney to ask, levy, recover and receive for
him, and in his name, to the only proper use and behoof of the said W. D. his
Executors and Administrators, 200. l. of etc. wherein R. C. of etc. by his
Obligation bearing date etc. is and stands bound unto the said I. E. as by
the same Letter of Attorney more at large it does and may appear. If therefore
the said I. E. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, avow, justify and maintain all and
every such lawful action and actions, plaints, process, suits, judgments and
executions, as the said W. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or
such as the said W. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
thereunto assign, name and appoint, shall attempt, commence and pursue in the
name of the said I. E. his Executors or Administrators, against the said R. C.
his Executors or Administrators, or any of them, upon or by reason of the said
recited Obligation. And also, that if neither the said I. E. his Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, shall hereafter willingly do or procure to be
done any manner of act or acts, thing or things, whereby the said debt of 200
l. or any part or parcel thereof, is or shall be released, or in any wise
discharged; or whereby, or by reason whereof, any action or actions, writ,
plea, process or execution to be had, attempted, brought or executed, for,
touching or concerning the suing for or recovery of the said sum of 200 l.
shall be any way impeached, abated, withdrawn, delayed or hindered, except it be
by and with the consent of the said W. D. his Executors or Administrators,
under his or their hands and seals, first had and obtained in writing: That
then etc.

A Condition for payment of money yearly, with a clause to find new sureties
upon death of any of the former.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bound R. D. W.D. and R.B. or any of
them, their or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named I. A. his Executors or
Assigns, yearly from henceforth, for and during the term of 21 years, the
yearly sum of etc. at or in etc. at the four usual Feasts or Terms in the
year: That is to say, at the Feast of etc. or within 20 days next after every
of the said Feasts, by even and equal portions to be paid. And if it shall
happen the said R. D. W. D. or R. B or either of them, to die or depart his or
their natural life or lives before the said term of 21 years shall be fully
ended, next after the date within written: If then the said R. D. his Executors
or Administrators, do within three months next after request in that behalf to
him or them to be made by the said I. A. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, procure and cause such other sufficient and able person or persons to
become bound and enter into Bond unto the said I. A. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, by Obligation in due form to be made for the same
payment of the said yearly sum of etc. for and during so many years as shall be
then to come and unexpired of the said term of 21 years, and with the like
clause for putting in other new sureties as herein is expressed, as shall be of
sufficient ability to answer and pay the sum of money, wherein he or they shall
so stand bound, if the same should be forfeited: That then etc.

A Condition to save harmless from Legacies.
THe Condition etc that if the within bound W. W. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named B, F. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, and his and their goods,
chattels, lands, tenements, possessions and hereditaments, and every of them,
as well against the children of R. E. late of etc. deceased, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them; as also against all and every
other person and persons whatsoever, of, for, from and concerning all and all
manner of gifts, legacies, childrens portions, sum and sums of money and
bequests whatsoever, given and bequeathed unto them, and every or any of them,
in and by the last Will and Testament of the said R. E. or otherwise; and of
and from all actions, suits, costs, judgments, extents, executions and demands
whatsoever, which shall or may at any time hereafter happen to arise, come or
grow, to, for or against the said B. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or any of them, upon or by reason of the same: That then etc.

A Condition not to molest, sue or trouble for any matter or cause before past.
THe Condition etc. that if neither the within bound A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any other person or persons, for him or them, or
in his or their name or names, do not at any time or times hereafter, molest,
sue, vex or trouble the within named C. D. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, by any manner of ways or means whatsoever, for, upon or by reason
of any matter or cause whatsoever, had, made, moving or depending between the
said parties, from the beginning of the world unto the day of the date within
written: That then etc.

A Condition to seal a counterpart of an Indenture by a day.
THe Condition etc. that if one A. B. of etc. shall on this side, and before
the first of etc. seal and subscribe to the counterpart of one Deed indented,
bearing date etc. made between the within named W. M. of the one party, and the
said A. B. of the other party; and the same so sealed and subscribed, do
deliver, as his proper act and deed, to the only use and behoof of the said W.
M. and also the said counterpart of the said Deed indented, so sealed,
subscribed and delivered by the said A. B. in manner and form aforesaid, do on
this side, and before the etc. then next ensuing, deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said W. M. his Heirs or Assigns, whole, uncancelled and
undefaced, at or etc. That then etc.

A Condition for acknowledgment of a Fine.
THe Condition etc. that if the above bounden G. S. and A. his Wife, do and
shall at and before the etc. next ensuing the date within written, at the costs
and charges in the Law of the within named R. P. his Heirs or Assigns, before
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, acknowledge and levy
one fine, sur conusans de droit come ceo que ont de ils done etc. unto the said
R, P. his Heirs etc. with Proclamation according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm in that behalf provided of all those Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, lying and being in P. In the County of
E. which by one Deed indented, bearing date with these presents, are mentioned
to be bargained and sold by the said G. S. to the said R. P. his Heirs etc. and
every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said R. P. and
of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of
the same Deed, as by the said R. P. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised and required: That then
etc.

A Condition to deliver an Obligation by a day.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within named T. M. by his Obligation
bearing date etc. is and stands bound unto the within bounden P. F. in the
sum of 100 l. with condition etc. as by the same Obligation may appear. If
therefore the said P. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do or shall
on or before the etc. next ensuing the date within written, deliver or cause to
be delivered unto the said T. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the
said recited Obligation cancelled or to be cancelled: That then etc.

A Condition to pay money during life.
THe Condition etc. that if etc. W. W. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do or shall yearly, for and during the natural life
of A. W. of etc. well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named
W. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for and toward the maintenance
of the said A. the sum of etc. at or in etc. on four days in every year: That
is to say, on the etc. by even and equal portions, the first payment thereof
to be made and begin on the etc. next ensuing the date within written, he the
said W. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assign, upon every such payment,
sealing and delivering to the said W. W. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, to his and their use, a sufficient acquittance and discharge in
writing under his hand and seal of the money so paid, and so from time to time
received: That then this etc.

A Condition to assign over a Lease by a day.
THe Condition etc. that if etc. I. W. in consideration of 300 l. to him in
hand paid by the within named P. C. do and shall on this side, and before etc.
next ensuing the date within written, at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said P. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by good conveyance and
assurance in the Law, grant, convey and assure unto such person or persons as
the said P. C. shall nominate and appoint, as well one Indenture of Lease made
by and from A. B. to the said I. W bearing date etc. and all Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments therein and thereby demised and granted; as also all the
estate, right, title, interest, rent, reversion, property, claim and demand
whatsoever of him the said I. W. of, in or to the premises, clearly discharged
of all Encumbrances whatsoever, done or to be done by the said I. W. or any by
his means, consent or procurement, except one Lease heretofore made by the said
I. W. to one T. T. of the premises, whereupon the yearly rent of 100 l. is
reserved: which said yearly rent shall or may from henceforth be paid to the
said P. C. or to such person or persons as he shall name or appoint, during the
continuance of the said Lease. And if the said I. W. do and shall permit and
suffer the said P.C. and his assigns, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, to have, receive and take the rents, issues and profits of the
premises, without the let or denial of the said I.W. or his Executors: That
then etc.

A Condition for quiet enjoying of a Message.
THe Condition etc. that if the within named I. M. his Heirs and assigns, and
every of them, shall and may for ever from henceforth peaceably and quietly
have hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all that Message or Tenement, and
Lands, situate, lying and being in etc. and every part and parcel thereof,
mentioned to be bargained and sold by the within bound R. W. to the said I. M.
in and by a certain Indenture of bargain and sale, bearing date the day of the
date within written, made between the within bound R. W. and A. his Wife, on
the one part; and the above named I. M. of the other party, clearly discharged
or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all and all
manner of estates, titles, troubles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, at
any time heretofore had, made, committed, permitted, suffered or done by the
said R. W. and A. his Wife, or either of them, or by his or their means or
procurement: That then etc.

A Condition not to do any act to prejudice the estate of the Obleigor in a
Lease etc.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bound R.R. has not done, nor that he,
his executors nor administrators, at any time hereafter, shall wittingly or
willingly do or assent unto any manner of act or acts, device or devises;
whereby, or by reason whereof, the interest, estate and term of years which the
within named H: B: has, of, in or to any the Messuages, Lands, Grounds,
Tenements or Hereditaments, called etc. or any part or parcel thereof, is or
shall be alienated, bargained, sold, assigned, determined, avoided or
encumbered, or whereby one Obligation or Deed obligatory, bearing date the etc.
last past before the date within written, is or shall be discharged, released
and made void, or loose any manner of force or strength, except it be by and
with the assent, consent and agreement of the within named H. B. his Executors
or administrators, wherein one R. A. Citizen etc. stands bound to the said R.
R. in the sum of etc. with a certain condition thereupon endorsed, touching the
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, called etc. as by the same may appear: That
then etc.

A Condition to pay rent during a Lease parole, and at the end to depart,
leaving the goods and household stuff mentioned etc.
THe condition etc. that whereas the above named T. L. has by Lease parole set
and and to farm let to the above bound T. D all that capital Message etc. for
the term of etc. to be reckoned and accounted from the etc. at and for the
yearly rent of etc. of lawful etc. payable in form following: That is to say,
on the etc. If therefore the said T. D. his Executors, administrators,
under-tenants or assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said T. L. his Executors, administrators or assigns, the said
yearly rent or sum of etc. in manner and form, as is before expressed. And also
if the said T. D. his Executors, administrators, under-tenants and assigns, do
at the end and expiration of the said term of etc. to be reckoned, as
aforesaid, depart out of the said house, and leave the possession thereof, and
other the premises, and leave behind him all such locks, keys, bolts, hinges,
doors, casements, glass, glass windows, wainscot, dressers, shelves and other
things as now do belong or appertain to the said Message etc. or which at any
time hereafter, during the said term, shall be set up, placed, made or provided
in or about the same premises, at the costs and charges of the said T. D. unto
the said T: L. his Executors, administrators or assigns, that then etc. But if
default be made in payment of the said rent of etc. in manner and form above
declared; or if the said T. D. his Executors or assigns, shall not perform the
other clauses and agreements herein contained, without fraud or coven: That
then etc.

A Condition that he shall enjoy quietly the aforesaid Message, without
interruption of any, during the said Lease parole.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the above bound T. L. has the day of the date
above written by Lease parole, demised and to farm letten unto the above named
T. D. all that capital Message etc. for the term of etc. to be accounted from
the etc. and for the yearly rent of etc. And whereas the said T. D. by his
Obligation bearing date the day of etc. with condition there under written for
payment of the said rent or sum of etc. and performing other clauses and
things, in such manner and form, as in the said condition is mentioned; as in
and by the obligation and condition before mentioned, may more at large appear.
If therefore the said T. D. his Executors, Administrators, Under-tenants and
Assigns, and every of them, shall or may from time to time, and at all times
during the said term of etc. lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy all that the said capital Message etc. and
appurtenances thereunto belonging, in as full, large and ample manner, as the
said T. L. had used or enjoyed the same premises, without any let, suit,
trouble, interruption or disturbance of the said T. L. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or persons by his or their
means, act, consent, title, interest, privity or procurement: That then etc.

A Condition where money is given, by a Will, to a Wife and her Children, and
the money being paid by the Executors to the Husband of the Wife, to be
employed for their benefit, the Husband is bound to employ it well, or to repay
it etc.
THe Condition etc. that whereas T.H. of etc. Gentleman, deceased, did by his
last Will and Testament in writing, give and bequeath unto M. one of the
Daughters of E H. and now the Wife of the above bound I. S. the sum of etc. and
the sum of etc. to the four Children of them the said I. and M. which said sum
of etc. together with the said sum of etc. more, the above named H. H. and W.
H. have at and before the ensealing and delivery of this present Obligation,
paid and delivered unto the said I. S. to be by him employed in stock, for the
benefit and advantage of the said M. and the said four Children. If therefore
the said I. S. do and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, use
his best skill and endeavor to manage and employ the said etc. in a stock for
the best benefit and advantage of the said M. and her said four Children. And
if the said I. S. do not nor shall not employ the said etc. in good manner, as
the same ought to be, according to the true intent and meaning hereof: Then if
the said I. S. do within six months next after request to him made in that
behalf by the said H. H. and W. H or either of them, their or either of their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for the use and behoof of the said M. and
her said four Children, the full sum of etc. or the full worth or value
thereof, in good and valuable goods and chattels, without fraud or coven: That
then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless an Executor, he not meddling with the
Executorship.
THe Condition etc. that whereas W. H. late of etc. by his last Will and
Testament in writing, did nominate and appoint the within named I. L. and
others, Executors of his said Will: since which time the said I. L. is become
sole Executor of the said Will. And whereas the said I. L. has not at any time
or times intermedled with, had, taken or received any of the debts, goods,
household stuff, plate, chattels or hereditaments, of or belonging to the said
W. H. but that the same have been equally divided and distributed to and
amongst the etc. part and part alike. And forasmuch as the etc. did of their
own accord satisfy and pay such debts duties and legacies as the said W. H.
did owe, give and bequeath, and had and received the acquittances for the same,
without the consent of the said I. L. If therefore the said etc. and every or
any of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every or any of
them, do and shall from time to time, and at all and every time and times
hereafter, freely and clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise,
upon request made, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and
indempnified the said I. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and his
and their goods, chattels and hereditaments, and every of them, of and from all
sum and sums of money, bills, bonds, debts, duties and demands whatsoever, which
shall or may at any time or times hereafter, happen to be demanded or recovered
of or from the said I. L. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or any of them,
for or by reason, of the Executorship of the said last Will and Testament; and
of and from all actions, suits, troubles, costs, charges and demands
whatsoever, which shall or may happen to arise or grow, for or by reason of the
same premises, without fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition to discharge an Executor from an Orphans portion in London, being
received without consent.
THe Condition etc. that whereas A. H. Spinster, one of the Daughters of W. H.
late of etc. deceased, has taken and received the full third part of the sum
of etc. which he the said W. H. left in his house at the time of his decease,
his several charges, debts and legacies being paid and discharged out of the
said sum of etc. And her full fourth part of all the goods, plate, chattels,
utensils and implements of household, as were belonging to the said W. H. at the
time of his decease; and also her full fourth part of the sum of etc. which was
paid upon Bond due from etc. For all which said sums of money, plate and goods,
the within bound R. H. and R. A. have hereby undertaken to acquit, discharge
and save harmless the within named R. M. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns. If therefore the said R. H. and R. A. or either of them, their or
either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and shall from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or
otherwise, upon request made, well and sufficiently save, keep harmless and
indempnified, the within named R. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and his and their goods, chattels and hereditaments, and every of them, as well
against the Officers of the City of London for the Court of Orphans, and every
of them, and against all and every other person and persons whatsoever: As also
of and from all actions, suits, costs, losses, charges, sum and sums of money,
and demands whatsoever, which shall or may at any time or times hereafter,
happen to arise or grow, or to be demanded or recovered of and from the said R.
M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, for or by reason
of the same several sums of money and housholdstuffe so by the said A. H. had,
taken and received, as aforesaid, and every of them, without fraud or coven:
That then etc.

A Condition to justify all such actions as shall be commenced, by reason of
an assignment of a Bill Obligatory.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within bound W. E. and M. A. have by their
Deed of assignment bearing date within written, assigned and set over unto the
above named R. N. one Bill Obligatory, wherein A. B. of etc. and C. D. of etc.
are and stand bound unto the said W. E. and M. A. in the sum of etc. (recite
according to the usual form) as by the said Bill and Deed of assignment may
appear. If therefore the said W. E. and M. A. or either of them, their or either
of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and shall at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, justify, avow and maintain all and every
such lawful action or actions, suits, pleas and process, as the said R. N.
his Executors or Assigns, shall commence or prosecute against the said A B. and
C. D. or either of them, their or either of their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, in the names of them the said W. E. and M. A. or either of them, for
or by reason of the said Deed of assignment, and Bill Obligatory, or either of
them, without revoking or releasing the same, or any the persons or sums of
money in them mentioned: That then etc.

A Condition for a hired Servants truth.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the above named H. H. has taken and received
into his service the above bound T. K. If therefore the said T. K. do and shall
at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during so long time as the said
T. K. shall dwell with the said H. H. well and truly serve the said H. H. his
Master, without consuming, imbeazling, wasting, loosing, mis-spending or
unlawfully making away any of the money, plate, goods or chattels of the said
H. H. his Master, or any other person or persons whatsoever, which shall be
committed to his charge and custody, by reason of his said service. And if the
said T. K. shall by negligence, or otherwise, consume, imbeazle, wast, loose,
mis-spend or unlawfully make away any moneys, place, goods and Chattels of the
said H. H. his Master, or any other person or persons whatsoever, which shall
be committed to his charge and custody, by reason of his said service, as
aforesaid: Then if the said T. K. the above bound P. W. and I. K. or any of
them, their or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, do and shall within three months next after due proof thereof, either by
the confession of the said T. K. or otherwise howsoever: And notice or warning
thereof given or left at or in etc. in writing, or otherwise, unto or for the
said P. W. and I. K. or either of them, make sufficient recompense,
satisfaction and payment unto the said H. H. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, for the said moneys, goods or chattels consumed or imbeazled, as
aforesaid: then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else
etc.

A Condition to pay rent reserved upon a Lease.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bound R. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, do well and truly pay or cause to
be paid unto the within named D. F. and I. S. and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said I. All that yearly rent reserved and payable unto the said D. F. and I. S.
and unto the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. upon and by virtue of a certain
pair of Indentures of Lease, bearing date the day of the date within written,
made between them the said D. F. and I. S. of the one party; and the said R. H.
on the other party, at such days and times, by such equal and quarterly
portions, and in such manner and form, during all the said term thereby
granted, as the same, in and by the said Indenture is limited and appointed to
be paid, without fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition to discharge Executors from the payment of Legacies to Non-ages.
THe Condition etc. that whereas M. H. Widow, by her last Will and Testament,
bearing date etc. did give and bequeath unto three sons of M. T. Widow, the sum
of etc. apiece to each of them. And whereas also the within named T. P. at and
before the day of the date within written, has paid unto the within bound R.
M. to and for the use of the said three sons of T. M. Widow, (viz.) I. H. and
M. the said sum of 300 l. given unto them by the said M. H. deceased. If
therefore the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless and indemnified the said T. P. and R. F.
Executors of the said last Will and Testament, and either of them, their and
either of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns; As also their and either
of their goods, chattels, lands, tenements and hereditaments, as well against
the said I. H. and M. and every of them, as against all other person or persons
whatsoever, of, for or concerning the said legacy of etc. apiece, to them the
said I. H. and M. given and bequeathed, as aforesaid. And also do obtain and
get sufficient and lawful releases and acquittances, or other discharges from
them the said I. H. and M. and of every of them respectively, as they shall
attain their full ages of 21 years, or within three months next ensuing their
said full ages of etc. respectively to be made unto the said T. P. and R. F.
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, purporting discharges for their
said Legacies given and bequeathed, as aforesaid, without fraud or coven: That
then etc.

A Condition to save harmless from a Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition etc. that if the above bound A. C. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or some of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all and
every time and times for ever hereafter, acquit, discharge, save, defend and
keep harmless and indempnified the above named R. N. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and his and their goods, chattels, lands, tenements
and hereditaments, and every of them, of, for and from all and all manner of
actions and suits, costs, charges, troubles, losses and detriments whatsoever,
which shall or may at any time or times hereafter, arise, happen or be, unto,
for or against the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for,
concerning or by reason of one Letter of Attorney, bearing date the day of the
date above written, which the said A. C. has sealed and delivered unto the
said R. N. or any suit or suits commenced or to be commenced by virtue thereof.
And also if the said A. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do or
shall, upon request to him or them to be made, well and truly pay or cause to
be paid unto the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all such
sum and sums of money as the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall be compelled to disburse or lay out, for or by reason of any
suit or suits, arrests or other things whatsoever, concerning the premises:
That then etc.

A Condition to pay money at the expiration of an Apprentiship.
THe Condition etc. that whereas one M. C. Daughter of etc. by her Indenture of
Apprentiship bearing date with these presents, has put her self an Apprentice
unto the within bound L. S. and L. his Wife, and with them to dwell and serve,
as their Apprentice, from the Feast of etc. unto the end and term of etc. from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, as by the same
Indenture of Apprentiship more at large appears. And whereas also the within
named I. P the day of the date hereof, has lent, disbursed and delivered to
the said L. S. the sum of 20 l. of etc. to occupy as a stock during the said
term. If therefore the said L. S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the
said M. C. or her Assigns, the full sum of etc. at the full end and expiration
of the said term of 7 years, or at the day of the marriage of the said M. which
of them shall first and next happen to be or come after the date hereof,
without fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition of an Obligation, wherein one Executor stands bound to another to
do his diligence in the execution of a will, and from time to time to give a
just account.
THe Condition etc. that whereas I.B. of etc. Gentleman, has named and
appointed the within bounden T. A. to be one of his Executors, together with
the within named G. B. If therefore the said T. A. do from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, use his utmost diligence and endeavor for the true
execution of the said last Will and Testament, according to the trust in him
reposed by the said I.B. and do also from time to time yearly, until the said
last Will and Testament be fully and wholly fulfilled and performed, make by
himself, or by some other lawfully authorized by him, a true account to the
said G. B. at or in etc. at any time between the first and last day of November
yearly. And if upon the making up of every such account or accounts, the said
T. A. his etc. shall make delivery of the moity and one half of all sums of
money, goods and chattels that the said T.A. his etc. shall have in his or
their custodies, or shall have received by virtue of the said Executorship of
the said last Will and Testament of the said I. B. That then etc.

A Counter-condition for performance of Covenants.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within named M. M. at the request and
desire of the within bound D. P. together with the said D. P. is and stands
bound in and by one Obligation bearing the date within written, unto E. S. of
etc. in the sum of etc. for the true observance, performance, fulfilling,
paying and keeping of all and every the covenants, grants, articles, clauses,
payments and agreements which are contained and specified in one pair of
Indentures of Lease, as by the said Obligation appears. If therefore the said
D. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and every of them, do and shall
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and
keep harmless and indempnified the said M. M. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, of and from all actions, suits and demands
whatsoever, which shall or may at any time or times hereafter happen to arise,
come or grow to or against the said M. M. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, for, upon or by reason of the said recited Obligation,
or any sum or sums of money therein contained, without fraud or coven: That
then etc.

A Condition that the Lessor shall pay money back upon the Lessees dislike of a
Farm.
THe Condition etc. that whereas there has been communication between the
within bound T.B. and the within named P. C. for and concerning one Farm,
called A. in the County of S. now in the occupation of the said T. B. to be
granted by the said T. to the said P. for term of 6 years. If in case the said
P.C. shall mislike to proceed in the same, and of such misliking do give notice
to the said T.B. before the last day of etc next ensuing: At the Message of
the said Farm: Then if the said T. B. his Executors etc. do within three days
next after such notice of misliking given, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the said P. not only the sum of 6 l. of etc. to him the said T.
delivered at th'ensealing hereof; but also do pay or satisfy unto the said P.
all such sums of money and other things as the said P. has, or before that
time shall have paid or be at, for the sowing or manuring of the said Farm, or
any part thereof: That then etc.

A Condition for building and setting up a frame of a House.
THe Condition etc. that if the within named E.W. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, do at his and their own costs and charges, on this side, and before
the Feast of etc. next coming after the date above written, not only well work
and substantially erect, build and set up, or cause to be erected, built and
set up one good and substantial new frame, or building, of good, new,
sufficient and well seasoned timber of heart of Oak, to serve for the plat or
foundation already set forth or made within the Message or Inn, called or
known by the name or sign of the Ship, in the Parish of Saint Clements Danes,
in the County of Middlesex, which shall contain from the West toward the East
40 foot of Assize, and in breadth from North to South 25 foot of Assize, and
with part thereof, which shall extend from the South part of the measure before
mentioned, toward the South, shall continue in length 20 foot, and in breadth
18 foot and 12 inches: All which said building shall contain in height three
stories and a half, and every story to contain in height 7 foot of Assize at
the least: But also do, before the said Feast of etc. at his like costs and
charges, fit and furnish the same building with flowers, boarded, doors,
stairs, pent-houses, and all other things pertaining to, or being Carpentary
work, with sufficient nails for the same, and hooks and hinges for all the
doors: In which said building there shall be such and so many stairs, as the
within named P. C. shall appoint; and to be set in such place and places, as
the said P. shall nominate; and there shall be in the stories extending West
and East, parritions, and three several rooms; and in every room one imbowed
window, with such and so many clear windows, as the said P. shall appoint; and
in every of the stories of the building, extending from North to South, one
partition, and one room: in every of which rooms there shall be one imbowed
window: all which to be well and sufficiently finished, as aforesaid, before
the said Feast of etc. next coming: That then etc.

A Condition to save three harmless, which are bound for one by Recognizance
to the Chamber of London for Orphans money.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, that whereas the within named I.
C. I. L. and W. G. at the instance and request of the above bound E. K.
together with the said E. K. in the inner Chamber of the Guild Hall of the City
of London, are become jointly and severally bound unto R. B. Chamberlain of the
City of London aforesaid, and to his Successors, Chamberlains of the same City,
in the sum of 350 l. of etc. with condition amongst other articles in the said
Recognizance specified, for the true payment of 300 l. of like money unto the
said Chamberlain, or his Successor, to the use of E. and I. Orphans of T. B.
late Citizen and Grocer of London, deceased, at such time as they, or either of
them, shall accomplish their several ages of 21 years, as by the said
Recognizance and condition thereof more at large may appear. If therefore the
said E. K. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, do from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, discharge, exonerate, acquit or otherwise well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless the said I. C. I. L. and W. G. and every
of them, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of them, and every of
them; and all and singular the lands, tenements and hereditaments, goods and
chattels of them and of every of them, against the said Chamberlain and his
Successors, and against all and every other person and persons whatsoever, of,
for and concerning the said Recognizance, and all and singular sums of money,
penalties, forfeitures and things whatsoever, in the said Recognizance, or
condition thereof, or either of them, contained or specified: And also of, for
and concerning all and singular actions, suits, judgments, extents, executions,
molestations, costs, charges, troubles, encumbrances and demands whatsoever,
which shall or may arise, grow, happen or be by reason or means of the said
Recognizance. And also, if it shall happen the said E. K. before the said sum
of 300 l. be fully paid to the said Chamberlain, or his successors, according
to the tenor and purport of the said Condition of the said Recognizance, to
decease, or by any means to come to poverty and insufficiency; or himself, or
his goods and chattels, out of the liberties of the City aforesaid, to absent,
withdraw or purloyn: Then if the said E. K. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, within six months next after such decease, coming to poverty
and insufficiency, or such withdrawing, absenting or retaining himself, or his
goods or chattels, out of the liberties of the City aforesaid, or upon
reasonable request, do make true payment unto the said Chamberlain, or his
Successors, of the said sum of 300 l. to the use aforesaid. And then also
within the same six months, or upon such request, as aforesaid, do cause and
procure the said Recognizance, and all extents and executions of the same, to
be clearly and lawfully discharged and made void: That then etc.

A Condition from an under Sheriff to a high Sheriff for saving harmless.
THe Condition etc, that whereas the above named Sir M. G. Knight, Sheriff of
the County of B. has assigned and deputed the above named B. N. his under
Sheriff. If therefore the said B. N. the above bound C. R. and G. D. their
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do at all time and
times hereafter, save and keep harmless and indempnified, as well the said Sir
M. G. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, as
also the lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods and chattels of the said Sir M
G. of, for, touching or concerning the returns and executions of all such
process, writs and warrants of what nature soever they be, as are or shall be
hereafter directed to the Sheriff of the said County of B. and shall be
brought and delivered, or offered to be delivered to the said B. N. during the
time that the said Sir M. G. shall be Sheriff of the said County. And of and
from all issues, fines and amerciaments, which shall happen to be imposed or
taxed upon the said Sir M. G. for or concerning the not executing, wrongful
executing or detaining in his hands, any writs, process or warrants; and of,
for and concerning all escapes of all and every person or persons that shall be
arrested or apprehended by virtue of any such process, writ or warrant, during
the time that the said Sir M. G. shall continue Sheriff of the said County of
B. And also if the said B. N. C. R. and G. D. their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, shall save harmless and indempnified the
said Sir M. G. and his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their lands, goods and
chattels, of, for and concerning all such account and accomps as the said Sir
M. G. is or shall be charged withal, as Sheriff of the said County of B. to
our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, in any of His Majesty's
Courts, and of all sums of money which shall be levied or received by the said
B.N. as under Sheriff of the said Sir M.G. or any Bayliffe or other person by
the direction or assent of the said B. N. to the use of the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors: That then etc.

A Condition to save harmless a Surety from a Bond of Arbitrament.
THe Condition etc. that if the above bound A. D. his Executors and
Administrators, or any of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and indempnified
the above named G. M. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and his and
their lands, tenements, goods, chattels and hereditaments, of, for, from and
concerning one Obligation bearing date the day of the date above written,
wherein the said G.M. at the request of the said A. D. is and stands bound
unto R. M. Gentleman, in the sum of 100 l. with condition there under written,
that the said A. D. abide the award of W. M. and T. B. Esquires, Arbitrators;
and of and from all actions, suits, arrests, costs, charges and demands
whatsoever, concerning the premises, without fraud or coven: That then etc.

A Condition, if money be not paid at the day, then to surrender certain copy
hold Lands, etc.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bound E. L. do not or shall not well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named I. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of etc. on the etc. next ensuing the
date within written, at etc. according to a proviso or condition mentioned in a
Deed of surrendor, bearing date the day of etc. Then if the said E. L. and A.
his Wife, do and shall at the next Court to be holden for the Manor of etc.
lawfully and absolutely surrender into the hands of the Lord of the said
Manor, to the only use and behoof of the said I. P. his Heirs and assigns for
ever, according to the custom of the said Manor, the said several parcels of
Land, with their and every of their appurtenances in the said surrendor
mentioned. And also, if the said I. P. his Heirs or Assigns, shall or may
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said parcels of Land, and every
of them, with their and every of their appurtenances so surrendered, as
aforesaid, freely and clearly acquitted of and from all and all manner of
former and other surrendors, bargains, sales, gifts, grants, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, and of and from the thirds of the said M. now Wife of
the said I. P. That then etc.

A Letter of Attorney, or an assignment to receive and keep money due upon a
Bond, wherein is a forfeiture, or, nomine penae, upon discharge without consent.
TO all Christian people etc. I, W. S. of etc. send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas B. S. of etc. and R. B. of etc. by one Obligation bearing
date etc. Anno Domini, 1647. are and stand jointly and severally bound unto me
the said W S. in the sum of etc. with condition. there under written, for the
true delivery of 46 quarters of Rye, as by the said Obligation with condition,
more at large appears. Now know ye, that I the said W. S. as well for and in
consideration that the said Obligation was made in the name of me the said W.
S. only in trust, and for the use of R: S: of etc. as for diverse other good
causes and considerations me hereunto moving, Have given, granted, assigned and
set over, and by these presents do give, grant, assign and set over unto the
said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, as well the said Obligation and sum of
etc. therein mentioned; as also all my right, action and demand to and in the
same: Giving, and by these presents granting unto the said R: S: by virtue
hereof, my full and whole power and authority, for me, and in my name, but to
the only use of the said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, to demand, ask, levy,
recover and receive of the said B. S. and R.B. and of either of them, their
Executors or Assigns, the said sum of etc. mentioned and due by the said
Obligation, and to use all lawful ways and means for the recovery thereof:
And the same so had and received, to detain and keep to his own use and behoof,
without any account thereof, or therefore to be rendered. And I the said W: S: do
covenant and agree, that for any act or acts, thing or things whatsoever by me,
or by any other heretofore by my appointment done or committed, or hereafter to
be done or committed, the said Obligation now is, and hereafter shall stand and
continue in full force and effect. And that neither I the said W: S: my
Executors or Assigns, shall nor will acquit, release or otherwise discharge the
payment or delivery of 46 quarters of Rye, in the Condition of the said
Obligation mentioned, without the special license, consent and agreement of
the said R: S: his Executors and Assigns, first had and obtained in writing
under his or their hand and seal. And to the true performance of all and every
the Articles and agreements hereby expressed on the part of me the said W: S:
to be done and performed, I bind me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators by
these presents, in the sum of etc. (nomine penae) to be forfeited and paid unto
the said R. S. his etc.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to receive rents.
TO all etc. I, E: D: of etc. send greeting etc. Know ye, that I the said E: D:
for diverse good causes me hereunto moving, and especially for the trust and
confidence which I have and do repose in C: K: of etc. have made, ordained,
constituted and invested, and in my place and stead by these presents have put
the said C: K: to be my lawful Attorney, for me, and in my name, and to the
use and behoof of me the said E: D: my Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to ask, demand, levy, recover and receive of H: G: of etc: the sum of etc: for
one half years rent of and for the Manor of B. in the County of etc: due at
the Feast of etc: last past before the date hereof: Giving, and by these
presents granting unto my said Attorney, by virtue hereof, full power and
absolute authority, for me, and in my name, and to and for my use, benefit and
commodity, to ask, levy, recover, receive and demand of the said H: G: his
Executors. Administrators and Assigns, the said rent or sum of etc: due and
payable, as aforesaid; And upon the receipt thereof, or any other agreement on
that behalf had and made, for me, and to my use to make, seal and deliver, for
me, and in my name, and as my Deed, all and every such acquittance and
acquittances, or other discharges, as to the said C: K: shall be thought meet
and convenient to be given. And to do, follow, execute and finish for the
receipt and recovery thereof, all and every such act and acts, thing and
things, device and devises, as to the said C: K: shall be thought fit and
convenient; ratifying, allowing, confirming and approving all and whatsoever my
said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done in or about the premises
by these presents. In witness etc.

A Letter of Attorney to demise, survey or sell a Manor.
TO all etc. Know ye, that we the said G. S. and E. M. for diverse good causes
and considerations us hereunto especially moving, Have made, ordained,
constituted, and in our place and stead put and authorized R. N. and H. B. or
either of them, our true sufficient and lawful Attorney and Atturneys for us,
and in our names, and for the use of us the said G. S. and E. M. to enter into
all those the Manors of W. T. and I. with their rights, members and
appurtenances, in the County of C. and into the Advowsons of or belonging to
them, or any or either of them, and into every part and parcel thereof; and the
same Manor, or either or any of them, for us, and in our names to view and
survey. And by these presents, for us, and in our names, do give full power and
authority to the said R. N. and H. B. and to either of them, to be our Steward
or Stewards of our said Manors, and every of them, and to keep such Court and
Courts of survey, and other Courts leets, and Law days, of and upon the said
Manors, or any of them, as our said Atturneys, or either of them shall appoint;
or shall be by them, or either of them, thought fit: And the same Manors, and
every or any of them, for us, and in our names to bargain, sell, lease or grant
to such person or persons, and for such estates, for life or lives,
inheritance, or otherwise; and for such sum and sums of money, as to our said
Atturneys, or either of them, shall be thought meet and requisite, to the
uttermost and best commodity and profit of us the said G. S. and E. M. and the
Deed and Deeds of the same grant, and estates so to be made, for us, and in our
names to seal, and as our deed or deeds to deliver unto the parties to whom the
same shall be so made, or to any other, to their use and uses, and the
counterparts of the same, for us, and in our names, to accept and receive: And
also all such fines, and other sum and sums of money, as shall grow due for the
same, for us, and in our names, and to the use of us the said G. S. and E. M.
to to collect, gather, receive and take, and all such rents, duties, heriots,
arrearages of rents, and profits of Courts, as are already, or hereafter shall
be due or payable, for, out of, or concerning the premises, or any of them, to
receive: Giving, and by these presents granting to our said Atturneys, and
either of them, our full power, and lawful authority, touching and concerning
the premises, to do, execute, proceed and finish in all things, in as ample
manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as we the said G. S. and E. M. or
either of us, might or ought to do, if we, or either of us, were then and there
personally present: And ratifying and allowing all and whatsoever our said
Atturneys, or either of them, shall do, in or about the premises, or any of
them, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

In witness etc.
A Letter of Attorney to deliver a Lease upon the Land.
TO all etc. I, I M. of etc. Whereas I the said I. M. have subscribed and
sealed one writing, bearing date with these presents, and hereunto annexed,
purporting a Demise unto W. W. of etc. of all that the Manor of C. with the
appurtenances, in the County of Y. and of one Message, 300 acres of Land, 100
acres of meadow, 200 acres of pasture, and 100 acres of wood, with the
appurtenances, in C. aforesaid, now or late in the tenure or occupation of W.C.
his Assignee or Assignees. To have and to hold the said Manor, and all other
the premises, unto the said W. W. his Executors or Assigns, for the term of 5
years, under the yearly rent of etc. as by the said Deed indented may appear.
Now know ye, that I the said I. M. for diverse good causes and considerations me
hereunto especially moving, have made, ordained, constituted, and authorized,
and in my place and stead by these presents, have nominated and put W.G. of
etc. my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my name, into all
that the said Manor of C. and into the said Message, 300 acres of Land, 100
acres of meadow, 200 acres of pasture, and 100 acres of wood, with the
appurtenances, and into every or any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the
whole to enter, and peaceable and quiet possession and seizin thereof, for me,
and in my name to take, and after such possession and seizin thereof, or any
part thereof, had and taken, as aforesaid, for me, and in my name, as my act
and deed, to deliver unto the said W.W. or his certain Attorney, upon some part
of the aforesaid premises, the said Writing or Deed indented, subscribed and
sealed, as aforesaid; And all and every other act and thing, requisite and
necessary to be done in about or concerning the premises, for me, and in my
name to do or cause to be done.

In witness etc.
A Letter of Attorney to keep Courts.
KNow all men by these presents, that we P.L. and H.S. of etc. do hereby
authorize, constitute and appoint G.C. of etc. Gent. our lawful Deputy and
Attorney, for us and in our names to appoint a Steward and Bailiff of and for
our Manors of B. and H. and by himself, or his sufficient Deputy, to and for
our use to keep Courts within the said Manors or either of them, and to give
admittance upon alienation or death, and to take and receive Attornments of all
and every the Tenants thereof: And to and for our use, to assesse fines upon
such admittances; and for us, and in our names, and to our use, to receive the
said fines; and also such Heriots as shall be due upon such death or
alienation; and likewise to receive all rents and arrearages of rents, and also
all amerciaments, perquisits and profits that shall arise or grow due to us, or
any of the said Courts. We do also further authorize and appoint the said G.C.
to gather, take up and seize to our use, all wayfs, estrays, deodans, outlaws
and felons goods, which shall happen to arise, be due, or fall within the said
Manors or either of them.

Given under our hands and seals the etc. in the etc.
A Letter of Attorney to take possession of Lands newly purchased.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I, I. H Citizen etc. have
made, ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed, and by these presents do
make, ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint, and in my stead and place by
these presents put T. C. of etc. my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney, for
me, and to my use, to take and receive peaceable and quiet possession and
seizin of, and in all that Message or Tenement, and all and singular the lands
and premises thereunto belonging, with the rights, members and appurtenances,
situate, lying and being in etc. lately bargained and sold by B. P. unto me
the said I. H. And the same possession so had and taken, to detain and keep to
the only use and behoof of me the said I. H. my Heirs and Assigns, according to
the tenor and true meaning of the Indenture, whereby the said premises are
conveyed unto me. Ratifying, allowing and confirming all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, about in or the premises by
these presents.

In witness etc.
A Letter of Attorney, for a Steward of a Manor to receive rents, with
authority to impound and distreyn.
TO all etc. I, G. K. of etc. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know
ye, that I the said G. K. for and in consideration of the special trust and
confidence which I have and do repose in my well beloved Friend C. P. of etc.
Gent have made, ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed the said C. P.
my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my name, stead and
place, and to the only proper use and behoof of me the said G. K. my Executors
and Administrators, to collect, gather, demand and receive of all, every or any
my Tenants or Farmers, of all, every or any my Lordships, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments what soever, in the County of G. all and every such
sum and sums of money, rents, arrerages of rents, amerciaments, heriots, fines,
issues and profits whatsoever, as shall any wise grow due, accrue, be issuing
or payable unto me the said G. K. out of all or any my said Lordships, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments. And upon the receipt of all, every or any
such sum or sums of money, rents and profits, for me, and in my name, to make
and give acquittances, or other sufficient discharges to any of my said Tenants
or Farmers, requiring the same. And the same sum and sums of money, rents,
issues and profits so had and received, to pay and deliver to me the said G. K.
my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to be accomptable unto me the
said G. K. my Executors and Administrators, from time to time, for all every or
any the said sum or sums of money, so, as aforesaid, by the said C. P. had,
taken and received, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, next ensuing
the date hereof, or before the end of Candlemas Term then next ensuing; and at
the Feast of the annunciation of the blessed Lady Saint Mary the Virgin, then
next following; or before the end and expiration of Trinity Term then next
ensuing; and so from time to time, at the Feasts and days before prefixed, to
give and make a true account, or accounts, to me, during the continuance of the
power to him given and granted, as aforesaid. And further, I do by these
presents give full power and authority to my said Attorney, at any time
hereafter, to elect and choose some one sufficient and able person to be Steward
of my Courts of my said Manors etc. and also to place and displace, at his
will and pleasure, upon just occasion, any Bayliffe or other Officer or
Officers whatsoever, as occasion shall require: and also giving, and by these
presents granting unto my said Attorney, full power and lawful authority, for
me, and in my name, stead and place, and to my use, as aforesaid, for
non-payment of all, every or any my said rents, arrearages of rents, issues,
amerciaments and profits, to distreyn, impound, arrest, sue, implead and
imprison all, every or any my said Tenants and Farmers, which shall refuse to
pay to my said Attorney, all or any such sum and sums of money, rents, issues
and profits, by them, or any of them, respectively due and payable unto me, as
aforesaid, and the same persons again to discharge, acquit and release of and
for the same, at his will and pleasure. And further, to do, or cause, or
procure to be done, in and about the premises, all and whatsoever to the said
C. P. shall seem requisite and needful to be done, as effectually, as if my
self were then and there personally present. All which etc. so to be done, I do
hereby covenant and grant, for me, my Heirs etc. to justify, averr and
maintain, as fully and perfectly, to all intents, constructions and purposes,
as though the same were actually done by my self.

In witness, etc.
A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment.
WHereas K. B. Widow, of etc. Executrix of the last Will and Testament of I.B.
Esquire, has sued out of the high Court of Chancery an original writ of debt
for two hundred pounds, against me T.E. and I. W. of etc. Esquires; and Sir R.
B. of etc. Knight, my sureties returnable this Trinity Term in the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster: These are therefore to require you to appear for
me, and my sureties, and to take Declarations for us the said T.H. I. W. and
Sir R. B. at the suit of the said K. B. and thereupon to confess Judgment,
either by non sum informat nihil dicet, or otherwise, as you shall think
fitting, and this shall be your sufficient warrant in that behalf,

In witness, etc.
A Warrant to acknowledge Satisfaction.
Mr. T. W.
WHereas in Trinity Term in the twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles over England etc. there was a Judgment had and obtained, in
His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, against A. P. of etc. for
etc. debt, and etc. damages and costs, at the suit of etc. These are to require
you to acknowledge satisfaction upon the said Judgment, and this shall be your
sufficient warrant for the same,

In witness, etc.
Another Warrant to acknowledge satisfaction.
Mr. T. F.
WHereas I heretofore retained you my Attorney, in His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, to sue, charge and implead R. E. upon several
Actions, and a Habeas Corpus depending against him, and whereas you thereupon
further proceeded by my direction, to the recovery and entry of four several
Judgments, the one of 500 l. debt, and 7. l. 10. s. and (...) d. damages,
another etc. another etc. and the other etc. for that I have received full
satisfaction from the said R. E. for and concerning all those actions, and
several executions by you in my behalf obtained and entered against him by
force whereof he remains Prisoner in the custody of the Marshall of His
Majesty's said Court; these are therefore to will and require you to discharge
those several actions by search or otherwise, out of the entry book of the
Marshall of that Court, or other declarations remaining on file there: And
further I do hereby direct and authorize you to acknowledge satisfaction upon
Record, upon the several Judgments above specified, and all other Judgments
chargeable against him for my satisfaction, and so to release his person out of
the Marshals custody, from all causes touching me; And for the doing thereof,
this shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge, In witness etc.

An Assignement of an Annuity.
TO all etc. T. D. of etc. send greeting: Whereas T. D. of etc. late of etc.
Uncle to the said T. D. party to these presents, in and by one Indenture
bearing date etc. and in the etc. made between the said T. D. Uncle of the one
party, and B. E and B. C. Gentleman of the other party, purporting certain
Uses as in the said Indenture is limited and expressed: Did give and grant unto
the said T. D party to these presents, one Annuity or yearly payment of etc.
per annum, for and during the natural life of the said T. D. party to these
presents, to be issuing and going out of the Messuages, Lands, Tenements etc.
of the said T. C. the Uncle, situate, lying and being in etc. to begin to be
paid yearly to the said T. D. party to these presents, from and after the
Decease of A. D. late wise of the said T. D. the Uncle, as by the same
Indenture amongst diverse other things therein contained, more at large
appears; And whereas the said A. D. is since deceased: Now know ye, That the
said T. D party to these presents, for and in consideration of the sum of etc.
to him in hand, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by
W. P. of etc. well and truly paid, whereof, and wherewith, he does acknowledge
himself fully satisfied, contented and paid by these presents, and for diverse
other, etc. Has given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over; and by
these presents does fully and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign
and set over unto the said W. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, as
well the said Annuity or yearly payment of etc. as also all the estate, right,
title, interest, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said T.
D. party to these presents, now has or may, can, might, should or ought to
have or claim of, in, or to the said Annuity or yearly payment of etc. To
have, hold, perceive, receive, take and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly
payment of etc. unto the said W P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
from the day of the date of these presents, for and during the natural life of
the said T. D. party to these presents, in such like, and in as large and ample
manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as the said T. D. party to these
presents, now has may, might, should, could, or ought to have and enjoy the
same, by force and virtue of the said Indenture of uses, or any thing therein
contained or otherwise: And the said T. D. party to these presents for him, his
Executors Administrators and Assigns, does covenant promise and grant to and
with the said W. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns by these
presents, in manner and form following; that is to say, That he the said T. D.
party to these presents, now has full power and lawful authority, to give,
grant, bargain, and sell the said Annuity or yearly Rent of etc. in manner and
form aforesaid: And that neither he the said T. D. party to these presents,
nor any other person or persons by his appointment, or with his consent has
heretofore made any former bargain, sale, gift, grant, assignement, surrender,
extinguishment, charge or incumberance of the said Annuity or yearly payment of
etc. or any part thereof; Nor that he the said T.D. party to these presents,
nor any other by, from, or under him, or with his consent, hereafter at any
time shall do or commit, or suffer to be done or committed any act, Deed or
thing whatsoever, whereby the said W. P. his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall or may be let or hindered of, or in the having, receiving,
and enjoying of the said Annuity, or of any part thereof: And that the said W.
P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, shall or may from time to time
and at all times from henceforth, for and during the natural life of the said
T. D. party to these presents, lawfully, peacefully, and quietly have, hold,
receive, perceive, take and enjoy the said Annuity, or yearly payment of etc.
and every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said W.
P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, without the let, suit, trouble,
interruption or disturbance of him the said T. D. party to these presents, or
any other person or persons by his act, means title, or procurement. And
further, that the said T. D. party to these presents, shall and will from time
to time and at all times hereafter, at the reasonable request, cost and charge
in the Law of the said W. P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, do
cause, procure or suffer to be done, all such further act and acts, thing and
things, device and devices in the law whatsoever, for the further assuring of
the premises to the said W.P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, for
and during the natural life of the said T. D. party to these presents; As by
the said W. P. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised and
required, In witness etc.

An Indenture for suing forth a Writ of Entry of a Manor; to the intent a
recovery may be had.
THis Indenture tripartite, made the etc. between H. E. of etc. of the first
part, W. G. of etc. of the second part, and A.B. and C D. of etc. of the third
part, Witnesses, that it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended unto,
and fully agreed upon, by and between the said parties to these presents: And
the said H. E. does for himself his Heirs etc. covenant etc. that he the said
E. or his etc. before the Feast of etc. at the proper cost and charges in the
Law of the said W. G. his Heirs or Assigns shall permit and suffer the said
A. B. and C. D. to bring and sue forth out of His Majesty's high Court of
Chancery, one Writ of Entry sur disseisin in le post, against the said W. G.
returnable before the Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster, at a
certain day before the said Feast of etc. by which Writ the said A. B. and C.
D. shall demand against the said W.G. all that the Manor of etc. by the name
of etc. or by any other name or names whatsoever, whereunto the said W. G.
shall appear before the said Justices, at the said day of return, to be
contained in the said Writ in his own proper person, or by his Attorney,
sufficiently authorized by the Law for the same, upon which appearance, the
said A. B. and C. D. shall declare against the said W. G. according to the
nature of the said Writ: And that he the said H. E. shall permit and suffer the
said W. G. to make defense, and vouch over to warranty the said H. E. and the
same E. by himself or his Attorney, sufficiently authorized by Law for the
same, shall vouch over to warranty, the common vouchee, and thereupon imparle
and after the same imparlance in the same Term, shall make default and depart
in contempt of the Court, to the intent a perfect recovery and Judgment in the
said Court, may be had against the said H. E. W. G. of the said Manor and
Lands, and all other the premises according to the course of common recoveries
in such cases used: And further, that the said recovery and execution thereupon
so as aforesaid, to be had and pursued by the said A B. and C. D. shall be to
the only use and behoof of the said W. G. and of his Heirs and Assigns and to
no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever (A Covenant for incumberances) In
witness etc.

A revocation for a Protection during the Parliament time.
WHereas I the Right Honorable I. Earl of R. have granted a protection under
my hand and seal, unto C. R. Esquire, bearing date on or about the etc. last
past, to endure for the time of this present Parliament: Now these presents
witness, that for diverse good causes and considerations me moving, I do hereby
revoke, disannull and make void the said protection, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, so as the said C. R. shall not from henceforth have any
benefit, privilege or advantage thereby, but be therefore and therefrom,
utterly debarred and excluded for ever by these presents,

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and sale of Trees.
THis Indenture made etc. between A. B. of etc. and T.H. of etc. of the one
part, and G.F. of etc. of the other part witnesses, that the said A. B. and T.
H. for and in consideration of etc. to them in hand paid, before the sealing
and delivery of these presents, the receipt thereof etc. have bargained and
sold unto the said T. F. on hundred Trees of Oak, to be taken and chosen by
the said T. F. his Executors or Assigns, within, amongst, and out of the woods
and Trees, standing and growing within the Park of S. in the County of etc. or
in or upon the banks of bounds of the said Park (all such Trees as now are
already felled or marked) always excepted out of this present bargain and
sale: And the said A. B. and T. H. do etc. to and with etc. that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said T. F. his Executors and Assigns, at
seasonable times in the year, at his and their free liberty, wills and
pleasures, before the Feast of etc. to fell, cut down, take and carry away the
said Trees, before by these presents bargained and sold, and every of them, so
that the said G. F. his Executors and Assigns at his and their, or any of
their proper costs and charges, do from time to time make up and repair all
such breaches and hurts, as he or they shall commit or do, or cause to be
committed or done, in any of the hedges, pales, or ditches, of or belonging to
the said Park, or any the grounds thereunto belonging, or adjoining for or by
reason of the felling, cutting down, carting or carrying away of the said
trees, or any of them; and so that all the said trees, and every of them,
before bargained and sold, be carried and rid of, from and out of the said
Park, and bounds thereof, before the said Feast of etc. And the said A. B. and
T. H. all the said trees before bargained and sold to the said T. F. in manner
and form, as aforesaid, against all men, at all times, shall warrant and for
ever defend. And it is further agreed and declared between the said parties,
that all such and so many of the said trees before mentioned, bargained and
sold, as shall remain, and not be carried away out of the said Park and bounds
thereof, before the said Term of etc. shall from thenceforth remain and be to
the only use of the said A. B. and T. H. their Executors and Assigns, any thing
before mentioned to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding. In witness etc.

An Indenture of Lease of a House and Lands in the Country.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. B. of etc. of the one party, and C. D. of
etc. of the other party: Witnesses, that the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the rents and covenants hereafter in and by these presents
reserved and contained, which on the part and behalf of the said C. D. are and
ought to be paid, done, performed, fulfilled and kept: Has demised, granted,
betaken and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, betake
and to farm-let unto the said C. D. all that Message or Tenement, etc. And
also all that Close of meadow ground, called etc. and all that etc. Which said
premises now are in the tenure or occupation of the said C. D. or his Assigns,
situate, lying and being in the said parish of etc. Except and always
reserved out of this present Demise and Grant, all trees, woods and underwoods,
now standing, growing or being, or which hereafter shall stand, grow or be in
or upon the same premises; and free liberty of ingresse, egresse, regresse,
way and passage to and for the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and
their workmen and servants, at any seasonable time or times in the year, to
come in and upon the demised premises, and every or any part thereof, to sell,
cut down, lop and top the same trees, and every or any of them: and the same
trees, lops and tops, with carts and carriages to take, load, bear and drive
away, at his and their wills and pleasures. To have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, Close of meadow, and etc. and all and singular other the
before mentioned premises to be demised, with the appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said C. D. his etc. from the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel last past, before the date of these presents, for and during, and
unto the full end and term of twenty and one years from thence next ensuing,
fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, and every
year, during the said term of one and twenty years, to the said A. B. his etc.
at or in etc. the yearly rent or sum of etc. at two of the most usual Feasts
or Terms of payment in the year; that is to say, the Feasts of etc. by even and
equal portions. And the said C. D. for himself, his etc. that he the said C.
D. his etc. or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said A. B. his etc. at or in etc. the said yearly rent of etc.
during the said Term of etc. on the Feasts aforesaid, or within fifteen days
next ensuing either of the said Feasts, by even and equal portions, in manner
and form aforesaid And that he the said C. D. his etc. or some of them, at his
and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, when and as often as need shall require, during the
continuance of this present Demise, well and sufficiently repair, support,
maintain, uphold, hedge, ditch scour, fence, amend and keep the said capital
Message or Tenement, and all and singular the before mentioned to be demised
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all
manner of needful and necessary reparations, paling, hedging, ditching,
fencing and amendment whatsoever (principal timber only excepted) And the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the before mentioned to be
demised premises, with the appurtenances, being so well and sufficiently
repaired, supported, maintained, upholden, ditched, hedged, fenced, amended and
kept together; with such household stuff, and implements of household, as are
mentioned in a Schedule hereunto annexed, in as good case and plight, as the
same now are (reasonable wearing only excepted) in the end of the said term of
one and twenty years, or other sooner determination of this present Lease,
shall and will peaceably and quietly leave, surrender and yield up the same
unto the said A. B. etc. And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said A. B. his etc. with workmen, and others, in his or their company, or
without, twice in every year yearly, during the said term, or oftener, to come
into and upon the before demised premises, and every or any part thereof,
there to view, search, and see the state and condition of the reparations of
the same. And upon every such view or search, to give or leave notice, in
writing, at the said demised Message, to or for the said C D. his etc. of all
defaults and lacks of reparations, then and there found, to repair and amend
the same, within six months next after such view made, and notice given, as
aforesaid. Within which time and space of six months, he the said C. D. etc.
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, by these presents, well and sufficiently to repair and amend the same.
And further, the said C. D. for himself, his etc. that he the said C. D. his
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times, during the continuance
of this present Demise, pay, bear, discharge and disburse all such Tithes,
Church-duties, taxes, subsidies, and other payments whatsoever, wherewith the
same premises, and every or any part thereof, shall or may be charged, or
liable to pay, during the said Term (except the quit rent due for the said
Message to the Lord of the Manor of Harrow) and thereof shall and will acquit
and discharge the said A. B. his etc. and also the said demised Message and
premises, and every part and parcel thereof. And also that he the said C. D.
his etc. shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
A. B. his etc. the full sum of 10 l. of etc. over and above the said yearly
rent of etc. for every or any acre or acres of Land, that shall be at any time
or times hereafter, during the continuance of this present Demise, ploughed,
dug, broken up or eared in the said Closes, called etc. or any of them, or
in any other of the said Closes not heretofore dug, ploughed or broken up;
and so proportionably, according to the rate of ten pounds for every acre of
Land; and according to that rate, for every acre, or part, or parcel of an acre
of Land, for every time, every or any acre or acres, part or parcel of acre or
acres, shall be so ploughed, dug or broken up and eared in any of the said
Closes, the same to be paid unto the said C.D. his etc. at such days and times
as the yearly rent hereby is reserved and appointed to be paid, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents. And further, that neither the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or will at any time
or times, during the continuance of this present Demise, fell, cut down, lop or
top any of the timber trees, or any other trees, now standing, growing or
being, or which hereafter shall stand, grow or be in or upon the said demised
premises, or any part thereof, without the good will and license of the said
A. B. his etc. in that behalf first had and obtained in writing under his or
their hands and seals; nor shall demise, grant, let, set, sell, assign or set
over the said demised Messuages, and other the premises, or any part thereof,
or his or their estate or term of years, or any part thereof, of, in or to the
same premises, during the term by these presents granted, or any person or
persons whatsoever, except it be by and with the consent and agreement of the
said A. B. his etc. in that behalf first had and obtained in writing under his
or their hands and seals. Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and fully agreed upon by and between the said parties to these
presents, that if the said A. B. his etc. or any of them, shall at any time or
times hereafter, during the said term of 21 years, be minded and desirous to
have again, resume and take the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular
other the before demised premises, with the appurtenances, into his or their
hands and possession, before the expiration of this present Lease. And of such
his or their desire, do give notice in writing unto the said C. D. his etc. at
any of the days or times of payment, wherein or whereat the said yearly rent
hereby reserved, is appointed to be paid: That then the said yearly rent shall
determine at the end of one whole year next after such notice given, to have
again the said Message, and all other the before demised premises: And that
then also, at the next Feast or time of payment, which shall shall be one whole
year next ensuing such notice or warning given, as aforesaid. And from
thenceforth this present Indenture of Lease, and every covenant, article and
agreement herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void, and of
none effect, as if these presents had never been had nor made. And that then,
and from thenceforth, and at any time or times then afterward, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said A. B his etc. into all and singular the
before demised premises, and every part thereof, wholly to re-enter, and the
same to have again, re-possesse and enjoy, as in his or their first and former
estate, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof, in any
wise notwithstanding. And the said A. B. does for himself, his etc. covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said C. D. his etc. and every of them, by
these presents, that if the said C. D. his etc. or any of them, shall at any
time or times hereafter, during the time and term by these presents granted,
desire to depart from the said Message or Tenement, and premises hereby
demised, and to surrender and yield up the same premises unto the said A. B.
his etc. and of such his or their desire, do give warning in writing under his
or their hands to the said A. B. his etc. at the house of the said A. B. at any
of the Feasts or days of payment aforesaid, one whole year before he or they
shall depart from the premises; and do and shall accordingly surrender and
yield up the said premises unto the said A. B. his etc. well and sufficiently
repaired, hedged, ditched, amended, paled and fenced, as the same ought to be;
together with the said implements of household, according to the true meaning of
these presents, that then upon such warning given and surrender, or other
assurance made of the premises as aforesaid, he the said A. B. his etc. shall
and will accept the same, and take into their hands and possession, the said
Capital Message or Tenement, and all other premises, with their
appurtenances, according to the true intent and meaning of these present.
Provided also, if it shall happen the said yearly rent, or sum of etc. or any
part thereof to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of ten
days, next over or after any of the Feasts or days of payment aforesaid,
wherein the same ought to be paid as aforesaid being lawfully demanded, or if
the said C. D. his etc. do not well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, pay
and keep, all and every the Covenants, Articles, payments and agreements in
these presents contained, which on his and their parts are, and ought to be
observed, performed, paid, done, fulfilled and kept,, that then in any of the
said cases, and from thenceforth at any time after, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said A. B. his etc. into the said capital Message or Tenement,
and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain,
repossesse and re-enjoy, as in his and their first and former estate; and the
said C. D. his etc. thereout, and from thence utterly to expel, put out, and
amove this Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof, in
any wise notwithstanding. And lastly, the said A. B. for himself, his etc. that
he the said C. D. his etc. and every of them, paying the said yearly rent of
etc. and paying, doing, and performing the covenants payments, provisoes and
agrements in these presents mentioned, which on his and their parts are or
ought to be paid, done, performed, and kept, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, shall or lawfully may, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all
other the premises before by these presents demised (except before excepted)
for and during all the said term of 21 years before granted, without any
lawful let, suit, trouble, denial, eviction interruption or disturbance of
the said A. B. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of them,
or any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from, or under
him, them, or any of them, In witness etc.

An absolute Bargain and Sale of a house and Lands.
THis Indenture made the etc. between A.B. of etc. of the one part, and C. D.
of etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that the said A. B. for, and in
consideration of the sum of etc. to him in hand, at and before the sealing and
delivery of these presents, by the said C. D. well and truly paid, the receipt
whereof he the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge, and himself therewith fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
clearly acquit, exonerate, and discharge the said C. D. his Heirs Executors
and Administrators for ever by these presents: Has given, granted, aliened,
bargained, sold, enfeoffed, and confirmed, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, aliene, enfeoffe, and
confirm unto the said C. D, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that the etc.
with all and singular its rights, members, jurisdictions, and appurtenances,
together with all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards,
Gardens, Yards, Back sides, Easments, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Ways, Easments, Profits, Commodities, Common of
Pasture Hereditaments and appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or
Tenement, and premises, or to any part or parcel of them belonging, or in any
wise appertaining; all which said Message, Lands, Tenements, Feedings,
Pastures, Closes and Hereditaments, with their, and every of their rights,
members and appurtenances whatsoever, before, in and by these presents,
mentioned or intended to be granted, are situate, lying and being within the
Township of H. aforesaid, in the said County of etc. and now or late in the
tenure or occupation of the said A. B. or of his Assignee or Assigns, and the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, of all and singular the
before mentioned premises, and all rent and rents, reserved upon any grant or
grants, demise or demises, made of the premises, or of any part or parcel of
them; And also all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession,
property, claim, and demand whatsoever, of him the said A. B. of, in, or to
the same, and all Deeds, writings, evidences, charters, transcripts of Fines,
Court Rols, escripts and minuments whatsoever, touching or concerning the
premises, or any part or parcel of them: To have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the premises, hereby granted,
bargained and sold, or mentioned to be herein or hereby granted, bargained and
sold, with their, and every of their rights, members and appurtenances
whatsoever, unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use
and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And the said A.
B. for himself and his Heirs, etc. the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular other the premises before granted, bargained and sold, with the
appurtenances, unto the C. D. and his Heirs, to the only proper use and behoof
of the said G. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, against him the said A. B.
his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other person and persons weatsoever,
lawfully claiming, by, from, or under him, them, or any of them, stall and will
warrant, and for ever defend by these presents: And the said A. B. for himself
his Heirs Executors and Administrators does covenant, promise, grant, and
agree, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns and every of them, by
these presents, in manner and form following, that is to say, that he the said
A. B. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents is, and
until a good, pure, perfect, and absolute estate of Inheritance, of all and
singular the before granted premises, and every part thereof shall be fully
vested, settled, and executed, in and upon the said C. D. and his Heirs,
according to the true meaning of these presents, shall remain, continue, and
be seized of, and in the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other
the premises, in and by these presents, granted, bargained and sold, with all
and every their rights, members and appurtenances, of a good, pure, perfect,
and absolute estate of Inheritance, in Fee-simple, without any condition,
reversion, remainder or limitation of any use or uses, estate or estates, in or
to any person or persons whatsoever, to altar, change, defeat, determine, or
make void the same. And that the said A. B. at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, has full power, good right, and lawful authority,
to grant, bargain, sell, and convey all and singular the before, hereby
granted or mentioned to be granted premises, with their, and every of their
appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns in manner and form
aforesaid. And that he the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of
them, shall or may by force and virtue of these presents, from time to time,
and at all times for ever hereafter, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all
and singular the before granted premises, with their, and every of their
rights, members and appurtenances, and have, receive and take the rents, issues
and profits thereof, to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever,
without any lawful let, suit, trouble, denial, interruption, eviction or
disturbance of the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them, or any of
them, or by his or their means, act, consent, title, interest, privity or
procurement. And that free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise, from time to time well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, by the said A. B. his Heirs Executors
or Administrators, of, and from all and all manner of former and other gifts,
grants, bargains, sales, Leases, mortgages, joyntures, dowers, title of dower,
statute Merchant and of the staple recognizance, extents, judgments,
executions, uses, entailes, rents and arreareges of rents, forfeitures, fines,
issues and amersments, and of and from all and singular other titles, troubles,
charges, demands and incumberances whatsoever, had made, committed, suffered,
omitted or done by the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them or
any of them, or by, from or under his or their means, act, consent, title,
interest, privity or procurement (the rents and services which from henceforth
from time to time, for or in respect of the premises, shall grow due and
payable to the chief Lord or Lords of the fee or fees of the premises only
excepted and fore prised.) And further, the said A. B. for himself his Heirs
Executors and Administrators does etc. that he the said A. B. his heirs and
assigns, and all and every other person or persons, and their Heirs lawfully
having, claiming or rightfully pretending to have, or which hereafter shall or
may lawfully have, claim or rightfully pretend to have any estate, right,
title, interest or demand, into, or out of the premises, or any part or
parcel of them, by, from or under the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall
and will from time to time, and at all times, for and during the space of seven
years next ensuing the date of these presents, at and upon the reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said C. D. his Heirs
or Assigns make, do, perform, acknowledge, leavie, execute and suffer, or
cause to be made, done, performed, knowledged, leavied, executed and suffered
all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, device and devices, assurance and assurances and conveyances in the Law
whatsoever, for the further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure
making, and conveying of all and singular the before, hereby granted or
mentioned to be granted premises, with their and every of their rights,
members and appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his etc, be it by fine or fines,
feoffement or feoffements, deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the
inrolement of these presents, recovery or recoveries, with single or double
voucher or vouchers, release or confirmation, or by all and every or any the
ways or means aforesaid, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by
the said C. D. his etc. or by his or their Council learned in the Laws shall
be reasonably devised, advised or required, so as the said A. B. his etc. or
such other person or persons who shall be required to make such further
assurance, be not compelled or compellable to travel further then the Cities
of London and Westminster, or either of them, in or about the making thereof.
And lastly, it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended unto, and fully
agreed upon, by and between the said parties to these presents, for them their
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that all fines, feoffements, recoveries
and assurances in the Law whatsoever, had, made, leavied, knowledged, suffered
or done, or hereafter to be had, made, knowledged, suffered, leavied or done,
by or between the said parties to these presents, or any of them, of, for,
touching or concerning the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular
other the before hereby granted premises, with their rights, members and
appurtenances, and every or any part thereof shall be, and enure and shall be
construed, esteemed, adjudged, and taken to be and enure, to the only proper
use and behoof of the said C. D. his etc. for ever, and to none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever, In witness etc.

A Conveyance of a Manor and Lands, in consideration of a Marriage etc.
THis Indenture made etc. between I M. of etc. of the one part, and E. F. of
etc. and G. M. of etc. of the other part, Witnesses; that for the preferment
and advancement of P. M. natural son of him the said I. M. and of the Heirs
Males of the said P. M. and for and in consideration of the great fatherly love
and natural affection, which the said I. M. bears to the said P. M. his son,
and to the intent and purpose that the Manor, Lands and Tenements hereafter
mentioned, shall and may be and continue in the stock, blood and kindred of the
said I. M. and for and in consideration of a Marriage by Gods permission
shortly to be had and solemnized, between the said P. M and one F. daughter of
E. T. of etc. and for diverse other good causes and considerations, him the said
I. M. especially moving, it is concluded, covenanted, granted and agreed, by
and between the said parties to these presents: And the said I. M. on his part,
for himself his Heirs Executors and Administrators does by these presents
covenant and grant, to and with the said E. F. and G. M. and either of them,
and the Executors and Administrators of them, and of either of them, that for
the considerations aforesaid, he the said I. M. and his Heirs, and all and
every other person and persons now standing, or being seized, or that hereafter
shall stand and be seized of and in all that the Manor of S. in the County of
B. with all and singular the rights, members and appurtenances thereof, and of
and in all and singular Messuages, Tenements, Houses, Buildings, Orchard,
Lands, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Mils, Woods, Underwood,
Advowsons, Revertions, Rents, Services, Wayfs, Estraies, Royalties, Liberties,
P^iviledges, Jurisdictions, Hereditaments, and all other the rights members and
ap^urtenances whatsoever, to the said Manor and Lands, incident, belonging or
in any wise appertaining or accepted, requited, taken or known, or occupied,
demissed or letten as part, parcel or member thereof, shall from thenceforth
stand and be seized of, and in the same Manor, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all other the premises, and of and in every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances, to the uses intents and purposes hereafter in
these presents mentioned and expressed, and to none other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. That is to say, unto and for the use of the said I. M.
until the said marriage shall be had and solemnized between the said P. M. and
F. and immediately from and after the said marriage so had, to the use of the
said P. M. and F. and of the Heirs males of the said P. M. on the body of the
said F. lawfully begotten: And for default of such Heirs male, to the use of
the right Heirs of the said I. M. for ever. And further, the said I. M does by
these presents covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, to and with the said E. F. and G.M. and either
of them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form
following: That is to say, That the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the premises, with their appurtenances, now are
and be, and at all times hereafter, and from time to time, shall and may
continue, remain and be clearly acquitted, exonerated, and discharged, or
otherwise well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said I. M. his
Heirs, Executors etc. or by some or one of them, at his or their own proper
costs and charges, of and from all and all manner of former and other bargains,
sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, titles of dower, uses, wills,
entails, rents, charge-rents seek arrearages of rents, titles, recognizances,
statutes merchant and of the staple, and of and from all other charges,
encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by the said
I. M. or by his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons by his or
their assent, consent, means, privity or procurement: The rents and services
which from henceforth shall grow due to the chief Lord or Lords of the fee or
fees of the premises, and all lawful leases or grants heretofore made or
granted of the premises, or of any part thereof, which shall not continue
above four years, or thereabouts, next after the date hereof, whereupon
several yearly rents are reserved, amounting in the whole to etc. which shall
be yearly payable to the said P. M. and F. and the Heirs males of the said P.
M. for and during the continuance of the said Leases and Grants, only excepted
and fore-prized. And that the said Manor, and other the premises, at the end
and determination of the said Leases and Grants, shall be, and from thenceforth
shall and may continue and be unto the said P. M. and F. and the Heirs males of
the said P. M. of the clear yearly value of etc. or thereabouts. And moreover,
that he the said I. M. his Heirs etc. shall and will at all times, and from
time to time, during the space of one whole year next after the said marriage
had and solemnized, when and as often as he, or they, or any of them, shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said E. F. and G. H. or either of them,
their Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, do make, knowledge, lea^y and execute,
or cause and suffer to be made, done, knowledged, leavied and executed, all and
every such further act and acts, thing and things, device and devices,
assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, be it by Deed or Deeds,
enrolled or not enrolled, fine, with proclamation, feofment, recovery, with
voucher or vouchers, release or confirmation with warranty, against the said
I.M. and his Heirs, or otherwise, or without warranty, or by all or so many of
the ways, means and devices aforesaid; or by any other ways or means
whatsoever; as by the said E. F. and G. H. or either of them, their Heirs or
Assigns, or by their or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised or advised and required, at the costs and charges only in
the Law of the said P. M. for the further, better and more perfect assurance,
surety, sure making and conveying of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with the
appurtenances, in and by these presents mentioned and intended to be conveyed
and assured, in manner and form above in these presents declared, and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said E. F. and G. H. to the uses, intents and
purposes above in these presents mentioned, and to none other uses, intents or
purposes whatsoever. In witness etc.

An assurance of a Jointure made before marriage, with special Covenants
concerning Children by a former Husband.
THis Indenture made etc. Between R. L. of etc. of the one part; and A. B. and
I. G. of etc. of the other part: Witnesses, that in consideration of a
marriage shortly to be had and solemnized between the said R. L. and A. H. late
Wise of etc. deceased, for the future good and advancement of the said A.H. and
in testimony of the singular good will and affection which he the said R.L.
has and bears to the said A.H. and for diverse other good and weighty
considerations him the said R.L. thereunto especially moving, it is covenanted,
granted, concluded and fully agreed upon by and between the said parties to
these presents, in manner and form following; that is to say: And the said R.
L. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them,
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A. B. and I. I. and
either of them, and the Executors etc. of them and either of them, by these
presents, that he the said R. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will from and
after the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, and from and after the said
marriage so had and solemnized, stand and be seized of and in all that the
site or seat of the Rectory or Parsonage of East-Church, and of and in all
Houses and Buildings thereupon built, standing or being; And of and in one
Field or Close of pasture, with the appurtenances, thereunto adjoining,
containing, together with the said site of the said Rectory, by estimation 40
acres, be it more or less; And of and in a parcel of ground, called, Herleys
Spring, containing by estimation one acre etc. And of and in one meadow,
containing by estimation 40 acres, be it more or less; And of and in one piece
of ground, called Reeds meadow, containing by estimation 29 acres, be it more
or less: And of and in one field, called, Frogs field, containing by
estimation 52 acres, be it more or less: And of and in one parcel of Land,
called, Parsnonage hill field, containing by estimation 37 acres, be it more or
less; And of and in all those Lands, Closes, Meadows, Feedings and Pastures,
called or known by the name or names of Stone pit, and stone pike, containing
in the whole by estimation 400 acres, be they more or less: And of and in one
other piece of Land, called, Beaconfield, containing by estimation 29 acres, be
it more or less: And of and in one Cottage, with one Rood of Land thereunto
belonging, or occupied with the same: In which Cottage or House, one R. D. did
late dwell: All which premises are situate, lying and being in E. aforesaid,
and now are in the occupation of etc. and of and in all other the Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and (...)


