A TREATISE Concerning the COVENANT and BAPTISM Dialogue-wise, between a
BAPTIST and a POEDO-BAPTIST, Wherein is showed, That Believers only are the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham; Fully discovering The Fallacy of the Argument drawn
from the Birth Privilege. WITH Some Animadversions upon a Book Entitled
Infant Baptism from Heaven and not of men, Defending the Practice of Baptizing
only Believers against the Exceptions of M. Whiston.

By Edward Hutchinson.

(...) i. e. It is necessary first to believe, and afterward to be signed with
Baptism. Basil. l. 3. contra Eunom.

I beseech you regard not what this or that man says, but enquire all things of
the Scripture.

Chrysostom. 13. hom. 2 Cor. If you be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the Promise.

Gal. 3.29. LONDON. Printed, for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle, near
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1676.

The Epistle DEDICATORY. To the spiritual seed of Abraham especially those of
the Baptized Congregations.
BEloved for the fathers sake, first premising, that they are not all Israel,
that are of Israel, I know there is dross mingled with your silver, chaff
amongst your wheat, and the Canaanite is still in the land, and troubles you:
but to you that are indeed the true seed of Abraham by faith in Jesus Christ,
do I dedicate this Treatise. You beloved are of God, and have your fathers name
written in your foreheads; you are the true Israelites, to whom pertains the
Adoption, and the glory, the Covenants and Gospel promises, whose are the
fathers, and for whom Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever. You
are a chosen generation, a Royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people,
walking in the steps of your father Abraham, harkening to that great Prophet
whom God has raised up among your brethren, and have been baptized into the
name of the father, son, and holy spirit. But the devil (that implacable enemy
of souls) has endeavored to wreak his malice upon you above all people,
opening his floodgates to overwhelm you; the Archers have shot sorely at you,
the plowers have made deep furrows upon your backs, yet you are still supported
by the rock of Ages, and strengthened by an Everlasting Arm; they have labored
in vain, for the blessings of your father Abraham have prevailed above the
blessings of your progenitors.

Your beginning in these nations (of late years) was but small; yet when it
pleased the Lord to dispel those clouds that overshaddowed us, and scatter some
beams of the Gospel amongst us, he gave you so great an increase that Sion may
say with admiration, who has begotten me these! etc.

Nor is it less observable that whereas other Reformations have been carried
on by the secular arm, and the Countenance and allowance of the Magistrate, as
in Luthers time by several German Princes; the Protestant Reformation in
England by King Edward, Q. Elizabeth, etc. The Presbyterian reformation, by a
Parliament, Comittee of Estates, Assembly of Divines, besides the favor and
assistance of great personages; you have had none of these to take you by the
hand, but your progress was against the impetuous current of humane
opposition, attended with such external discouragements as bespeak your
embracing this despised truth, an effect of heart-sincerity, void of all
mercenary considerations. Yea how active has the Accuser of the Brethren been
to represent you in such frightful figures, exposing you by that mischievous
artifice to popular Odium, and the lash of Magistracy; in so much that the name
of an Anabaptist was crime enough: which doubtless was a heavy obstacle in the
way of many pious souls.

And what our dissenting brethren have to answer, upon that account (who
instead of taking up, have laid stumbling blocks in the way of Reformation)
will appear another day. Yet notwithstanding the strenuous oppositions of those
great and learned ones, The mighty God of Jacob has taken you by the hand, and
said be strong.

Besides it has a considerable tendency to the advancement of divine grace, if
we consider the way and manner of the Reviving this costly truth. When the
professors of these Nations had been a long time wearied with the yoke of
superstitious ceremonies, traditions of men, and corrupt mixtures in the
worship and service of God; it pleased the Lord to break these yokes, and by a
very strong impulse of his spirit upon the hearts of his people, to convince
them of the necessity of Reformation. Diverse pi^us and very gracious people
having often sought the Lord by fasting and prayer, that he would show them the
pattern of his house, the goings out, and comeings in thereof, etc. Resolved (by
the grace of God) not to receive or practice any piece of positive worship,
which had not precept or Example from the word of God. Infant Baptism coming of
course under consideration, after long search and many debates it was found to
have no footing in the Scriptures (the only rule and standard to try doctrines
by) but on the contrary a mere innovation, yea the profanation of an ordinance
of God. And though it was purposed to be laid aside, yet what fears,
tremblings, and temptations did attend them lest they should be mistaken,
considering how many learned and Godly men were of an opposite persuasion: How
gladly would they have had the rest of their brethren gone along with them? But
when there was no hopes, they concluded that a Christians faith must not stand
in the wisdom of men, and that every one must give an account of himself to
God, and so resolved to practice according to their light: The great objection
was, the want of an Administrator, which (as I have heard) was removed by
sending certain messengers to Holland whence they were supplied. So that this
little cloud of Witnesses, has the Lord by his grace so greatly increased,
that it is spread over our Horizon, though opposed and contradicted by men of
all sorts.

And now friends I can safely bear you record, that it is not humor,
conceitednesse or singularity (so often charged upon you) that makes you
decline the BaptiZing your little ones: For I know they are as dear to you, as
children are to any parents under heaven; your sighs and tears, those
heartbreaking desires and pathetick wishes you send to the mercy-seat for
them, is a sufficient testimony hereof, and your petitions, that Ishmael may
live before God, that your children may be converted, that they may have an
Interest in the new Covenant, that the law of God may be written in their
hearts, that their sins may be pardoned, their natures sanctified, and their
souls eternally saved And did you know that Baptism could contribute the least
iota hereunto, how readily and zealously would you perform it? besides it is an
easy service, that would bring you into the credit and esteem of differing
professors, diverse of your natural relations, etc. yea it is as safe, as easy,
nothing of self-denial or the Cross attending it. And it is very remarkable
that many have suffered for owning most (if not all other) points of faith and
Christianity, yea diverse have suffered even unto death for denying, yet none
(that ever I heard of) suffered for owning Infants Baptism.

Yet though your children are dear to you, the word of the Lord, and the purity
of his worship is far more dear, and hence you dare not add to his words lest
he reprove you, and you be found liars. You dare not offer strange fire to the
Lord, which he has not commanded, nor profane an Ordinance; you know that
Baptism (being a part of instituted worship, not found in natures garden) has
of it self no virtue, but what it receives from the iustitutor; For as one well
observes moral laws are good, and therefore commanded: but positive worship is
commanded, and therefore good. So that your adversaries clamor without ground,
and the Lord will judge between us. And if it be questioned why I insist so
much upon this subject? I answer, I was weary with forbearing when I saw your
affliction, and beheld the reproaches, wherewith your opponents unmercifully
persecute you. But brethren as I have gone in and out among you these six and
twenty years, so I have had opportunity to know those pious souls among you,
whose Conversation is in Heaven, who live above the Clouds, who groan under the
body of sin, and remains of corruption, I have known your manner of life, your
faith, patience, long-suffering, charity; I have also seen your dark side, and
observed your infirmities (which your adversaries view through a multiplying
glass;) But if there be any society or Community of people that differ from
you, that have not their dark side, let them cast the first stone. Yet you dare
not allow the least sin in you; your prayers and endeavors f^^^ greater
measures of mortification, and that you may be sanctified throughout, stand
complete in the whole will of God, and be filled with all the fruits of
righteousness through Jesus Christ, are famous instances that you are pressing
after perfection.

I know you do not desire these Encomium's, but I have the example of the holy
spirit, whose steps I humbly conceive I may follow. Rev. 2.2. where these
Commendations are given of the Church, I know thy works, thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou can not bear them that are evil; and for my names sake
have labored, and have not fainted, etc. It Is true the Lord knows these things
in another manner then we do, viz. by searching the heart; we by outward
observation: yet so far as we know we judge.

And now what remains, but that you hold on your way, and grow stronger and
stronger, being like that shining light, that shines more and more to the
perfect day; daily purging your selves from all filthynesse of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holyne (...) the fear of God, walking in the steps of your
f^^^^ Abraham, and in a little time you shall he received into his bosom,
where the weary are at rest, and the wicked cease from troubling. And so I
commend you to God and the good word of his grace, which is able to make you
stand, and give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified, and remain

Your Soul-friend, E. H.

To the READER.
Reader,
IT is a truth too plain to need Demonstration, that the enemy of souls invaded
the Church of Christ even in its very infancy, privily bringing in Damnable
Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. That the Scarlet whore drew away the Kings of the Earth,
peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and tongues after her, Rev. 17. and made
them drunk with the wine of her Fornications. That the man of sin, that son of
perdition, 2 These. 2. erected himself a Monarchy, and sat in the Temple of
God, maintaining that station with power, and signs, and lying wonders. So
spreading and epidemical were the Incantations of that Glittering strumpet,
that few escaped the temptations of her Golden cup. Now amongst those
multitudes that wondered after the Beast, what kind entertainment could the
ordinances of the meek and self denying Jesus have? whose kingdom is not of
this world, John. 18.36. On the contrary, we find the whole Fabric, and
Economy of Gospel worship shattered, subverted, and overthrown in most places
where it was received; and the kingdom of darkness raised upon its ruins. What
fundamental truth, what practical duty of Christianity but was utterly
exploded, or so metamorphos'd, that nothing of its original form and beauty was
left? But when this Mystery of Iniquity came to be gradually revealed; when the
voice from heaven said, come out of her my people, Rev. 18.4. when the woman
was seen drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6. How was she bewailed by
those that dealt in her wares! How have those Locusts of the bottomless pit
pestered both sea and land to gain her proselites! making Reformation a hard
task, pursuing it with blood, persecution, and massacre. Yet, maugre all the
powers of Hell, truth gets ground, and the Lord with the brightness of his
coming, enlightens us more and more every day.

Yet still it is very observable, that when [by quadrating them with the word
of God, the only rule of faith and practise] any truths are recovered; or when
those carnal and trashy superficialls that deform and disguise others, are
flung away; Then some malevolent Agent of the grand Deceiver, improves his
uttermost craft to obscure and represent it in the most hideous and averting
forms, and fasten the blackest calumnies upon such as the Lord makes his
Instruments of reformation. The son of God foretold this, Math. 5.11. All ages
since have confirmed it. Our Martyrologies have recorded those worthies that
resisted unto blood, those blessed souls under the Altar, that were slain for
the word of God, and the Testimony which they held, to whom the white robes
were given, Rev. 6.9, 11. whose blood will one day be avenged upon their
Barbarous Assasinates.

The ordinance of Baptism [that great and radical duty here contended for] has
been as grossly perverted, mangled, and abused as any Gospel Institution
whatever, new matter, new form, nothing left but the bare name, and that too
wrested, misinterpreted, and forced to favor and bear symmetry with that Idle
and frivolous Poedo-rantism set up in its room.

Nor need we wonder at the stiff opposition and harsh usage the assertors of
Believers Baptism have met with from time to time; the error they attaque being
so necessary to the Antichristian Monarchy, that it is indeed the Basis upon
which that pompous, proud superstructure moves, from whose Pinnacle, the man of
sin may cast an Imperious glance and say with Nebuchadnezar,

Vah Babylon, Babylon proprio te robore servo.

For, if a thorough reformation of this point be admitted; if Ministers teach
first, then baptize such only as profess faith in the Lord Jesus, and newness
of life evidenced by a holy conversation, (that being the only practice
warrantable by, and exemplyfied in the word of God) It will inevitably follow,
that the Papal Monarchy (that great thing Catechrestically called a Church)
must vanish, and the large Revenues, pomp, and grandeur of its active
Janissaries expire with it: since the matter of such a synagogue is the
collective body of the nations; which because of its unbelief and profaneness
the word of God excludes out of the Church, till in Gods time and by his power
gradually converted: it being evident from the mouth that errs not, that the
greatest part of Mankind traverses the broad way to destruction, Math. 7.13.

Surely this one consideration has a more forcible rhetoric to keep up this
pernicious practice, then all the juglings of its abettors, or the gaudy
flourishes or specious Fulcrums its defenders produce to illustrate and support
it. It is one of the Popes political (and very necessary) maxims, [and I fear
borrowed by many from him,] wanting that power by which the Gospel ministers
acted, to principle the emissaries that manage his cause very ripely in
school-sophistry, and such other subtle qualifications, that their learned
craft, and seeming profoundness of wisdom and parts may amuse and captivate the
generality of mankind. And indeed we find them too apt to be gaping after those
ornaments, which the Apostle elegantly calls, (...), and well translated, the
enticing words of man's wisdom; 1 Cor. 2.4. They are well versed in the
perplexing Idle whimsies of Aristotle, Scotus etc. but mere dunces and fools in
plain Scripture doctrines: their Heathen Philosophy and the Gospel being at as
wide a distance, as the Earth is from the third Heaven. See Job. 5.12.13. and
32.9. 1 Cor. 1.19.

But what is most lamentable is, that ministers that are separatists from
national corruption and profaneness, and (in the judgment of charity) in many
things orthodox and pious, should be the forwardest opposers of so necessary a
reformation; and not only so, but when they find the pretenses upon which it
was (with a ridiculous retinue) obtruded upon the world rotten and reeling,
they must invent new supporters for it, viz. a Covenant right derivative from a
believing parent etc. As if spiritual graces would admit of carnal
propagations, or that a Christian does always beget a Christian, a divinity as
novel as it is absurd. And with this modern auxiliary this otherwise yielding
cause is reinforced.

In the judgment of some it may parhaps add to the credit of that fancy that so
famous a man as Mr. Baxter is, should patronize it. But he is not the first
Theological grandee that has been mistaken. Performances of never so exalted a
kind conferr not the privilege of Infallible. It Is only the great Creator is
unerring. A man may preach and write of the most seraphick verities, and yet
know but in part; Mr Baxter is to be honored as far as he has laid himself out
to preach the Gospel, and improve his Talent for the Conversion of souls in
this evil day; But when he forgets himself, and instead of promoting practical
holiness, fills the nation with notions as uncertain as they are numberless,
puzling such as arrive not to the subtilty of his distinction, creating more
doubts then ever he will be able to resolve, making Christianity a mere riddle
which no man understands but he, and liable to as many forms and
interpretations as his wavering mind: Then I humbly conceive he may be very
safely left. (...), was a golden Aphorism of a heathen poet. Sure as peaceable
as he would make us believe he is, that party or person that incurs his
displeasure, must expect an unmerciful handling. He is so envenomed an
Antagonist, that whoever encounters him has need of an Antidote. Nor is his
reverend new Author Mr. Wills (to whom he is so liberal of his encomiums) much
behind in this Excellency: A strenuous satyrist that by the flashes of his
Academick wit makes some blaze, little of solid heat or warmth.

As for Mr. Baxter it feems he has something prophetical in him, he says in his
last book, he knows what can be said in answer, and what he will reply, and the
others rejoinder etc. Belike he knew by the same prophetic faculty the first
year of his ministry when he fell into doubts about Infants Baptism, and
suspended the practice some years, as he says, that the Anti-Poedobaptists
would be out of the favor of the times, and so inconsiderable as he
(scornfully) says they are, which scared the man to the other side: And to
convince the world that he was re-proselyted in good earnest, persecutes them
with all the obloquy and slander, a virulent peevish humor could dictate. So
that, poor people! it is well their bones are whole from the furious artillery
and crushing grasps of so mighty a Polyphemus.

It would ^^artle a man to see what a room he would take up, as if the whole
world must become his pupil! How confident a dictator he is to universal
mankind! such a reconciler, that he will not be stopped in his cariere till he
brings us to Rome, as if the vast creation must be of his parish! But I doubt
the Pope will not be so tamely cog'd to resign up to Mr. Baxter his Regalia
Petri. Sure as nimble a Proteus as he is, he will find himself mistaken in these
incongruous Topics. We have the Bible in English (and in the original too) and
for all he picks a quarrel with that (in his 20. Quaeries etc.) because
(perhaps) too narrow to confine so boundless a wanderer, yet it shall be our
Christian Directory, we will keep it preciously, and leave his rotten and
superfluous notions to fill up the vacuums in the Stationers shops. That leaven
has so soured his whole lump, that for fear of sucking some poison with his
honey, we will be Christians (as well as the Lord shall enable us) without him.

Hold, but he gives you his extremum vale, at the door of eternity: But is very
angry that he is importuned to it from some supreme transactions he is hatching
in his study. Possibly his next errand may be to send us to Constantinople (nor
is the scruple extravagant, considering what he has done already) to have a
treaty of reconciliation with the Muphti, and make some part of Mahomets creed
(by his vast Authority) Orthodox. But being so successesse in Christendom, he
may very well despair of that undertaking. But what is his farewell? why he
begins with his old quarrel with Mr Tombs, rallying his defeated quibbles for
a new Combat. But he is full of words, and will lead his reader such a dance,
that he may sooner grow giddy, then find the truth, or whereabouts he is; such
a continuation of impertinent periphrases (though connext with his wonted
Artifice) that Daedalus's Labyrinth may sooner be traversed then the more
numerous mazes and perplexities of Mr Baxter, and all to ecclips a Gospel truth.

His next project is, to take Col. Danvers to task; he thinks it beneath a man
of his Talent to let him pass without fixing an Epithete upon him, as might
craftily insinuate him no fit person to inform the world of that abuse in
Religion. He thinks that worthy Gentleman encroaches upon the prerogative he
himself made bold to seize upon, viZ. handling cases of Controversy: But he
will not part so peaceably with the least aliquantulum of it. A Soldier (so he
calls him) must not enter the lists with this spiritual Warrior; if he does,
he will fling Ink enough in's face; I have heard some say, that his Soldiership,
and Mr. B's Chaplainship were contemporaries in the same service, and that the
later was far more active. Therefore may not that Elogy bestowed by Warlike
Ajax upon his opponent, be applicable to our Ulysses?

-- Quantumque ego Mart feroci,
Inque acie valeo, tantum vaiet iste loquendo.
But let me tell him in his ear, that if he re-engage any deeper in this
quarrel, and persist in his impenitent obstinacy, he will receive as shamful a
foyl as Mr. Tombs gave him. For our Soldier has truth of his side, and
ability to manage it, nor does he want an acute and elegant pen, perhaps not
inferior to the chaplain, for all his triumphs, and loud applauses of himself,
and his attempts to engrosse as vast an opinion of his accomplishments, as the
greatest University graduates (though he never, as they that know him say, was
a student at any). It Is no miracle to find him a match able to encounter him at
Quill-skirmishes in this age.

But as to our querulous master of Arts; Mr. Baxter dealt like a man of war to
set him in the Forlorn hope; thinking belike that his confident noise would
affright us, or his scoffs jeer us, or his reverence (an epithete he forces
upon his modesty) would cog us over to him, as his dexterous epistler inveigled
Mr. Lamb and Mr. Allen. In pursuance to which stratagem, the man talks big,
brags loudly, and like an Olympic gamester [so he calls himself, and very
fitly, for whoever loses, he gets by his divinity games, and may in time learn
the Ecclesiastical politicians push-pin Divinity] flings on all sides,
traverses every ground, to get us at advantage, that so he may (Comically)
insult, and flout us: for his language savours more of frothy scoffs, and
Romantic drollery, then of sober, serious, or Christian. But (...).

He thinks he can scarce get over any Anti-Poedobaptist to his party: that
indeed is the luckiest conjecture I met with in him, and I am of that opinion
too; for I hope they are a people of more reason and stedfastness in the truths
they have learnt, then to be shaken, by so mimick and ayry a companion, that by
the pedantry of his scoptick style seems fitter for stage-pageantry then
serious contests of this kind.

Besides the irreligious artifice, and (I may say) malicious insinuations, we
meet with every where in his pamphlet, to render the person, parts, and
principles, not only of his sober Antagonist, but of all that own his way,
ridiculous and hated, so to preingage his Reader to partiality, and anticipate
his judgment; is so notoriously disingenuous and dishonest, that I question
not, but the Intelligent Reader will easily perceive, that the want of a good
cause puts him upon those shifts, to fill up a Book with such Sarcasm's instead
of truth; as if he had been of the old Woman's mind when she took that impious
resolution, Flectere si nequio superos, Acheronta movebo.

But is this indeed the man of so clarified intellectualls? that puts a Remora
in the progress of truth, to obstruct such as would come over to its
Communion? that brags of ransacking the public library? that has his album
calculum, etc. (others say, that Argenteis hastis pugnat) that has the forehead
to charge Mr Danvers with plagiarism? when he himself has not a single Argument
new, but a surtive collection (mostly, for it is but now and then he mentions an
Authors name) from those that were formerly engaged in that controversy. So
that his whole book (had it been worth the while) may be confronted with
continued parallels; being only (in his own phrase) such trite and outworn
things that they have been in effect trampled upon and confuted again and
again. Is he not therefore himself that Aesops Crow, that struts so gaudily in
other birds feathers?

I cannot but remark how he treads in his Epistlers steps, I mean Mr B's idle
pamphlet, mis-call'd Plain Scripture proofs for Infant Baptism, etc. who in
plain English, amongst his other envious calumnies, represents the Anabaptists,
as guilty of Murder and Adultery, for an Imaginary practice he fathers upon
them of dipping naked, or in transparent garments, etc. So this Answerer page
258, etc. But methinks if ingenuous candor and modesty (altogether unpractic'd
by him, though) so graceful in all their possessors cannot persuade him to
treat us civilly; the awful reverence of an All-wise God might keep him from
such daring criticisms upon the plain expressions of Scripture, and drawing so
impious a consequence from premises pronounced by the unerring creator. For
instance, it is said Act. 2.41, 42. They that gladly received the word ((...))
were dipped, (so the word is English Luke 16.24. John. 13.26. Rev. 19.13. etc.)
what then? why then they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, etc.
But Mr Wills says they that are so dipped are Murderers and Adulterers; a more
favorable sense his invective will not bear. It Is pity this wise demurrer had
not lived in the Apostles days, that he may propose a more taking model for
Christian Ordinances then the holy Ghost could inspire them with: I doubt his
carnal and injurious canting would be answered as Simon Magus in another case,
thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. Certainly, if sprinkling the
face were the Lords choice, he could express himself by the word (...), being
the proper term for sprinkling, ( as 1. Pet. 1.2. Heb. 9.13.19.21. and 10.22.
and many places of the O. T.) and so put the matter for ever out of doubt. Was
not Christ himself so [(...) that is in English] dipped in Water? were not the
converted Thousands we read of so dipped? And durst this audacious man fix such
ignominies upon a practice that has so sacred a pattern? the Lord rebuke him.

But, candid Reader, here thou have them counted out of that fort Royal they
fancy so secure, viZ their modern pretenses to a Covenant hereditary title to
Baptism: The substance of what they can say in their own defense is examined
and soberly refuted: The vanity of their silly distinctions detected, and the
Doctrine of the Covenant cleared, and made familiar to the conscientious
peruser. And so the Lord (who will infallibly reckon with Mr B. and his
confederate, unless they repent, for putting such blocks and remora's in the
way to his truth) set it home upon thy heart, and give thee a discerning
spirit, to own him according to his directions in his word, notwithstanding the
Ambushes and attaques of Satan, and his Engines, in despite of whom truth
always stood, since the Nativity of time, and shall survive its utmost period
and obsequies.

Let it not defer thee from a serious weighing of the Arguments here offered,
that some of them may be heretofore presented; that diminishes not their force:
Nil dictum est quod non est dictum prius. Yet this wrangler Mr W. would put us
to the trouble of quoting every man's name that has the same sense or like words
with us, to avoid his aspersion of plagiaries: A provident shift he has got to
escape the edge of any Argument that gravells him. May not men often hit upon
the same thing, from necessity of the Argument, or chance, not choice or
design? I am certain no man's more guilty in that particular then this Mr of
Arts.

But there is need enough of pressing the same things again and again. When they
produce new grounds for their practice (but I presume this from the Covenant is
the last shift) we will address New Arguments to confront them; for the current
of the Scripture will afford us variety of Mediums to quash their bold
encroachments.

The subject of the Covenant (their celebrated Sanctuary) has not hitherto
been so singly insisted upon as it is here; although it has been cleared
sufficiently (one would think to candid Readers) by Mr Blackwood, Tombs,
Laurence, Danvers, etc. whose acurate and learned works are enough to satisfy
every one that would be found in the serious and impartial investigation of
truth: And indeed leave such a reader without excuse.

This Treatise is chiefly calculated for the perusal of some sober friends that
importuned the Author to write something upon this subject. And if truth has
any advancement by it, he has his end. He is careless of popular applause or
censure. He has contributed his Mite for common information, and undeceiving
the many souls that still hold fast those Dreggs and Remains of Popery.

T. D.

Ad Clerum sic Dictum, praecipue Triumviratum Novum.
COnquerar? an Sileam? Nova tollitis arma Ministri?
Christicolis cur non; pax sit habenda prius?
Oro, reformatae lucis caesura.
aperite fenestras:
Tingere credentes Pagina sacra docet.
Totus ab astura Meretrice illuditur orbis?
Fallit imaginibus Bestia docta dolis?
Illecebris fucata suis obscaena triumphat
Roma? propinquantem nescit adulta necem.
Fulta Armis Regum caput altum in praelia tollit:
Aegra repercussis ictibus illa cadet.
Aegra cadet, certum est, Agni certamine: rumpet
Sulphurei ignivomas per Phlegetontis aquas.
Pars R. B.
convicta (...) quondam concesserat; at nunc
Impedit egrediens introeuntis iter!
Haesit in ambiguum, vano Rantismate nollet
Spargere; at incerto convehit ore sonum!
Tempora mutantur, nos an mutamur in illis?
Sumere tot formas, quaeritur, unde licet?
B. mordet, duplex Vlatrat, garrulat alter;
His opibus tollit gens inimica Caput!
Fit simplex clangor triplici clamore: nec unquam
Causa patrocinio sustinuenda Novo est.
Sparsio parvorum Romana ab origin, fulcit
Papale Imperium: Castra cruenta Necis!
Lux Evangelii per binos emicat axes,
Occiduos inter lucifluosque sinus.
Bestia saeva perit, meretrix furibunda peribit,
Obruta flammiferis nam morietur aquis.
Sic raptim Pacis Ecclesiasticae studiosissimus.
T. D.

The PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
THou must know I do not write this Treatise because I think there are not
Books enough extant upon this subject: But because I observe that old books
(though never so excellent) are laid by, and seldom looked into, and nothing's
relishable with this curious Age but what is contemporary with it self: besides
many of the books already written are so large that ordinary persons cannot
attain to the price; and some so intricate, and delivered in such a sublimity
of phrase, that they are beyond the capacity of diverse godly and well meaning
Christians. Therefore I have sent out this without the exterior varnish of
humane blandishments, that I may recommend this truth to every man's conscience.
Eloquence is nothing but Air, fashioned with an Articulate and distinct sound,
and when suited to entice and enveigle carnal affections, may do much; but
there is a peculiar Majesty and veneration, upon the brow of truth that will
not be beholden to those artificial braveryes: No ornaments render it more
illustrious then its own native plainness. The end of speech is to make our
conceptions intelligible; and when our meaning is carried away by towering
expressions past the reach of a plain Reader, what is it but a gay piece of
vanity, and affected pedantry?

I know the difference between the parties represented in this Dialogue,
distracts the minds and troubles the hearts of many that are Godly. Now in this
distraction every serious man cannot choose but heartily desire and wish for
resolution. And in order to obtain that, the most likely way, is to examine the
pretensions and grounds on both hands. In prosecution of which I have selected
the most plausible Argument insisted upon by the Poedobaptists of this age (nay
the only grand pretense upon which that baffled practice is supported) so that
I may say, that all the Auxiliary considerations that contribute to its
reinforcement, will fall in the fate, and live and die with this Cardinal Thesis
(drawn from the Covenant) in its favor.

Perhaps it may be said, that I make the Poedobaptists speak what I please, not
what they think, this must be said of course, else they lose their old wont.
Nor shall I think it strange, if instead of solid Answers they return their
usual Oratory of calumny, and treat me with that severity so liberally
dispensed to their opposites [especially by those writers who entered the lists
for this cause of late years] for their cause requires it. To silence all
clamors will be a task of impossibility, and I shall supersede any thoughts of
the attempt, but for satisfaction to the tenderhearted and gracious Christian,
I say further that I have endeavored to cull out the strongest enforcements I
could find, and have declined nothing of moment I met within their best
Authors; if they think otherwise, let them produce their greatest strength, and
lay it down in plain propositions (without that encumbrance and perplexity of
words and wheeling phrases, as involve their meanings in puzling ambiguities)
and I hope they will find it fairly examined.

The Argumentative part which I put into their Mouths, is such as was first
taken from thence, and it is but a piece of Justice and restitution to return
them thither. They are such as are famously known to be their principles, still
the sense, often the very words of their most celebrated Authors.

The reason that I take no more notice of Mr Will's book is because Mr D. who
has already worthyly defended the Historical part, has promised also to
reckon with him as to the scriptural part, and I would not anticipate him,
whose works will praise him in the gate, notwithstanding the disingenuous
cavils and querulous janglings that fill up Mr Wills's invective Pampblet.

I hope our Opposites will not disallow the liberty they themselves take, of
making use of some pious and learned men, that have trod the paths of this
controversy before us of late years. I could wish that the voluminous and
accurate Treatises of M. Tombs were epitomiZed for the information of the
ordinary well meaning Christian, the Arguments of the Poedobaptists being there
learnedly and solidly confuted, and perhaps to the conviction of many of the
learned ones, who (had not reputation interposed, having born a signal
testimony to some excellent truths, which they fear might be called in question
had they subscribed a Recantation of this) would possibly own as much

It is not arrived to the degree of Miracle that even good men are loath to own
themselves transgressors, and destroy the things they built. Pezelius reports,
that when one from Frankford brought Calvin's institutions to Luther, demanding
his opinion of it; he replies profecto non inepte hic Author dixit, indeed this
Author has not said foolishly, meaning that he had spoke right, yet recanted
not his (opposite) Doctrine, but privately communicates his mistake to
Melancthon, fearing that a public conviction might discredit all his
Doctrine. To conclude, Reader I offer my conceptions of this bandied point to
thy candid acceptance, and with this assurance that nothing but a zeal for
Gospel reformation should invite me to expose my sentiments to this Censorious
age, and if they contribute ought to that end, I have my aim, And so I commend
thee to the good spirit of truth, to lead thee into all truth, and remain

Thine in all Christian Respects, E. H.
Feb. 10. 1674.
A DIALOGUE Between A Baptist and a Poedobaptist.
Bap. MY Dear Friend, I am glad to see thee, pray what News in the Country?


Poed. O Sir! the Controversy about Baptism is again renewed, which I fear will
occasion great differences amongst Professors; whereas we did hope to live in
love and peace together; but I see the point must farther be enquired into, and
the people must have more satisfaction, before they will walk in communion and
fellowship together.


Bap. Well; but what is your opinion, do you still hold Infant Baptism?


Poed. Yes, I am still of that opinion, but am willing to be informed, for I
would not practice any thing that is not warranted from the Scriptures.


Bap. You say well in that, but have you been at disputes where you might
receive satisfaction?


Poed. Yea, I have been at diverse, but their Logical way of discourse does so
obscure and hide the truth, that when the Dispute is done, we are no wiser then
before; now Sir, is there no way to find out truth but by Logic?


Bap. My Friend, you must know, that there is a natural Logic, which all men
have, except fools and Idiots, and it is nothing else but reason methodized:
but as for School-Logick which men make a great flourish with, especially
amongst women and illiterate persons, though by it also truth may be
discovered, if men were ingenuous, and desired truth more then victory: but
alas! it is miserably abused by men of corrupt minds, to the deceiving of the
hearts of the simple; but seeing you have mentioned it, I shall give you the
opinion of a Learned man about it: Nothing says he, has spoiled truth, more
then the invention of Logic, it has found out so many distinctions, that it
inwraps reason in a mist of doubts, it is reason drawn into too fine a thread,
tying up truth in a twist of words; which being hard to unloose carry her away
as a prisoner; it is a net to entangle her, or an art instructing you, how to
tell a reasonable lie: like an overcurious workman, it has sought to make
truth so excellent, that it has marred it. Vives says, he doubts not, the
devil did invent it, It has laid on so many Colors that the Counterfeit is
more various then the pattern. It gives us so many likes, that we know not
which is the same; nature it self makes every man a Logician; they that brought
in the art have presented us with one that has overacted her; But I speak this
of Logic at large, there may be an excellency found in the art, and it is good
to retayn it, that we may make it defend us against it self, in matters of
Religion, we must make faith the means to ascertain, for other matters simple
nature is the best reason, and naked reason the best Logic.


Poed. Sir I thank you for your opinion about Logic, and I think it were
better, if our Ministers did less use it and dispute after the same manner as
they preach; which is, to lay down a proposition, and to prove it by Scripture,
and reason; it would better satisfy the people; but we have gone a little out
of our way, my great desire is to discourse with you about Infants Baptism: and
especially concerning the Covenant, made to Abraham, and to his seed; which if
you can remove, I resolve to be of your opinion.


Bap. Its true, the Covenant or promise made to Abraham, and to his seed, is
the great hinge or Engine upon which the whole business of Infants Baptism
moves; now if I prove that the Infants of believing Gentiles are not the seed
of Abraham, then Infant Church-member-ship, under the Gospel, and Baptism falls
to the ground.


Poed. True Sir, and therefore pray let me hear your arguments.


Bap. First then, I argue thus. If none be the Children of Abraham, but those
that do the works of Abraham: Then infants are not the seed of Abraham.

But the Antecedent is true, John 8.39. If ye were the Children of Abraham, ye
would do the works of Abraham. So therefore is the consequent.


Poed. But our Ministers tells us this is meant of the adult; and not of
Infants.


Bap. I know they do so, and they think they had better say something, then
nothing, but I proceed.

The Second Argument.

If those that are Christ's, are only Abraham's seed; then Infants are not
Abraham's seed.

The Antecedent in true Gal. 3.3.19. Ergo, the consequent.

And if you say, Infants are Christ's, I answer, some are so by Election, but
the Apostle speaks of such as are Christ's by calling, not Election: which is
secret to us.

But 3dly. If none are blessed with Abraham but those that are of faith, then
infants are not the seed of Abraham.

But the Antecedent is true, Gal. 3.9. so then they that are of faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham.

Ergo the Consequent is true also.

4thly. If the Children of the flesh are not the Children of God, then infants
are not now the seed of Abraham.

But the Antecedent is true. Romans 9.8. they which are the children of flesh,
these are not the children of God, But the children of the promise are counted
for the seed: Ergo so is the consequent, I say, the children of the flesh may
be the children of God by Election, but they are not so by calling, and so not
counted for the seed; and if you still urge, as I know you will, that all these
places are meant of the Adult only, then let us read the words as you would
have us, and see what absurdity you will father upon the holy spirit.

First, from Gal. 3.9. They that are of faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham: and they also that are not of faith.

Secondly from Gal. 3.19. They that are Christ's (viz. visibly) are Abraham's
seed, and they that are not Christ's, are Abraham's seed.

Thirdly, from Romans 9.8. They which are the children of the flesh are not the
children of God. (visibly); and they that are the children of flesh are the
children of God visibly.

So from John 8.39. They that do the works of Abraham are the children of God;
and they that do not the works of Abraham are the children of God; so we must
read the words, if these texts of Scripture be not exclusive.


Poed. It is very true, if those texts be not exclusive, we must read the
words, or at least understand them, as you have, said; but then we should make
the Scripture guilty of great absurdity, and contradiction.


Poed. But out ministers tells us, the promise is to you and your children, and
them that are afar off: by which they understand believing Gentiles and their
seed.


Bap But what do you mean by promise? is it the promise and covenant of eternal
life and salvation? or the promise of outward ordinances? If you say the first;
then we ask you whether that promise be absolute or conditional? If absolute,
then all the children of believers must needs be saved. If you say conditional,
and faith and repentance, be the condition, then we are agreed: and the
controversy is ended.


Poed. No, we do not say that by promise in the 2d of the Acts, is meant the
promise of eternal life and salvation, for that is not made, much less made
good to any, upon the terms of their parents faith; but upon their own
personal belief, and obedience, but we mean the promise of outward ordinances,
as to be baptized, etc.


Bap. Very well; if that be Peter's meaning, that believers infants shall be
admitted to outward ordinances, when others shall not: Then consider what a
poor promise this is, and what a miserable comforter he is made by you, in
making as if this were all his meaning, and all that he intends by this
precious word of promise. But you must know Peter's business was to support the
Jews smitten down under a sense of sin and the guilt of Christ's blood, which
lay heavy upon them but if this be all he intended you, and your children shall
be baptized, etc. then the plaster is not broad enough for the soar; for, pray
consider and we will suppose Peter speaking thus to them: you have by wicked
hands crucified the Lord of life, and wished his blood to be upon you and your
children, but be of good comfort, believe and be baptized, and then you and
your children shall stand under the title of the people of God, under right to
outward ordinances, when others shall not, and not only you, but your children
shall be baptized. But neither you nor they ever the sooner saved, as born of
you, further then together with you they shall believe and obey the Gospel; in
which case of faith and obedience, all unbelievers in the world and their
children, shall be saved as soon as either you or they. It is as much as to
say, the promise of freedom to partake of the ordinances, is to you, and your
seed above other; but the promise of the inheritance is as much to all others
and their children, as to you and yours. What most comfortless comfort is this,
to men cast down under a sense of sin and guilt? what a pitiful plaster is
here applied to men pricked at the heart, and smarting under the direful
apprehension of Gods wrath? besides what exquisite nonsense do you make the
Apostle speak, if his words be taken in your sense, for they must run thus,
viz. first by way of precept, repent and be baptized you and your children.
2ly, by way of encouragement, so the privilege of being baptized shall belong
to you and your children which unbelievers and their seed shall not enjoy. But
the promise of remission of sins, and salvation, is made no more to you then to
them; But without doubt it must be otherwise: the promise, take it which way
you will, either for the proffer of the promise, or the thing promised, It must
needs be of some more excellent matter than outward membership, and ordinances,
abstract from remission of sins and salvation: yea, it is most evident that the
thing here promised is no less then remission of sins and salvation it self,
for as no less is expressed in the very text remission of sins, and the holy
spirit; which, elsewhere is called the earnest of inheritance, So, unless you
will divide the children from having a share alike with their parents in that
promise, which in the self same sentence, term and sense, is promised alike to
them both, so as to say, the word promise, is to be understood of remission of
sins, and salvation, as in relation to the parents; but of an inferior thing,
viZ. a right to ordinances only, as in relation to the Infants only, which were
great absurdity to utter, it must necessarily be meant of one kind of mercy,
to both parents and children: yea and upon the same terms too, and no other
then those upon which its tendered to the parents, viz. personal repentance, and
obedience, and so consequently of remission and salvation, and not of such a
trivial title to external participation only as you talk of, which if it be,
then, unless you assert that God has promised salvation absolutely to all the
natural seed of believers, upon those terms only, as they are their seed, which
you dare not stand too, the promise, mean which you will, the bare proposal, or
the salvation propounded, or both; upon those terms, belongs of right, not only
to believers and their posterity, but also to all men, and their posterity,
without difference, when at years of capacity to neglect, or perform them; for
the glad tidings of salvation are commanded to be preached to all, and
proffered to every creature at years, to hear, and understand; though not to
infants on terms of their parents faith; so assuredly the terms being
performed, the salvation so promised shall be enjoyed: there is no right by
birth to salvation, or the promise of it in believers seed, more then in
unbelievers; nor no privilege to them more then to others, save the mere
hopefulness of education, and advantage of instruction in the way and means of
salvation; which may possibly befall believers children, more then others:
though in case it happen (as sometime it does) that the children of believers,
have their breeding amongst unbelievers, and the children of unbelievers
amongst believers, in that case these la^t have not only no less privilege, as
to the promise of salvation by bare birth, but a privilege also by that
breeding above the other.

That therefore, that the promise of the Gospel covenant in any sense in the
world, is made to believers seed (as barely such) more then to the natural seed
of unbelievers, can never be proved by the word; yea the contrary is evident
from this place Acts. 2.38.39.

For, first neither were these parents believers as yet, when Peter said, the
promise is to you, and your children; but only were pricked at the heart upon
some measure of conviction; that the person whom they had crucified, was the
Lord of life (which the devils believe and tremble at) and in order to
begetting that saving faith, (which yet they had not) he spoke these words of
encouragement.

Secondly, does Peter make the promise any otherwise to them and their
children, then he does to all others in the world, viz. on condition of their
coming in at Gods call, it is said to you and your children, and them that are
afar off; all manner of persons in all nations, and generations, as the Lord
our God shall call, viz. as are prevailed with to come when God calls them;
which to be the sense of this place, is further illustrated by that parallel
place Heb. 9.15. they that are called, receive the promise of eternal
inheritance.

Thirdly, when the parents did believe, and were baptized; were any of their
children baptized with them? which they must have been, had that promise been
to the Infants, as well as to the parents on that single account of being their
seed, but that no Infants were then baptized, appears, because the Scripture
recording how many were baptized at that time, it concludes them under such a
term, as excludes the Infant from that days work, while it says, as many,
meaning no more (or else we are deceived in the relation) as gladly received
the word (this Infants could not do) were then baptiZed, which number, as they
are recorded to be about 3000 might in all likelihood have amounted to three
times 3000. if all the Infants of those had been baptized also; so that I
conclude, if they had Infants why did they not bring them? or at least send for
them? here being so fit an opportunity, to baptize them; and so (for ever) to
put the controversy out of doubt.

But fourthly, neither were there any more enchurched that day, but such as
gladly received the word, and were thereupon baptized. For of these only (and
not infants) its said they continued together in the Apostles doctrine, in
Fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayers. But all their Infants must
have been Enchurch'd also, if they had been baptized.

Fifthly, it crosses the current of all other Scripture to put such a
construction upon this, for that the promise of old, I mean the old promise of
the law, which was of the Earthly Canaan, and but a Type of this, did pertain
unto a fleshly holy seed, I grant. But that the new Covenant or Gospel promise
is made to any man's fleshly seed, that thereupon we may baptize them in token
of it, I deny. For sure I am the Scripture holds out no other seed of Abraham
to be heirs with him of the heavenly Canaan, but his spiritual seed, i. e.
Believers that do his works. Nor does it own any (but these) to have the right
of membership and Fellowship in his family i. e. the visible Church. For if it
should be granted, that the visible Church is Abraham's family, under the
Gospel, as well as under the law: yet it is so altered from what it was, so
different in its constitution, that it is even turned upside down, and in a
manner nothing remains as then it was. For as the covenant is not the same,
with that of the law, so neither is there the same Mediator, nor the same
Priesthood, nor the same Law, nor the same Lawgiver, nor the same promises:
That being of an Earthly, this of an heavenly inheritance, nor the same holy
seed, to which the promises are made: that being to the Typical seed, Isaac and
his posterity, this to the true seed Christ and believers Nor the same
ordinances, theirs being Circumcision and the Passe-over, ours Baptism and the
supper. Nor the same subjects for those ordinances, those being (by nature)
Jews or at least by profession, and their Male seed only; ours Male and female:
theirs, whether believing or not, ours only as believing. So that whatever can
be said of the Covenant, the promise, the holy seed; is only this, they were
Typical, ceremonial, abiding only to the time of Reformation Heb. 9.9. and are
now all abrogated, and out of date, so that we may say (as he) fuit Ilium, so
fuit Canaan, fuit lex, fuit Templum, fuit sacerdotium, fuit sacrosanctum semen.
There was indeed a holy land, a holy law, a holy Priesthood, a holy seed, But
all these belonging to a first Covenant which was faulty, are now long since
vanished before a better, and whatever was glorious has now no glory, by
reason of a glory that excels. 2 Cor. 3.9, 10, 12, 13.

Poed. Sir, I thank you for your opinion of this text Act. 2.39. But though the
children of believing Gentiles have no right to the Covenant by virtue of their
Parents faith yet may they not have a right by virtue of Abraham's faith?

Bap. In no wise; for the natural posterity of believing Gentiles, are so far
from being heirs apparent with Abraham, of Gospel promises and privileges,
that even Abraham's own natural seed, (as such only) are not at all his seed, at
this day, nor at all holy with the birth-holynesse they once had, nor entailed
as heirs of that heavenly Canaan, without faith and Repentance in their own
persons; and because this is the very root and knot in the state of this
controversy, the unfolding of which will discover the whole mystery of your
mistakes, all which arise originally from your erring in it, for error minimus
in principio, fit major in medio, maximus in fine. Give me leave therefore to
enlarge a little upon this point.

First then let it be considered, that Abraham's own seed, even those that were
heirs with him of the earthly Canaan, though born of his body now (as truly
though more remotely) of his body who was the greatest believer in the world
(Christ excepted) even these are not his seed in the Gospel account, nor heirs
of the Gospel promise; nor (as born of his body) to be admitted to Baptism and
Church privileges, which I make appear from Romans 9.6.7.8. in which pray
observe how the Apostle denies Abraham's own Natural Children, the name of
Abraham's seed, in the sense of the Gospel.

First he magnifies them exceedingly in the 4th. verse, and sets out their
dignity and pre-eminence above all people under the name of Israelites, to whom
pertained the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, i. e. both
Testaments, the Type, and the Antitype, unto whom pertained, not only the
giving of the law, but also the promises, and that not only of the Earthly
Canaan, but of the Gospel Covenant in the first tender of it, not in respect of
any right they had to it by birth (whether they received it or not) but as I
said in respect of the first tenders of it, which appears because by special
order and appointment it was to be offered to them in the first place.

Nor was it carried to the Gentiles till the Jews had slighted it, in proof
whereof the Scripture is very plain Math. 10.5, 6, 7. Christ forbids his
Disciples to go to any of the Gentiles, or to any save the lost sheep of the
House of Israel, yea they were Children at this time, whose Bread, (till they
loathed it) was not to be given to dogs except a few crumbs of it.

Hence the Jews were first bid to the wedding Math. 22.3. but they would not
come. So they are called the Children of the kingdom Math. 8.12. that were to
be cast out because they would not receive the Gospel; for he came unto his own
and his own received him not; yea Paul tells the Jews it was necessary the word
of God should first be spoken unto them, Act. 13.46.

Notwithstanding all which glory and pre-eminence of this people Israel who
were the fathers also, and of whom (as concerning the flesh) Christ came. Paul,
after he had showed their high privileges, comes with Alas! and great sorrow
of heart, that he was forced to exclude them, (save a few with whom the Gospel
took effect) even from the name of Israelites, and from standing Abraham's
Children any longer. For, says he, (as who should say, the more is the pity)
they are not all Israel, that are of Israel, that is all that are Israel after
the flesh, are not Gospel Israelites, Abraham's seed are no longer counted his
seed, but they that are Christ's by faith, are counted for the seed; and that
this is the meaning of the words is evident from them that follow. For, says
he, neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children; but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, these which are the Childsen of the
flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed.

A clear illustration we have of this Gal. 3.7.9. where the Apostle urges this
term, they which are of faith (that is, which believe) for none else are of
faith, the same are the Children of Abraham, and are blessed with faithful
Abraham. He says not, they which be of Abraham's flesh, for such are not
accounted his Children as to the Gospel Covenant, much less does he say or
mean, that those which are born of the body's of them that be of faith are
Abraham's children, and so to be signed, as his sons by Baptism, as his own
fleshly seed were signed by Circumcision, as heirs with him of the old Canaan.
As if because Abraham is the spiritual father of all that believe and walk in
his steps, therefore he must be a father to all their natural posterity too,
and be the spiritual father not of their persons only, but of their offspring
also.

But let me tell you he is not so much as a father to his own seed, in a Gospel
sense, neither can these stand his children, nor the children of God, or heirs
of the heavenly blessing and kingdom because they come out of his loins, unless
they do as he did. For though his fleshly seed, as a type for the time then
being, stood denominated the children of God, and holy in an outward sense, and
heirs according to the earthly promise, yet that account is now gone, and there
is no other way whereby the Jews themselves, much less any generations amongst
the Gentiles can be styled the children of God, or of Abraham, so as to expect
the Gospel portion, but by believing in Christ Jesus, in their own persons,
Gal. 3.26. ye are all the Children of God by faith in Jesus Christ; and if ye
be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

Another Scripture that proves that Abraham's own seed, in the old Covenant
account are not his seed, in the account of the Gospel, so as thereupon to have
right to ordinances is, John 8.33. to the 40. where Christ being cavilled at by
the Jews, for promising freedom from sin, to which they were slaves and
servants, notwithstanding the legal freedom they so much boasted of, discovers
plainly, the cutting off the Jews from three things.

1. From the repute and denomination of Abraham's children.

2. From any share in the spiritual blessings of the Gospel.

3. From any further right to Church Membership and ordinances.

First they allege that they are Abraham's seed ver. 33. that they were not
born of Fornication, ver. 39. (meaning as Ishmael was) but they had one father
even God v. 41. To which Christ answers, not by denying of any of all this, for
it was all true in that sense in which they meant it, yea they were Abraham's
children, and Christ confesses it ver. 37. I know you are Abraham's seed, yea
they were all the Children of God, by an outward and Typical adoption of them
unto himself. But Christ overthrows all, by telling them, that Abraham's
children are accounted of otherwise now then formerly; not as coming out of his
loins, but doing his works, as being allied to him, not so much after the flesh
as after the faith. Whereupon not yet believing he denies them to be now
Abraham's Children, in the true and substantial sense, and that appears in this
Hypothesis ver. 39. If ye were Abraham's children ye would do the works of
Abraham. To which do but add the Minor; But ye do not the works of Abraham: And
then the conclusion follows; Therefore ye are not the children of Abraham. You
see Christ asserts them to be Abraham's children in the old account, so as to
stand members of the old house, but denies them to be Abraham's children in the
sense of the New.

2ly. They say they are freemen, and were never in bondage: this Christ also
grants: it was so indeed in the outward Typical sense, they were freemen and
heirs of that earthly glory that was promised to Abraham in that old Canaan,
but deny's them to be freemen as to the Gospel, with heavenly freedom of that
Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of all believers Gal. 4.20. yea
asserts that they were but servants, and in bondage to sin, which is the
greatest slavery of all ver. 34. he that commits sin is the servant of sin. So
that for all their sonships, in truth they were but servants. He grants their
sonship and title to the old inheritance, but denies it to the new.

3ly. They boast or bless themselves in their standing in the house or family
of Abraham, that is the visible Church, as to the ordinances, privileges, and
rights whereof, who but themselves had the title. For this indeed was their
advantage of old, that to them were committed the oracles of God To which
Christ answers, true; they did stand in the house for a time, yet but for a
time, and though sons and heirs in the laws Typical sense, yet they were but
servants in the Gospels. And being but servants, as Moses, and his house, the
old Church were; they must anon be turned out of the house, and abide in the
Church, that is Abraham's family no longer; that believers the true sons and
heirs may come in, as in the 35. verse. And the servant (says Christ) abides
not in the house for ever; but the son abides for ever. If therefore the son
make you free, and that he does not for all your former freedom, unless you
believe in him; then shall you be free indeed, even to the glory, oracles, and
blessings of the spiritual house, the Gospel Church, which else, you must be
cut off from.

And so indeed it came to pass within a while, for not believing and
repenting, which are the only terms which give right to Gospel ordinances and
privileges. So that these Jews though Natural branches still as much as ever
(if being the fleshly seed of a believer could help them,) as to a standing
there, were yet clean broke from the root Abraham, as he stands a root to all
the faithful, because only of unbelief Romans 11.20. when such as were wild
olives, and no kin at all to Abraham after the flesh, were in their own
persons, but not their natural seed with them (save as they believed with them)
owned as his Children by believing, and as members of the true Church under the
Gospel.

And this was declared by John the Baptist, and the rest of the first Ministers
of the Gospel, who would not admit Jews as Jews (though Abraham's own seed) unto
Baptism, when they offered themselves upon the aforenamed terms without faith
and repentance. See how the Pharisees, Sadduces, and whole multitude of
Abraham's seed come to be Baptized. Math. 3.7. Luke. 3.7. pretending and
pleading that if Baptism were a Church privilege, it must needs belong to
them* who were the children of Abraham; But see how he rejects them, as having
no part nor portion in this matter. O generation of vipers, who has warned you
to flee from the wrath to come? as if he should have said, what have you to do
with the remission of sins and redemption from wrath, which I preach and
baptize in token of, being (notwithstanding your privileges) corrupt and
sinful in your lives. Bring forth therefore, to the end you may be baptized,
fruits answerable to amendment of life; and begin not to say, that we have
Abraham to our father, we are the seed of an eminent believer, for God is able
of these stones to raise up childeen to Abraham. i. e. God will without being
beholden to you, raise a seed to Abraham rather then to want them, from amongst
these stones; whether he means stones literally, or the Gentiles, which were as
stones in their eyes, it matters not.

But this we gather from it, that even at that very time, when the
birth-priviledge and holiness of a fleshly seed stood in full force, and
unrepealed (as then it did) how much more since the abrogation thereof by
faith, Abraham's seed could not, much less can the seed of believing Gentiles,
now it is repealed, be admitted to Baptism without Repentance.

The Jews as impenitent and unbelieving as they were, stood uncast out of the
Jewish Church, while the Church it self stood: But they could not pass out of
that Church into the Gospel Church, nor from their right to circumcision, prove
their right to Baptism; yet this they might have done, if what gave right of
old to one of those ordinances, does in like manner in right persons to the
other.

So then seeing Abraham's own seed had no right to Baptism, as such, how can you
expect it from your seed, who are not Abraham's seed: For Abraham has but two
seeds, as I know of (except Christ) the first is his seed after the flesh, and
such were all those that were born of his body, as Ishmael, and his children by
Keturah, and those that come of him, by Isaac and Jacob; which only were heirs
with him of the land of Canaan (for Esau sold his birthright.)

2. His seed after the faith, and they are all those that walk in his steps
Romans 4.12. and such that do his works John. 8. but to suppose that Abraham has
a third seed, and they are the children of believing Gentiles, is a fancy, for,
non datur tertium semen Abrahae.

Two seeds of Abraham the Scripture mentions, but a third sort cannot be
assigned, The first are only these that descend from his loins, as the
Midianites, and others by Keturah; the Ishmaelites by Hagar; The Edomites, and
Israelites by Sarah; which last only were the holy seed, and children of
promise, in reference to the Hagarens in a type, and sole heirs of the Typical
Canaan. All these I say were the first sort, and all believers of what Nation
soever, are the second sort; but the natural seed of believers are neither of
the one, nor of the other.


Poed. But were not the proselytes or strangers counted Abraham's seed, and
circumcised upon that account?


Bap. No: they were not Abraham's seed, and circumcised on that account; but
from a positive instruction, and an express command from God, as they were the
males in the family of one that was a Jew, at least by devotion, for which see
Genesis 17.12.13. And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought
with money from any stranger, which is not of thy seed. He that is born in thy
house, and he that is bought with money, must needs be circumcised; and in Exodus
12.48.49. it is called a law, When a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will
keep the passover, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him eat the
the Passover, and he shall be as one that is born in the land, and for the
stranger. And in Numb. 9.14. it is called an Ordinance. Ye shall have one
Ordinance for him that is born in the land, and for the stranger. Show but so
much for Infants Baptism, that it is called a law, an ordinance, or has any
institution for it, and the controversy is ended. So that you see the
prosclites were circumcised by virtue of a law, as they were Males in the
family, and not as Abraham's seed: for so they were not, nor heirs either of the
temporal, or spiritual Canaan. In the temporal Canaan they had no inheritance,
nor any right to the heavenly, unless they were true believers as Abraham was.

So that the sum of what has been said is:

First the seed of believers, are not Abraham^s seed.

Secondly, that Abraham's seed are cut off from all the privileges of the old
Covenant, and are not all counted his seed, in the sense of the new.

Thirdly, that Abraham's natural seed have no right to the privileges of the
new Covenant, by virtue of Abraham's faith.

Fourthly, that seeing Abraham's own seed, his natural children, have no right
to the Gospel Covenant, or privileges thereof, much less can the children of
believing Gentiles lay any claim thereunto, either by virtue of Abraham^s
faith, or the faith of their own parents.

And so I might here end this matter; but because you shall have full measure,
I will add another testimony concerning the Covenant, and the little ground
there is to baptize Infants, from that Scripture Genesis 17.7.

Know then that the Covenant of grace is to be considered, either of the
promise of eternal life and salvation, made to all the elect in Christ, the
which remains one and the same in all ages, though variously administered, in
the times of the old and new Testament. Or else of the manner of its
Administration, in which sense, its now (in respect of the old Testament
administration) which was a distinct Covenant in it self (for the time being)
called the new Covenant, and the other to have waxen old, and to vanish away,
Heb. 8. last. Which cannot be said of the promise or Covenant of eternal life,
that being an everlasting covenant, and over remains one and the same. Now its
one thing to be in the Covenant of grace, i. e. to have a right to the promise,
which is only proper to the elect: another thing, to be under the
administration of the Covenant, which is common to the elect and reprobates,
and depends merely upon Gods appointment.

Now if the Covenant be understood in the first sense, of the promise of
eternal life and salvation, made to the elect in Christ: that did never belong
to all the children born of believing paren^s, as might be instanced in Ishmael
and Esau, etc. but only to such as are elected of them, Romans 9.7.8.9. neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children, etc. The Covenant
of grace being first made between God and Christ, and all the elect in Christ.
And therefore in Scripture it is called the promise of eternal life which was
made to the elect before the world began; who are therefore called the heirs of
promise, which promise had its first promulgation to Adam, in the garden of
Eden. Where we have also the first discovery of the mystery of the two seeds.

Now the Covenant taken in this sense, is not the ground and reason of
administering ordinances to any person whatever. But the law of institution is
the ground or reason of visible Administrations. For the administration of
ordinances belongs not to the substance of the Covenant; but to its
administration as to the persons to whom they shall be administered, and that
merely on the law of institution, without any other consideration; and hence we
find, that from the first promulgation of the Covenant to Adam, until Gods
renewing of it to Abraham, there was no ordinance to be administered to Infants,
though some Infants as well as grown persons, both of believers, and
unbelievers might be comprehended in the Covenant yet not to be circumcised,
and so not to be baptized for want of an institution

So the promise in Act. 2.39. is said to be to them a far off, in the present
tense, while uncalled, even to as many as shall be called; and yet, not to be
baptized before calling, unless you will baptize Gentiles in professed
Gentilism; and so the Jews, some not yet born, some not called, have the
Covenant of grace made to them, Romans 11.27. For this is my Covenant unto them,
when I shall take away their sins; and yet they are not to be baptized till
converted.

Nor can the Covenant, considered in its pure nature, be a ministers rule to
administer Ordinances by, seeing it is unknown, who are in the Covenant, and
who are not; but that which is their rule, must be something that is manifest.

Secondly, when it is said, that the Covenant of grace belongs to believers
children, and that is the ground of their Baptism. If it be meant of its
Administration, you have heard, that depends merely on the law of institution,
and has varied in several ages according to the will of the lawgiver. For
during all that period of time, from Adam to Abraham, there was no Ordinance to
be administered to Infants; but when God renewed the promise to Abraham, he
instituted circumcision, which ordinance belongs peculiarly to the old
Testament administration, and was part of Moses law, which is now abrogated and
done away: And this was the first ordinance that was administered to Infants and
not to all Infants, but only to male Infants living in Abraham's family if they
did live to the eight day, otherwise, they had no right to this ordinance;
though many of them doubtless in the Covenant of grace and so saved: so we say
of Infants in the days of the Gospel, many of them are in the Covenant of
grace, and so saved, by virtue of the free promise: But yet not to be baptized,
if they do not live to the time of believing and repenting, the only time
appointed for Baptism: so that the Administration of ordinances to Infants,
depends upon an Institution, and not upon their being in Covenant.

And as to that place Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed, that
is, say you, the Covenat was made with Abraham, as a believer, and so with all
believers and their seed. To which I answer; The Covenant was not made with
believers, and their seed; but with Abraham and his seed. Now Abraham is to be
considered under a double relation.

First, as the father of the Jews, his fleshly seed.

Secondly, as he is the father of his spiritual seed, both Jews, and Gentiles;
Romans 4.11.12. Now to both seeds, does God promise to be a God, but in a
different manner and respect.

First, he promises to be a God to his fleshly seed, in giving to them the land
of Canaan for an inheritance, the promise of which is expressly called the
Covenant made with Abraham, and his seed as on Gods part, Psalm. 105.9.10.11.12.
which Covenant he made with Abraham, saying, unto thee will I give the land of
Canaan, the lot of your inheritance, etc. See also 1 Chronicles. 16.16.17.18. and
Neh. 9.8. This, I say, was the Covenant on Gods part. And their obedience to
circumcision is expressly called the Covenant on their parts, Genesis 17.10. This
is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you; Every male shall be
Circumcised. So Act. 7.8. And he gave them the Covenant of Circumcision, and so
Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eight day. By which they stood
engaged to keep all those other additional ordinances which Moses gave them,
when they were about to enter their promised inheritance as Gal. 5.3. I testify
that whoever is Circumcised is bound to keep the whole law.

Secondly, God promised to be a God to Abraham, and his spiritual seed; such as
walk in his steps, that is believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, in giving unto
them an eternal inheritance Heb. 9.15. incorruptible and undefiled, that fades
not away, purchased by the blood of Jesus, and reseved for them in heaven: of
which the earthly inheritance in the land of Canaan was but a type.

So, there is a twofold seed of Abraham, a fleshly, and a spiritual, typed out
by Ishmael, and Isaac: and a twofold inheritance, an earthly and a heavenly.
But the heavenly inheritance was not given to the fleshy seed, but only in
Types offered to them, and confirmed to the spiritual seed, who are therefore
called the heirs of promise. Heb. 6.17. Neither was the Covenant made with
Abraham, a pure Gospel Covenant, but a mixed Covenant, consisting partly of
promises of temporal blessings, of which Isaac, who is said to be born by
promise, was the true and proper heir. And partly of promises of spiritual
blessings, of an heavenly inheritance; and of these Jesus Christ was the true
her; and Antitypical Isaac: for as Ishmael, the child of the flesh had no right
with Isaac, in the outward Typical promise; so Isaac himself, by virtue of his
fleshly descent, had no right nor Interest in the heavenly inheritance, and
Gospel privileges Romans 9.7. any otherwise then he came to have an interest in
Christ.

And therefore we find the Apostle in Gal. 3.16. expounding the word of promise
(i. e.) I will be a God to thee, and thy seed; shows that the Gos-promises of
Abraham's Covenant were not made to any ones fleshly seed, no, not with the mere
fleshly seed of believing Abraham himself: but the promises did all run to
Christ the inheriting seed to whom they were made; and when Christ was come
they all center in him: see and consider the text. Now to Abraham and his seed
were the promises made; he says not to seeds, as of many but as of one, and to
thy seed which is Christ; to Isaac in the type, but to Christ in the Antitype,
and in him are all the promises yea and Amen.

Having thus followed the promises down along from Abraham to Christ, and found
them all to center in him; let us now see, to whom they came forth again: And
it is not to any ones fleshly seed whatever; but from Christ they all flow
forth again to believers, and only to believers, and that by virtue of their
union with Christ; and therefore says the Apostle; If ye be Christ's then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise, for there is no other way to
partake of the promise but by faith in Christ, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe; where two things are observable; first, to whom the
promise is given, viz. to them that believe; secondly, by what means, they come
to partake of them,; and that is, by the faith of Christ: so in verse the 26.
you are all the children of God, by faith in Jesus Christ; and if ye be
Christ's, (that is by faith) then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise: So then it seems all promises run to Christ, and from him flow
forth again only to believers. Which being impartially considered, is a full
answer to all Arguments drawn from the Covenants, and the promise made to
Abraham, and certainly and unavoidably cuts off Infants Church membership in
the days of the Gospel, unless the Poedobaptists can find a new institution
for it. But for a further illustration of this, and that you may see, that this
is not my opinion alone, I shall present you with some select passages that the
judicious and eminent divine, Dr Owen has upon this subject, it is in his
Exercitations upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, tom. 1. p. 55. etc. to which the
Reader is referred, and which by another hand may be shortly improved; In the
mean time take these few instances; Two Privileges did God grant unto Abraham
upon his separation to a special interest in the old promise and Covenant.

First, that according to the flesh, he should be the father of the Messiah;
the promised seed, who was the very life of the Covenant, the fountain and
cause of all the blessings contained in it. That this Privilege was temporary,
having a limited season, time and end appointed unto it, the very nature of the
thing it self does demonstrate. For upon this actual exhibition in the flesh,
it was to cease. In pursuit hereof, were his posterity separated from the rest
of the world, and preserved a peculiar people, that through them the promised
seed might be brought forth in the fullness of time, and be of them according
unto the flesh, Romans 9.8.

Secondly, together will this he had also another privilege granted unto him,
namely, that his says whereby he was personally interested in the Covenant,
should be the pattern of the faith of the Church in all generations, and that
none should ever come to be a member of it, or a sharer in its blessings, but
by the same faith that he had, fixed on the seed that was in the promise, to be
brought forth from him in the world. On the account of this Privilege, he
became the father of all them that do believe; for they that are of the faith,
the same aere the children of Abraham Gal. 3.7. Romans 4.11. as also heirs of the
world; Romans 4.13. in that all that should believe throughout the world, being
thereby implanted into the Covenant made with him, should become his spiritual
children.

Answerable unto this twofold end of the separation of Abraham, there was a
double seed allo^^ed unto him. A seed according to the flesh, separated to the
bringing forth of the Messiah, according to the flesh; and a seed according to
the promise, that is, such as by faith have an Interest in the promise, or all
the elect of God. Not that these two seeds were always subjectively diverse; so
that the seed separated to the bringing forth of the Messiah in the flesh,
should neither in whole, or in part be also the seed according to the promise;
or on the contrary, that the seed according to the promise, should none of it
be his seed after the flesh. Our Apostle declares the contrary in the instancos
of Isaac and Jacob, with the remnant of Israel that shall be saved, Chap.
9.10.11. But sometimes the same seed came under diverse considerations, being
the seed of Abraham both according to the flesh and promise, and sometimes the
seed it self was diverse, those according to the flesh being not of the promise,
and so on the contrary. Thus Isaac and Jacob were the seed of Abraham according
unto the flesh, separated unto the bringing forth of the Messiah after the
flesh, because they were his carnal Posterity, and they were also the seed of
the promise, because by their own personal faith they were Interessed in the
Covenant of Abraham their father. Multitudes afterward were of the carnal seed
of Abraham, and of the number of People separated to bring forth the Messiah in
the flesh, and yet were not of the seed according to the promise, nor
interested in the spiritual blessings of the Covenant, because they did not
personally believe, as our Apostle declares Chap. 4. of his Epistle. And many
afterward, who were not of the carnal seed of Abraham, nor interested in the
privilege of bringing forth the Messiah in the flesh, were yet designed to be
made his spiritual seed by Faith, that in them he might become heir of the
world, and all Nations of the Earth be blessed in him. Now it is evident, that
it is the second Privilege and spiritual seed, wherein the Church to whom the
Promises are made is founded, and whereof it does consist, namely in them, who
by faith are interested in the Covenant of Abraham, whether they be of the
carnal seed or no.

And herein lay the great mistake of the Jews of old, wherein they are followed
by their Posterity unto this day. They thought no more was needful to interest
them in the Covenant of Abraham, but that they were his seed according to the
flesh, and they constantly pleaded the latter Privilege, as the ground and
reason of the former. It is true, they were the children of Abraham according
to the flesh; but on that account, they can have no other Privilege then
Abraham had in the flesh himself. And this was, as we have showed, that he
should be set apart as a special Channel, through whose loins God would derive
the promised seed into the world. In like manner were they separated to be a
peculiar people as his Posterity, from among whom he should be so brought forth.

That this separation and privilege were to cease, when the end of it was
accomplished, and the Messiah exhibited, the very nature of the thing declares.
For to what purpose should it be continued, when that was fully effected
whereunto it was designed? but they would extend this privilege, and mix it
with the other, contending that because they were the children of Abraham
according to the flesh, the whole blessing and Covenant of Abraham belonged
unto them. But as our Savior proved that in the latter sense they were not the
children of Abraham, because they did not the works of Abraham; so as our
Apostle plainly demonstrates, Romans 4.9.10.11. Chapters. Gal. 3.4. Chap. That
those of them who had not the faith of Abraham, had no interest in his
blessings and Covenant; seeing therefore that their other privilege was come
to an end with all the Carnal ordinances that attended it, by the actual coming
of the Messiah whereunto they were subservient, if they did not by faith in the
promised seed attain an Interest in this of the spiritual blessing, it is
evident that they could on no account be considered as actually sharers in the
Covenant of God.

We have seen then that Abraham on the account of his faith and not of his
separation according to the flesh, was the father of all that believe, and heir
of the world. And in the Covenant made with him, as to that which concerns, not
the bringing forth of the promised seed according to the flesh, but as unto
faith therein; and in the work of redemption to be performed thereby, lies the
foundation of the Church in all ages. Wheresoever this Covenant is, and with
whomsoever it is established, with them is the Church, unto whom all the
promises and Privileges of the Church do belong. Hence it was, that at the
coming of the Messiah there was not one Church taken away, and another set up
in the room thereof, but the Church continued the same in those that were the
children of Abraham according to the faith. The Christan Church, is not another
Church, but the very same, that was before the coming of Christ, having the
same faith with it, and interested in the same Covenant.

It is true, the former Carnal Privileges of Abraham and his Posterity
expiring on the grounds before mentioned, the Ordinances of worship which were
suited thereunto did necessarily cease also. And this cast the Jews into great
perplexityes, and proved the last trial that God made of them. For whereas both
these, namely the carnal and spiritual Privileges of Abraham's Covenant, had
been carried on together in a mixed way for many generations, coming now to be
separated, and a trial to be made (Mal. 3) who of the Jews had Interest in
both, who in one only, those who had only the Carnal privilege of being
children of Abraham according to the flesh, contended for a share on that
single account in the other also, that is in all the Promises annexed unto the
Covenant. But the foundation of their plea was taken away, and the Church unto
which the promises belong remained with them, that were heirs of Abraham's faith
only.

It remains then, that the Church founded in the Covenant, and unto which all
the promises did and do belong, abode at the coming of Christ, and does abide
ever since in and among those who are the children of Abraham by faith.

And a little further he says, No individual person has any interest in the
promises, but by virtue of his membership with the Church, which is and always
was one and the same, with whomsoever it remains the promises are theirs: and
that Not by application or Analogy, but directly and properly. The Church unto
whom all the promises belong, are only those who are heirs of Abraham's Faith;
believing as he did, and thereby interested in the Covenant.

So far this learned man, whose words need no comment, nor need we draw any
inference, but recite his bare words, which are both perspicuous and Orthodox;
clearly and fully evidencing our position, That believers only are the children
of Abraham, and none but such have an Interest in the Covenant made with him,
which unavoidably excludes infants from Gospel Ordinances, until they believe
in their own persons: And then, and not before, they may lay a just claim, that
they are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. And if our
opponents think Dr. O. injured (as they are apt to clamor to that purpose) for
our improvement of his words to our advantage, he being for Poedobaptism; we
say, that they are at liberty to reconcile his words to his practice if they
can, to do which they have need of a considerable stock (but they are seldom
unfurnisht) of artifice, and distinction, to help at this dead lift. The Dr.
treating about the nature of the Covenant and promises made to Abraham, (and
perhaps forgetting Infant Baptism) opens and expounds them with such
spirituality and Orthodoxy, as leaves no room for Infant Baptism, but excludes
it beyond all possibility of reconciliation; unless it can be proved, that
they, viz. Infants are heirs of Abraham's faith, believing as he did; and that
the promises are theirs, not by application or Analogy, but directly and
properly, and by their own personal faith, which I despair ever to hear of;
though Mr B. himself, that unparalleld distinguisher, should undertake it.


Poed. But our Ministers tells us, that when the promises are said to be made
to Christ, it is not meant of Christ personally, but of Christ mystically, as
in the 1 Cor. 12.12. and so its to be understood of the visible Church, of
which infants born of believing parents are a part.


Bap. Its true these are your sayings: but, I must tell you, we must not be put
off with fancies, and bare affirmations, but we expect solid proof from
Scripture. And whereas you say, the promises are to be considered, as made to
Christ mystically, that is, to the visible Church; the contrary appears in Gal.
3.16. where he affirms that Christ was the seed to whom the promises were made.
And in verse. 19th. he says; the law was added because of transgression, till
the seed should come, to whom the promise was made: where it is observable that
the law (i. e.) the Mosaical administration, is said to be before the seed was
come, and was to have its period then. Now, if by Christ the seed be not
understood personally, but mystically, for the visible or invisible Church,
(take which you will) then the law could not have been before the seed; for God
had his Church in Abraham's family 400 years before the law was, of which Christ
was the head, and they his mystical body. And so by this interpretation, the
seed should have been before the law, contrary to the Apostle who makes the law
to have been before the seed, and to have its period, when the seed to whom the
promise was made, was come; and now the promises running to Christ personally,
God makes him over for a Covenant to the Elect, and all the promises in him.
Isa. 42.6. So that in Christ he is our God, and in Christ, he takes us to be
his people. In Christ, and a right to the promises; out of Christ, and
strangers to the Covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.12. So that it is evident, that
the promises, respecting the eternal inheritance, and spiritual blessings were
first made to Christ personally, and in him to his mystical body, the Church,
who are united to him by faith.

Secondly, as to that Scripture 1 Cor. 12.12. for as the body is one, and has
many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so
also is Christ: It rather seems to be meant of the invisible Church of true
believers, then of the visible; for the Apostle there, calls none the body of
Christ but such as ^ad received the gifts of the spirit, and such, as by one
spirit (as the concurring cause) had been baptiZed into one body, yea such who
had received the spirit to profit withal, such, that had a real sympathy one
with another, verse. the 26th. If one Member suffers all the members suffer with
it, if one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it: All which
cannot (in any tolerable sense) be applied to the visible Church, amongst whom
there are many hypocrites, that never received the spirit, nor by the spirit
could sympathize one with another, etc. But however, it is most certain infants
are not called the body of Christ, if it be meant of the visible Church indeed,
by virtue of the grace of election, some of them may be members of his mystical
body, the invisible Church, but not at all members of the visible, especially
from this chapter; for it is said, if one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it; and the manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit
withal, which cannot be applicable to infants.

For none in this Chapter are counted the body of Christ, but such as are
useful to the body, as an eye, an ear, or a foot, a hand, a head, etc. as
verse. 21. the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor the
head to the feet I have no need of you. So that I draw these two conclusions.

First every member in a Chuch stands in need of the help of all the other
members.

Secondly that every member in a Church must be useful in his place to the
rest of the members. But of what use are infants to the rest of the members in
respect to edification?

Now this objection being answered, I hope you see plainly, that all the
promises respecting spiritual blessings, and the eternal inheritance, were
first made to Christ personally, and in him they are made over to his mistical
body, the Church, who are united to him by faith, which being well weighed
would put an end to the whole Controversy.

And in the next place you may see to what little purpose, the promise in Genesis
17.7. is brought to prove, that God made a Covenant of eternal life with
believers and their Children.

The text speaks of a Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, it does not say
with all believers and their seed, or all Church Members and their seed,
neither does it follow by any necessary consequence, that because God made a
Covenant with Abraham, and his seed, therefore he has made a Covenant with
believers and their seed; sure I am, the Apostle was of another mind, who when
he expounds the Covenant Genesis 17.7. understands it to be made to Abraham, (as
it contains Gospel blessings) not as a natural father but as the father of the
faithful, both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 4.11, 12. he received the sign of
Circumcision that he might be the father of all them that believe, and walk in
the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, so Gal. 3.7. know ye therefore
that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham; And these
only are the seed to whom the Covenant was made (in respect to Gospel
privileges) and not to the natural seed either of Abraham, or of any other
believers, as has been evidently made appear before, and that beyond all
Contradiction: And whoever affirms otherwise preaches another Gospel then Paul
knew, and incurrs that doom mentioned Gal. 1.8, 9.


Poed. But we are told that as the Jews and their Children are broken off from
the Covenant, so the Gentiles and their Children are ingrafted in, in their
room, according to Romans 11.20. because of unbelief they were broken off, and
thou stand by faith.


Bap. in answer to which, I grant there was a time, when the Jews and their
children were broken off, as the Apostle says, but there are two things to be
considered. First, why they were broken off. Secondly, from what they were
broken off.

1. Why? Answ. It was not because they had not believing Parents; for Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, were the fathers of them all, and upon whose account they had
right to the privileges of the Covenant.

2. Not because they wanted title, for they were Abraham's seed, when they were
broken off; but,

3. Because the terms of standing in the Church were now altered; and the
Church it self removed: For before the Gospel came they stood members of the
old Church, though as much unbelievers for many generations, as they were when
they were broken off; and why did not their unbelief break them off before?

But now Abraham's Church state is at an end, and all the privileges and
immunities cease; the Jewish Church must give way to the Gospel Church; the
Messiah being come, and about to build him a new house, into which none are (of
right) to enter, but professed believers; and the Jews not believing now in that
savior who has the substance of the shadows, and which all their types pointed
out, and whom all those ordinances signified, yea for whose sake they did enjoy
their ordinances, and to which end were committed unto them the oracles of God,
the giving of the law, and the promises; yea therefore was their seed counted
holy, to point out, and keep them in memory of that holy child Jesus that was
to come as the Antitype of all these things: For the old house, or Jewish
Church was not intended to abide for ever, but to the time of reformation; then
the law must be changed, the priesthood changed, the privileges and ordinances
changed, the seed changed, yea the Covenant changed, which they not believing,
being willing to abide in the old house still, and to remain Churchmembers upon
a mere fleshly and natural birth; still crying out, Abraham is our father, and
we are his seed, and are free, and were never in bondage: and here it seems
they are resolved to stand; wherefore they were broken off, and that whether
they would or not, by reason of their unbelief, that is, because they would not
believe that the old Covenant and all the privileges thereof were ended, and
the substance come, the Lord Jesus the Antitype of their types.

The second thing is, from what they were broken off?

I answer, From all the glory they boasted so much of; as the Apostle says;
thou art called a Jew, and make thy boast of God, and trustest in the law;
but all these things are now gone, yea the Typical Adoption, the glory, and the
Covenants, the giving of the law, and the service of God and the promises; all
their birth-priviledges, Church membership and ordinances; which continued but
till the time of reformation; yea from that Covenant, which had also ordinances
of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary, which is now all abolished, as you
see Heb. 9.1.2.3.4. etc. And all because they did not believe in him, who was
the Antitype and substance of all their shadows; but were willing to abide in
the old house still, and loath to lose their outward privileges, their worldly
sanctuary, their ordinances and Church membership upon the account of Abraham's
faith, for it was indeed an easy service, a flesh pleasing religion, (if
salvation could have been obtained by it) notwithstanding the bondage and
laboriousness of some services, yet how willing would the carnal Jew have born
all, if he might have been saved by the faith of another, rather then to lose
all the righteousness of the law, and to count his circumcision, and Church
membership as dung to winn Christ, as Paul did when converted, and be found in
him only, not having his own righteousness which is of the law, but that which
is by faith in Jesus Christ.

Thus you see why the Jews ars broken off, and from what. But they are not all
broken off from the Gospel Covenant, for there is yet a remnant according to
the election of grace, and as many of them as believe, and repent of their sins
shall be admitted to the more easy, and more excellent privileges of the
Gospel Church membership and ordinances, and shall be a pillar in the Temple of
God, and shall go no more out.

Besides, we see many of the Jews have been converted, and shall be more
generally in the later days.

And if you say, May not the children of the Jews, be broken off from the
Gospel Covenant? I answer.

They are no more broken off, then the children of the Gentiles; for those that
dye in infancy, as many as belong to the election of grace shall be saved: if
they live to years of discretion, and then believe they shall be saved, as soon
as any children of believing gentiles.

But if the children of the Jews, be broken off from the Gospel Covenant, it is
either because of their parents unbelief, or their own personal unbelief. If it
be merely their parents unbelief, then if any do believe in their own persons
they cannot be admitted, because of their parents unbelief, for that which cuts
them off, will keep them off; and so the parents unbelief keeps the children
from the Gospel Covenant, and so, is the cause of their damnation, for causa
causae, est causa causati. But where do we find that children shall be damned
for the sins of their parents; the Scripture says, the soul that sins shall
dye.

And if you say, the Jews unbelief does not keep their children from the
Covenant of grace, but only from the administrations of it, as Baptism, etc. I
answer, that according to your principles, it amounts to the same thing, for
you say out of the Church no salvation.

But if you say their parents unbelief keeps them out of the Church, only
during their infancy, when they come to years, if they believe, they may be
admitted: Then it will follow that such children of the Jews, yea of all
unbelievers that dye in infancy are in a miserable condition, their case is
deplorable, for their parents (secundum te) can have no hopes of their
salvation. Poor souls! had you lived a while longer, you had been in the
Covenant of grace, and enjoyed the privileges thereof, but merely because of
your parents unbelief you are cut off while you are infants.

But if this be true, parents have cause to mourn to the breaking of their
loins, when their children dye. But David was of another mind, who when his
child dyed, rejoiced though it dyed on the seventh day, the day before
circumsion, and that not without hopes of its good estate, as learned men
conceive; for he said, I shall go to that, but that shall not return to me;
which is not meant only of going to the grave, but to a state of happiness,
for our going barely to the grave, is no cause of comfort.


Poed. But we are told, that Circumcision was a great privilege, as the
Apostle says Romans 3.1. What advantage is there of Circumcision? much every
way; and therefore, to be broken off, was their misery.


Bap. Its true the Apostle propounds that question, what profit is there of
Circumcision? his meaning is, that there was a time when they had advantage by
circumcision, and the main was, that Christ should come of their flesh; of
whom, as concerning the flesh Christ came. But this and all other advantages
are ceased, and now it is a mercy rather then a misery, (though they thought
otherwise) to be broken off from the Covenant of Circumcision; and that it is
so I shall make appear from these Arguments.

1. If standing in the Covenant of Circumcision, did keep up the expectation of
Christ to come, and so deny him to be already come in the flesh, then their
breaking off from that Covenant was a mercy not a misery.

But the Antecedent is true, Ergo, so is the consequence.

2. If while the Jew and his seed now stand in the Covenant of Circumcision,
Christ did profit them nothing: then to be broken off from that Covenant is a
mercy, not a misery.

But the Antecedent is true Gal. 5.2. If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit
you nothing, (that is if you now continue in the old Covenant) Ergo, so is the
consequent.

3. If while the Jew and his seed stand in the Covenant of Circumcision, they
go about to establish their own righteousness, and do not submit to the
righteousness of God: then to be broken off from the covenant is a mercy not a
misery.

But the antecedent is true, Romans 10.3. etc. Ergo, so is the consequent.

4. If the standing in the Covenant of Circumcision did oblige them to keep the
whole Law, then their breaking off is a mercy, not a misery. But the Antecedent
is true; Gal. 5.3. I testify, says Paul, that every one that is Circumcised is
bound to keep the whole law.

Ergo, so is the consequent.

5. If while the Jews stand in the Covenant of Circumcision they cannot be
justified in the sight of God; then to be broken off is a mercy not a misery.

But the Antecedent is true, Gal. 3.11. Ergo, so is the consequent.

Thus it appears that though the Jews thought it a misery to be broken off from
the old Covenant from Circumcision and Church membership, from the privilege
of being Abraham's seed; yet it was indeed their mercy if they did believe and
embrace the Gospel; for now they are delivered from all their yokes, and cruel
bondage, yea, from the curse of the law; for Christ has redeemed as many of
them as believe from the curse of the law, being made a curse for them.

Obj. And if it be objected, then their unbelief was a mercy.

Answ. It does not follow that because their breaking off was a mercy,
therefore the means by which, was a mercy, for the death of Christ was a mercy,
but the means of effecting it was not so; for they did it by wicked hands.

But had the Jews believed, they would willingly have broke off themselves,
but because they did not, they were broken off, contrary to their own wills,
(though for their good). For though it be not a mercy for any person to be
broke off from any mercy God gives, during the time it is to be enjoyed; But if
greater privileges be offered, and they shall adhere to the worse, (and there
being a period put to the former) then it is their mercy rather then their
misery to be forced out whether they will or no: as it is a mercy for a man to
live in his own house, and enjoy the benefits and privileges thereof; But if
that house be like to fall upon his head, it is his mercy to be forced out of
it, whether he will or not. So Lot would willingly have staid in Sodom, for the
text says he lingered, but God being merciful unto him, forced him out, so the
Jews would have staid longer in the old Covenant, but God being merciful unto
them, took away all their privileges, and concluded them all under sin, and
made them all as well as Gentiles guilty before God, that he might have mercy
upon all.


Poed. But if Circumcision and all the Jews privileges did hold out Christ to
come in the flesh, then they should have been broken off as soon as Christ
came, but they were not.


Bap. Its true they were not broken off de facto, but de jure they were; but
Christ was yet gracious to them, and tendered the Gospel first to them as you
have heard, saying, he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, and a considerable time after the Apostles preached to the Jews, till
they contradicting and blaspheming, Paul said; It was necessary the word of God
should be first spoken unto them But seeing you put it from you, and so judge
your selves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles, whence we
may observe.

1. How tender the Lord Jesus and his Apostles were to these people, and that
because they had all the types of Christ coming in the flesh, and the shaddows
of good things to come, and it was a great pity that Israel has not obtained
that which he seeks for, and that they which followed after the law of
righteousness have not obtained the law of righteousness.

2ly. We may observe that they broke off themselves, yet not all, the Apostle
says, it is but some of the branches are broken off, that is, some of Abraham's
seed, for blindness is but in part happened to Israel; And they also if they
abide not in unbelief shall be grafted in again.

So then it is a great mistake to think that all Israel, and their seed are
broken off from the Gospel Covenant, and the Gentiles and their seed come in
their room, and so their children to enjoy Church privileges, as membership
and Baptism. For the Jews, that is the whole lump of Abraham's seed, are not
broken off from the Gospel Covenant, but some only that abide in unbelief, but
for others of them that do believe, they have still as great a privilege, and
as much a right to Gospel ordinances as any believing Gentiles in the world.
It Is true they are all broken off from the old Covenant, that could not give
life, that made nothing perfect, which as you have heard is their mercy rather
then misery, if they could believe it.


Poed. But me thinks, believers Children should have some privilege above the
children of heathens, or else they will lose some privilege by the coming of
Chrrst, and the Gospel dispensation will be less then that of the law.


Bap. To which I answer,

1. That it must be proved that Baptism is any privilege at all to infants,
for we must understand that ordinances are the hard part of the Covenant; and
so, rather a burden then a privilege, without faith; they are part of Christ's
yoke, and though they be made easy to believers from their interest in Christ,
and the hope of the recompense of reward, yet they are a burden to the flesh,
both in respect to the performance of them, and the consequences of them; yea
rather a burden and a yoke then a mercy, and a privilege, where there is no
faith to make them easy. But,

2ly. If Circumcision were a privilege, (though the Apostle calls it a yoke)
it must be considered, whether our infants are capable of such privileges by
Baptism, as theirs were by Circumcision: for,

1. Circumcision did assure them that Christ should be born of their loins.

2. It did inright them to the land of Canaan none of which we can expect.

3. By Circumcision you say they were accounted Gods people, and this is the
only thing you mean. But,

Is it so great a privilege to have the name without the nature? the shadow
without the substance? We use to count that a misery rather then a mercy: and
Sardis is blamed for having a name to live and was dead. Is it any benefit for
a man to be counted rich when he is poor: we see Naomies modesty is commended,
who would not own the shadow without the substance; call me no more Naomi, but
call me Marah.

But in the next place, you say infants unbaptiz'd lose some privilege: I say
some things that were counted privileges are lost, for it was a privilege,
that all the sons of the priests were born Priests, but it is not so now. But
further; Its you your selves make your children lose a privilege since the
coming of Christ, and so make the new Covenant narrower then the old: And that
because the faith of a believing parent, as you say, admits only your immediate
children to Church membership and Baptism, but as to your childrens children,
they have no benefit by your faith, no admittance to Ordinances upon your
account; but it was otherwise of old; the Covenant of circumcision, and the
privileges of Church membership, was not only to the next generation flowing
from Abraham, but to his seed after him in their generations, Genesis 17.7. and
that not only to the third and fourth generation, but to Christ's time, they
enjoyed the privileges of the Covenant by virtue of Abraham's faith. But now
you have narrowed the Gospel dispensation, for you allow Baptism to none but
your immediate seed, by virtue of the parents faith: your childrens children
must come in upon another account, their parents must be actual believers or
else no admittance.

But what reason you have for so doing I know not, yea, I challenge any man to
give me a substantial ground, why the faith of a believer may not now as well
inright his childrens children to the 3d and 4th generation to
Church Membership and Baptism, as the faith of Abraham did inright his seed in
their generations to the privileges of the old Covenant.

Will you say Abraham was a famous believer, and therefore had this privilege
above others? These are indeed your sayings; but must we believe it therefore?
where is it so said? or what necessary consequence is there from any Scripture,
to enforce belief, that Abraham's personal faith shall inright him and his seed
in their generations? But a believers faith in the days of the Gospel (though
in some respect more excellent then that of Abraham) viz. in reference to the
Messiah already come, and Redemption completed) shall inright only his
immediate children such as are born of his loins: so that you make the Gospel
dispensation narrower then that of the law.

And whereas you say, if believers children are not baptized, they have no
privilege above the children of heathens. I answer, That had God so appointed,
that believers children should have been baptized, and unbelievers children
should not, you had ground then to consider it as a privilege; but seeing
there is no institution, you cannot say, they are denied a privilege: but if
it be a privilege, then (according to your practice) you run a great hazard of
denying Baptism to such to whom it does belong.

For if I should ask you, what sort of believers they are, whose children have
a right to Baptism, here you would be at a loss, and must needs say, such only
whom you count believers as your practice evidently proves: but it was not so
of old, it was certainly known, what children had a right to Circumcision, and
what had not: but if you do (as you do) baptize the children only of such
parents as you count believers, then you may leave out many thousands of
children that have as great a right to it as yours. For there are no persons
called by the name of Christians, but do count themselves believers, yea
doubtless there are many believers amongst them to whose children you deny
Baptism, for,

Let it be considered how many sorts there are, who count themselves believers.

1. The Papists have their believers, and they are such, as own Christ to be
the son of God, and believe all the Articles of the Church of Rome, etc.
amongst whom surely God has some people, for it is said, come out of her my
people.

2. The Episcopalians have their believers, that is, such whom they count so,
and they are such that believe that Christ is the son of God, that he dyed for
sinners, and that whoever believes in him shall be saved, and so the whole
nation owning and professing the faith of Christ, they baptize all their
children, amongst whom there are many thousand real believers, and so their
children have as much right to Baptism as yours.

3. The Presbyterians have their believers, and they are such (that is, so
accounted) who own the faith of Christ, profess regeneration, and are morally
righteous in their lives and conversations.

4. The Independents have their believers, and they are such who own the faith
of Christ, make a personal manifestation of their faith and repentance, and so
are enchurcht and become members (by a Covenant) of some particular
congregations.

Now pray tell me which of all these sorts of believers have right to have
their children baptized? If you say all of them, then you contradict your own
practice, it being famously known, that some of you will baptize none but them
of your own party. But if you say those children only have right to Baptism,
whose parents we count believers, then you run a hazard of denying Baptism to
the children of diverse whose parents are as true believers as your selves, and
so deny them the privileges of the Covenant, and in as much as in you lies
occasion their damnation, as you use to tell the Baptist.

And if you say, so the Baptists themselves may keep persons from Baptism, to
whom of right it does belong, and so are equally guilty.

I answer, that cannot be, for our principles are, that no person has right to
Baptism, but he that desires it upon the profession of his faith and
repentance: to such a person we do not deny it, unless his profession be
contradicted by an unholy life. By all which it appears,

1. That you (practically) deny the privilege of Baptism to many that have as
real a right to it, as your selves.

2. That you count the children of diverse true believers to be in no better
condition then heathens.

3. You do extremely narrow the Gospel dispensation, (a fault you use, though
unjustly, to charge the Baptists with) and so make the privileges of the
Gospel, less then the privileges of the law; for whereas of old all the seed
of Abraham, all his numerous posterity were circumcised, and that whether their
parents believed, or not, there was no questioning of their faith, no enquiry
into their conversations, etc. But now you, (practically) own no children to
have right to Baptism, but those whose immediate parents have given some
visible demonstration of their conversion, and manifested their faith and
Repentance, who are so few, that were their number reckoned up, it would not
amount to one amongst a hundred of them that are true believers, in the world.

But further, if the children of believers only (as you say) have right to the
Covenant and Baptism, and that of such believers as you count so; and so, their
parents, only, have hope of their salvation; then what shall become of the
children of unbelievers, yea of such, whom you count unbelievers? may not they
make this appeal to their parents, and say? O wretched and miserable parents,
that have brought forth so deplorable an off spring; other children as soon as
they are born are in the Covenant of grace, and by virtue of their parents
faith, have aright to Church membership and baptism, wherein they are made
children of God, heirs of Christ, and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven. But
woe and alas to us, that ever we were born of unbelieving parents, or at least
of such that were never enchurcht, nor members of any Presbyterian or
Independent congregation. We are unholy, unclean, dogs that must not meddle
with the childrens bread, without the pale of the Church, aliens from the
common weal of Israel, without hope and without God in the world. We must not
be admitted to the privileges of the Covenant of grace, though diverse of our
parents are professed Christians, and believe Christ crucified, etc. yet
because they have not made a personal manifestation of their faith and
repentance, and so joined to some Church diverse ministers will not admit us to
Baptism.

But stay children, there is hope for you for all this: If you dye in infancy,
as many of you, as belong to the election of grace shall be saved, though ye
are not baptized, and if you live to years of discretion, and understanding, if
then you believe in Christ and repent of your sins, and obey the Gospel, you
shall be saved as soon as they, yea upon those terms, and none other, shall
those that are Baptized in their infancy be saved if they live to years of
understanding.


Poed. Well Sir I see, it is a hard matter to prove that the infants of
believers have a right to the Covenant, more then the infants of unbelievers,
but yet methinks they should have right to the administration of the Covenant.


Bap. In no wise; and that for the want of an institution, as you have heard,
and it is answer enough to satisfy any that are willing to be satisfied: for
none ever had a right to the administrations of the Covenant any otherwise then
by virtue of a law; had it been otherwise of old, then Enoch, Lot, Noah, and
their seed had been circumcised; and Ishmael, Esau, and others had not been
circumcised: now if the natural branches, the seed of Abraham had not this
privilege to be circumcised by virtue of a right, but virtue of a law, how can
you expect that your infants should have a right to the administrations of the
Covenant by virtue of your faith? Besides you your selves deny one
administration to your infants, but what reason you have for so doing I know
not, seeing the same grace is signified in both. Will you say, because your
children are not capable to examine themselves? then let them plead their own
cause, and suppose they should make this Apostrophe to their parents?

O, our tender and indulgent parents, you have brought us into the visible
Church as you say, and admitted us to Baptism and membership; but why must we
not partake of the Lords supper, that soul strenghtning and soul-nourishing
ordinance? you take care to feed our bodies daily, and that in order to our
growth, and have you no pity to our souls? must they starve? the children of
the Jews of old were admitted to the passover, all the males were to appear
thrice in a year, and very early partook of that Sacrament, and were instructed
in the use and end of it, and have we lost this privilege by this coming of
Christ? besides the ancient Church did use it, for many years, and must we be
kept from it till we be come of age? yea, and not then neither (notwithstanding
our Baptism contrary to all Scripture president) unless we make a personal
manifestation of our faith and repentance. Will you say, it is because we
cannot examine our selves? We answer that Scripture concerns the Adult, not us.
You might as well have kept us from Baptism, because we could not believe and
repent; but surely the Apostle never intended that infants should examine
themselves.

Besides you say we are clean, holy with a federal holiness, innocent, in the
Covenant of grace, Church members, that we have habitual faith, and without
any sin (except original) therefore there is no need of self-examination. Why
then are we not admitted? will our parents faith serve to admit us to Baptism,
and not to the supper? Who will unriddle this? surely we want some Alexander to
cut this Gordian knot; for none will ever untie it.

But again; if infants have a right to the administration of the Covenant by
virtue of the parents faith, then if the parents turn Atheists, or Apostates,
the children lose their right, and are cast out from the said privileges. That
it must be so appears, if we consider, Romans 11.20. thou stand by faith;
(that is, say you) thou stand in the Gospel Covenant, and have right to
ordinances by virtue of their own faith; and thy children by virtue of thine.
Now this standing is not unalterable, a state which cannot be fallen from; but
a changable state from which thou may fall, for the Apostle adds, be not high
minded, but fear. Now if thou fallest by unbelief, and so casts out thy self,
thy children must needs be cast out with thee; for ablata causa tollitur
effectus, take away the cause, and the effect cease: thy personal and actual
faith was the ground and cause of thy Childrens admittance, so then thy
unbelief must dispriviledge them, for so it was with the Jews when they were
cut off, how many thousands of their infants were cut off with them from
membership and ordinances, and remain so to this day by reason of their parents
unbelief; And do you expect a greater privilege then the natural branches: the
Apostle lays them in an equal balance Romans 11.20, 21, 22. and what ground have
you to expect better; the unbelief of their parents broke off their Children:
By unbelief they were broken off, and thy standing is but conditional, if thou
abide in his goodness, otherwise thou shall be cut off. By which you see what
absurdities and contradictions to your own practice, your opinion leads to; if
the father be cast out, the children must be cast out with him.

Thus you see that as the children of believers have no right to the Covenant
of grace, more then the Children of unbelievers, by virtue of their parents
faith; so, they have no right to the administration of the Covenant, for want
of an institution, there being no precept nor president in the word of God for
such a practice.


Poed. But though there be no precept nor president for Infants Baptism, yet
our Ministers tells us, there is no weight in that Argument, for though we do
not find it written, that Infants were baptized, (yet perhaps some were,) for
a negative Argument don't conclude.


Bap. Indeed Mr Wills says so, and Mr Sydenham before him, and diverse of your
Ministers, and here they cry, Victoria; this being their beloved Argument they
so much boast of; but,

Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam; but pray stay a while, and let
us consider what veriety is in this position, a negative Argument don't
conclude.

It Is true in some cases, it does not, but in the matter of positive worship,
we have the opinion of diverse able and Godly men, who have told us, that what
is not commanded in the worship of God, is forbidden, and that every
affirmative command of Christ includes a negative. But if it be true that a
negative Argument concludes not in matters of Worship; then this had been a
good plea for Nadab, and Abihu; Levit. 10. who were destroyed for offering
strange fire which God had not commanded, they might have said; Lord, its true
thou have not commanded this strange fire, so thou, have not forbid it, and a
negative Argument don't conclude.

So God commanded Abraham to circumcise the eighth day, but he did not forbid
the 7th day, And a negative Argument don't conclude.

So in the passover God commanded a Lamb, a male of the 1st year to be eaten;
but he did not forbid an ewe, or a Ram of the 2d or 3d year, and a negative
Argument don't conclude.

So, God smote VzZah for holding the Ark, but he might have said; Lord thou
have not forbid me to support the Ark, when the Oxen did shake it and a
negative Argument don't conclude.

So, when God threatens Idolatrous Israel, for causing their sons and daughters
to pass through the fire to Molech, which the Lord commanded not, neither came
it into his heart Jer. 32.35. Yet they might say, though he had not commanded
it, so he had not forbidden it, and a negative Argument don't conclude.

So, God has not forbid Crucifixes, beads, Altars, praying to Saints, Images
in Churches, pilgrimages, the Cross in Baptism etc. and a Negative Argument
don't conclude.

So God has not forbid unbelievers children to be Baptized, nor the children
of believers to communicate in the Lords supper; and a negative Argument don't
conclude.

Lastly, Bells are not forbidden to be Baptized, and a negative Argument don't
conclude.


Poed. But Mr. Wills says that Bells are not subjectum capax, a subject
capable.


Bap. I answer wherein lies their incapacity? Cannot a Minister sprinkle a
little water upon a Bell, and use the words of Institution in as solemn a
manner, as he does, when he Baptizes a child? Or are they incapable for want of
an Institution? We say the same of infants.

But if he say they are not capable of the uses and ends of Baptism as men are,
I answer.

If God had pleased he could have made them (by an institution) capable of some
sacred usefulness, yea, capable of relative holiness, as well as Aarons bells,
or the bells mentioned Zec. 14.20. upon whom it was written, holiness to the
Lord.

But its well known there are those in the world, who think themselves as wise
as Mr. Wills that judge Bells capable subjects of Baptism, and have done so
diverse ages.

Thus you see what absurdities follow from that position; But surely God is
more jealous of his honor, and tender of his worsh^^^, then to leave it to the
pleasure of superstitious persons; And that God in all ages has testified his
^^^^ke, yea abhorrency of will worship, and th^^^^ because he has not
commanded it. See Jer. 7.3^. They have built the high places unto Toph^^, which
I commanded them not, neither come it into my heart: See, what God never
commanded, never came into his heart; and for this he threatens great
judgments, in the following verses. So Ezekiel. 4.3.8. they have set their
thresholds by my threshold, and their posts by my posts, wherefore I have
consumed them by mine anger. But pray let us reason a little about it, and be
serious in this matter. Do you think will worship is no sin? when the same
person who is to perform the obedience, shall dare to appoint the laws?
Implying a peremptory purpose of no further observance then may consist with
the allowance of his own Judgment, whereas true obedience must be grounded on
the Majesty of that power, that commands, not on the judgment of the subject or
benefit of the precept proposed. Divine laws require obedience, not so much
from the quality of the things commanded, as from the Authority of him that
institutes them: We are all servants of God, and servants are but living
instruments, whose property is to be governed by the will of those, in whose
possession they are. Will Worship and superstition, well may they flatter God,
they cannot please him. He that requires us to deny our selves in his service,
does therein teach us, that his commands stand rather in fear then in need of
us; in fear of our boldness, lest we abuse them, not in need of our judgment to
polish or alter them.

The conquest of an enemy against the Command of his General, cost a Roman
gentleman his life, though his own father were the Judge. Christ in Romans Hom. 2.

And the killing of a Lion contrary to the laws of the Kings hunting (though it
were only to rescue the King himself) cost a poor Persian his head. Brisson. de
Reg. Pers. lib. 1.

So the overwise industry of the Architect in bringing not the same but a
fitter piece of timber, then he was commanded to the Romish Consu^, was
rewarded with nothing but a bundle of rodds. So jealous and displeased are even
men themselves to have their own laws undervalued by the private judgments of
those, who rather interpret then obey them.

And therefore we find that those men who erected the Fabrics of superstition
and will worship, yet endeavored to derive the original of them from some
divine Revelations, And the Roman Captain Scipio, before the undertaking any
business, would first enter the Capitol, and pretend a consultation with the
Gods. And generally in all the Roman sacrifices, the Minister or servant was to
attend a command before he was to strike the beast that was offered.

Semper agatne? rogat, nec nisi jussus agit. Ovid.

Horrible then, and more then heathenish, is the impiety of those, who mixing
humane inventions and appointments of their own with the institutions of God,
and imposing them as divine duties, with a necessity of obedience, do by that
means take Christ's divine prerogative out of his own hands, and so make
themselves joint Authors of his Sacraments; yea rather indeed the destroyers of
them; For he that practices an Ordinance otherwise then Christ has instituted,
does not honor the Ordinance but an Idol of his own making.

This the Apostles durst not do; they tell us they declared unto them the
Counsel of God; but nothing else. And Paul tells the Corinthians, he delivered
nothing unto them, but what he had received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23. and
sure he did not receive Infants Baptism from the Lord; for he never declares it
unto them.

This therefore should be a boundary to Ministers, that they deliver nothing to
the people, but what they have received from the Lord. That faith that was once
delivered to the Saints must be preached and contended for, but nothing else:
and if Ministers have not received Infants Baptism from the Lord, and if they
cannot prove that it was once delivered unto the Saints, it is not to be
preached. It is sad to think how full our pulpits are of vain traditions and
humane mixtures; as if the all-wise God wanted the help of dimey'd man to mend
his worship by mixing their Inventions with Gods institutions. But as to
mixtures they are useful only for these two purposes; either to slacken and
abate something that is excessive; or to supply something that is deficient:
And so all heterogeneous mixtures do plainly intimate, either a vitiousnesse to
be corrected, or a defect to be supplied: Now it were great wickedness to
charge any of these upon the pure and perfect word of God, and by consequence
to use deceit by adulterating of it; either by such glosses as diminish and
take away the force of it, or by the addition of humane Traditions as argue any
defect. So that to stamp any thing (of but an humane original) with a divine
character, and obtrude it upon the consciences of men; to take any dead child
of ours, as the harlot did, and lay in the bosom of the Scripture, and father
it upon God; to build any Structure of ours in the road to Heaven, and so stop
up the way; is one of the highest, and most daring presumptions that the pride
of man can aspire unto: To erect a throne in the consciences of his fellow
creatures, and to counterfeit the great seal of heaven for the countenancing
his own forgeries, is a sin most severely provided against by God, with special
prohibitions and threatenings: se^ Deuteronomy. ^2.32. What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it, thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish from it. So Deuteronomy.
18.20. The prophet that shall speak a word in my name, that I have not
commanded, even that prophet shall dye. So Jer. 26.2. and Prove. 30.6. Add not
unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

And that will worship is so great a sin, we have the testimony of that learned
man M. Greenhill in his exposition upon EZekiel, where he has these
Observations, fit to be written with the the point of a Diamond, upon the heart
of every Christian.

1. That men love to have something of their own in worship, they are not
content with what the infinite wise God commands them, but will be adding. The
second Commandment shows that man is prone to be meddling, and making something
in Worship till he marrs. Israel provoked God to anger with their Inventions:
Psalm. 106.29.

2. God is not pleased with any thing in worship which is not his own. It is
not the works of men's hands, nor their heads that are pleasing to him; that
which pleases God must come from God, what he appoints he approves, and nothing
else.

3. That will worship and mixtures of man's inventions with Gods pure
ordinances, are the great Canons that batter Cities, and the Gunpowder that
blows them up.

These bring the Lord of hosts to war against them; it was the Calves that
wounded Israel, and laid their Cities wast. Hos. 10.5. the Inhabitants of
Samaria shall fear, because of the Calves of Bethaven.

4. That false worship does grive God Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish
heart, their superstitious and corrupt mixtures, did not simply displease God,
but oppressed, afflicted, and broke his heart. Great injuries enter deep, and
eat up the spirits of any they are done unto; and what greater wrong can be
done to God then to set at naught his Counsels, forsake his worship, and impose
that which he never commanded; yea it draws away the heart of men from God: and
therefore they are said to go a whoring from God by their own inventions.

5. Will Worship is a work of darkness Ezekiel. 8.12. See what the Ancients of the
house of Israel are doing in the dark.

6. Will Worship is that which God will not honor with his presence. Neither
Christ nor the Angels will be present at it, as Ezekiel. 9.2. The six men in the
vision that came into the Temple stood besides the brazen Altar; they had made
a golden Altar, thinking that would please God better, but they would not come
at it, but stood by the brazen Altar which was of Gods appointment. Haec ille.

Thus you see that will worship is a horrible sin; and methinks you should
examine whether Infant Baptism be not will worship, as having no institution:
and if it be will worship, it is not only evil in it self, but stands
aggravated with this circumstance, that it makes void the commandment of God;
for will worship does usually oppose some part of Gods true worship (as
Infants Baptism does believers Baptism in these nations) as Christ told the
Pharisees; you make void the Commandments of God by your Traditions.


Poed. But these persons you mention in Ezekiel, against whom God threatens
such Judgments were Idolaters: And I hope you do not count Infant Baptism
Idolatry.


Bap. That Infant Baptism is will worship and Superstition is evident. But
whether it be Idolatry? I leave that to enquiry.

But I shall give you the Definition of Idolatry, as we have it from our
Protestant Divines; which, say they, ^s to worship a false God, or the true God
in a false manner. And that appears from the Second Commandment, where all
kind of Idolatry is forbidden, as all sin is forbidden in the ten
Commandments, though not in express words, yet in the meaning thereof; For it
is a received Maxim, That all sins forbidden by the word, are reducible to the
10 Commandments, and fall under the prohibition of one of them, or other: For
upon the two tables of the law, hang all the law and the prophets, Math. 22.40.
Now it is plain, all sins are not contained in the letter of the Commandments;
and therefore we must open the later by Synechdoche's, and Metonymies;
Synechdoches do comprehend all sins of the like kind, and all the degrees
thereof: and Metonymies do comprehend all causes, and means, and occasions
thereof; so that for opening the 2d. Commandment, which forbids both making
and the worshipping any image or similitude, it is requisite to consider in what
sense or respect Images or similitudes are forbidden.

Images or similitudes then, are forbidden, not as Objects of worship, for all
false objects of worship, are the false Gods forbidden in the first
Commandment: but Images and similitudes are forbidden in the 2d Commandment,
not as false objects or worship, wherein the worship of God is terminated; but
as false means of worshipping the true God. The Golden Calf was not considered
as the God of Israel, but as an Image of that Jehovah, which brought them out
of Egypt; whence it is said that Aaron proclaimed a feast, not to the Calfe,
but to Jehovah, whereof the Calfe was an Image: the Calfe then was not the God,
but an Image of that God they worshipped, as that which resembled him, and put
them in mind of him.

And then further, the Image forbidden in the 2d Commandment, is, not only a
false means of worship devised by man; but a false manner also: and therefore
when the Samaritan-strangers knew not the manner of worshipping God in the
Calves of Jeroboam, it is said they knew not the manner of the God of the
Country 2 King. 17.26. and one of the Priests was sent to teach them the manner
of fear (or worship) of Jehovah; and so they feared Jehovah after the same
manner that was in serving him after their own devising.

So that under this one kind of false worship is forbidden by a Synechdoche
not only all worship of God in carved, moulten, or painted Images (all bodily
representations) of God; but all spiritual Images too, which are the
Imaginations and inventions of man, whether they be ordained for worship, as
the high places, and the devised feast of the eighth Month 2. Kin. 12.33. or
whether they be brought in, and used as helps and means of worship, as the
strange fire of Nadab Lev. 10, and David's new Cart to carry the Ark; he did not
make a new Ark, but a new cart; which devise of his, there being no command for
it, fell under the condemnation of the second Commandment. And so all Images
and Imaginations of men, all forms and manner of worship, devised by man, and
not ordained by God are forbidden as Idolatrous.


Poed. But Sir if your way be true, is it not strange, that so many learned men
should be of a contrary opinion?


Bap. No, it is not more strange then that there are so many learned men
against the Protestant Religion; and especially against your practice of
baptizing the children of believers only, and upon those grounds you do it; for
the whole Christian world (as its called) of learned men are against your
grounds of baptizing Infants, for they administer Baptism for the taking away
of Original sin, and to confer grace, and that not restrained to such believers
Infants, as you do it, but to the Infants of all persons in the nations where
they live: so that your opinion is a very novelty.

2. But Secondly, it is not strange if you consider what Christ says, Math.
11.25. I thank thee O father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, etc. Even so because it seemed good in thy sight. There is the reason
given, it is, beneplacitum, his good pleasure.

3. And Thirdly, I answer; we have not been without the testimony of learned
men, not only in this, but in former ages; for it is well known that
Infant Baptism was very early opposed, and for any thing I know as soon as it
was born, for no Antiquity mentions Infant Baptism to have any peaceable being
in the world any long time before it was opposed; and if it be said it was not
opposed at the beginning as soon as we heard of it in the world. It may be so,
for Christ says, while the servants slept the evil ones sowed tares; and
surely it was a sleepy time amongst Christians when it came in, but when they
begun to awake, they opposed it.

Besides all this, we have the testimony of some of your own party, whose
tongues and pens God has (at least) so overruled, that they have born a
famous testimony for our practice.

First Doctor Tailor says, This indeed is true Baptism, when it is both in the
Symbol, and in the mystery; whatsoever is less then this, is but the Symb^l
only and a mere ceremony, an opus operatum, a dead letter, an empty shadow, an
instrument without an agent to manage it.

2ly, Baptism is never propounded, mentioned, or enjoined as a means of
remission of sins, or of eternal life, but something of duty, choice and
sanctity is joined with it, in order to the production of the end so mentioned.

3ly, They that baptize children make Baptism to be wholly an outward duty, a
work of the law, a carnal ordinance, it makes us adhere to the letter, without
regard of the spirit, and to relinquish the mysteriousnesse, the substance, the
spirituality of the Gospel, which Argument is of so much the more
consideration, because under the spiritual Covenant, or the Gospel of grace. If
the mystery goes not before the Symbol (which it does, when the Symboles are
consignations of grace, as the Sacraments are) yet it always accompanies it,
but never follows in order of time; and is clear in the perpetual Analogy of
holy Scripture.

4. That the words mentioned in St. Peter's sermon Acts. 2. which are the only
Records of the promises) are interpreted upon a weak mistake: the promise
belongs to you and your children, therefore Infants are actually receptive of
it in that capacity: That is the Argument, but the reason of it is not yet
discovered nor ever will, for (to you and your children) is to you, and your
posterity, to you; and your children when they are of the same capacity, in
which you are, receptive of the promise, but he that whenever the word children
is expressed, understands Infants, must needs believe that in all Israel there
were no men but all were Infants, etc.

5. From the action of Christ blessing infants, to infer, that they were
Baptized, proves nothing so much, as that there is want of better Arguments:
for the conclusion would with more probability be derived thus -- Christ
blessed Children, and so dismissed them, but baptized them not: Therefore
Infants are not to be baptized. But let this be as weak as its enemy; yet that
Christ did not Baptize them, is an Argument sufficient that he has other ways
of bringing them to heaven then by Baptism. And we are sure God has not
commanded infants to be baptized, so we are sure God will do them no injustice,
nor damn them for what they cannot help, viz. if the parents baptize them not.

Many theusand ways there are by which God can bring any reasonable soul to
himself; but nothing is so unreasonable, because he has tied all men of years
of discretion to this way, therefore we of our own heads shall carry Infants to
him that way without his direction: The conceit is po^r and low, and the action
consequent to it bold and venturous. Let him do what he pleases with infants,
we must not.

Then Mr. Baxter says, if there can be no example given in Scripture of any
one that was baptized without the profession of a saving faith, nor any precept
for so doing; then must we not baptize any without it: But the Antecedent is
true: therefore so is the Consequent.

2. Christ has instituted no Baptism but what is to be a sign of present
Regeneration; but to men that profess not a justifying faith, it cannot be
administered as a sign of present Regeneration; therefore he has instituted no
Baptism to be administered to such.

3. If it be the appointed use of all Christian Baptism to solemnize our
Marriage with Christ, or to seal and confirm our union with him; then must we
baptize none that profess not justifying faith; but the Antecedent and
consequent are evident, Gal. 3.27.28.29.

Doctor Hammond says, that all men were instructed in the fundamentalls of
faith anciently before they were permitted to be baptized.

The Lord Brooks says; That the analogy which Baptism now has with
Circumcision in the old law, is a fine rational Argument to illustrate a point
well proved before: But I somewhat doubt, whether it be proof enough for that
which some would prove by it, since (besides the vast difference in the
ordinance) the persons to be Circumcised are stated by a positive law, so
express, that it leaves no place for scruple: But it is far otherwise in
Baptism, where all the Designation of persons fit to be partakers, for ought I
know are such as believe, etc.


Poed. But Mr. Wills, and others say, that Doctor Tailor did but personate an
Anabaptist, he himself was for Infants Baptism, only he gave some weak
Arguments to please the Baptists.


Bap. Its true Mr. Wills and others say so: But must it needs be as they
suppose? Does it follow infallibly that the Doctor does prevaricate in his
first book? is it not possible that he might be under some measure of
conviction, and so receded from the opinion he was once persuaded of, and fell
from that truth he so strenuously contended for? The Galatians once received
the Gospel, but were so foolish as to fall from it. Besides how frequently do
we find diverse of the fathers contradict themselves, and to build again the
things that they destroyed? But we need not go so far: Mr. Baxter himself is a
famous instance: How often does Mr. Baxter contradict Mr. Baxter? and is it
impossible Doctor Tailor should do so.

But you will say he wrote another book, wherein he submitted to the Judgment of
the Church in the matter of Baptism. Its very like he did, and perhaps he was
of the opinion of a Popish-priest who told me; There was indeed no Scripture
for baptizing infants, but yet it ought to be done, because the Church
commanded it. He spoke what many think.

But suppose the Doctor did, as you say, only personate an Anabaptist, and make
use of some weak Arguments to please them. Then,

1. I wonder Mr. Wills or some other have not answered the Doctors weak
Arguments all this while; for none that ever I heard of durst enter the lists
with the Doctor in the matter: And to say, he did it by his contrary practice,
is a frivolous answer.

2. But secondly, grant all to be true that you would have, and that the Doctor
was not against baptizing infants (which we grant) nor Mr. Baxter, nor Doctor
Hammond, etc. Yet we make use of their Arguments to a very good purpose, viz.
to set off the wisdom, goodness, and power of God, who as he has the hearts
of all men in his hands; so also their tongues, and can, when he pleases, make
use of them to bear witness to, and proclaim that truth, they neither owned,
nor practiced; as in the case of the High Priest, who prophesied, that it was
expedient, one should die for the people: so we say, God has overruled the
tongues and pens of Doctor Tailor, Mr. Baxter etc. and made them to bear so
famous a Testimony to his truth, and strike so deadly a wound to Infants
Baptism, that whoever shall go about to heal it, will prove themselves
physicians of no value.


Poed. But pray Sir what do you say to Romans 11.16. If the first fruit be holy,
the lump is holy; and if the root be holy, so are the branches. From whence, we
are told, this inference may be drawn, that as Abraham (considered as a root
was holy, so were his children and so to be Circumcised. So Believers being
holy, their Children are so, and so to be Baptized.


Bap. There has been enough said to show the fallacy of this consequence: But
that you may have no cause to complain, I shall speak further to it; first,
then you must know, that the Apostles purpose is to show what Abraham was
heretofore, a holy root to his natural seed; but you will not say, he is so
now; and that his children after the flesh are still holy, for they are cut
off: And that he is not a holy root to the Infants of believing Gentiles, and
that they are none of his branches, is abundantly proved: but if you say he is
a holy root to believers, his spiritual seed, and they are holy; then we are
agreed. For surely the Apostle intends nothing else, but that as Abraham was a
twofold father, so he had a twofold seed; so he is a twofold root, and has
two sorts of branches.

His first sort of branches were holy with a typical ceremonial holiness; his
second sort are holy by believing as he did, and walking in his steps. But to
pursue your consequence a little further; that a believer (considered as a
root) being holy, so his seed is holy, as of old it was with Abraham.

Then you must prove, that what was promised to Abraham, and what was his
privilege; just so it is with believers and their seed, and herein we expect
plain Scripture proof, and not forced consequences, and groundless non
sequiturs.

But Secondly; If the natural seed of believers be holy, what kind of
holiness is it? surely you do not mean moral holiness which is opposed to
sin, and that they have some inward quality, inherent habit, or principle of
grace in them, more then unbelievers infants.

Secondly, you do not mean negative holiness, for there is as much also of
that in unbelievers infants as in yours. But,

Thirdly, perhaps you mean a Covenant holiness; but what kind of holiness
that is, we could never yet learn from you.

But if believers natural seed be holy, with a Covenant holiness, as Abraham's
were; then you must baptize all their childrens children in their several
generations (as you have heard) whether their parents believe or not; as it was
of old: Abraham's branches, yea all his branches were holy to the 3d, and 4th,
yea the 10th. generation, and so must yours be, and so to be baptized; If the
Grandfather or great-grandfather were, or further removed: he was the root and
his posterity are the branches, as well as his immediate infants, and so to be
baptized. And if you say it is hard to find whether their progenitors were
believers so far remote; then it is but going a step higher to Noah; and his
faith will serve to Baptize the whole world, for Noah considered as a believer
is as well a root as Abraham.

But that there is no kind of holiness in the natural seed of believers more
then in the seed of unbelievers now under the Gospel appears from these
Arguments.

1. If there be no persons in the days of the Gospel, to be accounted common
or unclean, that is unholy (by nature) more then others; then there are no
persons to be accounted clean or holy (by nature) more then others: but the
antecedent is true, Act. 10.28. God has showed me that I should not call any
man common or unclean: Ergo so is the consequent.

But they that baptize Infants break the command of God to Peter, by counting
the children of unbelievers common and unclean, and the children of believers
clean or holy.

But if the children of believers be holy with any kind of holiness above
others: Then the children of unbelievers are unholy, with some kind of
unholinesse more then others, and so to be accounted common and unclean.

But this is not so, for believers children are by nature children of wrath as
well as others, as your selves confess. Therefore, call nothing, no men, or
species of men, common or unclean; for in every nation, he that fears God and
works righteousness shall be accepted. Observe, divine acceptance comes in
upon the account of actual and personal righteousness; no persons nor their
seed are now accepted for the holiness of another (rather then others.)

2ly, If God be now no respecter of persons, then there is no birth holiness,
and so no peculiar privileges belongs to believers natural seed by Gods
appointment, more then to the seed of unbelievers: but the first is true Act.
10. I perceive says Peter, that God is no respecter of persons: therefore, so
is the latter.

And that Peter meant this of birth holiness, and natural privileges is
evident, because he mentions this as the result of his vision, where he was
forbid to count any man common or unclean that is, more then others by nature,
for God is no respecter of persons. Its true all men are (by nature) common and
unclean, in opposition to moral cleaness, and Gospel-holiness: but no sort of
persons are by nature clean, or holy, with any kind of ceremonial, dedicative,
or Covenant holiness above others. But,

3. If there be a Covenant holiness now, in the days of the Gospel, flowing
from the root to the branches; then God would rather have continued his Church
in the posterity of believers (as of old); but he has not done so; therefore
there is no such holiness.

We read in the Second of the Acts. of 3000. baptized, and afterward 5000. The
greatest part of which were believers, and the 7 Churches of Asia; and (as you
say) their children holy, with a Covenant holiness: It is strange then the
Church was not continued in their posterity: but it was not, for I suppose it
is hard, if not impossible to find any one of their offspring a member of any
true Church in the world.

So the Church of Rome, once a true Church: But you do not count the present
Church so. why? they had believing parents, who were in Covenant, and their
seed holy, yet God did not think fit to continue them a true Church any long
time; But has rather raised his Church out of the posterity of unbelievers,
and longer continued them. As in this nation; our progenitors were all
Idolaters as the Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans; The offspring
of some of whom we are: yet God has continued his Church amongst us a very
considerable time. But if we boast of our Covenant holiness and birth
privileges, God may soon unchurch us, and raise up Church members out of
stones, as John the Baptist told the Pharisees.

4ly. There is no such Covenant holiness under the Gospel; because that
holiness was a Typical Ceremonial holiness, such as was in beasts, birds,
Garments, oil, the Altar, temple, yea in the whole land, and therefore called
Emanuels land, and no other kind of holiness was in the seed: (let
Pedo-Baptists say what they will) all which holiness is now abolished and done
away, and that appears thus.

If all uncleaness, and unholyness that was in some beasts, birds, garments,
oil, Altars, Temples, and men etc. be now abolished and done away; then all
that cleaness and holiness that was in some beasts, birds, garments, men etc.
is also abolished, and done away: But the Antecedent is true Act. 10. as
appears by Peter's vision; what God has cleansed, call not thou common or
unclean, Ergo, so is the Consequent.

And that there was an uncleaness, commoness, and unholyness in some men, as
well as in beasts, birds etc. is evident: For it was not lawful for a Jew to
eat with him that was a Gentile. But now it is not so -- If an unbeliever
invite thee to a feast, if thou be disposed thou may go. 1 Cor. 10.25.

And that all this Typical, dedicative denominative holiness is now abolished
appears further;

Because that holiness that sanctified the Jews land, City, Temple etc. was
Ceremonial only, and so abolished; but that holiness which sanctified the seed
was the same and no other, that sanctified the land: therefore that holiness
which sanctified the seed is now abolished.

And if it be said, that the holiness of the seed was not typical and
Ceremonial, I prove it thus.

1. If all things under the law were but a figure, and shadow of good things
to come; then the holiness of the seed was but a figure and shadow of good
things to come; And so a type.

But the Antecedent is true, as we find in the 9th. and 10th. Chapters of the
Hebrews; where all things under the law, all the privileges of the old
Covenant, all the perquisites, dependances and appurtenances are called by such
names, as make them evidently appear to be Typical: as first they are called a
figure Heb. 9.9. which was a figure for the time then present. So verse 24. For
Christ is not entered into the holy place made with hands, which are the figures
of the true.

They are called a pattern Heb. 9.23. It was necessary that the paterns of the
things in the heavens etc.

3. They are called a shadow Heb. 10.1. for the law having a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of the things.

So then the holiness of the seed being a dependence, an appurtenance, a
privilege of the law, or old Covenant was but a figure, pattern, shadow; and so
Typical, and abolished.

And if you say, if the holiness of the seed was a Type; what did it tipify? I
answer:

1. First it typifyed the holiness of Christ who is called the holy child Jesus.

2. It was a type of the holiness of all Abraham's spiritual seed under the
Gospel, true believers, who are made holy by believing in Christ.


Poed. But we have heard that when the Jews were broken off, their natural
Children were broken off with them; so when the Gentiles are grafted in, their
Children are grafted in with them.


Bap. You have heard that the children of the unbelieving Jews was not so
broken off from the Gospel Church and covenant, and excluded with their parents
unbelief, for if any of the children of the unbelieving Jews when they come to
years (and children when at years are the seed of their parents, I hope) if I
say, those unbelieving Jews children do believe the promise is so made to them,
that their parents unbelief cannot exclude them: but if when at years they do
not believe, the promise is so made to believers and their seed, as that the
parents faith, avails no further then to the ingrafting of himself; but he
cannot at all entitle his natural seed, by his single faith to the Gospel
Covenant or ordinances: For if it be otherwise, then the natural seed of those
thousands of Jews that were converted in the primitive times, have a birth
privilege, and are holy to this day, upon which they may claim admittance unto
baptism as well as any; for they may plead as you do and say. Baptism is our
right, we are the posterity of those believing Jews mentioned Act. 2. And if
the first fruits be holy, so ^s the lump, and if the root be holy, so are the
branches. Now we are the lump of these holy first fruits; and the branches of
the holy root; yet for all this I believe you would not Baptize them, unless
they did believe in their own persons. By which you do no less then grant what
we contend for: that the faith of Ancestors gives no right to their posterity,
to stand at all in the Gospel Church and Covenant, but faith in the particular
persons. So that the Jews were broken off by unbelief; and thou and thine (O
believing Gentile) must stand by faith. Yet not thy seed by thy faith, but
thou, thy self, by thine, and they by their own faith. Faith is that by which
(thou standing, and not thy seed) have right to stand in the Church, and not
they. But if thy seed have faith, and thou have none, they have right to stand
in the Church, and thou shall be kept out. By which it appears, that the root
may be holy (in a Gospel sense) and not the branches, and the branches may be
holy, and not the root: so that your consequence from Romans 11.16. if the root
be holy, so are the branches, is false, and the whole Argument vain and empty.

And if you still say (for nothing will satisfy some persons) that the natural
seed may be counted holy, with a denominative, and dedicative holiness: I
answer.

1. That then the first born of every creature both of man and beast is still
to be called and counted holy; for these were sanctified and holy by dedication
as well as the seed. Sanctify unto me all the first born of every creature both
of man and beast, they are still to be called and counted holy, for these were
sanctified, and holy by dedication as well as the seed. See Exodus 13.2.
Sanctify unto me all the first born, whatsoever opens the womb, amongst the
children of Israel, both of man and beast, it is mine. So that you may as well
dedicate the first born still, and count them holyer then the rest, yea and
that with better warrant then you can count the seed of believers, only, holy,
because (as you say) you dedicate them to God; there being an in^titution for
the first, but none for the last; For God no where says, that believers shall
sanctify all their natural seed, whatsoever opens the womb, for it is mine.

2ly. If the seed be to be accounted holy with a dedicative holiness, then you
may as well count all things holy which were dedicated of old, as Temples,
Altars, Tables, Garments, Tapers, Candlesticks, yea the very windows, Fonts,
Rails, Copes, Surplices, etc. But this you deny, and have labored hard both by
pen and pulpit to make these holy things unholy: Though those that own this
dedicative holiness still have more to say for Infant Baptism, then you who
disown it in all things else but in the natural seed.

But pray Sirs let me ask you a few questions.

1. Si aliquando, quare non nunc? If so once, why not now? If under the law,
why not under the Gospel? The same question you put to us when we deny any
birth holiness in your fleshly seed. So we say concerning Temples, Altars,
Garments, etc. Si aliquando, quare non nunc? If so of old, why not now?

2ly, Si aliquid, quare non quicquid? If any thing holy with a dedicative
ceremonial holiness, why not every thing? yea, quare non aequaliter? (if you
will Judaize) why not in every thing alike, as it was of old? but I may expect
an answer ad Gracas Calendas.


Poed. But Sir may not Infants be capable of the main and principal end of
Baptism, which our Ministers tells us is the washing away our sins by the blood
of Christ? If so, why may they not then be baptized?


Bap. There are not wanting learned men that are of another opinion, and say
that the blood of Christ is not the main thing signified in Baptism, but that
Baptism is a sign of our Regeneration; and that is the principal end of
Baptism. And herein I will give you the opinion of Judicious and learned Mr.
Mede upon that text Tit. 3.5. By the washing of Water and renewing of the holy
Ghost, and shall beg the Readers patience to read his entire sense upon that
text. He says thus.

The words, as it is easy to conceive, upon the first hearing are spoken of
Baptism, of which I intend not by this choice to make any full or accurate
^ractation; but only to acquaint you with my thoughts concerning two
particulars therein: one, from what propriety, analogy, or use of water, the
washing therewith was instituted for a sign of new birth, according as it is
here called (...) the washing of Regeneration. The other, what is the
Countertype or thing which the water figureth in this Sacrament.

I will begin with the last first, because the knowledge thereof must be
supposed for the explication and more distinct understanding of the other. In
every Sacrament as ye well know, there is the outward Symbol or sign, res
terrena, and the signatum figured and represented thereby, res Caelestis. In
this of Baptism the sign, or res terrena, is washing with water: the question
is what is the signatum, the i^visible and celestial thing, which answers
thereunto. In our Catechetical explications of this mystery, it is wont to be
affirmed to be the blood of Christ; that as water w^sheth away the filth of the
body, so the blood of Christ cleanses us from the guilt and pollution of sin.
And there is no question but the blood of Christ is the fountain of all the
grace and good communicated to us, either in this or any other Sacrament, or
mystery of the Gospel. But that this should be the (...), the counter part, or
thing figured by the water in Baptism I believe not, because the Scripture,
which must be our guide, and direction in this case, makes it another thing, to
wit, the spirit or holy Ghost; this to be that, whereby the soul is cleansed
and renewed within, as the body with water is without; so says our Savior to
Nicodemus in John. 3. Except a man be born of water, and the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. And the Apostle in the words I have read,
parallels the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, as
Type and Countertype. God (says he) has saved us (that is brought us into the
state of salvation) by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost: Where none, I trow, will deny that he speaks of Baptism. The same
was represented by that vision at our Saviors baptism, of the holy Ghosts
descending upon him, as he came out of the water, in the similitude of a dove:
For I suppose, that in that Baptism of his, the Mystery of all our Baptisms was
visibly acted; and that God says to every one, truly baptiZed, as he said to
him, (in a proportionable sense) thou art my son, in whom I am well pleased.

And how pliable the Analogy of water is to typifie the spirit, will appear by
the figuring of the spirit thereby in other places of Scripture; as in that of
Isay, I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring, where the later expounds the former: Also by the discourse of our
Savior with the samaritan woman, John 4.14. Whosoever (says he) drinks of
the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but the water that I shall
give him shall be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life: By
that also, John 7.37. where on the last day of the great feast, Jesus stood and
said, If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. He that believes on
me, as the Scripture says (that is, as the Scripture is wont to express it,
for otherwise there is no such place of Scripture to be found in all the Bible)
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this (says the
Evangelist) he spoke of the spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive. Nor did the fathers or ancient Church, as far as I can find suppose
any other correlative to the element in baptism, but this; of this the speak
often, of the blood of Christ they are altogether silent in their explications
of this mystery: many are the allusions, they seek ou^ for the illustration
thereof, and some perhaps forced, but this of the water, signifying, or having
any relation to the blood of Christ, never comes amongst them, which were
impossible, if they had not supposed some other thing figured by the water,
then it; which barred them from falling on that conce^t.

The like silence is to be observed in our Liturgy, where the holy Ghost is
more ^^en once paralleld with the water in baptism, washing and regeneration
attributed thereunto; but no such notion of the blood of Christ; and that the
opinion thereof ^^ nove^, may be gathered, because some (...) Divines make it
peculiar and proper to the, (...) Cal^in.

Whatsoever it be, it has no (...) in Scripture, and we must n^ of our own
heads assign significations to Sacramental types without some warrant thence.
For whereas some conceive those two expressions of (...) or sprinkling of the
blood of Christ, and of our being washed from our sins in (or by) his blood, do
intimate some such matter, they are surely mistaken; for those expressions have
reference not to the water of Baptism in the new Testament, but to the rise
(...) manner of sacrificing in the old; where the Altar was wont to be
sprinkled with the blood of the sacrifices, which were offered, and that which
was unclean paris^ed with the same blood: Whence is that elegant a^^course of
S. Paul, (Heb. 9.) comparing the sacrifice of the law, with that of Christ upon
the Cross, as much the better. And that whereas in the law, (...), Almost all
things are purified with blood, so much more the blood of Christ, who offered
himself without spot to God, cleanses our consciences from dead works: but
that this washing, that is, cleansing by the blood of Christ, should have
reference to baptism, where is that to be found? I s^ppose they will not
allege the water and blood, which came out of our Saviors side, when they
pierced him; for that is taken to signify the two Sacraments ordained by
Christ, that of blood, the Eucharist; of water, baptism; and not both to be
referred to baptism: I add, because perhaps some men's fancies are corrupted
therewith, that there was no such thing as sprinkling, or (...) used in baptism
in the Apostles times, nor many ages after them; and that therefore it is no
way probable, that (...) in Peter should have any reference to the laver of
baptism.

Let this then be our conclusion; thht the blood of Christ concurrs in the
mystery of baptism, by way of efficacy and merit, but not as the thing there
figured; which the Scripture tells us not to be the blood of Christ, but the
spirit.

And so I come to my other Quaere, from what property or use of water, the
washing therewith is a Sacrament of our new birth, for so it is here called the
washing of Regeneration; and our Savior says to Nicodemus, except a man be
born of water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. For in
every Sacrament there some Analogy between what is outwardly done, and what is
thereby signified: therefore in this. But what should it be? It is a thing of
some moment, and yet in the tractats of this mist^ry, but little or seldom
enquired after; and therefore deserves the more consideration. I answer, this
^^alogy between the washing with water, and regeneration lies in that custom
of washing infants from the pollutions of the womb, when they are first born,
for this is the first office done unto them when they come out of the womb, if
they purpose to nourish and bring them up. As therefore in our natural birth,
the body is washed with water from the pollutions wherewith it com^s into the
world: so in our second birth from above the soul is purified by the spirit
from the guilt and p^^^tion of sin, to begin a new life to Godward.

The Analogy you see is apt and proper, if that be true of the Custom ^hereof
there is no cause to make question; for the use at present, any man, I think,
knows how to inform himself. For that of elder times, I can produce two
pregnant and notable testimonies; one of the Jews and people of God; another of
the Gentiles. The first you shall find in the 16. Chapter of Ezekiel, where
God describes the poor and forlorn condition of Jerusalem, when he first took
her to himself, under the parable of an exposed Infant; As for thy Nativity,
(says he) in the day thou wast born, thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou
washed in water, to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at
all, no eye pitied thee, none to do any of these things unto thee, to have
compassion on thee; but thou wast cast out in open field, to the loathing of
thy person in the day that thou wast born. Here you may learn what was wont to
be done unto infants at their nativity, by that which was not done to Israel,
till God himself to^k pity on her, cutting of the Navel string, washing,
salting, swaddling: upon this place, S. Hierome takes notice (but scarce any
body else, that I can yet find) that our Savior, where speaking of Baptism he
says, Except a man be born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God; alludes to the custom here mentioned of washing Infants at
their Nativity.

The other testimony (and that most pertinent to the application we make) I
find in a story related by Plutarch, in his Questiones Romanae, not far from
the beginning, in this manner.

Among the Greeks, if one that were living were reported to be dead and funeral
obsequies performed for him, if afterward he returned alive, he was of all men
abominated, as a profane aad unlucky person; No man would come into his
company, and (which was the highest degree of calamity) they excluded him from
their Temples, and the sacrifices of their Gods: it chanced that one Aristinus
being fallen into the like disaster, and not knowing which way to expiate
himself therefrom, sent to the Oracle at Delphos to Apollo, beseeching him to
show him the means whereby he might be freed and discharged thereof; Pythia
gave him this Answer.

(...). What women do, when one in childbed lies, That do again, so may thou
sacrifice.

Aristinus rightly apprehending what the Oracle meant, offered himself to
women, as one newly brought forth to be washed again with water; from which
Example it grew a custom among the Greeks, when the like misfortune befell any
man, after this manner to expiate them; they called them Hysteropotmi, or
Postliminio nati: How well does this befit the mystery of Baptism? where those
who were dead to God through sin are like Hysteropotmi, regenerate and born
again by water, and the holy Ghost.

These two passages discover sufficiently the Analogy of the washing with water
in Baptism, to regeneration or new birth; according as the text, I have chosen
for the Scope of my discourse, exppesseth it; namely, that washing with water
is a sign of spiritual Infancy; for as much as Infants are wont to be washed,
when they came first into the world.

Hence the Jews before John the Baptist came amongst them, were wont by this
rite to initiate such, as they made Proselytes, (to wit) as becoming Infants
again, and entering into a new life and being, which before they had not. That,
which here I have affirmed, will be yet more evident, if we consider those
other rites anciently added and used in the celebration of this mystery, which
had the self same end we speak of; to wit, to signify spiritual Infancy. I will
name them, and so conclude; as that of giving the new baptized milk and honey,
ad infantandum, as Tertullian speaks, ad infantiae significationem, so S.
Hierome; because the like was used to Infants New born; according to that in
the 7th. of Isay. of Immanuels infancy; A virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse evil and choose good.
Secondly, that of Salt, as is employed in that of Ezekiel, thou wast not washed
with water, nor salted with salt: That of putting on the white garment, to
resemble swaddling: all these were anciently (especially the first) used in the
Sacrament of our spiritual birth, out of reference to that which was done to
Infants at their natural birth; who then can doubt but the principal rite of
washing with water, the only one ordained by our blessed Savior, was chosen
for the same reason? to be the element of our Initiation; and that those who
brought in the other, did so conceive of this; and from thence derived those
imitations.

Thus for Mr Mede. From whom we learn these truths.

1. That it not lawful to assign significations to sacramental Types (of our
own heads) without warrant from the Scriptures.

2. That in every Sacrament there is the sign, and the thing signified, res
terrena, and res caelestis.

3. That in Baptism there is an Invisible and caelestial thing signified.

4. That though the blood of Christ is the fountain and cause of all that grace
and good we receive in Baptism, yet it is not the thing signified by the water
in Baptism; but the spirit cleansing the soul from sin in the work of
Regeneration, according to Tit. 3.5.

5. That in the Baptism of Christ the mystery of all our Baptism was visibly
acted.

6. That God says to every one (truly Baptized (as he said to Christ (in a
proportionable sense) thou art my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.

7. That there is a plain Analogy between water and the spirit, confirmed by
diverse Scriptures: But not so, between the water in Baptism, and the blood of
Christ.

8. That the Fathers and primitive Church did not suppose any other correlative
to the water in Baptism, but the spirit, though they did allude to Christ's
blood for illustration thereof.

9. That in our Liturgy the water in Baptism, is made to signify the holy
spirit in our Regeneration: But not the Blood of Christ.

10. That there was no such thing as (...) or sprinkling used in the Apostles
times, nor many ages after.

11. That the Analogy between washing with water in Baptism, and Regeneration,
appears from the custom of washing infants from the pollutions of the womb,
when first born, according to the practice of Jews and Gentiles.

12. That the Fathers and ancient Church did use to give the new baptized Milk
and honey, and put white garments on them, to signify their spiritual birth,
out of reference to that which was done to infants at their natural birth.

From all which you see that baptism is not so much a sign of purging our sins
by the blood of Christ; though that concurs by way of merit and efficacy, but
is not the thing there signified or figured: and then to what purpose are
infants baptized?

Thus you see how this learned man (ere he was aware) has spoiled
Infant Baptism: for if baptism be a symbol of regeneration (as undoubtedly it
is) then unless you say (and that from Scripture grounds) that your infants are
regenerated, or seem so to be, baptism does not at all belong to them.

And it will no ways help you to say, that the Baptists do baptize some persons
that are not regenerated; for it is enough to warrant our practice, if they
profess so to be; and give us those Scripture characters, i.e. actual faith,
and Repentance.


Poed. But pray Sir what think you of the Covenant made to Abraham and his
natural seed, what kind of Covenant was it?


Bap. I confess there are various opinions about it; some say it was a Covenant
of grace; others, a Covenant of works, others, a mixed Covenant: But surely that
Covenant made with Abraham, and his natural seed called the Covenant of
Circumcision, or Covenant of the Law was not the Covenant of Eternal life and
salvation, which was made with all the elect in Christ upon the condition of
faith: but a distinct Covenant of it self concerning the worship and service of
God, and so may be called a Covenant of works, rather then a Covenant of grace;
though there was also grace in it, as there was in all the Covenants that God
ever made with men -- yet we say, it was a distinct Covenant, and therefore
called the old Covenant, and the Covenant of grace the new Covenant.

And if you say the Covenant of grace was the same in all ages under various
administrations, we confess it, and say that the Covenant of grace was made to
Adam after the fall, to the Patriarchs, and to Abraham, before the Covenant of
Circumcision was mentioned, and is the same to us now. But, as ours, its called
new, (or renewed) yet it does not follow, but this Covenant of Circumcision was
a distinct Covenant still; for Abraham and all believers in that age, were in
the Covenant of grace before this Covenant was made; and would have been so, if
the Covenant of Circumcision had never been. And if you demand then, why the
Covenant of works is called the old Covenant, and the Covenant of grace, the
new?

1. I answer, because of its priority, it being the first Covenant God made
with man before the fall, as Protestant Divines say; that God made a Covenant
of works with Adam, concerning perfect obedience, which he had then power to
perform. And some think God renewed this Covenant of works after the fall, as
appears by the sacrifices that Adam, Abel, etc. offered; and from that
Scripture, if thou do well, shall not thou be accepted; if not, sin lies at
the door. And afterward this Covenant of works or Covenant concerning worship
is renewed to Abraham, and his posterity.

2. It is called the old Covenant in respect to its deteriority, it being a
Covenant found fault with, as the Scripture says.

3. In respect to its decaying and perishing nature; it was not durable or
lasting, as the Apostle says, that which decayeh and waxes old is ready to
perish, meaning this Covenant. -- And the Covenant of grace is called the new
Covenant.

First, because of its meliority, or bitterness, it is more excellent, as the
new heavens and the new earth that God will make will be more excellent then
the old.

2. In opposition to the old, as appears Heb. 8.8. when God says he will make a
new Covenant, he adds, not according to the Covenant, when I brought your
fathers out of Egypt, which was by virtue of the Covenant made with Abraham.

3. In respect to its perpetuity and duration, it is the everlasting Covenant:
the Covenant made with Abraham and his natural seed is vanished and done away,
but this remains, as the Apostle says: if that which was done away was
glorious, how much more that which remains. That which was done away was the
old Covenant, or Covenant made with Abraham, and his natural seed with all the
privileges of it. And that which remains is the new Covenant, or promise of
eternal life made in Jesus to all believers.

4. It is called the new Covenant, as to us, because renewed in a more Gospel
and glorious manner. So that we are indeed still under the same Covenant of
grace made with Adam and all the partriarchs: but not under the same Covenant
of works made with Abraham and his natural seed.

But further, that you may know what the Covenant made with Abraham was, take
the opinion of a late learned Author

The old Covenant (says he) was a political Covenant made with the Jews, as
Princes compacts are with their people when they first set up Government: God
promises them his protection, and that he would lead them to a fruitful land,
overcome all their enemies, etc. with the like blessings. And they promise they
will be ruled by him, etc. To this purpose did God in sundry ways appear to
them, To Moses, to their elders, to them all in the cloud and fire, and then
causes a Tabernacle to be made for him; which was a keeping house amongst them,
where the sacrifices and offerings were his provisions, and the Priests his
servants that lived on him. And unto that Tabernacle and Ark, might they repair
for counsel and Judgment. This people then, being under a Theocracy, which
Samuel does in two places expressly signify (at least unto the time of Saul) so
that the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews were but one. It is no wonder if
Religion be made their laws and so required of them together with other
political Ordinances and statutes for their happiness and public peace as a
nation.

And though in their ceremonial offerings and Priests appointmens there was a
remembrance still of sin; yet had they Types of Christ, of remedying mercy, and
of the glory to come.

Their sacrifices as I have said serve to the maintenance of this house, the
Tabernacle and Temple which he was pleased to keep up amongst them for a time,
God indeed making use of these, for Types and representations of other things,
that is to say spiritual, and so the law being a Paedagogy under a temporal
dispensation, leading men to Christ. So far my Author.

But God has quite pulled down this house, brake up housekeeping as we say,
and turned the servants, Infants and all out of doors Romans 11. The natural
branches are broken off -- and Heb. 8.13. That which decays and waxes old is
ready to vanish. And says the Apostle, if that which was done away was
glorious etc. what was that but this old house with all the privileges of it?

But now God has built him a new house into which he has admitted none as his
household servants but believers or such as profess so to be. And these two
houses are mentioned Heb. 3.2, 3, 4. where one is called Moses his house, and
the other Christ's house: As Moses was faithful in all his house. For this man
was accounted worthy of more honor then Moses; in as much as he that has
builded the house, has more honor, then the house. Moses was faithful as a
servant but Christ as a son over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold
fast the confidence etc. where the servants are also described, they are
belivers, not infants, hence they are also called living stones, and a
spiritual house 1 Pet. 2.3.

And that none but such are of this household appears, in that Christ the great
Master of this house is compared to a king traveling into a far Country, who
called his servants, (all his servants) and delivered unto them his goods, that
is, Certain Talents to improve Math. 25.14, 15. which cannot be supposed to be
delivered to infants while they want the use of reason; for these ^alents are
presently to be improved and laid out, not laid up.

So again Christ is compared to a housekeeper who made a great supper, and
invited his guests, but they were not infants, because the first that were
invited made excuses. The next are compeld to come in, which supposes an
unwillingness in the parties, and that they were persons capable to consent or
deny. The sum of all is, that the old house the Jewish Church, with all the
appurtenances and privileges of it, is pulled down, and a new one built, into
which infants are not admitted, because not invited nor appointed by any law.
They were of the household of old, but it was by a positive law; show us the
like now, or you say nothing. Sure I am there is no institution that makes
infants now fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God:
Neither are they so to be accounted till they believe, and are able to do
service in the house.

And if you say, that amongst men, infants are counted of the household though
they can do no service; I answer; that comparison does not run upon four feet,
it does not follow, that, because we count our infants of our family, therefore
they are to be accounted members of Gods family, the Gospel Church, unless God
by any institution had made them so. The household of God is called the household
of faith; do good unto all, especially the household of faith; or a house
consisting of believers: now, unless you prove your infants to be believers
they are not of this house: For all the servants here must be believers either
really, or Historically and professedly, which infants cannot be. And it will
not help you to say the Church was (or may be) called the household of faith
synecdochically, from the greatest part; for it is evident all the materials
of the first Churches were adult persons, and professed believers as appears by
the narrative we have in the Acts of the Apostles, the direction of all the
Epistles, and diverse Scriptures. Besides it may so happen that the infants may
be the greatest part of a Congregation, and then where is your household of
faith?


Poed. But Mr. Wills tells us, that Mr. Baxter says; That Infant Church
membership did take place as an ordinance of God, before Circumcision was
enjoined, or the Ceremonial law instituted, and why then should it cease with
it? It was no part of the typical administration, but a moral institution of
God even from the beginning of the world. God ever made a distinction between
the seed of the faithful and the seed of the wicked, as visibly belonging to
several kingdoms of God, and of Satan. Mal. 2.15. Therefore they are called a
holy seed. Wills page 54.


Bap. Here is vox and praeterea nihil. It Is true Mr. Baxter says so; but if it
be warrant enough for Mr. Wills to believe it, it is not for me. It is strange,
of what authority some men's words are when they have got the estimation of
Orthodox and pious; and we have no great cause to wonder at the implicit faith
of the Church of Rome, when an ipse dixit, from an English oracle commands such
credit, and vassals us to their raw and undigested dictates. But let us examine
this assertion.

He says, that Infant Church Membership did take place as an ordinance of God,
before Circumcision etc. But where is that ordinance? why are we not directed
to some place of Scripture where we may find it? Did God make Mr. Baxter of his
Cabinet Council, and reveal it to him, and no body else? Or in what Ancient
father did he find it? Did any one ever say so before him?

2. He says, that it was no part of the typical Administration, but a moral
institution of God etc.

I answer; there has been enough said to prove the fallacy and novelty of this
position. Therefore I referr you to what has been written. But he says, it is
a moral institution. -- We still demand, where we shall find that institution,
or else we will say, Mr. Baxter is wise above what is written.

3. He says God ever made a distinction between the seed of the faithful, and
the seed of the wicked. -- But what distinction? Did God single them out, and
separate them by any visible sign or character before the law of Circumcision?
It is evidently known he did not. -- Or did God distinguish them by his
providential care of them, or provision for them more then others? The
Scripture is silent as to this also. -- Or did God love them with a saving love
more then the children of unbelievers? This seems to be his meaning, because of
his next words -- as visibly belonging to several kingdoms, of God, and Satan.

But is it so? Did all the children of believers from Adam to Abraham belong to
the kingdom of God? and all the children of unbelievers belong to the kingdom
of the Devil? If it be Mr. Baxters Divinity, or M. Wills charity, it shall be
none of mine. But he thinks to salve all with the word [visibly] But pray when
the sons of God took the Daughters of men, and all flesh had corcupted its
ways, to what kingdom did they belong? Did not the seed of believers grow
profane and wicked, and the seed of unbelievers pious and Godly? as appears in
diverse, even Abraham himself, whose father was an Idolater, as is probably
supposed (he himself being bred up in Idolatry) But Mr. Baxter has some
Scripture for his warrant, and it is Mal. 2.15. -- that he might seek a godly
seed -- But he that can find infants Church Membership in this text, and that
the seed of believers did always belong visibly to the kingdom of God, and all
others to the kingdom of the Devil -- erit mihi magnus Apollo.

What though God says, he that s^ught a godly feed, therefore let none deal
treacherously with the wife of his youth; implying that children born in lawful
wedlock are this Godly seed? Let none, whether believer or unbeliever -- unless
you hold, that children of unbelivers may not be a godly seed.

But these are such Non sequiturs, that it is in vain to spend further time
about them.

So that the Morality of Infants Church Membership is a very fancy. And that
which Mr. Baxter drives at, can never be proved, viz. that there was a lineal
successive conveyance of grace from the parent to the child: If so, it is
strange that all flesh should so soon have corrupted its ways, that God saw
cause to bring the flood upon the world of ungodly.

Surely had there been any such Covenant holiness as the Poedo-Baptists dream
of, before the flood; there would have been some godly society, some greater
number of believers, to have been preserved besides Noah and his Family, who
were not all godly neither; there was a Cham among them, which would not have
been if there were such a conveyance of grace and Covenant holiness from the
Father to the son.

So that notwithstanding what has been said, Infant Church Membership came in
with the law of Circumcision, and went out and was repealed with it, as has
been abundantly proved For when there was a change of the Priesthood, there was
a change of the law, which must needs include Circumcision with all the
appurtenances and privileges belonging to it.


Poed. But what think you of that principle that some told, that Infants are
Church Members before they are baptized? so Mr. Wills page 27. says.

The first and chief end of Baptism is to be the initiating sign and seal of
Gods Covenant, and favor to us in Christ, and not to give an entrance or
admission into the Church. Unless persons are to be reputed members of the
Church, they are not to be baptized: For Baptism in its own nature is the seal
of our being already ingrafted into Christ, and consequently into the Church.
For which he Quotes Dr. Ames. And page 45. We deny says he, that Baptism does
give Formality, or make a man a member of a visible Church, though that
Orthodox Divines have frequently termed Baptism, the Sacrament of our
initiation into the Church, and have ascribed our admission or entrance into
it, thereunto page 46. To which I answer.


Bap. It seems then, that Mr. Wills is wiser then his orthodox Divines.

2. If Baptism be a sign of our being already in Christ, and so members of the
Church before they are Baptized; Then I hope our children may be in Christ, and
reputed members of the Church, though they are not Baptized. And then what need
is there of these clamours against the Baptists for keeping their children out
of the Church, and (in as much as in them lies) hindering their salvation, when
they are in Christ, and members of his Church before Baptism, by virtue of
their parents faith? And if you say, we deny them a privilege that is due to
them; We say, we do not: Our great desire is they should be Baptized, and do
instruct them in the principles of Christianity for that end; that as soon as
they are capable to improve the privilege they may have it. And as for the
Circumstance of time your selves say, that is not materal, w^e^her it be done
on the 8th. 10th. or 20th. day, and why may not the Baptists deferr it to the
20th. year, there being as much warrant in Scriptures for the one as for the
other, though indeed no positive rule for either, only the time of believing is
the most certain time assigned for Baptism.

3. But thirdly Mr Wills spoils all he has said, and contradicts himself page
229. where he says, that as Circumcision gave entrance into the Church of the
Jews, so are believers and their seed by Baptism entered into the Gospel Church.
And it will not help him to say, that Infants by virtue of their parents faith
are only members of the universal visible Church (as he calls it) before
Baptism, but not of any particular Church: For he himself says, that he that
is a member of the universal Church, may at any time claim his privilege in
any particular Church.

What confusion is here! sometimes Baptism gives not admittance into the
Church, but they are members of the Church before as page 27, 28. And then
again that believers and their seed are by Baptism admitted into particular
Churches; at another place that Baptism only admits them into the Universal
visible Church. I think Mr Wills has little hopes to reconcile the Baptist^ and
the Poedo-Baptists, seeing he is not reconciled to himself.

But as to the principle you mention that persons may be Church members before
they are Baptized: Its true Mr Wills makes a great stir against Mr Paul and
others, whom he calls rigid Anabaptists because they cannot see any ground to
admit persons to the supper before Baptism. And therefore labors hard to prove
that which he confesses Orthodox divines are against, yet he would be singular,
and force this novelty upon the world, which himself and but few others have of
late contended for. But what would the man have? suppose a Turk or a Jew should
be converted, would he admit them to the supper before Baptism? and so own them
Church members, whether ever they were baptized or not? God strictly commanded
of old, that no uncircumcised person should eat the passover: And what rule
have you that unbaptized persons should be admitted to the supper? But he tells
us this is the opinion only of some rigid Anabaptist, and thinks there to
shelter himself. Indeed Mr Iessey, and some other good men were of that
opinion, that some persons might be admitted to the supper who were not yet
convinced, but that their Infant Baptism was true Baptism. But why must all
others be counted rigid Anabaptists because they cannot see with other men's
eyes? But this is one of the many scurrilous reflections in Mr Wills's Book, to
supply the scarcity of Argument. I could tell him of some rigid Independents,
and rigid Presbyterians too, who are so far from having Communion with the
Baptists, that they would pluck up such Tares (so they account them) out of the
^ield of the world, and that before the harvest, contrary to the express words
of our Savior. Let both grow together till the harvest: And the reason is very
cogent; lest plucking up the tares, you pluck up the wheat also. But Mr Wills
makes amends for this and tells us, that some of the Baptists are godly,
liberal men, of holy and pious conversations and such whom he could have
communion with; but this is Joabs curtesy, who salutes Abner friendly, but
smote him under the fifth ribb. And I may say Meliora sunt amici vulnera, quam
inimici oscula. The many hard speeches, and uncomely reflections, the so often
mentioning the miscariages of the people in Germany he calls by that
denomination show what gall his pen was dipped in. But for all these things I
say, The Lord forgive him.


Paedo. Sir I thank you for this discourse and the pains you have taken in
order to my satisfaction. I confess I find my self more convinced then I was;
and do think you are of the surest side, it being most certain that believers
were and ought to be baptized; but whether any Infants were or ought, is very
uncertain. And surely it is safest (in controverted matters) to adhere to that
side that is most certain. Besides there are two things that I am much stumbled
at.

The First, is the great ignorance of the members of the Paedo-baptist
congregations in this matter: Not one amongst many, is able to prove
Infant Baptism, or to answer your Arguments, but are forced to referr the
matter to their ministers: whereas, hardly any amongst you, but are able to
give a satisfactory reason of their hope in this thing; and can presently prove
believers Baptism from Scripture precept and example. As of old if a heathen
had demanded of any Jew the reason and Ground of his circumcision, he could
presently turn to the 17th. of Genesis, and there prove it from a positive
command of God. But if a heathen should ask us, why we baptize our Infants, we
that are but ordinary persons know not how to satisfy him; we cannot direct him
to any Scripture where it is written: Which is strange, that a Gospel ordinance
should be left so dark and intricate, and the ordinance of circumcision under
the law, be so plain and obvious that every child of any reason could presently
show the ground of it. This makes me suspect the truth of it; because the
Apostle says he used great plainness of speech, and not as Moses who put a vail
upon his face, etc. surely Gospel Ordinances should be so plain, especially as
to the subjects, that he that runs may read them.

2ly. The next thing that offends me is the great difference amongst Ministers,
about the ground of Infant Baptism, as if they knew not where to fasten it,
what basis to build it upon, some (as Mr Danvers observes) draw it from the
Universality of grace, and the necessity of Baptism to salvation, as Cyprian
and others.

Some from the faith of the Church; some from a supposed seminal faith that may
be in the child.

Some from the faith of the parents; others from the faith of the sureties;
some (if the immediate parents be not Godly) think the faith of the
Grandfather, or great-Grand-father may serve.

Some upon the account of Covenant holiness, or the promise made to Abraham
and his seed; others, if both, or one of the parents be a member of a gathered
Church. Some think they are born members of the visible Church by virtue of
their parents faith, and so may be baptized.

Besides this there is a great difference about baptizing of bastards: some
think if the father repent, the child may be baptized; others think otherwise,
because a Bastard was not to enter into the Congregation to the 10th.
generation; and so about the children of excommunicate persons, etc. All which
makes us fear that we are out of the way, and our leaders have caused us to err
seeing they cannot agree, upon what ground to baptize our Infants. Its true Mr
Wills pretends to answer this, but very weakly: he tells us the baptists differ
amongst themselves about the ground of their practice; but sure I am there is
no such material difference as there is amongst us.

You are all agreed that the profession of faith and Repentance is the ground
of Baptism, and if some desire a larger confession then others, and signs of
grace, I think it is no great error, but rather an evidence of zeal to God, and
good to the parties soul. But what is this to those material and essential
differences before mentioned?

These things will put me upon further search, and I hope what you have said
will be of advantage to me. In the mean time I take leave and bid you farewell.


Errata.
P. 64. l. 16. r. marrs all, p. 95. l. 1. r. betternesse. In the letter to Mr
Will's 5. l. 3. r. Magisterially. p. 9. l. 11. for heat r. heart. Mis-spellings
and mis-pointings correct as you meet them.

FINIS.
Concerning Unity.
OUr Opponents cry out for Unity, and would fain lay the cause of that hateful
Word [Division] at our doors, and methinks they might well forbear making such
a noise, unless they assign us what kind of the several sorts of Unity they
mean; and propound some Mediums to make the same practicable. And I may say,
What Unity? so long as that imperious, reflecting, and condemning Spirit
remains in them. Some forbidding of their Members to hear our Ministers, or to
read their Books; rather allowing them liberty to join with the Multitude, than
to appear in our Societies. But if I may spell out their meaning, it seems to
be this.

That all the Anti-paedo-Baptists should break up their Societies, and join
with them, and own their Ministers for their Pastors, suffer them quietly to
Baptize Infants, etc. and so sin against their Consciences; it appearing to
them to be gross Superstition, and the Profanation of an Ordinance. But should
they tell you, they judge there is as good, if not better grounds that you
should join with them, and own the Baptism of Believers (the only Scripture
Baptism) I know not where a Moderator or Umpire would be found to determine
this matter. And how can Two walk together, except they be agreed?

So that the Unity of the Verity is not surely the thing they hope for; for
though it be greatly desirable, yet very hard to obtain, because one man thinks
this to be truth, and another that, according to the several Lights they have
received. And if it be the Unity of Authority they intend, that the Magistrate
should set down some Uniform practice, and command all manner of persons to
comply thereunto; this looks like diverse of them. But were there such a
practice attempted and yielded unto, it might make many Hypocrites in the
highest degree of Hypocrisy; but be far from that spiritual Unity they talk of.

Nor can an Unity of persuasion be hoped for, seeing both in Press and Pulpit,
and other ways, both Parties have endeavored to persuade one another, but to
little or no Effect.

Nor can it be an Unity of Necessity, now in Times of common danger; for Ties
of necessity usually bind no longer than one Side has need of another.

Nor can any Unity of Covenant do it, for that is forced in many places; and I
fear too many say, as the Heathen did, Juravi Lingua, mentem injuratam gero, I
swore with my tongue, but not with my heart.

Seeing then we cannot find out what kind of Unity is intended, it is best for
both parties to continue in the Societies to whom they belong, till God shall
convince them otherwise, provided they do not put out their light, and sin
against their Consciences, nor neglect any opportunity, better to inform their
Judgments.

But there is one kind of Unity yet behind, and that is the unity of
Affections; and if you mean this, I am willing to join issue with you, and in
this I cannot but blame the whole generation of Professors, who are greatly
faulty in this matter.

For my own part, I know the shadows of the everlasting Evening are upon me,
and am every day walking upon the Banks of Eternity, and do hope er'e long to
enter into those sacred Mansions, where all the Saints are of one mind, where
we shall possess, not dispute our Unity; wherefore I shall leave my Testimony
for the unity of Charity and Affection amongst all that are Godly, though of
different persuasions; and shall enforee it from these Considerations.

1. From the work of Regeneration, which some of all differing Professors can
experience. Indeed while in a state of unregeneration, nothing is to be
expected but Jars and Contentions, for all Division comes from sin, Scelera
dissident. It is so in the natural body, one affection struggles in the Soul
for mastery; Ambition fights with malice, and Pride with Covetousness: the head
plots against the heart, and the heart swells against the head. Reason and
Appetite, Will and Passion, Soul and Body set the whole frame of Nature into a
continual Combustion, one Faculty moves contrary to the Government or
Attraction of another, and so as in a confluence of contrary Streams and Winds,
the World is turned into a maze of Contentions.

But when once we become Christians, and are made conformable to Christ, it
presently makes of two one; and so works peace: It slays the hatred and
war in the Members of Christ against one another; it reduces to that primitive
harmony, and uniform Spirituality. Yea Conversion lays an obligation upon
Christians to love one another: If we love him that Begat, we cannot but love
him that is Begotten.

2. Because all things else agree: The beams of the Sun, though divided and
distinct from one another, have yet an unity in the same nature of light,
because all partake of one Native and Original splendour. The limbs of a Tree,
though all several, and spreading diverse ways, yet have an unity in the same
Fruit; because all are incorporated into one Stock and Root. The streams of a
River, though running diverse ways, do yet all agree in the unity of sweetness
and clearness, because all issuing from the same pure Fountain. Why then should
not Christians, though of different Persuasions, agree in the unity of Love and
Affection?

3 Because by Division, Discord, and Rebellion the Apostate Angels lost their
Heavenly Habitation, and are for ever plunged into easeless and remediless
Torments. The Devil was Created an Angel of Light, and stood a while in Unity
and Harmony until he began to Jar, and enter into Division, and to choose to be
an absolute Nature of himself; and would separate and break himself off from
Unity, by which he became viler than the vilest of Gods Creatures: And so it is
possible, for persons by leaving the principles of Harmony, Unity, and Love, to
fall from the most glorious state of profession, into endless misery and
perdition.

The excellency of the unity of Charity appears further from those Notae
quietis, or letters of rest naturally imprinted upon the whole Series of
Created Beings; for if we survey the particulars of this stately Fabric, we
shall find the image of peace and love impressed and imprinted, as the
Conservatory principle of their Natures, stamped at first by the Divine Creator,
when out (of a confused Chaos) it pleased the Eternal parent, or Radical
principle of all things (being not willing that so large a space should be
Eternally bereft of his gracious influence, or his bounty any longer
frustrated, from Communicating Happiness to so many millions of Creatures as
might act upon this Stage) to effect this Creation; for when by his powerful
Word he applied himself to Create this sensible World, out of so great disorder
and confusion; he effects it with so much symmetry and proportion, that Nature
seems to lose it self in the Harmony of such a Being. And as the Crown and
perfection of all does so imprint peace and unity in it, that to attempt the
Extirpation of these from the Universe, were to endeavor the reduction of this
stately Engine into its Original Chaos and Confusion.

Besides we find when the great Creator began to make a division in this
sensible World, it was only of such things as were directly contrary and
opposite to one another, as light and darkness, Genesis 1.4. And God divided the
light from the darkness, and God saw that it was good; showing us that it was
never intended there should be any division in the World, but between light and
darkness; things directly and essentially contrary.

Therefore in the next Division (which was the Work of the Second day) that was
between the Waters and the Waters, things of the same kind and nature, and that
work had no Blessing annexed to it, because it was the first breach of Unity;
which number, some say is branded with infamy, Numerus Binarius infamosus est,
quia primus ausus est discedere ab unitate, because it was the first that durst
depart from unity. And though there be a kind of war between the Elements, yet
some are of Opinion, that it is more imaginary than real; for we find sometimes
they will forget their Natural stations and properties, and (to avoid vacuum)
will mutually pass into the room of one another; yea, not only lovingly to mix,
but to dwell with one another peaceably; as fire and water will sometime dwell
together; as we see in Tempests Of Thunder, Rain, and Hail; and also in Spirit
of Wine, and other things.

But especially things of the same Tribe and Kind do most earnestly affect one
another (from an Innate principle of Union) as Water and Salt do mutually
embrace each other.

And as the harmonious assent of things amongst themselves is admirable, so the
Heavens with the Lower Region is no less wonderful; for in the whole frame of
Nature, there is such an admirable mixture, that all the design is to maintain
a Friendly Union and concatenation between themselves; desiring only to
gratify the Supreme Ruler, and benefit each other: Nature ordering and
disposing all things to be carried about in a most uniform Circulation.

And now is it not strange, when the whole Creation, does, as it were, study
peace and amity, man should continue and practice the contrary? And those that
should be lead by the Spirit into Unity and Love, should be sent to the meanest
Creatures to learn their Lessons of peace and concord?

Lastly, We may consider the Evils that Discord brings upon the Outward man; it
was discord, division, and contention that brought, and still brings those
Bodily maladies, sicknesses, aches, pains, and weakness upon the Bodies of
Men; and at last death it self. For how came those things into the World, but
from the rebellious strivings and contentions of the Body with the Soul: For as
long as Adams mind was subject unto God, and stood in Harmony and Union with
him, the inferior powers of the Soul were obedient unto Reason, and the Body
unto the Soul, and this Union prevents all infirmities and sicknesses; but he
no sooner Rebels against God, and breaks himself off from this Union, and
enters into Division, but he presently finds Contention raging within him; for
now those inferior powers, will be no longer subject unto Reason; but the
rebellious pride of the Carnal appetite is such, that the Body cease to be
any longer subject to the Soul; upon which strivings and contentions enter, and
from thence all manner of Diseases and Distempers upon the Body: for death, and
all corporeal infirmities are but the immediate effects of the disobedience of
the Body to the Soul; and man is entered into Contrariety, not only with
himself, but others also, and has a property and principle of Contradiction,
whereby he opposes, quarrels, divides from, and contends with others. And is so
far departed from the unity and harmonious agreement that should be in the
minds of men, especially Christians, that now there arises passion, anger, and
envy; which so disturbs, torments, and disquiets the mind (because others are
not like us) that from thence follow in a great measure, diseases, infirmities,
and bodily distempers; because the Soul departs from Harmony, and is in
continual vexation and anxiety; so that the Humors of the Body are disquieted,
and the radical moisture destroyed. Persons that are of a Choleric Temper, are
more subject to Diseases, than those of a more quiet and s^rene disposition;
their passion inflames the inward parts, and disorders the whole frame of
Nature, and envious men are subject to Consumptive distempers.

Invidus alterius rebus macrescit Opimis) because his mind is full of
dissatisfaction and disquietness, being departed from Unity. And Solomon tells
us, The bloody-minded man shall not live out half his days: And we know those
Anchorets and Monks that have retired from the World into Dens and Caves of the
Earth, that they might live a contemplative Life, and be free from all manner
of discord, contention, and division, have lived to an exceeding Old Age, and
free from those distempers, and Bodily Infirmities that others meet with; the
unity, agreement, and harmony of their minds much conducing to their bodily
health. So it is said of Moses, that he was an hundred and twenty years old when
he dyed; his Eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. we know
of what quiet, serene, and meek Spirit he was of, Numb. 12.3. Now the man Moses
was very meek above all the men which were upon the face of the Earth; so that
the quietness of his mind did very much contribute to the sanity of his Body.
And if Men and Women would more follow the Counsel of the Physician of their
Souls, who bids us live in peace, unity, and love; they would not (perhaps) so
often want a Physician for their Bodies.

FINIS.
Some Short Questions and Answers for the Younger Sort.
Quest. WEre not the Children of Believers Church Members before Abraham's time?

Answ. No, the Scripture makes no mention of any such thing; neither was there
any visible sign or mark appointed by God to distinguish them from the Children
of Unbelievers.

Quest. Was there no successive conveyance of Grace from believing Parents to
their Children?

Answ. No, because the Children of Believers proved as wicked as others;
insomuch as all flesh had corrupted its ways, and God brought the flood upon
the World of Ungodly.

Quest. What then became of the Children that Dyed from Adam to Abraham?

Answ. Those that belonged to the Election of Grace were Saved, though in no
outward Covenant, nor signed by any Visible Ordinance.

Quest. Why then did God make a Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, and
distinguish them from all Nations?

Answ. Because he had a design that the Messiah should come of his Loins, and
therefore his Males only are commanded to be Circumcised, to signify that
Christ should be a Man-child, and should shed his Blood for the sins of
Believers.

Quest. What other Ends were there of Circumcision?

Answ. To distinguish them from other Nations, with whom they were not to
Marry, lest the Succession should be Interrupted, and so the Messiah not come
of Abraham's Loins.

Quest. What advantage had they of Circumcision besides?

Answ. They were counted the Visible people of God for a time, had the Laws of
God committed to them, and the Land of Canaan, and diverse Earthly Blessings
bestowed upon them.

Quest. But had any other People any right to Eternal Life and Salvation?

Answ. Yea; It being evident that God had diverse of his people amongst the
Gentiles who belonged to the Election of Grace, as Job, and his Three Friends,
and others, which appears by Bildad's appeal to the Ancients, Job 8.8, 10. For
enquire I pray thee of the Former Age, and prepare thy self to the search of
their Fathers; and verse. 10. shall not they teach thee, etc.

Quest. But how came it to pass that the Jews became the People of God, and not
others?

Answ. By virtue of a Grant from God to Abraham, who freely made a promise to
be a God to him, and his Seed after him.

Quest. Was this promise made to Abraham because he was better than others, or
before, or after he Believed?

Answ. No, It was freely of Grace, for God sound him an Idolater, and these
Promises were made to him before he Believed; for we hear nothing of his Faith
till Genesis 15.6.

Quest. Were his Children then Partakers of those Privileges, merely by being
descended from his Loins?

Answ. Yea; we find no other Reason rendered.

Quest. But we hear Abraham was a Believer, and received the sign of
Circumcision as a token of the righteousness he had by Faith: Is it necessary
then that his Children have the like Faith?

Answ. It Is true Abraham Believed after the Promise, and was Circumcised; but
it was not Commanded that his Children should Believe in order to Circumcision.

Quest. But as Abraham was a Believer before his Children had a right to
Circumcision, so should it not be known that every Father in Israel were a
Believer, before his Child were admitted to Circumcision?

Answ. No: for all were required to Circumcise their Children, whether the
Parent Believed, or not.

Quest. Were none to be Circumcised but those that Descended from Abraham?

Answ. Yea, all that were born in his House, or bought with money.

Quest. But was it not required that those Servants in Abraham 's House should
profess Faith before they and their Children were Circumcised?

Answ. No, It was not commanded to be done upon any condition of Faith, in the
Parent or Child that was a Servant.

Quest. Were Abraham's Children Circumcised by virtue of any right they had to
the Covenant of Grace above others?

Answ. No; for some of Noah's Children, etc. had a Right to the Covenant of
Grace, yet not Circumcised; and Esau and Ishmael etc. had no right to the
Covenant of Grace, and yet Circumcised,

Quest. Were not Infants Church Members in Abraham 's time?

Answ. Yea; the Church and the Commonwealth being all one, they must needs be
Members.

Quest. When did their Membership cease?

Answ. When Christ came and had suffered; when the Priesthood was changed, when
the Law of Circumcision ceased, when the natural branches were broken off, the
old House removed, and a new one built.

Quest. Are not the Infants of the Gentiles Church Members now in the days of
the Gospel?

Answ. No, there being no Institution or Command for it; besides the Church and
the Commonwealth are now divided, and God has not taken in any one Nation, or
sort of people distinct from others to be his Church; but Believers only out of
every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation.

Quest. Have not then the Infants of Believing Gentiles less privilege than the
Jews had?

Answ No; For Circumcision had been no privilege nor duty, had there been no
Institution for it: Neither is Baptism a privilege or duty to any, but to
those to whom it is Commanded. But the privileges of the Children of Believing
Gentiles are greater than the Jews; because the Messiah being come, which is
the sum and substance of all their shadows, of Circumcision, of Membership, and
all their Typical Ordinances: So that as soon as Infants are capable of
Understanding, they are to be brought up in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord, i. e. the Lord Jesus, the Antitype of all their Types; who is to be made
known unto them, as being already come, and has suffered for all that Believe
in him. Whereas the Jews could but inform their Children, that Christ would
come, and suffer for the sins of men.

Quest. Have not those that had a right to the privileges of the Old Covenant,
a right to the privileges of the new, by virtue of their former right?

Answ. No; for then the Jews had a right to Baptism without any profession of
Faith and Repentance. Besides the Apostle says, Heb, 13.10. We have an Altar
whereof they have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle: And so we say, we
have a Baptism, that Infants have no right to, as they had to Circumcision;
because there is no Institution for it.

Quest. But may not the Children of the Gentiles be counted Abraham 's Seed?

Answ. No; For Abraham has but two Seeds, the natural Jew, and professed
Believers amongst Jews and Gentiles: a third Seed cannot be assigned him.

Quest. But may not Infants be counted Christ's Seed?

Answ. No; for Christ left no natural Issue, (who shall declare his Generation)
showing us that he did not intend to build his Church of Natural Children (as
of Old) not of dead, but of living Stones. Besides Believers Children are
Children of Wrath by nature as well as others, and therefore not to be
accounted Christ's Seed, or to be Baptized, while so considered.

Quest. Is not Baptism an Ordinance of the New Testament, and must it not be
proved by a New Testament Institution?

Answ. Yea.

Quest. Where is your Institution then for Infant Baptism?

Answ. It is urged to be Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed.

Quest. Is there any thing concerning Baptism in this Scripture?

Answ. No, But we draw this Consequence, that as God promised to be God to
Abraham and his Seed; so he will be a God to every Believer and his Seed.

Quest. Did God in these words promise to save Abraham and all his Natural Seed?

Answ. No, But the meaning is, that he and his Seed should be the Visible
Church; and enjoy the Ordinances, which no other people should.

Quest. And does this promise belong to believing Gentiles, and their natural
Seed, that they only shall be the visible Church of God, and their Children
only enjoy the Ordinances of God successively from their Parents?

Answ. No; for then these Absurdities would follow.

1. That God has not been as good as his promise, for the Church has not been
continued in the posterity of Believers since Christ's time, but often passed
out of their Race into the Posterity of Unbelievers.

2. That then, since the first promulgation of the Gospel, there is no such
need of Preaching to the Heathen, in as much as these being not of the
Posterity of Believers, they are not to be of the Visible Church, nor enjoy the
Ordinances: So that it is a fallacy to hold that God has promised to be a God
to Believers and their Natural Seed, as he did to Abraham and his Seed; to
continue his Church only in the Posterity of them that first received the
Gospel. But he is still gathering his Church out of the posterity of
Unbelievers, and therefore before the end of the World the Angel is said to
Preach the Everlasting Gospel to every Nation, Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
who are not of the posterity of Believers.

Quest. Why do the Paedo-baptists Baptize their Infants?

Answ. Because (they say) they are in the Covenant of Grace.

Quest. How do they know that?

Answ. Because both, or one of the Parents, are in the Covenant of Grace.

Quest. How does that appear?

Answ. Because they profess so to be. Then if the Parent be an Hypocrite, the
Child is not rightly Baptized.

Quest. From what Ground do the Baptists Baptize Persons?

Answ. Because they make a Profession of Faith and Repentance; which is warrant
enough from the Scripture.

Quest. But how if they be Hypocrites, are they rightly Baptized?

Answ. Yea; because it is not necessary for them to know that the Person is in
the Covenant of Grace; but that he professes himself a Disciple of Christ; for
which they have Scripture-president, and many Examples.

POSTSCRIPT.
SOon after I had finished this Treatise, Mr. Baxter's Book came to my Hands:
And in regard of his long silence, some great matter was expected: but after my
perusal of it, I find no News at all. The first part of his Book (even 180
pages) is nothing else but a Collection of certain Old Letters that past
between him and Mr. Tombs long since: In which, whether he has dealt Heartily
with Mr. Tombs I know not, the contrary is justly feared; if the Reader take
notice of those Pieces, Scrips, and Parcels of Letters from Mr. Tombs, but his
own Written at large.

As to the matter contained in those Letters, I find it to be nothing but what
has been Answered long since; and it would amount to no other than
Superfluity, and Tautology to Answer over again. The truest Verdict I can give
of it, is, that it is (like most of his other Controversies) a lump of Logical
Superfluity, a System of Syllogistical Vanity, wherein the Man manages his War
like some Fresh man that is newly Matriculated into the Faculty of Logicking in
Mood and Figure, that delights to hear himself Syllogize out every Syllable;
and so comes out with a huge heap of Hypotheticals, arguing at a vast
difference from the business of Baptism, and sometimetimes Ex Suppositis non
Supponendis too, as if he should fetch Infant baptism from far, since it is so
dark in Scripture (as he has confessed it is) that he cannot have it nigh at
hand; proving in a great Circumference of Consequence upon Consequence,
Syllogism upon Syllogism; thus, if this, then that; if this, then that; but
this, therefore that; when very often neither this, nor that, is true: So that
like a Tree, his Book runs out into so many smaller Boughs, and Twigs, and
lays it self out at large into such a train of Trivials, so many littles to
the purpose; that he will find himself great store of small business that shall
throw away so much of his precious time to read his Book.

The next thing I take notice of in his Book is his Answer to Mr. Danvers his
Collections, etc. wherein the Reader will find so much Gall and Vinegar, such a
proud, austere, magisterial Spirit; such scurrilous, unchristian Language, that
it makes me amassed, and to question, whether this be Mr. Baxter or his
Coadjutor Mr. Wills. But it seems they are both agreed in their unsavory
Dialect. Is this the man that Wrote so much for Love and Unity? and would make
the World believe that he is made up of nothing but Charity? Suppose Mr.
Danvers should be mistaken in some of his Collections; had it nbt been better
to have showed him his mistakes in a Mild, Christian, and Brotherly way? And if
you say the offense was public, and therefore deserved a public reproof.
Grant that also, yet what need these peevish, bitter, and angry reflections?
Has Mr. Baxter forgot that Scripture, Gal. 6.1. If any man be overtaken in a
fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness: He
contemptuously calls him (Maj. Danvers a Soldier) but why a Soldier? I
confess an Officer ought to be a Soldier, but he was a Colonel as well as Mr.
B. was a Chaplain, and Mr. B. knows it is not civil, nor do Soldiers love to be
retrograded, no more than Chaplains. Would he think it kindly done, if he were
dwindled from a Chaplain in Folio to a puny Curate in duodecimo, I doubt his
ambitious Humor would rather be Pope, but I suppose he means, that he was so
once, and perhaps it was when M. Baxter was Chaplain; and surely it is the
Chaplain's work with all mildness and gentleness to convince his Officers of
any error. But it is like in those days he used better Language, and
accomodated himself to the humors of his Officers, or else Fama mendax. But
perhaps he will tell us, he looks upon Mr. Danvers as a rigid Anabaptist; whom
(with the Independents) he condemns and censures as ignorant silly persons,
etc. in his usual Civility, not deserving the least grain of his Charity.

But what does the man mean? do they separate from the Church of Rome? so does
Mr. Baxter. Do they separate from the Church of England? so did Mr. Baxter (as
constituted by Episcopacy) but what he does now is a hard question. But I shall
leave Mr. Danvers to vindicate himself.

Another thing notable, is his 56 Articles of Faith, that he supposes the
Anabaptists and others must hold, if they deny his Popish Positions in his
Christian Directory, etc. It were no hard matter to Father many grosser
absurdities upon Mr. Baxter, were his raw and undigested Notions, and erroneous
principles noted, that have past his Pen (at several times) for above these
Twenty years. But leaving his other mistakes, it will be no Injury to tell you,
that one Article of Mr. Baxter's Faith is; That all the Children, all the
numerous posterity of Unbelievers, yea of such Unbelievers whose immediate
Parents or Parent, were not Enchurcht, are all in the Kingdom of the Devil, and
necessarily damned. Seeing he holds that the Children of Believers only are the
Subjects of Baptism, being born within the Covenant of Grace, Children of God,
Heirs of Christ, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. But if Mr. Baxter in
these Fifty six Articles (nay in most of his late Writings) has not more
gratified the Papists, and contributed to their Cause, more than any English
Protestant Divine ever did, yea at once, (as much as in him lies) thrown away
the Protestant Cause, and as far as his Credit goes, spoiled all, that our
Famous Champions have done, I am much mistaken; having hereby laid such
stumbling blocks in the way of ordinary Christians, far beyond the most crafty
Jesuit that ever has been amongst us.

He tells us he will Write no more, but he has a mighty Faith that will
believe him. I am of Mr. Bagshaw's mind, who told him some time since, when Mr.
Baxter told him he would not answer him; Mr. Bagshaw replies, I know you will
not keep your word, for your pride will put you upon Writing, and your guilt
will necessitate you to do it; just in as unbecoming a manner as you have done:
for an ill Cause must be maintained by Calumny.

And then in a lusory way tells us, That if these Children will after this
baul, and cry, and wrangle, and foul the House (a savory Metaphor!) he is not
bound to rock the Cradle, and to make them clean.

From whence may it not follow (1.) That Mr. Baxter owns the Anabaptists as his
Children; but whether instead of an indulgent Nurse he has not proved a cruel
Stepmother, let the World judge.

2. That the Anabaptists are soul, (sweetly spoken!) and all the pains he has
taken in his Writings these Twenty years has been to clean them. But whether he
has not cast more dirt and filth upon them, and made them fouler than ever he
found them, is easy to be determined by any that reads his plain
Scripture Proof, etc.

The next thing I observe is, How strenuonsly he strives to have the Fathers on
his side; and fearing he should lose the Argument from Antiquity, we see how
the sleepy Lyon's roused, and roars like a Son of Thunder, fearing the Old
worn-out cause of Infant Baptism should be routed, and never rally again; But
he must know we are not so fond of the Fathers from the Third Century, that
being as Tully says, Omissis fontibus consectari rivulos, we believe
Infant Baptism is ancient, and so are other Errors more ancient; but from the
beginning it was not ^o.

But that which confirms me against this Fallacy of Infant Baptism, is, that
the first that mention it, do also mention the Erroneous Grounds upon which it
was practiced, viz. for the washing away Original Sin; for the conferring of
Grace, and absolute necessity thereof to Salvation, etc. But let Mr. Baxter
show us if he can, that any of the Fathers speaks of Infant Baptism as to be
performed upon the grounds he and others in this Land have practiced it, i. e.
the Child's being in the Covenant of Grace by virtue of both or one of the
Parents personally manifesting his Faith and Repentance, and being an
Enchurched Member of some Congregation, etc. Here I dare say, Mr. Baxter has
none of the Fathets of his side, now his Orthodox Fathers are Heterodox; but is
it not strange, that if Infant Baptism were an Apostolical Tradition as diverse
affirmed, and some still dream, that the Apostles had not delivered the true
grounds upon which it should be practiced as well as the practice it self. Or
did these Holy Fathers only keep the subject, and so soon lose the grounds. So
that I must give this short but true Character of Mr. Baxter and his late Book
that he has written, neither with that gravity that became his Age, with that
Sobriety that became his profession, nor with that modesty that became any
tolerable Education. And since he so much forgets himself, I must tell him that
that Gentleman Mr. Danvers, whom he so insolently despises, is (to say no more)
his Superior, a person of known worth, piety, and integrity, and one whom God
has chosen to bear witness to his truth, at that very time when he a Learned
Scribe is shaken with every wind, and scruples not to change his Judgment for
and against things, as the stream of outward success does guide and influence
them. I shall now conclude with Mr. Baxter's Opinion of the Anabaptists, when
his heat is over; he says thus [in his last Book,] There two sorts of
Anabaptists amongst us, the one are sober Godly Christians, who when they are
Rebaptized, to satisfy their Consciences, live amongst us in Christian love
and peace. And I shall be ashamed, if I love not them as heartily, and own them
not as peacably as any of them shall do either me, or better men than I, that
differ from them.

The other sort hold it unlawful to hold Communion with such as are not of
their mind and way, and are Schismatically Troublesome and Unquiet, in
laboring to increase their party.

I hope all the pious Anabaptists do virtually, though not actually devote
their Children to God, and Consent to their Covenant Relation, while they
vehemently plead against it; for surely they have so much natural Affection,
that if they did think that God would be a God, in a special Covenant with
their Children, and pardon their Original Sin, and give them right to future
Life, upon the Parents dedication and consent, they would undoubtedly accept
the gift and be thankful: And I believe most of them would say, I would do all
that God entrusteth me to do, that my Child may be a Child of God, and accept
any Mercy from him, as far as God does authorize me so to do, page 188, 199.

Indeed my Judgment was and is, that the point of Infant Baptism has its
considerable difficulties, which may occasion Wise and Good men to doubt, or to
be mistaken in it, page 219.

Therefore I never took the point of it to have such weight, as that all that
differed from me in it, must be denied either love, liberty, or communion. If I
know my own heart, I do as heartily love a sober Godly man that is against
Infant Baptism, as I do such men that differ from me in other Controversies:
and much better than one of my own Judgment who has less Piety and Sobriety.

Nor do I think there is so much Malignity in the bare Opinion which denies
Infant Baptism, as that all the Anabaptists miscarriages should arise from the
nature of that Opinion. Ibid.

I know that in the Ancient Churches men were left at Liberty, both when t^^
would be Baptized themselves, and when their Children should be Baptized, and
though Infant Baptism was without any Original since the Apostles, yet it was
not a forced thing. And were it in my power, it should be so still, I would not
deny Christian-love, nor Church communion, nor public Encouragements to any
pious peaceable man for being an Anabaptist. I am not therefore half so Zealous
to turn men from Anabaptistry, as I am to persuade both them and others to live
together with mutual forbearance in Love and Church Communion, notwithstanding
such differences, page 221. I make no question but many of them are far better
men than I, and knowing my self liable to Error, etc. I am far more offended at
their Separation than their Opinion, page 228.

I know not by any Scripture or Reason that Re-baptizing is so heinous a sin as
should warrant us to contemn at our Brethren, page 233.

By which you see Mr. Baxter is not so much offended with the Anabaptists, as
their Separation. To which we say; Let Mr. Baxter by his Elaborate Systems, and
subtle Distinctions, first convince the P^edo-Baptists of their error herein,
as the Independants, and others, and especially his Friend Mr. Wills; who
though he has Written so much for Infant Baptism, yet ('it is well known) he is
a wide Separatist. May not the Church of Rome cry out against Mr. Baxter for
his Separation? Might not the Church of England do so formerly? And may they
not still, (yea Mr. Baxter also) cry out against Mr. Wills and his party? and
say they are Rigid Independents and Separatists? What means then all this
Outcry against the Antipaedo Baptists? unless they would have us believe that
they are such Universal Dictators as have Authority over Faith, and are
Infallibly inspired to propound Rules for all others, that when they Separate
we must; and where they have Communion, so must we?

Now if Mr. Baxter will vouchsafe to do Two Things:

1. Tell us of what Church he is of.

2. Prove that Church to be rightly Constituted according to the Primitive
Pattern: We will not then Separate from him. In the mean time we judge it our
duty, whereunto we have already attained, to Walk by the same Rule. And if any
be otherwise-minded, we hope the Lord will in time reveal it unto them. Amen.

FINIS.
ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a Late Book, Entitled, INFANT BAPTISM From HEAVEN and not
of MEN, In Answer to Mr. Henry Danvers his Treatise of BAPTISM.

WHEREIN Believers Baptism in Opposition to Infants (pretended) Baptism, is
further Vindicated and Confirmed: And, that Believers only are the Spiritual
Seed of Abraham, is also further Evidenced, against the Exceptions of Mr.
Joseph Wh^ston.

By E. H.

Non adeo perdite confidens sum, ut ausim aliqu^d affirmare, quod Sacra
Scriptura silentio praeterit. Theodoret. i. e.

I am not so desperately confident, that I dare affirm any thing which the Holy
Scripture does pass by in silence.

Grace does not run in a Blood, neither is the love of God Tied or Entailed
upon any Lineage of Men: Caryl on Job, cap. 5.

The Preface to the READER
Courteous Reader:
THe Delay of the Foregoing Treatise in the Printer's hands gave me
Opportunity to peruse, and briefly to Animadvert upon Mr. Whiston's Book,
wherein I find a promising Title, and very little more: To Trace him in all his
Meandrous Digressions would be an Argument I want other Business: The main
strength of his Objections is in the said Treatise fully Enervated; and I do
not think my self concerned to pursue him, when he insists upon matters besides
the Question in Debate: His Exceptions touching the matter of Antiquity, are
substantially answered by Mr. Danvers, yet shall be briefly glanced upon here.

I shall not now Dispute whether it be Generously done by Mr. Whiston to assail
with so much Violence, one that is already beset with such clamarous Adversaries
as Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Wills: But he gives the Curious some occasion to
question, that either (he thinks) they want Relief, being very near a Defeat;
or have not so singular a Talent as himself to set off a bad Cause.

For my part I cannot conjecture what his design is, unless by making up a
Triumvirate of Champions, he thinks to carry the Cause by Clamor, and so share
of the Applause their admiring Votaries are liberal enough of. But as his Book
needs little more Confutation than to be perused, so the infirmity of his
Reasoning, serves to illustrate, not foil the Truth he invades.

Our Adversaries themselves are forced to confess that most of those great
Fathers (the generality of Christians are so fond of) have been of Corrupt
Principles, and tainted with Superstitious conceits, and unsound Notions; and
that there are but very few of them to be found thoroughly Orthodox, though of
great Learning, Zeal, and Industry; which is an Item to us not to lean upon the
Authority of man, though never so Celebrated by Ages and Nations, but to have
recourse to the Word of truth left for our Instruction, and to seek our Warrant
for Religious Duties there.

This consideration satisfies me, That this Triumviri (however acted by
confidence, or self-conceit,) may be out of the way, and that their Dictates
are no farther to be received, than they agree with the Word of God. The
perplexing Systems spun out of man's own brain, nice subtle Distinctions, and
long-winded periods, may be taking with such as are firmly Espoused to a Party
right or wrong, or such as think him Conqueror that has most words: but the
sober enquiring Soul, that seeks Truth, not Victory, will easily perceive the
Vanity and Error of such a procedure.

Error cannot be disputed against, without giving it its name, and its Abettors
cannot be reproved, nor admonished but in words accomodated to their mistakes,
which indeed is not Railing, but plain-dealing; and which I hope is Apology
enough for me, if any Expressions should seem to be of too acute an Edge: The
Scripture commands us to reprove Errors sharply, or ((...)) cuttingly, Tit.
1.13. I love the Godly Paedo-Baptist as one that I know my Master Christ
loves, but having such a Call to Witness to, and Contend for his Truth. I will
(as he shall enable me) do it without daubing on the one, and unnecessary
sharpness on the other hand. I know how to distinguish between such as by a
mistaken Zeal utter provoking rash words; and such as in pursuance to their
Duty contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints: And that
Believers Baptism is such an Ordinance as Christ delivered to his Saints, I
never heard doubted: And that Infant (pretended) Baptism is not such, is our
work to manifest.

After all the Clutter our Antagonists kept to find some Evidence for the
practice of Paedo-Baptism in Fathers, Councils, etc. (the Scripture as they
fully own being silent about it) they are glad to run for refuge at last to
their new Invention of a Covenant they imagine to be made with the Carnal Seed
of Believers, Genesis 17.7. which they say Intitles them to be Baptized, but to no
other Ordinance under the New Testament (a most pitiful Paradox) and being
ashamed to own the mistaken absurd Mediums, its old and most celebrated Patrons
have Insisted upon for its Support in Old Times, they have Centered in a more
plausible pretense for it, viz. the aforesaid Covenant, which is their only
Reserve at present. And I cannot but admire that Men of any Reason should cry
up Antiquity, Antiquity, at the Rate they do, when at the same Instant they
reject the Grounds and Reasons the Ancients used for the same. And is it fair
to derive the practice from Antiquity, and add Reasons of their Own, when the
Old Reasons are found to be indeed Irrational. We know Infant Baptism has been
of an Early Birth, (viz. in the Third or Fourth Century) to save the Child's
Soul, and upon a mistake that it might be Damned without it; But Infant Baptism
upon the modern ground of a Hereditary Covenant, is new, and altogether unknown
to the Ancient Paedo-Baptists, as by other hands is clearly made good. And how
plausible this New Argument is, in the following Pages is examined.

And before I come to a particular Survey of this present Undertakers Book, I
would tender to his Christian consideration, hoping him to be a man that Fears
God, Whether it be so consistent with his Profession, in so Taunting and proud
a manner, to scorn and reproach his Opponent, whereas a meeker way would be
(not only his Duty, but) more graceful?

2. Whether it be consistent with the Word of Truth to go about to impose his
bare Ipse dixit's upon the World, without any material proof from the Scripture?

3. Whether it be consonant to the plainness of the Gospel, to confound rather
than Instruct the ordinary plain Reader with such a variety of needless
impertinent Distinctions, Hypotheticals, Tedious and rambling Circumlocutions,
Preambles, and dark miserable shiftings, to find a Covert for his I adorantism
in the Word of God?

4. Whether it be Ingenuous or Honest to supply the want of Argument with such
phrases as these, proceeding from Immodesty to Impudence. Warning his Reader to
be wary of crediting any of his (viz. Mr. Danver's) persuasion, can any man
think he had any true actual Fear of God before his Eyes. Downright Falsities,
Forgeries, mere Cheats, etc. though not the least Tittle of them proved to be
justly chargeable upon Mr. Danvers.

And to all which, I think (as it is the product of an Unruly provoking Spirit,
actuated by prejudice, and its ireful concomitants) the best return will be
silence. Let him consider Gal. 6.1. Mat. 5.5.

We shall not Insist upon his uncomely carriage throughout the whole Book, we
leave it to his cooler consideration, and the Reader's Observation, and shall
present you with a brief account of his Book, and then Select what wants our
Reply, and leave all to the judgment of the Reader.

The Book consists of Two parts; 1. An attempt to weaken the Humane Authority
urged by Mr. Danvers for Illustration of Believers Baptism, in opposition to
Infants Baptism. 2. To Confute him in the Doctrinal part.

About the first he spends 24 pages; his Objections are some scraps of what Mr.
B. and Mr. W. have more at large urged, and already Answered by Mr. D. of which
nevertheless I shall anon take a brief View.

From p. 25. to 71. he goes about to disprove that Believers Baptism is only
Christ's Baptism. 2. To prove that the silence of the Scripture about
Infant Baptism tends more to its establishment than overthrow. 3. To vindicate
Tradition, as he defines it. viz. the Discoveries made by the Church
Doctrinally and Practically from the Apostles time to us, as a subordinate
means whereby we come to know, and are more fully confirmed what is contained in
the Doctrine of the Apostles. 4. From page 71. to 129. he considers the
Arguments from the Covenant, and Faederal Holiness. 5. From page 129. to the
end, He endeavors to prove the Validity of Baptism, as Administered by
Sprinkling. Of which in Order.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mr. Whiston's Book, etc.
HE Intitles his Book, Infant Baptism from Heaven and not of Men: This indeed
may raise the Expectation of such as have not Read Mr. Baxter's Plain Scripture
proof. I began to think he had lighted upon some Rarity, else he would not
Front his Book with such a Title, nor trouble the World especially at this
juncture, when such men of Noise are already Engaged against us. But Empty
Casks give the greatest sound, and pregnant Mountains bring forth a Mouse. From
Heaven? and has he been there then, and searched the Records, and was of the
Cabinet Counsel of the Almighty? what if we doubt it? we have but his bare word
for it. He must pardon me if I say Infant Baptism from (Rome or) beneath; for
if it had been of Heavens making, the Scriptures (and the Records, and
Histories of the purest Primitive times) would not be so silent about it, as
the most Learned Paedo-baptists confess, and particularly Mr. B. our keenest
Adversary is forced to own they are. But the Author is cunning, and would Decoy
the Reader by a specious Title, so the Vintners gaudy sign often Trapans to a
costly (though unwholesome) Entertainment. The plain Scriptureproof man himself
confesses Infants baptism has its considerable difficulties; the Ingenious
Papist counts it a Miracle to have it proved by Scripture. Most of the Learned
Paedo-baptists have recourse to Tradition for help, and how come they to miss
of this man's Invention all this while? This Apollo, this Oepidus, this
Alexander which you will, might have done good service to unriddle the Aenigma,
or cut that knot, the unfolding of which cost so much Debate. Had he brought
that from Heaven sooner, (which was ever there) he had saved many Learned men
the labor of their Elaborate Systems pro and con. But this Author has as
dexterous and nimble a way of confuting all Antiquity, as the Junior Sophister
in Oxford used with Bellarmine, when he writ in the end of his Works, Bellamine
thou lie; therefore I will make bold to tell him that he stamps his uncertain
Conjectures with a Divine Character, and fathers his Forgeries and contrivances
upon Heaven; which is a during piece of Confidence, to say no more. So that I
shall say of him, and from just ground, as the Poet of Pigmalion, extremely
doting upon the fair Image he made, Operisque sui concepit amorem, etc.

He tells us, Mr. Danv^rs his Book is all Forgery, which he leaves to the
Readers Observation, wishing him to have a care of crediting any of his
persuasion. But if this be not Inconsistent with the Laws of Ingenuity, Equity,
and the Generositie of a Scholastic Education, I know not what is. Had he been
as nimble to attacque the Cause we maintain, as we find him a keen Satyrist
against the person he Opposes, who never gave him the least Provocation, it
would be more honest and taking. But instead of a fair unprejudiced Examination
of our Arguments, he lays bout him terribly, and deals his strokes
unmercifully, charges the whole with Forgery, Falsehood, and what not? without
vouchsafing to tell us wherein those Forgeries and Falsehoods lie. [But stay
Sir, as lo^ty a conceit as you have of your self, we will not believe you upon
your bare word. Have you hit upon that pernicious Kn^^k ^^ assassinating men's
credit at a breath? It seems you ^corn to be ^uch a petty Chapman ^s Mr. Ws.
(who comes to Particulars, but) you would knock us down by whole Sale. You
l^^ve the ^^ader to his own observation. And is that all? as if he had stood
gaping till you become his Monit^^, could not the Reader make his Observations
without the impertin^^t memento?]

Be wary of crediting any of his persuasion.] In this I would app^al to Mr.
Whiston's Conscience, or any ^^^^^of common genuity, whether it be just and
(...) for him to charge the who^e party of Antip^ed^ baptists at this rate,
although Colonel Danvers, (as it is possible a Learned man may) had been
mistaken in some things among so numerous a Tract of Quotations? of which he
has made no significant discovery neither.) Would he think it fair dealing, if
we should improve the particular errors or miscarriages of Paedo Baptists to
the scandal of all under that denomination? particularly the apparent
Injustice, and unchristian Dealings of Mr. B. and Mr. Ws. in their late
conspiracy, wrongfully to impeach us, and the truth we profess; and their
malicious Contrivances in prosecution thereof, fully detected by another hand.

And whether we have not just ground to conclude his Infant Baptism is not from
Heaven, not only from the weakness of his Arguments, but from his manner of
Arguing also? the Apostles way being to convince in meekness, and confute in
terms full of Love, and void of all Opprobrious and Canting Railery. The
Scripture tells us, that the wisdom that is from Above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good Works,
without partiality, and without Hypocrisy, James 3.17. Whereas he accosts us
in so haughty and domineering an Equipage, as he thinks will crush and disable
us from any farther Encounters with so dreadful a Gigas as he takes himself to
be. Exposing us to the scorn and odium of the whole World, as if we had not
felt enough of its unkindness, till he comes to open the mouth of Calumny
wider, and make our Enemies b^^l louder. But these things we hope our Lord God,
whom we desire to serve, will give us patience to endure for his Name and
Truths sake.

But to put the better face upon the matter, he pretends to give some instances
of Mr. Ds. his unfaithfulness in his Quotations, and of a great many picks out
two (with singular judgment) which he thinks ^e can toss to the purpose, and
mak^s his Reader sport to see how ridiculous he would make them. But to check
his triumphant Insultings, we shall join issue with him in the fair Trial of
those particulars he impeaches.

1. He charges Colonel Danvers for unfaithfulness in affirming that the
Magdeburgs say in the place he cites, That in the first Century, they find they
baptized only the Adult or Aged, etc. whereas the Word only is not there. This
Exception Mr. Ws. made, and is answered by Mr. D. in p. 31, 32. of his Reply,
and I conceive it is no part of ingenuity in Mr. Whiston to be inculcating that
which he could not be ignorant was so justly replied to already. But

What if Mr. D. has been in the right, and the falsehood be laid at Mr. Whistons
door? is not Mr. Whiston then the unfaithful man? and that it is so, the Reader
is desired to consider, that what we desire to prove from the Magdeburgs is
matter of Fact, viz. whether Infants were Baptized in that Age, which in plain
terms they tell us they read no Example of, Exempla annotata non leguntur; and
that the Adult of Jew and Gentile were Baptized, as is exemplified Acts 2.8,
10, 16, 19, etc. and is not this Equivalent with what he alleges, viz. that
they Baptized only the Adult, finding examples for the one, and not for the
other; any man in his senses may see that there is no more difference between
them, than there is between two six pences and a shilling. We confess the
Mageburgs were for Infant Baptism, and that they cite Origin and Cyprian as
Authors, that it was an Apostolical Tradition, in these words, Sed Origines and
Cyprianus and alii Patres Authors sunt Apostolorum etiam tempore baptizatos
esse; Constat enim hoc ex Apostolorum Scriptis quod Infantes a Baptismo non
excludant, nam dum Circumcisionis locum Baptismum supplere Paulus docet, Col.
2. A^que Infantes atque Adultos ad Baptismum admittendos judicat; that is,
Origin and Cyprian, and other Fathers, tell us, that in the Apostles time some
were Baptized; for this is evident from the Apostles Writings, that they did
not exclude Infants from Baptism, and where Paul teaches, Col. 2. that Baptism
succeeds in the place of Circumcision, he declares that Infants as well as the
Adult are to be admitted to Baptism.

The Reader is desired to note how Craftily Mr. Whiston stops in his Quotation
at the words Constat ex Apostolorum Scriptis, i. e. it is evident from the
Apostles Writings, to make the Reader believe they mean it (that Infants were
Baptized,) whereas it relates to the following part of the sentence, viz. (Quod
Infantes a baptismo non excludant, that they did not exclude Infants from
Baptism, rendering himself guilty of what he unjustly accuses Mr. D. But to the
Quotation:

Wherein we have Three Things urged by them as Arguments for their practice;
First the Testimony of Origin and Cyprian Secondly, Arguments from Infants
non-exclusion from Baptism Scriptures. Thirdly, an Inference to prove it lawful
as succeeding Circumcision.

1. The Testimony of Origin and Cyprian, this I shall say little to, being
substantially enervated by Mr. Danvers already in his Rejoinder, where it is
made out, (1.) that Origin and Cyprian say no such thing; (2.) that if they
had, its no great matter; the Books being from just grounds judged spurious:
(3.) that if the Books were genuine, their Testimonies in the Third Century is
not sufficient to prove matter of Fact the First Age.

2. The Arguments from Infants non Exclusion being Mr. Whiston's dear Argument
so often repeated, and made such a flourish withal, and filling a good part of
his Book, our Answer shall be refered to the place where he urges it.

3. The Inference from Circumcision; this Mr. Whiston in express terms tells
us, is not made any ground of Infant Baptism by them in these words, We plead
not for Infants Baptism, merely from the Analogy it bears to Circumcision (and
is angry they should be charged with it, (though his practice contradicts the
expression very often, as well as the Mageburgs thereby) therefore I shall not
spend time to disprove that which he owns not. The Second Instance he gives of
Mr. Ds. unfaithfulness, is, page 7. Mr. D. says thus: As to Baptism in the
Second Century, they say Cent. 2. cap. 6. p. 109. that it does not appear by
any approved Author that there was any Variation or Mutation from the former,
Which Mr. Whiston is angry for, and says, Mr. D. would make people believe he
spoke this of the subject of baptism, whereas it is of the Rites and Ceremonies.

I have Examined what Mr. Danvers says, and that Century, and I find that he
mentions neither subject nor rite, but only cites their words, and applies it
as fairly; their words are, Simplicem bapti^andi formam fuisse retentam ex eo
apparet, quod in probatis anteribus nulla insignis reporitur variatio aut
mutatio annotata. It is apparent that the simple (or old) form of baptizing was
kept (viz. in the Second Age) because no remarkable Variation or Mutation is
noted by any approved Author, and that this comprehends both the subject and
way of Administration of the first Age, is evident to such as are not
critically contumacious and blind; and it is very probable, yea certain, that
had the Magdeburg's found any Example for Infant Baptism in this Age more than
in the former, they would not fail to mention it; and though they say, Nec
usquam legiter Infantes hoc saeculo remotos esse, that we read not of Infants
being excluded in this Age, we may as truly say, Nec usq^amlegitur Infantes hoc
saeculo baptizari; We read of no Infants baptized in this Age: So that it is a
sure Argument the thing was not in being, because no mention is made of it, as
practiced or not practiced. I have read the Story of the Jew, which he upbraids
Colonel D for over-looking, who like to dye, was upon his earnest request
baptized (as they call it) by his fellow Travelers, by flinging Sand upon him,
there being no possibility of having Water there. But what advantage this makes
for Mr. Whiston, we know not, let him make the best of it; if he had thought it
so much for his purpose, why did not he mention it? but he chooses rather to
make the Reader believe there is something in it for his advantage, when indeed
it signifies nothing for him.

The Second thing he remarks, is the impertinency of his proofs, and of which
he gives Five Instances, how proper we are no^ to enquire. But first, Is it not
unjust for Mr. Whiston to charge his Adversary with that Crime whereof he
himself is notoriously guilty; as I could instance if I would be impertinent,
and for a taste will beg the Readers pardon to remark one. Is it to Mr.
Whiston's purpose, or does the Argument he manages require it, that he should
publish in print (first part of his Infant Baptism) that he is a Bachelor,
etc. is the World concerned in the changes of his state? or does he think that
by the Charms of his Wit and Oratory, some great Cometissa will fall in Love
with him? Is not that as impertinent a Proclamation as the Ecclesiastical
Politician's publishing his dull and lazy distemper? I would not have said
this, but to show how he that is so nimble to fall upon others in print, should
take care first to amend himself.

And as to his Exceptions under this head, they are indeed so frivolous and
insignificant, that it is in vain to spend time to refute that which any Reader
may do in the very perusing; for what does he more than pick up some scripshere
and there, pickeering at a part as the preamble (or that that makes way) to the
main thing, wherein all the force is put, and to which these passages he
snatches up may be only Circumstantial. So that Mr. Whiston beats the Air, and
fights manfully with a Figment of his own brain. For,

1. The piece of the Waldensian Confession, which he says is not to our
purpose, is but an Introduction to the 7th. Article in the same page, which
says, That by baptism we are received into the Holy Congregation of the people
of God, declaring openly our Faith, etc. which our Answerer takes no notice of.

That of Vignier is pertinently enough brought, wherein the Waldenses reject
all Doctrines which have not their foundation in Scripture, and all Ceremonies
and Romish Traditions; because the Baptism of Infants at that time was
practiced from that ground. And that he gives ^ testimonial of them, that they
denied Infants Baptism in totidem Verbis; See what he says, ( viz. Nicholas
Vignier in his Book called la Vraye Histoire de l' Eglise, p. 354. upon the
year 1136. speaking of the Waldenses and some of their principal Barbs, where
he has these words, Et qu'ils condamnoient le Baptesme de Petits Enfans
alleguans que le Baptesme n'aportoient qu' a ceux qui ont foi. i. e. And they
condemned the Baptizing of little Infants, alleging that Baptism belongs to
none but those that have Faith.

As to the agreement between the Donatists and Novations; it is also properly
enough applied, for all Mr. Whiston's have, as the following words of Mr. Ds.
make out, viz. they held, That none ought to be received into Churches, but
such as were visibly true Believers, and read Saints, etc. The way of being
received into the Church, Mr. W. knows to be Baptism, but he overlooks this
also.

As to the Three other Particulars out of the Waldensian Confessions, p. 282,
283, 284. 1 Ed. he Excepts against, as not to our purpose, let the same return
serve them as before.

That out of Thuanus from Dr. Usher, viz. that the Beringarians held that
Baptism did not profit Children to Salvation is a proper and suitable Argument
of their denying Infant Baptism, it being elsewhere evidenced (and which Mr.
Whiston nor his Associates never Answered) that that was the only ground of its
administration, viz. that it Saved the Child's Soul.

3. As to his Charge of Mr. Ds. perverting Authors sayings, viz. Paedo-baptists
in general, it is already fully cleared by himself in his Rejoinder to Mr. Ws.
and to him the Reader is referred. 2. Mr. Whiston would have us show, wherein
lies the inconsistency of their words with their practice; which is also fully
done. But me thinks it might be a properer task for themselves to reconcile
their Contradictions, which they are loudly called to do, if they can; and so
either yield up the Cause, or remove the stumbling blocks they themselves lay
in our way.

4. He says, Some of Mr. Ds. Authorities are against himself, and instances Mr.
Baxter, (we confess he is sometimes against us to the purpose, but sometimes he
is also kind enough, and gave us Twenty good Arguments improved by Mr. Tombs in
his Felo de Se.) But for the rest it is but mere prattle. Chrysostom is
instanced, to show the Erroneous ground upon which Infant Baptism was
practiced, viz. to take away Original Sin; and if it be a proof for Mr.
Whiston, let him take it, I Will give him another proof too if that will please
him out of his Friend A^stin; 23 Epist. ad Bonif. Nec illud te moveat, quod
quidam non ea fide ad Baptismum precipiendum parvulos ferunt, ut gratia
spirituali ad vitam regenerentur Aeternam, sed quod eos putant hoc remedio
temporalem retinere, ac recipere sanitatem, non enim propterea illi non
regenerantur, quia non ab illis hac intention offeruntur, celebrantur enim per
eos necessaria Ministeria. But he must excuse me if I leave him the pleasure of
Translating it, seeing he may perhaps do it to most advantage.

That Peter Bruis and Henricus denied Infants Baptism, we have good ground to
believe from many substantial Reasons offered by Mr. D. and if we reject the
testimony of Papists (in whose hands most of our ancient Writings have been for
some Centuries, which we are well enough satisfied to do) in this, why not in
other things?

That Cluniacensis (owned to be a very learned man) disputed with Peter Bruis,
and Henry, is evident; he lays down their Position to be this:

Nos vero tempus congruum fidei expectamus, and hominem postquam Deum suum
cognoscere, and in eum credere paratus est, non ut nobis imponitis,
Rebaptizamus sed Baptizamus, quia nunquam baptizatus dicendus est, qui baptismo
quo lavantur peccata, locus non est. i. e. We wait for the fit season of Faith,
and when a man knows his God, and believes in him, we baptize him, not
rebaptize as you charge us; for he cannot be said to be ever baptized, that is
not washed with the baptism that washes away sins. And then makes this
pathetick declamation against them, enumerating the Absurdities he fancies that
follow their Opinion; he says thus: Itane desipuere praeterita saecula, and
tot millibus parvulorum per mill and eo amplius annos illusiorum baptisma
tribuerent, etc. which I thus English.

And have past Ages been so foolish, and have given but a mock-baptism to so
many thousand Little ones, for this thousand years and more, and from Christ's
time to ours have made them not real, but fantastic (or imaginary) Christians?
Was the whole World so blinded and involved in so huge a mist of darkness
hitherto, that it m^st wait for you at length to open its eyes, and to dispel
so tedious a Night, that after so many Fathers, Martyrs, Popes, and Princes of
the Universal Churches, it must choose Peter Bruis and Henry his Lackey as the
last Apostles to correct its long error? What has all the World perished till
the coming of these New Reformers of our Age, and have all things been managed
by the Sons of Light and Truth in darkness and falsehood, that whereas all of
any Age or Rank having been baptized in Infancy, and received their Christian
name then, and in convenient time have been preferred in diverse degrees in the
Church, no Bishop of the Bishops, no Priest, no Deacon, no Clerk, no Monk, not
one as I may say of those innumerable numbers, will be a Christian? for
whosoever is not baptized with the Baptism of Christ, has not Christ, nor can
he be of the Clergy, People, or Church And if it be so, what manifest
absurdities will follow. For whereas all France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and all
Europe for almost three hundred or four hundred years, have none baptized but
in Infancy, they have therefore no Christian, if no Christian, then no Church;
if no Church, no Christ; and if no Christ, then certainly they are damned. Our
Fathers therefore have perished, because they could not be baptized with
Christ's baptism in their Infancy; And we that live shall also perish, unless
after Christ's Baptism we be Baptized with Henry's Baptism also. And innumerable
of the Saints shall be plucked down from Heaven to the Infernal Seats, whom
though baptized in Infancy, their life by its Holiness, the World by its
testimony, and Divinity by Miracles have made famous; they must be made the
Colleagues of Devils, who were the Companions of Angels; and they that through
their pious Labors are arrived to Eternal life, will suddenly be flung into
everlasting death. Our Holy days shall be turned to mourning, our Sabbaths
into shame, and our Honor into nothing. Who can bear these? who can hear it?
who would not shut his ears, and with all those they labor to damn, would not
rise against these Arch Heretics? But come unto me, and repent of so great a
Prodigy. You scorn and deride that one should be Saved by the Faith of
another, denying it with great Mockery among the Rusticks and unlearned
Multitude. A brutish and impious Heresy. Petrus Cluniacensis, contra Paetro
brusianos haeret. p. 1124. Edit Paris 1614.

As to those late Authors, he says, whose testimonies deserve no credit, as to
the first Ages, viz. Willifrid, Strabo, Boemus, Lud. Vives. I conceive however
they are to be believed as soon as Mr. Whiston. And he that leans so much upon
Origin and Cyprian, (though those Books Fathered upon them are judged spurious)
to prove matter of Fact in the First Age, though they lived in the Third
Century, should clear himself, before he falls foul upon others.

And Lastly, Since he declines all Humane Authority as of no weight, so do we,
and proceed to examine the Scripture grounds, which we desire only to adhere
to, and own it to be our Principle to receive no Article of Faith, however
entertained or cried up by Nations, Fathers, etc. that is not made Authentic
by the Written Word of God.

And whether Mr. Danvers (the Exceptions here made, being so few, and of so
little weight) deserves so severe a Castigation as this Author is pleased to
give him, let the World judge.

And therefore we go on to try the opposition he makes as to the Doctrinal
part. And first we affirm:

That Believers Baptism is only Christ's Baptism; which Mr. Danvers proved by
the order laid down in the Commission, Matthew. 28.19. to which Mr. Whiston makes
this demur; That this Commission does not exclude Infants from Baptism,
supposing their Baptism elsewhere in Scripture warranted.

That this is a very sorry Evasion, will appear, if you consider that this is
the solemn Institution and Commission given to the Apostles, impowring them to
Preach the Gospel, and Baptize; and to charge it with darkness and imperfection
(as Mr. Whiston does,) is to reflect upon the Law giver; and for us to observe
any Order, but what is here laid down, is to go beyond our Commission, and be
wise above what is written. Which is not only our Opinion, but the great
Basil's own words upon the place, (...), etc. i e. But we think it necessary to
have recourse to the order prescribed by the Lord, viz. first to Teach, then
Baptize, page 636. de Baptismo.

2. It has been else where sufficiently proved that Infants (because
Unbelievers till Converted, Ephesians. 2.3. and so incapable of the qualification
pre-required here) are excluded.

3. If it should be urged that Infants have Faith (as several Learned
Paedo-baptists affirm, though not so fortunate as to agree what kind of Faith,
some being for a Seminal, some a Federal, some an Imputative Faith, etc.
verifying the Proverb; Tot capita, tot sensus,) then we may conclude that
there is no such thing as Regeneration; for if we be Believers from the Womb,
where is there any room for the New Birth? and if that be once admitted, the
whole scope and frame of the Gospel is subverted; for it would be an absurd
Errand to call such to Believe, who are Believers by a Birth-priviledg, and in
a state of Regeneration as soon as Born. But common Experience confutes this
Childish fancy. And for that distinction (some of them make) of Faith in actu
primo, or Potential Faith not yet grown up to actual, were it admitted (for
which there is no Reason, the Maxim being just and safe, Vbi lex non
distinguit, non est distinguendum; Where the Law distinguishes not, we must not
distinguish,) yet it would not serve the turn, since Unbelievers Children may
be as truly said to have Faith in Actu primo, or potentially, as Believers
Children, they proving frequently Converts, and precious Saints, whilst
Believers Children often run the broad way of Wickedness. Besides if Children
had such a Faith, and that the distinction were (as it is not) good, it would
not be enough, because no Faith but an actual personal Faith qualifies for
Baptism.

But he says, Supposing their Baptism elsewhere warranted in Scripture.] But
why is not that Scripture produced? it is much talked of, but we can never see
it: which makes us conclude, that men that are so nimble to press Scriptures
into their service, that not a whit be friend their Cause, if they could hit
upon any such plain Text, would be brisk enough to bring it forth. But alas! if
they had their Warrant from Scripture, they would not take such pains to prove
that the silence of the Scripture is such an Argument to evince the lawfulness
of their practice [a very mad and wild way of reasoning] nor run to the
beginning of the World, to find some protection for it among the Jewish Rites.
Gospel Ordinances must be evidenced by Gospel Authority. What institution of
the New Testament but is plainly to be proved by New Testament Scripture? Must
Baptism alone (though so plainly, yea in words at length, both as to subject
and form of Administration there instituted) be beholden to Circumcision, Genesis
17.7. for its Original? though as different and remote from it as the Gospel is
from the Law; If so, Why are not the Baptized Infants now admitted to the
privileges the Circumcised were of old? viz. to be Members of the Church now,
as they were then of the Commonwealth; to come to the Supper, as they to the
Passover, etc. this Riddle we desire may be unfolded.

But he goes on in the same Tune, and tells us, that as here is no express
mention of Infants (that is well granted) so no word, phrase, or clause, that
can be rationally interpreted to exclude them.]

No more is there any word, phrase, or clause excluding Unbelievers Children,
nay which is more, not so much as a word, phrase, or clause that (literally)
excludes Bells, Church walls, Standards, etc. from Baptism; and if there be
ground enough for this Author to Baptize them, let him take the Honor of the
Employment.

He says, Christ may have given this Commission only with reference to the
Adult* (that we believe and contend for; and it is now happily granted us,) and
may have sufficiently declared his will concerning the Baptism of Infants in
other parts of his Word, that is the thing he should prove, and that other part
of his Word; if he knows it, he should direct us to, and so end the
Controversy. We have read the Bible over and over, and an find no such thing
we guess what he drives at, and believe he will settle at last in the Old shift
of Genesis 17.7. But when he comes there, we are prepared to encounter him.

He says page 28. It Is not necessary that o^r Lord Christ should expressly
declare his whole mind in any part of his Word, no not in the Commission it
self, for the administration of them. He would do well to forbear charging
Christ with Mental Reservations in his Directions and Commissions to his
APOSTLES. We think our selves concerned to obey that part of his will he is
pleased to reveal to us, and that he exacts our Obedience no futher. And if Mr.
Whiston durst do things in presumption, that they are that part of his Will he
reveals not, so taking upon him to pry into the Arcana of God, we will not be
of his Confederacy, nor Abettors to so desperate a piece of Arrogance. He Will
find himself puzzled to answer that Question, Who has required these things at
your hands?

He proceeds, and would make us believe, that the Commission, Mat. 28.19. is so
intricate and insufficient, that nothing of the principal things therein
included, can be made out by it; and the better to make the Reader out of
conceit with it, propounds five or six Questions, whether to puzzle, or give us
work or show his dex^erity in qui^bling, is not much to the matter. It is (...)
discretion of Foxes to raise a dust, that in the Ob^curity^^ makes, they may
make an unobserved retreat ^o their Hole, from the Hortsman's pursuit. Our
Author has learnt that policy; his meaning is involved in a Labyrinth of
Ob^curities, and inextricable Meanders.

1. He tells us, if we will believe him, That it is not determinable by the
Commission, Whether the Nations were to be Discipled by Teaching or Baptizing.
That this is an idle Criticism will appear to any Body that understands the
meaning of the Verb (...), which is to make Disciples by Teaching, (for Baptism
cannot make one a Scholar,) and (...), the participle of the present-tense
^olds forth, that immediately upon their being made Disciples by the Word, they
are to be added to the Church by Baptism; which is the interpretation that is
exemplified by the Apostles, Acts 2.41.

2. Who among the Nations to whom the Gospel is preached, ought to be accounted
Disciples, and as such the proper subjects of Baptism? This he proposes as a
knotty point, but as Aenigmatical as he would make it, we evidence the Justice
of our practice by this Dilemma. Either Christ sent them to Baptize all the
World whether they will be Baptized or not, or such only as receive their
Doctrine: The former Mr. Whiston will not, nor dares not avouch; therefore the
latter answers his Question. Besides the Scripture plainly Resolves it, (and
that he cannot say of his Infant Baptism for the dear sake of which, he makes
this clutter,) when it tells us, That they were such as gladly received the
Word, Act. 2.41. and such as professed they believed with all their hearts,
Act, 8 37. etc.

3. Whether the Nations were to be Baptized as Discipled, or as men? the
Resolution of the former may be enough for this also; the Text says, ((...),)
Baptizing, but who? why certainly it must be ((...)*) Disciples, understood in
the Verb (...), which exactly agrees with the Apostles practice, (the best
Comment upon the Text) And if you refer the Pronoun (...), to (...), (which is
false Syntax too, unless you run for refuge to the figure Synthesis, which is,
Oration congrua sensu non voce) and so conclude that all the Nation whether
Discipled or not, are baptizable; it is evident you pervert the meaning of
Christ, and would make up a Synagogue of Heathens, instead of a Christian
Church.

4. What the manner of Baptism is, whether to be administered by Dipping or
Sprinkling? this he says is not determinable by the Commission.

But we affirm, and he cannot deny, that the Word properly and natively
signifies to dip, or plunge under water; never to sprinkle; and therefore
conclude it the safest way to keep to the proper meaning of the Word. If
Sprinkling had been Christ's way, he wanted not a fit expression for it: And if
he and his party durst play the Critticks upon his words, and commit a Rape
upon his very expressions, we durst not join with them in it.

5. Whether only Males, or both Males and Females ought to be Baptized (...),
being the Masculine gender?

He might as well raise this scruple, whether Females are concerned in most
Christian Duties, because the words of the Text are addressed to the Male kind,
the Masculine as the most worthy, comprehending the other Gender. Is a Woman
excluded from the duty of Self-examination, because the Pronoun (...) is in the
Masculine Gender, 1 Cor. 11.28. or from the duty to abide in the Calling
whereunto she is called, because (...), (1 Cor. 7.20.) is so? Does not the
Article (...) respect both Man and Woman, (...), they two shall be made one
flesh. And why we cannot be allowed the same liberty here, I know not.

Having raised this mist, he thinks in the Obscurity he has made about the
Commission, he might bring in Infant Sprinkling, that it may lurk there too,
telling us that since these Particulars are as difficultly to be made out by
the Commission, as Infant Baptism, he may have recourse to other Revelations to
evidence it.

Answ. He might have had that liberty without making so Critical an Invasion
upon this grand Commission. (2.) We t^ke it as an instance of the unlikelihood
of his producing any other Revelation, because he tampers with the Commission
at that rate, and spins out time, never coming to any such Revelation, wearying
the Reader, with such a Circuit and Maze of words, that he forgets the
beginning, before he comes to the end. But (3ly.)

Let him from other Scriptures or Revelations make out, That Infant Baptism is
warranted in this Commission as clearly and undeniably as we can Evidence, that
those only ought to be Baptized (in pursuance of it) as gladly receive the
word, Females, as well as Males (being the thing he would make us believe are
so indemonstrable by it) and we shall submit unto it; In the mean time, let him
not take it ill, if we take no more notice of him, then of a man under a great
and radical mistake, though he may perhaps expect as much Reverence as Delphos.

He says, p. 32. The very not mentioning Infants, does strongly imply his will
they should be Baptized.

That Is a Consequence I never heard before; and proves the Baptism of a Turks
Child, or of Bell^, as well as the Baptism he pleads for. But why so? because
Mr. Whiston takes it for granted, that Infants were Church Members under the
Law, and this Commission* nor no other Text in Scripture does not repeal those
privileges. Is that it? why then, let us examine whether this be sound
Doctrine.

And that it is not so, will ^ppear from Acts 21.21. where you have plain
Scripture Proof, that Infant-Church membership is repealed. The words are; And
they are informed of thee, that tho^ teach all the Jews, which are among the
Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that they o^ght not to Circumcise their
Children, neither to walk after the Customs.

These words were spoken by the Elders of the Church at Jerusalem to Paul; in
which are these things to be considered.

1. A Report of a certain new Doctrine, that Paul had Preached among the Jews.

2. The Doctrine it self, that they ought to forsake Moses, etc.

Concerning the first, we are to examine, Whether Paul did Preach such a
Doctrine or no? 2. Whether the Doctrine he Preach^d were true?

For the first, it is evident that Paul did preach so, that they must forsake
Moses, and not Circumcise their Children, etc. otherwise he need not have
consented to purify himself, and so far to Judaize, contrary to the Gospel,
and his own light; his denial only, of the matter of Fact, would have been a
sufficient Confutation of such a Rumor: But he denies it not (that would be to
forsake his Gospel Ministry) but in a peaceable condescension, complies to
purify himself, that he may appear to be no Contemner of the Law, that
removing their prejudice, he may have opportunity to preach Christ the
Antitype of all their Typical Administrations.

2. That also is undoubted, that the Gospel-Doctrine he preached, viz. that the
Jews and all others ought to forsake M^ses, etc. is true, and suitable to the
Gospel dispensation. It Mr. Whiston denies it, he is more Jew than Christian

The next doubt is, What is meant by forsaking of Moses? To which I Answer.

1. To forsake him as a Prophet, or Minister of the Gospel Church, God having
now raised up another Prophet, whom we must Hear in all things relating to the
matter and manner of Worship in the House of God: For though Moses was faithful
in his House, as a Servant, yet he must give way to Christ, the Great Prophet,
Heb, 3. and no longer give Laws, or prescribe Rules about the matter or manner
of Worship; yea nothing as to the Subject, Time, or Place, is to be received
from him; but in all things we must be instructed by that Prophet that God has
raised up from amongst our Brethren: this is the substance of Paul's Doctrine.

2. Not to Circumcise their Children, is to forsake Moses, as the Text
particularly makes out; because Circumcision was a Law or Doctrine they had
learned from Moses; for though Circumcision was first given to Abraham, yet it
is called Moses Law, John 7.22. Moses therefore gave unto you Circumcision,
etc. But you must forsake this Law or Doctrine of Moses, and not Circumcise
your Children any more. This sounds very Harsh, and was very grievous and
offensive to them, that it caused such Fear in the Elders, that some Trouble
and Hazard to his Person would follow; which was the ground of that Compliance
in purifying themselves, to pacify the Jews for the present; they being so
exceeding zealous for the Law, and especially for Circumcising their Children,
that Opposition was Death, or severe Punishment. Now had Paul told them, their
Children should be Baptized, and that Baptism was come into the room of
Circumcision, etc. in all likelihood it would have quieted them. But seeing
there is no mention of any such thing, that He preached such Doctrine amongst
them (which without Controversy would have been mentioned, had he done so) it
plainly appears that Paul knew no such thing, neither had he any Commission to
preach such Doctrine, as the Baptizing of Infants amongst them.

And this further is confirmed, if we consider the determination of the First
Council, who were met about this very Doctrine of Circumcising Children, etc.
that the Jews were still so zealous for, and knew not how to bear the
Abrogation of it, (though they did believe in Christ,) and they would have
enjoined it upon the Gentiles, as necessary to Salvation, Acts 15. Now if it
were a duty to Baptize Children instead of Circumcising of them, then the
Apostles were unfaithful in not telling them of it, especially at this time,
when there was so fair an opportunity to quiet their Consciences, and to put
the matter out of doubt, and for ever to cashier the Doctrine of Circumcision,
which we see the Jewish Teachers were afterward endeavoring to promote. But
in regard the Apostles mention no such thing as Baptizing of Infants in their
debates in this Council, nor in their Letters they sent to the Churches, it is
evident they received no such Commission from Christ. And how any man can
Believe otherwise, and not reflect imprudence, yea horrible unfaithfulness upon
the Apostles, I cannot imagine.

The next to be considered in this Text is, that the Jews are also forbidden to
walk after the custom, that is after the manner, for so the word (...) is
rendered, Acts 15.1. unless ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, etc.)
So that this word Custom, or Manner of Moses, prohibits not only all
Observation of the Law of Moses, but also all walking after the same way and
manner, as the Ordinances of the Law were administered in. Here is not only an
Injunction of nonconformity to the Law, but to the manner of it also. They are
not only forbidden to Circumcise their Children, but also to walk after the
Custom or Manner of Circumcision; and therefore not to Baptize their Children.
Paul might have said, indeed to Circumcise your Children was the Custom and
Manner of Old; but as for the Baptizing them, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God.

And hence it is clear, that Infants Church Membership is repealed, and
consequently have no right to Baptism. For,

If Infants (as our Modern Paedo-Baptists allege) were virtually Commanded to
be Baptized in the Command for Circumcision; and that Infant-Circumcision, and
Infant Baptism were both Instituted together (as they that bring the later from
Genesis 17.7. must needs hold;) then they are both uncommanded again, in these
very words, Acts 21.21, where God by the mouth of Paul forbad them to
Circumcise their Children any longer, and to walk after the Old Customs. I say
again, if Infant Baptism was commanded in the Command for Circumcision of
Infants, then by Analogy (for Contrariorum, contraria est ratio,)
Infant Baptism must needs be abrogated, and remanded, in the abrogation and
remanding of Circumcision. And though I do not believe, that the precept to
Circumcise Infants, was so much as a Virtual or Consequential Command to
Baptize them; yet it is an Argument ad hominem at least; and I hope the
Paedo-baptists will be very willing to receive the same measure they give; and
rest satisfied in this, that the Countermand to Circumcise Infants is a
Consequential and Virtual Countermand to Baptize them. By all which it appears,
that Infant-Church membership is repealed, because the same Law that gave being
to it, is repealed. And whether this be not as plain (yea plainer)
Scripture Proof, as any Mr. B. has in his Book so Entitled, is left to the
judgment of the Considerate and Impartial Reader.

Now he comes to it, and promises to direct us where those other Revelations of
Gods will are, that Infants should be Baptized: And reading on very
attentively, and going with patience through his preambular Extravagancies, and
wide fetches, he brings me at last to the saying of Peter to the Jews, The
promise is to you and your Children; and the words of Paul to a Gentile,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be Saved, and thy House: Which put
together, is his other Revelation (he brags so much of) for Infant Baptism.

Answ. Now we are to encounter with all his strength at once; therefore let us
try the force of this mighty Argument. And,

1. If he can spell such a meaning out of it, it is more than we can do; and if
he had a mind to be understood, he should express himself in more familiar
terms. As what this promise was. (2.) Whether absolute, or conditional. (3.)
How Extensive? But since he has left us in the dark, let us a little examine
it.

1. What this promise is? And we say, that it must be either of some Temporal
Blessing, or the Holy Spirit, as Ephesians. 1.13. in this World; or Life and
Salvation hereafter. The two first Mr. Whiston will not pretend to, because
they have no reference to his Baptism. It is the last then, viz. the promise of
Life and Salvation, he insists upon, as p. 34. And then the words of Peter will
run thus; the promise (of Life and Salvation ( is to you (Jews) and your
Children, and to as many as are afar off, which all agree to be the Gentiles,
and as many as the Lord your God shall call, (i^definitely without distinction,
whether Jew or Gentile.)

Now this promise so paraphrased, is either Absolute, or Conditional: If
absolute, then all Jews, Gentiles, and their Children are Saved, whether they
Believe or not: If you understand it conditionally, viz. that they first
profess Faith in the Messiah, and receive him as their Savior; then we are
agreed.

And if you say, It is Conditional to the Adult, not their Seed: I answer, Then
it must be absolute to the Seed; if so, then all their Seed must needs be
Saved. And then, How come so many of them to be so vile and wicked? if you say
it is only to some; then it must follow, that some Believers Children ought only
to be Baptized, viz. the Elect; but it is impossible to assign which are Elect,
and which non Elect; therefore uncertain from that ground, which ought, and
which ought not to be Baptized. And if you say, the Covenant of Grace (or
promise of Life and Salvation) be made to Believers Seed only, and consequently
they only have right to Baptism: then it will follow, that the Church is not to
be raised out of the Posterity of Unbelievers, which is absurd; for the Gospel
is to be Preached to gather in the Elect, viz. such as are in the Covenant of
Grace: But if the Children of Believers only are in the Covenant of Grace, then
to what purpose is the Gospel preached to the Posterity of Unbelievers, unless
it be to harden them? for suppose a Nation of Indians, whose Parents were all
Heathens, and who therefore (according to your Opinion) with their present
Children, are not in the Covenant of Grace, Will you Preach to them? If you do,
I ask you to what purpose? you will say, To bring them into the Covenant of
Grace. Then it seems there are two ways to come into the Covenant of Grace;
one by being the Natural Child of a Believer; the other by Actual Faith. But
this is ridiculous, for there is no being in the Covenant of Grace, but by
Election on Gods part; and actual Faith on Man's part.

And if you still say, That Believers Infants only are in the visible Covenant
of Grace, and all the Seed of Unbelievers excluded; then I demand, Whether you
do not make two Covenants of Grace, Visible, and Invisible? But if you deny
that (for it is hard to know where to find you) and say your Children are
Visibly in the Covenant of Grace, when others are not. I Answer; you delude us
very often with the word (Visible) for sometimes your Infants are, sometimes
they are not in the Covenant (visibly;) so that this term is as ambiguous and
mystical as words of Cabal. 2. But if you mean by Visibly, that they are
plainly and manifestly obvious to the view of all persons that are capable of
seeing in the Covenant, then we deny your Visibility. And if you mean, by
Visible, that they are in the Covenant, as far as you can judge, since you know
nothing to the contrary: We say the same of Unbelievers Infants; for they may
be in the Covenant for any thing we know, nothing appearing in their Infancy to
the contrary; and, Praesumere unum quemque bonum, nisi constet de malo; is your
own Rule.

3. If by (Visibly) you understand outwardly, or in the outward part of the
Covenant, which is Baptism; we answer, That Baptism is no more the outward part
of the Covenant, than the Purse that contains money is the outward part of the
money; or the Conduit the outward part of the Water; or Aarons Pot that held
the Manna, the outward part of the Manna* etc. For Baptism is a Symbol of
Regeneration, viz. Faith, Repentance, Self-denial, etc. and to affirm, that it
is the outward part of the Covenant, is a very Fancy, and mere Chimaera.

So that you see what a Heap of irregular Jarrings and Absurdities follow the
Assertion, that the Believers Carnal Seed, as such, are to inherit this promise.

And now I am come to the next consideration, which is, The extensiveness of
this promise; and this is determined in the Text, it is (to all that are afar
off) equal to the Posterity of Abraham; which spoils the pretense from the
Birth privilege. But what puts the matter out of doubt, is the next phrase,
(Even as many as the Lord your God shall call;) which expounds the former, and
proves that calling (or Regeneration) is the condition of the promise, and that
only such as are called of Jew Gentile, and their Children, are Inheritors of
it, according to Gal. 3.29,

As to that expression, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be Saved, and
thy House. Is it Mr. Whiston's meaning, that all in the House, Servants,
Children, etc. are Saved, though Unconverted, by the Faith of the Master? (but
that is a conclusion, he durst not stand by:) Or is that promise of Salvation
given to him, and his Household, upon the condition of his and the Households
Faith individually? If this latter be his sense, we join with him in it; but
renounce the former as absurd, and unsound: For if it were allowed, then one
may be Saved by the Faith of another (a Fancy exploded by all Protestants) and
so it were enough to Save all England, if every Master of a Family had been a
Believer. I would ask Mr. W. if taking himself to be a Believer, he would
Baptize his Servant, and believe him Saved, though an Unbeliever, upon that
ground? If it be his Religion, his practice shall not be my example.

Besides, if the Covenant promise, they so vehemently affirm to belong to
Believers Children only, must be limited to them, and extend no further; how
come Servants that are not so concerned in the Birth-priviledg, nor the Seed of
Believers, to be pleaded for by this man, to have a right to Baptism and
Salvation upon the Masters Faith? We grant they have as much right to it, as
the Children (that is none at all till Converted) for the Text says, Thou and
thy House, (and I presume the Servant is one of the House. So that a Believers
Servant has as much right to be Baptized, as the Believers Child, though the
Servant cannot pretend to be the Issue of Faithful Parents: And if so, What Is
the Reason they Baptize not their Servants, they having the same Title with
their Children to it. And indeed if they will grant, that the Master, or Chief
Man's Faith, is enough to entitle all his Family, or those under his Government
to Baptism and Salvation; then if the King of Spain, or the Pope, or Great
Turk be Converted, it is enough to Warrant our Paedo-Baptists to Baptize not
only all in their great Courts, but all that Inhabit their Territories also;
their Subjects being their Servants. And how pure such a Doctrine is, that
would force so gross an absurdity upon the Scriptures, let the World judge.

So that I humbly conceive it is very evident, that neither the one nor the
other Scripture, jointly, or severally holds forth the promise of Salvation, or
a right to Baptism to any one, upon any other account, than the Condition of
personal Faith. And that Mr. Whiston's confident boast of other Revelations is
an empty flourish.

He says, p. 35. It was very rational, yea necessary, the Commission should be
expressed in the Order it is, because those to whom the Apostles were sent, were
in a state of darkness, and ignorance, wholly estranged from God and his ways.

That Is a certain truth, which we oppose not; but is there not the same
necessity still? Are not the Nations in a state of darkness, ignorance, and
wholly estranged from God now, as well as then, till Converted? Are not the
Infants you Sprinkle, Children of Wrath as well as others? And therefore is it
not as necessary that the preaching of the Gospel should be antecedent to
Baptism now, as (they confess) it was then? For my part I know no difference
between a Heathen and an Unbeliever; they are both alike distant from God, and
both equally capable of his converting Grace. And this serves for an Answer to
this, as well as the two following Considerations, being of the same purport.

He affirms, page 37. That the promise of Salvation, and Covenant of Grace, in
which the promise is contained, is still extended to the Houses or Families of
Believers, as such. To which I say, as before, that his sayings would be more
regarded, if he would condescend to prove them. But however, if he means it
conditionally, viz. if they believe, they may be Baptized, and Saved, we grant
it: But if he intends it positively, that the Master's Faith is enough to
Entitle the whole Family to Salvation, the Covenant of Grace and Baptism,
without their personal Faith, we absolutely deny it; and he has not yet proved
it, nor indeed is he able to do it.

He goes on, still harping upon the same string, and tells us, page 38. That if
Mr. Danvers could have produced any one Scripture, wherein the Apostles did
exclude Infants, or in their practice did refuse to Baptize them, he had said
something to his purpose.

It Is an unpleasant task to be answering to the very same thing so often; that
when this Protaeus varies his word, but not his sense, to make the Reader
believe it is a new Argument, shall we be obliged to be as impertinent in
replying, as he is in inhauncing the bulk of his Book by such trifling
Repetitions? Have we not over and over again, told him, (his own party with
open mouth, affirming the same thing) that for every positive part of Gods
Worship, there is need of Scripture-precept, or example to warrant it? And is
not our practice of Baptizing Believers confirmed by both, as all parties
confess? Whereas Mr. Baxter (and others) own that Infant Baptism has no express
mention in Scripture, nor in the Records and Histories of the Church. More
proofs, p. 279. etc.

2. Have we not again and again affirmed, (and which is no other than pure
Protestant Doctrine; Witness Dr. Owen in his answer to Mr. Parker, page 345.
where he calls what Mr. W. here urges a captious and sophistical Tale, by which
ten thousand things may be made lawful. And a little further says, that every
thing (esteemed as any part of Divine Worship) is forbidden, that is not
commanded.) That the affirmative Command includes the Negative; and so the
command to Baptize Believers, and the constant practice of the Apostolical
primitive times to Baptize only such, is enough to warrant the exclusion of
Infants from that Ordinance; so that the Scripture indeed excludes them, in as
much as it does not include them: and the command of Baptizing persons upon a
profession of Faith, excludes such as cannot, or will not make such a
profession. But he would have us tell him, Where or when the Apostles refused
to Baptize any? But it were more proper for him, to give us some instance when
any were brought or offered to them to be Baptized, for we read of none
refused, because none offered; and certainly had it been the practice to
Baptize Infants, we should have some instance of it in some part of the
New Testament. We never yet found in Scripture that the Apostles refused to
Baptize the Children of Unbelievers, shall we therefore conclude they were
Baptized. But we read, Mark 10.14. (the Text so often produced for
Infant Baptism, but a pregnant place against it) that the Disciples rebuked
such as brought Children to Christ, which surely they would not have done, had
it been the practice to Baptize them. Besides the Text says, they brought them
only to be touched by our Savior, and he blessed, not Baptized them; and
certainly, if any Infants had a right to be Baptized, those Infants had it; for
Christ says, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; he knew if they were of the
Elect, and therefore it would be no Hazard to baptize them, had he allowed it.
But this Text indeed informs us, that our Children may be blessed, and be of the
Kingdom of Heaven, by the application of Gods Free Grace without Baptism; which
is only a Duty to such as it is commanded to, viz. such as are capable of Faith
and Repentance. But,

3. Will Mr. Whiston indeed adventure to practice any thing that is not
literally and syllabicably forbidden in Scripture (not allowing any Negative
consequences?) If so, then the children of Heathens, or Turks, etc. being not,
in so many words, forbidden to be baptized, will give him employment enough.
And hundreds of the ridiculous inventions of Romish Impostors are not forbidden
by name and circumstance, (being indeed not known any more than Infant Baptism
in those times:) Will he therefore hold them lawful? and this is the
consequence of his Doctrine, utterly exploded by the most Orthodox Protestants.

He proceeds page 40. and would have us believe, That Infants are capable of
the ends and uses of Baptism, whereof he mentions two: 1. To seal, confirm, and
ratify the Covenant, with the promise thereof, unto those with whom it is
established. 2. To give those a solemn admission into the Visible Church, who
have an antecedent right thereto: and this he takes for granted (which is
begging upon begging) concluding, He will not spend time in the proof of that,
which no Body can or will deny.

Now he has made quick work on it; but should not he have known our minds before
so confident a publication of our assent to his Dictate?

And since that is all, we do here publicly enter our dissent; and lay down
this as our belief; That Infants (till they grow up and are converted) are not
capable of the ends and uses of Baptism, which are; to witness Repentance and
Regeneration already wrought, to represent the Death, Burial, and Resurrection
of Christ, the washing away our sins by the blood of Christ, our union with,
and putting on Christ, our entrance into, and right to partake of all the
privileges in the Visible Church. And as to what Mr. Whiston says, since he
only beggs, That the Covenant and Promises are established with Infants, and
therefore have an Antecedent right to Church membership; We reject it, as
unproved, and un-scriptural. And he is at liberty to make good his, and
disprove our assertion if he can: Which I shall expect, ad Calendas Graecas.

He tells us, page 4.6. That John did not discharge the Jews from any privilege
they before had, only rectifies a mistake they lay under.

Here he had done honestly if he had acquainted us what their mistake was,
since he knows John's mind so well: but alas, he foresaw that that would spoil
his aim; therefore that the Reader may not be at a loss altogether, I have
Transcribed it from Dr. Owen's Exercit beforementioned; and I dare say, the
Doctor knows their mistake as well as our Answerer; he (I mean the Doctor)
calls it a woeful and fatal mistake, page 55, 56. For they would entail
Gospel-Priviledges upon the old Faederal right, and would share of the
blessings belonging only to Believers, upon the carnal consideration of being
Abraham's natural Posterity; They thought (says this Judicious Divine) no more
was needful to interest them in the Covenant of Abraham, but that they were
Abraham's Seed according to the flesh, pleading the later privilege as the
ground of the former: But on that account they could have no other privilege
then Abraham had in the flesh himself, viz. that God would derive the promised
Seed (the Messiah) through his Loins into the World. And is not this to a
tittle, the mistake of our Paedo-baptists, who plead for Infant Baptism from
the very same ground of the Birth privilege, and entailing Church-Ordinances
upon the same Faederal Right they did?

I cannot but note an expression he has, page. 38. viz. Because we know not
the time when Infant Baptism was instituted, we may therefore say it is from
Heaven, and not of men.

Now I perceive the reason why he bestows so glorious a Title upon his Book.
But shall we conclude that the Tares the Enemy sowed, while the Watchmen slept,
were from Heaven, and not of men, since the drousie Watchmen cannot calculate
the time they were sown to a minute? Learned Usher gives Malone the Jesuit an
answer to this purpose, when he maintained, that the Mass was of Divine
institution, because Protestants could not exactly find (...) its Nativity, or
when the fooleries that attend it, had their Original. Must we receive every
error, when we cannot assign the critical minute of its broaching? Suppose I
know not the time when Mr. Whiston was born, shall I therefore conclude him not
to be a man, nor of men, but dropped from Heaven, etc? Is it not enough, if we
can tell the time when Infant Baptism was not in the Church? and that Mr.
Baxter has (very kindly) done for us, when he says, that it has no express
mention in the Records or Histories of the Church, for the first (and purest)
Centuries. And if this be the ground of his mock-title, I shall conclude it to
be (like Mr. Bs. plain Scripture Proof) of a complexion that cannot blush.

As to what he says about Tradition, being nothing of weight, and upon which
he leans not much, I shall pass it by, only note that Dr. Owen defines
Tradition, page 20. Exercit. on the Heb. Tom. 1. to be a general uninterrupted
Fame conveyed and confirmed by particular Instances, Records, and Testimonies
in all ages. And no other Tradition, the Doctor says, is of any weight. And
how far short of making out his Infant sprinkling, by Tradition so understood
this Author has been, is sufficiently demonstrated already. And so I proceed.

He says page 75. It is their Covenant Interest that we contend for
principally, and design the proof of from the Covenant at first established
with Abraham; and again, we plead not for Infant Baptism from the Analogy it
bears with or to Circumcision, but from the Command obliging Abraham's Seed in
their Generations to keep the token of the Covenant.

This is somewhat odd, he pleads not for Circumcision, but from the token of
the Covenant, which in another place he calls Circumcision; which is in plain
English that he pleads, and pleads not, from Circumcision: So that I know not
how to come at him. This is a new way of distinction, to distinguish
Circumcision from Circumcision; he would seem to leave that baffled argument of
some of the Ancients, and yet he cannot but be at it again.

We acknowledge there was a Command obliging Abraham's Seed in their Generations
to be Circumcised, (which he means by the token of the Covenant,) but that
administration came to its period at the coming of Christ; and therefore the
command of being Circumcised is not in force now. Nor have we any new Command
that Believers and their Seed must be baptized in their Generations; besides
the term Generations is frequently used to signify a certain and limited time,
the burning of the Kidneys, and the burning of the Fat of Beasts to be
Sacrificed, is said to be a perpetual Statute in their Generations, Lev. 3.17.
So the Offerings made by fire, Lev. 6.18. The Feast of Booths. Lev. 23.41.
which nevertheless have their period with the Law. So where God promises to be
a God to Abraham and his carnal Seed in their Generations, it is meant during
the Legal administration; not but that if Abraham be understood as a Spiritual
Father, God will be a God to him, and his Seed, viz. (such as did believe as he
did) without limitation, for ever. Whereas if he be understood as a Political
and Natural Parent, the Covenant then must needs be understood (to make any
thing for them) absolute and everlasting; but that were absurd, for the Natural
Seed of Abraham, viz. the Unbelieving Jews have broke the Covenant, and are now
cut off, which they could not have been, if that Position were true.

But that the Covenant was not absolute (as it respected the Temporal ot
Spiritual Seed of Abraham,) I evince thus: If (while the Church of the Jews was
in being) God denies himself to be their God, and disowns them as his people,
because of their transgression, then the promise was Conditional, not absolute,
but the Antecedent is true, Hos. 1.9. Exodus 19.5, 6. Jer. 23.14.

But if you lay so much stress upon that expression, that God should be a God
to you and your Seed, what account will it amount unto? for you can apply
nothing of the Promise to them, but the bare outward act of Baptizing (or
rather Rantizing?) but what of favor or Spiritual saving-mercy is that? or
what advantage is it? since the Children that dye Unbaptized, are as capable of
Salvation, as those you Baptize. For it is the Protestant Doctrine, not to
ascribe Salvation Opere operato, and therefore Baptism confers not Grace, nor
Saves the dying Soul, unless in conjunction with Faith, which applies the blood
of Christ.

The Covenant made to Abraham and his Spiritual Seed, respects Salvable
Mercies, Grace here, and Glory hereafter; but Baptism of Infants can confer
neither, therefore it is not the Covenant made with Abraham.

Nor need we yield to that Opinion that would force us to acknowledge no
Covenant but what is mutual, because this Covenant consists of Free Donation,
and so rather a Testament than Covenant, as Ames Mar. Divinity, lib. 1. cap.
23. affirms. And the word (...) is Translated (...) in this place by the 70;
and in all places of the Old Testament, except Isai. 28.15. where they render
it (...) faedus vel pactum inter parts, a Covenant betwixt parties, as Leigh
in his Critica sacra. And that (...) is Englisht a Testament, see Matthew. 26.28.
Mark 14.14. Heb. 9.15, 17. 1 Cor. 11.25. Luke 22.20. So that the properest
expression is, to call it the Testament of Grace; and this name is most
agreeable to the nature of the thing, for God does hereby dispose, convey, and
bestow all that Grace which may fit all his Heirs for his Eternal Glory.

By virtue of this Testament, or Covenant of Grace was the Land of Canaan
promised to Abraham for his Natural Posterity; which Typified the Heavenly
Canaan, which his Spiritual Seed should enjoy, upon the exhibition of the
Messiah; and which is indeed the chief Blessing: Not but that some of his
natural Seed too should enjoy the later, provided they be his Spiritual Seed by
Faith, as well as his Natural Seed by Generation: See Jer. 32.40. Heb. 8.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. and 10.16, 17. Jer. 31.23. and that same condition of Faith is
still required of the Seed of Believers, and without it they have no interest
in Christian Ordinances; which Mr. W. takes no notice of, but concludes in
contradiction to what he said before, That as Abraham and his Seed were
Circumcised, Believers and their Seed must be Baptized; the main thing in doubt
betwixt us, and for which he offers no proof.

But he goes on page 77. If the Covenant Believers are now under, be the same
with that established with Abraham and his Seed, and that as such: that
Circumcision was the sign, token, or seal of the Covenant, and Baptism does now
succeed in the place, room, and use of Circumc^sion; then Infants ought to be
Baptized, as of old they were Circumcised: (observe his frequent
contradictions, just now he renounced what here he concludes: But if these, or
any of these things be not so, but are mere m^stakes on our parts, I must
confess we have no sure footing for Infant Baptism in the Covenant, as at first
established with Abraham and his Seed in their Generation.

This is indeed the grand Fabric whereby Infant Baptism has been of late Years
supported; which if we can demolish, the Super structure must needs fall, as
now ingeniously acknowledged. Nor need we employ any greater strength against
it, then what Dr* Owen lends us, Exercit. 6. page 55. etc. quoted before: where
he solidly confutes the Plea from the Birth-priviledg, to Christian Ordinances.
And therefore to produce Dr. Owen against Mr. Whiston, is a sufficient
Confutation, if we had said no more. And this being the Radical Thesis, to
which the other Considerations, he wastes his paper and time about, are only
subservient as Attendants, (that the number and equipage of the retinue might
bespeak its grandeur and port.) If we should take no notice of any thing he
says further, but apply our Arguments only to that, it were enough, since if
this be once com^ted, the rest of his Book is cashiered of course.

Which piece of Service the Doctor has excellently done to our hands, proving
undeniably that Abraham has but two Seeds, the natural Jew, and actual
professing Believers; and that such only as are Heirs of Abraham's Faith, have
right to Gospel privileges, the old Faederal right being insufficient to
entitle the Jews thereto; therefore let Mr. Whiston either convince the Doctor
if this be an error, or be convinced by him, in case it be a truth: Or let him
reconcile that Exercitation to the practice of Baptizing Infants upon a
Faederal Right, or tell us plainly, in what third capacity the Infant seed of
Believers now are the children of Abraham, since they are not his natural Seed
(as all must own) nor (as the Doctor well words it in the case of the Jews) can
they, wanting personal Faith, be counted his Spiritual Seed?

But however a little to examine this foundation-principle, three Things are to
be offered to our Enquiry: 1. Whether the Covenant Believers are now under, be
the same established with Abraham and his Seed. 2. Whether Circumcision be the
sign, token, or seal of that Covenant. 3. Whether Baptism does succeed in the
place, use, and room of Circumcision.

To the first I say as before, that the Covenant must be considered in a
twofold respect; 1. In respect to Spiritual Blessings, Grace here, and Glory
hereafter; so it is and was the same to Abraham's Spiritual Seed in and through
all Generations from him to us, viz. such as Believed as he did. 2. In respect
to Temporal blessings, and so it was peculiar to his Natural and Spiritual
Seed, during the Old Testament-dispensation, and Typical administrations; and
in that respect it is not the same, Believers being now under the former, not
the later.

As Abraham is considered under the notion of a double Father-hood, so there
must be a double Sonship to answer that Relation; the Jews were his Sons in
one capacity, namely a Carnal Generation, of which they were wont to bragg, as
appears by the reproof John gave them, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father; and in the other capacity all Believers,
whether Jew or Gentile are his children: This is evidenced Romans 9.6, 7, 8. They
are not all Israel that are of Israel; they which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God, etc. and v. 7. shows us, that their
Carnal Generation gives not the true notion of Sonship.

The Jew as a Natural Son of Abraham may pretend to Baptism, and
New-Testament-Ordinances by a priority in respect of the Offer, Romans 3.1, 2.
Therefore Christ commanded his Apostles, not to go into the ways of the
Gentiles, etc. but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel, and Preach the
Gospel to them, Mat. 10.5, 6, 7. See Romans 2.10. to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile; and this gave occasion to the Speech of Peter, Acts 2.39. The
promise is to you and your Children, viz. primarily; and to the Gentiles also
but secondarily, which they of the Circumcision were astonished at, Acts 10.45.
The Gentiles are called afar off, suitable to Ephesians. 2.13. Ye (Gentiles) who
sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Now as it was
the pre-eminence of the Jews to have the Gospel first Preached to them, so we
find their carnal prerogative stand them in no stead, Luke 3.8. where they are
informed that Gospel Ordinances are not bottomed upon Carnal Generation, or
privileges; but true Holiness manifested by the fruit it brings forth, viz.
Fruits meet for Repentance: He came to his own, but they received him not; and
therefore as many as received him, whether Jew or Gentile, to them he gave
power to become the Sons of God; and to receive him, is to believe in his Name.

Men are now admitted to Ordinances upon other considerations than legal
denominations of clean or unclean, viz. fearing God, and working righteousness,
which is not generated or conveyed by Birth, but by the New birth, and the
Spirit of the living God. Therefore if the Natural Seed of Abraham could not
pretend a right to New Testament Ordinances by that Title, much less the
Adopted Seed, by any such way of Natural Generation. And if their Birthright
could not serve them, how can our Birthright serve us?

And this may serve as an Answer to the first particular; that the Covenant as
it respected Life and Salvation to Believers, is one and the same now as then.
But as it respects external administrations, and the qualification of
Church Members it is not the same; the legal, typical, faederal right vanished,
and Faith is now the only qualification.

The second, Whether Circumcision be the token, sign, or seal of the Covennnt?
This needs but a short Reply, for we find it to be called the token of the
Covenant, Genesis 17.11. And the Apostle, Romans 4.11. calls it the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, etc. intimating by
distinguishing between a Sign and a Seal, that Circumcision was to all a Sign,
but to Abraham alone a Seal of the righteousness of Faith. And we find
Circmucision never called a Seal, but where it speaks of Abraham, which
intimates that it was only a Seal to him. And this is suitable to what
Chrysostom, Theophilact, and others (quoted upon the place by a very judicious
pen) viz. It was called a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, because it was
given to Abraham as a Seal and testimony of that righteousness which he had
acquired by Faith: Now this seems to be the privilege of Abraham alone, and not
to be transferred to others, as if Circumcision, in whom ever it was, were a
testimony of Divine righteousness: for as it was the privilege of Abraham, that
he should be the father of all the faithful, as well circumcised, us
uncircumcised, and being already the father of all uncircumcised, having faith
in uncircumcision, he received first the sign of Circumcision, that he might be
the father of the Circumcised. Now because he had this privilege in respect of
the righteousness which he had acquired by faith, therefore the sign of
Circumcision was to him a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, but to the rest
of the Jews it was a Sign they were Abraham's Seed, but not a Seal of the
righteousness of Faith; (...) all the Jews also were not the Fathers of many
Nations. And Ierom upon Gal. 3. says, Because Christ was to spring from the
Seed of Abraham, and many Ages were to pass from Abraham to Christ; the wise
God, lest the Seed of beloved Abraham should be mingled with other Nations, and
should by degrees be joined more familiarly, distinguished the flock of Israel
by a certain mark or Circumcision; then for 40 Years together in the wilderness
none were Circumcised, because they were out of the danger of such mixtures,
being alone; but as soon as they were past the banks of Jordan, Circumcision
prevented the error of mingling with others; whereas it is written that they
were Circumcised that second time by Joshua, it signifies that Circumcision
ceased in the Wilderness, which was rationally used in Egypt.

3. Whether Baptism does succeed in the room, place, and use of Circumcision?

To answer this doubt, let us consider the great difference between
Circumcision, and Baptism. Circumcision was a legal Ordinance appointed to the
Jewish Males Reprobate as well as Elect, by a positive command to distinguish
them from the rest of the World, as a Token of the Covenant God made with
Abraham, viz. that the Messiah should come of his Loins according to the Flesh.
But

Baptism is an Evangelical Ordinance, whereby Jew or Gentile, Male or Female,
upon a profession of Faith and Repentance is baptized in Water, in token of
Regeneration, and to signify the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ,
the Messiah already come, and so added to the Visible Church, and admitted to
all the privileges thereof* which being not the Office of Circumcision,
Baptism cannot be said to succeed in its room, place, and use.

The consideration of the great difference in their institution illustrates
this also; for when Christ instituted Baptism, he says, Go teach, and baptize;
and in the administration, they confessed and were baptized, Believed and were
Baptized; not a word of Infants. And in the Precept of Circumcision, not a word
of Teaching, or Faith; but of Infants the command expressly notes the time, age,
and sex. The Levitical and Typical Holiness in Abraham's Household, whether
natural or adopted, included not Regeneration, nor heart cleanness, which is
our holiness; land, fruit, and trees were holy, in a typical consideration,
when Circumcision was predicated of Trees as well as Men, Lev. 9.23. And for us
to affirm that Trees ought to be now baptized as they were then reputed to be
Circumcised, is a wild way of reasoning.

And therefore since things become Ordinances to us by virtue of a word of
institution, and no such word is found to make out that Baptism succeeds
Circumcision in its room, place, and use, we think it safe to be sober, and
advance no further than the Scripture guides. And to make Circumcision
institutive of Baptism, is to send us to School to the Law, and that Old first
vanishing Covenant, as it is styled, Heb. 8. as if the Lawgiver in the
New Testament had not by a positive institution established his Ordinances
there, nor left us any Warrant for our Gospel-Duties, without that
retrogression to Moses, and assimilating them to the Paedagogy and similitude
of Types.

So that these things being found mere mistakes on Mr. Whiston's side, we may
conclude (in his own words, that they have no sure footing in the Covenant for
the baptizing of Infants.

He says, page 81. The Covenant Genesis 17.7. was made with Abraham in both
capacities, viz. as a Natural, and Spiritual Father. What then? This is a mere
Ignoratio Elenchi, and Mr. W. has a peculiar Talent to prove that which is not
denied. But to this I have spoke before.

He argues, page 89. thus: If Jacob and Esau in their Infant-state, were heirs
of the World, through the righteousness of Faith, when they had no personal
faith, then the Infant Seed of Believers may be so too. But -- Ergo -- the Text
he grounds upon is Heb. 11.9. dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob,
heirs with him of the same Promise.

The vanity of which consequence will appear, if you consider,

1. That there is nothing in that Text to countenance his assertion: We grant
Isaac and Jacob were heirs of the same Promise, as well in respect of Gods
Covenant with their Father Abraham and his Seed, as their own personal faith,
when they came to years; but that it should follow, that all the Carnal Seed of
Believers should be so too, is that that needs proof, and we deny.

2. I humbly conceive, That to be heirs of the world through the righteousness
of faith, and yet have no personal faith, as he words it, is mere contradiction
and non sense.

3. The promise to which Isaac and Jacob were heirs, is, That the Messiah
should come of their Loins, according to the Flesh, and how that (being already
fulfilled) can be applicable to the children of believers, I cannot tell, nor
Mr. Whiston neither: Therefore his Syllogism is vain and empty.

He proceeds page 93. To demand, Whether there be any Original Sin? If so, how
came any Infants to be saved, unless through the righteousness of faith? viz.
Gods non imputation of guilt to them, etc. Now, says he, if they are capable of
the righteousness of faith, why may they not have that righteousness sealed to
them by an outward and visible sign?

To wave many things that may be said to show the childishness of the Quaere,
we say, The same reason may be urged for Unbelievers children; for if they be
capable of the grace and mercy of Christ, in order to their salvation, viz. non
imputing sin, and imputing the righteousness of Christ to them as well as the
children of Believers; then (at your rate of reasoning) they have as good right
to the outward visible Sign. If you deny the former, you impeach the free grace
of Christ, and have little of Christian Charity. If you grant it, your
Position's overthrown.

In page 101. he tells us (if we'll believe him) That Circumcision was
administered to the Adult, considered as believers.

Here I confess, I do not understand, what he means by Believers. I thought the
term [Believer] had not been used to have been appropriated to any person, but
in respect to Christ; viz. Such as had some knowledge of, and believed in, the
Messiah to come, or already come: Otherwise sueh of the Ethnicks, who believe a
Deity, but not a Redeemer, must needs be saved. I am sure the Jews are
accounted Unbelievers to this day, because they reject Christ, which could not
be, if their admission to Circumcision and to be Members of the Commonwealth
and the Church of Old, had been upon the account of faith. So that there is no
truth in this position; for it does not appear that the Proselytes, or any
others, were informed of the Messiah, before they were circumcised; or that
they gave any testimony of their belief in him: but only that they owned the
God of Israel to be the true God, and were willing to be joined to that
Commonwealth. And Mr. W. knows, that that is not sufficient now, there must be
says in Christ, else no believer.

But what would he conclude from hence? Suppose the Adult that were
circumcised, were eonsidered as Believers; if he say, So all the Adult that are
baptized, are to be so considered (which is the most natural inference that can
be drawn hence) we are agreed.

But I perceive the pains he takes here, is to make way for that absurd
Position he is now coming to (and which I conceive he is the Protoplast of)
page 116. That Circumcision was administered to the Jewish infants, considered
as the seed of Believers. By the way, I wonder the man will trouble himself so
much about Circumcision, when he professes so gravely, page 75. That he pleads
not for Baptism from any Analogy with it. Which would make one suspect, that he
is apt to forget himself, or that he thinks we'll believe any thing; so soon as
he pronounces his Magisterial, Thus I say it, etc. But let us hear how he proves
it; Why (says he) because the Adult that were circumcised, were considered as
the seed of Believers. A worthy proof indeed, but it is all we are like to have.
He takes it for granted (it seems) that the Adult were circumcised as
Believers, and grounds his Argument upon it as his Medium. But Logicians will
tell him, that such a way of Argumentation is but a silly Petitio Principii; or
begging the question. But in order to a further and more particular
satisfaction I offer these Considerations.

1. That the Congregrative Body of the People, or Jewish Males, were
Circumcised in their Infancy; pursuant to the Command of God, being else to be
cut off from his people, Genesis 17.14. and therefore this Argument being grounded
upon a false Hypothesis will vanish. Besides it is a non-sequitur: for will it
follow, That if the Adult were circumcised upon their own faith (which is but
begged too) therefore Infants were circumcised upon the faith of others?

2. All that the Scripture mentions to be circumcised at Age, are, 1. Those
that were at years at its first Institution. 2. The Proselytes that were made
from time to time. 3. The Jews in Joshuah's time circumcised after 40 years
discontinuance of it in the Wilderness.

Now as to the first, We find no other qualification required, to entitle them
to Circumcision, but to be Jews, or Abraham's natural Seed; nor any mention
made, that Belief was a condition sine qua non; nor any excluded for want of
it. Yea Ishmael was Circumcised though not in the Covenant, when 13 years of
age, for God said, verse 21. My Covenant will I establish with Isaac; which
phrase is brought by an Antithesis to Ishmael, excluding him, though born of
Abraham's body: and we find the numerous Family of Abraham circumcised
immediately, without any examination of their Faith. And whether Mr. Whiston or
the Scripture be to be the sooner believed, is easy to be determined.

2. As to Proselites, he says he remembers not any particular instance of any
such that were circumcised; but concludes some were Circumcised, and that as
Believers, because they kept the Passover to the Lord, Exodus 12.48. which
indeed proves that strangers, when Circumcised, may keep the Passover; but not
any thing to his purpose. For if all that kept the Passover be Believers, how
come the Jews that kept (and do still keep) it, to be rejected by Christ's Law
for their Unbelief? Or is the Faith he pleads they had, some other Faith, not
sufficient in Gospel-dayes? if so, then that Faith that is insufficient for
their admission to Christ, is not sufficient to entitle them to Gospel-
Ordinances ordained by Christ. But what does Mr. Whiston think of the 10 Tribes
in Jeroboam's days, when they fell to Idolatry, and Worshipped the Calves for
200 Years? Were there no Proselytes all that time? if so, were they (when
Circumcised) considered as Believers? Or were the Sechemites (after the Rape of
Dinah) Believers when Circumcised, Genesis 34? Were the Servants bought with money
Believers? or those Proselytes the Pharisees compassed Sea and Land to gain?
Christ says, they made them twofold more the Children of H^ll. But this is a
fine new Toy, and let Mr. W. take the credit of its first promulgation.

3. Those that were Circumcised in Joshua's time, 5 chap. of whose Faith we
find no Enquiry; they were Circumcised, because God commanded them so to be,
and if they were to be excluded upon the want of Faith, it is certain that among
such a multitude, there were many Unbelievers. We read of an Achan in the 7
chap. that was stoned, and the 36. that were smitten at Ai for the accursed
thing, though Circumcised a little before; and numbers of them fell in
Rebellion against the Lord afterward. So that upon the whole, the Scripture
tells us of no qualification that entitled to Circumcision, save to be a
natural Jew, or such as were Proselyted, or bought with money: And to invent
others is point blank arrogance.

So that our conclusion is firm, viz. that to be the fleshly Seed of a Jew, or
bought with his money, was enough to qualify for Circumcision; no profession
of Faith being pre-required of either, Genesis 17.12. And he that is eight days
old shall be Circumcised, etc. not he that believes, or is a Believers Child,
etc. And what advantage the extravagant round-abouts (in which Mr. Whiston so
abounds) has got him, I cannot yet perceive. I am sure it convinces me that he
is in extreme poverty of argument, when he is forced to have recourse to such
Foreign and Remote Projects to uphold his tottering cause.

As to the trouble he is in about the promises made to Abraham, Whether they
belong to the Covenant of works, nature, or grace, or no Covenant at all,
concluding thus; If our Author will help us out here, he shall have hearty
thanks for his pains.

To which I say, that I doubt Mr. W. dissembles egregiously, for I cannot
conjecture how he can be so ignorant. But the perplexity he involves himself
in, is a needless impertinent one; and whoever goes to pluck him out, is as
idle as himself. But yet if he be really at a loss, and to deserve his thanks
(if it be not a complement) I shall adventure to direct him, where he may learn
what the promise made to Abraham was, and how to be understood in relation to
both Natural and Spiritual Seed. Let him turn to Dr. Owen's, 6 Exercit. on the
Hebrews, page 55, 56. etc. where he will be informed, the Doctor exactly
agreeing with us, and fully speaking our sense in that point, and therefore
quoted by me at large in my Treatise. And I hope Mr. Whiston cannot suspect the
partiality of the Informer.

And for his interpretation of Gal. 3.29. (...), if ye be of Christ; or
appertain to Christ, were it admitted, it is no disadvantage to us, it being
the same in sense with our Vulgar Translations: And if Believers Children, as
he says, be of Christ, it must be in respect of Calling, or Election, the
former is not to be alleged; and the later may be true for ought we know, but
that is no ground for any Gospel-administrations which are dispensable only
according to appearance; and since no Faith or Signs of Election appears, and
that de non apparentibus, and de non existentibus eadem est ratio, we,
according to Scripture-warrant and example, suspend our Baptizing them, till
they can give some evidence of their right to it; and if a supposing them to be
Elect be a good ground to baptize, then the children of Unbelievers have a good
plea, because some of them are Elect.

As to what he offers in order to remove the absurdities charged by Mr.
Danver's upon the practice of baptizing Infants, and his essay to vindicate the
practice of Sprinkling for Dipping, they are fully and clearly, as to the
substance of them, already so bla^led by Mr. D. himself, that I shall pass
them; and shall only conclude that consideration with the words of Dr. Martin
Luther in his Book de Baptismo Tom. 1. p. 71, 72. speaking of the signification
of the word, Baptizmus Graecum est, latin potest verti mersio, cum imm^rgimus
aliquid in Aqua, ut totum tegatur Aqua. Et quamvis ille mos jam aboleverit,
apud plerosque debebant tamen prorsus immergi, and statim retrahi. -- Et sane
si spectes quid Baptismus significet, idem requiri videbis; that is, Baptism is
a Greek word, and may be interpreted an Overwhelming, when we plunge any thing
into the Water, that it may be covered all over. And although that custom is
now out of use with many, yet they ought truly to be dipped, and presently lifted
up again. And certainly if you consider the nature of the thing, you will see
that to be necessary; which being the true signification of the word, we find
cause rather to adhere to it, than follow Mr. Whiston's unscriptural Dictates.

As to what he closes withal, that our practice of Dipping is a breacb of the
Sixth and Seventh Commandments. Let the same return serve his impious
insinuation, as is given to Mr. B. and Mr. W. after whose Copies he writes.

And so I shall conclude with an admonition to Mr. Whiston to more Christian
moderation; and if he thinks himself concerned to appear farther in ths
Controversy, that he lay aside all passion and heat, as inconsistent with a
Gospel-frame of Spirit, and tending to the extirpation of that Charity and
Mutual Forbearance our Lord Jesus expects from us. And let him lay down his
Thesis distinctly, and set down his Arguments syllogistically, or in a form
more intelligible to all persons, which he will; and directly to the matter in
debate: and not to trouble us, nor the world with extraneous and needless
rambles, leaving the Cardinal pretense unessay'd: (as he has done) save at a
very great distance, and with such timorousness and collateral approaches, as
would make one think he has no great confidence in the attempt, however he
would carry it in tongue, and confidence. And I can assure him, that if there
be any escape or undue reflection in what I have offered, which may tend to the
breach of Peace or Charity, I allow not my self in it, and will be willing to
receive an admonition if offered in meekness.

I would further advertise Mr. Whiston not to make Mr. Baxter, nor Mr. Ws. his
pattern in dealing with us, whose pens run at so licentious a rate, that the
most unspotted innocence is not armor enough against their virulence. As for
the first, no pencil can pourtray him better than his own pen: A man of
quarrel, sometimes friend, and sometimes foe, to most persuasions; to reject
whose poison is to provoke his sting; And to slight his Dictates, how
incongruous soever to truth, and inconsistent among themselves, is to undergo
the severe Discilpine of his lashing pen. Mankind (it seems) must gape for his
Oraculous Dictates, and must believe him as his present Sentiments actuate him,
or else take what comes after.

Nor need we express Mr. Ws. in a more averting Character than that he squires
^t after him; and should we apeal to Mr. Whiston, or any sober man of his
persuasion, we doubt not but we may have so much equity as to disallow his late
dealing with us. Figuring and Traducing us in his invective reflections upon
the person of Colonel Danvers, as if we had been such dangerous persons, etc.
in these phrases, -- When their hands are tied from fighting, -- Exploits done
in the time of his Collonelship, -- etc. And what is that but to exasperate the
world against us, and expose us to the frowns of Authority as much as he can?
how does this poisonous insinuation consist with his pretenses of respect? This
looks like Juda's kiss. Would he think it fair if we should use the engine of
Repercussion here? does it not rather (in his own Oratory) discover the
ebullition of a temporizing, waspish spirit? But he loves us Brethren, and
desires not our shame.] He is as courteous as lightning, that spares the
Scabbard, but destroys the blade. After he has represented us as such misshapen
Bug bears, and woundded us with his keenest Railery, he would lick over the
place he bit, and make us believe it is all stark love and kindness. Well, he
has shot his Bolt, tells us, our Doctrine is ominous, not fit for any Age of
the Church, with a fixation of black characters upon it, leading to blasphemy,
and immorality; and yet all this, is not to desire our shame. He may by the
same artifice knock a man down, and laugh upon him, and tell him, he does him
good service. He must pardon us if we be coy, to so rude a kind of Courtship.

Therefore upon the whole, if Mr. Whiston perseveres in that Intemperate angry
frame he began withal, in Imitation of the other two, I shall not think my
self obliged to divert my self from more grateful studies to vye tongue with
him; knowing that whatever he says, or what hard measure he may give me, Truth
will remain always answerless and unconquered.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is now humbly submitted to thine impartial judgment, Whether our practice
of Baptizing Believers so fully made out by the Scriptures, the Suffrage of
Learned men in every Age of the Church since Christ, owned by our Severest
Adversaries to be a Scriptural Baptism, exemplified by the practice of all
Antiquity, deserves such sharp Rebukes as our present Opponents dispense to us?
And whether that cause we maintain, though under so sacred a Patronage,
deserves to be so persecuted, as it is by them, and delineated in such
frightful Characters? since on all sides the baptizing of the Adult is granted?
but Infant Baptism by one side only, and upon such uncertain grounds too, every
distinction or denomination of Paedo-baptists, administering it upon a different
pretense, some upon a mistake, that it takes away sin, and saves the Child's
Soul; some affirming the Infant to have Faith; some upon the Parents, some upon
the Pro-parents, or Gossip's, some upon Abraham's, some upon the Churches
Faith: a very uncertain sound! whilst opposed on the other side with such a
dint of Reason both from Scripture-Authority, and primitive Antiquity.

And suppose you had been called to decide a matter in controversy betwixt
two, and find that what one affirms is granted on both sides, but what the
other maintains granted by one only, and rationally opposed by the other, would
you not judge his cause best, and most safe, that is allowed by both? And such
is our present case. A Queen of England demanded of the Protestant Prelates,
whether the Church of Rome was a true Church, and if Salvation may be had in
it? They answered in the affirmative. The Queen replies, that since both sides
grant, there may be Salvation in the Church of Rome; and but one only, that
there may be Salvation obtainable in the Church of England; therefore it was
the safest way to remain on that side that both agreed Salvation may be had in.
And though we plead not for the inference as then applied, yet it holds well in
other cases. For if one should ask, whether Adult or Infant Baptism be a true
Scriptural Baptism? both sides are agreed that Adult baptism is so, and one
side only holds Infants baptism to be lawful. May not the Querist safely and
certainly conclude, that side that has the suffrage of both to be safest. And
therefore we hope upon a serious weighing this Consideration, we may have the
Justice and Equity of an open Ear, from any denomination of the Christian
Religion; and that understanding the reason of our conscientious dissent from
the practice of Infant Baptism, they would not condemn us for affirming what
the Scripture invincibly makes out, the suffrage of Antiquity ratifies, and
they themselves own. Farewell.

A BUCKET of WATER To Quench the FIRE: Or a Letter to Mr. Obed. Will's
concerning the Contention between Him and Mr. Danvers.
SIR,
STanders by see more than Gamesters; and the present heat and passion you are
in, in your Contest with Mr. Danver's has occasioned these cooling
considerations, and if they may prevail to bring you to your self, I have my
end. It Is true you, have added in the end of your Book, A persuasive to Unity,
and to say the truth, you have done excellent well, and have used many Powerful
and Cogent Arguments to prevail with Christians to love one another; yea, and
you have given us your Opinion of Mr Danver's, that he may be a good man; and
that you have a very charitable Opinion of the Anabaptists. But to see you
spoil all again by your frequent scurrilous Reflections, and dirt you cast upon
them in diverse places of your Book, as if you would tell the World, that you
did not intend any Unity with them, or mean as you say: But either to keep up
an interest in the affections of some of them, or to quit your self from the
Odium of a downright Railer; therefore you first break their head, and then
give them a plaster: But do you think they are all Spirit and not Flesh, that
you thus provoke them, and stir up the remains of Corruption in them; Did you
really intend as You say, to be at Unity with them, and reduce them to the
truth, from which you suppose they have erred, you would have used more
moderation. And had you wrote a Letter to Mr. Danvers in a Brotherly way, and
showed him his mistakes in some of his Collections, and desired an amicable
treatment, how likely would it have been to have produced an acknowledgment,
and if occasion had been, a retractation. But Mr. Danvers has little reason to
think that you intended his Conviction (as a Brother,) but to defame his
person, and to disgrace the whole party, and that you sought Victory more than
Truth, so the course you take may increase the Malady, never heal it;
exasperate, but never unite dissenters: I could wish your discourse of Unity
had been printed by it self, it might then perhaps have done some good, but as
joined to your Book, it is a plain contradiction, and not like to produce any
advantage, unless to discover your Hypocrisy.

The character that is given of You (by them that know you) is, that you are a
person of a friendly Nature, debonair and courteous to all, given to loquacity,
and rather inclined to levity than morosity; so that the Gall and Wormwood in
your Book, breeds strange admirations in some, and makes them doubt whether it
be yours or no. I have heard of a man that beholding a Cat, said, It Is pity so
much Cruelty should lodge under so mild a countenance.

But perhaps You Will tell us, there was need of a sharp reproof, and you thought
that the best way to convince him; if it were your end (which is much doubted)
it has not, nor is it likely to be very succesful. Mr. Baxter has been
thundering against the Anabaptists these twenty Years, (as of late your self and
Mr. Whiston) with the greatest severity, rage, and fury imaginable, loading
them with many false and unjust censures, as the Heathens used the Christian,
the Papist the Protestants, they the Presbyterians, and so forward: And the
name Heretic passes for Orthodox amongst you all, but if you did really intend
Mr. Danvers his conviction, and the good of his Soul; then learn some
Directions from a late Learned Author (one of your own party.)

1. Says he, He that reproves another, must be careful that himself be
faultless and blameless, as much as may be; The Snuffers of the Sanctuary were
of pure Gold: and it behooves that man that will be a Snuffer to correct others,
to be very upright himself, and circumspect in all things; and then he may
admonish with the greater Authority and Advantage.

2. A man must be blameless in reference to that sin he reproves especially,
else in healing his Brother, he does stab himself; if thou reprovest Heresy,
Pride, Prevarication in others, and art guilty thy self, thou do but like
David in Nathan's Parable, pronounce the sentence of thine own Condemnation.

3. As he must take heed himself to be faultless, so he must be sure his
Brother be faulty, for otherwise it is not to reprove him, but to reproach him;
and instead of doing a Christian duty, he commits a Devilish Sin, and becomes
an Accuser of the Brethren, instead of a reprover of them; so that the fault
must not be a conjecture, or imagination, or jealousy, or rumor, [and then how
Mr. Baxter will clear himself, I know not.] But Sir, If your Brothers fault
must not be a conjecture or imagination only, how can you and your party so
reprove the Anabaptists for Heresy, Error, etc. and so majestically condemn
the whole party, and proudly trample upon all their Arguments, (as if the Word
of God had come to you only,) and that there was nothing (as you use to say) in
all their assertions; and that all their Mediums are such trite and out-worn
things that have been trampled upon, and confuted again and again. It seems
there are others besides the Pope that sit in Peter's Chair, and would tell the
World they are as infallible as he. But you must give us better proof of your
Infallibility before we believe you, and conclude the Anabaptists mistaken in
their principles and assertions.

4. He that reproves must be sincere in his ends, and take heed that his aims
and intentions be right and honest, and that he do not mingle any wildfire of
Pride and vainglory, and of an ambitious Humor of contradicting and
controlling others. This heat must be holy heat, a fire of the Sanctuary
purely, for Gods Glory, and the Salvation of thy Brothers Soul.

5. He must reprove Compassionately, with the deepest sense of his own failings
and miscarriages. Bernard said of himself, That he never saw another man sin,
but he was distrustful, and jealous of his own Heart, ille heri, tu hodie, and
ego cras; he was faulty yesterday, thou to day, and I may be so to morrow.

6. He must reprove Charitably, with the greatest love to men's persons, even
then when he shows the greatest zeal against their sins, for it is one thing to
be angry with the Sins, another with the Persons.

Therefore we should consult our Brothers credit, and esteem, and honor, while
we stab his sin, and not in healing a wound in his Conscience or Conversation,
to leave a scar of reproach upon his person, and a brand of shame and ignominy
upon his Name; that were to do the work of an Enemy under the Vizard of a
Friend.

7. He must reprove meekly, not in rage, passion, and bitterness, but in
meekness and sweetness of Spirit; This is the Apostles rule, Gal. 6.1. 2 Timothy
2.25. Take heed of carrying your teeth in your tongues, take soft Words to
convince Gainsayers, and gentle reproofs, and solid Reasons to reduce
Offenders. But whether Mr. Wills has at all consulted these Rules, (or Mr.
Baxter before him, and Mr. Whiston since,) or whether there has been any thing
of tenderness to their Opponents names and persons, any thing of compassion,
charity, meekness, whether any serious examination of the absolute certainty
and verity of their own Opinion, lest themselves should be mistaken (as Mr.
Baxter confesses it is easy for Wise and Good men to be mistaken in it, the
point is so dark and dubious) or whether they have enquired into the sincerity
of their ends, whether their heat has been an holy heat, and purely for Gods
Glory, and the Salvation of their Brothers Soul: all this is now left at the
Bar of the Readers Judgment, and will shortly be brought before a greater and
more impartial Tribunal. And truly Sir, I must tell you, that your dirty
Language, your extreme slighting and contemning your Opponents, loading them
with Scandals and Reproaches, sometimes charging them with ignorance and
insufficiency; proudly and vainly boasting, and trampling over them in your own
conceit, has (not a little) spoiled your cause, and given the Anabaptists a
great advantage against you in the Consciences of sober and pious Christians. I
have heard my self some persons of Quality and Piety to say, alas what
difference is there between Mr. Danvers, and Mr. Will's their Books! the later
is stuffed with ride, rage, and passion, the first with meekness, tenderness,
and humility.

And I suppose were the Books searched that have been Written of late Years on
the subject of Baptism, as Mr. Baxter, Sydenham, Cragg, Wills, and Whiston,
etc. on the one part, and Mr. Tombs, Blackwood, Byfield, Den, Danvers,
Patient, Norcot, etc. on the other part, it would seem to be discovered by what
Spirit they Wrote; and men would see in the first party a proud, magisterial,
scurrilous, abusive, and scornful Spirit; in the other a more humble, gracious,
meek, and charitable temper. If any Question it, the Books are Extant, and the
matter may soon be brought to an issue; but Sir, you have outdone them all,
not only in shooting your invenomed Arrows against the whole party, but
especially against Mr. Danvers, as appears by your Appeal to the Baptist
Churches against him; it seems you have arraigned, condemned, and executed him
already, and have said implicitly (though audaciously) as Paul to the Church
of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. for though I am absent in the Body, yet have
judged him already, that that he be delivered to Satan.

But stay a while Sir, and give Wiser men leave to search out the matter; Will
nothing serve your turn but present Repentance, or Excommunication? What
Scripture-rule have you taken to convince him? or must he Repent before any
Conviction has past upon him? Surely Illumination is the first work, and the
same Organ, that is for Weeping, is for Seeing; but a man must see first, as
Zach. 12. They shall look, and then mourn. But Sir, there are as Wise men as
your self, (and none of his party neither,) that judge that what Mr. Danver's
has Writ, was in the simplicity and sincerity of his heart, according to his
knowledge, and as he apprehended the meaning of those Ancients he has quoted,
and that he had no intention to prevaricate (as you charge him with) or abuse
the Fathers, to patronize his Opinion. If otherwise, you may think him, non
compos mentis, considering he could not be ignorant of the prejudice and
sedulity of the Opponents, who might have advantage enough against him, from
the Libraries in the Universities, and elsewhere. It Is true indeed some of his
Friends wish he had not concerned himself with the Arguments from the Fathers,
they say, they can spare it you very well; and are content with Father Paul,
Father Peter, and the rest of those Scripture- Fathers; what can be drawn from
the three First Centuries, is rather for than against them. And in regard the
mystery of Iniquity began to work in the Apostles days, and the Apostasy soon
came on, they do not value the following Centuries, though others think the
most part of his Collections justifiable, were the matter brought before
impartial and indifferent Judges. And though you have so concerned your self,
and served your Wits to maintain Infant Baptism, and some of you, as Mr. B. and
Mr. Whiston, etc. by such strange absurdities, and ridiculous Mediums,
altogether unknown to the Fathers, yet wise men judge, you have been all this
while bringing Brick and Mortar toward the repairing of Babel, which else
perhaps would have fallen long since; for they do not think, that the more
immediate Ministers and Factors for Babylon, would have been able to have
brought a stone at this day, had not you and others stepped in, and took the
Antichristian party by the hand, and said, Be strong; and in this matter, have
said as the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, Ezra 4.2. Let us build with
you, for we seek your God, as ye do; so we Baptize Infants as ye do, and though
we differ in some Circumstances, touching the ground of their Baptism, yet we
all agree in the subject, and so you have proved the greatest Enemies to
Reformation; though it is strange that men who have Covenanted to reform
Religion according to the Word of God, and have pretended to cast out all the
dirt of Romish Superstitions and Traditions of men in the Worship of God,
should be the greatest upholders of that Babylonish Building.

But what shall we say? The Carpenter encourages the Goldsmith, Isai. 41.7.
and it seems Gods time is not yet come, when Babylon the Great shall be thrown
as a Millstone into the Sea, and rise no more. But Sir, in the mean time, what
way is there left, but for Christians diligently to search the Scriptures, to
pray for the Holy Spirit, (the promise of the Father) and wherein they differ,
modestly to examine the Opinions of one another, and where God reveals more
light, to endeavor to convince their Brethren, with a spirit of meekness,
concealing the Infirmities, and covering the Imperfections of one another: But
those thunderclaps that came from you of late, make your Enemies to rejoice,
and your Friends mourn, and standers by cannot hold their peace, but like
Craesus his dumb Son, are compelled to speak, when they see the point of
Infant Baptism so provoke and enrage your Spirits against a people, who
practice the contrary, according to that light and knowledge they have received;
and profess, they would be convinced, did they see any solid Arguments from the
Scriptures: in the mean time, it seems they must be exposed to all the
calumnies and reproaches a numerous and prevailing party of their Opponents can
cast upon them.

But (Brethren) is not the Devil our common Enemy? and surely could we unite
amongst our selves, his Kingdom should soon be divided; and then, and not till
then, shall we see Satan fall like Lightning, and what glorious times might we
then expect?

I desire these Lines may be received in the same Spirit, and for the same end,
for which they were Written, which was not to increase our Divisions, but to
allay them; for the effecting of which, we shall still pray, and till God
removes from us every thing that offends, and supplants every Plant that his
own right hand has not planted. Sir, I Rest

Your Soul-Friend, T. B.

BOOKS Treating about the Subject of Baptism, Printed for, and Sold by Francis
Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
A Treatise of BAPTISM, wherein that of Believers, and that of Infants, is
examined by the Scriptures, with the History of both out of Antiquity, making
it appear that Infant Baptism was not practiced for near 300 Years after
Christ, nor enjoined as necessary, till 400 Years after Christ, etc. With the
History of Christianity amongst the Ancient Britains and Waldensians, etc. By
H. D.

Innocence and Truth vindicated; or, a Sober Reply to Mr. Ws. Answer; wherein
the Authorities and Antiquities for Believers, and against Infant Baptism, are
defended; and the mis-representations and Forgeries he boasts of, are returned
upon himself. With a brief Answer to Mr. Blinman's Essay; by the same Author.

A Second Reply in Defense of the Treatise of Baptism, wherein Mr. Baxter's
More Proofs, are found no Proof, in two parts; the First defending the
Antiquities against his charge of Forgery. The Second, justifying the charge of
Slander, Contradiction, and Popery, against his Writings: As also an Admonition
to Mr. B. by the same Author; and some Reflections by Mr. Tombs upon Mr. B's.
More Proofs.

With a Rejoinder to Mr. W. his Vindiciae, and an Answer to his Appeal; by the
same Author. Together with the Baptists Answer to the said Appeal.

The Bookseller further signifies to the Impartial. Reader, desiring
information into that Principle of Baptizing Believers, that he can furnish him
with

The Learned Treatises of Mr. John Tombs.

The Works of Mr. Samuel Fisher, in Folio.

A Pious and Learned Piece, by Henry Lawrence, Esquire

A judicious Piece, by Mr. Christopher Blackwood, Entitled the Storming of
Antichrist, etc.

ERRATA.
Candid Reader, Literal Escapes and Mis-pointings are left to thine Ingenuity
to Correct or Pardon; the most material Errors, correct thus: Last page of the
Preface, line 20. after endeavors, read to remove the absurdities charged upon
their practice and. p. 3. l. 9. r. never. p. 8. l. 2. dele thereby. l. 29. r.
legitur. p. 12. l. 29. r. lotus. p. 13. l. 4. r. illusorium. p. 18. l. 2. for
there r. that. p. 19. l. 1. r. included. p. 22. l. 10. dele not. There should
be a spiritus asper over some Greek words, which thou will note.


