AN ARGUMENT upon a general Demurrer joined and entered in an Action of false
Imprisonment in the Kings Bench Court termino Trinitatis 1631. rot. 1483. part
tertia, between George Huntley Clerk plaintiff, and William Kingsley
Archdeacon of Canterbury and others Commissioners Defendents as it was prepared
to have been uttered in Court by the said George Huntley, but was not
permitted by the Judges of that Court because, as they pretend, the said Action
or Plea or Demurrer was discontinued termino Sancti Michaelis. 1632.

Published by the said George Huntley to show whose duty it is to preach the
visitation Sermon, and thereby principally to vindicate the ancient
Jurisdiction of the Crown over the State Ecclesiastical against the
usurpation and presumption of the High Commissioners whereunto he is bound to
the utmost of his power by the oath of supremacy, and secondly to clear his
own innocence, and to recover his former credit and good name much blemished by
their scandalous and opprobrious sentences, whereunto he is tied iure naturali.

A discovery also and confutation of the foresaid pretended discontinuance,
with a true copy of so much of the two parts of the High Commissioners, first
final sentence, as is pleaded by the Defendants and as conteines the whole
matter to justify the said Huntleys nine years three quarters imprisonment at
several times, his five hundred pounds fine deprivation degradation and
excommunication. Both placed before the Argument, the one to remove the
foresaid rub of the pretended discontinuance, and to open a fair and clear
passage f^r the Argument, the other to show the state of the controvers^e and
ground of the Argument out of the defendants own words, against which the Law
admitts no exception.

Dicere viva voce in curia per judices non permissus.
Dicere in scriptis ex prelo per juramentum cogor.
London, Printed for George Huntley, and are to be sold be Michaell Sparks in
Green-harbour in the Little Old Bailey, 1642.

The discovery and confutation of the foresaid pretended discontinuance.
THe true cause of the pretended discontinuance mentioned by Master Noy,
Atturny General in his motion Termino Michaelis 1632. was this; That the
Plaintiff Huntley, began his Action by original, and drew up the
imparliances by Bill, and so had discontinued his Action by original in
drawing up the imparliances by bill, and had not begun any action by bill, and
so had no Action at all either by bill or original depending in Court against
the Defendants: hereupon the Court granted the order following.

Dies Sabbati prox. post Crastinum Animar. Anno octavo Car. Reg.
Huntley verse. Kingsley and alios.
Nisi causa ostensafuerit in contr. die Iovis prox. post Crastin. sancti
Martini actio Discontinuetur ex motione Attorn. Gralis. per curiam.

I presently got a copy of the foresaid order but I could not get my Counsel
to show cause to the contrary within the time limited in the Order, neither was
I permitted within that time to show cause to the contrary my self and
thereupon the Defendants Attorney Mr. Barker entered upon the foresaid Roll the
following discontinu^nce in these words.

Recordatur percuriam 27. die Novem. Anno Reg. Dmini Regis nunc Angliae 8o quod
istud placitum non habet Deum continuationis ^er islud rotulum ultra non post
predict. Octab. sancti Michaelis. Ideo ^lacitum illud ad requi sitionem predcti
Georgij Huntley disconti^uatur. The foresaid discontinuance enrred upon the
said roll is neither grounded upon the pretended cause of discontinuance
mentioned in ^he Attorney, Gralls motion, nor upon the foresaid Order of the
Court, but only on my request, and I was so far from requesting any such
thing, that I offered 40 pound, nay 100 pound to have the foresaid error
reformed. And the foresaid Order mentions no error, or cause of discontinuance
but only supposes one, and what can it suppose, but only that, which Master
Attorney General mentioned in his foresaid motion? and that is only this
because I began my said Action by original, and drew up the imparliances by
bill in these words, Petunt licentiam jnde ulterius interloquendi ad billam
predictam, and this I do six times mention in the plea, for so many Terms
the Judges gave the defendants to put in their Plea; and that being only an
error in form and not specially and particularly set down and expressed by
the parties demurring together with their demurrer (as appears by the said
Record roll and the original paper book under both our Counsels hands,
which I have to show) cannot discontinue the Action, Plea or Demurrer, nor
hinder, the hearing of the cause, nor be the ground of a writ of error nether
suspend nor reverse a Judgment, but is to reformed and amended by the Judges
even after demurrer joined and entered as appears by the 5. chapter of the 27.
of Eliz. which runs thus:

Be it enacted by the Queens most excellent Majesty, etc. That from henforth
after Demurrer joined and entered in any action or suit in any Court of Record
within this Realm the Judges shall proceed and give judgment according as
the very right of the cause and matter in Law shall appear unto them, without
regarding any imperfection, defect or want of form in any writ, return,
plaint, declaration or other pleading process, or course of proceeding
whatsoever, except those only, which the party demurring shall specially and
perticularly set down and express together with his Demurrer. And that no
judgment to be given shall be reversed by any writ of error, for any such
imperfection, defect or want of form, as is aforesaid, except such only as is
before expressed.

And be it further enacted, that after Demurrer joined and entered, the Court
where the same shall be, shall and may by virtue of this Act from to time
amend all and every such imperfections, defects and wants of form, as is
before mentioned, other then those only which the party demurring shall
specially and particularly express and set down together with his Demurrer,
as is aforesaid.

A true Copy of so much of the two parts of the High Commissioners, first
final sentence as it is pleaded by the Defendants Doctor Kingsley and the rest
follows.
ANd upon opening of the cause, the foresaid George Archbishop of Cant, Richard
of Durham John of Rochester, Thomas of Coventrey and Lichfield Theophilus of
Landaffe, Robert of Bristoll Bishopps, and some other of the Commissioners
aforesaid, found the aforesaid George Huntley, especially charged in the
Articles with two perticulars, first for refusing to Preach a Uisitation Sermon
at the requisition and command of the Archdeacon of the Diocese contrary to
his Canonical obedience; and secondly for setting up an opinion and
maintaining it before the rest of the Clergy of the Diocese, that the
Archdeacon of the Diocese had no power to require or command him or any other
Minister to preach a Sermon at his Uisitation, with many other abusive
behaviors about that matter, it now appeared, that the said Mr. Huntley in the
months and years articulate, especially since the 27 of March 1625. had been
by the said Mr. Archdeacon diverse times willed or required to Preach a
Uisitation Sermon, and had time sufficient to provide himself, that Mr.
Huntley without all due respect of Mr. Archdeacon, or the canonical obedience,
he ought unto him with words of scorn and contempt, refused to perform that
duty, as was justified out of his own answers, both in words and writing, that
Mr. Doctor Kingsley hereupon appealed to the Lord Archbishop of Cant. his
Grace, (who is immediate Ordinary and Metropolitan to them both) for redress
herein, that his Grace upon notice thereof, wrote a particular letter to said
Mr. Huntley, the true copy whereof after the original showed to Mr. Huntley,
was left with him) and therein advised and required Mr. Huntley to prepare
himself to preach a Uisitation Sermon he having time enough given him to
prepare himself for that purpose, which commandment of his Grace, the said
Mr. Huntley slighted and utterly refused to perform that duty, and not
desisting after such refusal, came unsent for, or uncalled for to Mr.
Archdeacon aforesaid being in his Uisitation amongst the Clergy, and sitting
there to hear causes and very malepartly and unreverently charged him the said
Mr. Archdeacon of falsehood or injustice and in a very arrogant and
irrespective manner, laid down an hundred pounds in gold upon the table, and
offered to lay wagers with him the said Mr. Docter Kingsley the Archdeacon,
that he had done him the said Huntley wrong, or the like in effect, without any
due respect of the said Archdeacon his person or place, and to the
encouragement of other refractary persons, as was there also proved to the
Court, for which his gross abuses and contempts, the Court held him well
worthy to be punished, and so much the rather, because the court was of
opinion, and so proncunced, that the said Mr. Huntley was by the Lords Grace of
Cant. his Ordinary and the Archdeacon aforesaid enjoined to do no more, then
what by Law and custom according to his canonical obedience, he was tied to
perform, yet nevertheless the court at this time reserving to themselves
their further censure, as occasion should be offered, for the present only
ordered him the said Mr. Huntley upon the commandment of the Archdeacon of
Cant. upon a competent warning to be given him, to Preach a Sermon at the next
Uisitation to be holden by Mr. Archdeacon of Cant. and afterward before the
Clergy in the said Uisitation to acknowledge his fault in conceptis verbis, as
shall be prescribed by any three or two of the Commissioners Judges of the
Court, unto whom it is now referred to set down the same, and he is juditially
admonished, and required to appear here personally in this place, the second
court day of the next term, to certify of his due performance thereof
accordingly, whereupon afterward namely, one the 19. of April Anno Dom. 1627.
at Westminster aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, the aforesaid
George Huntley then and there, being publicly called, appeared personally. And
being then and there by the foresaid most Reverend father in Christ and Lord,
the Lord George by Divine providence Archbishop of Cant. primate of all
England, and Metropolitan: Richard of Durham John of Rochester, Lewis of
Bangor, Thomas of Coventry and Lichfield, William of Bath and Wells,
Theophilus of Landaffe, Robert of Bristoll, respectively Bishops, Dudley
Digges, and Henry Marten Knights, John Done, Walter Balcanqnall, William
Kingsley, Thomas Worrall, professors of Divinity, Edmond Pope, Hugh Barker,
Doctors of Law, Commissioners aforesaid, demanded whether he the said George
had performed the foresaid order, made the foresaid eigth day of February, Ann.
Dom. 1626. foresaid, as is aforesaid or no, to wit, whether he had Preached his
Uisitation Sermon according to the requisition and command of the foresaid
Archdeacon of Cant. and made his submission conceptis verbis before the
Clergy, as was enjoined him by the foresaid Court of high Commission
aforesaid; he the said George Huntley, then and there acknowledged that he had
done neither, and then and there alleged frivolous matter in excuse thereof,
to wit, that Mr. Archdeacon aforesaid had not warned him by a lawful process
to Preach. But it appeared to the said Court of high Commission by affidavit
made, that the foresaid Master Archdeacon had given him sufficient warning by a
public officer, and a competent time to provide himself, to Preach a
Uisitation Sermon, and he being a man sufficiently qualified, by his gifts of
learning for that purpose, not withstanding contemptuously refused to perform
his duty therein, and also that he the said George Huntley refused to perform
his submission conceptis verbis, as was enjoined unto him: The said Court of
High Commission unamimi consensu prononuced him guilty of a great affront and
contempt, not only to the said Mr. Archdeacon, and the Lord Archbishop of
Cant. primate of all England, and metropolitan, and his the said Huntleys
immediate Ordinary, unto whom the said Huntley is tied by oath, to perform
canonical obedience, but also against his Majesty's supreme power and
authority in matters and causes Ecclesiastical, and this Court, unto whom the
same by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England is delegated and
committed, and therefore the said Court of high Commission held the said George
worthy to be punished, and first fined him in five hundred pounds to his
Majesty's use, and committed him to the new prison (namely to the custody of
Brian Wilton, then warden of the new prison) and there ordered him to remain,
until he shall give sufficient bond with suerties in a competent sum to his
Majesty use, as well for the payment of his fine, as it shall be mitigated as
for the performance of his submission heretofore enjoined him, etc.

Now these two parts of the High Commissioners first final sentence, contain
the whole original matter, for which alone the High Commissioners aforesaid
did fine me five hundred pounds and imprisoned me on the 19 day of April 1627.
and kept me in prison two whole years; And for which alone without any other
crime or fault afterward objectd against me in any new articles, or in any
additionalls or superadditionalles to the first articles, the Commissioners did
on the 25 day of June, 1629. by a sentence, wherein they charge me with grievous
and enormous crimes, excesses and delicts mentioned in the foresaid articles,
(in which articles there is never a crime charged upon me) deprive and degrade
me, and thereupon kept me a prisoner until the 10 day of May 1633. And for
which alone, on their last court day in Hilarie Term 1630. they did
excommunicate me, because I would not deliver up my orders diaconatus and
presbyteratus. And for which alone, yet neither certified into the Exchequer by
the h High Commissioners together with the fine aforesaid, nor legally seen
nor understood by the Barons of the Exchequer, my Lord chief Baron sir
Humphrey Daverport and the other Barons of the Exchequer refusing to grant me a
certiorarj to the High Commition Court to command them to certfie the cause and
to permit me to plead to the foresaid fine, did the 10. of May 1633. commit
me to the Fleet in execution of the foresaid fine, and there detained me a full
year, until I to procure my liberty, paid the fourth part of the said fine to
Mr. Motershed pecunijs numeratis, and stal'd the other three parts to the Kings
use. And for which, and also for a Petition delivered at the Counsel Table to
crave justice therein according to his Majesty's mandate, under sir Edward
Powels hand to my Lord chief Justice, sir John Bramston and the other Judges
of the Kings Bench court, dated the 29. of December 1635. and delivered with
mine own hand to the said Judges in open Court the first day of Hilary Term
1635. I was by my most reverend Diocesan and provincial William Lord
Archbishop of Cant. his Grace, and other right Honorable Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council, on the third day of February 1636. committed to
custody of the Warden of the Fleet, by a warrant wherein no cause of
commitment was expressed, and there detained a prisoner by him, until Trinity
Term 1639. and then upon an habeas corpus issuing out of the Kings Bench
Court I was brought to that court in Trinity Term 1639. and the foresaid
warrant for my commitment returned and then I was presently bayled, and thereby
tied to appear in court diverse days, both that Term and the Term thence
next following, and because none of the Kings Counsel in all that time came in
against me, I was on the last day of that Michaelmas Term 1639. delivered
from the said bail and imprisonment, by the joint consent of all the Reverend
Judges then of that court. As I formerly had been in the same court, Termino
paschae 1629. after the first two years imprisonment upon the foresaid
original matter, returned to an habeas, and fully debated by Counsel on both
sides and Mr Justice Bertley then the Kings Sergeant in open court professing
himself fully satisfied. And for the former original matter only, may for
nothing at all in the judgment of the Law, even for the foresaid sentence of
deprivation and degradation, charging me with grievous and enormous crimes
excesses and delicts mentioned in the said Articles and those Articles not
given in evidence, nor found by the Jury in the special verdict between Allen
and Nash, entered upon record in the Kings Bench court termino Sancti michaelis
8. Car. rot. 508. my Lord chief Justice of that court, sir John Bramston did
for himself and his brethren Termino Trinitatis 1637. affirm the foresaid
sentence, and deliver his opinion against me for the intruder Robert Carter.

Whence it follows that if the Commissioners aforesaid first final sentence
against me and the 500 pounds fine thereby imposed upon me, and the two years
imprisonment thereby sustained by me be just and legal, then all the other
sentences, censures and punishments following and depending thereupon, may be
just and legal: But if the former the only ground of all the rest, be unjust
and illegal, then all the other must of necessity be unjust and illegal.

And whether the former be just or unjust, let the indifferent reader judge
impatially, upon the perusal of the following argument.

MY Honored Lord chief Justice, and my Honored Judges, the first thing in
this Controversy, concerning the points of the Canon law in question,
whereunto chiefly I am to speak, is the very stating of the controversy it
self between me and my adversaries; And for that purpose in the first place I
humbly desire your Lordship and the Court to observe, that the defendants
charge me with faults of several degrees, some principal and especial,
others inferior and accessory^

The Principal and Especial are two, as appears by their first final
sentence alleged in their plea, wherein they say, that upon the opening of the
cause, they found the aforesaid George Huntley charged in the said Articles,
with these two perticulers principally This word specialiter, in this sense is
3. times used in the defendants plea. twice in the first part of their first
final sentence, and once in the Commission, and of 14. Articles objected
against me, 12. do expressly mention my refusal to Preach the Visitation
sermon, as a fault, or prepare the way theieunto; and the fourth says that I
offered two or three pieces to the Archdeacon, to procure one to preach that
sermon, only the sixth and thirteenth Articles do not mention it.
or especially, first that he refused to preach a visitation sermon at the
Archdeacons of Cant. Doctor Kingsleys command contrary to his Canonical
obedience, and secondly that he raised an opinion amongst the Clergy, that the
said Archdeacon had no power to command him the said Huntley or any other
incmbent to preach the said visitation Sermon.

The Inferiors or Accessories are four; first that the said Huntley came
unsent for, or uncal'd for to Master Archdeacon aforesaid, he being in his
visitation amongst the Clergy, and sitting there to hear causes; Secondly
that the said Huntley did then and there very malepertly and irreverently
charge the said Archdeacon of falsehood or injustice, thirdly that the said
Huntley did at the same time and place in a very arrogant and irrespective
manner, lay down an hundred pounds in Gold upon the table and offered to lay
wagers with him the said archdeacon, that he had done him the said Huntley
wrong or the like in effect: and fourthly and lastly that the said Huntley
refused to perform his submission conceptis verbis as was enjoined him by the
Commissioners, and therein gave a great affront and contempt both against his
Majesty's supreme power and authority, in matters and causes Ecclesiastical,
and also against the high commission court, to whom the same by letters patents
under the great seal of England is delegated and committed.

And for these six particulers, the defendants confess, that they imprisoned
me two years, namely from the nineteenth day of April 1627. to April 1629.
In which month upon my appearance in this court the first day of that Easter
Term 1629. to save my bail, you Master Justice Heath, then the Kings
Attorney General were first called for by the Court in the Kings behalf
against me, and you came and confessed, that you had nothing to say against me,
and then Master Justice Bertley being then the Kings Sergeant, whose Master
Justice Bertley at this time was in the custody of the Sheriff of London.
absence I much lament, whose presence I much desire, was called for by the
court for the same purpose against me, and he came and confessed, that he had
formerly spoken twice against me upon the matter returned to the habeas corpus
(which was the very same for substance, that is now pleaded against me) and
he then further added, that he was now satisfied, he had no more to say
against me; and yet the court would not upon that day deliver me, but ordered
me to make my appearance in court two several days after that, and then when
no man came in against me, I was on 29. day of that month of April 1629.
delivered by the joint consent of all the reverend Judges, then of this court,
and therein, (I speak it with singular exultation) I received as much favor
as a Rogue at Newgate, who when no man comes in against him, is acquitted by
Proclamation, which is the most that I could ever get since, except it were
greater injuries and indignities, I speak it with much grief, and lamentation.

Now my Lord the two principal, and especial pretended faults against me,
will descide the whole controversy between me and my adversaries, and either
justify them, and condemn me, or else condemn them, and justify me, for if
the defendants can make good these two Principal or Especial pretended faults
against me, that my refusal to Preach the Archdeacons visitation Sermon is a
breach of Canonical obedience, and that I in maintaining it to be the
Archdeacons duly to Preach his own visitation Sermon, have raised among the
Clergy a new opinion contrary to the Canons, then I shall confess my self
faulty in all the rest, and justly fined, imprisoned, deprived degraded and
excommunicated. But if the defendants fail in these two points, being by their
own Testimony, the two Principal and especial points against me, then they
fail and fall in all the rest, for according to their law; Siprincipalis causa
non subsistat, ea quae sequuntur, locum non habent. And then your Lordship and
the court, are not to give credit unto the defendants in any other part of
their plea, that makes either for them or against me, for qui semel est malus,
semper, presumitur malus in eodem genere mali, and qui semel veritatis and
verecundiae limits transilierit, eum oportet esse guaviter imprudentem, nec ei
deinceps nisi paenitenti, culpam consitenti, and veniam expetenti, est in
aliquo credendum. And therefore if the defendants have wittingly, and
willingly, palpably and grossly falsified the law in the principals, Your
Lordship and the court are not to give credit unto them in the accessories. If
in the principalls they have called my obedience to the word of God, to the
Articles, Statutes, Canons, to his Majesty's Letters Patents, royal
Prerogative and oath of supremacy (which are all extant to the veiw of the
world) a breach of Canonical obedience, a principal or especial fault, a
grievous and enormous crime, what credit is to be given unto them concerning
any fact, they charge me with in the Accessories, seeing therein they may speak
false securely, and not be confuted by any law, as in the former? And so my
Lord, having stated the controversy between me and my adversaries concerning
the points of the Canon law in difference between us, I proceed to speak to
the controversy thus stated, and first to the principalls.

My Honored Lord chief justice, and my Honored Judges my refusal to Preach
the Archdeacon of Cant. Doctor Kingsleys Uisitation Sermon, and the publishing
of an opinion amongst the Clergy, that the said Archdeacon had no power to
command me, or any other incumbent to preach the said visitation Sermon are
the two maine and Capital crimes, for which I have been imprisoned these two
years 1627. and 28. by the defendants Doctor Kingsley and the rest.

This appears out of the High Commission sentence alleged in the defendants
plea, put in to my Declaration, for therein they say, that upon the opening of
the cause, they found me charged in the said articles with these two
particulers principally or especially, first that I refused to Preach a
Uisitation Sermon at the Archdeacons command contrary to my canonical
obedience, and secondly that I set up an opinion amonst the Clergy, that the
said Archdeacon had no power to command me or any other incumbent to Preach
the said Uisitation Sermon.

Now my Lord, if these two be my Principal or Especial faults, as the
defendants themselves confess they are, and testimonium ab adversario contra
se fortissimum, then by the force of comparison drawn from the adversaries own
estimate, all the other must needs be inferior and accessory, and then if the
Principal or Especial faults prove no just causes of imprisonement nay
further prove no faults at all nay further yet, prove virtues and eminent
virtues even the virtues of canonical obedience, much less can the inferiors
or accessories be any faults or any just causes of imprisonement, for according
to their own law, accessorium debet sequi naturam principalis, and si
principalis causa non subsistat ea quae sequuntur locum non habent.

Now my Lord these two Principal or Especial faults pretended against me, do
beget two Principal or Especial questions, the one of practice and action,
and it is this; whether my refusal to preach the Archdeacons Uisitation
Sermon be a breach of Canonical obedience, or not? the other of Speculation
and Opinion and it is this; whether this my opinion that the Archdeacon has no
power to command me or any other incumbent to Preach his Uisitation Sermon, be
held and published contrary to the Canons, or not? And these two questions are
so lincked together that they do invieem se ponere and auferre and are to be
both, either jointly affirmed or jointly denied, for if my refusal to Preach
the Archdeacons Uisitation Sermon, be a breach of Canonical obedience, then
this my opinion, that the Archdeacon has no power to command me or any other
incumbent to Preach his Uisitation sermon must of necessity be held and
published contrary to the Canons. And on the contrary, if this my refusal to
preach the archdeacons Uisitation Sermon, be no breach of Canonical
obedience, then this my opinion that the archdeacon has no power to command
me or any other incumbent to preach his Uisitation Sermon, is neither held nor
published contrary to the Canons: so that handle one, handle both, clear one,
clear both, and fail in one, fail in both.

And this first Principal or Especial question of practice and action,
whether my refusal to preach the Archdeacons Uisitation Sermon be a breach of
Canonical obedience, or not? Does either way, that is, whether it be or be
not, beget another question, If it be a breach of Canonical obedience, then it
begets this question; whether for the breach of a Canon, or of Canonical
obedience unto the Canons, according to the laws and customs of this land,
men are to be fetched from the judgment and jurisdiction of the ordinary up to
the High Commission Court, and there to be fined and imprisoned for it, or else
whether they are to be left to the judgment and jurisdiction of the ordinary,
and he to proceed against them according to the power of the keys?

And though my Lord, this question be no question, if the high Commissioners by
the first of the first of Elizabeth, never had any power to fine or imprison
for any crime within that statute, and the cognizance of the high Commission,
as is declared by a statute made the first Session of this Parliament, which
statute makes wholely for me, and against the high Commissioners, and puts the
former question out of question: yet my Lord in favor of the high
Commissioners, and to my own disadvantage, I do forbear to take the benefit
and advantage of the former statute and Declaration, and granting to the high
Commissioners a power to fine and imprison for crimes, within the first of the
first of Elizabeth, according to the Commissioners practice before, and at the
time of my censure, according to the words of their commission, and the
approbation both of the Exchequer, who did imprison me for the 500. pounds fine
estreated by the high Commissioners into the Exchequer, and of this Court also,
which would not upon an habeas corpus deliver me from that imprisonement: I do
in this sense and respect only, propose the former question, whether for the
breach of a Canon or Canonical obedience unto the canons, according to the
laws and customs of this land, men are to be fetched from the judgment and
jurisdiction of the ordinary, up to the high commission court, and there to be
fined and imprisoned, or else whether they are to be left to the judgment and
jurisdiction of the ordinary, and he to proceed against them, according to the
power of the keys.

And though this question my Lord, be within the compass and cognizance of
the common Law, and therefore ought to be spoken unto by the worthy professors
of this Honorab. profession; yet seeing it is in defense of the Episcopal or
ordinary jurisdiction, which the Bishops themselves have wronged, and which at
this time in this my case no common Lawyer will undertake to defend, and that
for this very reason as I conceive, because they have men's persons in
admiration for advantage sake, Epist. 16.
as St. Jude speaks, and do prefer the person of some Bishop before and above
the Episcopal or Ordinary jurisdicton it self. Therefore ut nequid detrementi
capiat respublica Episcopalis vel ordinaria, and to the intent that all men may
know, that I both truly love and reverence the Episcopal or Ordinary
jurisdiction, not only above and beyond you the common Lawyers, who will not
according to your profession defend it, but also above and beyond those Bishops
who contrary to their callings have wronged it, and also that I only oppose
the usurpation and presumption of some Bishops and not the Episcopal or
ordinary jurisdiction it self, I will endeavor to show and that by seven
reasons, Thesis prima septem rationibus confirma^a.
that the breaches of canons or of canonical obedience unto the canons
according to the Laws and custom of this land belong to the juridiction of
the ordinary, and not to the cognizance of the High commission court.

Lyndewode in the first book of his Prove. tit. de constitut. cap. Exterior
habitus. Verbo Ordinarij, in these very words. Nota quod haec dictio Ordinarius
dicitur, quia habet ordinariam iurisdictionem in iure proprio, and non per
deputationem Cokes institutes. f. 96
Ordinarius principaliter habet locum de Episcopo. and aliis superioribus, qui
sunt universales in suis iurisdictionibus and de iure communi solus Episcopus
est ordinarius super omnes subditos suos, sed sunt sub eo alij ordinarii, hi
vid. quibus competit iurisdictio ordinaria de iure, privilegio, vel
consuetudine. By which words my Lord, it appears, though there be some other
subordinate, and inferior ordinaries under the Bishop in some parts of his
Diocese, who have and hold under him in those parts an ordinary jurisdiction
either iure, privilegio, vel consuetudine: yet de iure communi, over the whole
Diocese, the Bishop only is Ordinary, and only has a general and an
universal jurisdiction.

And this general jurisdiction of the ordinary or Bishop extends not to all
causes both Temporal and Ecclesiastical, but only to all causes merely
Spiritual, so called not in respect of their own nature, but because they are
assigned to the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And those are of
two sorts, either civil Ecclesiastical causes, as Tithes, Oblations, Legacies
Pentions, and portions, or else criminal causes, and both these belong to the
general jurisdiction of the Ordinary, for the former it appears principally
in two cap. of Lyndewodes Provinc. and that in the very text, first in his
second book tit. de foro competenti. cap. circumspecte agatis, which though it
be King Edw. 1. direction to his Judges or Justices or Commissioners concerning
the Bishop of Norwich and other of the Clergy, and be extant among the
Statutes 13. Edw. 1. yet seeing it treates of the spiritual jurisdiction of
Ordinaries, it is set down by Lyndewode among the provincial constitutions of
our Archbishops of Cant. Secondly, in his 5. book tit. de paenis, cap.
aeternae Sanctio voluntatis.

And for the latter, namely criminal causes, it appears both in the two
chapters before alleged, and more especially in the first book of Lyndewodes
Provinc. tit. de constitutionib. c. exterior habitus. ver. Inquirant. upon
which word Lyndewode shows, that there is triplex inquisitio, generalissima,
generalis and specialis vel singularis. and each of these is twofold, either
praeparatoria or Solemnis, praeparatoria est fine exactione juramenti, solemnis
est cum juramento, and the one of these makes way and work for the other. The
preparatory inquisition finds out and starts the game, and the solemn
inquisition persues and takes it.

And the most general inquisition both preparatory and solemn belongs to a
general council or to a provincial Synod; but the inquisition general and
special both preparatory and solemn belongs to the jurisdiction of the
Ordinary. And this general inquisition has three degrees; for it is general
either in respect both of persons and of crimes: or it is general only in
respect of persons, and special or singular in respect of crimes or lastly it
is general in respect of crimes and special or singular in respect of
persons, as the Ordinary shall think fit, and the matter require.

Now my Lord, the High Commission has nothing to do with the first of these
causes, namely civil Ecclesiastical causes: no nor a general jurisdiction in
the latter, namely criminal causes, and both these are evident by diverse
judgments at the common Law.

Hilary. 8. Iacobi, In the common Pleas in the case of Huntley and Clifford it
was resolved, that the High Commission had not power to meddle with civil
Ecclesiastical causes and therefore none might sue before them for Tithes,
Legacies, Oblations Pentions or Portions. First because this would be a means
to take away all Ecclesiastical proceedings from the Ordinary. Secondly,
because their sentences and Decrees are final, and no appeal lies from them,
so that it might be very mischeivous if they should hold plea of all manner of
Ecclesiastical causes. Thirdly, because the first of Elizabeth gives them
power only in enormities. 1. in heinous, horrible and exorbitant crimes.

In the Exchequer in Ailemers case, it was resolved that the High Commission
might not meddle to punish one for working upon holy days, and 44 Eliz. rot.
1255. in the Common Pleas in the case of Tailer and Mass, a prohibition was
granted, where one was convented before the high Commission for giving
irreverend speeches of a Minister for carrying his corn on holy days, and for
not suffering the Parson and parishioners to go through his yard upon Rogation
week, and for not giving them a repast in the perambulation, as he had used
to do, and for whistling and knoeking upon the door of the parson, and
saying, he did it to make the parson music for the marriage of his Daughter,
for this ought to be before the Diocesan.

But my Lord there is one case at the common Law, which I more esteem than the
three former, because in this very point it conteines not only the resolution
of all the reverend Judges then of this Court, but also a real confession of
the High Commissioners themselves my very adversaries, and that is this mire
own case: for the high Commissioners did at first Pasohae 1627. committ me to
prison for breach of canonical obedience in refusing to Preach the Archdeacons
Uisitation Sermon, and after two years imprisonment, when upon an habeas
corpus, I was set at liberty by the court paschae 1629. because that matter was
coram non judice: then trinitatis 1629 in their second final sentence upon the
same Articles, wherein there is no crime objected against me, they charge me
with grievous and enormous crimes mentioned in the Articles, that so they might
make the matter coram judice, and within the cognizance of the High Commission.
So that by the canon and common Law and by the real confession of my very
adversaries, the breaches of Canons or of Canonical obedience unto the Canons
belongs to the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and only grievous and enormous
crimes to the cognizance of the High Commission court.

England, for it is the general custom and uniforme practice over all Eugl.
for the Church wardens to make their presentiments at the Ordinary or episcopal
jurisdiction, and not at the High Commission Court, and therefore the breaches
of Canons, or of canonical obedience unto the canons belongs to the
jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and not to the cognizance of the high commission
court. And this reason being the general custom and uniforme practice over
all England time out of mind both of all the Churchwardens in making their
presentiments, and of all the ordinaries in receiving them, is the Common Law of
the Land and being in use nono. Hen. 3. is confirmed by the 1. chap. of Magna
Charta under the name of the Rights and Liberties of the Church, for as
Lyndewode in the fifth book of his provinc. tit. de sententia ex
communicationis. cap. cum saepius. verbis Ecclesiasticae libertatis. Says
Ecclesiastica libertas inter caetera consistit in libero exercitio
Iurisdictionis Ecclesiasticae. And this custom and Ecclesiastical liberty and
jurisdiction has lately been cleared by the resolution of all the reverend
Judges then of the 3. Honorable Courts of Common Law, as appears by his
Majesty's Proclamation dated at Lyndhurst 18. August. 13. Caroli. wherein they
affirm that the Bishops Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical persons may
keep their visitations as usually they have done, and then they may receive
all presentations from the churc-wardens as usually they have done and then
they now have a general jurisdiction as formerly they have had. And this their
resolution is fully warranted by the fifth proviso of the 2. cha. of the 1. of
Eliz. for that proviso and paragraph gives power to all Archbishops Bishops and
to every of their Chancellours Commissaries Archdeacons and other ordinaries,
as well to inquire in their visitations synods, and elsewhere within their
jurisdiction at any other time and place to take accusations and informations
of all and every the things above mentioned done committed or perpetrated
within the limits of their jurisdictions and authority and to punish the same
by admonition, excommunication, sequestration or deprivation and other censures
and process inlike form, as has heretofore been used in like cases, that is
cases of Ecclsiasticall cognizance, by the Queens Ecclesiastical laws, not
by a commission, as some would have it, but by the Queens Ecclesiastical
laws. Which last words do approve of such a jurisdiction, as the ordinaries
at that time did exercise according to the Ecclesiastical laws of the land,
and at that time and both before, and since that time the Ordinaries did and do
exercise a general jurisdiction according to the Ecclesiastical laws of the
land, without a commission as appears upon record in their own Courts and the
Canons and Ecclesiastical laws of the land do approve of that general
jurisdiction of the Ordinaries, as appears by the body both of Lyndewodes
provincial, and of the legantine constitutions of Otho and Othobon, and also
by ten of our last Canons made primo Iacobi, namely by the 109. to the 119.
so that in this second reason the Common and Canon and Statute Law do
concur, and all three show, that the breaches of Canons or of canonical
obedience unto the canons belong to the jurisdicton of the ordinary and not to
the cognizance of the High Commision Court.

primo Iacobi for therein after he has in the first place confirmed those
canons with his Letters Patents out of his supreme Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and in the second place charged all his loving subjects of both
Provinces to keep and observe all those Canons in every point, wherein they
do or may concern every or any of them, and in the third place charged all
Archbishops, Bishops, and all others, that exercise any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within this Realm, to see and procure that all within their
jurisdictions do observe the foresaid canons in the former manner: then in the
fourth place he gives power to the said Archbishops Bishops and to all others
that exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Realm, to inflict
all the punishments mentioned in those canons upon the violators of those
canons; so that by his Majesty's own gift and grant primo Iacobi. The breaches
of canons or of canonical obedience unto the canons are assigned and deputed
to the Episcopal or ordinary jurisdiction, and not reserved to the
jurisdiction of the crown or cognizance of the high commission.

be altogether needless, whether the Defendants can show any such branch of
their commission or not, for if they cannot show any such branch of their
Commission, then doubtless the labor will be needless seeing the proof
lies on their side and no proof being made sufficet neganti ut neget, dummodo
non probetur in contrariu^. And if they can show any such branch of their
commission, then it shall suffice to confute that branch when the defendants or
their counsel shall produce it. I confess my Lord that the Commission dated
11. Iacobi extends as far as the canons and ecclesiastical laws themselves in
cases concerning the reformation of Ministers, for it gives in express terms
power and authority to the commissioners to punish a Minister for any fault
committed in his own cure or else where, that is punishable by the
Ecclesiastical laws of the Land: but I am sure my Lord, that there is no such
branch in the commission pleaded by the Defendants, and therefore in that very
respect, if in no other, an information lies good against the commissioners,
and this court has rightly assigned me for a prosecutor in an information
against the commissioners for going beyond their commission. And if there were
any such branch in their commission, that branch under favor were void,
because it is contrary to the sense and meaning, to the scope and drift, to the
very letter and text of the 1 of the 1 Eliz. (the statute whereupon their
commission is grounded) as shall now appear by my next: and

Eliz. and from the 19 of the 25. of Hen. 8. revived in the first of Eliz. and
therefore whatsoever the 1 of the 1 Eliz. does particularly and expressly
establish by reviving the 19 of the 25. of Hen. the 8. It is to be presumed,
that it does not in the same statute afterward by general terms abrogate,
for that were to make that statute like the high commission sentence against
me, to be at variance with it self, and to have our part contrary to another:
why then my Lord, seeing the first of the first of Eliz. by reviving the 19, of
the 25. of Hen. 8. does particularly and expressly allow unto the ordinary with
in his diocese a general jurisdiction in reference to the canons and
Ecclesiastical laws of this land. It is not to be supposed that in the
following parts of that statute, the Parliament did afterward by general
terms take that away from the ordinary, and therefore those ensuing general
words, which enables the King to nominate commissioners, and by his
commissioners to reform and correct all manner errors, heresies, schisms,
faults offenses, enormities, which by any manner of power or authority may be
reformed, do not make void the the former statute, and general jurisdiction
of the ordinary, but only show, that be the fault never so great, so that the
ordinary by virtue of his subordinate jurisdiction, cannot sufficiently punish
it, yet it may be sufficiently punished by the Kings supreme jurisdiction
within the land without going to the Pope out of the land for by that paragraph
that is invested in the crown, which by the former paragraph was abolished and
extinguished in others, and in the former paragraph all foreign usurped power
only, and not the ordinary jurisdiction is extinguished. So that by those
former general words, such grear, grievous and enormous crimes only, as the
ordinary by virtue of his subordinate jurisdiction cannot sufficiently punish,
may be brought to the high Commission court, and there fully punished, and yet
the former statute and general jurisdiction of the ordinary remain whole and
entire, namely that breaches of Cannons, or of Canonical obedience unto the
Canons belong to the jurisdiction of the ordinary, and that be within his
diocese has power to punish any fault punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws
of this land.

And this interpretation, My Lord, is warranted, first by the very title of
that statute, which is an act to restore unto the crown the ancient
jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical, and for abolishing all foreign
power repugnant to the same, not for abolishing the ordinary jurisdiction,
which is subordinate unto it, but for abolishing all foreign power repugnant
to the same.

And the abolishing of the one, and the restoring of the other, is the whole
and sole cause and occasion of that statute, as is more fully expressed in the
beginning of that statute, where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons do all acknowledge, that from the 25. year of Henry the 8. at which
time all foreign usurped power was by diverse good laws and statutes
abolisht, and the ancient Ecclesiastical jurisdiction fully restored and
united unto the Crown, they were kept in good order, and were disburdened of
diverse great and intolerable charges and axactions until such time, as the
aforesaid good laws an Statutes made since the 20. year of Henry the eight by
one act in the first and second of Philip and Mary were all clearly repealed
whereby, as they there complain, they were again brought under an usurped
foreign power, and yet remain in that bondage to their intolerable charges,
if some releife be not had and provided, and thereupon they supplicate that
both the foresaid statute of repeal may be repealed, and the foresaid good
laws and Statutes for abolishing all foreign usurped power, and for restoring
the ancient Ecclesiastical jurisdiction unto the Crown may be revived. In all
which there is not any one word spoken against the Ordinary jurisdiction, but
only against foreign usurped power, and this being the only greivance and
the total occasion of that law, must direct us in the interpretation of that
law, for occasio legis indicat and mentem legislatoris and sensum legis.

Secondly by the oath of Supremacy extant in the same statute, and made for the
same purpose, namely to abolish all foreign power repugnant to the
jurisdiction of the Crown, not to abolish the ordinary jurisdiction, which is
subordinate unto it.

Thirdly, by those general words, wherein the Kings jurisdiction is expressed,
namely by these words, all errors, heresies, schisms, faults, offenses,
enormities: which last word does and must qualify all the rest, and does show
that by those words, not every fault punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws
of this land, but only all great grievous and enormous crimes punishable by the
Ecclesiaticall laws of this land, are reserved to the jurisdiction of the
Crown and cognizance of the high Commission, for otherwise those words will
abrogate the nineteenth of the twenty fifth of H. the eight before revived in
that Statute, and will also swallow up all the ordinary Jurisdictions over
England, contrary to an other Statute there revived in behalf of the ordinary
jurisdiction, made 23. Henry 8. entitled, an act that no person shall be cited
out of the diocese where he or she dwells except in certain cases, and
also contraty to the foresaid fifth Proviso of the second cap. of the first of
Elizabeth.

And Lastly, by this excellent rule of Saint Hilary in his ninth book, de
trinitate, Intelligentia dictorum ex antecedentibus and consequentibus
expectetur. For this makes the several parts of that Statute accord one with
another, and the whole Statute to be as a body at unity in itself, and yet
herein my Lord by making one part of a statute interpret another, we give no
more to that Honorable Court than is due to every discret man for unusquisque
suorum verborum optimus interpres, and condentis est interpretari.

Te primitus de legitima and canonica obedientia nobis and successoribus
nostris in omnibus licitis and honestis mandatis per te praestanda and
exhibenda ad sancta evangelia rite iuratum admittimus. We admit thee says the
ordinary, having first been rightly sworn by the holy Gospells to perform
lawful and Canonical obedience to us and our successors in all our lawful
and honest mandates. And this canonical obedience, as Lyndewode in the first
book of his provincicall. tit. de mayor. and obedientia, cap. Presbiteri
verbis, in virtute obedientiae, shows, is such obedience as the canons and
constitutions rightly made and published do require, and the Cannon law
shows, that this canonical obedience consists in these three things. In
reverentia exhibenda, in mundato suscipiendo, and in iudicio subeundo. In
yiedling canonical reverence to the ordinaries person, in undertaking his
canonical mandates, and in standing to his canonical judgments. And
therefore my Lord, as we the incumbents by taking this oath of Canonical
obedience, are bound by this oath in things concerning the Canons to stand to
the ordinaries canonical judgments: so the ordinary by administering this oath
unto us, and by accepting this oath from us, is bound by this oath in things
concerning the canons to judge us according to the canons. And by both these it
appears, that the breaches of canons, or of Canonical obedience unto the
Canons, belongs to the Jurisdiction of the ordinary, and not to the cognizance
of the High Commission Court.

And this reason my Lord is stronger against my adversaries by their own
confession in their plea then it is in truth and by my allegation, for the
defendants in their plea challeng canonical obedience from every incumbent to
and for every ordinary, and they do extend this canonical obedience not only
so far as the Canons, but also as far as the laws in general and the
custom reaches: and therefore in challenging canonical obedience from every
incumbent to and for every ordinary, and in extending that canonical obedience
not only so far as the Canons, but also as far as the laws in general and
the custom reaches, they do under the name of canonical obedience challenge
from every incumbent to and for every ordinary a jurisdiction as general, as
the canons, laws in general and the custom will warrant; whieh is as
general as can be, unless they would bring in arbitrary and blind obedience.

of the high Commission, is taken from the opinion of our late Lord and
Sovereign King James, and of Archbishop White-gift, whereof the former being
ad miraculmm usque acutissimus, did in his time give the authority to the High
Commission court, and the latter being a Bishop according to this rule of Saint
Paul, a Bishop must be holy, just, and unrebukeable, was in his time the chief
person under the other to exercise and execute that authority in the high
Commission court. And this their opinion, as it was at first publickely
deliv'rd in a solemn assembly of the church to reform what was amiss, and
confirm what was well established: so it has been extant in print to the
view of the world full 30. years and upwards in a Treatise styled, the sum
and substance of the conference at Hampton Court. In the eighty ninth page
whereof King James makes this exception against the High Commissioners, that
the matters wherein they dealt, were base and mean, and such as ordinaries at
home in their own jurisdictions might censure whereunto in the 90. page
Archbishop Whitegift answers, that though the matters be base and mean, and
the fault of that nature that the ordinary jurisdiction may censure it, yet in
two cases, no more, only in two cases the high Commission may interpose.

First, when the party delinquent is to great, so that the ordinary dares not
proceed against him. or,

Secondly, so wealthy in his estate, or so wilful in his contumacy, that he
will not obey the summons and censure of the ordinary, and so the ordinary is
forced to crave help at the High commission

And it seems My Lord, that the High Commissioners, and the defendants would
make this latter my case, for in the 14. Article objected against me in the
high Commission court, and pleaded against me in this court by the defendants,
they both say, that the ordinary desired the assistance of the High commission
against me.

But it is certain, My Lord, that in this matter I am not within either of
these cases, for I being but a Presbyter, and of a single benefice, am not so
great, as great as I am and as great as the defendants would make me that the
ordinary my Lords Grace of Canterbury Primate of all England, should be afraid
to proceed against me at his ordinary jurisdiction if his cause were good;
neither was I ever contumacious, for I was never summoned or cited to appear
at the ordinary jurisdiction. And therefore in this case seeing the fault, if
it be a fault is but petty and small, but the breach of a canon or of
canonical obedience unto the canons testantibus ad versarijs; the person but
mean and poor, but a Presbyter, a minister, an incumbent, and that only of a
single benefice, and never any ways contumacious, this matter belongs not to
the cognizance of the High commission but to the jurisdiction of the ordinary
and then it has been all this while coram non judice, and so the sentence and
whole proceedings are utterly void. And thus much concerning this first
question, which my refusal to preach the Archdeacons visitation Sermon, if it
be a breach of Canonical obedience, begets namely that the breaches of canons
or of canonical obedience to the canons according to the Laws and customs of
his land, belong to the jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and not to the cognizance
of the High commission court; or that for the breach of a canon or of
canonical obedience to the canons according to the Laws and customs of this
land men are not to be fetched from the judgment and jurisdiction of the
Ordinary up to the High Commission court, and there to be fined and imprisond
but are to be left to the judgment and jurisdicton of the ordinary, and he to
proceed against them according to the power of the Keys.

Now on the other side, my Lord if this my refusal to preach the Archdeacons
visitation sermon, be no breach of canonical obedience, then it begets this
question, whether the high commissioners, your Lordship this court, the Barons
of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the counsel have power to punish me for
that which is no fault, no breach of any law? And least the high commissioners;
this court, the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the counsel should
all think to escape by maintaining the affirmative, that they have power to
punish me for that which is no fault, no breach of any law, and peradventure in
a desperate case, they will not stick to maintain a desperate opinion,
especially seeing your Lordship has showed and lead them all the way. For
termino trinitatis 1637. When your Lordship delivered your opinion in the
especial verdict between Allen and Nash, your Lordship not only affirmed the
high commission sentence of deprivation and degradation against me, but also
maintained, that your Lordship and this court were bound to affirm it, whether
it were true or false, grounded upon a cause or upon no cause.

Therefore my Lord, to stop up that gap, to prevent that starting hole, to
overthrow that parodox, and with one argument to confute those four Honorable,
senates whereof the first and the last, the high commissioners and the Lords of
the counsel challenge as great authority, as the King himself has, and all
of you in this my case usurp a greater, for you all punish me for that which
is no fault, no breach of any law: I must in the first place

And for the first of these positions, that no Magistrate whatsoever, no not
the supreme, has any power, Thesis 1. Tractatio.
prerogative or authority, to punish any man within his jurisdiction, except it
be for some fault, some offense, some vice, some error, some evil, some sin,
some transgression of some law, this appears out of the 13. chapter to the
Romans verse. 3. where the Apostle speaking of that Magistrate, to whom the sword
is committed, of that Magistrate, to whom we pay tribute, of that magistrate,
to whom we must submit, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, of that
Magistrate to whom every soul is to be subject, that is, of the sovereign,
supreme, Monarchical Magistrate, Gods immediate deputy and vicegerent, he
says of that Magistrate, the Magistrate is not a terror to good works, but to
evil. will thou then be without fear of the power? do well, so shall thou
have praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God for thy wealth. But if
thou do evil, then fear, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil, Saint Paul then is
clear, that no Magistrate whatsoever, can justly punish any man, except it be
for some evil.

And Saint Peter testifies as much 1 Epist. 2. chap. 13. and 14. verses. Submit
your selves, says he, to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King, as the supreme, or unto governors as them, that are sent of
him, sent of him, for what purpose? Even for the same purpose, that he before
is sent of God, namely for the punishment of them that do evil, and for the
praise of them tbat do well. So that by the express word of God, no
Magistrate whatsoever, no not the supreme, has any power, prerogative or
authority to punish any man within his jurisdiction, except it be for some
fault, some offense, some vice, some error, some evil, some sin, some
transgression of some law.

And this much, my Lord, king Artashast saw by the very light of nature, as
appears by the words of his Commission, granted to Ezra, and expressed Ezra.
7. chap. 25. 26. verse, And thou Ezra (after the wisdom of thy God, that is
in thy hand) set Magistrates and Judges, which may judge all the people beyond
the river, even all that know the law of thy God and teach-yee them, that know
it not. And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of thy King,
let judgment be speedily executed upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, to confifcation of goods, or to imprisonment. In which words King
Artashast, just as Saint Peter, and Saint Paul before did, gives power unto
Ezra to punish men, not for well doing, but for evil doing, no for keeping,
but for breaking Gods laws and the Kings, not for obedience, but for
disobedience, not for virtue but for vice.

Nay God himself chalengeth no greater prerogative, then to reward the
observers and to punish the transgressers of his law. Cursed be he, says
Moses, that confirms not all the words of Gods law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27. or
as the Apostle expresses it, Gal. 3. Cursed is every man, that continues not
in all things, which are written in the book of the law to do them. And if
they only, who break Gods law, be cursed, then all those who keep his law,
must needs be blessed, and this much Moses expressly tells the Israelites
Deuteronomy. 11. Behold says he, I set before you this day a Blessing and a Curse,
the Blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, The Curse if
ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God. And if God the supreme
Magistrate of all the world, and the creator of all men and Magistrates will
not punish any man, except it be for some breach of his law, how can any of his
deputy Magistrates, without pride or presumtion arrogate more, or challenge any
power, prerogative or authority to punish any man for that which is no fault,
no offense, no vice, no error, no evil, no sin, no transgression of any law
whatsoever.

And here now my Lord behold the conformity both of our Kings and of the laws
of our Kingdom unto the word of God in this particular, our King James
confesses so much in his speech to the Lords and commons at whitehall on
Wednesday 21 Martii 1609. p. 12. and page 13. he says, all Kings that are not
tirants or perjured will be glad to bound them selves within the Jimites of
their laws, and they that perswad them the contrary, are vipers and pests,
both against them and the Common Wealth.
Kings challenge no more, our laws made by their own appointment, confirmed by
their own authority, which by oath they are bound to maintain, and which his
K. Charles in his declaration to all his loving subjects published by the
advice of his privy council 1641. page 20. says we doubt not, it will be
the most acceptable declaration a King can make to his subjects, that for our
part we are resolved not only duly to observe the laws Our self, but to
mainetaine them against what opposition soever; though with the hazard of our
being.
Majesty professes, he will maintain against whatsoever opposition with the
hazard of his own being, gives them no more. This appears out of the first of
the first of Eliz. an act to restore unto the crown the ancient jurisdiction
over the state Ecclesiastical, which Sir Edward Coke in Cawdreys case calls,
an act only declaratory and assertory of the ancient jurisdiction of the
Crown, not collatory or introductory of any new right. And what jurisdiction
does that act restore, or more properly declare to be restored to the Crown?
Namely all such spiritual and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as by any manner
spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or may
lawfully be exercised for the Uisitation of the state Ecclesiastical, and for
the reformation of all manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, faults,
offenses, contempts, enormities.

In which words, my Lord, there are three things expressed, incident to the
ancient jurisdiction of the Crown.

First it is Sovereign and supreme, over and above all, excluding and
abrogating all foreign, including but not abrogating all domesticke
jurisdiction.

Secondly, it is such a jurisdiction, as may lawfully be exercised, it is not
then an unlawful, but a lawful jurisdiction.

And Thirdly it is for the reformation of all errors, heresies, schisms,
abuses faults, offenses contempts, enormities. It is no power then to punish
men for truths for conformity to the doctrine and discipline established for
virtues, for obedience to the Ecclesiastical laws of this land, no, but for
errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, faults, offenses, contempts enormities.

And this my Lord does likewise appear by the end of that ancient jurisdiction
of the Crown expressed in that statute, which is, that all things in the
Ecclesiastical courts by virtue of that ancient Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
of the Crown may be done to the pleasure of Almighty God to the increase of
virtue, and to the maintenance of the peace and unity of this realm.

Now my Lord if the end of that ancient jurisdiction of the Crown be for the
maintenance of the peace and unity of this realm, then that ancient
jurisdiction of the Crown, cannot punish men for peace and unity, but for
discord and dissension; not for obeying the laws of this land, which is a
principal means, to maintain the peace and unity of this realm, but for
violating the laws of the land, which is a forcible means to breed discord
and dissension.

Again, if the end of that ancient jurisdiction of the Crown, be for the
increase of virtue, then that ancient jurisdiction of the Crown cannot punish
men for their virtues, but for their vices, for otherwise that would be a
means to decrease virtue, and to increase vice.

And thirdly, seeing the end of that ancient jurisdiction of the Crown, is,
that thereby all things in the Ecclesiastical courts should be done to the
pleasure of Almighty God, and the pleasure of Almighty God, as I have before
showed out of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, is, that the Magistrate shall not be
a terror to good works but to evil; Therefore the ancient jurisdiction of the
Crown cannot punish men for well doing. but for evil doing, not for keeping,
but for breaking Gods laws and the Kings, not for obedience, but for
disobedience, not for virtue but for vice.

And this much my Lord, is evident by all laws, for all laws do consist of a
direction and a punishment, and they inflict the punishment only upon the
transgressers, not upon the observers of the direction of the law, and this the
Apostle shows in his 1. Epist. to Tim. chap. 1. ver. 8. We know the law is
good, if a man use it lawfully, howes that? why thus, knowing this, says the
Apostle that the law is not given to the righteous, but to the lawless and
disobedient, what is not the law given to the righteous, yet in respect of the
direction, not in respect of the punishment, for because he observes the
direction of the law, he is freed from the punishment of the law, but to the
lawless and disobedient, the law is given in respect both of the direction and
punishment, and because they observe not the direction of the law, they and
they only are liable to the punishment of the law, and thereupon if any judge
shall impose the punishment of the law, upon any that does not violate the
direction of the law, he crosses and confounds the very law it self, and
incurres that foul fault committed by A^aniae the high Priest and excepted
against by Saint Paul, Acts. 23. Thou sit to judge me after the law, and
contrary to the law command thou me to be smitten? And therefore my Lord
seeing the nature, property, and purpose of all laws, is to secure the
observers, and to lay the punishment of the law only upon the violaters of the
direction of the law, It is needless to allege any more particular laws, to
prove that which is the scope and intent of all laws. Yet I cannot pretermit
one, and I will allege but one law of the land more to this purpose, and
that is the twenty nine chapter of Magna Charta most fully and strongly
confirmed 3. Caroli, by the Kings Majesty, in his answer to the Commons
Petition of right in these words, let right be done, as is desired according
to that twenty nine chapter of Magna Charta.

Now what says that twenty nine Chapter of Magna Charta? No freeman, says
that chapter, shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, neither will we pass upon him, nor condemn him, says the King,
but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the land. That is,
under your Lordships, and the Courts correction whose office it is to interpret
statutes, unless that party be first convicted and found culpable of the
breach of some law of this land, by a legal proceeding, either at the common
law, or else in some other court, and whosoever shall either condemn, or
punish any freeborne subject of this kingdom, either for his obedience to the
laws of this land, or for that which is no breach of any law of this land he
does violate that twenty nine chapter of Magna Charta, and for that he stands
excommunicate by a double excommunication, the one delivered publicly here in
Westminster Hall, Tempore Bonifacii Archie^ regnante tunc in Anglia. H. 3.
videlicet anno. Dom. 1253. Id ibus Maii. inaula. Westmon. 15. Epis. leguntur
sententiam de qua hic sit mentio, fulminasse. Lyndew. Prove. lib. 5. tit. de
sententia excom. cap. cum malum. Parag. Item excom. verbis. ab omnibus. Daniell
in the life of H. 3.
37. Henry 3. by Bonifacius then Archbishop of Cant. assisted with 14. other
Bishops, all in their pontificalls, and tapers in their hands, which after the
excommunication denounced, they threw upon the ground, and as they lay there
smoking they cried so let all them, that incur this sentence, be extinct,
and stincke in hell, and all this was done in the presence of the Commons,
Nobles, yea and of the King himself, who at the same time with a loud voice
said, as God me help, I will as I am a man a Christian, a Knight, a King
crowned and anointed inviolably observe all these things, and the
excommunication it self is set down at the end of the statutes made 52. H. 3.
in the book of statutes at large put out by judge Rastall, and the other is
extant in the same book at the end of the statutes made 25. Edward. 1. and
uttered by Robert Winchelsee Archbishop of Canterbury in his time, and both
against the violaters of this renowned law of Magna Charta often confirmed not
only by the following Kings, the successors of Henry the third, and Edward
the first, but also by the Pope him self, as appears out of the fifth book of
Lyndewodes provincial, titulo de sententia excommunicationis cap. Cum Malum
parag. Item excommunicatj.

And besides the former confirmations and excommunications, the authority of
Magna Charta was made sacred and inviolable, as it were 25. Edward. 1. first,
by decreeing, that that charter under the Kings seal should be sent unto all
the Cathedral Churches throughout the Realm there to remain, and to be read
before the people twice a year. And secondly by enacting that that Charter
should ever after be propugnated and vindicated by the sentence of
excommunication, to be denounced twice a year by all Archbishops, and Bishops
in their Cathedralls, against all those that by word, deed, or counsel did
do contrary to the foresaid charter, or that in any point did break or undo
it: and if the same Bishops or any of them should be remiss in the
denuntiation of the said sentence that then the Archbishops of Cant. and York,
for the time being, should compel and distraine them to the execution of their
duties in form aforesaid as appears by the 3. and 4. chap. 25. Ed. 1.

And surely my Lord those two former solemn excommunications were and those
other continual semiannuall excommunications might have been hitherto, and
may hereafter be, rightly and justly denounced against the violaters of this
29. chap. of Magna Charta for this 29. chapter, that no free man is to be
punished but for the breach of some law is good Divinity, and accords
excellently with the word of God. The Apostle Romans 4.15. tells us (...), the
law causes wrath, that is punishment; and how does the Law cause wrath or
punishment? not simply and singly of it self not observed but transgrest, and
therefore in the next words the Apostle says, (...), where there is no Law,
there is no transgression. And as where there is no (...), no law, there, there
cannot be any (...), any transgression of Law: so where there is no (...) no
transgression of law, there there cannot be any (...), any fault or offense,
and where there is no (...) no fault or offense, there, there ought not to be
any (...) any wrath or punishment.

Nay my Lord, though there be a law, yet if that law be not transgrest there
cannot justly be any (...), any wrath or punishment: At most, though there may
be (...) proposita, (...) denuntiata, wrath proposed or denounced in the Law,
to terrify all persons from sin, which is nothing but the binding power of
the Law: yet justly there cannot be (...), imposita, (...) inflicta, wrath
imposed or inflicted by the Judge, upon any person to punish him for sin,
until the Law be transgrest, and sin committed by that person. And this the
Apostle Romans 5.12. does most acutely and divinely show by imputing the
punishment partly to the Law, and partly to the transgression of the law, to
the Law as to a just rule inflicting punishment upon the transgression and to
the transgression, as to a meritorious cause deserving that punishment,
according to the just rule of the Law (...). By sin, which is the transgression
of the law, Death, the wrath, and punishment of the law entered into the world.

So then my Lord, this is most certainly and most undoubtedly true,
wheresoever there is any (...), any wrath or punishment, any fining or
imprisonment, any deprivation, degradation, excommunication, or any other
censure sentence, mulct, or punishment whatsoever rightly and justly inflicted:
There there must of necessity, of necessity my Lord there, there must be some
(...) some fault or offense Wheresoever there is any (...) any fault or
offense, there there must of necessity of necessity my Lord there there must be
some (...) some transgression of Law. Wheresoever there is any (...), any
transgression of Law, there, there must of necessity, of necessity my Lord,
there, there must be some (...), some law transgrest. If there be no (...) no
law transgrest then it is impossible it is impossible my Lord, that there can
be any (...), any transgression of Law. If there be (...), no transgression of
law, then it is impossible, it is impossible my L. that there can be any (...),
any fault or offense. If there be no (...), no fault or offense then it is
impossible, it is impossible my Lord, that there can be any (...) any wrath or
punishment any fining or imprisonment, any deprivation, degradation
excommunication, or any other censure sentence, mulct or punishment whatsoever,
rightly and justly inflicted.

Nay further my Lord, this law must be a known law; for by the law is the
knowledge of sin, says the Apostle Romans 3.20. and by what law is the
knowledge of sin? surely by a known law, not by an unknown law, for seeing
sin is the transgression of the law, he that will know sin, which is the
transgression of the Law, must know it by the law transgrest, and therefore he
must first know, that law which is transgrest; and this the Apostle does
expressly and pregnantly show Romans 7.7. What shall we say (says the Apostle)
is the Law sin? God forbid; nay I know not sin, but by the Law for I had
not known lust, to be a sin, unless the law had said thou shall not lust.
So that first we know the Law, and then by virtue of the law, we know sin,
which is the transgression of the Law.

And here my Lord, I must again repeat the Apostles question, What shall we
say, says the Apostle, is the Law sin? God forbid, yea, God forbid it in
deed, my Lord, for if the law be sin, then the lawyers cujuscunque generis,
eo nomine are sinners, and the greater Lawyers, the greater sinners, and Judges
the greatest of Lawyers, the greatest of sinners and how shall we avoid or
confute this consequence, my Lord, which to touches all our copyholds. Why,
just as the Apostle does the former. The Apostle proves the law to be no
sin, because the law discovers, forbids, condemns, and punishes sin. And
if the Lawyers do so, then the Lawyers cujuscunque generis, eo nomine are no
sinners but the ornaments both of Church and common wealth, and Gods Ministers
and Deputies to reform and preserve both. But if in steed of discovering
sin, they conceal sin, in stead of forbidding sin, they command sin,
in stead of condemning sin, they justify sin, and in stead of punishing
sin, they patronize, protect and prefer sin, then Lawyers cujuscunque
generis eo nomine are sinners, and the greater lawyers the greater sinners, and
judges the greatest of Lawyers, the greatest of sinners, for as the law does
first discover sin, and then condemn and punish it: so must Judges, first
discover a particular sin, a particular transgression of law, and particular
law transgrest, and then condemn and punish it. Otherwise they are not judges
according unto law, but sinners against law, and their very act and work of
judging, in respect of the anomy, obliquity and irregularity of it, is not
judging according unto law, but sinning against the law.

Nay my Lord, not only Judges, but every man is to show unto his brother, his
particular sin, his particular transgression of law, and the particular law
transgrest, even by Gods own express command Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly reprove him, and not
suffer sin upon him, and if every man must plainly reprove his brother, and
not suffer sin upon him, then every man must plainly show his brother his
particular sin; and if every man must plainly show his brother his
particular sin, then seeing sin is the transgression of the Law, every man
must plainly show his brother his particular transgression of law, and if
every man must plainly show his brother the particular transgression of law,
then every man must plainly show his brother the particular law transgrest.
And if every man must do this in love as a brother, then ever Judge must do
it, both in love as a brother, and in Justice as a Judge: and therefore no
Magistrate whatsoever, no not the supreme, can justly inflict any wrath or
punishment upon any man whomsoever unless he first discover in him and to him,
to him and in him, some particular fault, some particular offense, some
particular vice, some particular error, some particular evil, some particular
sin, some particular transgression of Law.

And by this, my Lord, it appears, that the two final sentences of the High
Commission Court against me, are both void: first that of the deprivation and
degradation, because in twelve sheets as it it stands upon record in this
Court, it mentions no one particular fault, but only generals, namely
grievous and enormous crimes, excesses and delicts contumacies contempts and
incorrigibilities, and therefore my Honored Lord Chief justice, under favor
your LP. was much mistaken, when your Lordship delivering your opinion in the
special verdict between Alllen and Nash did parallel my case and Caudreys case
in the principal point. The principal point, in Caudreys case, And that the
said Caudrey before time of the said trespass supposed, was deprived of his
said benefice before the said Commissioners, as well for that he had preached
against the said book of common prayer, as also for that he refused to
celebrate Divine Service according to the said book. and showed particulerly
wherein, Caudreys case. Fol. 3.
was not, whether the sentence found against Caudrey did charge Caudrey with
any particular crime within any branch of the Commission found, for that is
evident, and granted on both sides in Caudreys case, and is the principal
point in my case, and the negative thereof is as evident in my case, as the
affirmative thereof was in Caudrys case, and that negative makes the principal
point and question in my case to be this, whether the matter be coram non
iudice or not, seeing the sentence found against me does not charge me, with
any particular crime within any branch of the Commission found, but only with
generals, namely grievous and enormous crimes mentioned in the articles and
those Articles not found; so that in very deed there is nothing at all found
against me, according to this rule of the common law, de non apparentibus et
non existentibus cadem est ratio, idem iud^cium.

But the principal point and question in Caudreys case was, whether the High
Commissioners had persued the form of their commission, or not, in depriving
Caudrey upon his first conviction, who by the Statute, the 2 of the 1. Eliz.
was to be deprived upon his second conviction, which is no point or question in
my case. And if your Lordship will parallel these two cases in the principal
point, your Lordship must either show, that the sentence found againg Caudrey
did not charge Caudrey with any particular crime within any branch of the
Commission found, but only with generals, as in my case. Or else that the
sentence found against me, does charge me, not only with generals, but also
with some particular crime within some branch of the Commission found, as in
Caudreys case. And unless your Lordship can do one of these two, your
Lordship may sooner bring together Hercules his two pillars, or the two poles,
then parallel our two cases in the principal point. And until then, this
sentence containing only generals, shall according to Gods word, the word of
truth, stand charged and branded with injustice and uncharitableness, and in
respect of the anomy obliquity and enormity of it, shall be taken by all men of
sound judgment to be as indeed it is not a sentence according unto law, but
a sin, and a foul sin against law; or rather to use the words of that
erroneous sentence in a true sense, a grievous and enormous crime contrary to
the Law, and therefore void. And both the High Commissioners in giving of it,
and your Lordship and this Court in affirming of it, have showed your selves,
not Judges according unto law, but sinners against Law, and I out of love to
all your persons, our of duty unto God, and out of obedience unto his word, am
bound to tell you so much expressly by the former text. Levit. 19 17. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly reprove him
and not suffer sin upon him.

And secondly my Lord, this High commission first final sentence of the five
hundred pounds fine, and two years imprisonment against me, is for the same
reason likewise void, because though it mention a particular, namely my
refusal to preach the Archdeacons Uisitation Sermon; yet that particular, that
refusal to preach that Uisitation Sermon, is no fault, no offense, no vice, no
error, no evil, no sin, no transgression of any law whatsoever, but a
virtue, and an eminent virtue, even the virtue of canonical obedience unto the
36. 49. and 52. Canons to his Majesty's Letters Patents, Royal prerogative and
supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as shall now fully and amply appear out
of my second position. And thus much concerning my first position, that no
Magistrate whatsoever, no not the Supreme, has any power, prerogative, or
authority, to punish any man within his jurisdiction, except it be for some
fault, some offense, some vice, some error, some evil, Thesis 2, pro^atio.
some sin, some transgression of some law.

I now proceed to my second position, that my refusal to preach the
Archdeacon of Cant. Doctor Kingsleys visitation Sermon, my principal or
especial fault in the judgment of my adversaries, is no fault, nor offense,
no vice, no error, no evil, no sin, no transgression of any law whatsoever,
and that therefore neither the High Commissioners, your Lordship, this court,
the Barons of Exchequer, the Lords of the Counsel, nor any other Magistrate
whatsoever, no not the supreme, has any power, Prerogative or authority to
punish me, much less to imprison me for it.

And that I may begin and go on in this position, with that upon which I did
much insist in the former; certain it is, my Lord, that here is (...), here is
wrath and punishment, here is (...) ad octo, here is wrath in the highest
degree, here is wrath as grievous as the fire is hot; here is wrath
incomparable, implacable, inexplicable, wrath unparalleled, wrath superlative,
(...); as Greg. Nissen, (...), in another case speaks. The evil, the
mischeife is beyond expression, beyond consolation.

The two final sentences of the Honorable Court of High Commission against me,
may not unfitly be compared to that wind in the first of Job: for as that
wind struck upon the four corners of Jobs eldest sons house, and so did
utterly ruinate it: so have these two final sentences struck upon the four
quarters of my estate, and utterly ruinated me in all, if they stand good.
first they have struck me in my goods by a fine of five hundred pounds,
estreated into the Exchequer, and partly paid and partly stall'd. Secondly,
they have struck me in my liberty by four times imprisonment, and nine full
years and three quarters continuance therein. Thirdly, they have struck me in
my benefice by deprivation. Fourthly, they have struck me in my Ministerial
function by degradation; nay my Lord, they have struck me one stroke more,
above and beyond all the former: they have drawn out the spiritual sword of
excommunication against me, and therewith as much as in them lies, they have
struck me out of this orthodox Church, cut me off from the communion of
Saints, delivered me up to Satan, and adjudged my soul (for the salvation
whereof our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ shed his most precious blood) to the
eternal torments of hell fire, so that if ever there were, then here is wrath
incomparable, implacable, inexplicable, wrath unparalleled, wrath superlative.

Now my Lord, if herein the defendants have proceeded according to the rule of
Justice, which places and observes a proportion and correspondency between
fault and the punishment, according to this rule of Gods word, Deuteronomy. 25.2.
Secundum mensura^ dilicti erit plagarum modus: then it must needs be, that
this greivo^s and enormous punishment must argue some grievous and enormous
crime, some crying sin, like that of Cain in murdering his brother Abell,
whose blood calls to God for vengeance, out of the dumb and dead Element of
the earth: nay it must argue some ascending, some soaring, some mounting sin,
flying up into the presence of God, and laying hands as it were upon the
Almighty, and violently haling and pulling him down, to execute vengeance
unpon the offender like the sins of the Sodomites and what is it? Why it is
my refusal to Preach the the Archdeacon of Canterbury Doctor Kingsleys
visitation Sermon. Parturiunt montes, nasceturridiculusmus.

And now my Lord, to examine this their sentence and proceeding to law and
justice. If this wrath this incomparable wrath and punishment, or any peer or
particle thereof, be rightly and justly inflicted upon me for my refusal to
preach the Archdeacons Uisitation Sermon: Then according to the former rule
delivered in the former position, this my refusal to preach the Uisitation
Sermon, must of necessity be some (...), some fault or offense. If this my
refusal to Preach the Uisitation Sermon be (...), some fault or offense, then
it must of necessity be some (...), the transgression of some law. If it be
(...) the transgression of some law, then there must of necessity be some
(...), some law transgrest, that binds me to Preach that Uisitation Sermon. My
Lord the High Commissioners by the very Letter and text of some Commissions,
that I have seen, have this power, that they may punish a Minister for any
fault committed in his own cure or else where, that is punishable by the
Ecclesiastical laws of this land. By which words my Lord it appears, that
first there must be some fault. Secondly, that that fault must be against some
law. Thirdly that it must be against some Ecclesiastical law of the land or
else that Honorable Court by the very Letter and text of the largest
commissions, that I ever saw, have no power to punish a Minister.

And though this their Commission my Lord, does much outstrip the first of the
first of Eliz. the statute whereon it is grounded: for that statute extends not
to every fault punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws of this land, for then
it would swallow up all the ordinary jurisdictions over England: but only to
grievous and enormous crimes punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws of the
land, as the Counsel on both sides in the special verdict between Allen and
Nash have confessed, and the words of the statute, as I before have showed, do
necessarily enforce. Yet in this case of mine, to show mine own innocence and
the goodness of my cause, not to make a precedent in other men's cases, I will
give the defendants free leave and liberty to exceed both the statute and their
Commission. I will not coope them up, and confine them, within the lists and
limits of the Ecclesiastical laws as the most indulgent and munificent
Commissions that ever I saw do yea and must do, unless they will make their
Commission as well Temporal as Ecclesiastical: no my Lord, I will not require
an Ecclesiastical law, let them produce an law, canon, civil common, statute
or divine, nay my Lord, I will once again deal more Nobly and generously more
heroically and munificently with that Honorable court with those Augustins
Hieromes, Gregory's, Ambroses, with those Nazianzens, Chrysostomes, Origens,
Basils, with those reverend right reverend most reverend Prelates and
Patriarchs of our church, I will not require a whole law, noe not a full period
of a law. Let them only produce some colon, nay some comma of law only, nay
my Lord I will once again deal more Nobly and generously more heroically and
munificently with that Honorable court, I will not require a whole colon, no,
nor a whole comma of law neither, that were too too an Herculean labor for
that Honorable Court, for those Canonists, Civilians, and Divines, for those
commissaries, chancellours, Archdeacons, Deanes, Bishops Archbishops, let
them only produce (...), some shaving, some scraping, some paring, some shred,
piece, particle or fragment of Law, nay let them only produce (...), unum unum
apicem, one jot, one apex, one tittle, one prick or point of law, of any law
my Lord, and I do most willingly and most instantly submit.

And now my Lord as the defendants do pretend a fault, so likewise they do
pretend a law: the pretended fault is my refusal to Preach the Archdeacons
Visitation Sermon: the pretended law is the Law of Canonical obedience. They
say, that my refusal to preach the Archdeacons visitation sermon, at the
Archdeacons command, is a breach of Canonical obedience.

And now my Lord, we are come to the (...), ad statum causae, ad caput
controversiae, for this Canonical obedience is the whole and sole ground and
foundation and supportation of the whole sentence against me, and it cannot be
understood and determined, whether my refusal to preach the visitation sermon,
be a breach of canonical obedience or not, unless it be first known and
understood, what this Canonical obedience is: so that in the first place, my
Lord, there is a necessity imposed, upon me, breiflly to present unto your
Lordship what this Canonical obedience is.

The high Commissioners in the first part of their final sentence, as it was
given in their own Court, make Law, custom, and Canonical obedience three
different and distinct things. For therein they say, that the Archdeacon in
injoyning Huntley to preach his visitation sermon, has commanded him no more,
than the said Huntley was bound to do by law, custom and by his Canonical
obedience, and herein by making Canonical obedience a third and distinct thing
from law and custom, they show that they only use the name of Canonical
obedience, but intend arbitrary or blind obedience, that is, a general and
universal obedience to all the Archdeacons commandes, though they swarve both
from law and custom, whereby they make every Archdeacon, Bishop and
Archbishop a lawmakers within his own jurisdiction, and every of their
commands binding and compulsive, though fortified neither by law, nor Custom.

But your Lordship, as it seems, not content herewith steps a degree further,
and makes Canonical obedience, not only a third and distinct thing from law
and custom, but also a thing opposite, and contrary to law and custom: for
termino trinitatis 1637. when when your Lordship delivered your opinion in the
special verdict between Allen and Nash, your Lordship said, that if the
Archdeacon did owe me an 100. pounds by bond he might by virtue of my
Canonical obedience, command me to deliver up that bond, the money, not being
yet paid. Or he might command me by virtue of my Canonical obedience, to send
him a yoke of fat oxen, a couple of good Coach-horses, or a score of fat
weathers, which I am sure is not only beyond, but contrary to law and custom,
and more than either his Majesty or any of his royal predecessors did ever
challenge of any freeborne subject, either by the oath of allegiance or oath of
supremacy, and whether your Lordship have altered this your opinion, or no, I
know not, the high Commissioners I suppose, have altered theirs.

For certain it is, that the former words of the first part of their first
final sentence, as it was given in their own Court, are altered in the
defendants plea, wherein they make Canonical obedience, not a third and
distinct thing from law and custom, as before, but a subordinate, relative,
and a proportionable thing to law and custom, by changing these their former
words, law, custom and his canonical obedience, into these, law and custom
according to his Canonical obedience.

And this alteration, as I suppose, proceeded from the acute and polite wit of
you Master Justice Heath, at that time the Kings Attorney General and
Commissioners counsel, who seeing that the Commissioners by the former words,
did make canonical obedience, a third and distinct thing from law and custom,
that thereby they did under the name of canonical obedience, challenge
arbitrary and blind obedience to and for every Archdeacon, Bishop, and
Archbishop, that thereby they made themselves all lawmakers within their
several jurisdictions, and that so at once by two words, they gave two deadly
wounds, one to his Majesty's supreme jurisdiction, who under God is the only
lawmaker within this land, the other to the freedom and liberty of all his
freeborn Subjects, who are not tied to any laws, but to those only,
whereunto they give their consents; did prettily and wittyly invent and
contrive this trim and almost undiscernable alteration, to cure these two
deadly wounds: for which Sir, you did then, deserve a better fee from the
Commissioners, than either from his Majesty, or from his other freeborn
Subjects.

But my Lord, though, Master Justice Heath has with that one salve well cured
those two sores, yet therein he has not rightly and truly expressed and
discovered the nature of canonical obedience, for Canonical obedienee has no
reference to custom; that is customary obedience, which is due to custom,
neither has canonical obedience relation to the laws in general, of what
kind soever they be, but only to that part and kind of law, which is called
the canon law, for canonical obedience, is such obedience as the canons
require, and such obedience as the canons require, is canonical obedience,
they are convertible of the same circuit and circumference, just even:
whatsoever is within compass of canonical obedience, is within the compass
of the canons: and whatsoever is without the compass of the canons, is without
the compass of canonical obedience, so that if I am bound by my canonical
obedience to preach the Archdeacons visitation Sermon, then I am thereunto
bound by some canon, and if not by some canon, Thesis tertiae probatio.
then not by my canonical obedience. And that this is so, that canonical
obedience is such obedience as the canons require, I will now endeavor to
prove by four reasons, such I hope, as shall satisfy your Lordship, this
Court, and all men that will be satisfied with reason, and I hope, shall
silence them, that will not with reason be satisfied.

vi and virtute ipsius vocis Canonicae, from the very sense and signification
of this word Canonical, for as legal obedience is such obedience as the law
requires, Evangelicall obedience such obedience as the Gospel requires,
customary obedience such obedience as the custom requires, arbitrary
obedience, obedience ad arbitrium praelati, according to the praelates
pleasure, blind obedience such obedience as is required of blind men, and
unreasonable obedience such obedience as is required of unreasonable creatures,
so a vi and virtute ipsius vocis canonicae from the very strength, sense and
signification of this word Canonical, Canonical obedience must be such
obedience, as the canons require. And this reason is further confirmed by an
argument drawn Hor argumenti genus quandoque acuminis, quandoque virium
multum, quandoque utrumque habebit. Eleganter itaque apud Terentium est; Homo
sum, humani nihil ame alienum puto. Rod. Agricola de Inventione lib. 1. cap.
10. (...). Arist. Secundo Topicor. libr. His illud adiicere ridiculum putarem,
nisi eo Cicero uteretur, quod coniugatum vocant. Vt eos qui rem^ustam faciant
just facere: quod certe non eget probatione Quntil. Institut. lib. 5.
a conjugatis or denominativis, a toprike place delivered by Aristotle and
Quintilian, and approved, and put in practice by Saint John 1. Ep. 3. chap. 7.
ver. there the holy Apostle, says; He that does righteousness is righteous,
even as he is righteous, that is, as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is
righteous. In which words Saint John argues from one conjugate to an other,
from doing of righteousness to being righteous: and so after his example I
argue he that does the canons, is canonical, he that performs obedience to
the canons, performs canonical obedience. And that this is true sense of
this word canonical, appears by the authority of William Lyndewode in the
fifth book of his Provincicall titulo de Haereticis, cap. Reverendissime.
where he does thus expound this word canonical, Item eodem lib. tit. de
Purgatione canonica. cap. statuimus, verbo. Canonice: canonice id est, secundum
exigentiam Canonum.
canonice id est secundum ex gentiam canonum, canonically that is, says he,
according as the canons require. And this my Lord, is my first reason, drawn a
vi and virtute ipsius vocis canonicae together with an argument drawn a
Conjugatis or Denominativis, a topicke place delivered by Aristotle and
Quintilian, and approved and put in practice by Saint John, and confirmed by
the authority of William Lyndewode.

My second reason my Lord, is taken from the general consent of learned men,
not only in our own church, and of our own religion but also from those, who
though they are of our religion, yet they are not of our Church, I mean of our
national Church, nay from those, that are neither of our church nor of our
religion. And this reason being drawn from the joint consent of learned men,
ought to be of great force and authority according to that of vincentius
Lerinensis, quod abomnibus, quod ubique quod semper tenetur, illud pro
certissima veritate habendum and tenendum est. I will begin my Lord, with those
that are furthest from home.

My first Man is Bellarmine, a learned man in the judgment of those, that are
soundly and deeply learned on our side: my most reverend diocesan and
provincial my Lords Grace of Cant. in his relation of the conference between
his Grace and Master Fisher the Iesui^e does diverse times highly magnify him
for his acute solid and profound discourse upon diverse points of controversy.
sect. 3. number. 2. and number. 17.

And Doctor Rainolds speaking of Bellarmine and Campian Styles them nobile par
Iesuitarum, and prefers Bellarmine as far before Campian notitia rerum, as he
does Campian before Bellarmine structura verborum. This learned man in a
particular treatise immediately following his books of Justification, the
title whereof is de bonis operibus in particulari. 10. chap. speaking of
Canonical hours, does there thus describe them, canonical hours, says he,
are such hours, as are appointed by the canons, to praise God, and to pray
unto God, and these hours, says he, are called canonical, because they are
assigned, deputed and appointed by the canons to that purpose. And Petro soave
Polano the learned author of that excellent history of the council of Trent
in his sixth book, does give the same reason of the same name, Collegiate
churches by their institution have this function among others, to assemble
themselves in the churches to praise God, at the hours appointed by the
canons, which says he, are therefore called canonical and Brentius a learned
man of our own religion in his Confessione wittenburgensi. cap. 20. de Horis
Canonicis, does give the very same reason of the same name, that the two former
do.

Again, Gregory the great in the 11. book of his Epistles and 51. Epist, to
John Bishop of Panormum, and received into the body of the Canon Law, writes
thus; Si quid de quocunque clerico ad aures tuas pervenerit, quod te just
possit offendere, facile non credas, nec ad vindictam te res accendat
incognita, sed praesentibus Ecclesiae tuae senioribus, diligenter est
perscrutanda veritas, and tunc (si qualitas rei poposcerit) canonica districtio
culpam feriat delinquentis. Let a Canonical punishment be inflicted upon the
offender for his offense; now what is this canonica districtio, or canonica
paena? The most learned Bishop Bilson in that excellent treatise of his De
perpetua Christi Ecclesiae gubernatione. 11. cap. interpreting the former words
of Gregory, does in these very words show, paena canonica. 1. paena canonibus
congruens. A canonical punishment that is, a punishment agreeable to the
Canons; and so does William Lyndewode in the 5. book of his Provincial. tit.
de Paenis. Cap. Evenit. verbo. Canonicas. paena canonica. id est. paena a
sacris canonibus approbata. A canonical punishment, that is, a punishment
approved by the Canons. and Iohanes de vanquall in Breviario in sextum
Decretalium. fol 43. tit. de supplenda praelatorum negligentia ultima
conelusio. Episcopum excommunicatum pro culpa sua punire potest Archiepiscopus
paena canomica et arbitraria. Probatur hic in fine tex. and glo. fi. et facit.
c. de causis de offi. deleg. and si dicatur puniri debet paena arbitraria tum
non canonica. quia paena canonica dicitur, quae est in canone and iure
expressa. ut in l. siqua paena. ff. de verbo. sig. solutio. Dicit Io. Mo. and
Archid. quod paena expressa and de terminata a Canonibus proprie dicitur
canonica. ut in dict. lo. Siqua paena. Illa tamen quae non est expressa and
determinata a canone, datur tamen secundum moderationem canonum, qualitate
personae and quantitate culpae consideratis, dicitur proprie and completive
arbitraria. eo quod iudex sua discretione supplet, quod in canone non est
expressum. potest tamen talis paena dici canonica, saltem inceptive, and quia
per canones dirigitur iudex in moderatione
Iohanes de vanquall Iohanes Molanus, and Archidiaconus, do all make this the
difference between a canonical and an arbitrary punishment, that the one is
expressed in the Canons, the other is not, but left to the discretion of the
Prelate. Paena Canonica dicitur, quae in Canone and jure est expressa and
determinata: illa autem quae non est expressa and determinata a canone est
arbitraria.

Now to recollect the force and strength or this argument; If canonical hours
be so called because they are assigned deputed and appointed by the canons, as
in the judgment of Brentius Bellarmine, and Petro Soave Polano they are: and
again if a canonical punishment be such a punishment, as is agreeable to the
Canons, such a punishment, as is approved of the canons such a punishment, as
is expressed and determined in the Canons, and if not expressed and determined
in the Canons, not a canonical but an arbitrary punishment in the judgment of
Bishop Bilson, William Lyndewode, Iohanes de vanquall, Iohones Molanus and
Archidiaconus; Then by the same analogy canonical obedience, must be such
obedience as is assigned, deputed, and appointed by the canons, such obedience
as agreeable to the canons, such obedience as is approved by the canons, such
obedience as is expressed and determined in the Canons, otherwise it is not
canonical but arbitrary obedience; and this is my second reason which being
drawn from the joint consent of learned men, ought to be of great authority
according to this former rule of Vincentius Lerinensis, quod ab omnibus, quod
ubique, quod semper tenetur, illud pro certissima veritate habendum and
tenendum est.

My third reason my Lord, Ratio 3.
strikes the nail on the head, and drives it home, and it is the very
definition of canonical obedience, delivered by William Lyndewode, in the
first book of his Provincial. tit. de maioritate et obedientia. cap.
Presbyteri. verbis. in virtute obedientiae: where he does in the former words
terminis terminantibus, define canonical obedience thus. Nota circa hanc
materiam obedientiae, quod obedientia, quae homini debetur ab homine, est
debita minoris ad maiorem reverentia. Vnde si mandatur id quod iustum est,
obediendum est, si in iustum, nequaquam, si dubium, tunc illud propter bonum
obedientiae est explendum. Lyndewode Prove. 1. lib. tit. de Constitutionibus.
cap. Quia incontinentiae. ver. obedientiae.
Canonica obedientia, est obedientia secundum canones and constitutiones rite
editas et publicatas, canonical obedience is such obedience, as the canons and
constitutions rightly made and published do require.

Now this man's testimony and authority, ought to be of great esteem for
diverse reasons; first because he is the only glossator and commentator upon the
provincial constitutions of our Archbishops of of Cant. Secondly, because he
was Doctor of both laws, and singulerly verst both in Church government, and
in deciding of controversies, and the ef^re doubtelesse did well understand
what this canonical obedience was: and unicuique in sua art perito credendum:
especially if he be not Judge in his own case, as the Defendants against me
are. Thirdly because he was official to Henry Chichley Archbishop of Cant. to
whom he did dedicate his provincial; and therefore in all likely hood he would
not write any thing therein in the behalf of the Rectors and Uicars of this
kingdom, to the prejudice of the Episcopal or Archiepiscopall authority or
Sea of Cant. Lastly, because he lived about 200. years since, and was long
dead before this controversy was on foot, although this It began at the
Archdeacons Visitation, October. 1624. and continued at his Uisitations April
1625. and 26. and the last day of that April 1626. Articles were exhibited in
the High Commission against me, and the 19. of April 1627. I was by the
Commissioners committed to prison, and there continued two years, and then
being delivered on the 29. of April 1629. I did that Term begin an Action in
the Kings Bench Court against the Commissioners, which this 24th day of March
1641. has depended 12. years three quarters.
has been on foot full 16. years, which is a larger portion of time, than
the term of two men's lives is valued at by the common law, and and therefore
certainly he wrote the truth without all respect of persons, without
prejudice or partiality on either side, and for these reasons his definition of
canonical obedience stands good against all exception.

Besides, that Canonical obedience is such obedience as the canons require,
appears by the opposite member of the division: for the obedience now used in
the Church of Rome, is either canonical; that is, such as the canons require,
and the Prelate by virtue of the canons may require, or else arbitrary Neque
probamus caecum illud obedientiae genus, nuper a Iesuitis excogitatum, nempe ut
secundum prouerbium, sint caeci caecorum duces: quo volunt simpliciter and
absolute, atque adeo (...) inferiores pendere a superioribus, (...), ut verbis
utar Theodoreti (...). verum ut iniquit Chrysostom. (...). Chamier.
that is such as the superior shall require by his Dictats, whatsoever it be.
This the Papists call religious obedience because they make it a part, and a
principal part of their religion, to become the servants, yea the slaves of
men; contrary to Gods word, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not
the servants of men: and we rightly call it blind obedience, because they that
yield unto it, have as it were their eyes thrust out and must like blind men
be wholly led by others. But it is properly called arbitrary obedience that is
obedience according to the will and pleasure of the superior.

And as it appears in the constitutions of the society of Jesus; part 6. chap.
1. parag. 1. this arbitrary obedience consists in things Obedientiam omnes
plurimum observare and in ea excellere studeant, nec solum in rebus
obligatoriis, sed etiam in aliis; licet nihil aliud, quam signum voluntatis
superioris sine ullo expresso praecepto videre tur. Constit. societatis Jesus
part. 6. c. 1. parag. 1.
obligatory, and in things not obligatory: and in respect of this latter in
respect of things not obligatory, this arbitrary obedience may be subdivided
into obedience, uncanonicall, pretercanonicall or ultra canonical, that is
besides or beyond the canons, and into obedience anticanonicall or
contracanonicall, that is, against or contrary to the canons. And this
Obedientia quod ad executionem attinet, tunc praestatur, cum res iussa
completur quod ad voluntatem, cum ille qui obedit, id psum vult, quod qui
iubet: quod ad intellectum, cum id ipsum sentit. quod ille; and quod iubetur,
been iuberi existimat. and estimperfecta ea obedientia, in qua praeter
executionem, non est haec eiusdem voluntatis and sententiae inter eum, qui
obedit, Conseusio. Ibidem in delarationibus.
arbitrary obedience as appears out of the place last cited, is either perfect
in respect of execution will and understanding, or else imperfect; perfect
obedience in respect of execution, is when the thing commanded is fully done.
In respect of the will, when he that obeyes, does will the same thing, that he
who commands does. In respect of understanding, when there is the same opinion
in both, and he that obeys, thinks as he that commands does, and though the
thing commanded be fully done, yet if there be not a full consent and
conformity of will and opinion both in him that commandes, and in him that
obeys the obedience is imperfect.

And in the same place, my Lord, they give us Et sibi quisque persua deat, quod
qui sub obedientia vivunt, se ferri ac regi a divina providentia per superiores
suos sinere debent, perinde ac si cadaver essent, quod quoquo versus ferri, and
quacunque ratione tractarise sinit vel similiter atque senis baculus, qui
ubicunque and quacunque in re velit eo uti, quieum manu tenet, ei inservit.
Ibidem in constitutionibus.
two emblems of this arbitrary obedience, whereof the one is a dead body, which
suffers it self to be carried whethersoever and to be handled, howsoever the
living will: and the other is a staff in a man's hand, which is wholly at his
service that has it, and to be used howsoever, whenever, and in whatsoever,
he that has it pleases.

Indeed my Lord, in the same place they interpose Sancta obedientia tum in
executione, tum involuntate, tum in intellectu sit in nobis semper omni ex
part perfecta; cum magna celeritate, spirituali gaudio, and perseverantia,
quic quid nobis iniunctum fuerit, obeundo: omnia iusta esse, nobis persuadendo,
omnem sententiam ac iudicium nostrum contrarium caeca quadam obedientia
abnegando; and id quidem in omnibus, ubi definiri non possit, quemedmodum
dictum est, aliquod peccati genus intercedere.
a plausible condition, which if it were sincere and truly observed, would in a
great measure rectify and justify their arbitrary obedience, and that is this,
that it is not to be performed, if the thing commanded appear to be a sin,
but this my Lord is only a Jesuiticall and juggling trick to gloss the matter
and to gull the world, for this condition is contrary to the two former embles
of Arbitrary obedience, for can a dead body or a staff discern what is
sinful or whether they be lawfully or unlawfully used? It is contrary to the
name and nature of blind obedience, whereby as they there say, we must
renounce and deny our own opinion and contrary judgment. It is contrary to
the third condition of perfect obedience, which requires that there be a full
conformity of mind and opinion both in him that commands, and in him that
obeyes. And lastly, it is contrary to the practice of the Jesuits, who require
and perform obedience not only in things, that are and appear sinful, but
also in things that are and appear grossly, palpably and transcendently
wicked, as I shall presently show.

And they do derive this arbitrary obedience, and the two parts and kinds
thereof, uncanonicall and an anticanonicall from the words of Greg. the seventh
produces Samuel to prove, that it is Idolatry and Infidelity to disobey the
Pope. He that will not obey this most wholesome precept of ours (forbidding
Priests their wives under color of fornication) incurreth the sin of
Idolatry, as Samuel witnesses, not to obey is the sin of witchcraft, and
not to be content, is the wickedness of Idolatry. Distinct. 81. Si qui sunt.
What said Samuel more of God, than the Pope here applies to himself. Bishop
Bilson in his true difference between Christian subjection and uncristian
rebellion. second part page 231. 1 King. 20.32.33.42. Ipse prorex sive papa
etiam solus sine concilio quaecunque ad reipub. Statum pertinent, decernit,
eique non secus ac regi ipsi Christo, omnes dicto audientes esse oportet.
Gasper scioppius in his Ecclus. cap. 55.
Samuel unto King Saul, rebuking him for sparing Agag. and the best of the
cattle, contrary to the conmmandment of the Lord, under pretense to offer
sacrifice to the Lord. 1 Samuel 15. 22. Has the Lord says Samuel, as great
pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices as when the voice of the Lord is
obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken is better than
the fatt of rams: for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is wickedness and idolatry.

In which words my Lord, as God require, that his word be taken, first for a
law, secondly for an universal law or a law in all things, and thirdly for a
law of that authority, that if he command any man to kill a man, yea a King,
the chief of men, and Gods immediate deputy, he must do it, and if he do it
not, he sins greatly, which was Saul's case here. So do the defenders of
this arbitrary obedience, strive in these three things, to be similes
altissimo, to be very Gods. First they will have their bare word to be taken for
a law, secondly for an universal law, or law in all things, and thirdly for a
law of that authority, that if they bid kill a man, it must be done by them
that are under their jurisdiction.

And this appears my Lord, by a plea or argument, styled the arraignement of
the whole society of the Jesuits in France, made in the Court of Parliament in
Paris, the twelfth and thirteenth of July 1594. by Master Anthony Arnould
Counselor for the University of Paris against the Jesuits: wherein he
shows, that the Jesuits fourth vow is to obey their general ubique and in
omnibus, every where and in all things and he further adds, that the words
of their fourth vow are that they must acknowledge Jesus Christ present as it
were in their general, and that if Jesus Christ should command them to go and
There are above 3000. persons that know that Common let Preaching at Christmas
last in Saint Bartholomewes Church, took for his theme the third chap. of the
book of Judges, where it is reported, that Ehud slew the King of Moab, and
escaped away, and after he had discoursed at large upon the death of the King,
and exalted and placed amongst the Angels, this Tiger, this Devil incarnate,
James Clement, he fell into a great exclamation: we have need of an Ehud, we
have need of an Ehud, were he a Friar, were he a Soldier, were he a Lackey,
were he a sheapherd, it made no matter: needs we must have an Ehud, one blow
would settle us fully in the state of our affairs, as we most desire The
Arraignement of the whole society of the Jesuits. fol. 12.
kill they must do so. And to this purpose Ignatius Loyola in his Epist. de
virtute obedientiae, sect. 18. gives his Disciples the Jesuits this one
general rule of obedience Statuere debetis vobiscum, quicquid superior
praecipit, ipsius Dei praeceptum esse and voluntatem atque ut ad credenda quae
Catholica fides propo-nit, toto animo assensuque vestro statim incumbitis, sic
ad ea facienda, quaecunque superior dixerit, caeco quodam impetu voluntatis
parendi cupidae, sive ulla prorsus disquisitione feri mini. Sic egisse
credendus est Abraham filium Issaac immolare iussus. Mysteria Patrum
Iesuitarum. page 62.
Statuere debetis vobiscum, quicquid superior praecipit, ipsius Dei praeceptum,
esse and voluntatem etc. You must resolve with your selves, that whatsoever the
superior commands, is the very praecept and will of God himself and as you
betake your selves with a full mind and assent to believe those things, which
the Catholic faith proposes: so be ye carried with a blind zeal and an
obedient will, to do all things, which the superior shall say, without
making any question or disquisition at all, for so Abraham is thought to have
done, being commanded to offer his son Isaac and in the twentieth section of
his former Epist. Ignatius Loyola adds, Quae de obedientia diximus, aeque
privatis erga proximos superiores, atque rectoribus praepositisque localibus
erga Provinciales, Provincialibus ergo gralem, grali denique erga illum quem
ipsi praefecit Deus, nempe suum in ter^is vicarum observanda sunt. Ibidem. Page
^1.
Quae de obedientia diximus etc. Those things which we have said concerning
obedience, are equally to be observed by private men toward their next
superiors, by inferior governors and Rulers of several places, to their
provincialls, by provincialls to their general, and by the general to him,
whom God has set over him, namely to Gods Vicar on earth.

Here then my Lord, we have now the full extent of this religious, irreligious,
blind, detestable, damnable, devilish obedience in two respects; in respect of
the persons, to whom it is due, and in respect of the nature of the thing it
self. In respect of the persons to whom it is due, it is to be given by every
inferior to every Ecclesiastical superior, In respect of the nature of the
thing it self, it is a general and universal obedience to all their commands
whatsoever. And if we look a little more perticularly and narrowly into it we
shall find, that they extend it sometimes to things fond and frivolous
sometimes to things ridiculous and absurd and sometimes to things wicked and
ungodly.

First to things fond and frivolous; an instance hereof we have in Anselmus
Archbishop of Cant. who after he was bishop of that See, wrote to Pope Urban
to appoint him some man, according to whose commands he might frame his whole
life, and Pope Urban appointed him Edmerus, and as Malmesburien. in his first
book de gestis pontificum Anglorum in the life of Anselmus says, the
Archbishop did so much esteem the command of Edmerus, that being in bed, he
would not so much as rise, nay he would not so much as turn himself a latere
ad latus, from one side to the other, sine praecepto Edmeri, unless Edmerus
first commanded him, and herein the Archbishop showed himself a true pattern
and a lively portraiture of blind obedience. For Caeca obedientia est, ut quis
sit tanquam corpus exanime, quod requiescit ubi quis reposuerit, sine motu.
This is blind obedience, that a man be like a dead body, which rests where it
is laid, without motion until it be stirred, as my late Lord of Ely Bishop
White in his explanation of the Orthodox faith and way, cap. 3. parag. 13.
shows.

Secondly, they extend it to things ridiculous and absurd, Ethelwold the Abbot
of Abington having set workmen to repair the Abbey, charged one of his Monks
called Elstan, to see their diet well prepared for them. Thereupon the Monk
betakes him into the Kitchen, makes it clean, trimmes up the vessels, and
prepares meat for the workmens dinner, a little before dinner, the Abbot comes
into the kitchen and finding the Monk busy in preparing meat for the
workemens dinner, asks him, what his meaning was? The Monk answers, that he
was yiedling obedience to his command: the Abbot replied, that he gave him no
such command, he commanded him only to over-see others, not to do those
things in his own person, yet he told him, that he had done well to let his
obedience outstrippe his command, but added withal that his obedience was not
yet perfect: if he would have his obedience perfect indeed, the Abbot bid him
thrust his naked arm into a great seething pot full of meat and pull out the
lowest piece of meat, that was in the pot and added, that if the scalding
liquor did not hurt his naked arm, then his obedience was perfect indeed,
Malmesburiensis in his second book de gestis Pontificum Anglorum in the life of
Elstan, says that the Monk did do so, and his hand and arm received no
harm and thereby as by a miracle his obedience was known to be perfect indeed.

In the third place they extend it to things wicked and ungodly, Cardinal
Bellarmine de Pontifice Romans lib. 4 cap. 5. tells us, that if Si autem Papa
erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere
vitia esse bona, et virtutes malas, misi vellet contra conscientiam peccare.
the Pope should so far forth err, as to command vices, and to forbid
virtues, the Church were bound to believe, that vices are good and virtues are
evil unless she will sin against her own conscience and Cardinal Cusanus
excitat. lib. 2. Sermon. 2. and excitat. lib. 6. sermon. super respice domine de
caelo, and vide, requires every man to yield both implicit faith and blind
obedience, not only to the Popes erroneous doctrine, but also to the erroneous
doctrine of his own prelate, and that without any further search or inquiry
after the truth, Quam firma est aedificatio ecclesiae? quia nemo potest decipi
etiam per malum praesidentem. si dixeris domine obedivi tibi in praeposito, hoc
tibi sufficient ad salutem. Tu enim per obedientiam, quam facis praeposito quem
ecclesia tollerat, decipi nequis, etimasi praeceperit alia quam debuit:
praesumit enim ecclesia de illa sententia, cui si tu obedieris, magna erit
merces tua. Obedientia igitur irrationalis est consummata obedientia and
prefectissima, scil. quando obeditur sine inquisitione rationis, sieut iumentum
obedit domino suo.
how strong, says he, is the building of the Church: for no man can be
deeeiued, no not by an evil prelate. If thou say unto God, O Lord, I have
obeyed thee in my prelate, this shall suffice thee unto salvation, for thou
can not be deceived by thine obedience, which thou yeildest unto thy prelate
whom the church suffers, though he command thee other things, than he ought
to do, for the Church presumes his sentence to be good, which sentence if
thou obey, thy reward shall be great. Obedientia igitior irrationalis est
consummata obedientia and perfectissima. Therefore says he, obedience
unreasonable, obedience without reason blind obedience is consummate and most
perfect obedience, that is, says he, when thou obeyest thy prelate without
seeking a reason, even as an horse obeys his Master.

Suppose now my Lord, that the Pope should teach the Church, and the Bishop
should teach those of his diocese and the general of the Jesuits, should
teach those of his order, not such doctrine as Defens. fidie. lib. 6. cap. 6.
mysteria patrum Jesuit. p. 159. 160. 161.
Swarez teaches that it is lawful for any man actually to depose, and kill a
King by the Popes sentence, First excommunicaed, deposed, and divested of his
Subjects allegiance and fealty:

But such doctrine, as Mr. Anthony Arnoulds plea. page 11. 12
Varade Principal of the Jesuits in France taught Barriere, namely, that to
murder Henry the fourth of France, though a Catholic, and not excommunicate,
was a meritorious work, and that for that deed he should go straight unto
Paradise: or that to murder any other good King, good Magistrate, good man is a
meritorious work, and that for that deed, he that does it shall go straight
unto Heaven: In this case according to this doctrine, what were the Church, the
Bishops subjects, and the Jesuits bound to do, only vi mandati, and virtute
obedientiae, without any reference to those manifold subtilties, distinctions,
and subdistinctions in the Jesuits King-killing doctrine? why, the Church
says Bellarmine it tied in conscience, to believe and obey the Pope, though he
teach virtue to be vice, and vice to be virtue, otherwise she sins against
her conscience. The Bishops subjects must obey him, without requiring a reason,
as an horse, having a bridle on his head, follows his Master, and this says
Cusanus is perfect obedience, and after the fact is done, if they say unto God,
O Lord, we have obeyed thee in our prelate, they have every one his quietus
est, this shall suffice them unto salvation, nay their reward shall be great.
And the Jesuits, even by their vow, are bound to obey their general, even as
Jesus Christ himself, ubique and in omnibus, every where and in all things,
yea when he commands them to kill and murder.

And hereupon Campian in that one of his three Generalis praepositi nostri
d^creto, quod ego tanquam mandatum caelitus missum, and a Christo ipso sancitum
veneror, Praga Romam, ubi Generalis nostri perpetua seeds est, Roma deinde in
Angliam contendi. Campian.
Epist. prefixed before his ten reasons, directed to Queen Elizabeth's
counsel, says that he came over into England, iussu sui Generalis, tanquam
iussu ipsius Christi, at the command of his general, as at the command of
Christ himself, and what to do? Even by his own confession, as Sir Edward
Coke in Caudreys case says, to make a party for the Catholic cause, that is,
to withdraw the Queens subjects from her allegiance and to reconcile them to
the Church of Rome, which as Sir Edward Coke there says, is treason and
punishable with death by the common laws of the Land.

And if any will further see the fruits and effects of this arbitrary and
blind obedience, let him cast his eyes upon Felton at the command of Pope Pius
Quintus setting up upon the Bishop of London his gates, an excommunication
against his own Sovereign Queen Elizabeth that peerless Lady. Let him cast
his eyes upon Jacob Clement murdering King H. the 3. upon Francis Ravaillac
murdering King Henry the fourth both of France.

And lastly upon the Gunpowder treason plotted and contrived by the advice and
approbation of Henry Garnet, superior of the Jesuits here in England, and of
Oswold Tesmond, John Garrard and other Jesuits, as appears by the 2. of the
third of James.

And this is the reason my Lord, that such monstrous impieties, and such
matchless villainies, are done by the inferior at the command of the superior
in the Church of Rome, and not in the Church of England, because the Church of
Rome does approve and embrace arbitrary and blind obedience, and the two parts
and kinds thereof, uncanonicall and anticanonicall, and extends it, to things
fond and frivolous, ridiculous and absurd, yea wicked and ungodly, which the
Church of England does utterly reject, and contents her self with Canonical
obedience only, that is, with such obedience as the canons require.

For as Bishop Bilson in his forcited treatise, de perpetua Christi. Ecclesiae
gubernatione, says, In our Church, metropolitani and d^aecesani, scriptis in
quaque re legibus diriguntur: and again in our Church, minime sibi sumunt
diaecesani ut diaecesibus suis leges constituant, quod tamen presbyteriis
vestris in qualibet paraecia licere contenditis, He speaks against the
Presbyterians, sed ut quas pii principes and concilia rite celebrata
decreverius, executioni mandari faciant. And thereupon afterward he calls the
Bishops of our Church, in their several jurisdictions, custodes non conditores
canorum, which words of his, do fully approve of canonical obedience, and
utterly exclude all arbitrary and blind obedience out of our Church. And so my
Lord, by the definition both of canonical and arbitrary obedience it appears,
that Canonical obedience is such obedience, as the canons require, and if if
it exceed the Canons never so little, it is no longer Canonical, but arbitrary.

My fourth reason to prove that canonical obedience, is such obedience as the
canons require, is in my apprehension of more strength and force, than the
three former, and it is taken from the 19. and 21. chap. of 25. of Henry. 8.
which acts do so limit and confine the Clergy of this land unto the canons,
either made by a provincial synod in this land, and confirmed by his
Majesty's letters patents out of his prerogative royal or else made beyond
sea, and received here for laws of this land, by the Kings sufferance, and the
subjects free consent and usage, that none of the Clergy in their several
jurisdictions, can go beyond those canons, without incroaching upon the
supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Crown: and therefore the
Canonical obedience approved and required in our Church by the oath of
canonical obedience, must of necessity, be such obedience, as those canons
require, because the superior clergy cannot out of command require more, nor
the inferior clergy out of obedience yield more, without prejudice to the
Kings supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

This will appear most evidently, by the first of the first of Eliz. by the
19. and 21. chap. of the 25. of Henry 8. and by the oath of supremacy. The
first of the 1. of Elizabeth is an act to restore unto the crown, the ancient
jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical and Spiritual; then the crown
has a jurisdiction and an ancient jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical.
And as the first of the first of Eliz. does show, that the crown has an
ancient jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical: so the 19. and 21. chap.
of the 25. of Henry 8. both revived in the first of the first of Elizabeth, as
parts of that ancient jurisdiction of the crown over the state Ecclesiastical
do show, how far that ancient jurisdiction of the crown does extend over
the state Ecclesiastical and they do extend it, over the whole clergy, and
submit the whole clergy unto it, in these two points or respects.

First concerning canons made beyond sea, and then concerning canons made in
this land. Concerning canons made beyond sea, they so far submit the whole
Clergy unto the prerogative royal and supreme jurisdiction of the Crown, that
none of the clergy in their several jurisdictions, can execute or put in use,
any such foreign canons until those foreign canons are first received here
for laws of this land, by the Kings sufferance and the Subjects free consent
and custom.

Secondly among the canons in this land formerly made, they abrogate all such
canons, as are contrary, either to the supreme jurisdiction of the Crown, or
to the statutes, customs or common laws of this land, and approve and
establish all the rest, until they be otherwise ordered and determined by the
32. persons there mentioned, and then concerning canons hereafter to be made in
this land, they submit the whole clergy unto the supreme jurisdiction of the
crown in these four particulers.

The first particular is, that the Clergy cannot make any canons in their
several jurisdictions, but only when they meet in a provincial synod.

The second particular is, that they cannot meet in a provincial synod,
until they be first called thither by the Kings writ.

The third particular is, when the clergy are so met, being so called, and have
made canons, that they cannot execute or put in use, nay they cannot promulge,
or publish any one of these canons, until those canons are first confirmed by
his Majesty's letters patents out of his supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

And the fourth particular is, that so far they may go, further they cannot.

And then in the third place, comes the oath of supremacy, and that binds every
Bishop, every judge, every Clergie-man, and every other person that has taken
that oath, to defend and maintain all those foresaid particulers, of the
prerogative royal of the crown over the whole Clergy. For the last clause of
that oath binds every one that takes it, The words of the oath, are to his
power: but they are so interpreted by the right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall of England, and General of his Majesty's
forces in his treatise styled: Laws and Ordinances of war, page 26. where he
expounds the former words by these, even to the utmost of my power and hazard
of my life.
to the utmost of his power, to defend and maintain all jurisdictions,
privileges, preheminences and authorities united, or annexed to the imperial
Crown of this realm. So that if any of them shall extend canonical
obedience, or the oath of canonical obedience, or the archidiaconall,
Episcopal, or Archiepiscopall jurisdiction, by virtue of canonical obedience,
or of the oath of canonical obedience, beyond those canons; he does incroach
upon the prerogative royal of the crown, withdraw his submission from his
Majesty, presume to make canons within his own jurisdiction, violate the oath
of supremacy, transgress the first of the first of Elizabeth and the 19. of
the 25. of Henry 8. and is therefore by that statute, liable to be fined and
imprisoned at the Kings pleasure. And so my Lord, I have by four reasons
proved, that the canonical obedience in force in our church, is such
obedience, as the canons in force in our church do require, and that all
arbitrary and blind obedience is quite excluded, as a thing utterly repugnant,
to the word of God, to the doctrine and discipline of their orthodox church, to
the supreme jurisdiction of the crown, and to the ancient and just liberty
and freedom of every freeborne Subject.

And now my Lord by one syllogism grounded upon this canonical obedience I
will acquit my self and all other, incumbents from preaching the visitation
Sermon, and show that every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop and Archbishop
is bound to preach his own visitation Sermon, and both these by virtue of
canonical obedience, so that these two words, which the defendants have
abused to acquit themselves, and condemn me, being rightly understood, shall
condemn them and acquit me, and this is the syllogism. Judge Dodridge in his
English lawyer says, although the common lawyers of this land, do use a
continued speech and non concisis argumentis, yet do they observe very often the
forms of arguments, used in the schools, as ^yllogismes, enthimems,
inductions, examples, sorites, dilemmata etc. as may be proved by sundry
instances, and first of syllogismes in Shellies case, In Calvin's case.
Canonical obedience is such obedience as the canons require. But the canons
bind every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop to preach his
own visitation Sermon, licensed preachers to preach at their own cures only,
and forbid me, and such as I am, that are not licensed preachers, to preach and
expound any Scripture in our own cures, or elsewhere. Ergo by canonical
obedience every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop and Arch bishop etc.


The Major or first proposition, that canonical obedience is such obedience as
the canons require, has formerly been proved by four reasons, and therefore
that cannot justly be denied, until those four reasons are first answered and
confuted; and it is contrary to the rule of Logic, yea and of law too, to deny
the conclusion before the premises are confuted: so that all the question is
concerning the Minor. That has three parts,

Canonum, lex legum, regula regularum and that yields us three arguments, to
prove that every visiter every Archdeacon, Bishop and Archbishop, is bound to
preach his own visitation Sermon.

Argument 1:
My first Argument is taken out of the first Epistle of Saint Peter, 5. chap. 2.
verse, where Saint Peter charge all his compresbyters, to feed every one his
own flock. Feed says he, the flock of God, (...), which is amongst you,
which is committed unto you, or which depends on you: that is, as Saint Paul
expounds it, Acts 20.28. whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, whence
I thus argue.

Every flock is to be fed ex officio, ex debito, by that pastor to whose
charge it is committed.

But the incumbents, curates, Churchwardes, Sidemen, and the rest by the
visiters authority, assembled at the visiters visitation are there committed to
the visiters charge, and not to any of the incumbents charge there present.
Ergo.

They are there to be fed ex officio, ex debito, by the visiter, and not by any
of the incumbents there present.

The Major, or first proposition, that every flock is to be fed ex officio, ex
debito, by that pastor, to whose charge it is committed, is the plain,
evident, and express word of God in the places before alleged, and therefore
that cannot be denied without manifest injury and violence to the Word of God
in the places before alleged.

The Minor or second proposition, that the Incumbents, Curats, Churchwardens,
Sidemen, and the rest by the visiters authority, assembled at the visiters
visitation, are there committed to the visiters charge, and not to any of the
incumbents charge there present, is likewise evident: for the visiter calls
them thither, if they come not, he punishes them if they come, he examines
them, if they depart before he dismisseth them, he cites them again. And the
visiter, if he be a Lyndewode Provinc. l. 4. tit. de claudestina desponsatione.
cap. Humana concupiscentia. verbo. diaecesanorum qui, cum habeant curam in
solidum per totam diocesin, possunt licentiam de qu^ sequitur, concedere vbique
per totam diaecesin. Pr. lib. 5: tit. de Haereticis cap. Reverendissime. v.
Diaecesano. Paulus. dicit, quod epus loci vel superior praelatus sacerdodotis,
maiorem gerit curam in ecclesia, quam curatus, and allegat ad hoc de pae. and
re. c. si epus. l. 6. vide Pr. lib. 5. tit. de pae. and re. c. In confessione
verb. Non recipiantur.
Bishop is nector totius Diaecesis, and has curam animarum over them whom he
visits.

And if he be an Archdeacon, then he is oculus Episcopi, to observe them, manus
E;piscpi, to govern them to reward and punish them, lingua Episcopi, to
instruct and teach them, and vicarius Episcopi, to do them all for the Bishop,
for vicarius tenetur implere vicem eius, cuius est vicarius. and he likewise
under the Bishop has curam animarum over them, whom he does visit as these
texs of law show; Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 6. de electione Cap. 7. Inferiora
etiam ministeria, ut puta decanatum, Archidiaconatum, and alia, quae curam
animarum habent annexam. And upon these words the gloss notes. Et est verum,
quod Archidiaconus, qui habet inquirere and visitare parochiam suam, curam
habet animarum. And again, eodem lib. tit. 23. de officio Archidiaconi, Cap.
1. Vt Archidiaconus post Episcopum, sciat se vicarium esse eius in omnibus, and
omnem curam in clero, tam in urbe positorum, quam eorum, qui per parochias
habitare noscuntur, ad se pertinere, sive de eorum conversatione, sive honor
and restauratione ecclesiarum, sive doctrina Ecclesiasticorum, vel caeterarum
rerum studio, and delinquentium rationem coram Deo redditurus est. And again,
Cap. 7. cum super his i.e. super clericis and ecclesiis eorum, sit redditurus
rationem in districti examinis iudicio. and so both propositions are proved,
and therefore the conclusion, following directly upon the premises, must
needs be true.

Lukes Gospel. 7. verse. From these words of our Savior, The labourer is
worthy of his hire, which is true ^ converso. He that has the hire, is bound
to perform the labor, and the canon law does approve of the rule both ways:
Qui sentit onus, debet sentire and commodum, and qui sentit commodum, debet
seutire and onus, inter regulas iuris regula 55. Now the labor of the
visitation, is to correct and preach, else why am I fined, imprisoned,
deprived, degraded, and excommunicated, for refusing to preach a visitation
sermon: and the hire for that labor, is procurations, and both these appear
by the definition of Procurations. Decretalium lib. 1. tit. 23. de officio
Archidiaconi cap. 10. Est procuratio necessariorum sumptuum exhibitio, quae
debeter praelatis, diaecesim seu subditos visitantibus, and every Archdeacon,
Bishop, and Archbishop confesses as much. For always before Easter in their
process, they cite us to appear at their next visitation, and there to pay
unto them, procurationes sibi ratione visitationis debitas, procurations due to
them, for visiting, that is, for preaching, and correcting, says the Canon
Law. Procurations, there is the hire of the visitation, due for visiting, that
is for preaching and correcting there is the labor or work of the visitation.
So that the visiter and he only, and that by the rule of natural equity, is
bound to preach his own visitation Sermon, because he receives his
procurations of the incumbents for that work: whence I thus argue.

Whosoever receives the hire of the visitation, which is procurations, he is
bound to perform the labor of the visitation, which is to preach and to
correct.

But every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop, receives the
hire of the visitation, namely procuration. Ergo.

Every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop, is bound to
perform the labor of the visitation, to teach and to correct, to preach and
punish.

That procurations are the hire of the visitation, and that the labor of the
visitation is to preach and to correct, and that every visiter receives that
hire, for visiting, these three are without all question, all the question is,
whether to visit, be to preach and to correct, and that will I prove most
plentifully, when I come to the canon law; I only suspend the proof thereof,
until I have alleged my third and last argument out of the word of God.

Epistle of Saint Paul to Tim. 3. cap. 1. v. out of these words; This is a
true saying, if any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy
work. In which words Saint Paul admonishes Bishops, not to make a divorce
between their office and their work, not to take to themselves, the dignity
and profit of their office, and to cast the labor, and work upon others: but
to join them both together, and in their own persons, as well to do the
work, as to desire the calling: And this does analogically bind all others, of
what calling soever they be, to join the office and work both together,
according to that of the same Apostle Romans 12.7. (...). Let him that has an
office, wait on his office: whence I thus argue.

Whosoever has desired, whatsoever has obtained the office of a visiter, he
is bound to desire, he is bound to perform, the worthy work belonging to that
office, namely to teach, and to correct.

But every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop has desired, has obtained the
office of a visiter: Ergo. Every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop is bound
to desire, is bound to perform the worthy work belonging to that office,
namely to teach and to correct, to preach and punish.

The only thing questionable in this syllogism, is that which was
questionable in the former, namely, whether to teach and to preach be the
visiters work at the visitation, and that being proved, then by the former
argument, every visiter is tied to desire it, and do it in his own person, or
by some other lawfully procured. For quod quis legitime facit per alium, idem
est ac si faceret per se. And I will now prove that, the visiters duty, so
evidently out of the Canon law, that no man shall doubt of it, and so my two
last arguments, out of the word of God shall stand good against al exception.

Lyndewode in the first book of his Provincial, tit, de officio Archidiaconi
cap. 1. sets down this canon, made by Steven Langhton Archbishop of Cant.
about 400. years since.

Vt Archidiaconi secundum Apostolum, non quae sua sunt quaerant, sed quae sunt
Jesus Christi: in sua visitatione provideant, quod canon missae emendetur, and
quod sacordotes, rite noverint proferre verba canonis and baptismatis, and quod
in hac part sanum habeant intellectum. Doceant quoque laicos, in qua forma
baptizare debeant, ut saltem hoc faciant aliquo idiomate.

This Canon binds the Archdeacon, to teach the Clergy and Laity at his
visitation: and what must he teach them? why, he must teach the Clergy, how
to pronounce the words of the canon of Mass and of Baptism, and the Laity how
to baptize in some tongue: and where were the Clergy and Laity to do these
things? In their own Parishes, not at the visitation. So that by this canon,
the Archdeacon is bound, to teach the Clergy and Laity at the visitation, how
to do their own duties, at home in their own Parishes, not how to do his
duty at the visitation. And that all this is the Archdeacons duty, it is
evident by the title of the canon. It is de officio Archidiaconi. The text is
plain, Lyndewodes gloss makes it plainer, for upon these words, ut sacerdotes
in hac part sanum habeant intellectum, Lyndewode gives this gloss.

Sanum intellectum, 1. fidelem intellectu^ sive Catholicum: and ex hoc apparet,
quod in Archidiacono requiritur Scripturarum scientia: quomodo namque possit in
aliis canonis missae, verborum baptismatis sanuum intellectum exquirere, nisi
ipse prius eadem sano sapuerit intellectu? Nam non convenit talem aliis
praefici in magistrum, Good my Lord, mark this, non convenit talem aliis
praefici in magistrum, qui nondum se noverit esse discipulum. By which words it
is evident, that the Archdeacon is made a teacher, an instructor, a Doctor to
the incumbents, and they Disciples, Scholars, and hearers unto him, and
therefore he is ex debito, ex officio, to teach and to Preach unto them at his
visitation, and not they unto him.

From the provincial constitutions of our Archbishops of Cant. I proceed to
the Legantine constitutions of this Kingdom, and amongst them I find this
canon or constitution made by Otho the Popes legate, tit. de septem sacram. c.
Sacram. Ecclesiast. parag. statuimus.

Statuimus quod in susceptione curae animarum, and ordinis sacerdotii,
examinentur de sacramentis praecipue, ordinandi. Archidiaconi quoque in
singulis Decanatuum suorum conventibus, sacerdotes, in his studeant erudire,
docentes eos, qualiter circa baptismum, eucharistiam, matrimonium, paenitentiam
se habere debeant.

This canon likewise binds the Archdeacons at their visitation, to teach the
incumbents, how to carry themselves in administering the Sacraments, which are
to be administered by them, in their own Parishes, to their own people, and
not at the visitation to strangers. So that by this canon also, the Archdeacons
are bound at their visitation, to teach the incumbents, how to do their own
duties at home in their own cures, not how to do the Archdeacons duty at the
visitation. And which is especially to be observed in this canon, the
Archdeacons are here bound to teach the incumbents in singulis decanatuum
suorum conventibus, at every meeting of the Deaneries, at every visitation, and
therefore the incumbents are not bound to teach the Archdeacons, or one another
at any visitation.

Again among Othos legantine constitutions tit. de Archidiaconis c. De Archi.
quoque. par. sint solliciti. I find this canon or constitution.

Sint solliciti Archidiaconi, frequenter interesse capitulis per singulos
decanatas: In quibus diligenter instruant inter alia sacerdotes, ut been
vivant, ut sciant and sane intelligant verba canonis and baptismatis.

This Canon also binds the Archdeacons at their visitation, to teach the
incumbents, and that frequently, carefully, and diligently, both how to lead
their lives, and how to discharge their cures. And Iohanes de Athona in his
gloss, shows as much, and withal shows, how the Archdeacons did then
neglect that duty, and why, even because it brought no profit with it.

These are his very words upon the last text: Hic textus requiquirit
sollicitudinem and diligentiam in Archidiaconis. Haec tamen constitutio perraro
ab Archidiaconis servatur, quia lucrum pecuniarium, eis inde non applicatur.
And this is also the reason, my Lord, that our Archdeacons, Bishops and
Archbishops violate these constitutions, which binds them to preach their own
visitation Sermons, and enforce that duty upon the incumbents, because it is
for their profit and ease so to do.

But if either profit or ease, my Lord, would have prevailed with the
Archdeacon, this controversy concerning Preaching the visitation Sermon, had
never been between him and me: for in his plea, the fourth Article he
confesses, that I offered him two or three pieces, that is, by his own
interpretation, forty shilling or three pounds, to procure one to preach the
visitation Sermon: so that if he would have Preached that Sermon himself, he
might have had a rich reward for his own pains, in doing his own work: or
if he would not, he might with part of the reward, have procured another to
have preached it, and so he might have had both profit and ease. But his
spleen against me was so great, that he would not accept of either, but
preferred a most unjust war, before a most just peace, and so quod pessimorum
est ingeniorum, he has rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my good
will.

From the provincial and legantine constitutions of this Kingdom, which are
as it were an epitome, or breviat of the whole body of the canon law, I proceed
to the body of the canon law it self, and there in the Decretals 3. book. 39.
tit. de Censibus etc. cap. 23. parag. porro, I find this canon or constitution.

Porro visitationis officium exercentes, non quaerant, quae suae sunt, sed quae
sunt Jesu Christi, praedicationi and exhortationi, correctioni and reformationi
vacando, ut fructum referant, qui non perit.

The first thing, my Lord, to be inquired into, in this canon, is, who these
visitationis officium exercentes are? The former part of the canon shows, that
they are Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops: what are they to do at the
visitation? non quaerant, quae sua sunt, sed quae sunt Jesu Christi: They must
not seek for their own things, that is, for procurations, but for the
things of Jesus Christ, that is, for the salvation of their souls, whom they
visit. How is that to be done? Praedicationi and exhortationi, correctioni and
reformationi vacando. By employing themselves in preaching and exhorting,
there is the first thing; By employing themselves in correcting and reforming,
there is the second thing. Where must these things be done? In visitationis
officium exercendo, at the visitation. By whom? a visitationis officium
exercentibus. By them that keep the visitation, who are they? Archdeacons,
Bishops, Archbishops, who is now, my Lord, to preach the visitation sermon,
The visiter or the visited?

And here my Lord, I do how make good my two last arguments out of the word of
God, wherein there was nothing doubtful, but only these two things, whether
to visit were to preach and to correct, and both they the visiters work at
the visitation? and both these appear out of this text. For here, exercere
visitationis officium, est praedicationi and exhortationi, correctioni and
reformationi vacare. To visit or keep a visitation, is to employ ones self
in preaching and exhorting, in correcting and reforming. So that when the canon
law gives the visiter, his procurations for visiting, it gives him his
procurations for preaching and correcting: and when the Archdeacons, Bishops,
and Archbishops of this realm, in their process challenge their procurations,
of us the incumbents for visiting us: they challenge their procurations of us,
for preaching unto us, and for correcting of us: and the reason hereof is, quia
visitare vel visitationis officium exercere, nihil aliud est, quam
praedicationi and exhortationi, correctioni and reformationi vacare. Because to
visit or keep a visitation, is nothing else but to employ ones self in
preaching and exhorting, in correcting and reforming. And therefore my Lord,
seeing without all question, without all peradventure, it is the visiters duty
to visit, and to visit is to preach and to correct: therefore it is his duty
to preach and correct, as this text shows: and this much shall likewise
appear out of my next canon, which is taken ex Sexti decretal. lib. 3. tit.
20. de censibus, exactionibus and procurationibus cap. 1. parag. Sane. The
words are these.

Sane Archiepiscopus visitationis officium impensurus, proposito verbo Dei,
quaerat de vita and conversatione ministrantium in ecclesiis.

This canon my Lord, just as the former did, does show, what it is, impendere
visitationis officium, it is proponere verbum Dei, and quaerere de vita
ministrantium in ecclesiis. To preach the word of God, and to examine the lives
of the Church ministers. And both these, as this canon shows, must be done by
the visiter, yea by the chief ecclesiastical visiter, by the Archbishop
himself at his visitation. Archiepiscopus visitationis officium impensurus,
proposito verbo Dei, quaerat de vita and conversatione ministrantium in
ecclesiis.

Vives makes this one difference, my Lord, lib. de causis corruptarum artium.
between a base wit and an ingenuous mind: that the one will strive for
victory, in a known error, the other will rather seek, how true that is,
which he holds, than how he may defend it, and make greater price of verity,
than of victory. And hereupon my Lord, I hold my self bound in conscience, to
acquaint your Lordship with the only exception, that the advocates for the
office, have made against all my proofs, that so it may appear, that I am not
partial in mine own cause, nor wedded unto it, whether it be right or wrong:
but that I am indifferently affected, nay wholly bequeathed unto the truth, that
that may take place, and get the victory, whether it be against me, or for me.

When this last text was alleged in my behalf, at informations in Doctors
Commons, Doctor Rives the Kings advocate, and one of the advocates for the
office against me, a learned Lawyer and an elegant orator, made this exception
against it. He granted, that by the former text, praeponere verbum dei, was the
Archbishops duty at his visitation. But he added, that proponere verbum dei,
did not bind the Archbishop to preach the word of God at his visitation, but
only to lay the word of God before him at his visitation: as if the words of
the text had been, Praeposito verbo Dei, and not proposito verbo dei.

Dulhard vives his schoolmasters was of opinion, that the worst Grammarian
would make the best logician: and it seems, Ibidem.
that Doctor Rives is of Dulhards opinion and thinks to prove himself a great
canonist, by showing himself a weak grammarian, by taking pro or prae, or by
confounding pro with prae. But this my Lord, is not expositio or interpretatio,
but nugatio, nay corruption and depravatio textus: or if it be an
interpretation, it is such an interpretation, as gave occasion to this old
proverb, mala glossa corrumpit textum. And as at that time, I entreated Doctor
Rives to compare his gloss, with the approved gloss upon these words, which I
suppose satisfied him at that time, I am sure it made him silent: so I desire
your Lordship to observe the difference between Docter Rives his gloss, and
the ordinary gloss, and to judge which comes nearest the text.

The ordinary gloss upon these former words, Sane Archiepiscopus visitationis
officium impensurus, proposito verbo Dei. quaerat de vita and conversatione
ministrantium in ecclesiis, makes this question, Hic quaeritur, quid primo
debet facere Archiepiscopus visitans? It gives this answer, Respondetur, quod
primo debet praedicare verbum dei, deinde debet inquirere, de vita and moribus
habitantium ibidem vid. clericorum and laicorum.

Proponere verbum dei then, not only by its own grammatical signification,
but also by the glosses approved interpretation, is praedicare verbum dei, to
preach the word of God: and thereunto the Archbishop himself, the chief
visiter, under the King, is tied, and that ex debito, ex officio, out of debt
and duty. Nay it is his primum debitum, his primum officium: his second debt
and duty at the visitation, is to correct, and reform: and both these this
last gloss does expressly show. Archiepiscopus visitans debet, primo debet
predicare verbum dei, deinde deber inquirere, de vita and moribus ibidem
habitantium vid. clericorum and laicorum. So that both by this last text and
gloss, Archiepiscopus visitans tenetur, tenetur ex debito, tenetur ex officio,
praedicare, primo praedicare verbum dei, secundo corrigere and reformare.

And now my Lord having proved it the Archbishops, the chief Ecclesiastical
visiters, debt and duty, which he is to pay and perform to the Clergy and
Laity at his visitation, nay his prime debt and duty, in the first place to
preach his own visitation Sermon, I may easily by an argument, drawn a majore
ad minorem, a superiore ad inferiorem, prove it the duty of every inferior
visiter, of every Bishop, and Archdeacon, to preach his own visitation Sermon;
for quod valet in majore, valebit etiam in minore. But I stand not in need of
these topicall and analogicall arguments. The last paragraph of that chapter,
the paragraph Hanc autem, requiers as much of every Bishop, and Archdeacon, at
their visitation, as is by the former paragraph, the paragraph Sane, enjoined
the Archbishop at his visitation.

Vltima conclusio. Praedicta forma visitationis debet servari in epis and aliis
inferioribus: regularium consuetudinibus exceptis. Probatur hic in Parag. fin.
and intellige de forma tradita a Parag. Sane usque in finem non de forma
tradita in principio textus. secundum Do. Johannes De vanquall in Breviario
super sextum Decretal. in his conclusions upon the Parag. Hanc autem. ultima
conclusio.
Hanc autem visitandi forman ab universis etiam Episcopis, aliisque praelatis,
ordinario jure subjectos suos visitantibus, plene observari praecipimus.
praecipimus.

Here my Lord we have this word praecipimus, and this word being inserted in a
canon, makes canonicum praeceptum (...), in the highest degree, as the
Canonists speak: and there fore the canonical obedience here required, must
needs be canonica obedientia by an excellency. And upon this word
praecipimus, Lyndewode gives this note: Lyndewode Provinc. lib. 1. tit. de
constistutionibus. cap. Quia in continentiae vitium. verbo. Praecipimus.
Ex hoc apparet, quod contrafaciens peceat, saltem ille, qui est subditus
praecipientis: and Greg. ad Iovinianum says, quod praecipitur imperatur, quod
imperatur necesse est fieri, si non fiat, paenam habet.

This Canonical precept then requiring canonical obedience, is of necessity
to be obeyed, and he that breaks it, sins, says Lindewode, and is to be
punished, says Greg. Now what is the canonical obedience required by this
canonical precept? why, Hanc visitandi formam observari, That the precedent
form of visiting, enjoined the Archbishop before in the paragraph, Sane.
namely, that first he preach his own visitation Sermon, and then correct and
reform the parties visited, be observed. By whom must it be observed: ab
universis etiam episcopis, by all Bishops. By whom else? aliisque praelatis. By
all other Praelates. Scilicet. Archidiaconis, namely Archdeacons, says the
gloss: and lastly, how must it be observed? why, plene observari praecipimus,
it must be fully observed, not semiplene, not by pieces or halfes, they must
not only preach, and omit to correct, nor only correct, and omit to preach:
but they must do both jointly together. If they omit either, they break their
canonical obedience, they violate this canonical praecept, and therein they
sin, and therefore they are to be punished.

And if to omit to preach the Uisitation Sermon, my Lord, be a sin in the
Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops, and to be punished: what a sin is it
in them, wholly to reject that duty from themselves, and without both canon and
color, to put it upon the incumbents, and if any incumbent refuse it, to cite
him to the high Commission Court, and there to fine, imprison, deprive,
degrade, and excommunicate him? this surely is a transcendent and a superlative
sin, and therefore deserves a transcendent and a superlative punishment.

But I proceed, and from the text and gloss, I proceed to the Commentators
and glossators upon the text. And in the first place I produce these three;
Iohanes Andreas in apparatu suo super sextum decretalium, Helias Regnier, in
his casus literales and notabilia super sextum decretal. And the third is
anonymus quidam, the title of whose work is, casus longi super sextum
decretalium, compilati in alma unversitate Pictavensi; and I join these three
together, because they write upon the same text, and use the very same words
upon the text.

The text they write upon, is the text last cited, ex sexti decretal. lib. 3.
tit. 20. de censibus exact, and procurat. cap. 1. cap. Romana parag. Sane. Sane
archiepiscopus visitationis officium impensurus, proposito verbo dei, quaerat
de vita and conversatione ministrantium in ecclesiis. And upon this text, they
all give this gloss in these very words. Hic quaeritur, quid primo debet
facere Archiepiscopus visitans? Respondetur, quod primo debet praedicare verbum
dei, deinde debet inquirere, de vita and moribus habitantium ibidem, videl.
clericorum and laicorum: and it seems, that Johanes Andreas was the first
author of those words, and that the other two, and the gloss in the last and
best edition of the body of the canon law, put out by Gregory the thirteenth,
borrowed them from him. For I find them in the gloss of that edition, but in
the glosses of former editions, I find them not. But howsoever that prove,
this is certain, that this their gloss is uncontradicted by any, that ever I
saw, and I have seen as many, as I could upon a diligent search find in Paul's
Churchyard, Duck-lane, and some other by-corners.

My fourth author is Johanes de vanquall Coloniensis, Doctor utriusque juris,
in his Breviary on the sixth book of the Decretals. in his conclusions upon the
text last cited, conclusione 2. where he thus writes.

Spectat ad officium visitatoris primo discutere statum clericorum, qualiter
baptismum and alia sacramenta administrent, and qualiter se habeant in ecclesia
and vita. Et si omnia recte inveniat, deo gratias agat, sin autem aliter
inveniat, ignaros instruat, and haec nocte, qua venit, expediat: sequenti die
de mane plebi vocatae, debet praedicare verbum dei, docendo fidem, and quod
mortalia vitent: and se continue in bonis operibus exerceant.

This gloss is agreeable to the former text, and binds the visiter, ex debito,
ex officio, to preach at his visitation, and there to teach both Clergy and
laity.

My fifth man is Cardinal Hostiensis in the third book of his sum, tit. de
Censibus, exactionibus and procurat. Expounding the text last mentioned. His
words are these.

Archiepiscopus in secunda visitaione illos visitet, qui in prima non fueriut
visitati: and imprimis verbo dei proposito, quaerat de vita and conversatione
ministrantium. Praecipit autem dominus noster universis episcopis, aliisque
praelatis, ordinario jure, exceptis religiosis, visitantibus, ut hanc formam
studeant observare. ut omnia haec leguntur in authentica Domini.

In which words, my Lord, this is very observable, that Hostiensis says, it is
expressly set down in the very text of the canon law, even in the Popes
authenticke Epistle, that every Archdeacon, Bishop and Archbishop, is first
to preach his own visitation sermon, and then to correct and reform the
parties visited. And if this much be expressly set down in the very text, what
need we any more glosses to prove that, which is clear and evident in the very
text, and if any gloss shall contradict a plain text, we may lawfully reject
it, and conclude that it is mala glossa, quia corrumpit textum.

Now upon the other text, before alleged out of the Decretals lib. 3. tit. 39.
De censibus exactionibus and procurationibus. cap. 23. parag. Porro. The words
whereof are these. Porro visitationis officium exercentes, non quaerant quae
sua sunt sed quae sunt Jesu Christi, praedicationi and exhortationi correctioni
and reformationi vacando, ut fructum referant, qui non perit. I produce these
three glossators, Petrus de Anchorano, Cardinal Zabarell, and Abbot Panormitan.

Petrus de Anchorano upon the former text says. Praelati tunc sunt procurandi
cum personaliter visitant. Et debent tunc consilium Lateranense servare, and
praedicationi, exhortationi, and reformationi vacare.

Cardinal Zabarell upon the same text, gives us this gloss. Octavo nota quod
debet visitans instare praedicationi, exhortationi, and correctioni, and quid a
clericis exquirere debeat, and quid eos docere, traditur in decretis, causa
decima, quaestione prima, cap. placuit. Abbot Panormitan upon the former words
says, visitator debet praedicare ex munere. and he further adds. Quid debeat
facere praelatus tempore visitationis, vide bonum textum in decretis. causa
decima. quaestione prima. cap. placuit.

There are two things my Lord in these three gloss^tors to be observed. The
first is, that they do expressly affirm, that it is the visiters duty to
preach his own visitation sermon. The other is, that for fuller information in
that point, they do refer us to two, canons: The first, is the tenth canon
of the second Lateran Council, mentioned by Petrus de Anchorano. The other is
the first canon of the second Brachara metropolis in provincia Gallaeciae. The
city Braga or Bracha in Portugal. ex Binnio.
Bracharen Council, contained in the decrees, the tenth cause, the first
question, the Chapter Placuit, mentioned by Zabarell and Panormitan: And these
two canons lay a greater burden upon the visiter, than to preach his own
visitation sermon, at the public meeting of the deaneries; or at a general
chapter and visitation of many parishes. For the first canon of the second
Bracharen Council contained in the chapter placuit, binds every Bishop to go
over his whole diocese parochiatim, and in every parish to teach, both clergy
and laity: The clergy, how to do their own duties in their own Churches:
and the laity, how to understand the Articles of the Christian faith, and how
to lead a godly life, and then that canon concludes. Et sic postea Episcopus de
illa ecclesia proficiscatur ad aliam.

And if any Bishop eitheir through multitude of business, or bodily sickness,
or want of knowledge, or through other occasions, cannot in his own person,
preach the word of God Parochiatim through his whole diaecesse: Then the other
canon, the tenth canon of the second Lateran Council binds him, assumere viros
idoneos, potentes opere and sermon, qui plebes sibi commissas, vice ipsius
(cum ipse per se idem nequeat) solicit visitantes, verbo aedificent and
exemplo. To take unto himself able men powerful in deed and word, who
carefully visiting the people committed to him, may in his steed, when he
himself cannot, edify them by word and example And it ties the Bishop to give
them competent allowance. Quibus ipse cum indiguerint, congrue necessaria
ministret, and it shows, that the Bishop is bound so to do, by the law of
natural equity, because they are his coadintors and cooperators, non solumin
praedicationis officio, verum etiam in audiendis confessonibus and panitentiis
iniungendis, ac caeteris peragendis, quae ad salutem pertinent animarum, and it
concludes, si quis hoc neglexerit adimplere districtae subiaceat ultioni. If
any Bishop shall not preach the word, hear confessiones, injoyne penance
Parochiatim, through his whole diaecesse, either in his own person, or else
substitute others under him, to do so for him, and give them a good allowance
for it, he is severely to be punished.

And thus my Lord, whereas our Archdeacons, Bishops and Archbishops, make it
the incumbents duty, out of canonical obedience, to Preach the visiters
visitation Sermon: I have proved, that canonical obedience is such obedience
as the canons require, and that the canons bind every visiter, every
Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop, to preach his own visitation Sermon, at
the public meeting of the Deaneries, and also in his own person, or by
deputies, to preach parochiatim in every incumbents cure, through his whole
Diocese, and I will now conclude this first particular, with the repetition of
the first part of my former syllogism. Canonical obedience is such obedience,
as the canons require. But the Canons bind every visiter, every Archdeacon,
Bishop, and Archbishop, to Preach his own visitation Sermon: Ergo. By
Canonical obedience, every visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop,
is bound to preach his own visitation Sermon.


vna fidelia duos parietes de albare.

And in the first place, my Lord, I must put a difference between the ancient
and modern canons. The ancient canons gave power to every Presbyter, that had
cure of souls, to preach the word, and to do all other offices of his calling
in his own cure. In the fifth book of Lyndewodes Provincial tit. de
Haereticis. cap. Reverendissime. Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Cant. speaks
thus; Curatum perpetuum missum intelligimus a jure, ad locum and populum curae
suae. We understand, says he, that a perpetual curate is sent by the Law, to
the place and people of his charge; and who this perpetual curate is,
Lyndewode in his gloss upon those words does in these words show: Perpetuus
curatus, sicut Episcopus in sua Diaecesi, rector and vicarius in sua parochia,
and quilibet perpetuo intitulatus ad beneficium, cui imminet cura animarum. So
that then, even by the Law it self, every Rector and Uicar was a licensed
Preaher in his own cure, as well as the Bishop was in his own Diocese, and
might do all functions belonging to the office of a Presbyter, in his own
Parish without any license from the Bishop, as well as the Bishop in his
Diaecesse may do all the Offices of a Bishop, without any license from the
Archbishop.

And to that purpose in the first book of Lyndewodes Provincial tit. De
officio Archipresbyteri, cap. Ignorantia sacerdotum. I find this canon made by
John Peccan, Archbish. of Cant. Praecipimus ut quilibet sacerdos plebi
praesidens, quater in anno per se vel per alium dilucide exponat subditis suis,
articulos fidei december mandata decalogi duo praecepta evangelij, vid geminae
charitatis septem opera miserecordiae, septem peccata mortalia, sua cum
progeny, septem virtutes principales, ac septem gratiae sacramenta.

But our modern canons, our canons made in King James his reign, has altered
this point and permits not any incumbent to Preach or expound any Scripure no
not in his own cure, until he be first made a Licensed Preacher: so that our
Church according to those canons, has two sorts of incumbents, some that are
licensed Saint Chrysostom. on 1. Cor. 1.17. says, Evangelizare perpaucorum est,
baptizare autem cuiuslibet, modo sungatur sacerdotio. and a little after:
Siquidem presbyteris, qui simpliciores sunt, hoc manus tradimus, ut baptizent;
verbum autem ut doceant, non nisi sapientioribus: hic sapientia and labor.
quamobrens and alibi inquit: qui been praesunt presbyteri, duplici honor digni
sunt, maxim qui laborant in verbo. Quilibet sacerdos cum ordine accipit
potestatem consecrandi, baptizandi, praedicandi and absolvendi ab omnibus
peccatis: sed interdicitur exercitium illius potestatis, donec concedatur de
licentia eius, qui potest: quare reservare non est non concedere potestatem
absolvendi, sed minuere potestatem. Itaque non caute Sotus est loquutus.
Compendium Navarri de irregularitate, cap. 28. page 337. tit. De casibus
reservatis.
preachers, others that are not. These licenses are only granted, either by
one of the Universities, or by a Bishop or an Archbishop: He that is licensed
by one of the Universities must be licensed under their Scale only, he that is
licensed by a Bishop, or any Archbishop, must be licensed under their hand and
Scale. And at the time of his licensing, the Bishop that licenceth him, is to
see him subscribe to the three Articles for the conformity of Religion, extant
in the 36. canon. Otherwise the Bishop that licenseth him, is to be suspended
for a tweluemoneth, by the 36. canon: And such a license is qualification to
hold two benefices, by the 41. canon: And he that is thus licensed, is bound to
preach in his own cure once every Sunday only, by the 45. canon. He that is
not thus licensed, is no licensed preacher, and is forbidden to preach, or
expound any Scripture in his own cure or elsewhere, by the 36. 49. and 52.
Canon.

Now my Lord, can the Archdeacon, or any other Prelate by canonical obedience,
command a licenced preacher to preach either twice a sunday in his own cure,
or once in the week days, either in his own cure, or at the visitation, or
elsewhere? He cannot by canonical obedience, which is such obedience as the
canons require, command him beyond the Canons. If he do, he brings in
uncanonicall, praetercanonicall, or ultracanonicall obedience, the first part
or kind of Arbitrary or blind obedience, and therein, he goes contrary to the
nineteenth of the 25. of Hen. 8. which in submission to the Kings supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, limiteth the whole Clergy of this Land, to the
Canons of this land, he incrocheth upon the royal prerogative of the Crown,
he withdrawes his submission from his Majesty, he presumes to make Canons
within his own jurisdiction, and for that by the former statute being convict
therefore, he is liable to be fined and imprisoned at the Kings pleasure. And
beside both he, and they that obey him, and they that assist him, and they that
plead or argue for him, and they that give sentence or judgment with him, do
all violate the oath of supremacy: for by that oath they are all bound to the
utmost of their power to assist and defend all jurisdictions of the Crown, and
they to the utmost of their power do overthrow and betray the ancient
jurisdiction of the crown over the state Ecclesiastical.

But this is not my case, my Lord, for I am not a licenced Preacher, neither
was I, when this controversy first began: and the Defendants confess so much
in their plea, the fifth Article: neither could I since procure a license of
them, though I sued unto them twice for it, and they both in their Articles and
sentence, extant in their plea, confess me to be sufficiently qualified for a
licensed preacher. And therefore I then was, and am now forbidden to preach or
expound any Scripture in mine own cure, or elsewhere, by the 36. 49. and 52.
canons.

Now these Canons my Lord were made by a provincial Synod, called together by
the Kings writ, and they were afterward confirmed by his Majesty's Letters
Patents, out of his prerogative royal. His Majesty therein straightly
charge, all his loving subjects of both provinces, to keep and observe all
those Canons, in every point, wherein they do, or may concern every, or any
of them: and he does likewise charge all Archbishops, Bishops, and all others,
that exercise any Ecclesiastical authority within this Realm, to see and
procure that all within their jurisdictions, do observe and keep them in the
former manner. So that his Majesty does charge me, being no licensed preacher,
to keep and observe the former canons, which forbid me to preach in mine own
cure, or elsewhere: and does likewise charge the Archdeacon, Bishop and
Archbishop of Canterbury to see and procure, that I do observe them. And to
the intent that both clergy and laity may the better observe them, his Majesty
charge all incumbents, to read them publickely, in their own Churches, to
their own people, once every year.

Now can the Archdeacon, or any other prelate, by canonical obedience command
me to preach, contrary to these canons? No surely, canonical obedience is such
obedience as the canons require: but this is contrary to the canons, and
therefore is arbitrary obedience, and the worst part or kind of Arbitrary
obedience, namely anticanonicall or contracanonicall obedience.

What then am I to do in this case? For this is my case, my Lord; am I to obey
the Contumax est, qui been intelligit Canones praecipientes contrarium, and
tamen non vult eis obedire, sed scienter contrafacit. Vnde contumax idem est,
quod superbus iniuriosus, repugnans, contemnens, sive in obediens secundum
Ianuensium Lyndewode. Prove. lib. 1. tit. de Saera unctione. Cap. cum sacri.
verb. contumaci.

See Bishop Whites Treatise of the Sabbath day. page 99. 100. 101. 102. 103.
concerning of Ecclesiastical precepts and constitutions with the marnall notes.


canons, his Majesty's letters patents, his royull prerogative, a royal
prerogative invested in the crown, by God himself, acknowledged by article,
by statute, by canon, nay a royal prerogative, which every one, that has
taken the oath of supremacy, as I have done, is sworn to the utmost of his
power, to defend and mainetaine? or am I to obey the Archdeacons Apocryphal,
uncanonicall, anticanonicall, antidiplomaticall, antiprerogative,
antisuprematicall postscript, private letter, or message, contrary to all the
former?

This question my Lord, is as if a man should ask, which is highest heaven or
earth? lightest day or night? largest the circumference or center? greatest the
whole or a part? And therefore at the very first hearing, without any discourse
at all, even by the inbred light that is in it it may be resolved. Yet seeing
my adversaries do But in particular, for that which first caused, and now
continues the loss of unity in the Churh of Christ, as I make no doubt, but
that the pride of men, is one cause, so yet can I not think, that pride is the
adaequate and sole cause thereof. But in part pride caused it, and pride on all
sides: Pride in some that would not at first, nor will not since submit their
private judgments, where with good conscience they may and ought: and pride in
others, that would not first, nor will yet mend, manifest, great, and dangerous
errors, which withal good conscience they ought to do. But it is not Pride,
not to submit to known and gross errors. My Lords Grace of Cant. Archbishop
Laud in his relation of the conference between his Grace and Master Fisher the
Jesuit. Parag. 38. Numb. 24.
wilfully oppose the evident truth of Gods word, of the articles, statutes
canons, of his Majesty's letters patents, royal prerogative, and cath of
supremacy, which are as clear in this my case, and as easy to be discerned,
as the light of the sun, the heat of the fire, the weight of the earth, and
the water of the Sea: By your Lordships favor, I will presume to add light to
the sun, heat to the fire, weight to the earth, and water to the sea, and by
some few texts of law, endeavor to make that more clear, which is of it self
most clear.

Felinus de rescriptis. cap. si quando. gives this rule: Subditi debent
resistere praelato legem ignoranti instruendo eum, multo magis legem violanti,
maxim vero legem conculcanti. And if this rule be a good rule, then the 36.
49. and 52. canons, made by a provincial synod, for the lawfully authority of
a Bishop over a Presbyter, according to Gods word and the uniforme practice of
the Christian Church for 1500. years after Christ and confirmed by his
Majesty's letters patents, out of his prerogative royal, are to be preferred
before the Archdeacons apocryphal, uncanonicaIl, anticanonicall,
antidiplomaticall, antiprerogative, antisuprematicall postscript, private
letter, and message: And then I have done well, and the Archdeacon, the
defendants, the Honorable Court of high Commission, your Lordship, this court,
the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the counsel have all done ill.

Hostiensis gives this rule, si quid praecipit praelatus, quod canonicis obviat
institutis, non est obediendum sed resistendum. 3. Lib. summae. tit. de
maioritate and obedientia.

Provinc. lib. 2. tit. de Appellat cap. In concilio Oxoniensi. verbis.
statutum. Huius statuti.


And if this rule be a good rule, then etc.

Lyndewode gave this rule, nihil potest statuere Episcopus, contra canones, nec
inferior tollere legem superioris. And if this rule be a good rule, then etc.

In consultationibus.
Martinus ab Aspilcueta Doctor Navarrus gives this rule. Non est obediendum vni
superiori, cum superior eius contrarium praecipit. And if this rule be a good
rule, then etc.

Loco praeallegato. Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 2. De constitut. cap. 1.
Hostiensis again gives this rule, cum duo domini contraria iubent, maiori est
obediendum, minori resistendum. And if this rule be a good rule then etc.

The body of the Canon law, gives this rule; Canonum statuta ab omnibus
custodiantur. and nemo in actionibus vel iudiciis Ecclesiasticis suo sensu, sed
eorum authoritate ducatur: and if this rule be a good rule: then, etc.

Bellarmine gives this rule, Lib. 2. De council. cap. 8. parag. Alii dicunt
Concilitum. Nisi manifestissime constet intolerabilem errorem committi. parag.
33. numb. 3.
as it is well expressed by my most reverend Diaecesen and provincial, my
Lords Grace of Cant. in his relation of the conference between his Grace, and
Master Fisher the Jesuit in these words; Inferiors may not judge whether
their superiors, (and that in a Council) do proceed lawfully, or not,
unless it manifestly appear, that an intolerable error be committed. And
this caution or exception, that an intolerable error do first manifestly
appear, does free Bellarmine from inclining to a private 2 Pet. 1.20.21.
Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private
interpretation; for the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but
holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. An interpretation
may be private, ratione personae, and yet more then private, ratione medii.
spirit, as his Grace does seem there to employ. And if this rule be a good
rule, then, etc. and have all inclind to a private spirit.

Parag. 33. Numb. 4.
Again my most reverend Diaecesan and Provincial, my Lords Grace of Cant. in
his forecited treatise gives this rule; The Church is never more cunningly
abused, then when out of this truth, that she may err, men infer this
falsehood, that she is not to be obeyed. For it will never follow, she may
err, therefore she may not govern. For he that says, obey them, which have
the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. Heb.
13. commands obedience, and expressly ascribes rule to the Church. And this is
not only a pastoral power, to teach and direct, but a praetorian also, to
correct and censure too, where errors or crimes are against points fundamental
or of great consequence else Saint Paul would not have given the rule for
Excommunication. 1 Cor. 5. Nor Christ himself have put the man, that will not
hear and obey the Church, into the place and condition of an Ethnicke and a
Publican, as he does. Saint Mat. 18. And Solomon's rule is general, and he
has it twice, My son forsake not the teaching or instruction of thy mother.
Now this is either spoken and meant of a natural mother, and her authority
over her children is confirmed Ecclesiasticus 3. And the fool will be upon
him, that dispiseth her, Prove. 15. Or it is extended to our mystical and
spiritual mother the Church: and so the Geneva note upon the place expresses
it: and I cannot but incline to this opinion, says his Grace, because the
blessings, which accompany this obedience, are so many and great, as that they
are not like to be the fruits of obedience to a natural mother only as
Solomon expresses them all, Prove. 6. In all which here is no exception of a
mothers erring. Hitherto my Lords Grace, verbatim. Now my Lord, I demand, which
best deserves the name of Church, and of spiritual Mother, A provincial
Synod, or an handful of men in the high Commission Court, sitting Judges in
their own cause, wherein they are all parties? surely a provincial Synod. And
if this rule be a good rule then etc. and have all (to use his Graces own
words) followed the swinge and whirlewind of a private spirit.

Contra fund. Cap. 4.
Saint August. gives this rule; and my most reverend Diaecesan and provincial
my Lords Grace of Cant. in his forecited treatise renders it thus; Parag. 33.
Consideration 5. numb. 2.
Consent of nations, authority confirmed by miracles and antiquity; Saint
Peter's Chair, and succession from it, must not hold me, says Saint August.
against demonstration of the truth: which if it be so clearly demonstrated,
that it can not come into doubt, it is to be preferred before all those things,
by which a man is held in the Catholic Church. Therefore says his Grace, an
Evident Scripture, or demonstration An argument necessary and demonstrative, is
such as being proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but
inwardly assent unto it. parag. 33. Consider. 5. numb. 1. out of Hookers
preface. page 29.
of truth, must take place every where, but where these cannot be had, there
must be submission to authority. And if this rule be a good rule, then etc.
and have all followed the wildness of a private spirit.

Solomon Prove. 28.4. gives this rule. They that forsake the law, praise the
wicked: but they that keep the law, contend with them, and if this rule be a
good rule, then etc.

Saint Peter 1. Epist. 2. cap. 13. and 14. verse. gives this rule. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the
King as the supreme, or to governors, as them that are sent of him. First to
the King, then to governors, first to the supreme, then to the subordinate:
for so, says Saint Peter, is the will of God, that by well doing ye might put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. It is then the will of God, the word
of God, and a good work, to prefer the King the supreme, before Governors
the subordinate, and they that maintain the contrary, are ignorant and foolish
men, says Saint Peter. In which words Saint Peter is very bold with his
pretended successor the Pope, and with all those who being subjects, do with
that (...) Advance themselves above and before their own Sovereigns: for he
calls them all in express terms ignorant and foolish men: and if this rule
etc.

But were there no other rule my Lord, but canonical obedience only, which my
adversaries by abusing it against me, have thrust into my hand, that were
enough to decide this question, for canonical obedience is such obedience, as
the canons require, and if this rule be a good rule, then the canons are to be
preferred before the Archdeacons uncanonicall and anticanonicall postscript,
private letter, and message: and then I have done well and the Archdeacon, the
defendants, and the Honorable Court of high Commission, your Lordship, this
Court, the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the counsel have done
ill. So that now canonical obedience, which the defendants have abused, as a
net to ensnare me, and a buckler to defend themselves, being rightly
understood, prooves an engine to deliver me, and a net to entrap themselves:
and in the very same net, that they have jointly laid for me is their own
foot taken and I am delivered. Hic est digitus Dei. This is the Lords doing,
and it is wonderful in my eyes.

And that all that hear me, may further behold the wonderful work of God,
being acquitted in this first particular, by virtue of Canonical obedience, I
am likewise by virtue thereof, acquitted in all the rest, and that by the
testimony of my very adversaries. For the defendants themselves confess, that
my refusal to preach the Archdeacons visitation Sermon, is my principal or
especial fault: and therefore by the force of comparison, drawn from the
adversaries own estimate, whatsoever else they charge me with, must needs be
inferior and accessory: and then seeing the principal or especial fault
prooves no fault at all, noe breach of any law whatsoever, but a virtue and an
eminent virtue, even the virtue of canonical obedience: all the other being by
the testimony of my adversaries, which is the strongest proof against them and
for me, lesser than that refusal, they must needs be virtues, and great
virtues, no faults or vices.

And yet once again, my Lord behold the wonderful work of God, qui non
tantum liberat innocents, sed etiam capit astutos in astutia sua. By virtue of
this first particular I am not only acquitted, but the defendants themselves
convicted and found culpable of a double crime.

First in that they bring into this Orthodox church, arbitrary or 2 Kings c.
6.18.19. ver. Patemur sacerdotes non esse audiendos, nisi docuerint iuxta legem
Domini. Canus lib. 3. c. ultimo.

Believe no every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God. 1 John
4. Try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. Be not
unwise, but understand, what the will of the Lord is. Ephesians 5. He that is
spiritual, discerns all things. 1 Cor. 2. you may have a thousand like both
places and proofs, that the faithful look and take heed, they be not
seduced. And except you will excuse the people before God, if you mislead them,
why should you bar them all trial and understanding, whether they follow
faith unto Salvation, or withdraw themselves unto perdition? when the blind
leads the blind, and they fall both into the pit of destruction, is not he
that follows, as sure to perish, as he that leads? Bishop Bilson in his
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion. 2 Part.
page 261.


blind obedience, and the worst part or kind thereof, namely anticanonicall or
contracanonicall obedience: A thing prejudicial to Gods glory, repugnant to
his word, contrary to the doctrine and discipline of this Orthodox Church,
dangerous to the safety of all good Kings good Magistrates, good men, the
introduction of tyranny and slavery, and the subversion of all lawful
authority, obedience and liberty, and lastly the seminary and noursery of
vices, and the bane and ruin of virtues, and one of the most damnable
villainies and profound subtilties, that ever Satan brought into the Church of
Rome: And therefore to be opposed and cried out against by every good man and
Minister, not only though he should with me, be fined imprisoned, deprived,
degraded and excommunicated for it, but also though it should be his lo^, to
were a Tiburne tippet for it.

And secondly in that they have called the Canons, the oath of canonical
obedience, his Majesty's letters patents, his royal prerogative, the first of
the first of Elizabeth, the 19. of 25. of Henry the eight, the oath of
supremacy, the 37. Article of our Church, and the word of God, breaches of
Canonical obedience, principal or especial faults, grievous and enormous
crimes: and have fined imprisoned, deprived, degraded, and excommunicated a
provincial synod, the high Court of Parliament, this Orthodox Church of
England, and his Majesty: for in calling my obedience to the former, a breach
of Canonical obedience, a principal or especial fault, a grievous and
enormous crime, they do virtually by consequence, and by necessary
implication, call all the former breaches of Canonical obedience, principal
or especial faults, grievous and enormous crimes: and in fining, imprisoning,
depriving, degrading, and excommunicating me, for my obedience to the latter,
they do virtually by consequence, and by necessary implication, fine,
imprison, deprive degrade, and excommunicate all the latter for requiring such
obedience of me.

For as Saint James in his Epist. 4. cap. 11. verse. says, He that speaks
evil of his brother, or he that condemns his brother, speaks evil of the
law, and condemns the law: which words of Saint James are absolutely
unavoidable with this limitation; he that speaks evil of his brother, or he
that condemns his brother, walking according to the law, he speaks evil of
the law, or condemns the law according to which his brother walks: and
threfore seeing the defendants call my obedience to the word of God, and to all
the former, a breach of canonical obedience, a principal or especial fault,
a grievous and enormous crime, they do virtually, by consequence, and by
necessary implication, call If you be railed on for the name of Christ, blessed
are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you: which on their
part is evil spoken off: but on your part is glorified. 1 Pet. cap. 4.14.


the word of God and all the former, breaches of canonical obedience,
principal or especial faults, grievous and enormous crimes: and seeing they
do fine imprison, deprive, degrade and excommunicate me, for my obedience to
the King, and to all the latter, they do virtually, by consequence, and by
neccessary implication, fine imprison deprive, degrade, and excommunicate the
King, and all the latter, for requiring such obedience of me.

And so my Lord the defendants have eminently committed that foul fault, in
these very words, condemned in the canon law. Turpissimum est, ut inde
nascerentur injuriae, ubi iura nascuntur. It is a most shameful thing, that
Courts of Justice, should be courts of injustice, and not only against private
persons, but also against that Orthodox Church, wherein they live, against the
Churches doctrine and discipline, Articles and Canons, which ought to be rules,
not only to guide the lives and opinions of private men, but also to regulate
the censures and sentences, even of the highest ecclesiastical Courts.

And to conclude this point, my Lord: If to punish for obedience, to the word
of God, to the Articles, Statutes, Canons, to his Majesty's Letters Patents,
Royal prerogative, and oath of supremacy, be to punish for virtue and piety:
and to begin that their sentence: In the name of God, Amen. And in the body
of the sentence to affirm, That they did first call upon the name of Christ,
And that they had God himself alone set before their eyes, be to hide iniquity
under the cloak of Hypocrisy and fained sanctity: Then the high Commissioners
have both punished me for virtue and piety, and have covered that iniquity, not
with the short cloak, for that will not do it, but with the long robe of
deep dissimulation and profound hypocrisy: And then by the confession of my
Lords Grace of Cant. my most reverend Diocesan and provincial in his speech in
the Starchamber Termino Paschae 1637. there is all the reason in the world,
that his Grace, the High Commissioners, and the defendants should all for that
be severely punished themselves.

Should be? my my Lord, they are all ipso Libro primo Pr. tit. de off.
Archidiaconi. c. eisdem. verb. ipso facto. and est dicere ipso facto, ac si
diceret ipso iure, scil. nullo hominis ministerio interveniente.
facto severely and deservedly punished. They are all by a double
excommunication, excommunicate ipso facto and to be excommunicate ipso facto
is, says Lindwode to be excommunicate, lege ante lata, vel sententia ante
data, nullo interveniente hominis ministerio post actum peccantis: and so are
all they, for by punishing me, in the former manner, not only for that, which
is no breach of any law of the land, but also for my obedience to the Laws of
the land, contrary to the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, they have all ipso facto
drawn upon themselves, those two dreadful sentences of Excommunication,
denounced against all the future violaters of Magna Charta, the one by
Archbishop Boniface 37. Hen. 3. the other by Archbishop Winchelsee. 25. Ed. 1.

And my Lord, seeing pares in culpa, pares in paena, your Lordship, this Court
the Barons of Exchequer, and the Lords of the Counsel have all likewise ipso
facto, drawn upon your selves that double excommunication: your Lordship and
this Court by affirming the Commissioners second final sentence, the sentence
of deprivation and degradation, contrary to that 29. chap. of Magna Charta: The
Barons of the Exchequer by imprisoning me contrary to that 29. chap. for the
five hundred pounds fine, imposed upon me, by the Commissioners first final
sentence, contrary to the foresaid cap. and the Lords of the Counsel likewise,
by imprisoning me contrary to the foresaid chap. for a Petition, wherein I
justly complained both against the High Commissioners for their former
exorbitances, and also against your Lordship, and this Court, because you would
not do me justice, according to his Majesty's most just mandate.

And yet my Lord in this matter, the High Commissioners have a double
precedence above your Lordship this Court, the Barons of Exchequer, and the
Lords of the Counsel: for the high Commissioners have punished me six times,
contrary to the 29. chapter of Magna Charta. They have twice imprisoned, and
once fined, deprived, degraded, and excommunicated me: and for every time they
are ipso facto, twice apeece excommunicate, once every time with the two former
excommunications, in all twelve times: your Lordship, this Court, the Barons of
the Exchequer, and the Lords of the Counsel, have punished me only once apeece,
contrary to the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, and so are all ipso facto only twice
apeece excommunicate.

Again, your Lordship, this court, the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords
of the Counsel stand excommunicate by the two former excommunications only:
but the high commissioners, besides the two former excommunications, stand
excommunicate also by that very excommunication, which they unjustly denounced
against me, according to this rule of the canon law, Qui aliquem injuste
excommunicat, non excommunicat sed excommunicatur, non ligat, sed ligatur.

For my Lord, excommunication, the Spiritual sword of the Church is (...),
gladius ex utraque part acutus, 2 Samuel 1.22.
a two edged sword: and that like the sword of Saul, does never return empty
from the blood of the slain: but whether it be justly or unjustly unsheathed,
It always killes and slaies one or other. If it be justly drawn against any
man, then it kills and quite cuts off, from the Communion of Christ, and of his
Church, that man against whom it was justly drawn, unless he submit and
repent. But if it be unjustly drawn against any man, then let the stroke be
never so great, and the edge never so sharp, yet by the innocence of the party
and Christ's institution, that stroke is warded, that edge blunted, and thereby
the sword is recoiled and reverberated upon him, that unjustly drew it, and so
with the other edge does kill and quite cut off him, from the Communion of
Christ, and of his Church.

And this my Lord is evident by the very words of our Savior, wherein he gives
power to his Apostles to excommunicate. John 20. Whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted, and whosesoever sins ye retain they are retained: And the
retaining of the sins of an impenitent sinner, is the excommunicating, and
casting him out of the Church, for his sins, and for his impenitency.

Why then my Lord, a man cannot be justly excommunicated, except it be for
some sin: and then our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ cannot justly be
excommunicated. For he did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his
mouth. 1. Pet. 2.22. and if our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ cannot be justly
excommunicated, neither can any man be justly excommunicated, for his Communion
with, or his obedience to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

What then is the effect of that excommunication, when a man de facto is
excommunicated, Luke 6.22.
for his communion with, or his obedience to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?
why this, my Lord, that excommunication makes no separation between the
parties excommunicated, and Jesus Christ, but unites and knits them nearer, and
faster together: and makes a separation only, between the parties
excommunicating on the one side, and Jesus Christ and the party united by that
excommunication on the other side.

And this is evident, my Lord first in the Jews. John 9. who by
excommunicating the man borne blind, and cured by Christ, for professing and
defending Christ, did not excommunicate or separate him from Christ: (for
Christ did immediately after that, entertain him most graciously) but did
excommunicate and separate themselves both from him and Christ, united by that
excommunication. And secondly, in the Council of Trent, who by Anathematising
the reformed Churches, for diverse divine trueths, wherein they hold communion
with Jesus Christ, have thereby united Christ, and the reformed Churches more
strongely and nearly together: and have made a separation only, between that
Council and all that hold with it, on the one side, and Jesus Christ and the
reformed Churches thereby united on the otherside.

And so likewise my Lord, the high commissioners by excommunicating me, for my
obedience to Jesus Christ, to this Orthodox Church, to the Kings Majesty to the
high Court of Parliament, and to a provincial synod, have thereby indeed
united me, and all these more nearly together, and have made a separation
only between themselves on the one side, and me and all the former, united by
that excommunication on the other side. And as among the high Commissioners, my
Lord, some are oftener or seldomer excommunicate, according as they have had
their fingers, oftener or seldomer in my punishments: so they that have been
actors and parties in all my six punishments, are excommunicate full 13. times.
And whilst they stand and continue thus excommunicate, without either pleading
the Kings pardon, or performing public penance, I for my part shall account
them fitter for Amsterdam, and for Rome, than for this orthodox Church of
England, out of which they have justly cast themselves by excommonicating me
unjustly, for my communion therewith, and for my obedience thereto.

And this much my Lord, concerning the principalls: The Defendants 3. Arguments.
I should now proceed to the accessories, but that their are three arguments,
first to be answered. The first is taken from law, the second from custom, and
the third from a title, given to the Archdeacon in the canon law, and alleged
in the defendants plea, the third Article, namely because the Archdeacon is
oculus episcopi, and therefore may enjoyne the incumbents within his
Archdeaconry, to preach his visitation sermon: that thereby he may see, and
learn, and know their sufficiency. I will begin with the Argument taken from
Law. The law is the fifth commandment of the decalogue: Honor thy father and
thy mother: and from these words a right learned commissioner in giving the
first part of the first final sentence against me argued thus; The first
Argument,


You Sir (says he to me) will do nothing, but what you are bound to do by
law, will you? and does not the law bind you to preach the Archdeacons
visitation sermon? does not the fifth Commandment bind you to honor your
Father? and is not the Archdeacon your spiritual father, and are not you his
spiritual son? and has not a spiritual father power by the fifth
Commandment to command his spiritual son any spiritual work? and is not a
spiritual son bound by the same commandment, to obey the spiritual command
of his spiritual father, in doing the spiritual work commanded by him? Ergo
you Sir are bound by the fifth commandment, to do this spiritual work, to
preach the Archdeacons visitation sermon at the Archdeacons command.

This was the argument my Lord, Socratically drawn from law: and this argument
in and of it self, is very weak and feeble, all the strength of it, depends
upon the authority and credit of the argumentator: and therefore unless I will
be injurious to the argument it self and to the cause of my adversaries, I
must make known the Author of this Argument, that so the strength and validity
thereof may the more appear.

It was the right worthy, and right worshipful Sir Henry Martin, vir cum cura
dicendus, a man not to be mentioned without singular reverence. A man that has
a long time, and did very lately Dominari in Curits Ecclesiasticis; A man that
deserved that Elogy, which Eunapius gives to Longinus, he was (...). A living
Library, and a walking study; or as the same Eunapius says of Plutarch, that
he was (...): The very Uenus and harp of all Philosophy; So we may truly say
of the eminently learned Sir Henry Martin, that he was (...): the Uenus, the
delicacy, the musical instrument, the Harp, the Lute, the Theorbo, the
Polyphon of all the law both Civil and Canon; he was like Servius Sulpitius,
Iurisconsultorum eloquentissimus and eloquentium iurisconsultissimus. And as
one said of Saint Augustine Deest theologiae, quicquid Augustino deest. Wherein
so ever Augustine is defective, Theology it self is defective: so Deest legi,
quicquid martino deest. Wherein soever sir Henry Martin was defective, the very
law it self is defective; and then surely the former argument, if it be
answerable to the Author of it, must needs be of great force and virtue, or
else the Law it self must needs be defective.

But my Lord, though the Author of this Argument was so accomplished, yet if
we examine the argument it self, we shall find it very weak and feeble, and
being reduced into a syllogism, it runs thus: By the fifth commandment every
spiritual Father, may command his spiritual son any spiritual work, and
by the same commandment every spiritual son is bound to obey the spiritual
command of his spiritual father in doing the spiritual work commanded by
him. But the Archdeacon is my spiritual father, and I am his spiritual son
and he has commanded me a spiritual work, namely to preach his visitation
sermon: Ergo. By the fifth commandment I am bound to do that spiritual work,
to preach that visitation Sermon at the Archbishops command.


This syllogism my Lord, in respect of the form is good, and all the doubt is
concerning the matter of the major or first proposition. If that be true,, then
the conclusion is true, if that be false, then the conclusion will fail. And
first my Lord, I will confute the major or first proposition (wherein the whole
strength of the argument lies) by granting it, and by showing what a multitude
of errors absurdities, and inconveniences, will follow and flow from it. The
major or first proposition is this:

By the fifth Commandment every spiritual father may command his spiritual
son any spiritual work, and by the same commandment every spiritual son
is bound to obey the spiritual command of his spiritual father, in doing the
spiritual work commanded by him.

Henry Martin si reviviscoret, interpose any limitation, qualification,
restriction, or exception, to overthrow any of these consequences, or
collections from his major proposition, but I by the same will overthrow his
major proposition, and free my self from preaching the Uisitation Sermnn.

visitation Sermon, then I may likewise command them, to preach either monthly
or weekly in mine own Parish, and so free my self from both those labors,
and yet legally discharge them both by my Parishioners, for quod quis legitime
facit per alium, idem est ac si faceret per se: nay further then that Parson or
Uicar, in whose Parish sir Henry Martin did dwell, dum viveret, might have
commanded him to have Preached in his cure weekly or monthly, and that
Archdeacon, Bishop and Archbishop within whose Jurisdiction Sir Henry Martin
did dwell dum viveret, might have commanded him to have preached their
visitation Sermon: for he was a spiritual son to all them, as well as I am
to the Archdeacon: neither shall Sir Henry Martin si revivisceret interpose any
limitation, qualification, restriction or exception to overthrow any of these
consequences or collections from his major proposition, but I by the same, will
overthrow his major proposition, and free my self from preaching the
visitation Sermon.

(...). Iggat. Epistola ad Trall.
in and ever since the Apostles time held distinct and different. The most
learned Bishop Bilson in his forecited Treatise De perpetua Christi Ecclesiae
gubernatione, observes that there were eight things in the Apostles, whereof
four were ordinary and perpetual, and four extraordinary and temporary. The
four extraordinary and temporary are these; To be sent immediately by Christ,
to have infallibility of judgment, a power to work miracles, and to be sent
over the whole world. The four ordinary and perpetual are these, a power to
preach the word, to adminiminister the Sacraments, to ordain Ministers and to
excommunicate. All the eight were only in the Apostles: The four ordinary and
perpetual only in Bishops, two of them, namely a power to preach the word,
and to administer the Sacraments, only in presbyters: and none of all the
former in Lay men.

But if the former proposition be good Divinity, then every parochial
Presbyter may command any of his Parishioners to do the forsaid four ordinary
works, namely to preach the word, to administer the Sacraments, to ordain
Ministers, and to excommunicate any man, both in his own Parish, and over the
whole world, and then every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop may command all
them, that are under their authority, to do like. And so every Parish Priest,
Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop, shall have not only Episcopal and
Archepiscopall authority by his bare word, to make licensed preachers over all
England, which is contrary to the Canons, but also Apostolical power, to send
licensed Preachers over the whole world: which is the usurpation and
presumption, which the Pope of Rome challenges to the prejudice of all the
Bishops, Archbishops, and Churches of Christendom, and to the diminishing of
the supreme jurisdiction of all the temporal Princes through the world.

Whence my Lord, will arise an intolerable confusion of all the foresaid
functions: and every lay man, by the Command of his spiritual superior, shall
be enabled to excommunicate any man, even Kings and Princes, and then surely
every Clergy man may do as much, and then neither Clergy nor Laity can
justly except aginst Pope Pius Quintus for excommunicating Queen Elizabeth,
nor against Felton, for setting up that excommunication upon the Bishops of
Londons gates. Neither shall sir Henry Martin, si revivisceret, interpose any
limitation, qualification, restriction, or exception to overthrow any of these
consequences or collections from his major proposition, but I by the same, will
overthrow his major proposition, and free my self from preaching the
visitation Sermon.

Henry Martin, and not to stretch his words, so far, as by true Logic, sound
reason, and good consequence they reach, but only so far as he intended
them; certainly his intent was to prove, that the Archdeacon might thereby
command me to preach his visitation Sermon, and it was known unto him, that I
was not a licensed preacher; for he together with the other Commissioners says
as much in the fifth article extant in the Defendants plea: and it was also
known unto him, that by the 36. 49. and 52. canons made. 1. Iacobi, no
incumbent may preach or expound any Scripture, no not in his own cure, until
he be first made a lycensed preacher, either under the seal of one of the
Universities, or else under the hand and seal of a Bishop or an Archbishop:
and it was likewise known unto him, that these Graviter peccat, qui obedientiam
infringit, and praesertim si veniat contra leges sive constitutiones per
superiorem rite and rationabiliter editas and promulgatas. Lyndewode. Prove.
lib. 1. tit. de Constitut. cap. Quia incontinentiae. ver. obedientiae.
canons were made by a provincial Synod, called together by the Kings writ,
and confirmed by his Majesty's Letters Patents out of his Prerogative Royal,
out of a Prerogative Royal invested in the Crown by God himself,
acknowledged by Article, by Statute, by Canon, nay out of a Prerogative Royal,
which he and I, by the oath of Supremacy were both bound to the utmost of our
powers, to defend and maintain.

So that by the former argument drawn from the fifth commandment, Sir Henry
Martin would bring into this orthodoxe Church, arbitrary or blind obedience,
and the worst part or kind thereof, not that only which is uncanonicall,
pretercanonicall, or ultra canonical, but that also which is anticanonicall or
contracanonicall, even contrary to the Hic dicit Glossa Hebraica: si dixerit
tibi, quod dextra sit sinistra, vel sinistra dextra, talis s^ntentia est
tenenda, quod pater manifest falsum. Quia sententia nullius hominis
cuiuscunque sit authoritatis, est tenenda, si contineat manifest falsitatem
vel errorem. Et hoc patet per id, quod praemittitur in textu. Indicabunt tibi
iudicii veritatem; Postea subdi^ur: and docuerint te iuxta legem eius. Ex quo
patet, quod si dicant falsum, and declinent a lege Dei manifest, non sunt
audiendi Lyran. in 17. cap. Devt.
Canons, Statutes, Articles, oath of supremacy, and to the word of God, and
thereby does himself, and would make me prefer the single command of my
spiritual father the Archdeacon, above and before the joint command of all my
spiritual fathers met in a provincial Synod. 1. Iacobi, nay above the command
of all the fathers gathered together in Parliament, 1. Eliza. and 25. Henry 8.
yea before the command of the King himself, Gods immediate deputy, who is
Pater patriae, pater reipublicae, yea and Pater Ecclesiae too: for though he be
not Pater generans Ecclesiam, yet he is pater nutrient Ecclesiam, as the
Prophet Esaias speaks, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy
nursing mothers, Esaias 49.23. nay above the command of God himself, who has
commanded us to render unto Caesar those things which are Cesars, Mat. 22. and
to obey Cesars just laws, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. Romans
13.5. and that in the first place, above and before the command of any
subordinate officer whatsoever, 1 Pet. 2.13.14.

So that Sir Henry Martin deals with the fifth commandment, just as Pope
Gregory the seventh did with the words of Samuel to unto King Saul. 1 Samuel
15.22. for whereas the word of God says, to avoid fornication, let every man
have his own wife, and every woman her own Husband. 1 Cor. 7.2. which is an
absolute precept enioyning all those to marry, who cannot otherways avoid
fornication, Gregory the seventh by the foresaid In concernentibus fidem, etiam
dictum vnius privati esset praeferendum dicto Papae, si ille moveretur
melioribus rationibus novi and veteris testamenti, quam Papa. Panormit, de
elect. cap. significasti. prope finem.
text of Samuel, does contrary to the foresaid word of God, 1 Cor. 7.2.
command all Priests to put away their wives under pretense of fornication. He
says Gregory that will not obey his most wholesome precept of ours, forbidding
Priests their wives, under color of fornication incurreth the sin of Idolatry,
as Samuel witnesses not to obey is the sin of witchcraft, and not to be
content, is the wickedness of Idodolatry. Distinct. 81. si qui sunt.

So that Pope Gregory the seventh and Sir Henry Martin agree both in this: They
both approve of Arbitrary or blind obedience, they both make the word of God
the ground of it, they both derive it from general texts of Scripture, and by
virtue of those general texts, they challenge a power to command, even
contrary to God himself, speaking in other plain, evident, and perspicuous
texts; they differ only in this Pope Gregory the seventh, derives this
arbitrary obedience from the former words of Samuel, 1. Sam. 15.22. and
chalengeth it only for himself. Sir Henry Martin deduceth it from the fifth
commandment, and chalengeth it, for every spiritual father, for every
incumbent Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop.

Nay farther, Sir Henry Martin by his former argument from the fifth
commandment endeavors to make our Church, like the Church of Rome, as it is
defined by Gasper Scioppius in his Ecclesiasticus. cap. 147. both in his sum
and book at large, where he thus defines the Church of Rome. Ecclesia As
Bishops ought to discern which is truth before they Teach: so must the people
discern, who teaches right, before they believe. Bishop Bilson in his true
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion. 2. part.
page 259.
est mandra, sive grex aut multitudo jumentorum and asinorum. The Chrurch is a
society or a company or a multitude of cattle and asses.

And where there are horses, and asses, and mules, there if there be any good
done with them, must be Horse-keepers, Assekeepers, and Muletors: and their
whole Church as Scioppius says, consists of these two. The Horses, Asses, and
Mules, are the Laity: and the Horsekeepers, Assekeepers, and Muleters, are the
Clergy of the former he says: Nos Dei jumenta sumus, sive peccora subiugalia,
tanquam equi, aut muli, sive asini Clitellarij, veterini, dossuarij, sarcinarij
sagmarij: we are Gods juments or yoke cattle, as it were horses or mules or
asses, to carry packes, to be girt with circingles, to carry Dossours, to bear
burdens, to be sumpters. And of the latter he says, illi agasones, illi
muliones nos fraenant, nos loro alligant, nos agunt, nos stimulant, nobis jugum
and onus imponunt: those horse-keepers, Sic nimirum se reshabet, Iudicant oves
and privati omnes iudicio discretivo: Judicant Episcopi and pastores iudicio
directivo and clavium potestate coactivo; sed iudicant saepe errante Clave; quo
casu videntur solum ligare, non ligant. Judicat Christus solus iudicio
infallibili, nec unquam errante clave. Non sic vel Pontifex vestere suo
tripode, vel Concilium, vel tota Ecclesia Iudicat. Doctor Crakanthorpe Def.
Ecclsiae Anglic. contra Archiep. Spalat. cap. 13. parag. 20.
those muletors put the bridle upon us, they tie us with the raines, they drive
us, they spur or goade us, they put the yoke and burden upon us. And does not
Sir Henry Martin endeavor to make our Church like theirs, in giving power, by
the former argument, to every incumbent, to lay his burden upon his
Parishioners, to every Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop, to lay their
burdens upon the Clergy and Laity within their jurisdiction. This is so
evident, my Lord, that it cannot be denied, and all the harm I would wish him
for it, si revivisceret, is only this, ut patiatur interpretationem, quam
tulerit, that the blessing of Ishachar, Gen, 49.14. which by his former
argument he endeavors to bring upon the whole Church of England may fall upon
himself only, and that in the highest degree.

Scioppius ranks amongst these Asses; not only such as are Subjects, but also
such as are Sovereigns, even Kings and Princes, Gods immediate Deputies, as
well those of their Religion, as those of ours; but with this difference, those
of their Religion, he calls understanding and obedient Asses; those of our
Religion, refractory Asses without understanding.

He calls them all To Bishops speaking the word of God. Princes as well as
others must yield obedience: but if Bishops pass their Commission, and speak
beside the word of God, what they list, both Prince and people may despise them.

If Apostles and Angels be tied to this condition, much more others our first
addition (which speak unto you the word of God) is ever intended in the
Bishops function, though it be not expressed. Bishop Bilson in his true
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion, page 261,
262.


Asses for his former reason, because they were to bear what burdens those
Agasones, those Muliones, the Popish Clergy should lay upon them; and their
Kings he calls obedient and understanding Asses, because they did do so, they
did submit their backs and shoulders to those burdens. And amongst them, he
especially commends Charles the Great for a wise morigerous, and a patient Ass
because he was a ringleader to all other Asses, to submit to this his own rule
in the Canon law. In memoriam B. Petri honoremus sanctam Romanam and
Apostolicam sedem. Servanda est cum mansuetudine humilitas, ut bicet vix
ferendum, ab illa sancta sede imponatur jugum, tamen feramus and pia devetione
toleremus. Let us in memory of S. Peter honor the holy Roman and Apostolic
See. Humility with meekness is to be observed, that although a yoke hardly to
be borne, be put upon us by that holy See, yet let us bear and endure it with
pious devotion: By which words says Scioppius, thou may know him to be a
true Ishachar, of whom it is written, Genesis 49.14. Ishachar is a strong Ass
couching down between two burdens, he bowed his shoulder to bear.

And our Kings he calls refractory Asses without understanding, because they
would not submit their backs and shoulders to these burdens, but did pedibus
recalcitrare, kick against these horsekeepers and muletors the Popish Clergy,
which would put these burdens upon them. And in particular, he calls our late
Lord and Sovereign King James (whom I mention with singular reverence) a very
Ass without understanding; because he would neither suffer the bridle to be
put into his mouth, nor any burden to be put upon him by that chief
horse-keeper and Arch-muleter the Pope of Rome; and was moreover, a ringleader
to the Romish Asses, to do the like, both by his example, and also by his
exhortation unto them, in these words of the third Psalm, Let us break their
bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

And though my Lord, I do not charge either the High-Commissioners, your Lp.
this Court, the Barons of the Exchequer, or the Lords of the Counsel, with
those shameless and immodest words of Scioppius, which even impudency and
insolency would blush to utter against the Lords Anointed, and his immediate
deputies and Vicegerents. Yet I must tell your Lordship, that all of you have a
great part and share in the matter it self.

The High-Commissioners by two final sentences, as I have formerly showed;
have advanced the Apocryphal, uncanonicall, anticanonicall, antidiplomaticall,
antiprerogative, antisuprematicall postscript, private letter and message of M.
Doctor Ringsley, Archdeacon of Cant. above the Canons of this orthodox Church,
above his Majesty's Letters Patents, above his royal Prerogative, above a
royal Prerogative invested in the Crown by God himself acknowledged by Article
by Statute by Canon; nay, above a royal Prerogative, which every one that has
taken the oath of Supremacy, is bound to the utmost of his power to defend and
maintain.

And they have fined, imprisoned, deprived, degraded, and excommunicated me for
my obedience to the Canons of this Church, to his Majesty's Leters Pat. and to
his royal Prerogative and so vertually, by consequence, and by necessary
implication, they have fined, imprisoned deprived, degraded and excommunicated
the King himself, for requiring such obedience of me. And your Lp. and the
Court, by affirming the Commissioners second final sentence, the sentence of
deprivation and degradation have approved of all this, and the Barons of the
Exchequer by imprisoning me for the 500 l. fine imposed upon me by the
Commissioners first final sentence, have done as much; and the Lords of the
Counsel by imprisoning me for a Petition, wherein I justly complained both
against the High-Commissioners for their former presumptions, and also against
your Lordship and this Court, for your disobedience to his Majesty's most just
mandate, have approved of both.

So that you Quilibet homo doctus potest and debet toti concilio resistere, si
videat illud ex malitia vel ignorantia errare. Gerson 1. part de examinatione
doctrinarum Consider. 5.
all join together Regem fraenare, to put a bridle upon the King; yea, Regem
loro alligare, to rain in the King, and his supreme jurisdiction: nay, in
very deed Regi jugum and onus imponere, to put a yoke and burden upon the King,
and such a yoke and burden, as was never yet put upon any of his royal
Predecessors. If the first of the first of Eliz. 19. of 25. of Hen. 8. and Sir
Edw. Coke in Cawdries Case deceive me not.

For by all these it appears, that the Crown had ever a jurisdiction over the
state Ecclesiastical, and now you all do not only exempt the state
Ecclesiastical from the jurisdiction of the Crown, but also subordinate the
jurisdiction of the Crown to the state Ecclesiastical, and do both advance the
postscript, private Letter, and message of every Archdeacon, Bishop, and
Archbishop above the Canons of this Church, above his Majesty's Letters
Patents and royal Prerogative: and thereby also elevate the person of every
Archdeacon, Bishop, and Archbishop above the person of the King according to
this rule; Cum duo Domini contraria jubent, qui obedit minori and resistit
majori, is minorem majori proefert and proeponit: which is an intolerable
injury, indignity, and injustice; the King himself, but also against not only
against God himself, from whom the King has received his Supreme
jurisdiction, and whose immediate Deputy the King is.

And therefore as my most reverend Diaecesan and Provincial my Lords Grace of
Canterbury in his Epistle before his Speech in the Starchamber, termino
paschae, 1637. does rightly observe against Scioppius and such as he is, that
blasphemy against God, and slandering the footsteps of Gods Anointed, are
joined together, Psa. 89. Because he that blasphemes God, will never stick at
the slander of his Prince; and he that gives himself liberty to slander his
Prince, will quickly ascend to the next highest and blaspheme God.

So I may as truly observe against his Grace, the High-Commissioners, your
Lordship, this Court, the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the
Counsel, that justice toward the King, and justice toward God, are both
joined together by our Savior in one verse, Mat. 22. because he that out of
conscience, is just toward one, will be just toward both: and he that is
wittingly unjust toward one, will easily be unjust toward both.

Nay my Lord, seeing the King receives his supreme jurisdiction immediately
from God, he that is unjust toward the King, by depriving him of any part of
his supreme jurisdiction, must of necessity, ipso facto, be unjust toward
God: for as he that renders unto Caesar, that which is Cesars, by the gift of
God, does eo ipso, render unto Caesar, that which is Cesars, and unto God that
which is Gods: so he that takes from Caesar that which is Cesars, by the right
of God, does eo ipso, take from Caesar, that which is Cesars and from God that
which is Gods.

And therefore my Lord, when the High Commissioners, your Lordship, this Court,
the Barons of the Exchequer, and the Lords of the Counsel do all in the
former manner regem fraenare, put a bridle upon the King, ye do all eo ipso,
Deum fraenare, put a bridle upon God himself: when ye do all in the former
manner regem loro alligare, rain in the King and his supreme jurisdiction,
ye do all eo ipso Deum loro alligare, rain in God and his jurisdiction: and
when ye do all in the former manner, regi jugum and onus imponere, put a yoke
and a burden upon the King, ye do all eo ipso Deo jugum and onus imponere, put
a yoke and burden upon God himself.

And how near this comes to the chief D. Downeham of Antichrist 1. Book 5.
chap.
character of the man of sin, who exalts himself above all that is called
God, above God (...), above God (...), above God by nature, above God by
deputation, above God and Gods, immediate Deputy the King, I leave it to your
Lordship and the Court, as it was then, to inquire only, not determine because
in this case ye are all both parties and offenders, and in both those respects
incompetent Judges.

But now my Lord, in the last place, let us see, whether Sir Henry Martines
argument be not directly contrary to the fifth commandment, to the very text,
whence it is taken. The question is, whose duty it is, to Preach the
Archdeacons visitation sermon, the Archdeacons, or the incumbents. Sir Henry
Martin out of the fifth commandment, would prove it the incumbents duty to
preach the Archdeacons visitation sermon, and not the Archdeacons, because the
Archdeacon is the incumbents spiritual father, and the incumbents are the
Archdeacons spiritual sons; and by the fifth commandment, the spiritual
son is to teach the spiritual father, and not the spiritual father his
spiritual sons: and therefore by the fifth commandment the incumbents, and
not the Archdeacon are to Preach the Archdeacons visitation Sermon.

Deuteronomy. 4. and for that reason, in Greek the decalogue: and therefore if any
thing be obscure and dark in them, it is to be cleared out of the larger
commentaries of Moses, the prophets, and the Apostles; let us then see, how
these divine commentators resolve this question between the natural father
and the natural son and between the spiritual father and the spiritual son.

In the 6. and 11. chapters of Deuteronomy. God commands the Israelites, to lay up
his words in their hearts, and to teach them their children, when they sit in
their houses, and when they walk by the way, and when they lie down, and when
they rise up: and Proverbs 1. Solomon says, my son hear thy fathers
instruction, and forsake not thy mothers teaching; and Ephesians the sixth chap.
Saint Paul says Ye fathers provoke not your children to wrath, 11. verse.
but bring them up in the instruction and information of the Lord: and in the
first Epistle to Tim. 2. chap. the same Apostle delivers one text which
decides the question between all kinds of fa^hers, and all kinds of sons:
I permit not, says he, a woman to teach, (...), nor to exercise or usurp
authority over the man. whence it appears, that they are to teach others, who
have authority over others; and then the natural father is to teach the
natural son, the spiritual father the spiritual son, the aeconomicall
father, the master of the family, the aeconomicall son, and the Magistrate, the
politic father, the politic son, and not on the contrary: and Saint Paul
of purpose as it were, interpreting the fifth commandment, makes this one
reason, why the spiritual son is to honor his spiritual father. Let the
Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they
that labor in the word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 5. and in this very thing consists
the spiritual paternity and filiation, 17. verse.
they are both wrought by the spiritual seed of Gods word, the spiritual
father begets, and the spiritual son is begotten by the spiritual seed of
Gods word. Saint Paul tells the Corinthians, I write not these things to shame
you, but as my beloved children I admonish you, for though you have ten
thousand instructors in Christ, yet ye have not many fathers: for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. 1 Cor. 4. and to the Gal. he
says my little children of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you. 14.15. verse.
Gal. 4.19. and how is that done? why, by preaching the Gospel. Gal. 3.1.

And therefore my Lord, seeing Sir Henry Martin by his chimicall interpretation
will extract the contrary out of the fifth commandment, and make it every
spiritual sons duty to teach his spiritual father, the Parishioners duty to
teach the incumbents, the incumbents duty to teach the Archdeacon, the
Archdeacons duty to teach the Bishop, the Bishops duty, to teach the
Archbishop, the Archbishops duty, to teach the Patriarchs the Patriarchs duty
to teach the Apostles, the Apostles duty to teach Christ, and Christ's duty to
teach God: I think I may truly say, that Sir Henry Martin has found out that
in this commandment, which God never put into it, just as Anah found out Mules
in the wilderness, as he kept his father Zibeons Asses. Genesis 36. the one
found out a creature which God never made; the other a sense, which God never
intended. And therefore seeing so eminent a man, so transcendent a lawyer, who
was vox legis, lex legis, rex legis, and Deus legis, a kind of omnipotent
Lawyer, who could creare legem de non sege, and annihilare legem in non legem,
could not yet find out any one good argument, either in the civil or canon
Law, no nor in the word of God neither, nisi afferat sensum ad scripturam, and
such a sense as is repugnant both to the analogy of the place and of faith too.
I think it is more than probable that neither the canon, civil, or divine law
will afford, my adversaries any one good argument against me in this whole
controversy. The second Argument.


The Defendants second Argument, my Lord, is taken from custom: they say it is
the custom, that the Incumbents should preach the Archdeacons Visitation
Sermon. And this they say both in their third Article, and in the first part of
their first final sentence extant in their Plea. And in speeding the
Commission at Canterbury, they brought up ten or twelve Processes to prove this
custom. But after they had brought them up, they durst not so much as show
them, either at informations, or at the final hearing of the Cause. And yet
what they cannot prove, my Lord; I out of a desire of peace and concord with
them, will voluntarily grant unto them. Concessio 1. and retortio in
adversarios.
Dabo ex supposito, quod non dabo ex animo. Let it then be custom, what
follows? why this; Then the Cause is a civil Ecclesiastical Cause, and not a
criminal Cause, and then it is and has been all this while coram non judice,
and so the sentence and whole proceedings of the Commissioners are utterly void.

Concessio 2. and retortio in adversarios.
Secondly, be it custom, then the Archdeacon has broken the custom and not
I; for the Commissioners in the first part of their first final sentence
extant in their Plea, made an Order, that I upon the Archdeacons Mandate, and
a competent warning thereby to me given, should preach a Sermon at the
Archdeacons next Visitation. Now this Order is the custom, or else it is not.
If this Order be not the custom, then I being bound to observe the custom, am
not bound to observe this order: or else being bound to observe this order, I
am not bound to observe the custom. Let them choose which they will, they are
faulty in either. If this Order be the custom, then the Archdeacon, and not I
has broken both Order, and custom; because he only sent an Apparitor with a
postscript private letter, or message to warn me to preach his Visitation
Sermon; but sent no mandate, or process, or public instrument for that
purpose, out of his Court by his Apparitor, as he should have done, both by the
Order and custom; and both these the Defendants confess in their Plea, and
they shall be both showed against them at large, in my answer to to the fourth
accessory.

Iacobi, that is, about 39 years since; and then it must be custom either
before those canons were made, or else only since. If it were custom before
those canons were made, then it was before that time tried and obtained in some
contradictory judgment; for consuetudo non valet, nisi sit obtenta in
Contradictorio judicio. Now can the Defendants show any contradictory judgment
before that time, wherein this pretended custom was determined to be custom?
If they can, let them show it, and I submit: If they cannot, idem est nen esse,
and non apparere. If it were not custom before the former Canons were made, it
cannot grow to be a custom since. Nine and thirty years prescription, is not
sufficient to make a custom, for consuetudo est, cujus contrarium memoria
hominum non existit, and if this custom be but of 39. years standing, there
are diverse men yet living, which can remember the contrary.

Nay, my Lord, seeing a custom cannot grow in the time of opposition; if we
will make an exact computation, we must from the former 39. years, defalke full
16. years, because so long this controversy has been on foot, and this
custom opposed. And then at the beginning of this controversy, there remains
but 23. years, since the making of the former Canons, and since the beginning of
this pretended custom, if it began since those Canons were made. And then at
beginning of this controversy, this pretended custom, being but of 23. years
standing, could not be custom according to the former rule; seeing at the
beginning of this controversy, there were diverse men then living, who could
remember the contrary.

England, tried and determined in a contradictory judgment at the Common Law?
There is I suppose, no question of it; and the reason as I conceive is, because
all the parties that have right in that custom, are either personally, or
vertually present in Parliament, and there by making a contrary Act, give up
their right to that custom; and then by the same reason, seeing none had right
in the former custom, but the Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops on the
one side, and the Incumbents under them on the other side; and the three
former, were personally present in a provincial Synod, and the others
vertually present in the Clerks of the Convocation and all on both sides, by
making the former Canons, gave up their right to the former custom, that
custom is, and must be abrogated by the former Canons.

Lyndewodes provincial, in the Legantine Constitutions of Otho and Othobon,
and in our last Canons, all which I have formerly showed. And lastly, because
it is contrary to natural equity, and contra naturalem aequitatem nulla valet
consuetudo etiamsi omnes homines de mundo aliter facerent, says the Canon Law.

Now this rule of natural equity, is delivered by our Savior, Luke 10, 7. The
labourer is worthy of his hire, which is true, e converso, he that has the
hire, is bound to perform the labor. And this labourer is the Visiter, and
his labor is to Visit, that is to preach, and to correct, and his hire for
that labor, is Procurations: and all these I have formerly proved. It is then
contrary to natural equity, for us to detain Procurations from the Visiter,
when he Visits us, that is preaches unto us, and corrects us. It is likewise
contrary to natural equity, for the Visiter to require Procurations, when he
does not Uisit, that is preach and correct. It is most apparently contrary to
natural equity, for the Visiter to require Procurations of the Incumbents for
Visiting them. that is for preaching unto them, and for correcting them, and
yet to impose upon them the Visitation Sermon, the special part of that
labor, for which the Visiter requires and receives his Procurations of the
Incumbents. And upon this ground the Canon Law affirms, quod in procuratione
ratione visitationis debita, non currit praescriptio. And then there can be no
custom to bind the Incumbents, either to pay Procurations, or to preach the
Visitation Sermon.

The third Argument.
There is one weak argument my Lord, yet remaining, and that is this. The
Archdeacon is tanquam oculus Episcopi; and therefore may enjoin the Ministers
within his jurisdiction to preach his Visitation Sermon, that thereby he may
see, and learn, and know their sufficiency.

I do confess, my Lord, that in the Canon Law, the Archdeacon is called
oculus Episcopi, and which is more, vicarius Episcopi. And I have often
wondered, why they should so much press the former, and wholly pass over the
latter; and the reason as I conceive, is this: The latter, gives not only some
part of Episcopal authority to the Archdeacon, but also binds him to
perform some part of Episcopal duty. Now the Bishops duty, he being Rector,
totius Diaecesis, and having curam animarum is to Visit his Diaecesse, and to
preach to, and instruct all there, and to reform those that are faulty, and
this much the name of Vicar imposes upon the Archdeacon; for Vicarius tenetur
implere vicem ejus, cujus est Vicarius. And therefore Master Archdeacon does
willingly omit this title, because this does bind him as well to preach and
correct at his Visitation, as give him power to hold a Visitation under the
Bishop. He only insists upon this title of oculus Episcopi, as if he were tied
not to preach himself, but only to see the Incumbents preach, and that not in
their parishes, at their own Cures, but at the Visitation, his Cure.

Decreti 1. part. Did. 93. cap. 6. we have these words, Diaconi Ecclesiae,
tanquam oculi sunt Episcopi, oberrantes and circum-lustrantes cum verecundia
actus totius Ecclesiae, and perscrutantes diligentius, si quem videant vicinum
praecipitio, and proximum esse peccato: and the gloss upon that Text notes,
quod loco Diaconorum successerunt Archidiaconi, qui dicuntur occuli Episcopi,
quia perlustrant.

Now could the Deacons, because they were oculi Episcopi, enjoin the Presbyters
to preach a Visitation Sermon? They could not, and if they could not; neither
can Master Archdeacon do it, by virtue of that title which was theirs, before
it was his. All that was thereby required of them, was to go about, and to
observe with modesty, what was done in the whole Church, and to mark and view
diligently, if any man ran headlong into sin and wickedness, and to
certify the Bishop thereof; and in this sense, let the Archdeacon be oculus
Episcopi in Gods name, and be as vigilant to prevent sin, and to recover
sinners, as may be. But this gives him no power to command the Incumbents to
preach at his Visitation; but only to observe how they lead their lives, and
how they discharge their Cures; and if he find them defective in either, then
tanquam oculus Episcopi to inform the Bishop thereof.

And how ever, my Lord, it cannot be denied; but that the Archdeacon by the
abuse of this title of oculus Episcopi; that is, by wincking at the faults of
some Incumbents, and by prying into, and aggravating the faults of others; has
drawn diverse Incumbents to preach his Visitation Sermon, which else would not:
yet there is no such power or virtue in the title it self, but rather the
contrary, as will appear out of the Decretalls, lib. 1. tit. 23. De officio
Archidiaconi, cap. 7. which sets down the several respects, in which the
Archdeacon is called oculus Episcopi. I will allege the words at large.

Oculus Episcopi Archidiaconus appellatur, ut loco Episcopi per Episcopatum
prospiciens, quae corrigenda viderit, corrigat and emendet. and institutio
corporalis tam super beneficiis quam etiam dignitatibus, ad ipsum debeat
pertinere. Examinatio etiam clericorum, si fuerint ad sacros ordines
promovendi: Et hoc idem in collationihus beneficiorum credimus observandum; Vt
qui beneficiis Ecclesiasticis praeficiendi fuerint, a suo prius examinentur
Archidiacono, and per ipsum post Episcopo praesententur.

In this text, my Lord, the Archdeacon is called oculus Episcopi, in these
three respects. First, because in the Bishops stead, he is to look over the
whole Diaecesse, and to correct and reform such things, as are out of order,
or else to inform the Bishop thereof. Secondly, because he is to examine the
Clergy at their Ordination, and according to their deserts; either to turn
them back, or else to present them to the Bishop: and this much likewise is
given to the Archdeacons in our Church, as appears by the book of ordering
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And thirdly, because the Archdeacon is to do
the like at the Collation of Benefices; that is, before the Bishop admits and
Institutes into Benefices, and then to induct those, whom the Bishop upon his
commendation admits and Institutes.

All the power then, that the Archdeacon has by being oculus Episcopi, is
either a general power to observe and reform all faults over the whole
Diaecesse, or to inform the Bishop thereof; or else a more especial power to
examine the Clergy at their Ordination and Institution, but not to enjoyne
them then and there to preach. And seeing the Archdeacon at Ordination and
Institution, can discover the sufficiency of the Clergy by examination,
without hearing them preach; why may he not by the same course, do the like at
the Visitation? Nay, why should he at the Visitation, go about by examination,
to question the sufficiency of those Incumbents, whose sufficiency he had
before discovered and approved, both at their Ordination and Institution? How
ever, this is certain, my Lord, that the Archdeacon by that Text and title,
has no more power at the Visitation, than he had at Ordination and
Institution: And therefore seeing at these latter, he has by the foresaid Text
and title, a power only to examine the Clergy, that is the utmost that he can
challenge at the former, as oculus Episcopi.

But see my Lord the Art and wisdom of Master Archdeacon, or rather his
deceit and subtilty in interpreting the former text. To examine the incumbents
at his visitation, which by the former text and title he may do, would be to
his trouble; to command them then and there to preach, which by the former text
and title he may not do, would be for his profit and ease: therefore in the
foresaid Text, by a verbal transmutation, he would convert examination into
preaching, and Ordination and Institution into Visitation. And so where the
Canon Law says, that he is to examine us at our Ordination and Institution; he
would make it say, that we are to preach to him and for him at his Visitation:
where the Law says, that this eye is to look into the Clergy by examination
at their Ordination and Institution, that is, before their preferment: He would
make it say, that this eye is to look into them after their preferment, by
hearing them preach at the Visitation; as if their preferment were to go before
their trial and not their trial before their preferment.

But my Lord, this is not oculum agere, to perform the part of an eye; or if it
be, it is of a weak and dim sighted eye, which takes one thing for another,
like the blind man in the Gospel, who in the beginning of his cure, saw men
walk like trees, Mark 8. For I can never think that eye, whose so ever it be,
quick-sighted, nor fit to be oculus Episcopi, which cannot discern examination
from preaching, and Ordination and Institution from Visitation.

And so my Lord, for a farewell to the Principals; I leave it to your Lordship,
and the Court to consider whether the Commissioners were not invited by the
presumption of their own strength, and of my weakness, to use the foresaid
arguments, which upon examination make quite against them: Or whether they were
not at that time like men in danger of drowning, who being taught by nature to
do their best to save themselves, and yet being deprived of the right use of
their senses, do diverse times seek help, and lay hold on things that hurt
them, and keep them under water, and thereby drown themselves the sooner.

And thus much concerning the principalls, The accessories.
and the Defendants three Arguments. I now proceed to the accessories. And here
my Lord, seeing the Defendants have falsified the Law in the principals, your
Lordship, and the Court are not to give credit unto them, concerning the
accessories: seeing in the principalls they have called my obedienc to the Word
of God, to the Articles Statutes, Canons, to his Majesty's Letters Patents,
royal Prerogative, and oath of Supreamacie (which are all extant to the view
of the world) a breach of Canonical obedience, a principal or especial
fault, a grievous and enormous crime; they are not according to their own Law,
to be credited concerning any fact, they charge me within the accessories; for
qui semel est malus semper praesumitur malus in eodem genere mali and qui semel
veritatis and verecundiae limits transilierit, cum oportet esse gnaniter
impudentem, nec ei deinceps nisi paenitenti, culpani confitenti, and veniam
expetenti, est in aliqua credendum.

But my Lord, though according to these axioms, the defendants are not to be
credited in any of the accessories, because they have falsified the Law in the
principalls. Yet I labor not to impeach their credit in all, but in one only
circumstance, which runs through the three first accessories, which is grossly
and palpably false, and contrary to the Records of their own Court. For whereas
in the first accessorie, they charge me, that I came unsent for, or uncalled
for, to Master Archdeacon aforesaid he being in his Visitation among the
Clergy; and sitting there to hear Causes: and in the second accessorie, that
I did then and there charge the said Archdeacon of falsehood and i^justice: and
in the third accessorie, that I did at the same time and place lay down an
hundred pounds in gold upon the table, and offered to lay wagers with him the
said Archdeacon, that he had done me wrong, or the like in effect. I confess
I did these three, but not at the same time and place, not whilst Master
Archdeacon sat in his Visitation to hear Causes; but afterward, as will
appear by these three circumstances.

The Visitation is always kept in Saint Margarets Church in Canterbury; this
was in the parlour of the Checker Inn in Cant. The Visitation is always
begun, continued and ended in the forenoone before dinner; this was in the
after-nooneafter dinner. At the Visitation are present both Clergy, and Laity,
the Ministers, and the Churchwardens; here were present the Clergy only; and
the Defendants themselves in their Plea mention only the Clergy: the
Archdeacon, say they, being in his Visitation among the Clergy, not amongst
the Laity. And it is evident by the Records of their own Court, and by the
testimony of their own witnesses, Dr. Say, and Henry Ienkins that these things
were said and done in the Checker Inn in Canterbury after dinner and not in
Saint Margarets Church at the Visitation. And it appears likewise by the
submission enjoined me; for by their own Order that submission was to be
uttered before the Clergy in the dining room before dinner, and not in Saint
Margarets Church, at the Visitation. And beside I here make oath in truth in
justice and in judgment, that these three accessories were said and done, not
in Saint Margarets Church at the Visitation, but in the parlour of the Checker
Inn in Canterbury, where I never yet knew any Visitation kept by Master
Archdeacon.





Yea but though it be; yet peradventure I might not tell him so much. Yes, my
Lord, I was bound to tell him of it by the Word of God, by the Canon Law, by
the law of Nature, and by the oath of Supremacy. The Word of God, Levit, 19.17.
says, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly
reprove him, and not suffer sin upon him. So did I. The rule of the Canon Law
set down by Felinus de rescriptis cap. si quando, is this: Subditi debent
resistere pralato legem ignoranti instruendo eum, multo magis legem violanti,
maxim vero legem conculcanti. So did I. The law of Nature binds every one to
challenge and defend his own right, and to repel injury, So did I. And the
oath of Supremacy binds me to the utmost of my power; to defend and maintain
all jurisdictions of the Crown; and therefore this among the rest, that none of
the Clergy in their several jurisdictions can go beyond, much less contrary
to the Canons without incroaching upon the Prerogative royal, and supreme
Jurisdiction of the Crown.

The wager.
And this does likewise justify the wager of an hundred pounds, laid down to
defend the Kings supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Clergy, to the
utmost of my power, according as I was, and am expressly bound by the oath of
supremacy. And for that purpose I have made choice rather to be fined,
imprisoned, deprived, degraded, and excommunicated by the High-Commissioners,
and to endure those tedious delays, and those manifold disgraces, indignities,
and injuries in this Court, than by betraying the Kings supremacy to the
Archdeacons usurpation, with the High-Commissioners, this Court, the Barons of
the Exchequer, and the Lords of the Counsel, to violate that oath, and so to
commit perjury; knowing it a thing most acceptable in Gods sight, to endure the
greatest punishments for to avoid the least sin, much more for to avoid the
greatest sin; so that set aside this one untrue circumstance, there is nothing
at all culpable in these three first accessories.

The manner of speaking and of laying the wager.
And though the Defendants say, that I did speak very malepertly, and
irreverently to Master Archdeacon, and offered to lay the wager with him in a
very arrogant and irrespective manner; yet seeing they mention no one particular
evil word or deed, I hope your Lordship, after so many arguments upon the
general sentence of deprivation, and degradation, and this argument of mine
upon the special matter; will remember, that in generalibus latet fraus, and
vir dolosus versatur in universalibus; and will then conceive, that that which
they say, was spoken and done very malepertly, irreverently, and arrogantly,
was spoken and done discreetly, resolutely, and heroically; that I might to the
utmost of my power defend the Kings supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over
the Clergy, according as I was, and am expressly bound by the oath of the
supremacy; and then there is no fault at all, either in my words, or wager, in
the things or circumstances.

But now my Lord, though that one circumstance be false, and the Defendants
according to their own law, are not to be credited in the accessories; because
they have falsified the Law in the principalls. Yet my Lord, seeing we are now
in a demurrer, according to the nature of a demurrer, let all be granted in
these three first accessories, that the Defendants themselves affirm. Let the
words be uttered very malepertly and irreverently, let the wager be offered in
a very arrogant and irrespective manner; let the Archdeacon at the same time be
in Saint Margarets Church in Canterbury at the Visitation among the Clergy,
and sitting there to hear Causes. Yet now I will make it appear by the
Defendants own confession, and by a necessary consequence from their
confession, that in these four accessories, there is no fault at all.

The Defendants, as your Lordship may remember, charge me with six particulars;
amongst which they make my refusal to preach the Visitation Sermon, and my
maintaining it to be the Archdeacons duty to preach his own Visitation Sermon,
the two principal or especial faults. And if they two be the principal and
especial faults; then by the force of comparison drawn from the adversaries
own estimate, the other four must needs be inferior and accessory. And then
if the principal and especial faults be no faults, no breach of any Law; much
less can the inferiors or accessories be any faults, or any breaches of Law;
for si principalis causanon subsistat, ea quae sequuntur locum non habent. Now
I have before showed, that the two principal or especial faults are no
faults, but virtues and eminent virtues, even the virtues of Canonical
obedience; and therefore the other four being in the Defendants own judgment
lesser and inferior vices, than the two former, they cannot be any faults, but
must needs be virtues, and greater and superior virtues. And the Defendants
cannot except against this consequence, because it is necessarily drawn from
their own estimate and testimony, and testimonium ab adversario contra se
fortissimum.

conceptis verbis, which the Defendants pretend to be a great affront and
contempt both to the Kings supremacy, and to the High Commission authority,
seeing therein I was enjoined to acknowledge my refusal to preach the
Archdeacons Visitation Sermon, at the Archdeacons and Archbishops mandate,
to be a breach of Canonical obedience. It is certain my Lord, that if that my
refusal to preach that Sermon be no breach of Canonical obedience, then my
refusal to perform that submission, conceptis verbis, is no affront or
contempt, either to the Kings, or Commissioners authority. And if I make good
the former, the Defendants must of necessity grant the latter.

And for the clearing of this former, it is to be observed; that there is a
twofold Canonical obedience, the one due to the Canons only, the other to the
Prelates mandate according to the Canons. To the former, we are bound by the
Canons themselves, and by his Majesty's Letters Patents confirming the Canons.
To the latter, we are beside bound by the Prelates mandate, and by the oath of
Canonical obedience. The breach of the former, in all such as submit unto the
canons, is but only disobedience. The breach of the latter, is not only
disobedience, but also contumacie, yea and perjury too, in all them that have
taken the oath of Canonical obedience.

This will appear, my Lord, by the oath of Canonical obedience, extant in the
instrument of my Admission, and Institution (which I have here to show) wherein
the oath runs thus; Te primitus de legitima and Canonica obedientia, nobis and
successoribus nostris in omnibus licitis and honestis mandatis per te
praestanda and exhibenda, ad sancta Evangelia rite junatum admittimus, we admit
thee, says the Ordinary, having first been rightly sworn by the holy Gospels,
to perform lawful and Canonical obedience to us, and our successors, in all
lawful and honest mandates.

In which words, my Lord, it is first to be observed, that the thing that I
swear, is not arbitrary and blind obedience, that is such obedience as the
Prelate shall require by his Dictates, whatsoever it be; but lawful and
Canonical obedience; that is, such obedience as the Canons and Ecclesiastical
laws of this Land require. Secondly, that the persons to whom I have sworn,
are only the Bishop and his successors, not the Archdeacon: and therefore
though I am bound to yield Canonical obedience to all the Archdeacons lawful
and honest mandates, yet I am not by oath bound thereunto; and therefore when I
violate his lawful and honest mandates, I commit only contumacie not perjury,
And lastly, that I have not sworn this Canonical obedience to the Canons
themselves; for then every time I broke a Canon. I should commit perjury: but
only to the Bishop, and his successors mandates nor to his words or private
letters, or postscripts, or messages; but only to his and his successors
mandates; no, nor to al their mandates neither, but only to all their lawful
and honest mandates.

Now what is a Prelates mandate? A Prelates mandate, says Provincialis lib. 3.
de Institutionibus and commendis. cap. 1. verbis. Archidiaconis suis.
Extorqueri. and cap. 3. Verb. superioris. and tenentur. See 120. 122. 124,
Canons. Such are the mandates in the King's Bench, their habeas corpus, their
Latitats, Capias, and other mandates, and these are made in the the Kings name,
and subscribed with the chief Justices hand, and sealed with the seal of the
Court. And such are all the processes, mandates, letters Missive, Decres of the
High Commission Court, and ought to be such, as appears by the latter part of
their Commission, and I have one of their mandates or letters missive here to
show.

A Writ is the Commandment of the King, formed in Latin; directed either to
some Minister of his Courts, or sometime to the party-Defendant, at the pursuit
of the Plaintiff, for the better administration of Justice. Writs touching
their form are breife and short, and therefore are called in Latin Brevia; in
French Breifs, for their shortness, in English Writs, for that they are short
mandates in writing. Judge Dodrige in his English ^awyer, p. 43:


Lyndewode is a public instrument out of the Prelates court, made in the
Prelates name, under the seal of his office and the hand of a public Notary.
Without such a mandate sent from the Bishop to the Archdeacon; the
Archdeacon, though he has taken the oath of Canonical obedience to the
Bishop, is not bound to Induct any man instituted by the Bishop, neither is he
in contumacie if he refuse. But after he has received such a mandate. if he do
then refuse, he is then both in contumacie, and perjury too. And of these
mandates, I have two out of the Archdeacons Court here to show; one for my
Induction, another to reverse a suspension. And such mandates are daily sent
out of the Archdeacons and Bishops Courts, to command us to p^blish the
excommunications, and other censures of their Courts against our Parishioners;
and upon our Parishioners submission and reformation, there comes out other
mandates, commanding us to publish the assoiling, acquitting and restitution of
our Parishioners, and the abolition or abrogation of the former censures. And
so likewise there are daily sent out mandates or processes, commanding both us
and our Parishioners to appear at our Prelates Courts. And all these mandates
are agreeable unto the former definition of a Prelates mandate, given by
William Lyndewode.

And of those mandates, the Canon Law makes two Clementinarum lib. 2. titulo de
Dolo and Contumacia. cap. unic. verbo. manifest. Contumax in non veniendo non
appellat. Contumax in non parendo, appellat. quod iste peccat in uno tantum,
ille in duobus. Quod intelligo, quia iste venit, sed non paret. ille nec venit,
nec paret.

Decretal. lib. 2. titulo 14. de Dolo. and Contumacia cap. 4. verbo.
Conrumaciter. Contuma^ est, qui cum debet parere, non paret. (...) Ibidem cap.
2. verbo Contumaciter. Multis modis committitur Contumacia, quandoque
attenditur respectu non venientis, quandoque respectu non restituentis,
quandoque respectu non respondentis, vel obscure respondentis, quod idem est,
ac si. non responderet; quandoque respectu non iurantis, quandoque respectu
recedentis infecto negotio, and quandoque respectu non exhibentis; unde versus.

Non veniens, non restituens, citiusque recedens. Nil dicens, pignusque tenens,
iurareque Nolens. Obscureque loquens, isti sunt iure rebels. Quibus add
alios versus eodem libro. ut lite non contestata, etc. tit. 6. Casibus in
tribus his, quis dicitur esse rebellis. Impedit, occultat, iussis parere
recusat.


sorts; there is mandatum pro apparendo, and mandatum pro parendo a mandate for
appearing, and a mandate for obeying. And so accordingly there is a twofold
contumacie, contumacia in non apparendo and contumacia in non parendo; a
contumacie in not appearing, and a contumacie in not obeying. The contumacie in
not appearing, is committed when we violate the Prelates mandate for our
appearing at his Court. The contumacie in not obeying, is committed, when we
violate the Prelates mandate, enjoining us to obey some act of his Court: and
without one of these mandates first had and received, neither of these
contumacies can be committed.

Now with what contumacy do the Defendants charge me? not with any contumacy in
not appearing: neither can they, for neither did the Archdeacon, no nor my
Lords Grace neither, send out any mandate, to command me to appear, either at
their Archidiaconall, Episcopal, or Archiepiscopall Courts, and I always
observed the mandates of the High Commission court for my appearance. So that
they neither can nor do charge me with any contumacy in not appearing. They
only charge me with contumacy in not obeying the Archdeacons and Archbishops
mandates, commanding me to preach the Archdeacons visitation sermon.

This appears my Lord, out of their own sentence for in the first part of
their first final sentence, alleged in their plea, the defendants say; Super
aperientiam causae, ipsi invenerunt Georgium Huntley specialiter oneratum in
articulis praedictis cum duobus particulariis, primo pro recusatione ad
praedicandum visitationis sermonem, ad requisitionem and mandatum Archidiaconi
diaecesis, scilicet praedicti Willielmi Kingsley in Contrarium suae canonicae
obedientiae. And afterward in the first part of that first final sentence,
they say, that I violated the Archbishops mandate in the same matter, quod
quidem mandatum dicti Archiepiscopi, dictus Georgius Huntley, etiam neglexit,
and afterward in the second part of that first final sentence, they charge me
with perjurie for violating, that my Lords Graces mandate.

Now my Lord, if I have violated my canonical obedience to the Archdeacons and
Archbishops mandate, and therein have committed disobedience, contumacy and
perjury, as the Defendants pretend: then I have violated some Canon, and some
Canonical mandate of the Archdeacons and Archbishops, Canonical both for
form and matter; where these three concur, a Canon and a mandate Canonical,
both for form and matter: there if the party that breaks them, has taken the
oath of Canonical obedience, he commits anticanonicall disobedience,
contumacie, and perjury. But where the first of these is wanting where there is
no Canon, there, there cannot be a Canonical mandate for matter: and though
there may be a Canonical mandate for form; yet when the other two are
wanting, the breach of that only, is neither contumacie, nor perjury; no, nor
any anticanonicall disobedience neither; much less can there be any
anticanonicall disobedience, contumacie, and perjury, when all the three former
are wanting.

Now let us see, my Lord, which of the three former, the Defendants can show
against me. First, can they show any Canon that binds me to preach the
Visitation Sermon? No, the Canons, as I have before showed, bind every
Visiter, every Archdeacon, Bishop and Archbishop to preach his own Visitation
Sermon, Licensed Preachers, to preach at their own Cures only, and forbid me,
and such as I am, that are not licensed Preachers, to preach, or expound any
Scripture, in our own Cures or elsewhere.

Secondly, can the Defendants show any mandate Canonical for matter, sent from
the Archdeacon, or Archbishop to command, me to preach the Visitation Sermon?
Why, that is impossible; for seeing the Canons do not only not command, but
forbid me to preach at my own Cure, or elsewhere. The mandate that commands me
to preach at the Visitation; must of necessity be for matter, not only
uncanonicall, pretercanonicall, or ultracanonicall but also anticanonicall or
contracanonicall.

Thirdly, and lastly, can the Defendants show any mandate, Canonical for form
of the Archdeacons, or of his Graces, sent unto me, to command me to preach the
Visitation Sermon? If they can then they can show some public instrument out
of the Archdeacons, or Archbishops Court, made in the Archdeacons, or
Archbishops name, under the seal of their Office, and the hand of a public
Notary, commanding me to preach the Visitation Sermon. If they can do so,
though that mandate for matter be not only beyond the Canons, but contrary to
the C^nons; and their mandates ought not to exceed the Canons: yet let them
only show, that canonical mandate for form, that public instrument out of
the Archdeacons, or Archbishops court, made in the Archdeacons, or Archbishops
name, under the seal of their Office, and the hand of a Publick-Notary,
commanding me to preach the Archdeacons Visitation Sermon: and I will be so
indulgent unto them, that I will acknowledge my self culpable of contumacie,
in disobeying such a canonical mandate of the Archdeacons for form, though
uncanonicall, and anticanonicall for matter; and both of contumacie, and
perjury, in disobeying such a canonical mandate of his Graces for form,
though uncanonicall, and anticanonicall for matter. Can they do it?

No, no, my Lord, in their Plea, the Defendants confess the contrary; they
only mention three private letters written to me, to require me to preach the
Visitation Sermon, one from his Grace in the seventh Article, another from Sir
George Newman, the Archdeacons Official, in the ninth article; and another
from the Archdeacon himself in the eleventh article.

But private letters, my Lord, are no canonical mandates for form: neither am
I tied by oath, to perform canonical obedience to the Prelates private
letters, but only to his mandates; to the public instruments out of the
Prelates Court, made in the Prelates name, under the seal of his Office, and
the hand of a Publicke-Notary: and unless the Defendants can produce some such
canonical mandate for form, sent unto me, to command me to preach the
Visitation Sermon; they cannot make any show or color, that I have committed
either any contumacie, or perjury; no, nor any anticanonicall disobedience
neither.

Nay my Lord, unless the Defendants can show such a canonical mandate for
form, sent from the Archdeacon to me, to command me preach his visitation
Sermon, they cannot make any show or color, that I have broken the order of
the High Commission Court, in refusing to preach the Archdeacons visitation
Sermon. For in the first part of their final sentence, given the eighth of
Feb. 1626. the High Commission Court made an Order, that upon the Archdeacons
mandate, and a competent warning thereby to me given, I should preach a Sermon
at the next visitation, to be holden by the Archdeacon. These are the very
words of their sentence or Order upon record in this Court. Nihilominus dicta
curia alta commissionis, ad tempus illud reservans sibi ipsis eorum ulteriores
censuras, prout occasio oblata foret, pro co tempore tantum mode ordinavit
ipsum dictum Georgium Huntley, super mandatum praedicti Archidiaconi Cant.
super competenti monitione ei danda, ad praedicandum sermorem ad proximam
visitationem, tenendam per magistrum Archidiaconum Cantuarien. So that by their
own Order extant in the Defendants plea, I was not bound to preach that next
visitation Sermon nisi super mandatum Archidiaconi Cant. and super competenti
monitione mihi danda. But upon the Archdeacons mandate, and upon competent
warning, thereby to me given; So that by their own order, the Archdeacon was
first to send his mandate to the Apparitor, and then the Apparitor by virtue of
that mandate, was to warn me, to preach that next visitation Sermon.

Now did the Archdeacon at that his next visitation, send out such a mandate,
such a public instrument out of his Court, made in his own name, under the
seal of his office, and the hand of a public notary, to his apparitor, to
enable him to warn me to preach that his next visitation Sermon? can the
defendants show any such mandate or process, sent from the Archdeacon to the
Apparitor for that purpose. No, no, my Lord, the Defendants confess the
contrary in their plea: they acknowledge in the second part of their first
final sentence, given the ninteenth of April 1627. extant in their plea, that
George Huntley then alleged in his own behalf, quod Praedictus magister
Archidiaconus non admonuisset cum per legalem processum: and they grant it,
that there was no legal mandate or process, sent by the Archdeacon to the
Apparitor for that purpose; so that by their own confession in their plea, in
refusing to preach that visitation Sermon, I have neither committed any
anticanonicall disobedience, contumacy, nor perjury, no nor transgressed the
order of the High Commission court, because there was no process or mandate
sent from the Archdeacon to the Apparitor, to warn me to preach that sermon,
as there should have been according to their own Order.

What then do they allege against me? only this my Lord; That it appeared to
the Court by affidavit made, quod praedictus Magister Archidiaconus dedisset ej
sufficientem admonitionem per publicum officiarium. That Master Archdeacon had
sent an Apparitor, or public officer to warn me, to Preach the Uisitation
Sermon. There Is the warning indeed, given by the apparitor, and I confess it:
yea but where is the Archdeacons mandate or process to the apparitour, to
enable him to warn me to preach that sermon? That my Lord is either shrunk in
the wetting, or lost in the carrying, for they themselves grant, that that
apparitour or public officer, had no mandate or legal process from the
Archdeacon, to warn me to preach that sermon.

And then my Lord, how have I transgrest, either the Archdeacons mandate, or
the order of the High Commission Court, or what authority had that apparitor,
or publik officer, to warn me to preach that Uisitation Sermon? just none at
all, as appears by the 138. canon, made 1. Iacobit where it is said, all
apparitors shall by themselves, faithfully execute their offices, neither shall
they by any color, or pretense whatsoever, cause or suffer their mandates to
be executed, by any messengers or substitutes.

In which words my Lord it appears, that an apparitor does then faithfully
execute his office, when he does faithfully execute his mandates, that is,
neither go beyond, nor come short of his mandates, so that the apparitours
have no power to warn or summon any man with out such a mandate.

No, nor the Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Judge, as appears by this 120 Canon. No Bishop, Chancellor,
Archdeacon, Official, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, shall suffer any
general Processes of Quorum nomina, to be sent out of his Court, except the
names of all such, as thereby are to be cited: shall be first expressly entered
by the hand of the Regester or his deputy, under the said Processes; and the
said Processes and names be first subscribed, by the Judge, or his deputy, and
his seal thereto affixed. So that whenever any Bishop or any other
Ecclesiastical Judge, will cite any man to appear before him; he must send out
by his Apparitor a mandate, or process and therein the name of the party to be
cited, must be first entered by the Regester, or his deputy, and then subscribed
by the Judge, or his deputy, and his seal thereto affixed.

And if any Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever, shall by his Apparitor without
such a process or mandate, Summon any man to appear before him, the party is
not bound to appear; and though he do not appear, yet he is not culpable of
any contumacy, as appears by this 122 Canon.

When any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court belonging to
any Bishop of this Province, for any crime: the Chancellor, Commissary
Official, or any other, having Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to whom it shall
appertain shall expedite the cause by processes, and other proceedings against
him; and upon contumacy for not appearing, shall suspend him.

First then, after complaint made against any one, the Judge must cite the
party by process to appear before him; if the party obey not the process, he
is then contumacious; but without process there is no contumacy.

If your Lordship shall ask me what authority the Apparitour pretended when he
warned me to preach the said Visitation Sermon. I answer, that he pretended a
process or mandate from the Archdeacon: and it is true, my Lord, that he had a
process and mandate from the Archdeacon, and yet no process or mandate from
him. He had a process or mandate to warn me to appear at the Archdeacons
Visitation, and there to pay my procurations due to him for Visiting; and that
process or mandate was a public instrument out of the Archdeacons Court,
made in the Archdeacons name, under the seal of his Office, and the hand of a
public Notary.

But he had no such mandate or process, to warn me to preach the Archdeacons
Visitation Sermon; but only an In this particular, Doctor Kingsley, and the
Commissioners are more Popish and presumptuous, than the Pope himself. For the
Pope sends out only his Bulls, Diplomaes, or Mandates, formally and regularly
made, signed, and sealed with out any postscript, according to this old
proverb, Mittit plumbum, exigit aurum; But these together, with their Mandates,
or Processes, send out their said Postscripts; and thereby they will abrogate
the Word of God, the Articles, Statutes, Canons, his Majesty's Letters Patents,
royal Prerogative, and oath of Supremacy; Just as the Pope presumes to do
with his Bulls. And for the violation of these Postscripts, they will Fine,
Imprison, Deprive, Degrade, and Excommunicate; which is a Popery, pride, and
presumption more than papal.
apocryphal, uncanonicall, anticanonicall, antidiplomaticall, antiprerogative,
antisuprematicall postscript in these very words; You are to warn George
Huntley Parson of Stouremouth, to preach at the time and place above mentioned.

And this postscript set under the process, after the test and Regesters hand
was made in no man's name, subscribed with no man's hand, confirmed with no man's
seal, and is contrary to the Canons both for form, and matter: for matter, to
the 49 Canon, which forbids me being no licensed preacher, to preach, or
expound any Scripture in mine own Cure, or elsewhere: for form, to the 120
Canon, which forbids any thing to be written under a general process of
Quorum nomina, such as that was: but only the names of the parties to be cited,
and those names must first be entered by the Regester or his deputy, under the
process, and then subscribed by the Judge, or his deputy. Here were not only
names, but also new matter; namely, the preaching of the Visitation Sermon; and
yet neither names, nor matter, either entered by the Regester, or his deputy,
nor subscribed by the Judge, or his deputy.

Unto this warning thus given by the Apparitour, by virtue of his vicious
postscript, I gave only this answer; that on the morrow I would send my answer
in writing to Master Archdeacon, and on the morrow I sent this letter to Master
Archdeacon, and he received it, and it was read in the High Commission Court by
Doctor Ducke, one of the Advocates for the Office against me, the 19 day of
April, 1627. when the second part of the first final sentence was given
against me, and I Fined five hundred pounds, and first imprisoned.

To the Right worshipful, Mr Doctor Kingsley Archdeacon of Cant. give these.
Sir,
I Marvel, that being a member of the High Commission, you should not better
observe the order of that Honorable Court. Their order is, that you must
command me to preach a Visitation Sermon, and that I must obey your command,
and this they say is the custom. And therefore as I must obey according to
custom, so you must command according to custom. What the custom in this
point is, Sir George Newmans answer ad septimum articulum declares; who there
deposes, that for these thirty years of his own knowledge, the Archdeacon of
Canterbury for the time being, has sent Process by his Apparitor, to command
the Ministers to preach at his Visitation. Do you observe this custom, command
me by Process to preach at your Visitation, and I will preach a sermon for
your Visitation, as effectually as I can. Your Apparitor showed me Process,
and no Process; Process to command me to appear at your Visitation, no
Process to command me to preach at your Visitation. When you conceive meanly,
and not evilly of me, you conceive as I my self do, and both aright; yet if I
may speak it without arrogancy, I am not so stupid and obtuse, but that I can
discern between the Text, and a marginall Note; which corrupts the Text,
between the Canon, and the Apocrypha; between the Process for my appearance,
made in the Archdeacons name, confirmed with the public seal of his Court,
subscribed with the hand of his Regester, and an unwarrantable and an
unjustifiable additament or postscript, which has neither hand or seal unto
it: whose Author is anonymus, whose authority apocryphal, which has no
warrant or foundation in the Process, nay, which quite out-strips the
Process. The Process commands me only to appear, and pay procurations; which
says your Process, are due to you for Visiting; this is, says the Canon Law,
for preaching and correcting. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 39. De Censibus etc. cap.
23. parag. Porro. and Sexti Decretal. lib, 3. tit. 20. De Censibus etc. cap. 1.
par. Sane. and par. Hanc autem. But the postscript commands me to preach, which
is more than to appear; It is to appear, and to do something else, namely, to
perform one part of the Visiters duty, for which I pay my procurations. If you
cannot command me to appear without Process, can you command me to preach
(which is more than to appear) by a postscript, which is less than Process,
which is no Process, no part of your Process? If you command me by Process
to pay procurations; which say you, are due to you for Visiting, that is, for
preaching and correcting? Will you by a postscript command me to do your
principal duty, namely, to preach at your Visitation, for which I pay my
procurations? This postscript then is faulty, in a double respect; it exceeds
your Process, and is contrary to your Process. It exceeds your Process,
because it commands me to preach at your Visitation, your Process commands me
to appear only. It is contrary to your Process, because it makes it my duty
to preach at your Visitation, your Process makes it yours. It is your duty to
visit, that is to preach and correct, and for that it requires procurations.
And what small authority your Process and postscript have, to compel me to
preach at your Visitation; the wisdom of your Advocates may teach you, who
would not produce either in open Court, although they were thereunto urged by
my Counsel; for thereby they should have discovered your most palpable
usurpation, who command that by postscript, which you dare not do by Process,
and yet pretend you do it by Process; because the Process and postscript are
both written upon one sheet of paper, although the postscript has no
correspondencie with the Process, because it is not made in your name,
confirmed with the seal of your Office, subscribed with your Regesters hand,
neither has any warrant or confirmation, in or by the Process. If you will
have me take this postscript for a Process, you must either put it into the
body of the Process, or else like a Process, make it in your own name,
confirm it with the seal of your Office, subscribe it with your Regesters
hand, and then I will take it for Process, and obey it as Process. Without
one of these you neither observe the order of the Court, nor the custom, which
you strive for; and in your breife allege Sir George Newmans testimony to
prove it. Do you observe both these and I will break neither. And so desiring
you to command me by Process to preach at your Visitation or to provide a
Sermon elsewhere, I commend you to the Almighty, and rest

Stouremouth, Feb. 23. 1626. The next day after the Apparitor was with me.
Yours according to law, custom and canonical obedience, GEORGE HVNTLEY.


Now may it please your Lordship, to knit and unite these severalls together;
Canonical obedience, is such obedience as the Ius Canonicum. i. e. ab ecclesia
seu viris ecclesiasticis institutum, and dicitur canonicum a Canon, quod est
regula: Eo quod tanquam regula recte ducit, nec aliquando aliorsum trahit. vel
quia recte regit, and Normam recte vivendi praebet, and id quod distortum,
pravumque est corrigit. L. P. lib. 1. tit De Postulando. c. veloces ad
audiendum Glossa in Ius canonicum.
Canons require. The Canons do not only not require, but forbid me to preach at
my own Cure, or elsewhere. The High Commission Court make an order contrary
to the Canons, that I upon the Archdeacons mandate, and a competent warning
thereby to me given should preach the Archdeacons next Visitation Sermon, and
this say they, is the custom. The Archdeacon sends an Apparitor with an
apocryphal and anticanonicall Incorrigibilis est, qui revertiturad priora
delicta, vel in eis perseverat, vel qui ter monitus non desistit. Sic sentire
videtur Io. An. de iudi. c. cum non ab homine. Et concordat ibi Antho. de
butrio. Lyndewode Pro. lib. 5. tit. de paenis. c. Item statuimus. verb.
Incorrigibilis.
postscript to warn me, but without any mandate; and so neither observes either
order, or custom. An Apparitor without a mandate, even by the Canons, has no
authority to warn any man. I writ to the Archdeacon to observe both the
custom, and order of the High Commission, to summon me by a mandate or
Process, and proffer to preach that his next Visitation Sermon. He does not,
he will not, in plain terms my Lord, he dares not.

Is it not most clear, then my Lord, that in refusing to preach that
Visitation Sermon, I have neither transgressed the Canons, nor canonical
obedience, nor the Archdeacons mandate, nor the custom, nor the order of the
High Commission Court, nor the oath of Canonical obedience, and therefore am
most free, not only from contumacie and perjury, but also from all
anticanonicall disobedience?

All this is most clear and evident. And why then, my Lord, should I have
submitted to the submission, and contrary to a most evident truth, and mine own
conscience; have acknowledged my self culpable of disobedience, contumacie,
and perjury? Nay further, if I had yielded to the submission, I must have
advanced the Archdeacons apocryphal, uncanonicall, anticanonicall,
antidiplomaticall, antiprerogative, antisuprematicall postscript, above the
Canons of this orthodox Church, above his Majesty's Letters Patents, above his
royal Prerogative, above a royal Prerogative invested in the Crown by God
himself, acknowledged by Article by Statute, by Canon; nay, above a royal
Prerogative, which I by the oath of supremacy am bound to the utmost of my
power to defend and maintain. So that I could not have submitted to that
submission, without palpable You made it sacrilege to dispute of the Popes
fact, heresy to doubt of his power, paganism to disobey him, blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, to do, or speak against his Decrees or Canons; and
that which is most horrible, you made it presumption not to go to the Devil
after him without grudging. O shameful and sinful subjection, such as Lucifer
himself never offered the bondssaves of hell. Bishop Bilson in his true
difference of christian subjection and unchristian rebellion 2. part. page 23^
perjury; and I am sure, that perjury is transcendently unlawful, and propter
unum illegitimum tota submissio fit illegitima, especially seeing as it
appears upon Record in this Court, that submission was framed by the
Commissioners, in conceptis verbis, in a set form of words; and by their own
order, that set form of words was to be uttered, without addition, or
alteration; and therefore any one part thereof being unlawful the whole must
needs be unlawful.

And so my Lord, it appears, that in refusing to preach that Visitation Sermon,
I have not transgressed the order of the High Commission Court, because the
Archdeacon sent no mandate as he should have done by that order; neither if he
had, was I bound to perform either that mandate, that order, or the submission
enjoined; because both that mandate, that order, and that submission enjoined
are contrary to the Canons, to his Majesty's Letters Patents, and to his royal
Prerogative, and supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Crown; which by
the oath of supremacy I am bound to the utmost of my power to defend and
maintain; and against which, no man that has taken that oath, can speak,
plead argue, or give sentence without perjury: neither can any Judge, according
to that his oath, to the utmost of his power, defend and maintain all
jurisdictions of the Crown unless in this case of mine, he does speedily
without delay, without procrastination give judgment for the Canons his
Majesty's Letters Patents, his royal Prerogative, and mine obedience unto
them; against that apocryphal uncanonicall, anticanonicall, antidiplomaticall,
antiprerogative, antisuprematicall postscript of the Archdeacon of Cant. Master
Doctor Kingsley.

And so my Lord I do conclude, and I do most instantly and most importunately
sue, and supplicate to your Lordship, and to these my just Judges, in the
presence of a most just God, for a just judgment, as a just man should do,
both for my self and for my adversaries. First for my adversaries, if their
Cause be better then mine, and they can confute what I have said: and if they
cannot, then for myself, and for both speedily without all further delay,
without all further procrastination; for it has been fall twelve years three
quarters, since this action first began in this Court; full twelve years three
quarters, before I could get this first hearing, this one Argument. A long and
a tedious time, in which diverse interessed in this controversy have ended
their lives: and as Julian the Emperor, though an Apostata says. (...).
Epistola 35.
It is a fearful a terrible thing, that he that sues for justice, shall sooner
lay down his life at the judgment seat, then procure judgment from the just
Judges that sit upon the seat: that he shall stand in need of two lives to
determine one controversy, and yet end them both, before he can end that his
one controversy.

What a blemish and disgrace is it, that the justice of private men, shall
exceed and surpass the justice of Judges, and of Courts of justice? and if
private men do all that ever they can to have their Causes heard, and
determined; and Judges do all that ever they can, to delay, procrastinate, and
stave off the hearing and determining of them; does; not the justice of private
men exceed and surmount the justice of judges, and of Courts of justice?

And yet the justice of private men is but the private and particular justice
of the Kingdom; and if there be any question concerning that, it must pass
per libram per trutinam, sub examine justitiae judicum and Curiarum. And
therefore the justice of Judges and of Courts of justice is the general,
universal, aecumenicall, epidemicall justice of the Kingdom. The light of the
body says our Savior is the eye; if that light be darkness, how great is
that darkness? So the general, universal, aecumenicall, epidemicall justice
of the Kingdom, is the justice of Judges, and of Courts of justice. If that
justice be injustice, how great is that injustice? It is then the general
universal, aecumenicall, epidemicall plague pestilence, consumption,
desolation, and destruction of the whole Kingdom.

And though, my Lord the difficulty to get justice, and the danger to lose it,
is always very great; because there are so many things needful, even in an
honest course to prevail in a suit at Law, as a good and a just cause, a
diligent, faithful, and expert Solicitor, an honest, skillful, and incorrupt
Attorney, a learned, faithful and courageous Counsel, and a just and an
upright Judge; of which if any one fail to do his duty, a good cause may have
an ill success: Yet certainly amongst all the former, next after a a good
Cause, a just and an upright Judge is the principal and especial. And because
even in a good Cause, the three former cannot prevail without this latter, and
this latter can and may correct and amend the faults and errors of the three
former; therefore Julian the Emperor makes this latter the only necessary
thing, to prevail in a good Cause. His words are worthy to be engraven in
letters of gold, on every Court of justice, for a direction and caution to all
Judges, Counselors, Atturnyes, Solicitours, and Clients. (...); Epistola
praeallegata.
This is the only thing, says he, for them that suffer wrong, to get their
right namely, to get such a judge as both can and will judge rightly, can and
will do justice. If the Judge either cannot, or will not, if either through
weakness he cannot apprehend the truth, or else through wickedness will not
hear, or will betray the truth; there is then a necessity, that right and
justice most be subverted.

Wherefore my Honored Lord Chief Justice, and Honored Judges; to the intent
that your Lordship and the Court may show your selves such Judges as men
oppressed according to Iulians advise, should seek for; such Judges as both
can and will judge rightly, can and will do Justice; such Judges as both can
and will rectify and reform the faults and errors of Solicitours, Atturneys,
and Counselors; nay such Judges; as in a good cause will supply the want of
all these, which is my case for I can get none of them. Consider I beseech you,
by how many bonds you are tied to do justice; you tied by your places titles,
offices oaths by the Laws of the Land by the Word of God; and in these two
particular cases of mine in this action of false imprisonment, and in the
special Verdict between Allen, and Nash, by his Majesty's special mandate
delivered to your Lordship with mine own hand here in open Court, on the first
day of Hilary Term, 1635.

All these bind you to do justice, but none of these prove you to be just. The
only rule to prove you just, is this of St. John 1 Epist. 3. cap. 7. verse. He
that does righteousness, is righteous. The works of justice, and not the
titles of justice must prove you just: without these works, you may be called
Justices; but it is (...) abusive, (...) and antiphrasis est vox signans
contraria dicto; and then you have no better right to be called Justices, than
the Lords supper has to be called missa, and missa signifies the Lords supper,
just as excommunication does the Communion, as Bishop Bilson shows; for missa
is a sending away from the Lords Supper, as excommunication is from the
Communion.

Or if you have any better right to be called Justices, yet without the works
of justice, it is only ratione officii, not ratione meriti; and in that sense,
as the Papists say, if Judas or Simon Magus were Popes, they had right to, and
might be honored with the title of holiness. And in this respect, as Gerson
says, absque mendacio Papa nequissimus dici potest Sanctissimus, and in that
regard, any of the lapsed Angels, even Beelzebub himself, the prince of
devils, in regard of original purity, and Gods law written in him in the
Creation, which ex officio is over bound to observe, may be called Angelus
Sanctissimus; although in respect of his works, now and ever since his fall,
he be spiritus impurissimus and diabolus nequissimus.

But if you will be truly called Justices, both ratione officii, and ratione
meriti, then you must do the works of justice; you must do justa just, that
is, as Aristotle expounds himself, you must do justice volenter, scienter,
constanter, willingly without any backwardness; wittingly by hearing sifting,
and searching the allegations and proofs always on both sides; and constantly
without any intermission or deviation. Or if you had rather have the rule from
Solomon; you must do justice joyfully. It is joy, says Solomon, to the just to
do judgment, Prove. 21.15. And this one word of Solomon, includes the three
former of Aristotle. For if it be joy to the just to do judgment, then he will
do it willingly, wittingly, and constantly; or if you please, take the rule out
of your own Laws, out of the common Laws of the Land, out of the epitome an
principal part thereof magna Charta, cap. 29. you shall deny to no man, you
shall delay to no man, you shall sell to no man justice, or right; you shall
deny to no man, you shall delay to no man justice, or right; therefore you
shall do to every man justice and right speedily; you shall sell to no man
justice or right; therefore you shall do to every man justice and right freely:
and join all these together, and then you have the absolute and complete rule
of justice: The observation whereof, will make you all, not only Justices, but
also chief Justices; if not ratione loci, tituli, and officii, which is the
inferior; yet ratione operis and meriti, which is the superior; and will make
suum cuique, which is anima, vigor, and executio legis, take place in every
cause that comes before you: wherein next after the service and worship of God,
and the exercise of the true Orthodox Religion, consists the welfare and
flourishing estate, both of Church and Commonwealth.

And this my Lord, will be the best, if not the only course, to vindicate the
credit of this your Court, and to confute that opprobrious distinction of Court
Christian, and not Christian; whereby the name of Court Christian is
appropriated only to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and all Temporal Courts
reputed Ethnic or heathenish, but both very erroneously. For it is the doing
of justice, that makes Courts Christian and the omitting or neglect of justice,
much more the doing of injustice, that makes Courts Ethnic or Heathenish, as
the Apostle shows in his 1. Epistle to the Corinths 6. chapter, 1. verse. Dare
any of you having a matter against another, be judged under the unjust, and not
under the Saints? which Apostolical Dichotomy, if it be rightly made, and the
members thereof truly opposite; then they which are unjust, cannot be Saints or
Christians; and they which are Saints or Christians, cannot be unjust. And to
make the matter more clear, those whom the Apostle in the first verse calls
(...) unjust, those in the 6. verse, he calls (...) unbeleevers or infidells.
And those whom the Apostle calls (...) Saints or Christians, Saint John calls
doers of righteousness; If you know that Christ is righteous know ye, that every
one that does righteousness is borne of him, in his first Epistle, 2. chap.
29. verse. and in his 3. chap. 7, verse, he calls them both righteous, and
doers of righteousness. He that does righteousness, is righteous, even as
Christ is righteous. And therefore, my Lord, that Court which does justice, is
a Court Christian, and that Court which does not do justice, is a Court not
Christian. If the Ecclesiastical Court does justice more cheerfully, readily,
and freely, than the Temporal Court, then the Ecclesiastical Court is more
Christian; if the temporal Court does justice more cheerfully, readily, and
freely, than the Ecclesiastical Court, then the temporal Court is more
Christian; if they both do justice, as they both should do, then both are
Christian, if neither do justice, then neither is Christian. Or if both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Judges, will have themselves, and their Courts
reputed christian, though they do not do justice; yet they must be content to
be ranked among those christians, who profess they know God, but by their
works deny him. Tit. 1.16. or among those, who have indeed a show, or form of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3.5.

Wherefore my honored Lord Chief Justice, and my honored Judges, to the
intent that you may show yourselves and this your Court truly Christian; (...)
do most humbly and most heartily beseech your Lordship, and these my honored
Judges, to observe the former excellent rules of justice, both in this case of
mine, now after full twelve years three quarters, and in all other men's cases
at the first, as you will answer the contrary before the dreadful tribunal of
God himself: whose deputies you are, whose names you bear, whose oath you
have taken, whose work you are here to do, and in whose presence and
judgment, as you now sit to judge others, so you shall hereafter stand to be
judged your selves; and that (...), without prejudice, without partiality: ubi
plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba: and conscientia bona, quam marsupia
plena.

Dixi.

(...). Ignatius Epist. ad Polycarpum.
FJNJS.
Errata.
Faults in some Copies, and their Corrections. P. and the first number shows
the Page. L. and the second number the line. M. the Margin. E. signifies
expunge. F. for. R. read. W. wants.
TItle Page line 34. read by, for be. p. 1. l. 24. r. Diem. p. 2. l. 1. r. it
f. I, p. 3. l 27. w. the. p. 6. l. 8. r. certify. l. 22. w. the. l. 33. r.
desisting. l. 35. w. corpus. l. 38. r. nay, f. may. P. 7. l. 16. r.
impartially. p. 9. l. 5. r. decide. l. 11. r. duty. l. 23. r. gnaviter. l. 24.
r. confitenti. p. 12. l. 8. r. cognizance. p. 17. l. 32. r. expressly. p. 19. l.
17. r. asticall. p. 20. l. 7. r. provincial. l. 8. r. presbyteri. l, 12, r,
mandato. p, 22, l, 11, r, this f, his. l, 32, r, special. p. 24, l, 14, r, the
f, thy. l, 32, r, provincial. p, 29, l, 25, w, no. p, 30, l, 40, r, his f,
the. p, 31, l, 3, marg. w the. p, 34, l, 17, w. according. p, 38, l, 30, w,
the. p, 40, l, 25, r, of, f. or. p. 42, l, 28, mar, read (...), l, 45, mar, r,
consensio. p, 43, l, 17, r, gloss. p, 47, l, 9, r, igitur. p, 51, l, 18, mar,
r. Enthymems. p, 55, l, 8, r, whosoever. p, 56, l, 40, r, soliciti. Item p, 57,
l. 1, and l, 12. p, 59, l, 28, r, proponere. p, 64, l, 22, r, solicit. p, 68,
l, 6, m, E, and, l, 36, m, r, marginall. p, 69, l, 3. r, lawful. l, 37, r
imply. p, 79, l, 1, r, Archdeacons. p, 82, l, 27, E, to. l, 35, r, this, f,
his. p, 86, l, 29, r, not only against the King himself, but also against Cod
himself. p, 87, l, 15, r, gift, f, right. p, 90, l, 38, r, non. p, 93, l, 10,
r, oculi.


