DEMONSTRATION OF ASTROLOGY. OR, A brief Discourse, proving the Influence of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, over this Terraqueous Globe.

Grounded on the Fundamental Rules of the Copernican System and Philosophy, and
verified by Practical Examples and Experience. Illustrated by Diagrams. Whereby
the Art is rendered almost Mathematically Demonstrable.

To which is added, An Astrological and Philosophical Appendix, or Second Part,
treating of this Summer's Effects, both in the Macrocosm as well as Microcosm.
Wherein we have great cause to fear, that the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine,
will annoy our European Territories this ensuing Summer.

By WILLIAM HUNT, a Lover of the Mathematics and Natural Philosophy.

Can thou refrain the sweet Influences of the Pleiades? or loose the Bands of
Orion? Job 38.31. LONDON, Printed for the Author; and are to be sold by George
Sawbridge in Little Britain, 1696.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Viscount MANDEVILL, Baron of Kimbolton, Earl
of Manchester, Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum of the County of Huntingdon.
My LORD,
THE last Favors which I received from you, embolden me to affix on your
Lordship this Dedication, and commit these my first Fruits to your Honorable
Protection: For which Presumption I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon. The
Style I confess is plain and rustic, and ^anteth that elegancy of Language
which a more learned Pen might have dressed it up with.

But the Subject (tho ill clad) is wholly new and sublime, being a Subject
never before treated on in this Nature, viz. the Demonstration of Astrology,
founded upon the Copernican Hypothesis: And tho but an Embrio, I hope it will
live in spite of all its Opposers, especially if it may receive the auspicious
Favor of your Lordship's Countenance; then shall I not doubt its Preferment,
and therein the Advancement of the Celestial Sciences, and chiefly this most
useful and innocent Part, the Knowledge of the Weather.

Wherein I through my diligent Study and Observations, have gained more select
Arcana's than ever were known to the late (tho Learned) Dr. Goad, who wrote K.
James the Second's Weather.

I confess it unworthiness to stamp the Impression of your Honor's Titles upon
such an abortive Embryo; yet could I imagine it would in the future become the
least disparagement to the Dignity of the Godfather, I would even now crush it
in the Bud, and stop its production, and not suffer it to appear in this wild
World, where the Zoilian Sharks stand ready, with their duplicated Teeth, to
devour it, if not sheltered under the Shadow of your Honor's Wings, to whose
Tuition I only commit it for Protection; humbly imploring your Lordship's
favorable Construction of this my Boldness, and it will be an Encouragement to
the future Endeavors of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, WILLIAM HUNT.

The Preface to the Reader.
I Designed to have wrote a large Volume of the Demonstration of Astrology; but
considering that Books of this Nature are chargeable to print, by reason of the
Diagrams, which are many: And when printed, there being but few Students or
Lovers of this Art, whereby I feared it would not pay the Charge of Printing;
therefore I altered my first Intentions, and do now design to appear in this
manner quarterly, viz. at every Solar Ingress of the Sun into the four Cardinal
Points, or oftener, as Matter and Occasion shall permit, provided this finds a
kind Reception.

In which intended Essays I shall endeavor toward the Demonstration of
Astrology, and the Restoration of the Celestial Sciences, which, like many
ancient and ruined Cities, lie buried in their own Rubbish: for Arts and
Sciences have their Crisis, their Times of flourishing, and Times of decay, as
well as all other sublunary things. We have a common and ignorant saying
amongst us, That every Age grows wiser and more learned than other; but I am
of the contrary. Opinion, and do believe, that at this day Astrology is not so
well understood as it was in the Days of Solomon and Daniel, who understood it
in its Purity: But alas, now it is so sullied over with Innovations and
Superstitions, that it is hard to find the Truth from Falsehood. But in our
following Discourses, I desire to be believed or credited no further than I can
rationally demonstrate the same. The following Work is founded upon the
Copernican Hypothesis, wherein I shall make it apparent, that the aforesaid
Philosophy is so far from destroying Astrology, (as some ignorant Astrologers
pretend) that it is the unum necessarium, the only thing needful in the
demonstration thereof.

My Method is wholly new, and different from the Modern Astrology, whose Basis
is founded upon the Ptolomean Hypothesis and Aphorisms, as mine is upon the
Copernican System and Philosophy.

My Books will be composed of a First and Second Part: The first Part generally
treating of Astronomical, Astrological, and Philosophical Aphorisms and
Arcana's, tending to the Propagation of the Celestial Sciences, and
Restoration of Astrology, and will be introductory to young Tyro's in this our
new Method, to whose consideration I commend it.

And the second Part will be composed of my Astrological and Philosophical
Judgment for the Quarter I write of; wherein I chiesly shall treat of the
Weather and its Intemperatures, whereby we have sometimes scarcity of one
thing, and sometimes of another; as also Sickness and Health, Earthquakes,
Thunders and Lightnings, Blasts and Mildews; and at some times pleasant and
fruitful Seasons, thereby producing Plenty and Health: all which I shall
demonstrate in their several Seasons, as I foresee them to happen.

I shall also in some other succeeding Tracts, treat of the Weather day by day,
wherein I shall be more large than in this: Which is the larger in the first
Part, being it is an Introduction to the rest; Which second Part I chiefly
direct to our Countrymen, wherein they may see (as an Object in a Glass) the
Natures of the Seasons before they happen: Wherein they need not much question
the Verily thereof, for I shall not deliver any thing, or impose the belief
thereof upon any, farther than I can give probable Reasons for my so doing.

Therefore these following Essays, being Select Astrological and Philosophical
Arcana's, grounded upon Rational and Experimented Athorisms, never before made
public, and I believe known to very few besides my self; I commend to all
Lovers of Learning, and also to my Countrymen, hoping I have not cast a Pearl
before Swine, but set a Glass before the grateful Doves.

Will. Hunt.
Allconbury, March 10. 1695/6.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THese Medicines mentioned, are prepared and sold, both Wholesale and Retail,
by Hen. Martin of St. Ives in Huntingtonshire, Student in Physic and
Chemistry; namely, a famous Stomach Pill in the Green Sickness, and many other
Diseases; also Sal Solutivum, or Glauber's admirable purging Salt; the Elixir
Salutis, or purging Cordial, called by some Dassie's Elixir; Dr. Bostick's
Cordial, an Eley Water; also Spir-Mundus, both plain and exalted to an Oleosum
Volatile; also Vinum Vitae proprietat. also Arcanum Vniversalis, and Species
Vniversalis; also Arca^am Specificatum Catharticum; also several Acid Spirits
dulcified and volatilized, as Spir. Vitrioli Volatilae; also a very good
Medicine to cure the French Pox, without sluxing or much confinement; also a
good Balsamic Pain-easing Pill, exceeding that called Matthews Pill or many
more of that kind; also the Golden or Purging Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and the
Plain; and several other Chemical Preparations, too tedious to mention here,
all with printed Directions.

To his Ingenious Friend Mr. William Hunt, on his Demonstration of Astrology.
ASTROLOGY on the old System grounded
Of Ptolomy, like lofty Building founded
On a Foundation ruinous, decayed;
Sunk in Repute, with Rubbish overlaid:
Till, like bold Hercules, adventurous Man,
To cleanse the Augean Stable you began,
And build it new on Frame Copernican,
And Principles Cartesian, whose bright
Conjunction adds new Luster to the Light:
Whose Monarch from his Throne, how he dispenses,
By Viceroy Planets, various Influences;
And by the sevenfold Cord of the Heavenly Ball,
Tuneth each Change by Force Mechanical,
Heat, Cold, Fruit, Famine, War, Peace, Life and Death,
Whence come enlivening Blasts, whence poisonous Breath:
Whence Meteors above, Earthquakes below,
Their hidden Causes thou do clearly show.
Go on, till solidly thy Pen has given
The Frame and Workings of the Fluid Heavens.
Go on with Lucky Planets, till thou be,
Within our Vortex the famed Mercury.
Go on, these hidden Wonders to explain,
Till greater than thy self none does remain.
Ita Precatur Thom. Gery, Sid. S. Col. Alumnus.
N. B. The Reader is desired to take notice, that the third Diagram; (in Page
27.) is, by Mistake, turned to one side.

DEMONSTRATION OF ASTROLOGY.
CHAP. I.
FOR the Instruction of the unskilled in the Art, and that they may the better
understand our following Discourse, it is necessary that I explain the
Characters of the 12 Signs, and the Planets and Aspects, as follows.

The Characters of the
Six Northern Signs. Six Southern Signs. Planets. Aspects. Aries, Libra,
Saturn, Conjunction, Jupiter; Taurus, Scorpio, Mars, Sextile, Gemini,
Sagittary, Sun, Cancer, Capricorn. Earth, Trine, Venus, Quartile, Leo, Aquary,
Mercury, Virgo, Pisces, Luna. Opposition.

And for the sake of young Artists, which are not furnished with the Globes,
and do not understand these following Circles, etc. of the Heavens. I say, for
their Instruction, I have drawn two Projections or Diagrams, which I shall
explain, as follows, that they may be the more capable to understand my
following Essays; the Circles are these which follow.

The Horizon, Meridian, the Zenith and Nadir, which are Poles to the Horizon;

These alter according to the Place in which you live.

The Equinoctial, Ecliptic, two Tropicks, and the North and South Poles;

These are always supposed fixed in the Heaven, live where you will.

The Horizon is a great Circle, dividing the uppermost or visible part of the
Heaven from the Invisible: As suppose your self at Sea, or upon an high Hill;
and looking round you, you imagine that the Sky touched the Earth or Water. Now
that Line of Separation of the Sky and Earth, or Water, is the visible Horizon,
and such a Circle is supposed to be in the Heavens.

And when the Sun, Moon and Stars, either rise or set, they are then said to be
upon the Horizon.

And note, that this Circle is moveable, because that it alters according to
the Place of your abode.

To this Circle there are assigned Poles, which are also moveable as the Circle
it self is; these Poles are called the Zenith and Nadir.

The Zenith is that Point just perpendicular over your Head in the Heavens, and
is every way equidistant from the Horizon 90 Degrees.

The Nadir is that Point in the Heavens opposite to it, being also 90 Degrees
in distance from the Horizon on the nether side thereof.

The Meridian is a great Circle passing through the Poles of the World, and
Zenith and Nadir, and crosses the Horizon at Right Angles in the North and
South Points.

The Sun, Moon and Stars, when they are full South, as the Sun is every Day at
Noon, then are they said to be upon the Meridian. The Circle alters according
to the place of Longitude in which you live.

The Equinoctial is a great Circle, and crosses the Meridian at Right-Angles,
and crosses the Horizon in the East and West Points thereof; thereby, with the
Meridian, dividing the Horizon into four equal Parts, each Part containing 90
Degrees. So that the whole Circle contains four times 90, or 360 Degrees; as
all other Celestial Circles are supposed to contain the same Number. This
Circle is drawn through the midst of the Heavens exactly, between the two Poles
of the World, being equidistant from each Pole 90 Degrees, and is known by the
Way or Course of the Sun every Year, about the 10th day of March and 12th of
September.

The Ecliptic is a great Circle, and crosses the Equinoctial it Oblique
Angels, in the East and West Points thereof. This Circle is the Way of the Sun
or Earth, in the Zodiac, and is divided into twelve Signs, viz.,,, etc. Each
Sign is also again subdivided into Degrees, containing each 30 Degrees, making
thereby the whole Circle to contain 360 Degrees. And by reason of the Obliquity
of this Circle, it constitutes Breadth to the Zodiac, extending to 23 Degrees
on each side the Equinoctial; the boundary Limits whereof are the North and
South Tropicks.

The North Tropic being the greatest Northern Declination of the Sun, who
chalks out this Circle by his apparent Diurnal Course every Year about the 11th
day of June. The South is the greatest Southern Declination of the Sun, and is
chalked out by his apparent Diurnal Circuit each Year, about December the 12th
day.

But for the better understanding of these Circles, I have drawn two
Projections of the Sphere, one upon the Plane of the Horizon of those who live
under the Equinoctial Line; and the other being the second, is projected upon
the Horizon of 52 Degrees 21 minutes, (the Latitude of Allconbury) North.

Now by the first Projection or Diagram, you may see by the Ecliptic crossing
the Equinoctial Line obliquely, that there are these six Signs,,,,,, on the
North Side the Equinoctial-Line; and also the other six Signs,,,,,,, on the
South side of the Equinoctial-Line.

So that the Sun always to appearance moving in this Circle, he thereby becomes
sometimes near to us who live in that Point where the Latitude of Allconbury,
being 52 degrees. 21 min. North, crosses the Meridian: for when in upon the
Equinoctial-Line, he marches through and, and comes to our North Tropic, and
then is our Summer; and then he passes back through,, and, and comes to the
Equinox again, and then marches southward through,, and, to the Southern
Tropic, in which place he is farthest from us, and then is our Winter and the
Southern Spring; and then as he comes back through, and, he comes again to the
Equinoctial-Line: By which we see that they who live under this Line, have two
Summers and two Winters. See the Diagram.

Projection of the Sphere upon the Horizon of those that live under the
Equinoctial Line. I. Diagram.
Artick Circle Latitude 52.21 the lat. Allconbury North Tropic South Tropic
Antartick Circle


The outmost Circle is the Horizon. The Center is the Zenith and Place of abode
of those that live under the Line. The Line N.,, S. is their Meridian. And the
Line A B crossing it at Right-Angles, is the Equinoctial-Line; A is the East
side, and B the West side. And that Line divided by the 12 Signs, and crossing
the Meridian and Equinoctial at Oblique Angles, is the Ecliptic. And the broad
Space on both sides, full of Parallel-lines, is the Zodiac. The Line R Q, is
the North Tropic. And the Line T W, is the South Tropic. The two Poles lie
upon the Horizon, at N the North, and S the South Pole.



CHAP. II.
Treats of the Solar Influence; how by his apparent Motion, or the real
Motion of the Earth, our Seasons are constituted, viz. Day, Night, Spring,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter: Which is delineated to the Eye by the second
Diagram; which shows the Circles of the Sphere as they are projected upon the
Plane of our Horizon.

THESE Variations or Seasons are caused by the Motion of the Earth: which is
twofold, viz. Diurnal and Annual, (of which I shall treat more particularly in
the next Chapter): for as the Earth turns round upon her own Axis, she makes
our Days and Nights; and as she moves in the Obliquity of the Zodiac, she
constitutes our Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter.

And note, that in our following Discourse, where I write of the Sun's Motion
in the Zodiac, etc. understand that I mean his apparent Motion, and do express
my self according to the common way of speaking.

About the 10th day of March every Year, the Sun is in the beginning of, and
upon the Equinoctial Line, and then he rises at full East, and is South upon
the Meridian at AE, and sets full West at, at which time the Days and Nights
are of equal length throughout the World; and from thence he advances
through,,, in the Months March, April, May, to the 11th of June, whereby our
Days lengthen, and Nights decrease, as the Sun advances nearer and nearer
toward us; for when in, then he rises at C, culminates at the Meridian, and
sets at D; whereby he rises more toward the North, and sets also more North,
making a greater Circle above our Horizon.

The Projection of the Sphere upon the Plane of our Horizon. II. Diagram.
The outmost Circle is our Horizon. The Center Z is our Zenith, or place where
we be. is the North Pole. The Line N Z AE S is our Meridian. The Line AE is our
Equinoctial-Line. The Lines upon which you see the 12 Signs, viz., is the
Ecliptic Line. The Line R Q, is the North Tropic; and the Line T W, is the
South Tropic. S is the South part of the Horizon or Meridian; and N is the
North. And the Parallel dotted Lines is the Way of the Sun, when in each
respective Sign thereunto belonging.



And when that the Sun is advanced to his Northern Tropic s, then he is at his
nearest approach to us under the North Pole who live at Z: Now our Days are
longest, and Nights shortest, the Sun rises North-East at R, and is South at,
and sets North-West at Q; whereby he goes almost round us, and is but little
depressed under the North side of the Horizon, as you may see by the Diagram by
the Circle R Q: And while, the Sun transits these Signs,,,, he constitutes our
Spring by his near approach, who (under our great Creator) is the Life and
Cherisher of all Sublunary Bodies.

The Birds of the Air chant out their melodious Harmony as a Welcome to his
Approach, the Flowers of the Field open for his Entertainment; every thing
rejoices and is active in its Sphere; all things vegetate and are pregnant,
endeavoring toward a continuation of their Species, while the Sun advances to
our Northern Tropic, who enters June the 11th: And being then at his nearest
Approach, as I said before, he returns back through, and, in the Months June,
July, August, to the 12th of September, at which time he comes to the
Equinoctial again, (which aforesaid time is our Summer Quarter.) Now are our
Days and Nights of equal length, and the Sun rises and sets in the same place
as he did on the 10th of March. And from this Line he takes his Journey
Southward through, and, in the Months September, October, November, to the 11th
of December, thereby constituting our Autumnal Quarter, and the Southern
Spring. Now do their Vegetables spring and flourish, and ours tend to
Corruption; the Sun by his cherishing and enlivening Rays, revives their
drooping Spirits, who in his absence lay locked up in Frost and Snow; now do
their Days lengthen, and ours shorten, their Spring increasing while the Sun
comes to their Southern Tropic, making their longest and our shortest Day.
Now are we generally locked up with Frosts and Snow, and they contrarily are
scorched with the Sun's perpendicular Rays; and having arrived to his Southern
Tropic, which he always does about the 11th of December, he then recedes back
through, and, in the Months December, January, February, to the 10th of March;
and comes to the Sign again where he began.

By which we see that the Sun is (apparently) always in Motion, nor can he be
persuaded to stop or stay at all in his Journey, except by the Almighty Hand,
he being of himself an impartial Dispenser of his Heat or Influence.

For without him (the great Minister of Light, Motion, Heat and Life, under
God, especially of our Vortex) Darkness would usurp her old Dominions again, we
should have neither Day nor Night, Winter nor Summer; all things would be in
Confusion, the Sea would be Ice, and the Land Flint; Motion would cease, and
our Vortex would turn to a Chaos or confused Lump again, as they were before
the World was made.

This Solar Influence is so obvious, that none can deny it.

But methinks I hear some Critics make this Objection, viz. If (says he) the
Sun be the Ruler of the Seasons, and he coming to the Equinoctial Line always
at the same time of the Year, What makes our Spring to be sometimes late, and
sometimes early, coming or putting forward sooner by five or six Weeks some
Years, than at other some? What makes our Dary, Primrose, Violet, etc. to put
forth at Candlemass some Years, and at other some they are not to be found at
Lady Day?

What Is the Cause of Winter's Heat and Summer's Frosts? Can a Winter's Night be
warmer than a Summer's Day? Can the Sun in his lowest Degree and Absence be
more potent, than in his Presence and almost Verticity?

Sure if the Sun were the only Cause of the Seasons, they would be (like him)
more constant, our Heat and Cold would increase and decrease gradually,
according to his Accesses and Recesses to and from us.

I believe, says our Antagonist, that the Sun rules and constitutes the
Seasons, viz. Day and Night, Winter and Summer: But what makes our Winters and
Summers to be sometimes colder, and sometimes warmer? Why some Winters pass
away without Frosts almost, and some again are very severe and frosty? How
shall we believe in Astrology, when none of our Astrologers can foretell, or
truly demonstrate, or show a Reason for these Variations? Which of them
foretold the last cold Summer, or this warm Winter? Or which of them can show
me why they were so? Are they not all of them mistaken in the Weather of this
present Winter, which makes us think and say, (with Marcianus) Si vis divinare,
totum contrarium ad unguem dicito ejus quod Astrologi pollicentur; that is, if
we should say Rain, when the Astrologer writes fair and dry Weather, or Warm,
when he writes of Cold, we should guess right as soon as the Astrologer, who
does only banter his Reader, and pretended Art. Who can be such Fools as to
believe them? Or who can pretend to vindicate Astrology, which ought to be
credited no farther than it can be demonstrated? To which I agree, and believe
that to be no Art, or at least vain and frivolous, and not to be trusted, which
does not carry Reason and Demonstration along with it.

Therefore in our following Essays, I shall endeavor thereat, and desire to be
credited or believed, no further than I can give a rational Demonstration
thereof.

CHAP. III.
Demonstrateth the Copernican Hypothesis, and with it my Method, viz. how the
Planets are moved round the Sun in their respective Orbs in several spaces of
Time, whereby they become sometimes near to the Earth, and sometimes at a
greater distance from her, and sometimes making several Angles or Aspects to
the Earth, as shall be made appear by the third and fourth Diagrams.

IN the third Diagram you may see, that I, according to Copernicus, have put
the Sun in the Center of his Vortex, he being the Fountain of Light, and Heat,
and Prince of the Planets; who, like a great Monarch, having large Dominions,
makes use of Deputy-Princes and Magistrates to distribute his Majestic Rays
throughout his Dominions. Which Deputies I represent to be Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, the Earth, Venus and Mercury, with their several Satellites which respect
their several Orbs, as the Moon does our Earth.

The Motion of the Sun round his own Axis, is the Spring or first Mover of the
Planets, who are carried round him in their several Orbits, as you may see by
the third Diagram, which I shall demonstrate as follows.

You see the Sun is in the Center, and each Planet is put in his respective
Place and Orbit for the 10th day of June 1696, at Sunset, being marked with
their respective Characters. Now the Sun moving round his own Axis from West to
East, carries the Planets round him the same way as follows.

Mercury is the nearest, and is carried round the Sun in 88 days.

Venus is the next in order, and is carried round the Sun and Mercury's Orbit
in 225 Days.

The Earth is the next in order, (about whom moves the Moon in 27 days and odd
Hours) who together with the Moon is carried round the Sun, and the two
Inferiors in her Orbit in 365 days and 6 hours fere.

Mars is next, and is carried round the Sun in his Orbit in 682 days.

Jupiter is next, and is carried round the Sun in his Orbit in 12 Solar Years.

Saturn is the last in order, and is carried round the Sun and all the Planets
in his Orbit, in almost 30 Solar Years. Beyond whom is the large and
unaccountable Space, or Heavens of the fixed Stars.

And these aforesaid Planets are moved round the Sun by a twofold Motion, viz.
round their own Axis, and also round their respective Orbits, through the
Zodaical Signs about the Sun.

Like as a Bowl is trundled to a certain Mark or Jack, it moves round its Axis,
and also from the place of your Station where you delivered it; for by its
often turning round its Axis, it at last arrives at or near the aforesaid Jack,
only with this difference, that as the Bowl moves in a straight Line, the
Planets are moved circularly in their Orbits about the Sun. But I shall explain
their Motions more plain by the Motion of the Earth, as follows. But before I
begin, a word or two to explain some Requisits belonging to the third Diagram.
1. Understand that the Earth is placed on the East side of the Sun, who appears
to set in the West, to the Inhabitants who live at the Point B. 2. The Point (
Saturn being therein) is the East side of the Diagram. 3. The Line
perpendicular from down to B, is the Meridian, or South, and its opposite the
North Point. 4. The Center of the Earth is its Axis, about which it moves, and
the outward Circle of the Earth A, B, C, D, is that Line or Surface of the
Earth, which lies parallel under the Equinoctial Line, and represents the
Equator. 5. Those Lines drawn through the twelve equal Divisions of the Lunar
Orbit, are the Right Ascensions of the twelve Zodiacal Signs.

Now suppose that you lived at the Point B upon the Equator, then would the Sun
seem to set to you in the West, and Saturn presently after appear to rise near
the East; for the Earth turning or trundling round its Orbit and Axis from West
to East, the Zodiacal Signs do each severally appear to rise, culminate and
set, as also the fixed Stars, the Sun and Planets. Now the Earth turning from B
to C, which it performs in six hours, from the aforesaid time of Sunset, then
would it be Midnight, the Earth's Body interposing between the Sun and you at
C; and in six hours more you would, by the Earth's Motion, be carried to D,
then would the Sun appear to rise; and in six hours more you would be moved to
A, and then would the Sun be upon your Meridian, viz. just over your Heads,
making thereby Noon with you; and in six hours more, (making in all 24 hours
the length of the Day and Night) you would be brought to the same Place again,
and the Sun setting as before; and by that time that the Earth had moved round
her Axis 365 times, thereby constituting as many Days, she would in the said
space of time be carried round the Sun in her Orbit, through the Obliquity of
the Ecliptic, and the 12 Zodiacal Signs thereby constituting our Year, as was
before treated on in the last Chapter.

And as the Earth is carried round the Sun, from East to West, both in respect
of her Axis as well as Orbit, so likewise are rest of the Planets, though with
different Spaces of Time, both in respect of their Diurnal as well as their
Annual Revolutions, who (as the Earth) are carried round in the Obliquity of
the Ecliptic, through the 12 Zodiacal Signs in their several Orbits; whereby
they appear to us as the Sun does, viz. sometimes in Summer, and sometimes in
Winter Signs; so that we have a Saturnine Year, a Jovial Year, a Martial Year
as well as a Solar Year, and also a Lunar Year. Venus and Mercury being within
the Perimeter of the Earth's Orb, seem to us to be the Sun's particular
Attendants or Lacquies, Venus never being above 48 Degrees, and Mercury never
above 27 Degrees from him, either before or after him. However they have their
several Revolutions or Years in respect of themselves.

Authors pretend to tell us their Diurnal Motions about their own Axis: Among
whom Rheita affirms, that Mercury's Day or Motion about himself is about six
hours; that the Motion of Venus about her Axis is 14 hours: Mars his Day or
Motion about his Axis is in 45 hours: The Diurnal Motion of Jupiter is
performed in 11 of our Days and 20 Hours.

The Diurnal Motion of Saturn is performed in 29 of our Days and ten Hours: But
these are uncertain, and not pertinent to our Purpose, therefore I shall not
impose the belief thereof upon you; but for their Annual Revolutions we are
certain of, and find it very material to our Purpose, and necessary to be known.

CHAP. IV.
A brief Discourse of the five old Planetary Aspects.

BY reason of the different Motion of the Planets in their several Orbs, they
become sometimes in Conjunction, and sometimes in Opposition; and sometimes
beholding one another with different Angles and Faces, both in respect of the
Earth and themselves: Which Angles or Radiations are by Astrologers called
Aspects, and were taken notice of by the Ancients to be of singular Efficacy
and Power in the Mutations of the Air. The Reasons why they embraced only these
Positions, are too long and tedious for me to treat of here; but I shall
explain them, and say something thereof, and in some other Tract I shall
enlarge further thereupon: In the mean time if you be impatient, I refer you to
that learned and incomparable Piece wrote by Sir Christopher Heydon.

And for the Explanation of the aforesaid Aspects, etc. I have drawn the fourth
Diagram, which is drawn for the same Time that the third Diagram is drawn for,
viz. the 11th day of June 1696, at Sunset, and is only to show the Planetary
Aspects that are then in the Heavens, and is the same as the Lunar Orbit in the
third Diagram, and is drawn larger on purpose to demonstrate the Aspects.

Which are five in number, viz. Conjunction, Opposition, Sextile, Quartile, and
Trine.

A Conjunction is, when two Planets are in one Sign and Degree, or within seven
or eight Degrees of one another in distance; for the Planets admit of their
Rays, and are said to be in Conjunction or Aspect, though not bodily conjoined,
and that Aspect is called a Platick Aspect; but when they are in perfect Aspect
to a Degree and Minute, then that is called a Partile Aspect. And note, that
the nearer they are, the Aspect is the stronger and of more force.

A Conjunction, as I said before, is when two Planets are both in one Sign and
Degree, whereby the Earth and they come into a Diametrical Line; and when the
two Planets are partilely joined, both in respect of Longitude and Latitude,
then is the highest or Superior eclipsed by the lowest or Inferior: Also the
two Planets do then rise South, and set both at the same time; and this Aspect
or is showed by Jupiter and Mars in the fourth Diagram, where you may see how
they send their mixed and united Rays to the Earth.

They may also be seen in the Firmament (if the Air be clear) at the same time
the Diagrams are drawn for, viz. June the 11th, after Sunset, to be near the
West, within a Span's breadth of one another; a beautiful Sight to behold.

An Opposition is, when two Planets are 180 Degrees, or half the Zodiac in
distance, the Earth being in a Diametrical Line between them. And to them who
live under the Equinoctial Line, always when one rises the other sets, as is
evident by Saturn and Mercury in the fourth Diagram: Mercury being at his
farthest Elongation almost from the Sun, may at the aforesaid time be seen to
set North-West after him, and Saturn at the same time to rise South-East in
opposition to him.

A Quartile Aspect is, when two Planets are elongated 90 Degrees, or a fourth
part of the Zodiacal Circle, making thereby a Right Angle at the Earth: This
Aspect is demonstrated by the Sun and Moon, she being in her last Quarter; view
them in the fourth Diagram. And note, that to them who live under the Line,
where the Meridian is their Zenith; always when one Planet is upon the Horizon,
either rising or setting, then the Planet in Quartile to him is in the Zenith
or Nadir, viz. upon the Meridian. Which Aspect is of great force, for diverse
Reasons which shall hereafter be made appear, but for brevity must be omitted
here; the Influence of a Planet upon the Horizon or Meridian, is vulgarly known
even to the Rustic, who when he meets with a misling or hazy Air in the
Morning, he remains in doubt until the Sun has mounted the Meridian, and then
he tells you, that the Day will either clear up and be fair, or else prove
rainy downright; the Reason (though unknown to him) is this, that the Sun then
coming to his Virtical strength, has more Power to dissolve the Vapors or
Clouds, if not beheld by some other Planet which then may rise above the
Horizon: As suppose or, and then that Planet getting above as aforesaid,
causes it to rain downright, which before was only misly.

A Sextile Aspect is, when two Planets are a sixth part of the Zodiac, or 60
Degrees elongated, making thereby an Equilateral Triangle at the Earth, which
is delineated by the Moon and Saturn in the fourth Diagrams.

A Trine Aspect is the distance of two Planets, a third part of the Zodiac,
and is an Angle of 120 Degrees, making an Equilateral Triangle in the Heavens,
and is delineated by Saturn in Trine to Jupiter and Mars, who send their Rays
to the Seven Stars, as you may see by the aforesaid Diagram.

These two last Aspects are not of such force in the Mutation of the Air as the
other, which shall be made appear in my next, together with the Reason of their
Influence.

If you have a mind to view these Distances or Aspects in the Heavens, you may
see them at the aforesaid Time, viz. near an Hour after Sunset, when you may
see Saturn rising South-East in Opposition to Mercury, setting North-West; and
beholding Jupiter and Mars with a Benevolent Trine, they being near the West:
and if you rise the next Morning before the Sun rises, you may see the Moon in
Sextile of Saturn, and in Quartile to the Rising Sun. And so much shall suffice
at present concerning the Aspects.

CHAP. V.
Treats of the Nature of the Planets.

THE Natures of the Planets were first found out by the diligent Observation
and Experience of the Ancients; amongst whom Ptolomy was the chief, who left us
their Natures and Affections, and wrote the whole Body of Astrology, and left
it to Postority, he being called the Prince of Astrologers. It Is pity his
Foundation was laid upon the Sands, for if he had built it upon the Philolaian
or Copernican Hypothesis, which was invented by Philolaus before Ptolomy's
Time, he would by his Observations and Industry have done Wonders, and
Astrology by this time might have been much approved. But Learning as well as
other things is subject to Changes and Vicissitudes, according as it does
please God to reveal himself to Man; for tho some Men in any Age be never so
wise, and do leave their Aphorisms and Arcana's to Posterity, yet by several
Accidents they may be lost, for either the Genius of that Age may not be fit or
capable to receive them; or they may be lost by Fires, or the Subversion and
Alteration of Governments, etc.

Is it not great pity that the Works of that most wise Man Solomon should be
lost, who wrote of all things under the Sun, from the Cedar of Lebanon to the
Hysop that grows upon the Wall? Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 7. But to our purpose.

Ptolomy, and all Astrologers after him, (Dr. Goad excepted) define the Nature
of the Planets as follows.

Saturn cold and dry; Jupiter hot and moist; Mars hot, dry, and burning; the
Sun hot and dry, more temperate than Mars; Venus cold and moist; Mercury cold
and dry; the Moon cold and moist. This is their brief Account of the Natures of
them.

They tell you also why they retain those Natures, too tedious here to insert,
because I think it not material, being their Opinion is grounded upon a false
Supposition.

Dr. Goad, a late Author, denies the Account, and makes Jupiter to be a cold
Planet, yea colder than Saturn.

How shall we agree these Opinions? Truly I think they are both mistaken, being
both upon a wrong and false Foundation; for Dr. Goad treads in Ptolomy's steps
in all things, except in this, viz. about the Nature of the Planets.

Now I shall lay down my Judgment of their Natures, which I presume will hold
the Test of Experience, which is the only Refiner of Truth.

Saturn I believe to be (as well as the rest) an Opake Body, and (as says
Ptolomy) of a cold and dry Nature, especially by Accident, for we are always
sensible of his chill Influence, when he is in Perigaeon, or in Heliocentrick
with the Earth: and for Demonstration view the fifth Diagram, where you will see
Saturn in Perigaeon, or in conjunction with the Earth, which was the principal
Cause of the last cold Summer. I could bring several Examples and Reasons to
prove my Assertion; two or three Instances we have had in our late cold
Summers, which were always cold when Saturn was in Perigaeon.

Mars all agree to be hot, dry, and burning, yea, hotter than the Sun himself:
Which seems a Contradiction, that a reflected Light should be hotter than the
Fountain from whence it proceeds. To which I answer, that it may be by
Accident: As for Instance. The reflex burning Glass, which receiving the Sun's
Rays, and contracting and uniting them, they become hotter than the Sun's Rays;
and being darted upon any combustible Matter, it sets it on fire. And such is
the Nature of Mars, who when in Perigaeon, or near the Earth, does make us
sensible of his Heat. View the sixth Diagram, where Mars is in conjunction with
the Earth, which at the same time caused a very warm Season.

And now I come to Jupiter, concerning whom there has been much Controversy:
Ptolomy making him warm, and Dr. Goad contrarily making him a cold Planet, and
gives very probable Arguments to prove his Assertions.

How shall I reconcile these two Opinions, for they both plead Reason and
Experience for their so doing?

Ptolomy thinks him warm, because when simply in opposition with the Sun, he
produces a warm Season, and when joined with Mars, he often produces great
Heat and Thunder.

And Dr. Goad makes him a cold Planet, because that when joined with Saturn,
he augments Cold; yea and in Winter, when joined with Mars, he has a hand in
many hard Frosts, he being the Parent of the North Wind, and Serenity, both
great Friends to a cold Constitution; with many more Reasons of the like Nature.

Now my Opinion of Jupiter is, that he is a Planet composed of Nitrous
Particles, which like Gunpowder or Nitre, when it meets with Cold, it actuates
it: And when it meets with Fire or Heat, it actuates that, and breaks forth
into Combustions.

Jupiter being a Planet full of Nitre, does (as the Cartesians say) six the
Particles of the Atmosphere, thereby stopping or hindering Motion, and then
Cold follows of course, which is an Essential Quality, and was in being
before the World was created; for in the beginning this Vortex was a Chaos or
confused Lump, the Air, Earth, and Water, being congealed or mixed together.

But when God created the Sun, Moon, and Planets, by putting them in Motion,
this Motion was the Original of Heat, as may be proved by the violent Motion of
any thing, as suppose a Mill, which will cause Heat to that Degree, that she
will fire if not prevented.

Now when this Motion is hindered by the Nitrous Particles of Jupiter, then Cold
the prime Quality takes place. As is proved by mixing of Salt or Nitre with
Snow, it will freeze and cause Ice by the Fireside. But if this Nitre or
Gunpowder be joined with hot and sulphurous Planets, then it causes
Combustions in the Atmosphere, as Heat with Thunder and Coruscations, etc.

So that I define Jupiter to be of a Nitro-sulphurious Nature, like to
Gunpowder, and is either Hot or Cold by Accident, but rather a favourer of Cold
if simply considered: Which aforesaid Definition I shall prove by Examples.

The Nature of the Sun needs no Definition, it being vulgarly known to every
Plow-boy, all the World being sensible of his Warmth, nothing being hid from
the Heat thereof.

But as for the Natures of the Inferiors, viz. Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, I
shall at present rest with the Opinion of the Ancients, for brevity-sake, they
not having so great Influence in the general Constitution of the Seasons: But
it may be expected in some succeeding Book, where I treat of the daily
Vicissitudes of the Air, and shall say no more here, having cleared the great
Point between Ptolomy and Dr. Goad.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter I shall explain my Method; and as I have in the foregoing
Chapters explained the most material Circles, etc. of the Sphere; and also how,
by the Motion of the Sun or Earth, our Seasons are constituted, viz. Day,
Night, Winter and Summer; together with the Natures and Aspects of the Planets:

So now in this, and the following Chapter, I shall demonstrate why some
Winters are warmer than others, and some Summers are colder than other-some;
and the reason why our Spring sometimes is late, and at other times early,
coming sooner by five or six Weeks some Years than other.

First, Know that the general Constitutions of the Seasons are caused by the
Diurnal and Annual Motion of the Earth, as before treated of.

But the Reason of their Variations must be examined by the Annual and
Revolutional Motion of the rest of the Planets, especially the Superiors, the
Inferiors having most to do in the daily Mutations of the Air.

Now the Motion of the Planets is to be considered in a threefold manner.

1. According to their Revolution in respect of the Ecliptic, whereby they
sometimes, as the Sun, (though with some difference of Latitude) are in Estival
Signs, and sometimes in Winter Signs.

2. They are to be considered according to their Motion in this Copernican
Projection, whereby they are sometimes near to the Earth, and sometimes at
remoter distance, having great Influence at some times, and at other times in
abject Places, and almost void of Influence in respect of us.

3. They are to be considered as to their Aphelions and Perihelions, they
moving in Eliptick Circles, as also their Diurnal Revolutions; passing by the
Motion of their Satellites, which as yet have no known Influence.

4. Their Natures are chiefly to be noted, both Simple and Complicated: These
are the chief relating to the several Constitutions of the Seasons.

But in the Diurnal and Horary Vicissitudes, we consider the Motion of Venus
and Mercury, and chiefly the Lunar Motion, as also their Aspects and Transits:
And the Diurnal Motion of the Earth, whereby the Sun, Moon, and Stars, become
sometimes upon the Meridian or Zenith, and sometimes under the Earth or Nadir,
and sometimes upon the Horizon, either rising or setting. And note, that those
Planets are of greatest Force which are nearest to us, both in respect of their
Perigaeons, as well as being Vertical, and having North Declination and
Latitude; as also that Planet which is above the Horizon: and the more vertical
he is, the stronger he is; which also is augmented or diminished, according as
he is beheld by the Sun, or the rest of the Planets. These and many more
Phenomena's are to be considered, and well poised in Judgment, of which I shall
treat in some following Tracts: This Tract only treats of the general Nature
and Constitution of the Seasons. And I shall farther explain the Copernican
Projection, or Diagrams, which ought well to be understood by every one that
would be a Proficient in the Knowledge of the Weather.

Which Diagrams are a new Projection, and never before made public: They
showing the true Motions of the Earth, and other Planets about the Sun; and
represent to you the true Geocentrick Places of the Planets, as well as
Aspects; but in the Heliocentrick Places and Aspects of the Planets, they vary
a little from Truth, because of their apparent Eliptical Motions.

And note, that what I say concerning the Demonstration of the third Diagram,
understand the same of the rest.

In the said Diagram the Sun is the Center, the other Planets move about him in
their several Orbits, as I have demonstrated in the third Chapter of this Book.

In this Diagram you may see, that the Lunar Orbit is divided into 12 equal
Parts, being the Right Ascensions of the 12 Zodiacal Signs, viz.,,,,,,,,,,, to
those who live under the Zodiac.

Now when a Planet is in the Point, then I say that Planet (...) in
Heliocentrick Conjunction with the Earth; and in Perigaei^, or at his nearest
approach to the Earth, when in the foresaid Position. But note, that I call a
Planet in Perigaeon, when that he is elongated, from the Point, as far on
either side as the two next Signs, viz. and, that is 30 Degrees on each side.

And a Planet posited within a few Degrees of the Lines or on either side, then
I say that Planet is in with the Sun.

And a Planet upon or near the Lines or, then is that Planet in Square to the
Sun.

And when upon the Lines or, then in Sextile of the Sun.

And when in or near the Line A, then he is in with the Sun.

But when in the Space between the Points and, or and, then, I say, that Planet
is in an Abject place, or place void of Influence, or at least having very weak
Influence.

And note, when two Planets are in both in Abject places, as suppose in 15
Degrees of, in Quartile of in 15 Degrees. of, then is that Aspect of much less
Force than if they were in Aspect, in other places posited nearer the Earth;
which Aphorism ought well to be heeded.

And note farther, that what I have here said, relates chiefly to the
Superiors, the Phenomena of the Inferiors being something different to them;
for the Demonstration whereof I shall say nothing until my next appears.

And what I have said of this Diagram, I would have you understand the same of
the 5th and 6th Diagrams, and in all others of the same Projection.

Mars is called by me the Sun's Deputy, who if near or at a fit distance, he
becomes hotter than the Sun himself, who by reflecting the united Rays of the
Sun upon us, like a Burning-glass does make them the more strong and forcible
to us; but if he be in an Abject place, then he has little or no Force; for
place a Burning-glass in an Abject place, or so far off that the reflected Rays
do not reach the Matter or Object to be calcined, it cannot fire it.

Saturn is famed on the other hand for Cold, who being composed of Nitrous
Particles, does, when near the Earth, (and not opposed or hindered by his Rays)
by his Nitrous Particles, stop or slacken the Motion of the Atmosphere, and
thereby (as I have said before) cause Cold.

But Jupiter simply considered, viz. when powerful or near the Earth in
Perigaeon, and in Estival Signs, causes Serenity, and wholesome North Winds in
Winter, seasonable Frosts; and in Summer a serene, sweet, temperate, and
prolifick Air, being rather a favourer of Cold than Heat.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chapter I shall demonstrate my former Method by Examples, which shall
be done by the cold Summer in the Year 1695, and the succeeding warm January
and February.

And first, for the reason of the cold Summer 1695, view the fifth Diagram,
which is drawn for the Sun's Ingress into the Tropical Sign, viz. June the 11th
at Sunset; in which Diagram you see that Saturn is in Perigaeon, or near the
Earth, and Mars in an abject Place, as also, which is the Cause of our cold
Summer; for Saturn's nearness fills our Atmosphere with Nitre; and Mars not
being able to oppose his chill Influence, we therefore had a very cold Summer,
notwithstanding the Sun was then in his greatest Northern Vertical Strength.

And in the next place, let us see the Reason for our warm and favorable
Winter, especially in January and February following the said cold Summer,
which two Months are as much famed for Cold, as June and July are for Heat.

In the sixth Diagram, which is drawn for the Sun's entrance into, viz. the 8th
of February at Sunset, wherein we find the cold Planet Saturn in an abject
place, being thereby far remote from the Earth; and Mars and Jupiter are in
Perigaeon, and also in an Estival Sign, viz. on this side the Equator, and Mars
in a Southern and Winter Sign: for depressed Mars in this place becomes our
Deputy- Sun, who, like a Burning-Glass, warms our Atmosphere by reflecting back
the Sun's Rays upon us, thereby warming our Air very much; whose Heat is
augmented by the Proximity of Jupiter, they both being in Opposition of the Sun.

In Places about ten degrees North and South Declination, viz. on each side the
Equinoctial, yea all that part of the Torrid Zone, they felt Mars his Influence
with a Vengeance; for Mars being in of the Sun, and in Conjunction with Jupiter
a Nitrosulphurious Planet, would, like Gunpowder, cause violent Combustions in
the Atmosphere, great and violent Thunders and Lightnings, burning up the very
Vegetables with their great Heat.

But we in the more Northern Climates, by reason of the Sun's Absence and great
Depression, only enjoyed a more warm Season than usual at the Season; nay it
was often and many a day in January and February, warmer than several days in
June and July preceding.

We had Thunder and Lightning even at Christmas this Year in our Climate,
caused by the aforesaid Position.

But before I conclude this Chapter, I shall say something concerning the
unparalleled and never to be forgotten Frost, which happened in the Year 1683,
which most Astrologers judged to be a Badg of the Effects of the grand of
Saturn and Jupiter trebly repeated the Winter and Spring preceding; but tho
that was the Cause, as I believe it was, why had we not the Cold the Winter
before, when they were partilely conjoined? I doubt not but it will puzzle most
of our Modern Astrologers to show the Reason.

But by our Copernican Method it is plain, why the Cold did not commence the
Year before; for tho and were both in Perigaeon, which by our Method is a
strong Augment of cold and severe Frost, yet we had then Mars our Deputy- Sun
in square to the Sun, who being upon the Meridian or Zenith, while Saturn and
Jupiter were upon the Horizon, who has great Force and Power by that Position,
and did by his great Power overcome the chill Influence of and, and caused a
temperate Season.

But after that Mars had got into an abject place, which was the succeeding
Winter; and Saturn and still continuing near together, and becoming in
Perigaeon again the next Winter, who then played their parts to purpose; for
Mars was also in a Winter Sign, as well as in an abject place, who being
thereby weakened, and not able to overpower the Influence of and, who then play
their parts to purpose, then began the time for Severity.

They that will or can may draw the respective Diagrams for the said Winters,
wherein they may find Satisfaction. And so I shall conclude this Chapter, and
with it the first Part.

June the 11th 1696. at Sunset. Diagram III.
This Diagram I call a Copernican Projection, upon the Plane of the
Equinoctial. In which the Sun is the Center, about whom move all the Planets in
their respective Orbs; as also the Earth, about whom moves the Moon as her
Center. But for the Explanation thereof, see the 3d Chapter of the first Part;
and also the 6th Chapter.



Diagram IV.
This Diagram is drawn for the sake of demonstrating the Aspects of the
Planets, and is only a Projection of the Lunar Circle of the 3d Diagram, in a
larger Figure, whereby the planetary Aspects are more plain to the Eye, they
being the same in the Lunar Orb in the 3d Diagram, but not so easy to be
understood.



June the 11th 1695. at Sunset. Diagram V.


February the 8th 1696, at Sunset. Diagram VI.


The Second Part.
Being a brief Astrological Judgment, or Appendix, treating of this ensuing
Spring, and Summer's Effects, both in the Macrocosm as well as Microcosm:
wherein there are many Causes to fear that Pestilence and Famine will be added
to the Plague of the devouring Sword in our European Territories.

CHAP. I.
I Shall begin with the Month of March, wherein about the 10th day the Sun
enters into the Vernal and Equinoctial Sign Aries, at which time I consider the
Position and Affection of the Planets according to our former Method.

At which time Saturn is in great Southern Declination, viz. in a Winter Sign,
but yet the Earth begins to apply to him, he being separating from a
Geocentrick of the Sun, and applies to a of him: Mars separates from Jupiter
by Retrogradation, and is gotten out of his Perigaeon, and left Jupiter
therein; Mars is also in Opposition with Venus, which is a general Aphorism
amongst all Astrologers, viz. when and are conjoined by Body or Aspect, and
especially in, then they produce at this season Rain or Snow to excess, it
being called an Apertio Portarum, or an opening of the Floodgates of Heaven:
But at this Season, for the abovesaid Reasons, we shall have rather Frosts and
Snow with Hail; for Jupiter in Perigaeon, and so far elongated from Mars, who
is out of his Perigaeon in with, will undoubtedly cause much Frosts and Snow,
to the Detriment of our too forward Spring and early Vegetables, as Apricocks,
etc.

And these frosty Mornings are like to continue throughout the Month, because
about the end is in with, and becomes in to the Sun, a Position wherein he is
very powerful; yet in with the Sun will mitigate a little, and give us a
glimpse of his warm Influence about the two or three last days of this Month,
and beginning of April, and may cause a Remission of Cold, especially in the
Afternoons, but the Cold prevails afterward again.

And now being come to April, in the beginning whereof, as I said before, there
is an, and, which notwithstanding the aforesaid, will cause a glum cold Season
for the most part of the Month, because and are in more powerful Positions than
our Deputy Sun; for is every Morning at Sunrise upon the Meridian, by which
Position he becomes vertical to them who live on the South Side of the Equator;
therefore this Position will certainly produce us cold Mornings and frosty most
part of April, very prejudicial to our too forward Spring. Mercury is at his
greatest Elongation from the Sun, and may be seen to rise before him about the
tenth day for several Mornings.

May comes next in order, in which Month on the 6th day the Moon suffers a
total Eclipse, and happens just at Midnight upon the Meridian, and in their
Zenith who live upon the Equator in the same Longitude with us.

At which time is in with, and is separated from a of the Sun. Mars is gotten
in with, and is upon the Meridian every Evening about Sunset, to them who live
under the Equinox, in which Position (he being upon their Zenith) he has great
force: also applies to a of, and also to a of Sol. I fear by this Eclipse, and
other Positions attending it, that we shall have but little Fruit; it also
threatens a Rot of Sheep, and a sickly Season, for the Atmosphere is full of
Pestilential Vapors: A violent and active Season both in the Macroeosm as well
as Microcosm.

The Weather at the beginning of the Month will be wet, and I doubt holds
longer than it is welcome: About the middle we shall have great Heat by sits,
and tempestuous high Winds. This or the next Month should produce plenty of
Earthquakes, and violent Eruptions of the burning Mountains, with diverse
strange Phenomena's in the Heavens, sure no Comet: There will be very violent
Thunders and harmful Lightning in this and the next Month, firing many Houses
in more Southern Countries, if not here in England.

And now I come to treat of the Tropical Month of June, about the 11th day
whereof the Sun enters into our Northern Tropic, for which time I have drawn
the Copernican Projection, viz. the third Figure or Diagram, which is a violent
Position, which I shall explain as follows.

Saturn in the said Diagram is in Perigaeon, and in with, both being in
Tropical Signs.

Jupiter and Mars are in near the end of, an Equinoctial Position, and will be
seen South-west in the eighth House (the House of Death) within a Span's
breadth of one another: A beautiful Sight to behold, but (as says the Learned
Dr. Goad) they will be like the Cannon in the Camp, tho beautiful, yet
terrible. All the rest of the Planets are in Cardinal Signs, the Moon being at
the said time in of and; these are active and violent Positions, and will as
certainly be attended with as violent Effects.

The Weather will be variable, Saturn's nearness to the Earth makes a cold Air;
but in, an Estival Sign, and near a of, will cause very hot Weather by fits,
violent Thunders and harmful Lightnings, and great Hail caused by the Chemistry
of the Heavens; for Saturn fills the Atmosphere with Nitre, and the nitrous and
sulphurious Particles being fired by the, will undoubtedly cause violent
Combustions, etc.

By whose poisonous and sulphurious Fumes our Air will be infected, producing
thereby contagious and infectious Diseases, with prejudicial and unkind Blasts
and Mildews, damnifying the Corn; this Month being the principal Season for the
flowring and blossoming of all manner of European Corn, as Wheat, Barley,
Beans, Rye, etc. It being a certain and true Maxim in Philosophy, that all
manner of Vegetables are most tender and subject to be hurt when in blossom or
flowring; which may be compared to teeming Animals, who are in more danger of
Abortion presently after Conception, than when long gone with young.

So that this falling at the time of the blossoming and flowring of our Corn,
will by its poisonous Quality much damnify it by Mildews and Blites; and I fear
that this will be generally throughout Europe, and especially in the more
Southern Countries, and particularly in France. As far as I can see, it
threatens Scarcity and Famine, of which I shall treat more particularly in the
next Chapter.

And shall now treat of the Nature of July, about the middle whereof Saturn is
in with the Earth, or in Perigaeon, and Jupiter and Mars are in abject places;
this Position denotes another cold July, and slow and dull Hay-weather, cold,
cloudy and moist Season, with South Wind often, but more often the North East:
our Harvest ripens slowly. But I shall say the less of this and the next Month,
because I design in my next Book to treat more particularly thereof, they being
our Harvest Months.

August will be cold and dull Weather for the Reasons aforesaid, with much
South-Winds, and cloudy, and moist too, (I fear) especially the latter half
thereof: But for the Particulars I beg your Patience until my next appears;
certainly it will be a sickly Season, and so shall conclude this Chapter. But I
shall fore-stall my next Book so much, as to let you know, that we shall
certainly have a very early and sharp Winter, fore-warned, fore-arm'd.

CHAP. II.
I Having in the last Chapter hinted of a turbulent and violent Summer, both in
the Macrocosm as well as Microcosm, wherein I fear a general Sickness and
blasting Season; as also that the Sword will be more mortal and deadly this
Summer than it has been since the War began; therefore I shall say something
thereof in this Chapter more particularly, and consider what Countries will be
most passive, and how it will terminate.

We are still under the malevolent Effects of the grand, and of the dire
Effects those Comets presaged, which appeared in the Years 1680, and 1682,
which was the Prodromus of these European Wars.

And in the Years 1692, and 1693, the said Superiors and were in Opposition,
which produced several Earthquakes: These Earthquakes by their
Nitro-sulphurious and mineral Vapors, and Arsenitical and Mercurial Fumes have
poisoned our Air, and rendered our Vegetables, etc. corruptive and unwholesome;
for the Air was first infected by those aforesaid Fumes and Vapors, which
overpowered and poisoned the true saline and nitrous Particles conducing to
Vegetation and Health; so that our Vegetables did not come to their Maturity:
for wanting that saline Vigor which should conduce to their Perfection, they
remained crude and not fit for Aliment; so that we feeding on these Vegetables,
and Animals, whose Flesh (not being fed with healthful Aliment) wanting its
true Balsamic Virtue and Nourishment; and also by breathing and sucking in the
aforesaid poisonous Vapors, we do become unhealthy, and our Bodies for want of
the aforesaid saline Vigor, and true Balsamic Temper, do become infectious and
corruptive.

Also it is a general Rule amongst Physicians and Philosophers; that when we
have our Seasons irregular and out of order, viz. Winterly Summers, and
Summerly Winters, and when instead of a wholesome North Wind, we have an
unwholesome South Wind most part of the Winter, then do they foresee a Sickness
generally to ensue.

Astrologically we have had Saturn annoying us by his Presence all last Summer,
and Mars this Winter, and just at the Solar Ingress into our Northern Tropic,
and are in in, a Sign and Position, by Observation and Experience noted for
Sickness.

Where was Saturn when the last devouring Plague raged in London? Was he not in
Capricorn, the same place wherein he now is? which Distemper was agitated and
stirred up by the.

To be brief; I have too many Reasons, both Astrological and Philosophical, to
fear a blasting and pestilential Season, which will (if not prevented by the
Almighty) produce a Pestilence and Scarcity in most of our European Countries,
who are already under one of God's Scourges, viz. the devouring Sword.

But in the day of God's Anger, when that he resolves to pour forth his
Vengeance, and join to the Sword Pestilence and Famine, who can stand before
him? He has been pleased, like a kind Father, to correct us at first gently,
to see and try if we would repent and amend our Ways; but when he finds that
will not do, he then corrects us with more Severity. I pray God I be not a true
Prophet, but that we may, with the Ninevites, avert his Judgments which hover
over our Heads, with true Repentance and Prayer.

And now, tho contrary to my intended Method, I shall consider what Countries
will be most passive this next Summer.

Jupiter is the Planet Passive, who is afflicted by in: and Saturn strong in,
being the Significator of the Turks, shows their Strength; being afflicted,
shows the Weakness of the Christians, viz. of the Emperor and K. Lewis; for
Jupiter in, conjoined to, is the Significator of the French Government.

Mars is our England's Defender, viz. the Heroic and unparalled in Valor,
K. William, who afflicts Jupiter in the very Bowels of France: for France is
generally known to be under the Sign Virgo; who, like a dying Cock, is resolved
to strike the sparring Blow if possible; and in order to it, musters up all her
Force and Strength; but missing her Aim, she falls flat down and expires.

Certainly France is driven to her last Shifts, when that she has no other way
to rid her self of her Mortal Enemy, than to invent and contrive so horrid and
devilish a Design, contrary to the Law of God, Nature, or War, viz. the
Assassination of his Majesty K. William; certainly every honest Man cannot but
hate the thing. Surely it is enough to make the Jacobites themselves, which have
any spark of Honesty in them, to hate and abhor the Contrivers of so black and
detestable Practices, and come over to K. William. But be it as it will, his
Sword will decide the Controversy, and make him more Friends this Summer than
ever; who will be forced to sneak to him for shelter, for he is born to be a
Shield to the Reformed Religion.

What can any Protestant Jacobites propose to themselves, or expect to gain by
a French Power, but Popery and Slavery, if they should have attained their
Ends? but before that could have been effected, the Nation must have been
ruined by a Civil War. For let me reason with them thus; Suppose they had made
an Insurrection and Invasion, and that Hellish Project of theirs, and the
French King's, had taken effect, viz. the Assassination of our King, (which God
out of his Mercy has, and I hope will prevent) I say, suppose they had brought
in a French Army, yet we see that the Confederates had Eyes over them, and in
kindness to us and our King, was resolved to land an Army to assist us; the
Duke of Wirtemberg having twenty thousand Men ready to land, and assist our
King, or Us, if he had been so unfortunate as to have lost his Life by those
barbarous and wicked Men: I say, we should not have been left to be devoured by
the French; but before the Disorders had been settled, and that we could have
crowned the next Successor, the Nation might have been ruined; no body
considering the Miseries of a Civil War, but those that groan under it: Have we
already forgot the Civil War in Oliver's Days?

We have now a King who ventures his All to make us happy, who stands himself
between Danger and Us, who crosses the Seas to defend our Lives, Liberties and
Religion: And yet we are so ungrateful to him, and unkind to our selves, as not
to assist him to our Powers. Had we a King who minded nothing but Luxury and
Ease, and cared not what became of his Subjects, we might well grumble; or had
we a King, who like the Stork in the Fable, devoured us and our Liberties, we
might then justly complain, and Self-preservation would be a great Temptation
to make us rebel: But contrarily we have an Hero, who undergoes all Perils to
make us easy and happy. Therefore be so kind to your selves and Native Country,
as to stand by and defend your King against his Enemies; and instead of
bringing in the Sword amongst us, let us unanimously join and carry it into the
Bowels of France: I say, let us share in the Honor thereof, for, if I ben't
mistaken, she will be afflicted with War, Pestilence and Famine, this Year 1696.

Scarcity and Sickness will be our Visitants in England, I hope no Civil War;
but if it be, it will be to the Cost of the Jacobites, let them begin as soon
as they will.

King William is born to bring down the Power of the French King; and I believe
this Campagn will end the Controversy, and we shall not be long e're we enjoy
the long-wish'd for Honorable Peace.

But yet I fear the Emperor loses Ground with the Turks. Many will be the
Calamities which will afflict Europe this Year, which undergoes several
Catastrophes, let Time demonstrate: Howsoever I am certain the French War is
almost at an End, and the fatal Blow will be struck this Summer; and so shall
end this Chapter.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter I shall consider of the Causes, Symptoms, and Cure of this
Sickness or Pestilence, so often hinted at in the foregoing Chapters; which if
it should happen in England, (which God divert) our Physicians, especially the
Astrologians, may prepare Antidotes and preventative Remedies, as being the
fittest Men to cure, as well as prevent all Distempers, especially those which
have their dependence upon the Season and Stars, who by their Nitro-sulphurious
and poisonous Rays, infect our Air, whereby our Bodies, by breathing and
sucking in that Air, etc. (whereof I said something in the last Chapter) do
become corruptive, and tending to Putrefaction.

For how many Souls have perished for Want of the Physicians Knowledge of the
true Nature of the Disease, which alters according to the Nature of the
Afflicting Planets? etc. for every Year brings with it a new Distemper, not
known to the Drug-Doctor, until he has found it out by Experience, which costs
the Lives of perhaps half a hundred of his languishing Patients: While the
Astrologian sees the true Cause and Nature of the Distemper before it comes,
and can, if desired, prevent the Malady, if not destined by the Almighty to
Destruction.

The Places chiefly menaced by the Stars, are France, Germany, Hungary, Spain,
England, and Flanders; and especially in the French Camp in Flanders.

The Symptoms and Nature of the Distemper it is hard to define, but may be guest
at by the afflicting Planets, etc. Which are both Saturn in Capricorn, and Mars
afflicting Jupiter in Virgo; Saturn in Capricorn afflicts the Head with
Diseases, proceeding from Melancholy, which will produce Madness, Ravings,
Frenzies, beginning with great Pain and Heaviness; also Pains and Weariness in
the Joints, Knees, and Sinews, etc.

Secondly, Jupiter afflicting Mars in Virgo and Luna, at the Solar Ingress in
Opposition to them, denotes Melancholy to have Dominion, causing stoppages of
the Liver, Cardiaca Passio, great pain in the Sinews and Joints; and all over
the Body; and the Bowels are afflicted from a cold Cause, Cholick, Gripings of
the Guts, with tough and thick Phlegm falling upon the Throat and Lungs, causing
troublesome Coughs.

And if we be so happy to escape in England from a Pestilence, yet I am certain
that we shall have a new malignant Distemper, and the Symptoms will be partly
as I have before described.

The Method to prevent or cure this hovering Malady, is as follows, viz. we
must have respect to the afflicting Planets, and see how they are dignified.

Mars being the chief afflicting Planet, and not very strong* we may oppose him
by Antipathy with Herbs of Venus; but Saturn being strong, and beholding
Jupiter and Mars with a friendly Trine, we must sympathize with him, and make
use of his Herbs in the Cure. Also we must in all Pestilential Distempers, make
use of a certain number of Solar Herbs, which have a principal Virtue to
strengthen the Heart and Vital Spirit.

So that you must have recourse to the Herbs of Saturn, the Sun, and Venus,
being gathered according to their Planetary Strength and Virtue, respect being
had to their Number and Proportion in the Composition. Verbum sat.

It Is also requisite to open the Obstructions of the Liver and Breast, and to
clear the Body of Melancholy this Spring, by purging Medicines composed of the
aforesaid Herbs, etc. And so shall I conclude this Embrio of Astrological
Influence, designing to be more large and particular in my next; in the mean
time farewell.

FINIS.
Errat. Page 14. lin. 24. for Faces, read Phases.


