THE REPORTS OF THAT REVEREND AND LEARNED JUDGE, SIR RICHARD HUTTON KNIGHT;
Sometimes one of the JUDGES of the COMMON PLEAS. Containing many Choice Cases,
Judgments, and Resolutions, in points of LAW,

In the several Reigns of King JAMES and King CHARLES; being written in
French by his own hand: AND Now faithfully Translated into English according
to ORDER.

Major haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a Jure and Legibus, quam ab ^is, a
quibus illa bona relicta sunt.

Cic. pro Caerin. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Henry Twyford, and Thomas Dring,
and are to be sold at their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, and at the
George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-Inne, 1656.

COURTEOUS READER,
THese REPORTS of that Famous and Learned Judge, Sir RICHARD HUTTON, were
intended long ere this to have been exposed to public View, as they were
Originally penned in FRENCH by his own hand; but now (in obedience to a late
Act of Parliament) they are faithfully rendered into ENGLISH: And may be of
great use and benefit to the Studients and Practisers of the LAWS of these
Nations.

This just Judge (as the greatest man (once) of this Nation was pleased to call
him) was sometimes Contemporary with the Lord HOBART; By reason whereof, though
they may seem to meet sometimes in Cases, yet they part many times in the
Points thereof, and the Arguments thereupon; CICERO and ROSTIUS together make
one incomparable Man. And here our Learned Author appears, not to justle the
Chief Justice out of his place, but to continue (as he was upon the Bench) a
friendly Associate, and a Learned Assistant.

THE NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL CASES contained in this BOOK.
A.
A Andrews and Hacker 3 Agars Case 10 Allaboyter and Clifford 29 Andrews Case
30 Adams and Flemming 34 Allen and Swift 46 Aris and Higgins 65 Aleston and
Andrew 128
B.
BLands Case 18 Bishops Case 22 Boonton and the Bishop of Rochester 24 Bigg and
Malin 27 Brook and Groves 28 Bagshaw and Walker 34 Blackburnes Case 36
Bridgland and Post 44 Bullen and Jevis 52 Bawtry and Scarlet 63 Blemhasset and
Humblestone 65 Bickner and Wright 71 Beverley and Power 79 Baker and Johnson
106 Bill and Lake 106 Babbington and Wood 111 Baker and Hucking 126
C.
Combs and Invvood 1 Cole and Allen 10 Cravvley and Kingsvvell 13 Conesbies
Case 22 Cardinals Case 29 Coppledick and Tansey 31 Coney and Coney 32
Castilion and Smith 35 Clerk and Wood 39 Cartright and Underhil 42 Clanrickards
Case 43 Curle and Cook 51 Chittle and Sammon 55 Crane and Crampton 80
Clotvvorthy and Clotvvorthy 82 Crocker and Kelsey 84 Chidleys case 89 Chapman
and Chapman 90 Chichley and the Bishop of Ely. 96 Conghams case 98 Cook and
Cook 110 Cole and Wilkes 121 Champernons case 135
D.
DOrrell and Andrevvs 6 Drevvry and Fitch 16 Darcy and Askvvith 19 Davies case
42 Dovve and Palmer 124 Deanes case 125 Davies case 127 Digbies case. 131
E.
EDmonds case 20 Eire and Banister 24 Easington and Boucher 26 Egerton and
Egerton 28 Empson and Bathurst 52 Edwards and Laurence 123
F.
FLetcher and Harcot 55 Flight and Gresham 76 Farrington and Arrundel 82
Franklyn and Bradell 84 Farrington and Cagmer 98 Freeman and Stacy 109
G.
GIbbs and Davy 8 Green and Harrington 34 Griggs case 59 Goldenham and Some 71
Glasier and Heliar 122
H.
HArding and Bodman 11 Heard and Baskerfeld 15 Hall and Woollen 39 Hord and
Cordery 49 Hawkins and Cutts 49 Howell and Auger 60 Hickson and Hicson 69
Hitcham and Brook 75 Hearne and Allen 85 Howard Sir Charles 86 Hartap and Cocks
88 Humbeton and Buck 89 Hilton and Paul 93 Holt and Sambach 96 Harbert and
Angel 113 Hicks and Mounford 120 Huttons case Just 131 Hugles and Drinkwater
133
I.
IUrden and Stone 18 Jennings and Pitman 63 Jones and Powell 135
K.
KInd and Amery 23 King and Bowen 44 Knight and Copping 125
L.
Leygh and Pain 9 Lamb and Thompson 40 Lightfoot and Brightman 54 Lindleys
case 70 Laycon and Barnard 81 Lincoln the Earl 87 Lamb and West 114
Lashbrookes case 127
M.
MAson and Thomson 38 Mayes and Sidley 46 Meredith and Bovill 58 Metholl and
Peck 73 Mackerney and Ewrin 101 Medcalf and Hodgson 120
N.
NOrris and Staples 5 Napper and Sanders 118
P.
PIes case 35 Powell and Ward 41 Pit and Chick 45 Parkers case 56 Poole and
Reynold 57 Pleydell and Gosmore 67 Potter and Brown 72 Peto and Pemmerton 94
Paston and Utber 102 Purnell and Bridge 112
R.
SIr Walter Rawleys case 21 Reyner and Waterhouse 27 Rugles case 37 Rud and the
Bishop of Linc. 66 Ram and Lamley 113 Risam and Gooding 117
S.
STeward and Bishop 2 Shaw and Tailor 4 Swain and Holman 7 Speak and Richards
11 Stone and Roberts 13 Smith and Stafford 17 Staffords case 20 Smith and
Lindsey 32 Smith and Boucher 33 Sherley and Underhill 41 Suggs and Sparrow 47
Sherwills case 51 Stevens and Oldworth 91 Sandford and Cooper 95 Starkey and
Tailor 104 Shervin and Cartwright 109 Strilleys case 122 Smith and Cornelius
123 Souler and Burton 132
T.
TIppin and King 44 Treherne and Cleybrook 68 Trevors and Michelborn 77 Townley
and Steel 78 Turner and Hodges 101 Treford and Holmes 108
U.
UVedall and Tindall 77
W.
WOolfe and Heydon 30 Wentworth Sir Tho: 42 Wilson and Stubbs 45 Walrond and
Hill 48 Whitguift and Eldersham 50 Wades case 81 Winsmore and Hobart 87 Woolfe
and Hole 92 Watand Maywell 104 Wilson and Briggs 111 Whittington and Earl of
Derby 37
Y.
YOung and Young 92
THE NAMES OF CERTAIN CASES Cited, Obiter in the PRINCIPAL CASES.
A.
ALbanies case 35 Ashburneham and Skinner 72 Alephs case, Sir William 107
Arrows case 113 Arrowsmiths case 83
B.
BAker and Hall 3 Bedford and the Bishop of Exeter 4 Brownes case 9 Belcher and
Hudson 17 Burnell and Brook 48 Beddinfeilds case 78 Baker and Willoughby 105
Borman and Bower 115 Bland and Moseley 136 Brooks case 14 Bosdens case 23
Bedforne and Dandy 25
C.
CAndish and Savill 7 Coppleston and Langford 23 Craddock and Wenlock 26
Coniers case Crachfords case 97 Capels case, Sir Arthur Charter and Hunter 14
Couper and Andrews 58
D.
LOrd Derbies case 119 Dunking and Leycroft 125 Dorchester and Webb 128
E.
EWer and Moyle 44
F.
FLeet and Harrison 26 Farrington's case
G.
GEorge and Whitlock 14 Greenwood and Beckett 76 Gillinghams case 95 Gerards
case, Sir John 122 Gonard and Dennet 83 Godhow and Bennet 83 Gittings and
Redserne 13
H.
HOdges and Balwin 81
I.
Johnson and Barker 35 Johnson and Atewood 76 Jone's case 111
K.
KEldriche's case 35
M.
MIldmore and Warlowe 52 Mills and Whitewood 105
N.
NEwby and Sag 9 Nowels case Nich and Langford 115 Nichols and Grandie 29
P.
PEriam's case 26 Pell and Brown 60 Powell and Vardoffe 76 Potmans case Parker
and Parker 84
R.
REdforne and Dandy 24
S.
SMith and Mopham 136 Skinner and Amery 115 Sabud and R.W.L. 26 Stepney and
Woolfe 42 Stanley and Buddens case 52 Somerford and Beaumount 77 Specot and
Shere 91 Simpsons case 92 Shudsouth and Fernell 107
T.
TImberly and Calverley 47 Tadcaster and Hallowell 47 Thompson and Green 105
Trugeon and Meron 128
W.
Wild and Woolf 41 Wolley and Bradwell Wrotheys Case, Sir George Walker and
VVorsley 83 VValcot and Hind 14
PASCH. 15 JACOBI.
Combs versus Inwood.
THE first day which I sat at the Bench, after the day in which I was sworn,
Ejectione suma. A Conve^ance delivered to be enrolled, and yet not in^^lled,
shall be accounted a Record.
i. e. Thursday the twenty second of May; A Jury was at the Bar from the County
of Surrey, in an Ejectione firmae, brought by Combs against Inwood, upon a
Lease made by one John Stockwood, which was Heir to one Edward Stockwood, and
was for a Farm in Chertsey, called Haylwick: And upon Evidence the Case
appeared to be th^^s.

Edward Stockwood was seized in fee, and about the 29 Hen: 8. this Land was
supposed to be conveyed to King Hen. 8. in fee, for the enlargement of the
Honor of Hampton; but no Deed, nor any other matter of Record was in being to
prove this original Conveyance, and many Arguments were used to prove that
there was never any such Conveyance, because there was not one of any such
conveyance named in the Act of 31 H: 8. But of the other part it was proved,
that this Land had continued in exchange as the Land of H: 8. all his life, by
diverse accounts; and that it had been enjoyed by diverse Leases made by Edward
6. and Queen Elizabeth, and Rent paid for them: And that in the year 16 Eliz.
she granted it in Fee-farm to the Earl of Lincoln, and under that Title the
Land had been quietly enjoyed until of late time.

And the Court delivered their opinion, That it there were a Deed by which
Stockwood conveyed the Land to H: 8: and that brought into the Court of
Augmentation; although this Deed be not found nor enrolled, yet it is a
sufficient Record to entitle the King, and it is a Record by being brought into
Court, and there received to be enrolled. And the Report of the case in Lord
Dye^, fol: 355.19 Eliz. was not as it is there reported, for it was for Bormi^
Inn, and it was adjudged a good conveyance; and in this case the Jury found
for the Defendant.

Trin. 14 Jac. Rotulo 769. Steward versus Bishop.
Words.
STeward brought an Action upon the Case for certain words against Bishop,
because that the Defendant said, Steward is in Leicester Gaol for stealing an
Horse and other Cattle, the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Jury found
for the Plaintiff, and Damages to thirty pounds: And it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment by Sergeant John Moore, that the Action does not lie, for the words do
not affirm and Deed, or Act, or Offense, but that he was in prison upon
suspicion of an Offense: And it is the Ordinary speech and communication by way
of interrogation; What is such a one in prison for? For stealing: And all the
Kalenders are, such a one for stealing of a Horse, such a one for Murder, Vide
Coke lib: 4. he is detected for Perjury, is not actionable; And to say such
words of a Justice of Peace, or an Attorney, peradventure it shall be
otherwise, yet it seems all one, if it touch not him in his Profession. To say
that I. S. was in Newgate for forging of Writs, will not maintain an Action,
and so adjudged in Nowels case, and Judgment was given that the action will not
lie.

Pasch. 15 Jac.
ONe brought and Action upon the Case, and counted, that the Defendant (in
consideration that the Plaintiff would take such a woman to his Wife) promised
to pay twenty pounds when he shall be thereto requested after the marriage,
Request, where it shall not be alleged.
and that the Plaintiff such a day had married the said Woman, and the
Defendant (though often requested) did not pay the aforesaid twenty pounds: And
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that he had not shown any particular
request; but yet Judgment was affirmed for the Plaintiff, for this action is
grounded upon the promise, which imports Debt, and not upon any collateral
matter, which makes it a duty by the performance of a collateral Act upon the
request.

Trin. 15 Jac. Resolved upon the Statute of 3 H. 7. Cap. 2.
Upon diverse Assemblies at Sergeants Inn of all the Judges to consider (by the
direction of the Star Chamber) whether by the Statute of 3 H: 7. cap: 2. the
taking of any Woman against her will, and the marrying or deflowring of her, be
Felony, or only of such a Woman which has Substance, or Goods, or Lands; or
otherwise be an Heir apparent, the body of the Act seems to be general, viz.
He that shall take any Woman so against her will: And it was said, that it were
a great inconvenience that it shall be Felony to take an Heir apparent of a
poor man, or to take a Woman which has but a very small Portion, and of mean
Parentage, and (as it was said) of a Woman in a red Peticote, and that it shall
not be felony to do and commit the said Offense in taking the Daughter of an
Earl, or some other great man of the Realm. But it was resolved that the body
of the Act was incorporated to the Preamble, for it had been adjudged, that if
one take a Woman with an intent to marry her, or deflower her, etc. and does it
not, this is not Felony, and this rests only upon the Preamble; then it shall
have relation as well to such a Woman which is before named, viz. Maid, Widow,
or Wife, having substance, and to an Heir apparent, and to no other.

And so it was taken in a Case in the Star Chamber by the like resolution, 10
Jac. between Baker and Hall, and the Lord chief Baron said, Baker and Hall.
that it had been adjudged, that no Appeal did lie upon this Statute, and all
the Presidents in effect warrant this resolution, vide Stamford, fol. 37.

Statute 1 H. 4. Cap. 14.
COnsideration upon the Statute 1 H: 4. Cap: 14. was had, how the word Appeals
shall be intended before the Constable and Marshall.

And 26 Eliz. Doughties Case, Doughties case.
Petition was made to the Queen by the Heir to make a Constable and Marshall,
but she would not.

Admitting that the King get a Commission of the Office of a Constable and
Marshall, whether the King may have any remedy before them by Indictment, or
information by the Attorney general.

Mich. 15 Jac. Andrews versus Hacker.
AN Assise of Darrein Presentment was brought by Andrews against Hacker, and
the Earl of Salop, Assise.
and against the Archbishop of York for the Church of Gothur in the County of
Nottingham; the Assise was brought to the Bar, and when the Jury appeared, the
Archbishop made default, and the others appeared, and pleaded in abatement of
the Writ, that the same Plaintiff had before brought a Quare impedit against
the Defendants for the same Church, which Writ was returned, and that they did
appear to defend it.

First, we must know that this Assise shall be taken only in the Common Bench,
vide Mag: Char: cap: 13. Assize of Darrein presentment, abate by a Quare
^^pedit.
then the Archbishop making default, and the Assise being awarded against him
by default, if the other Defendants plead to the Assise, yet the Assise shall
not be presented, because an Assise shall not be taken by parcels, and therefore
a Resummons shall be awarded against the Archbishop, and the same for the Jury.

But the other Defendants pleading their Plea to the Writ, the Court was of
opinion that it was a good Plea in abatement of the Writ, for the Quare impedit
is a Writ of a higher nature, vide Regist: fol: 30. That if he against whom an
Assise of Darrein presentment is brought, brings a Quare impedit, the Darrein
presentment shall abate: And the Statute of West: 2. cap: 5. says, it may be
in the Election of one, whether he will have an Assise of Darrein presentment,
or Quare impedit, ergo he cannot have them both.

And if an Assise of Darrein presentment be brought, and after that a Quare
impedit for one avoidance, the Assise shall abate, for the Quare impedit is
higher in his nature, that is, for the right, and for the possession. And
Justice Warburton vouched 10 Ed: 3: Statham in Darrein presentment 3. If a man
shall have a Quare impedit, and also an Assise of Darrein presentment, of one
and the same Advowson, pending at one and the same time, the Darrein
presentment shall abate, and the Quare impedit shall stand, because that it is
of an higher nature. By Hank and Hill, it was urged that the Quare impedit was
not depending until he had appeared, and it is not pleaded that he did appear,
but vide 2 Ed: 4. fol: that it is depending when it is returned. And in a Quare
impedit by the Earl of Bedford against the Bishop of Exeter, Bedford versus the
Bishop of Exeter.
it was adjudged Pasch. 15 Jac. that he could not have two Quare impedits of
one Church, and for one avoidance. And in this Case the whole Court agreed that
the plea was good in abatement of the Writ, and awarded that the Assise should
abate.

Mich. 14 Jac. Rot. 3297. Shaw versus Tailor.
Wigorn. Replevin. Where the Lord shall lose his Heriot when the Tenant have not
any Beasts.
BRidget Shaw brought a Replevin against George Tailor, for the taking of an
Horse at Northfield, in a place called Little falling; the Defendant makes
Cognizance as Bailiff to Sir Thomas Gervas, because that one Richard Shaw was
seized of an House and diverse Lands, (of which the place where, etc. was
parcel) in his Demesne as of Fee, and them held of the said Sir Thomas Gervas,
as of his Manor of Northfield, by Fealty and Rent of twenty pounds, and
rendering and paying after of every Tenant (dying thereof seized) one Heriot, and
alleged Seisin, and that he died seized: And that for one Heriot so due, and
not delivered, he distrained in the place in which, etc. as within the Fee. The
Plaintiff plead in Bar to the Avowry, and takes the whole Tenure by
protestation, and for Plea says, that the said Richard Shaw at the time of his
death had no Beasts, whereof a Heriot might or could be rendered, upon which the
Defendant demurrs.

And upon the matter it seemed to the Court, that if he had not any Beasts,
than the Lord must lose it; for it is a casual thing if he have it, unless
the Custom or Tenure be to have the best Beast, or such a sum: And if he had
conveyed it away, and so prevented him by any fraud, then the Statute of 13
Eliz. had provided remedy, but where there is nothing of any such thing, which
may be rendered at the time of the death, there the King must lose his right.
And it was resolved by the Court that the Cognizance was not good, for it ought
to be certain, i. e. for the best, or two best Beasts, and not generally for
one Heroit, and not showing what thing in certain, vide 3 Eliz: Dyer 199. A
Heriot is Quaedam prestatio, etc. and see there the Plea, that there was no
Beast at the time of his death: And the opinion of the Court was also, that the
Bar to the Avowry was not good, because the Issue is tendered to a thing not
alleged, for in the Avowry he made not mention of any beast, but generally of
one Heriot, which is not certain; And therefore it was awarded that the
Plaintiff should recover, and should have a return, etc. and Damages.

Pasch. 14 Jac. Rot. 907. Norris versus Stapes. Goldsborough.

Berk.
RObert Norris and Thomas Trussells Warden^, and the Society of Weavers, in the
Borough of Newbury, De^. 1. By laws.
in the County of Berkshire, brought an Action of Debt for five pounds against
John Stapes, and Count, that Queen Eliz. by her Letters Patents, 14. of October:
An: 44. at the request of the Inhabitants there using the Art of Weaving, and
to the intent that Corruption therein might be taken away and avoided, etc. did
grant to all Weavers within the said Town to be a Body Politic, by the name of
the Wardens and Society, etc: as before, and to have perpetual succession and
power to purchase, to plead, and to be impleaded: And also power to make Laws
and Ordinances agreeable to reason, and not in any wise contrary and repugnant
to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, for the well Government of the Society,
Apprentices, and Servants, and all using the Trade of weaving or selling of any
thing thereto belonging within the same Borough, and power to inflict
punishment by Imprisonment, Fine, or Amercement upon the Offenders: And granted
further, that the said Wardens and Society shall have the survey of those
Laws, and the benefit of the Forfeitures; And that no other person, born
within or without the said Borough, shall exercise the Art of weaving within
the said Borough, if he shall not be admitted thereto by the Wardens and
Society. And they recite the Act of 19 H: 7. cap: 7. of not putting of any Law
or Ordinance in execution, before it shall be allowed by the Lord Chancellor,
Treasurer, and two chief Justices, or three of them, or before both the
Justices of Assise in their Circuits, upon pain of forfeiting forty pounds: And
show that one Cuthbert Goodwin, and John Hame Wardens of the said Society, with
the greater part of the said Society, 1. Maij 45 Eliz. at the Guildhall within
the said Borough, made diverse Laws and Ordinances for the Government of
Weavers; and that the 18 November. 1 Jac. the said Orders were confirmed by the
Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Anderson one of the chief Justices,
among which one was, that none should use the Art of Weaving within the said
Borough, or should have any Loom in his house or possession, to have any
benefit thereby, unless he had been an Apprentice to the said Art within the
said Borough, for the space and term of seven years, or had used the said Art
within the said Borough for five years before the making of the said
Ordinance, or shall be admitted thereto by the Wardens and Society, upon pain of
forfeiture for every month twenty shillings.

And they further show, that after the said Ordinance made and confirmed the
Defendant (such a day) before his inhabiting in the said Borough; and after
(such a day) that one William Godwin being then Warden of the Weavers, gave
notice to the Defendant of the said Ordinance, and that he afterward, etc.
during five months continued using the said Trade there, and that he had two
Looms in his possession, where he had not been an Apprentice, nor used the said
Art for five years, as before, etc. by which he forfeited to them five pounds,
viz, for every month twenty shillings.

The Defendant pleaded Nil debet, and after Verdict for the Plaintiffs, it was
moved by Arrest of Judgment, that this Ordinance was not reasonable: and upon
Arguments and Conference, without arguments at the Bench, it was agreed that
the Ordinance was against Law, and Judgment against the Plaintiffs.

And Lord Hobart in Hill: 15 Jac, declared, that we were all of opinion that
Judgment should be given against the Plaintiffs: And he repeated the Case and
the reasons of this Judgment, because the Ordinance was, that none should use
the Trade of Weaver, nor have any Loom in the Town, unless he had served, etc.
before the making of this Ordinance, so that all Apprentices which serve after
shall be excluded, unless they shall be admitted by them, which is
unreasonable: And the Plaintiffs do not convey to themselves any good Title to
be Wardens, but as to the principal point of making such a restraining
Ordinance, the Court did not deliver any opinion.

Mich. 15 Jac. Rot. 2327. Dorrell versus Andrews.
SUsan Dorrell brought an action of Debt against Sir Eusebius Andrews, London.
Debt. The Visn of a Town within a Parish.
and John Cope for eighty five pounds, and count upon a Lease made by her to
the Defendants by Indenture, by which she demised one Capital Message,
Manor, or House called Causton, within the Parish of Dunchurch in the County
of Warwick, and all the Stables, etc. in Causton aforesaid.

The Defendant protesting that the Rent was not behind, for Plea says, that
before any Rend arrear the Plaintiff entered into several parts of the house,
and him dispossessed, and upon that they were at issue, and the Venice facias
was de vicineto de Causton within the Parish of Dunchurch: And it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Venire facias should be of the Parish only, and
not of Causton, for Causton is not alleged as a Town, but the name of a house:
And the Court resolved that the Ven. fac, was good, for Causton is alleged as
a Town in the Parish of Dunchurch, and that by the addition and general words
in the Demise, in which also there was an exception of part of the House as
Mannor-house at Causton aforesaid, so that the house is alleged to be in
Causton, in the Parish of Dunchurch, if all be considered: And if it appear
that Causton is a Town or Village in the Parish of Dunchurch, it will be
without any doubt good.

And my Lord Hobart said, that it had been diverse times adjudged, that on the
Allegation of a thing done at the Town of Dale in the Parish of Sale, that the
Ven. fac. of the Parish is good, for though the Parish may contain more Towns,
yet it is not to be presumed but that it is of one Continent, if the contrary
appear not by the Record, vide for that Pasch: 9 Jac. between the Lord Candish,
and Sir George Savill, etc. There was another exception taken to the pleading,
Candish and Savill.
which I have not transcribed.

Trin. 14 Jac. Rot. 755 Swain versus Holman.
RIchard Swain Plaintiff, Brownlow. Dors. Wast.
against Thomas Holman and Elizabeth his Wife, brought Wast, and declared of a
Lease made: Anno the 8. of Eliz: by the Queen, under the Exchequer Seal, to
William Jolliff, Thomas Jolliff, and Elizabeth Jolliff, for three lives, and
that William and Thomas were dead, and convey the remainder to the King that
now is, and from him to the Plaintiff, and that the Defendant Elizabeth took H.
to Husband, which did wast, etc.

The Defendants confess the Lease, death, and marriage as above, etc and say,
that the said Holman and Elizabeth his wife, 2. Feb: 40 Eliz. surrendered as
well all their Estate of the said Elizabeth, as the Letters Patents, to the
intent that the Queen should make a new Lease to the said Elizabeth, and to
Humphrey Holman, and to Roger Holman for their lives successively, which
surrender the Queen accepted, and the third of Febr: next made such Demise, and
this they are ready to aver, etc.

The Plaintiff replies, and joins Issue upon the Surrender and Demise in manner
and form, and the Issue was tried by a Venue which came from Westminster, and
the Jury found this special Verdict, viz. the new Lease made the third of
Felic: in which it is recited that she had surrendered the Estate, and the
Letters Patents, and the Queen as well in consideration of the surrender of the
Letters Patents, as in consideration of the payment of twenty Nobles made by
the new Lease, and the Jury found that the Demise made the third of Febr: was
with the consent of the said Thomas Holman, and that the said Thomas Holman and
Elizabeth his wife agreed thereto, and held in claiming by the said Demise: And
it was adjudged by the Lord Hobart, and others the Justices, that the Plaintiff
should have Judgment.

First, the consideration which procured the new Lease is the Surrender, and
the Surrender is not absolute but defeisable if the wife survive, or if the
Husband will disagree; and therefore the Lord Hobart said, that if Feme Lesses
for years takes Husband, and after the Feme takes a new Lease of the Queen for
life, this extinguisheth the term; but if the Husband disagree, then the Lease
for years is revived. And as in Barwicks Case, the surrender of all the Estate
where he had made a Lease for years before, or where the Lease which he
surrendered was void, the new Lease made (...) consideration thereof is vein, for
the Surrender which is the consideration, ought to be a good surrender of the
former Estate: And therefore if Lessee for life of the Blemise of the King
surrender conditionally, and the King reciting that he had surrendered all his
Estate, makes a new Lease, this shall be intended an absolute Estate, for a
conditional surrender within three years of the Lease, is not a surrender
within the Act of 32 H: 8.

2. Another reason, because that the Freehold which the Husband had in the
right of his Wife, could not be given by this bare assent; But if the Lease had
been made, de novo, to the Husband and the Wife, then it had been questionable,
for the Estate pass by Implication, viz. by a surrender in Law, by acceptance
of a new Lease, as in the eighth Report of the Lord Coke, S. Savors Case, but
there no Estate of the Husband pass, for by the inter-marriage he was in of
the Freehold with his Wife, in the right of his Wife, and that he gives not by
assent, vide 7 H. 7.14: vide 41 E: 3. fol. 19.

3. Another reason was, as this issue is joined, it is found against the
Defendants, for it shall be thereby taken and intended of an actual surrender
made by the Husband and Wife, and not of such a surrender which is operated by
a subsequent act in Judgment of Law, and the reason thereof is, because that the
surrender of the Estate, and the cancelling of the Letters Patents are pleaded
to be done at Westminster, 2 Febr: and the Lease, 3. Febr: so that this Issue
is taken upon an actual surrender: And by Warburton, if issue be joined upon
the Manumission of a Villain, that is not maintained by giving in evidence that
the Lord made to him an Obligation, but by the making of him free by Charter of
Manumission, vide the Case directly, 25 H: 8. Brook general Issue 82. vid:
Dyer 284. Croucheads Case.

Memorand. That in this case the Jury of Middlesex found the Damages, and the
value of the Wast in the County of Dorcetshire, vide Coke live: 6. fol. 47.
Dowdales Case.

Mich. 15 Jac. Rot. 1634. Gibbs versus Davie.
EDward Gibbs brought an action upon the Case against Jenkin Davie, for words
spoken in the Welsh Tongue, and declared that the conference was had by Baron
Snigg with the Defendant, concerning the selonious stealing of three Heisers,
and the Defendant is supposed to answer to the question in Welsh, whether
Thomas Jackson stole them; If he had them, Case. Welsh words.
I should have had them again, but Edw. Gibbs stole them: And upon Not guilty
pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff at Bristoll, And it was moved this Term
in Arrest of Judgment, that the words in Welsh did not signify stealing, but
carrying away upon ones back: And it appeared upon examination of one Mr.
Gunter upon Oath, that it is properly the word for carrying, though that there
in the intendment of the parties it might be taken for stealing, it being
joined with other precedent circumstances, yet it is not actionable, for it
shall be taken in the most favorable construction and best sense, as if one
had said, That such a one had the Pox, and forbid one to use his company, it
shall not be intended of the French Pox, and no Action lies: And Judgment was
given for the Defendant, yet it was averred in the Count, that the words were
spoken in the hearing of them which understood the Welsh Language.

Micih 14 Jac. Rot. 953. Leigh versus Pain. Oxon.

MAtthew Leigh brought an action of Debt upon an Obligation against Matthew
Pain, Debt.
which was with condition for the performance of an Arbitrament, which was of
all Actions, Quarrels, etc. depending between them: The Arbitrators award that
the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff such a sum, Arbitrament of all
Action until the day of the Awa^^.
etc. for content and in full satisfaction of all Actions, Quarrels, etc.
until the day of the date of the Arbitrament: And upon Demurrer by the
Defendant, it was debated whether this was a good Arbitrament, it being that
the Arbitrator had exceeded his Authority in giving satisfaction for trespass
after the submission, that is, until the date of the Arbitrament; and it
seemed to the Court that it is a good Arbitrament, and that it appears not to
the Court that there were any Trespasses or Suits after the submission, and
that shall not be intended until it be shown by the other part; as in the case
of Baspool, Co. lib. 8. fol. 98. where submission was of all controversies, so
that the Award be made of the Premises, etc. there the Arbitrators made an
Award of diverse particulars, and the Award was good, and he that will avoid it
must show that there were other controversies, and that he gave notice of them
to the Arbitrators, for they shall not be bound to arbitrate of more then they
have notice of, Die: 242.19 E. 4.1. vide Summons case, Coke lib. 5 fol: 77: That
an Award ought to be reasonable, and to be done between the same parties: And
therefore the Arbitrament that the Husband and Wife shall levy a Fine where the
submission was by the Husband only, is void (but quaere) if it be not good as
to the Husband, and vide in James Osborns case, Coke lib: 10. fol: 131. There
the case of More and Bedle is bouthed, and is adjudged that where it is awarded
that a certain sum shall be paid, and for the payment thereof a stranger shall
be bound, it is a good Award, though as to the giving of security by a stranger
it is void, and there it is said, if satisfaction be to be given for many
things, of which part is out of the Award, yet it is good for them which are
submitted unto, vide 42 and 43 Eliz: Newby and Sav: Newby and Sav.
An Award to make a release to the date of the Arbitrament, and good if it does
not appear that there was other matter. A submission of all matters done till
the fourth of September, the Award was of a Release of all matters until the
third of September, and good; Browns case.
And this case was vouched to be between Barnes and Grenewell, Trin: 43 Eliz:
Rot: 947. vide a case between Hilton and Brown, Trin: 5 Jacobi Rot: 1618. an
Arbitrament was made general in satisfaction of all Controversies Indefinitely
without any limitation: And upon Argument upon Demurrer, it was adjudged good,
and in this case the Arbitrament will not discharge any action which was not
submitted unto; and then it is but Surplusage which shall not avoid the Award,
though the Plaintiff has mine recompense by the Arbitrators, In respect that
the Defendant shall be discharged of trespasses until the making of the
Arbitrament: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 11 Jac. Rot. 318. Agars versus Lisle.
Case.
THomas Agar brought an action upon the Case against Lisle, for studing and
converting of a Cow at the Castle of York, the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that
the Bishop of Durham was seized of the Town of Darton, in the County of Durham,
and prescribe to have a Fair there and Toll, and for not payment thereof, etc.
the Cow was taken by the Defendant, Trover and Conversion is justified without
confessing the Conversion.
as Servant to the Bishop of Durham, Absque hoc, that he was guilty at the
Castle of York, or any where else, etc. And this Case was long depending, and
the first point was, if the Defendant had confessed any conversion, for that is
the ground of the action, and ought to be traversed, or else confessed and
avoided: It was agreed, that the Conversion is the ground of the Action, Brook
1 Mar. Trespass 121. and the Inducement ought to be such as contain sufficient
matter with the Trespass, vide 9 E. 4, 5. 19 H: 6.30.22 Then it was agreed, H.
6. 35./8.
that when one takes a Distress and such an action is brought, that is no
plea, for that is not any conversion, vide 27 H. 8.22. Coke lib. 10. fol: 46,
47. Request and refusal to deliver, is good evidence to prove conversion, but
if it be found specially it shall not be adjudged Conversion; and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, because the Defendant did not claim any property, and
did not answer to the point of the Action, for a Distress is no Conversion.

Hill. 15 Jac. Coble versus Allen.
Norf.
Trespass.
COble brought an action of Trespass against Allen for breaking his Close at
Barningham, and by the new Assignment diverse parcels were assigned, the
Defendant as to part pleads that he was seized of an House and thirty acres of
Land in Colby, and prescribe to have a way over them to his Common in
Barningham; Prescription for a Way, and no place to which, etc. Issue joined
upon the Prescription.
and for the other parcels prescribe that he and all those whose Estate he has
in the said house in Colby, used to have for themselves and their Families, one
way for Pack-horses over the said other parcels of Land in Barningham, unto the
Kings high way leading to the City of Norwich: And Issue was joined upon these
two Prescriptions, and found for the Plaintiff: But it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Venue was from Barningham and Colby, and that in the Plea
there is not mention of any place where the Common lies, and therefore there is
not any trial; but it was adjudged that the trial was good, for though that
the proper use of a way is to some end, and that ought to be shown, yet if it
be only that he had a way over the Closes of the new Assignment; and no place
or end thereof is pleaded for what cause, or to what other place, and Issue is
taken upon the Prescription, and found, the Prescription is good: And another
reason was there by Implication; it is indifferent whether the way lies in B.
or in another Town, and by intendment rather it may be taken to lie in B. and
then if by one intendment the trial may be good, it shall so be intended. But
when it appears that the trial shall be in three Towns, and the Ven: fac. is
but in two, this is not aided, for it is a Mis-triall, and there must be a
Venire facias de novo, but in this case no new Venice can be awarded, and then
it is but a Jeofaile for not pleading in which Town the way lies, and then it
is alo^^; and also unto the Kings high way, may be taken that this Kings high
way is contigue adjacent to these Closes where the way is by Prescription: And
for these reasons and causes Judgment given for the Plaintiff.

Harding versus Bodman.
RObert Harding Plaintiff, against Bodman Defendant, Case.
in an action upon the Case, recites, that whereas the Plaintiff brought an
action upon the Case against one Lenning for calling of him, etc. the Defendant
upon the trial, being produced for the Defendant as a Witness, gave evidence
upon his Oath to the Jury, Action upon the Case against one fo^giving evidence.
that the Plaintiff was a common liar, and so recorded in the Star Chamber, by
reason of which Evidence (though the Jury found for the Plaintiff, yet by
reason hereof) they gave but small Damages to the Plaintiff: And upon not
guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff; and upon motion in Arrest of
Judgment, it was adjudged that this is a new invention, and that no action lies
for it. First, because that it is impossible to be known whether the Jury gave
greater or less Damages for that or not: Also by this means every man which is
produced as a Witness by one way or other, may be subject to an action upon
the Case; and also by any thing which appears to the Court, the Evidence was
true, for it was not averred that Revera, that the Plaintiff was not a common
liar, and that he was not recorded for a common liar, in the Star Chamber; And
for these reasons the Plaintiff. Nil capiat per breve, etc.

Trin. 15 Jac. Rot. 1968. Speak versus Richards.
South.
HUgh Speak brought an action of Debt against Edward Richards, Debt.
for 523 l 17 s 8 d and declare, that Anthony Hall, and Henry Paramour 22. June
13 Jac. became obliged to the Plaintiff by Recognizance in the Chancery in 2000
l and that they did not pay it, whereupon the Plaintiff had two Sci. fac.'s to
the Sheriff of Middlesex, Debt for money returned levied by the Sheriff.
who returned Nihil, whereupon Judgment for the Plaintiff, and a Levari facias
awarded to the Sheriff of Southampton, returnable 15 Mich. which Writ was
delivered to the Defendant, being then Sheriff, to be executed: The Defendant
before the Return levied by virtue of the said Writ, the said 523 l 17 s 8 d of
the Lands and Chattels of the said Henry Paramour, parcel of the said Debt,
and at 15 Mich. returned that he had levied the said 523 l 17 ^. 8 d parcel,
etc. which sum he had ready at the day to deliver to the Plaintiff in part of
satisfaction, etc. And that the Defendant (although often required thereto)
refused to pay the said 523 l 17 s 8 d (by cause whereof this action accrued)
nor brought it into Chancery, and to have the parties, etc.

The Defendant as to three hundred and eight pounds, part thereof, pleaded Nil
debet, to two hundred and fifteen pounds seventeen shillings eight pence,
residue thereof, Actio non: For he said, that after the Writ directed, and
before the return, viz. 31 Augusti, 14 Jacobi, the Defendant at Westminster
paid it to the Plaintiff, upon the receipt whereof, the same day the Plaintiff
gave an Acquittance for the same (which he pleads) and thereby acquitted and
discharged the Defendant, and demands Judgment if against his own Deed of
acquittance he shall be received to demand the said money, whereupon the
Plaintiff demurred.

And it was argued by Sergeant Richardson for the Plaintiff, and by John Moore
for the Defendant: An exception was taken that he could not plead Nil debet,
because that it is a Debt upon Record, for he is charged by the return; He is
not estoppled to plead payment before the return, because it is another Action,
and the Sheriff might have paid it to the Plaintiff, though he return that he
had the money ready to be delivered to him; for if he had after that paid it to
the Plaintiff, that was good satisfaction, and he might as well pay it after he
had levied it, and before the return, as he might pay it after the return, and
then Nil debet is a good Plea.

But it was objected, that by the return 15 Mich. that he had the money ready
(and that after the acquittance) his return should conclude him: And it was
said that it would not, for it is in another Action and stands therewith, 22 E:
4.38. One vouched as Heir may be bound to Warranty by his Father, and if he
bring an Assise De morte Antecestoris, and the Tenant plead Bastardy, it is no
Estoppell that the Defendant vouched him as Heir before.

The Acquittance or Release is good before the return, and not like unto Hoes
Case of Bail, Coke: lib: 5.71. or 5 Eliz: Dyer 217. Release of Actions and
Suits will not release a Covenant before it be broken.

Object. That the Acquittance or Release is pleaded only by recital.

Res. To this it was answered, that he had paid the two hundred and fifty
pound, seventeen shillings eight peace, which the Plaintiff had accepted, and
the Plaintiff by Demurrer had confessed the Deed, and all that is contained
therein, then it appears that he is satisfied, and that the release in matter as
it is recited shall be an Estoppell, vide 46 Eliz. 13. But it seemed that it is
no Estoppell by the reciting in the Release that which is in possession, but
that afterward he might well say, that he was not in possession at the time of
the Release, and all the Court agreed, that the Acquittance or Release, and
receipt of the money is a good Bar as to two hundred and fifteen pounds,
seventeen shillings eight pence, and so it was adjudged: But whether an Action
of Debt lies against the Sheriff upon this return is questionable, yet that it
is not any Contract, Account, or Loan, upon which three properly an Action of
Debt lies, as it is said M. 18. E. 4.23. and 41. E. 3.10. and 42 E. 3.9. When
money is delivered to be delivered over, that no Debt lies if it be not
delivered over, but Account, vide 34 H. 6. 36. a. 9 E: 4.50. And the Court
inclined, that in this Case Debt lies, for it is a general Contract: In Dowses
Case, the Sheriff levy part and do not return it, but the party pay it, Debt
lies against the Sheriff: And if money be delivered to buy Land, if he buy it
not, Debt lies, or Account.

Mich. 15 Jac. Rot. 636. Stone versus Roberts.
STone brought an Action upon the Case against Roberts for these words; The
Plaintiff is a Witty, and an Inchaunter, Case.
and has bewitched the Children of one Strong: And Judgment for the Plaintiff;
Words.
For though Witch is a word of malice, and familiarly used to old poor women,
and therefore no Action lies, yet here it is coupled with a Deed, by which the
Plaintiff is drawn in danger of his life, by the Statute of 1 Jac.

Hill. 15 Jac. Rot. 710. Crawley versus Kingswell.
RIchard Crawley Plaintiff, in Roplevin against Richard Kingswell, Replevin.
for taking of one Cow at C. the Defendant makes Conuzance for ten pounds
Rent-service come Bailiff to his Father, the Plaintiff confess the Tenure, but
allege that at our Lady day (which was one day of payment) he was upon parcel
of the Land, Rent tendered at the day.
and there was ready and offered to pay it, and remained there till after the
setting of the Sun: The Defendant replied and (protestando that he made no such
tender) for plea says, that after that, and before the Distress, viz. such a
day, he at this Close demanded the Rent, and none came there to tender or pay
it, for which he did distrain, and prays a return, etc. and avers that the
Plaintiff nor any other, neither at the time of the distress, nor at any time
after offered to pay the Rent, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred; and it being
argued by Hendon and John Moore, it was adjudged by the whole Court that the
Defendant shall have a return: And a diversity was taken between this and
Homage, where one makes a tender to the party, and he refuse, there he cannot
distrain, because it is a personal thing which cannot be performed (as payment
of a Rent may) by another hand, vide Litt. fol: 35.21 E: 4.17.7 E: 4.4.20 H.
6.13. Also it was agreed, that the tender there by the Tenant at the day is not
material, but if he had tendered it when the Distress was taken, the taking
should be tortious. 30 Ass: 38. vide 22 H: 6.36, and 37.21 E: 4. b. 45 E. 3.9.
vide Litt. 7. fol: 28.

Demand necessary only for a Penalty.

26 Eliz. Certain Cases vouched in an Action for words.
GIttings Plaintiff in the Exchequer, against Redserve. Gittings is a cousening
Knave, and so I have proved him before my Lord Mayor, for selling me a Sapphire
for a Diamond, the Action does not lie: And by Manwood, if A. says of B. Thou
art a cousening Knave, and have cousened me of five hundred pounds, no Action
lies, which the Court agreed.

Banco Regis 30 Eliz. George versus Whitlock.
HE is a cousening Knave, and consened a poor man of a hundred pounds, and all
the Georges are cousening Knaves, no action lies,

Hill. 30 Eliz, B. R. Walcot Plaintiff versus Hind.
HE is a cousening Knave, and has cousened me of forty pounds, adjudged no
action lies: And upon Error brought in the Exchequer, Judgment was affirmed;
and it is said that our Law takes no notice what a Cousener is.

Trin. 37 Eliz. Brooks Case.
HE is a false Knave, and keeps a false Debt Book, for he charge me with the
receipt of one piece of Velvet which is false, not actionable.

Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. Charter versus Hunter.
THou art a Pilfring Merchant, and have Pilfred away my Goods from my Wife and
my Children not actionable:

A Butcher and his Wife brought an action upon the Case against B. and his
Wife, and show that the Plaintiff used the Trade of a Butcher, and that his
Wife in his absence sold and delivered flesh, and the words were, that the Wife
of the Plaintiff is a cousening woman, and has cousened one of her Neighbors
of four pounds; And it was alleged over, that she the Defendant would bring
good proof of it, and adjudged that an action lies not.

Trin. 13 Jac. Rot. 650. Heard versus Baskerfield. Brownl^w^

Devon.
WIlliam Heard Plaintiff, Replevin.
against Richard Baskerfield in Replevin for taking two Cowes at Brood, the
Defendant makes Conuzance as Bailiff to John Dinham Esquire, and shows that
Walter de la Therne was seized in Fee of twenty acres of Land, whereof, etc. And
by his Deed (shown in Court) 12 E. a. granted a Rentcharge of two shillings
out thereof to John Milleton and Walter Milleton, In Replevin, one makes
Conusance and derive his Estate from one as Cousin and Heir, and shows not how.
John Milleton dies, and Walter survived and died seized; and this Rent
descended to one John Milleton of P. as Cousin and Heir to the aforesaid Walter,
and he was seized in Fee; and one John Dinham was seized in Fee of one house
and twenty acres of Land in Pensons, and by Deed (shown in Court) exchanged
them with the said John Milleton for the said Rent; and Walter de la Therne
being seized of the Land, out of which the Rent issued, attorned, and gave
Seisin of the Rent to John Dinham, whereby he was seized in Fee of the Rent, and
conveyed the Rent by three discents to this John Dinham, for whom the Defendant
makes Conuzance for ten shillings for five years arrear: And the Plaintiff
demurs generally upon the Conuzance. And the cause was, that it is not shown
how John Milleton is Cousin and Heir to Walter upon the descent.

First, if it be good as this Case is, viz. That he claims not as Cousin and
Heir, but makes Title under him by conveyance afterward: Also because the
Defendant makes Conuzance and is a stranger.

Secondly, if it be but form.

And this Case was argued at Bench briefly, in Trin. 16. And I was of opinion,
because that this is the Conuzance of a Bailiff, and it is a descent in one
blood, to which Dinham is a stranger, and because that a good Issue might be
taken thereupon as it is alleged; And if it had been a case of Bastardy, the
Jury might have tryell it, therefore it is good by the Common Law, and differs
from a Formedon, for there he which brings it is privy, vide 41 Eliz. 13, and
14 in a Scire facias, good without showing how, 33 H. 6. 34. Sir T. C. Case, 27
H. 6. 2. 4 E. 3. 43. vide 19 E. 3. Quare impedit 58. And if it were not good by
the Common Law, yet it was but form, and aided by the Statute of 27 Eliz: cap.
5. vide in Doctor Leifeilds Case, lib: 10. fol: 94. And Justice Winch agreed
with me, but Warburton to the contrary, and argued strongly, that it was
substance and was very material, and he relied upon the Book in the 38 H: 6.
17. and he put the cases of 11 H: 6. 43. 8 H: 6. 22. and 2 H: 2. and Wimbish
and Talbois case. Plowden, There is debate, and argued two against two, and no
Judgment given, because that it is not shown Comment. Cousin, vide 2 H: 5. 7. a
good Issue, there is no such Ancestor, a general Demurrer confess not the
matter, as in Debt upon a Bill, he plead payment and the Plaintiff demur, that
Demurrer does not confess the payment. Lord Hobart would not speak of the
Common Law, but it seemed good to him by the Statute. The Title of the Act is,
An Act for furthering of Justice, Definitive Justice, and Interlocutery. The
Statute takes not away form, but the intrappings and snares of form: No place
where the Obligation is made cannot be tried by them affirmatively. Hough and
Bamfields case matter and no form, and so Dyer 319. But the point of Cousinage
which comes by videlicet is form: And if the case of Wimbish and Talbois had
been at this day it should be aided, and Judgment for the Defendant.

Sheriff ought to deliver the Moiety by meets and bounds.
IT was argued by the Court that upon an Elegit the Sheriff ought to deliver the
Moiety by meets and bounds, and if it be so that the Conuzor be Ioynt-tenant,
or Tenant in Common, then it ought to be so specially alleged and contained in
the return.

Pasch. 16 Jac. Drury versus Fitch.
Case.
DRury an Attorney of this Court, brought an action upon the case against
Fitch, one of the Sergeants of London, for saying, I arrest thee for Felony,
and after not guilty pleaded the Plaintiff was Nonsuited: Costs upon Nonsuit
where the Plaintiff has no cause of action.
And now it was moved that no costs should be given to the Defendant, because
that the words will not bear action, and therefore Judgment shall be given Quod
nil capiat per billam: And they vouched one President in Grewstons case in Ban.
Reg. vide, that now by the last Statute, costs shall be given to the Defendant
in all cases where the Plaintiff should have costs if he recover; but in such
case where the Plaintiff if he recover shall not have costs, the Defendant upon
the Nonsuit of the Plaintiff shall not have costs.

But it seemed to Lord Hobart, that in this case the costs are for vexation,
and this is more vexation if he had no cause of action, vide 29 H: 8. fol: 32.
It is there resolved, that an action lies for the costs, notwithstanding a Writ
of Error brought: And the last day of this Term the Court was of opinion that
the action lies for the words, for it is more then these, I charge thee with
Felony, and if the Action lies not, yet the Defendant shall have costs, for it
was such an Action in which the Plaintiff ought to have costs if he recover.

Upon motion in Court by the direction of Justice Warburton who had caused a
Jury to be drawn, by reason of the slenderness of the matter, and for avoiding
the charge of a special Verdict; the Case was, A Copyholder was a Lunatic,
and the Lord committed the custody of his Land to one which brought an Action
of Trespass; Action brought by the Committee of a Lunatic which is a
Copyholder.
and whether it ought to be brought by him or by the Lunatic was the question.
And the opinion of the Court was, that the Committee was but as Bailiff, and
has no Interest, but for the profit and benefit of the Lunatic, and is as his
Servant; and it is contrary to the nature of his Authority to have an Action in
his own name, for the interest and the Estate, and all power of Suits is
remaining in the Lunatic: And it was ruled in this Court, that a Lunatic
shall have a Quare impedit in his own name, vide Beverlies case, Coke lib: 4.
the diversity between a Lunatic and an Idiot, and H: 8. Dyer fol: 25. And
though when Guardian in Socage (as it was adjudged) makes a Lease for years,
his Lessee shall have an Ejectione firmae, yet there the Guardian has the
Interest, and is accountable therefore. But in this case the Committee has no
Interest, but is as a Servant appointed by the Lord to keep the possession for
him, who is not able to keep it for himself. Lord Hobart and the Court also
agreed, that the Lord of a Manor has not power to commit or dispose of the
Copyhold of a Lunatic without special Custom, no more then a man shall be
Tenant by the Courtesy, etc. of a Copyhold without Custom, nor the Lord cannot
commit during the Minority of an Infant Copyholder without Custom.

Hill. 15 Jac. Rot. 906. Smith versus Stafford. Brownlow.

Suff.
ANdrew Smith and Anne his Wife, Case.
against Richard Stafford Executor of Jeremy Stafford in an Action upon the
Case, the Plaintiff counts, that whereas there was Communication had of a
Marriage between the said Anne (when she was sole) and the said Jeremy, Where
inter-marriage release a promise made by the Husband to the Wife before
marriage.
the said Jeremy in consideration that the said Anne would take him to her
husband, promised that if after the Marriage the said Jeremy dyed, living the
said Anne, he would leave the said Anne worth a hundred pounds: and aver that
she did marry the said Jeremy which died, and did not leave her worth a hundred
pounds: And upon Non assumpsit the Jury found for the Plaintiff; and in Arrest
of Judgment it was alleged, that this intermarriage had extinguished the
action, vide 11 H: 7. 4 21 H. 7. 30. Coke 8. 136. there in Sir John Needhams
case many cases are put, vide Hoes case, that a Release do not discharge Bail
before Judgment, for it is contingent, vide one Judgment, Hill: 6. Jac. in the
Kings Bench, Rot: 132.

Thomas Belcher and Elizabeth his Wife, Belcher and Hudson.
against Edmond Hudson an Action upon the case, in consideration that the said
Elizabeth at his request would take one Thomas Mason his familiar Friend to her
Husband, he assumed and promised that if the said Elizabeth survived the said
Mason, that he would pay yearly to her forty shillings for her maintenance, and
shows that thereupon she did take the said Mason to her Husband, and survived
him, and then married with the Plaintiff; the Defendant pleads a Release from
Mason of all Actions, Demands, etc. and it was adjudged no sufficient release:
But Lord Hobart said, that if he had released all promises that would have
discharged the Defendant, vide 4 Eliz: Release of all Actions, Suits, Quarrels,
etc. does not release a Covenant before it be broken, but otherwise of a
release of all Covenants, as it appears in Dyer 57. though the principal case
was a release of all Covenants until such a day, and Covenants were broken
before and not discharged, for it being broken before, there was no Covenant as
to that.

Vide Lampets case, Coke lib: 10. 51. the reason of the release in Hoes case
was, because that it was contingent and uncertain, and 17 Eliz: a Lease to the
Husband and Wife for life, the Remainder to the Survivor of them for one and
twenty years, the Baron grant it over and survive, yet it is void, because it
was contingent.

And the Lord Hobart said, that the promise was released by the inter-marriage,
and so shall be in the case of an Obligation, for Fortior est dispositio legis
quam hominis; and he held that strongly to be Law, but Justice Winch and
Justice Hutton held the contrary, and that the Law will not work a release
contrary to the intent of the parties, and that the marriage (which is the
cause) do not destroy that which it self creates.

Trin. 6 Jac. Jurden versus Stone.
Glocest.
EIectment upon a Lease made by Alice Remington of a Copyhold in South Corny;
Walter B. Copyholder in Fee married the said Alice: And there was a Custom in
the Manor that the Wife shall have the Copyhold as of Franck-banck during her
Widowhood, Where a woman may enter in and bring an action t^^ be^^^ Franck bank
before admittance.
Si tam diu casta viveret, and had used to challenge it, and the Lord granted
it, as appears by diverse admittances of women; and this Wife after the death of
her Husband came into Court, and challenged her right of Franck-bank, and
prayed to be admitted, and that the Steward refused, and she made a Lease for
one year to the Plaintiff; and if he might bring this action, by reason the
woman was not admitted (for it was agreed that no Fine was due to the Lord) was
the question.

And upon the Evidence it was resolved by the Court, that this Estate arises
out of the Estate of the Husband: And as Lord Hobart said, it budded forth of
the first Estate; and it seemed that where Tenant for life is admitted, that
shall be the admittance of him in remainder: Also if the Freehold of the
Copyhold be granted over, and the Husband dies, there there cannot be any
admittance, and yet she may enter; and in this case if any admittance had been
necessary, she had done all that she could do, and that amounts to an
admittance in Law to an Estate created by the Custom, and by the act of God and
Law. A Tenant alieu, and the Feoffee tender the services and gives notice, the
Lord refuse, this is sufficient, and the Lord shall be compelled to avow upon
him. Continual claim amounts to an entry.

Pasch. 16 Jac. Rot. 444. Blands Case.
Case.
GEorge Bland brought an Action upon the Case against A. B. the Defendant
having some communication with one Eagle said, that he was a troublesome
fellow, and he doubted not but to see him indicted at the next Assizes for
Barretry, or Sheep-stealing as George Bland was, Words.
for George Bland was indicted the last Assizes for stealing of Sheep; and it
was not averred that he was not indicted, but that he was of good fame, It was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it is not actionable, and so was the opinion
of the Court, for it is not a direct affirmative: vide the case of Steward
against Bishop, before fol. 1. And if one says, I suspect you for stealing my
Horse. And Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Trin. 16 Jac. Darcy versus Askwith. Brownlow.

Ebor.
JOhn Lord Darcy of Ashton brought an action of Wast against Robert Askwith
(now Knight) and John Marshall, Wast.
and assign the wast in Woods, viz. In cutting down and selling two Oaks,
four Ashes in a Close called Tisley Close, two Oaks in Parsons croft; one Ash
in Pinder croft, and sixty one Oaks in Preston Lands, Wast in cutting of wood
to make Cole mines.
and in diverse other Closes in Swillington and Preston: The Defendant plead a
Lease of the Manor of Swillington to him for years, and also of the Mines, and
justify the shrowding of the Trees to make Punchons, Poles, and Stakes, and
other Vtensils, in and about certain Pits called Cole-mines, in one of the
Closes, without which the Defendants could no^ dig and take Coals out of the
said Pits; and aver employment about of the said Cole-mines, and justify the
cutting of other trees for the making of Instruments, for the extracting of the
water out of the said Pits, and that without which they could not dig any
Coals, and they were necessary for the digging of Coals, and for supporting the
Pits, and aver the Employment; And thereupon the Plaintiff demurred: And we all
agreed that the Plea is not good; Harris argued for the Defendant for three
reasons.

1. Because by the Lease this was included, vide 21 H: 6. 61. grant of
Conuzance, etc. gives power to make a Steward, tempore E. 1. Fitz. 41. 2 E. 2.
Bar 237. grant to fish in a Pond, yet he cannot make a Trench.

2. The Coals are the Inheritance, and the bettering of them is the bettering
of the Inheritance.

3. For the profit of the Commonwealth, 14 H: 8. 18. 20 Eliz: Dyer 361. Altams
case, Trench to make a Meadow the better is no wast, vide 22 H: 6. 6. digging
of certain Loads of Gravel for the amending of the Land, vide 12 H: 4, 5. And
for telling, this ought not to be answered any other way then by justifying of
the Employment; and the Plaintiff may reply upon the sale if he will, and the
case is long debated, 5 E: 4. 10. vide Dyer 37. Malenders case.

And the last day of this Term, the Lord Hobart declared, that we were all of
opinion that the Plea is not good, for there though the Lease be of Mines, and
by virtue thereof the Lessee might open new Mines, as in Sanders case, Coke lib:
5. fol. 12. there it shall be intended of new Mines which in themselves is
wast, if it had not been by special words; And the digging of a Mine is an
impairing of the Inheritance and a great benefit to the Lesses, and therefore if
Lessee for years build a new house, if he cut Trees off the same Lands for the
making thereof, it is wast, 17 E: 2. Fit: wast 118. And no more then one may
make a Brick Kilne and burn Brick, or a Lyme Kilne and burn Lyme with wood
growing upon the ground, and sell the Brick or Lyme, no more may the Defendants
in this case cut down wood for the making and supporting of these Mines for
Coals which they sell, vide 41 E: 3. 17. And so Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Edmonds Case.
MEmorand. That at the Assizes holden at Winchester in Lent, 15 Jac. one
William Edmonds was indicted of Burglary, because that he Burglariter and
feloniously did break the house of one Richard Heydon in the night at Ramsey,
Burglary.
and the Jury gave a special Verdict. We find that Richard Heydon and
Christian his Wife were both in Bed and at rest in an upper Chamber in the
Mansion house of the said Richard Heydon; and that the said William Edmonds
then was and yet is the Servant and Apprentice of the said Richard, and that he
then lay in another Chamber of the said house, remote from the Bedchamber of
his said Master and Dame, and that there was a Door with a Latch at the Stairs
foot of the said Bedchamber of the said Heydon, but none at the Stair-head
being the entrance into the said Bedchamber of the said Heyedon: We find that
the said William at the said time in the Indictment drew the Latch of the
Stair-foot door, and opened the said door being then latched, and went up the
Stairs, and entered into the Bedchamber of his said Master, with an intent to
murder the said Heydon, and that he did then and there with an Hatchet (with
an intent to murder his said Master) strike and grievously wound him, and gave
him fifteen wounds on the head, and other parts of his body: And if upon the
whole matter, etc.

And this special Verdict was shown by the Lord chief Baron Tanfield, unto all
the Judges of Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, viz. Justice, Warburton, Crook,
Baron Bromely, Justice Dodderidge, Houghton, Winch, and Hutton; And they all
(besides Winch which doubted) agreed that it was Burglary, and afterward in
the same Term, at a meeting in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet it was shown to
Mountague, Hobart, and Denham, which concurred.

Mich, 16 Jac. Staffords Case.
FAlse Imprisonment was brought by Sir John Stafford, the Defendant justify,
Matter of Record tried by the Country.
that Bristoll is an ancient City, and that time whereof memory, etc. there has
been a Court holden there before the Sheriffs etc. and justify that there was
a Plaint levied, and Judgment, and that the now Plaintiff was taken in
execution. The Plaintiff replied Quod non fuit aliqua querela levata, according
to the custom, and requires this Quod inquiratur, etc. And it was tried at
Bristoll and found for the Plaintiff, and damages twenty six pounds. And it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this being matter of Record, viz. the entry
of the Plaint in a Court of Record, it shall be tried by the Record, and not by
the Country.

And it was adjudged that the trial was good, because that it is not merely
Record, but whether it was according to the Custom. And Non prosecutus est
ullum breve is tryable by the Country; Quaere if the King grant by Patent to
hold plea under forty shillings, if it be a Court of Record.

Sir Walter Rawleys Case.
MEmorand. that on Friday the 23. of October, upon conference between all the
Justices of England, whether a privy Seal was sufficient, it being directed to
the Justices of the Kings Bench, to command them to award execution against Sir
Walter Rawley (which was attainted of Treason at Winchester Mich. 1 Jacobi, How
Prisoners which are attainted of Treason, and set at large, shall be brought to
execution.
before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer) or how they should proceed before
execution be awarded: It was resolved by all, that he ought to be brought to
Bar by Habeas Corpus to the Lieutenant of the Tower, and then demanded if he
could say any thing why execution should not be awarded, for the proceedings
against him being before Commissioners, they are delivered only into the Court
of Kings bench, or they might have remained in a Bag or a Chest, and no Roll
made thereof, and so long time passing, it is not a Legal course that he should
be commanded by a privy Seal, or great Seal to be executed, without being
demanded what he has to say, for he might have a pardon, or he might say, that
he is not the same person: As if one be Outlawed of Felony and taken, he shall
not be presently hanged, but he shall be brought to Bar and so demanded etc.
And upon this resolution a privy Seal came to the Justices of the Kings Bench,
commanding them to proceed against him according to Law: And thereupon a Habeas
Corpus was awarded, and October: 28. he came to the Bar, being brought by the
Lieutenant, and there he was demanded of whether he had any thing to say why,
etc. and there he showed, that the King had employed him as General of a
Voyage, and has given him power De vita and membris upon others: And whether
this did amount to a pardon or no, he knew not. The Attorney-generall said,
that the King pardoned no Treasons by any Implication, but it ought to be by
special words: Then he said he had nothing else to say, but submit himself to
the mercy of the King; And there execution was awarded, and a Roll made thereof
(and so it was done in Lepu's case, as the President was shown) and he was
committed to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and by them he was brought
to the Gatehouse, and the next day (which day the Lord Mayor of London came to
Westminster to take his Oath) he was beheaded in the great Court at
Westminster, and he died in a good and religious manner, and spoke much without
any fear of death, submitted himself to the Block, and by his death gained
great reputation in this life, and by the grace and mercy of God remission of
his sins, and eternal life afterward, etc.

Bishop and others.
FAther Tenant in tail has Issue two Sons, the Father with the eldest Son
makes a Feoffment with Warranty, the eldest Son dies, Lineall Warranty.
and after the Father dies, the younger Son brought his Formedon; and this
Feoffment with warranty of the eldest Son is pleaded in Bar, and upon Demurrer,
Judgment for the Demandant: For it is but a lineall Warranty, and then without
Assets it is no Bar, for though the eldest Son dye in the life of the Father,
yet the younger Son by possibility might have the Land as Heir to him.

Mich. 16 Jacobi.
AN action of Debt was brought upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for perjury against
one that was produced as a Witness in an action of Trespass, and deposed
falsely: And upon Nil debet pleaded, the Plaintiff was nonsuit, Costs shall not
be allowed upon a nonsuit in an action brought upon the Statute 5 Eliz. of
Perjury.
And whether the Defendant should have costs or no, was moved by Sergeant
Harvy, and that stands upon the words of the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 16. the
words are, In any Action, Suit, Bill, upon the Case, or upon any Statute for
any Offense, or wrong personal immediately supposed to be done to the Plaintiff.

The opinion of the Court was, that the Defendant should not have costs upon
this nonsuit, because that this action is founded upon a Statute made long
after the making of that Statute. Also this is not an immediate wrong to the
Plaintiff, but to the Secondary for it is an immediate wrong to the truth; and
such Statutes which are intended by this Act, shall be like to Trespass done
to the party himself, as Ravishment of Ward: Also it is not aided by the
Statute of 4 Jacobi cap: 3. for that gives costs to the Defendant, where the
Plaintiff shall have costs if he recover; And Mr. Brownlow the Prothonatory
said, that it had been ruled so before, for the Plaintiff should not have costs
if he recover, because the Act 5 Eliz. gives a Penalty, viz. a forfeiture of
twenty pounds against the Witness, and forty pounds against the Suborner, and
so the Plaintiff if he had recovered, should not have had any costs, and
therefore it is not aided by the Statute of 4 Jacobi.

Mich. 16 Jacobi. Conesbies Case.
THe Lady Conesby, being the Wife of Sir Ralph Conesby, was cited into the
Ecclesiastical Court by Mr. Watts, Prohibition:
who had married Elizabeth the Grandchild of the Father of Sir Ralph, to which
Grandchild by Will one Legacy of a hundred pounds was devised, and that was
pass 3 Jac. by the Lady Conesby Executor of the first Testator, and upon
payment an Acquittance under the hand and Seal of the said Watts was, etc. in
the presence of two Witnesses now dead: And this being denied, and they
allowing of no proof by comparison of hands, nor by circumstances, but only
proof of them which wrote it, or of them which saw them subscribe: And by their
Law an Acquittance of the Husband for a Legacy to the Wife, without the Wife is
not sufficient, also if Watts himself will deny it upon his Oath, there it
shall stand against all proofs: A Prohibition was granted upon the motion of
Sergeant John Moore, and after Sergeant Harvy had said all that he could say.

Trin. 16 Jac. Rot. 954. Kind versus Ammery.
KInd Plaintiff in a Replevin against Ammery: Replevin.
The Avowry was for a Rentcharge, and the Grant was of a rent of twelve pounds
payable at two Feasts, Demand not necessary in an Avowry for a Rentcharge.
and if it us behind for the space of a month after any of the said Feasts, it
being lawfully demanded, that he might distrain; and for Rent arrear at the
Annunciation, and by the space of a month after, and not paid, he distrained:
And the Plaintiff demurred upon this Avowry, and shows for cause, that it is
not shown that the Avowant made any demand before the Distress: And Sergeant
Harris relied upon a Case which was An: 31 Eliz. as he said, and vouched the
number Roll; Bosdens case.
that upon demurrer between Bosden and Downs, there the Avowry was not good
for the same cause: And Maunds case, Coke lib. 7: fol. 28. implies that it
ought to be demanded, but it is not issuable, if it be at the day or after: And
he said it was debated 31 Eliz. whether it was form or substance, which shall
not need to be shown upon Demurrer; But the Court agreed that no actual demand
was necessary to proceed the Distress in this case, but that the Distress is
a demand. But if the Grant has been penned in this form, if it be arrear at
such a Feast, and for a month after demand, that then he may distrain,
otherwise it is, for there the Distress is limited to the month after the
demand: And so it was adjudged in this Court, between Coppleston and Langford,
Trin. 3. Car. Rot. 2865. Copplestone and Langford.


Replevin between Beriman and Bower, Avowry for Rent granted out of ten acres
of Land in Crediton, payable at such a Feast upon the Town stone, upon the Key
in Barnstable, if it be lawfully demanded, with clause of Distress, and the
Distress was before demand; and upon demurrer it was resolved a good Distress
without demand, vide Dyer 348.

Booton against the Bishop of Rochester
A Quare impedit was brought by Booton against the Bishop of Rochester, who
pleads that he claims nothing but as Ordinary, and yet pleads further that the
Clerk which the Plaintiff present, had before contracted with the Plaintiff
Simoniacally, Insufficient return on a Writ in Quare Impedit to the Arch bishop.
and therefore because he was Simoniacus he refused him, and that the Church was
then void, and so remained void, whereupon the Plaintiff had a Writ to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who returned that before the coming of this Writ,
viz. 4 July, the Church was full of one Mr. Doctor Grant ex collatione of the
said Bishop of Rochester which had collated by Laps, and this return was
adjudged insufficient: First, it is clear, that though the six months pass,
yet if the Patron present, the Bishop ought to admit, although it be after the
title devolved unto the Metropolitan: And it seems also reason that he ought to
admit, though that the Title by Laps be accrued to the King, for he claims it
as supreme Ordinary, vide Dyer 277. quaere. But in this case the Bishop which
is the Defendant is bound by the Judgment, and the Writ is, notwithstanding
the claim of the Bishop, that he admit the Clerk; and the Bishop is but
Servant, and ought to execute the process of the Court. It was urged by
Sergeant Henden, one Canon, Linwood fol. That if the Church be vacant when the
Writ comes to the Bishop, that he is bound to execute the Writ, but if it be
full, then he certifies the Justices: And the Archbishop is sworn to the
Canons, and he vouched 22 H: 6. 45. Coke lib: 6. 49. and 52 Dyer 260. F.N.B.
47. Dyer 364. 14 H: 7. 22. 34. H: 6. 41. 9 E: 3. Quare non admisit, 18 E: 4. 7.

Trin. 16 Jac. Rot. 1999. Eire versus Bannester.
JOhn Eire brought an Ejectione firmae upon a Lease made by Sir Edward Kinaston
against Andrew Bannester and Thomas Wenlock for Land in Norwood, Challenge.
and after Not guilty, the Plaintiff made surmiss of Kindred to the Sheriff Sir
Thomas Owen to the Plaintiff, the Defendant pleads, that the Sheriff Non est de
consanguinitate of the Plaintiff, as he by his challenge supposed: And because
the Defendant denied the said Challenge, John Eire calumnia illa non obstant,
prec: est quod ven. fac. etc. And at the Nisi prius the Defendants challenge
the Array for consanguinity between the Sheriff and the Lessor, viz. Sir Edward
Kinaston, and make this Averment, that the Sheriff had Issue by Susan, which
was the Daughter of Judith, the Wife of Sir Edward Kinaston; and conclude it is
a principal Challenge, and thereupon the Plaintiff demurred: And it was
returned upon the Postea, and it seems that the Sheriff being admitted and
allowed to be indifferent by the Defendants in the same Plea, they which allow
cannot have a Challenge to the Sheriff, for the Defendants might by confession
of the surmise of the Plaintiff to be true, have had a Writ directed to the
Coroners, and although the entry is Calumnia illa non obstant. that is the form
of the Award, and if he should be allowed otherwise afterward to challenge the
Array, then it would be infinite.

As a man ought to allege but one principal Challenge, though he has many,
so it shall be peremptory to the Defendant, and when he allows the Sheriff
indifferent, that shall be taken to be for all causes precedent, unless it be
of latter time: And so is the opinion of 20 E: 4. 2. And if there be many
Defendants, if one challenge the Array, that shall be peremptory for the
others, as it seems; for the others ought when they challenge the Tales to show
cause presently of the Challenge, for if it be quashed that shall also be
against them, vide Dyer 201. in Attaint vide 36 H. 6. 21. that where one
challenge the Array which is affirmed, the other Defendants after may challenge
the Array of the Tales.

The second point is, if it be a principal challenge or no, by reason that the
Lessor is not party to the Action, vide 10 E 4. 12. 15 E. 4. 18. and 21 E. 4.
61. there it seems that where the Defendant justifies as Servant to I.S. and
that the Land is his Freehold, it is a principal challenge that a Iuror is
within the Distress of John S. for the Title is to be tried: And now it was
found by common experience that the Less^e is but Servant; common recoveries at
this day are but as other common Conveyances.

But it seems that the Law is contrary, and it is not averred that this is a
Lease for trying the Title; and (as Judges) we take no notice thereof, but vide
3 H: 7. 2. contrary to the 10 and 15 E: 4. where the Challenge is to the Array,
because that the Sheriff was of Kindred to him whose Freehold was in Issue:
and vide 9 H: 7. 22. Cognizance as Bailiff to the Abbot of Ramsey, Challenge to
the Array, because the Sheriff was within the Distress of the Abbot, and that
was not a principal Challenge by Fineux, Brian, and Vavasor, because that he
was not party to the Writ, vide this very Case, Dyer 300.

And upon argument at the Bar the Court was of opinion, that it was no
principal Challenge, but ought to have concluded with the favor. All agreed
that a Surmise which is for prevention of delay, ought to contain matter which
is a principal Challenge, for no trial shall be of such suggestion, but by the
denial of the Defendant or Confession: And by the opinion of Lord Hobart and
Justice Winch cest. dedire n'est peremptory to the Defendant, for his time of
challenge is not till the Jury come to be sworn; but I hold the contrary,
because that he might have confessed the Surmise, and so have had time: And I
rely upon 20 E: 4. 2. there in the end of the Case it is said, that the
Defendant by his denial, where he says that the Sheriff is not favorable,
but indifferent, there he shall never have a challenge for favor unless he
shows cause of later time.

As to the second Point, it is no principal Challenge, because it might be,
that the Lessor had granted over the Reversion, or that the Defendant might be
found Not guilty: And a principal Challenge ought to contain such matter,
which (being so) the Law adjudge favorable; and in this very case two
Presidents scil. Judgments more strong then this case, Bedforne and Dandy.
Hill: 44 Eliz: Rot: 1208. Bedforne against Dandy in an Ejectione firmae upon a
Lease made by Sir John Digby, after Not guilty pleaded, a Surmise made of
consanguinity between the Lessor and the Sheriff, etc. confessed, and thereupon
a Venire facias to the Coroners, and after the Challenge was adjudged
insufficient, and a Venire facias likewise to the Sheriff was ruled, Craddock
and Wenlock.
Trin: 14 Jac. Rot. 2284. Craddock against Wenlock, in an Ejectione firmae upon
a Lease made by Sir Robert Cotton, such Challenge and Award to the Coroners,
and tried and adjudged a mis-tryall; and a Venire facias awarded to the
Sheriff, and the mis-tryall is not aided by the Statute, vide Coke lib: 5.
Bainhams case: And so by the Judgment of the Court this Challenge was
insufficient; and Warburton being then sick was of the same opinion, as he told
me, vide 8 Eliz: Dyer 281. Austen and Baker in Attaint, vide 33 H. 6. 21.

3. Defendants, one challenge the Array of the Principal, and that being
affirmed the other Defendants challenge the Tales.

Mich. 16 Jac. Easington versus Boucher. Debt.

Several Defendants in Debt upon a joint Contract may plead several plea^.
EAsington brought an action of Debt upon a joint Contract against: Sir John
Boucher, Turner, Bolder, and one other; Turner appear and tender his Law, Sir
John Boucher and another plead Nil debent, and the other was Outlawed; and it
was said, that he ought to have joined, but it was resolved by the Court that
they may sever in Bars, but ought to join in Delatories; For otherwise if one
which never bargained be joined in the action, he must put his matter upon
their pleadings. And in Debt upon a joint Obligation, one may plead a Release,
the other Non est factum, vide 48 E: 3. 21. and vide Presidents in this case
according to this resolution, Sabud versus R^w. ^. Trin. 26 Eliz Rot. 821.
Trin: 26 Eliz: Rot: 821. Sabud against Robinson, Matson, and Loughton, and
Count sur emisset, Waston and Loughton pleaded, and Non sum informatus by
Robinson, Sed judicium inde cesset quousque, the Issue be tried, and Venire
facias awarded and found for the Plaintiff, Pe^iam and T.P. H.P and I.P.
Hill: 41 Eliz: Rot: 455.

John Periam and Margaret his wife, Executors of John Heart vrought an action of
Debt upon Emisset against Thomasin Phelpes Widow, Henry Pittard, and John
Phelpes: John Phelpes was Outlawed, and Judgment against Henry P. by Non sum
informat. and Thom: P. plead Nil debet, Fleet and Harrison.
Venire facias, and Judgment respited quousque etc. and after trial the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

Hill: 13 Jac: Rot: 841. Fleet brought an action of Debt against Ja: Harrison,
and Isaac. Brook upon Emissent: And James H. waged his Law, and Judgment
against Isaac. Brook by nihil dicit. Et quia Conveniens est quod judicium de
loquela praedicta unicum sit versus praedictos Isaac. and Jacobum si contingat
ipsum Jacob. de perficiend. legem suam praedictam desicere, Ideo parcat in
judicium inde versus praefatum Isaac. reddendum quosque praedictus Jacobus
legem praedictam perficeret, sive inde desiceret and postea praedictus Jacobus
perfecit legem suam. Ideo consideratum est per Curiam quod praedictus querens
nihil capiat per breve suum praedictum sed sit in miserecordia pro falso
clamore suo inde, and quod praedictus Jacobus eat inde sine die. And according
to this President it was agreed per Curiam that so it ought to be.

Hill. 12 Jac. Rot. 3007. Reyner versus Waterhouse.
Ebor. Case.

JOhn Reyner brought an action upon the case against L: Walterhouse, Ven. fat.
de d^versis villis.
and declares, that whereas he is, and by the space of twenty years past have
been an Inhabitant within the Town of Long Leverseidge in the Parish of
Burstall: And whereas the Inhabitants of Long Leverseidge aforesaid, De tempore
cujus contrarii memoria hominum; etc. used to have a common way as well for
Footmen as for Horsemen, to go and ride from the said Town of L. to the
Parish Church of Burstall aforesaid, on Lords days, and Festival days, and
other convenient times to hear Divine Service within the said Church; and to
carry bodies, etc. dying in the said Town, to the said Church to be interred,
Modo and forma sequent. viz etc. and shows the way through diverse Closes in
Long Leverseidge, Little Leverseidge, and Gomersall, and over the Churchyard
of the Church of Burstall, and from thence unto the Church aforesaid, and
backward, etc. and show one disturbance made by the Defendant by making of a
Ditch in one of the Closes in Gomersall; the Defendant pleaded Non culpab: and
found for the Plaintiff; and in Arrest of Judgment it was alleged that the
Venire facias fuit de Gomersall tant. And the Venire facias was quashed per
Curiam, and a new one awarded de L.L.G. and Burstall.

Hill. 16 Jac. Bigg versus Malin.
BIgg brought an action upon the Case against Malin, Case.
as Administrator, and counts that whereas the Intestate was indebted to him in
ten pounds, and the Defendant also was indebted to him in forty shillings, they
accounted, and upon account the Debt being twelve pounds, In case upon
Assumpsit against Executors, it is not necessary to allege Assets.
the Defendant being Administrator did assume and promise to pay it, Et licet
saepius requisitus non solvit: And upon Non assumpsit pleaded, the Verdict was
found for the Plaintiff: And by Finch, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
the Plaintiff had not shown in this Count sufficient consideration to charge
the Defendant, because that it does not appear that the Defendant has Assets.
But the Court disallowed that, for if that were necessary it ought to be
presumed to be found in the Verdict; As in the case, in consideration that the
Plaintiff had sold and delivered to him twenty quarters of good and
merchantable Barley, the Defendant promise to pay him twenty pound: Non
Assumpsit, the Plaintiff ought to prove the promise and the delivery. And as in
Debt against Executors upon a simple Contract, it shall not need to be alleged
that they had Assets to pay Debts by specialties, yet good, and that ought to
be proved.

But it seemed to be agreed, that if an Executor or Administrator which has
not Assets, makes promise of payment, if it be not mixed with any profit to
himself, viz. forbearance, etc: there it shall not charge him.

But by Warburton, if an Executor has fifty pounds Assets, and he promise to
pay to a Creditor a hundred pounds, that shall bind him for all, for when he
has Assets for part, the Plaintiff has Judgment for all, and execution only
for so much as is found. And in this case the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Brook versus Groves.
BRook brought a Quod permittat against Groves, and after Imparlance the
Defendant demanded a view, and ruled by the Court that he might, and vide 34 H:
6. 9, 10. accordant, vide 6 E. 4. 1. and the Plea, Quare impedit.
viz. the View was De tenementis predictis, which was as well of the Lands to
which the Nuisance, as of the Lands which was the Nuisance: View.
And the View in this action is but for fifteen days.

Egerton versus Egerton.
THe Lady Egerton Wife of Sir John Egerton, brought a Writ of Dower against
Edward Egerton, the Tenant at the day of Essoin did not cast any Essoin: And
the Demandant entered her exception, and at that time the Writ was not returned,
and upon motion to the Court for the tenant to be essoined notwithstanding the
exception, Dower.
it was resolved that notwithstanding the writ was not returned, yet the Tenant
might have his Essoin, vide 2 E. 4. 11. 21 E. 4. 7, 8. 30 H. 6. 1. that an
Essoine may be before the Writ be returned, and vide 2 H: 7. 4. 10 E: 4. 4. the
Tenant may be Essoined at any day, Essoin though the Writ be not returned.
as well at the fourth day as the day of Essoin, unless the Essoin be
challenged, viz. an exception entered, and 2 H: 7. 4. takes a difference between
a real Action, or Original Suit, and a Writ of Execution; for upon the first,
the Essoin lies at any time before the fourth day, but in the Writ of Execution
the Defendant ought to be essoined at the day of the Essoin.

And Warburton said, that if the Essoin be not cast before the return of the
Writ, it ought not to be at all, for all Writs come in by Post diem.

Cardinals Case.
Cardinal an Attorney of this Court of Common Bench, Case.
brought an action upon the case against I. B. for saying of him, That he had
forged the last Will of I. S. and after Issue upon not guilty, it was found for
the Plaintiff: And moved in Arrest of Judgment, Words.
that it is not alleged that the Will is supposed to be forged. But by the
Court, that was necessarily employed, and the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Pasch. 17 Jac. Allaboyter versus Clifford.
Suff.
JOhn Allaboyter brought an action of Debt upon an Obligation against Daniel
Clifford, which was with a Condition, Debt.
that if the Defendant perform the Award of two Arbitrators of all Actions,
Demanos etc, moved between the Plaintiff and Defendant from the beginning of
the world until the day of the date of the Obligation, Arbitrament,
so that the arbitrament be made before the tenth day of December, the
Defendant plead no such award before the day, the Plaintiff reply and show,
that the ninth day of December they awarded of and upon the premises, and
arbitrated that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff fourteen pounds at
two several days, and that upon the last day the Plaintiff should make a
general release to the Defendant, and the Defendant likewise to the Plaintiff,
and allege a breach for the non payment of the first seven pounds, and aver
that the fourteen pounds was awarded to the Plaintiff, in full satisfaction of
all suits, quarrels, etc. depending between the Plaintiff and the Defendant,
at any time before the Date of the Obligation, upon which Plea the Defendant
demurred, and objected by Attho, that the Release which is appointed to be made
upon the last day, is not appointed but after the payment of the money, and
also is then to be made of more then is submitted to them. But by the Court it
is agreed to be a good Award, for it shall not be intended that there were more
matters arising between them after the date of the Obligation: Also if he had
made a Release until the date of the Obligation, that were a good performance.
And this Case had been adjudged before between Nichols and Grandie. Nichols and
Grandy.


George Andrews Case.
Upon a Habeas Corpus, one George Andrews was brought to the Bar, and upon a
long return by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, The Custom of
London to give security for the payment of the Portions of Orphans, and upon
refusal the Debtors are to be committed.
of their custom concerning the Orphans of Freemen, and for the security of
their Portions to be paid to them at the age of 21. years, or at the time of
their marriage, or at such time as is appointed by the Will of their Father, or
Mother, or other Freemen giving to them any Legacy, they use to take
sufficient security of them which ought to pay them, and if they refuse, then
to commit them to the Counter until they give security; and that their customs
were confirmed by Act of Parliament, An. 7. R. 2. William Andrews a Freeman
having one Son and one Daughter by Emery his Wife died, this George Andrews a
Freeman being Suitor to the Wife before marriage agreed, that if the Wife
would marry him, she should dispose of two hundred pounds, etc. and he was
bound in a Statute to permit and suffer her to make her Will, and dispose
thereof; and after she died, and by her Will gave a hundred pounds to her Son,
and a hundred pounds to her Daughter, and the said G.A. agreed to her Will, and
yet refused to give security to the Chamberlain of London to pay it at the day
appointed by the Will, pretending that he was bound by Statute to the Friends
of the Orphans to perform it: And by the Court he was remanded, for it is a
laudable Custom, and the voluntary Obligation upon marriage is not any
discharge as to the security by the Custom, and we will not disparage the
Government of the City.

Trin. 16 Jac. Wolf versus Heydon.
London.
Debt.
THomas Wolf Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of John Aldrich, durante
minore aetate of Edward Aldrich, William Aldrich, and other Children of the
said John not administered by John Talbot, Executor of John A, or by Robert
Armiger late Administrator of the said Goods and Chattels during the minority
of the said Children not administered, To what intents a man shall be said
Executor before he prove the Will.
brought an action of Debt against Simon Heydon, and count upon an Obligation
of fifty pounds, whereof ten pounds was satisfied to John Aldrich in his life,
and counts that John Talbot was made his Executor and died; and that the money
was neither paid unto the said John Aldrich the Testator in his life, nor to
John Talbot the Executor in his life, nor to the said Robert Armiger late
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of the said John Aldrich, during the
minority of the Children; and he produce Letters of Administration, and aver
that the Children were within the age of seventeen years. The Defendant plead
in Bar, that the said Aldrich before this Writ purchased, viz. such a day at S.
in the Parish, etc. made his Will and constituted John Talbot his Executor, Qui
suscepit onus inde, and administered diverse Goods as Executor, and after, viz.
such a day, the said John Talbot made Benjamin Roblet his Executor, and died,
and Roblet suscepit onus testament, and did administer, and demand Judgment si
actio, etc.

The Plaintiff reply and confess that John Aldrich made John Talbot his
Executor, and that he administered and made Roblet his Executor: But he says,
that the said John Talbot did not prove the Will of the said John Aldrich
according to the Ecclesiastical Law; and that the said Benjamin before that he
took the charge of the Testament of John Talbot renounced before the Ordinary
to be Executor of the said John Aldrich, or to administer any of the Goods
which were the Goods of the said John Aldrich, or to have any thing to do
therewith: And thereupon the Defendant demurs, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

And in this case the Court well agrees with the replication, for he was
Executor before probate, to pay Debts and to be sued, but not to have an
action, though that originally the probate was temporal: and it is no plea in
our Law, scil. that he did not prove the Will, but that he was not Executor:
And of late times our Law for the increasing of the credit, and for the
enforcing of the Probate, do disallow actions brought before the Probate, vide
the Case upon which it was principally insisted, 22, 23 Eliz. Dyer 272. a.
Isted against Stanley; If an Executor dies before Probate, and if the residue
of the Goods be devised to him, then Administration shall he committed to his
Executor, or otherwise to the next of the blood of the first Testator, for now
he dies intestate: And although it be one dying intestate of the first Testator
in Law, yet if being the real and special matter it agrees well with his
Writ, and is matter in Law, scil. to some purposes he dies intestate, and to
others not, for he had power to release, to pay Debts, and to take a release,
vide Dyer 367. a, It seems that his Executor shall have his Legacy. But the
Count is cu^bred with the Administration committed to Armiger, and it does not
appear how it was dischrrged, for it is only that the money was not paid to him
late Administrator, and it is good, and the action is brought according to the
Letters of Administration to him, which were of the Goods not administered by
John Talbot, nor by Armiger which was Administrator.

Coppledick versus Tansey.
Linc.
FRancis Coppledick Plaintiff in a Quare impedit against Samuel Tansey Clerk,
Sir Philip Tirivint Baronet, Quare impedit.
and Richard Bishop of Lincoln, Quod permittant ipsum presentare ad Ecclesiam
de Ulceby; and count that one Francis Coppledick was seized of the Advowson in
Fee, and that it was holden in Socage; Trial where no such Town is pleaded.
And that the said Francis so being seized devised it in tail, and entitle
himself as Heir in tail.

Tansey plead that he is Parson imparsonee of the presentment of the said Sir
Philip, and demand Oyer of the Writ, and plead that at the day of the Writ
purchased there was no such Richard Bishop of Lincoln in rerum natura, and
demands Judgment of the Writ: Sir Philip plead that there is no such Church
called Ulceby in the County of Lincoln, and demand Judgment of the Writ.

The Plaintiff ^emur upon the plea of the Incumbent and as to the plea of Sir
Philip, he reply, that there is such a Church called Ulceby in the County of
Lincoln; and this plea being tried at Lincoln, before Baron Bromley, it was
found for the Defendant: for there was an union of the Church of Fordington to
Ulceby, and it was called Ulceby cum Fordington: And it was said that
Institutions and presentiments were to Ulceby; and Ulceby was the greater, and
Fordington was the lesser Church, and united, and therein had lost its name. It
was agreed, that it being known by the one or by the other name, had been
sufficient to have found for the Plaintiff.

Sergeant Harris moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it being tried Per Venire
facias de vicineto de Ulceby, it was mis-tryed, for when Null tiel vill. is
pleaded, it shall be tried per Corpus Commitatus, 8 H. 6. 38 H. 8. and 24 E. 4.
4: Fitz. visne 27. And he vouched 45 E. 3. 6. where such an Issue was tried,
but it did not appear how the Venire was awarded. And at the first time of this
motion it appeared, prima facie, to be a mis-tryall.

Bawtry at another day moved it, and said, that the Writ is Quod permittant
presentare, to the Church of Ulceby, and the Count according therewith, it is to
be intended a Town or Parish: And he resembled it to the case of an Appeal
against one by the name of I. S. of Dale, Carpenter, and he traversed that he
was not dwelling at Dale, and it was a good trial from Dale: And of, in, and
at, are all one; but said, that in the Count it is said, that Edward Coppledick
died at Ulceby: And all the Court agreed that it is a good trial, and that it
is admitted that there is such a Town, and the Writ implies it: And Judgment
for the Defendant.

Smith versus Linsey.
Scire facias.
A Scire facias against Michael Linsey late Sheriff of Kent, by Smith,
reciting, that whereas he had recovered a hundred pounds against Sir Richard
Potham, and had sued a Scire facias, the Defendant being Sheriff, returned that
he levied sixty and three pounds which he had ready at the day, Scire facias
against a Sheriff to have execution against him of money returned levied by him.
and yet he did not bring the moneys into Court; and after it was removed de
son Office, and to know why he should not have Execution against him of the
said sum, with which he had charged himself by his return; and the Defendant
demurred, and upon reading of the Record, Judgment for the Plaintiff, according
to the case, 9 E 4 50. vide F.N.B. 165. 34 H. 6. 36. a. and 5 E. 3. 53. Fitz.
Execution 101. And between Richards and Speak, it was adjudged in this Court,
that Debt lies against the Sheriff, that has charged himself by his return,
that he has levied the money.

Replevin. Annuity for life to commence after 8. years mentioned in the Will,
where there is no mention made thereof.
Cony versus Cony.
Linc.
PAragrin Cony awows (in a Replevin brought by Sir Thomas Cony his Brother) for
twenty marks per annum, granted to him by the will of his Father for life, to
commence after the end of eight years contained in the Will, and in the Will no
mention is made of any eight years, and that was averred, and by the opinion of
the Court it ought to commence presently.

Trin. 17 Jacobi. Smith versus Sir John Boucher. Mich. 16 Jac. Rot. 3339.
London 1.
EDward Smith brought a Writ of Annuity against Sir John Boucher, Annuity.
and Thomas Jones de placito quod red. ei 120 l. and Count that the Defendants
by their Deed (shown in Court) reciting that whereas the King (by his Letters
Patents) had granted to them, A grant of an Annuity out of the profits of
Allome.
and to one William Turner certain Privileges and Licenses concerning the
making of Allome within this Realm, and within the Realm of Ireland for twenty
seven years, for the Council given before by him to the Defendant (he being
Counselor at Law) concerning the drawing of the Letters Patents: And for his
Council to be given afterward, granted to him the said annual sum of 40 l.
for 26 years next, payable at Midsomer and Christmas. The Defendants plead that
the King granted the sole, making of Allome to them as in the Letters Patents,
and confess the grant of the Annuity to the Plaintiff by Deed indented, one
part whereof sealed with the Seal of the Plaintiff they show, etc. But further
said, that the said Annuity was granted Percipend. extra clara lucra and
proficua, which accrue to them by the making of Allome: And they aver, that no
clear gains or profits have accrued to them, or any of them by the making of
Allome, since the making of the said Indenture, whereupon the Plaintiff demur.

1. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, for it is one good Grant of an
Annuity to charge their persons: And so of a Grant of an Annuity to be paid out
of such Coffers or Bags, vide 9 H. 6. Margery Parkers case, vide 22 H. 6. 12.

2. Also the limitation is to perceive of the clear gains, and plead it by the
Counter-part of the Indenture, and that ought not to be, but they should have
demanded Oyer of the Deed, and then either demur or plead that the same Deed
was granted over, etc.

3. It is not averred that no other person received or made any clear gain, but
only that the Defendant made no clear gain.

Burglary.
MEmorand. At the Assizes holden at Winchester in the last Circuit, before the
Lord chief Baron Tanfield (it being the third Circuit which I went with him:)
It was a question, whether one which had a Shop in the dwelling house of
another, and he which had the Shop worked therein in the day, but never lodged
there, and yet he had a house out of the Shop to the Street, if this Shop be
broken in the night, and diverse Goods stolen out thereof: if, it be Burglary.
Burglary.
And the Lord chief Baron and I resolved that it was no Burglary, because that
by the severance thereof by Lease to him which had it as a Shop, and his not
inhabiting therein, it was not any Mansion house or dwelling house, and ergo no
Burglary, but ordinary Felony.

Mich. 15 Jac. Adavis versus Flemming.
Case.
AN action of the Case was brought for these words, Thou have forsworn thy self
before the Council in the Marches ( innuendo in the Marches of Wales) in a
Suit which I have there, and I will sue thee for Perjury. Words.
And after issue of Not guilty pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff; It was
moved in Arrest of Judgment by Chibborn, that the Common Law takes no notice of
any such Councels, and they are to meddle according to instructions, and if it
be not warranted thereby, then no Oath whereupon any remedy: And therefore it was
adjudged that if one say, another is forsworn or perjured in Canterbury Court,
no action lies, for we cannot take any notice of any Court in Canterbury, which
has power to administer an Oath. But Sergeant Harris said, that this Council
of the Marches, is established by 27 H: 8 cap: 32. and have power to examine
Witnesses and to administer an Oath, and is also mentioned in the Statute 5
Eliz. that Perjury committed before the Counselors of the Marches shall be
punished by this Statute. And the Court was of opinion that the action well
lies, for the Council of Marches (without innuendo) is sufficient, for there
is no other Council of Marches. And as the Court take notice of the Court of
requests (for if one says another is perjured there it is actionable) so of
this Court which is established by Statute, and concern the King, and thereof
the Judges ought to take notice; Judgment for the Plaintiff. And by Lord
Hobart, if one says, another is forsworn in the Common place, an action lies:

Mich. 17 Jac. Bayshaw versus Walker.
Case.
AN action of the case was brought for saying, Thou art a filtching Fellow, and
did filtch four pounds from me; And after Verdict for the Plaintiff it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were not actionable: And so the
Court resolved, for the word siltching is dubious, and may be by Cousenage, by
shifting, by deceit, and is not Felony but by Implication; and it is not good
to enlarge actions for words, Plaintiff Nil capiat per breve.

Green versus Harrington.
Case. Assumpsit lies not for Rent.
PEter Green brought an action upon the case against Thomas Harrington, and
counts, that whereas the Defendant such a day was indebted to him in ten pounds
for the rent of one House and land which he had demised to him for one year
then past, the Defendant promised to pay it upon request; and upon issue Non
Assumpsit, it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment by
Chibborn, that no action lies upon this promise, because it is Debt for the
rent for Land; and the Assumpsit is of a less nature, as if one he indebted
upon an Obligation, and that being forfeited, he promised to pay it, no action
lies, for the Debt is due upon the Obligation: Albanies. case.
And the opinion of the Court accorded. This was ruled in Albanies case of
Lincoln^ Inn in Banco Regis.

Trin. 17 Jac. Rot. 1849. Castilion versus Smith.
AN action of Covenant was brought by Sir Edward Castilion against Thomas Smith
as Executor, Covenant Iudment against Executors for Covenant broken by them,
shall be De bonis testatoris. Johnson and Barker.
and a breach assigned by act done by the Executors; and after Verdict it was
moved if Judgment should be De bonis propriis, by reason the breach was made by
the Executors: And it was resolved that it should be de bonis testatoris. And
where the Writ is in the Detinet only, there the Judgment shall be de bonis
testatoris, vide the like Judgment, Hill. 33 Eliz. Rot: 1143. between Johnson
and Barker.

Pies Case.
PIe exhibited an Information upon the Statute of the 35 of Eliz. for
converting of a house in London into many dwelling houses; and upon Not guilty
pleaded, the Defendant is found guilty. But be cause the said Statute is
discontinued by the 43 Eliz; Costs against an Informer.
and there is now no such Statute, the Court (upon motion in Arrest of
Judgment) award, that the Defendant eat inde sine die: And whether the
Defendant in this case shall have costs upon the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5.
was the question.

The words of the Statute are, if any Informer willingly delay his Suit, or
discontinue, or be nonsuited, or shall have the matter, or the trial pass
against him by Verdict or Judgment in Law, he shall pay costs.

1. Object. It was objected, that this Statute does not extend but only to
penal Statutes which then were in Esse.

Answ. To which it was answered by the Court, that this Statute was a
perpetual direction to all Informers.

2. Object. It was objected, that if there be no Statute, then there is no
Informer.

3. Object. In this case Verdict is sound for the Informer, and he may be
presumed to be ignorant: And there is no reason that he shall pay costs for
default of his Council.

4. Object. There is no Judgment against him, but that the Defendant eat inde
sine die; and that is no other then an exception in stay of Judgment:
Keldridges case.
And a President was cited by Henden 25 Eliz. Banco Regis; there upon an
Information against Keldridge, and another upon the Statute of 35 H. 8. for not
enclosing Woods, but suffering them to lie open after cutting by the space of
one month: he alleged the cutting the tenth of April, and the lying open
until the second of May, which was not a month: And upon Not guilty pleaded,
it was found for the Plaintiff; and upon motion in Arrest of Judgment, it was
awarded that the Defendant eat inde sine die, and no costs.

And the Lord Hobart said, that this Statute was made for the ease of the
Subject, and for avoiding and preventing of vexations, and therefore did
enumerate all the cases in which the Informer could not prevail, and had many
words that the Statute of 23 of H. 8. or any other Statute does not give
expressly costs upon demurrer; and this is not within 23 H. 8. if upon
discontinuance: And now the matter pass against the informer, be it by Verdict
or Judgment, all is one, for the makers of this Statute intended to curb all
vexatious Informers: And if it shall be suffered that Informers may inform upon
Statutes not in force, and pay no costs, that would open a Window to the great
vexation of the Subjects. And for Presidents not inflicted upon, they are of
little esteem. And I concurred, and though Verdict be found for the Informer,
yet there being no Statute there can be no Offense, and it is in Law as not
guilty; And this case is within the meaning and Letter of the Statute, for the
Statute intend costs where the cause pass against the Informer, be it by
default of matter or form.

Winch doubted of this special case, because the matter is found for the
Informer; but he agreeh if it were upon Judgment; upon demurrer or special
Verdict, costs should be given.

And Justice Warburton was of opinion, that there should be no costs in this
case, for he is not capable to sue where the Statute is discontinued: And so if
the Venue be misawarded, and he said, that he had conference with the Lord
chief Baron, who also held that there should be no costs in this case: And so
the matter rests.

Blackburnes Case.
Norff.
Debt.
AN action of Debt was brought by I. S. against Blackburne upon a Lease for a
year, and so from year to year; And upon Nil debet pleaded, the Jury gave a
special Verdict to this effect.

A Devise to a Feme of a term upon condition.
Wells seized of Land in Fee, devised them to his Daughter and her Heirs, when
she come to the age of eighteen years, and that his Wife should take the
profits of the Land to her use, without any account to be made until the
Daughter come to the age of eighteen years: And made his Wife his Executor and
died; And it was provided that the Wife should pay the old Rent, and find the
Daughter at School until she could read and write English, the Feme enters and
proves the Will, takes Husband and dies, the Husband assign this term to the
Lessor who brought this Action. And it was found that all the Conditions were
performed, and that the Daughter was within the said age of eighteen viz.
thirteen years.

And the sole question was, whether it be a term for years in the Wife, and
whether (when she takes Husband) he shall have it after the death of his Wife;
and it was ruled clearly that it is, and it being by Will it is a good Lease.

Another question was, if this trust of Education be Quasi a Limitation
personal, and with intent that the Lease shall not be to the Wife any longer
then she may educate her Daughter: And it was agreed that it was not, for any
one may educate her, and find her at School, and there it is without any
default in the Wife, for it is the act of God; and therefore Judgment for the
Plaintiff.

Trin. 17 Jac. Whittingtons Case.
IVdgment in Debt against Ferdinand Earl of Derby, Scire facias. Sci. fac. by
the Baron and Feme, the death of one of them shall abate it.
at the Suit of I. Whittington, and his Wife (she being Administrator to her
Husband who had the Judgment) who brought a Sci. fac. upon the Judgment against
30. Ter-tenants, they appear and all besides 3. plead, that at the time of the
Judgment Ferdinand the Earl was seized in tail, etc. And the Plaintiff had
Judgment against the three with a cesset executio; and afterward Whittington
the Husband died, and this is surmised and entered upon Record, viz. the death
of the Baron after the Darrein continuance; and whether the Writ shall abate or
no, was the question: And per totam Curiam the Writ shall abate, for the Wife
there cannot recover as a Feme sole; and though this Writ be judicial, yet it
is in nature of an Original, for she might have had an action of debt upon the
Judgment, and ought to have that action solely after the year, until the
Statute of Westminster 2. which give Scire facias, and to this Writ they may
plead: But in Writs Judicial, which are only Writs for the doing of execution,
there the death of one shall not abate it, vide 19 Ass. 10. and 25 E: 3. and
vide Reads case, Coke lib: 10. fol. 134.

Ruggles Case.
IN Ruggles Case, upon the motion of Sergeant Arthure, upon the Statute of 1
Jacobi cap. 15. concerning Bankrupts, How the distribution of the Estate of a
Bankrupt shall be.
a Commission was sued out by some of the Creditors, and they pursued it, and
the Land was sold, and it being opposed, they defended their several Suits,
and prevailed by a trial at Bar: And after other Creditors (which before would
neither partake nor aid them) came and prayed to be joined with them. And the
Commissioners doubted upon the Statute, whether they might allow them to be
joined; and the words of the Statute are, That it shall be lawful for any of
the Creditors of the Bankrupt within four months after the Commission sued
forth, and till distribution shall be made by the said Commissioners, for the
payment of the Bankrupts Debts, as in such case has been used, to partake and
join with other Creditors that shall sue out the said Commission, the said
Creditors so joining, to contribute to the charges of the said Commission, and
if the Creditors came not in within four months, then the Commissioners to have
power to distribute.

It was resolved, that the Commissioners may sell and prepare for distribution
presently upon the execution of the Commission; but until the four months are
passed, they may not proceed to distribution; for the Creditors which inhabit
in the remote part of the Realm, peradventure cannot have notice: and it may be
carried so secretly, that if they might distribute presently, that they which
sued out the Commission should be only satisfied, when indeed there was no
default in the others.

Also it was resolved, that the offer of Creditors to be joined, and before
they be partakers, is not an affectuall offer, without offering to be
contributory to the charges: But to offer any particular sum, is not
necessary, because they know not what sum is disbursed, and that is to be
assessed by the Commissioners. And the words (for the charge of the Commission)
is to be extended to all charges arising in suing forth the Commission, and in
execution and defense thereof.

Also it was resolved, that at any time before the distribution made, they may
come and pray to be joined: But after the four months passed, and any
distribution made (though it be but of part) then they come too late: For by
this means the distribution which is made, and whereby some of the Creditors
shall receive more, shall be utterly avoided, and another proportion made,
which was not the intent of the Statute.

Pasch. 18 Jac. Mason versus Thompson.
Case.
AN action upon the case was brought for these words, I charge thee with Felony
for taking money forth from John Spaci's Pocket, and I will prove it.

Words.
Henden moved in Arrest of Judgment that these words were not actionable.

First, because that it is not any direct affirmative that he is a Felon; and
for that he vouched a case (as he said) adjudged in the Kings Bench, Masters,
bear Witness that he is a Thief.

The second reason was, because that the matter subsequent do not contains
matter which must of necessity be Felony, but stands indifferent: For if it be
not privily and secretly, it is not Felony; and it may be by way of sport, or
trespass: For as one said, That he is a Thief, and stole his Timber, it is not
actionable, for it might be Timber cut, or Timber growing: so to say, That he
stole his Corn or his Apples, or his Hope: For in Mitiorem partem verba sunt
accipienda. And it seemed to the Lord Hobart that the first words, viz. (I
charge thee with Felony) are actionable, for the Constable (if he be there
present) ought to apprehend him thereupon, and it is a plain Affirmative. I
arrest thee of high Treason; Justice Winch prima facie held, that the words
were actionable; and not qualified by the subsequent words, as it should be if
he had said, For thou have stolen my Apple Trees standing in my Orchard, that
could not be Felony, but it is not so there, for it may be Felony, and ex causa
dicendi, it shall be taken Felony, in these words, for taking money, etc.
Warburton and Hutton was of opinion that the Action lay not.

This Case was moved in Mich. 18 Jac. And then the opinion of the Court
(praeter Warburton qui haesitavit) was that the Action did not lie. Ideo
memorand. quod quetens nil capiat per breve.

Trin. 18 Jac. Hall versus Woollen.
JOhn Hall an Attorney of this Court, Case. Consideration of an As^ur^p sit.
brought an action upon the case against Woollen, and declared, that whereas the
Defendant was possessed of an House and Land in Mekon Mowbray in the County of
Leicester, for one term of the Lease of Sir John Woodward: And whereas one Webb
was in communication of buying the said Lease of Woollen, and Woollen could not
sell it without the assent of Sir John W. The Defendant in consideration that
the Plaintiff would procure license of the said Sir John, he promised to pay to
him so much as he should disburse, and deserve therefore: And averred that he
did procure a License, and delivered it to the Defendant, and disbursed such a
sum, and deserved for his labor such a sum; and the Defendant upon the Count
did demur. And the question was, whether that were a good consideration or no,
for it did not appear that there was any condition to restrain him from making
an Assignment; and if I promise, that (whereas I am obliged to A.) if you will
procure B. (which is a stranger) to make a Release thereof to me, I will pay you
forty pounds, though it be done at my instance, no action lies, for it is
apparent that B. could not release the Obligation: But it was adjudged that is
a good consideration, for it appears that there was privity between them, and
it may be that he had promised that he would not assign it without his license:
And in good discretion it was convenient to have it, also it was at his
instance, and for his satisfaction: And it has been adjudged, if one promise
forty pounds to another, if he can procure the assent of the Mother of a woman,
though he may do it without such consent, yet it is a good consideration.

Mich. 18 Jac. Clerk versus Wood.
CLerk brought an action upon the case against one Wood, Case.
alias Warren, and count that he was seized of an house and twenty acres of
land, etc, in Thursfield; and that he and all those whose Estate he has, have
had a Common in seven acres in Thursfield; And that he and all those, etc. have
had one way leading through the said seven acres, Ven. fac. upon prescription
for a way in diverse Town^.
and from thence into one Common way leading to Buntingford, and from
Buntingford to Blakeley: And that the Defendant had plowed and turned up the
seven acres, and estopped the way. The Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the
Venire facias awarded de Tursfield. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment by
Sergeant Jones, that it ought to be from all the Towns through which he claim
his way, for he ought to prove it in evidence, viz. that he had a way, or
otherwise he is not endamnified. But it was resolved that the trial was good,
for Not guilty is properly a denial of trespass and disturbance; and though
he ought to prove title to the way, yet it is sufficient if he prove title to
the way by and through the seven acres upon evidence. And yet if the
Prescription had been traversed, then he ought to prove all the way, any the
trial shall be from every Town through which the way is pleaded to be
extended, quod vide 10 E. 4. fol. 10. where it was in two Counties, and the
Venire facias shall be from both, and the trial shall not be by Nisi prius:
vide the case between Reyner and Waterhouse supra.

Mich. 16 Jac. Rot. 2344. Lamb versus Thompson.
Debt. A Condition not to be assisting to another, hinders him not to bring a
Writ of Error jointly with him.
EDmund Lamb brought an action of Debt against Richard Thompson, upon an
Obligation of forty pounds; the Condition whereof was, If the Defendant shall
not be assisting, or any ways aiding unto Thomas Elm, or any other person for
the said Thomas Elm, in any Actions, Suits, Vexations, etc. to be commenced
and prosecuted against the said Plaintiff, etc. That then, etc. the Defendant
pleaded Negative: The Plaintiff reply, that he such a day brought Trespass
against the said Thomas Elm, and the now Defendant, and had Judgment; and that
the Defendant joined with him in a Writ of Error, in hinderance of the
Plaintiff to have execution against the said Thomas Elm, and so was aiding and
assisting unto the said Thomas Elm: Whereupon the Defendant demurred, and it
was adjudged by the Court, that this prosecution of a Writ of Error to
discharge himself of an erroneous Judgment, is no breach of the Condition, no
more then if the Plaintiff had released, and he had brought an Audita Querela:
And it shall be intended in this case of a Suit to be solely commenced by the
said Thomas Elm; and if he will restrain him, that he join not in a Writ of
Error, it ought to be precisely contained in the Condition, and shall not be
taken by a large Exposition, to the forfeiture of an Obligation, by a general
and ambiguous sentence. It was urged that the Defendants had power to have
several Writs of Error, 11 H: 6. 9. But the Court resolved, that being the
Costs were joint, they ought to join, vide Coke lib: 6. fol: 25. but the
release of one will not bar the other, vide 34 H: 6. 42. and 35 H: 6. 10. that
this Suit is in discharge of the Defendant, and not to charge the Plaintiff;
and therefore the Condition is not broken, vide Dyer 253. A Condition to suffer
a Lessee quietly to enjoy, the word (suffer) guide all the sentence in favor
of the Obligor; and Judgment cannot be reversed in part, and stand for the
other part, or be reversed against one, and stand in force against the other,
except in special cases. As where Infant Tenant for life, and he in remainder
of full age levy a Fine, that shall be reversed as to the Infant, and stand for
the remainder, for it is no other then as a Conveyance;

Mich. 18 Jac. Powell versus Ward.
AN action of the case was brought for these words, Case. Words.
I have matter enough against thee; for John Halden has found forgery against
thee, and can prove it: And after Verdict it was resolved by the Court, that
the words are too general, and will not maintain an Action, no more then if
one said, that another had forget a Warrant, for it might be a Warrant for a
Buck; and this is not right Affirmative.

Sherley versus Underhill.
A Quare impedit brought by George Sherley Baronet, Quare Impedit. Error in
Quare Impedit.
against Underhill and Bursey, for presenting to the Vicaridge of the Church of
Nether Elington, and count of a Nomination as appendent to the Manor of
Elington, and Issue thereupon, for they pretend it to be appendent to the
Rectory of Elington: And it was found for the Plaintiff at Warwick Assizes, and
Judgment there for him, and a Writ to the Bishop, and thereupon a Writ of Error
was brought in the Kings Bench, and it was to remove a Record which was between
George Sherley Knight and Baronet, and the truth was, that Sir George is not,
neither was named Knight by all the Record: And therefore the opinion of the
Court was, that the word Knight is part of the name, and so no Record was
removed: And it is so material that the addition where there is none, or the
omission where it is, Knight, makes it no such Record, and they perceiving it
discontinued their Writ.

Memorand. That though Judgment was given at the Assizes, the Writ of Error was
directed to the Lord Hobart, and the Record is demurrant in the Court of Common
Berich. And now it was moved, that the Judgment might be amended, for it was
Quod recuperet presentationem suam ad Ecclesiam praedictam. And the value sound
of the Church aforesaid: And it should be Quod recuperet praesentationem ad
vicariam Ecclesiae, and valorem vicariae Ecclesiae: And it was urged that it
was not the mis-prision of the Clerk, but of the Court; and Judgment erroneous
in point of Law is not amendable, for if it be Quod capiatur, where it should
be Quod sit in miserecordia, it is not amendable. But it was resolved and so
awarded by the Court, that it should be amended: And the reason is, because the
Verdict is general, and they found for the Plaintiff, and the Judgment ought
to agree with the Verdict: But it is solely mis-prise by the default of the
Clerk, for the Record precedent is in every part, and in the Issue and Verdict,
Vicariam Ecclesiae; And by the Statute 8 H. 6. cap. 15. that is amendable, for
the mis-prison of the Clerk in the Record shall be amended, though it be in the
Judgment, Wild and Woolfe. Mich. 33. and 3^ Eliz 230.
vide Dyer 258. Also Mich. 33. and 34 Eliz: Rot: 230. between Wild and John
Woolfe, Ideo considerat. est quod praedictus Thomas Wild recuperet versus
praedictum Thomas Woolfe, where it should be John; and Error was brought, and
it was amended.

Stepney and Woolfe.
42 Eliz: Rot: 693. An action of the case by Stepney against John Morgan Woolfe.
Id. consid. quod recuperet versus praedictum Morgan Woolfe, and there was no
such Defendant, but John Morgan Woolfe, and it was amended upon Error brought
in the Exchequer Chamber.

And vide Coke lib: 8. fol. 164. Blackamores case, more cases upon this
learning; where the mis-prison of the Clerk in the entry of the Judgment of a
thing which is apparent, and not of necessity shall be amended, as in
Mis-prision of the sum of Arrerages before and pending the Writ of Annuity
shall be amended, vide 9 Eliz: Dyer 258.

Mich. 18 Jac. Sir Thomas Wentworths Case.
Replevin.
SIr Thomas Wentworth brought Replevin, the Defendant avowed for a Rent granted,
Demand of Rent with a Nomine poenae after Issue joined upon other matter.
and a Nomine poenae, and shows not any Demand of the Nomine poenae; But the
Issue was tried, and found upon other matter, viz. Non concessit: And now it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that he avowed for a Nomine poenae, and did
not allege any demand thereof; yet Judgment was given for the Avowant: For it
is matter confessed, and the Action is a request, viz. the Avowry, for he is
there the Actor: And it is but a Circumstance collateral to the right: And in
Actions upon the Case founded upon a promise, after request a Licet saepius
requisite, shall be a sufficient Allegation of a request.

Davies Case.
Statute-Merchant without day of payment.
ONe Davies acknowledged a Statute-Merchant at Gloucester in three hundred
pounds, and the Statute did not limit any day of payment, and yet an Extent was
sued; And upon motion by Sergeant Harris, a Supersedeas was awarded; for that
is no Statute, for they had not pursued the Authority given by the Statute: For
the Statute of Acton Buanell, 11 E. 1. says, if the Debt be not paid at the
day: And though Debt upon an Obligation is payable presently, if the day be not
expressed, yet there the Statute appoint a day certain.

Pasch. 15 Jac. Rot. 1714. Cartwright versus Underhill
Trover and Conversion.
AN action of Trover and Conversion was brought by Abraham Cartwright against
Clement Underhill: And upon Not guilty pleaded, there was found a special
Verdict to this effect.

Bankrupt.
Francis Bail being a Merchant, had made a fraudulent Deed to the Defendant of
the Goods contained in the Count, but afterward he went abroad to Church, to
the Exchange, and did Trade and Commerce: And yet afterward it is contained in
the Indenture of Sale by the Commissioners to the Plaintiff, that he had made
this fraudulent Deed, and that afterward he had traded and served the Exchange
until a day after, at which day he wholly absented himself. And upon this
special Verdict the Defendant had Judgment.

For every Deed to defraud other Creditors (but those to whom such Deed is
made) is not sufficient to make one to be a Bankrupt: But if he make any Deed
after he begins to be a Bankrupt, it shall not bind: But upon the Statute of 1
Jacobi, which makes him a Bankrupt, which make fraudulent Deeds, it ought not
to be as this case was, viz. so long before he became a Banrupt: And there were
many more imperfections in the special Verdict.

Hill. 18. Jac. The Earl of Clanrickards Case.
THe Earl of Clanrikard, and Frances his Wife, Writ of Right.
brought a Writ of Right against the Earl of Leicester; Essoin upon the return
of an alias Summons.
And upon the Summons being returned (but no return of proclamation made at the
Church of the Parish where the Land lies upon the Lords day Post praedicationem
sive Divinum Servitium) there was an Essoin cast, and that was adjourned in the
Essoin Roll: And the Demandauts perceiving the return to be insufficient, they
sue an alias Summons, which having great returns (as all the Writs issuing out
of this Court in a Writ of Right, or other real actions ought to have) was
returnable, Oct: Hill: And the Tenant cast an Essoin upon the alias Summons: And
it was moved at the day of Essoin, and now also at the first day of the Term by
Sergeant Harris, that an Essoin did not lie, for he had an Essoin before: And
by the Statute de essonii calumniand. 1^ E: 2. Non faciant quia alias se
essoviant: And the Statute 31 Eliz: cap: 3. which gives the Proclamations, has
provided that no Grand Cape shall be awarded upon this default, but only an
alias Summons, so that the Writ is good and stands, and therefore he shall not
be otherwise essoined: But it seemed to the Court to be otherwise here; for the
first Essoin is as Null, and therefore vide Dyer 252. that when the Sheriff
return tarde in a Formedon, and the Tenant is essoined, and that is adjourned,
it is of no effect, but he shall be essoined upon the other Writ of alias, etc.
vide 24 E. 3. Br: Essoin 24. accord. also vide 21 H. 6. That upon the resummons
after the death of the King, the Tenant shall be Essoined, and yet the first
Writ and all is revived: And in this case though the party may appear to the
first Writ, ^ne, note besoigne de ject un essoign, for the nature of that is to
save a default, so that no Grand Cape shall be awarded, and there no Grand Cape
ought so be avwarded, and therefore the Essoin before not avoidable.

Hill. 18 Jac. Rot. 739. Bridgeland versus Post.
Dower. Counter-plea to the View.
BRidgeland against Post and his Wife in a Writ of Dower, the Tenants demand
the View, and the Demandant counter-pleads the View. Quod le tenant n'ad entry
nisi per le Baron; And thereupon the Tenant demur: And it was adjudged a good
Counter-plea, and the Tenant ousted of his View, Accord. 9 E. 4. fol: 6. vide 2
H: 4. 24.

Pasch. 19 Jac. King versus Bowen. Case.

Words.
KIng brought an action of the case against Bowen a Minister, for saying, Thou
art a false forsworn Knave, and did take a false Oath against me at a
Commission at Ecclesall (innuendo a Commission sued out of the high
Commission.) the Defendant justify, and after issue tried and found for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words were not
actionable, for it does not appear in the Count, what Commission, nor out of
what Court, nor what matter he did depose, but generally, that he had taken a
false Oath at a Commission. The former words (forsworn Knave) will not maintain
an action, otherwise of Perjuted Knave, for that shall be intended in a legal
sense; and no Innuendo will supply matter which give not cause of action, nor
the Justification: But the words ought to contain scandal in themselves,
without any supplement. An action lies for saying, one had forsworn himself in
a Court Baron, and to say, he had forsworn himself in the Common place; but to
say, that one has forsworn himself at the Bar ( innuendo the Bar of the Common
place) will not maintain an action, Querens nil capiat per breve.

Pasch. 19 Jac. Tippin versus King.
Wast.
SIr George Tippin Plaintiff, in an action of Wast against King, and allege
Wast in several Closes Sparsim: Inquiry of damages.
And Judgment by nihil dicit, and an Inquiry awarded, the Jury found but eight
pence Damages: And upon motion for a new Writ, it was resolved, that the Jury
ought not now to enquire of the Wast: And therefore the difference is, when the
Plaintiff upon the distress recover upon the Statute; there the Statute gives
power to enquire of the Wast: But in this case the Wast is confessed Per nient
dedire, Ewer and Moyle.
Dyer 204. a. accord: And it was so adjudged between Ewer and Moyle upon
demurrer in Wast, there the Wast is confessed, and the Writ shall be only to
enquire of the Damages; so if the Plaintiff will release his Damages, he shall
have a Writ upon Judgment of the place wasted.

Mich. 18 Jac. Rot. 2805. Pit versus Chick.
MAtthew Pit brought Replevin against Chick; Replevin.
The Defendant avow, for that the place contains five acres, which lie between
the Lands of Sir George Speck: And that the said Sir George Speck and all his
Ancestors, Prescription to have Herbage.
de temps d'out, etc. have used to have Herbage and Pasture of the said five
acres, viz. if they were sown, then after the reaping until re-sowing; and if
they were not sown, then for the whole year, and convey Title to the said
Herbage by Lease in writing to him, and avow Damage feasant.

And it was urged, that he which had all the profit for a time, and the sole
profit, had the Freehold; and that is not a thing which lie in Prescription,
semble al Common, or so pasture for a certain number of years: And it was said,
that a Grant de vestura terrae, or de herbag. terrae for one and twenty years,
is a good Lease. But it was adjudged, that it is a good Avowry, and he had only
profit a Prender, and that he might have an Assise, or justify for Damage
feasant: And he which has the fore-crop is he which has the Freehold, 15 E.
2. Fitz. Prescription 51. And the very case in, temps E. 1. Fitz. Prescription
55. and this sole feeding might have Commencement by Grant, and therefore a good
Prescription. Judgment for the Avowant.

Trin. 19 Jac. Wilson versus Stubbs.
WIlson brought Replevin against Ralph Stubbs; Replevin.
The Defendant avow as Bailiff to the Earl of Northumberland, for Amercements
within a Leet at Toxcliffe. And upon Issue joined, and trial at the Common
Pleas by Default, it was alleged, Supersedeas upon Indempnitate nominis.
that Ralph Stubbs was dead; and the Plaintiff would proceed, and had Judgment,
Damages, and Costs sixteen pounds, and a Capias awarded to the Sheriff of York,
and Ralph Stubbs the Son, as is supposed, is taken, and had an Indempnitate
nominis, which Writ being directed to the Justices, they award a Supersedeas:
And now upon diverse motions, the sixteen pounds was brought in Court, and they
proceed upon the Indempnitate nominis. The question was, if the Supersedeas lie
thereupon, being that it is only a surmise and matter en fait, and lies properly
and more frequently, for preventing an Arrest upon Outlawry, and after that the
party is taken upon the Outlawry, vide 5 E. 4. 23. and vide lib: Intrat. and it
is matter not frequent in use, and is in nature of an Audita Querela, and the
party shall find surety to pay the Debt, if it be found that he be not another
person: And the Court inclined strongly that it is no Supersedeas, but it is
much in the discretion of the Court, vide lib: Intrat. 5 E. 4. 36. bone Case,
and fol. 51. and 53.

Mich. 19 Jac. Allen versus Swift.
Case.
ALlen brought an action of the case against Swift, and declared, That whereas
he bargained and sold, that is to say, Merchandized for Lead in the County of
Derby, Words.
and thereby has acquired money toward his livelihood: The Defendant said of
him, He is a Bankrupt, and is not able to pay his debts, but will run the
Country; It was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment by
Sergeant Harvey, that the action lay not, because that the Plaintiff showed
not, that he used it as his Trade, nor that he gained his living by buying and
selling; Also he is entitled Gentleman. But the Court hold that the action
would well lie, and it had been adjudged 14 Eliz. That a Tanner shall have an
action for such words.

Mayes versus Sidley.
Case. Consideration of forbearance.
MAyes brought an action of the case against Sir Isaac Sidley, and count, that
whereas one was indebted unto the Plaintiff in a hundred pounds by Obligation,
the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff at his request would forbear
to sue the said party, and if he did not pay it, the Defendant would; And upon
Non assumpsit pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, Hitcham moved, that is no
good consideration, for it is uncertain, for if he forbear one hour, one day,
this is a forbearance; And he resembled it to Palmers Case, forbear him a
little while, and if he do not pay it, I will: This was adjudged for the
Plaintiff in Banco Regis, but afterward by a Writ of Error it was reversed. And
he cited a President (which was shown) of the 36 of Eliz. where the case was
the same in effect with this: And Judgment reversed, but it might be for other
Errors.

And the Court inclined that this action lie, for when it is alleged that he
did forbear, it shall be intended of such a forbearance by which the party had
ease and benefit, and shall be a competent and convenient time; and that shall
be convenient time, as in other cases: As Tenant pur auter vie, shall have
convenient time to remove his goods after the death of Cestui que vie; And it
shall be convenient time to purchase a Writ by Iourneys Accounts: And it was
said, that there were many Presidents of this case, and of the like actions,
for if he does not forbear convenient time, then it is no consideration, and it
being left indefinite, the Law will judge of the convenient time, but it was
adjourned, and after the first day of Hill. 21 Jac. This case was moved by
Hitcham, and he said, that the Writ and Count vary, for the Writ is Per magnum
tempus distulit: And the Count says, that he did forbear for the space of a
year and more: Also no time is put in the Writ, but is in the Count, and that
he did forbear by a year and more after that; so that it does not appear that
he did forbear till the Writ purchased, for that appear to be half a year after
the year passed, and he ought to forbear it totally. Richardson answered him,
that the breve, Writ did not comprehend the time and circumstance, but the
matter and substance, and ^ot at large, for then it should not be breve; As in
a case sur Trover, no day in the Writ, but in the Count, and forbearance of a
year and more being alleged, and issue taken and found for the Plaintiff, it
shall not be intended that he had sued, and not forbeared till the commencement
of that Suit: And it is like to a grant of a Rent (pleaded without Deed) and
issue joined upon non concessit, and it is found Concessit, and good, for it
shall be intended effectual, etc.

And the Court showed their Judgment, and concurred that Judgment should be
given for the Plaintiff: And this difference was taken when the promise appear
to be such, that it shall not be any benefit to the party in whose behalf it
was requested, as forbearance for an hour, or a little time, there it is not
good, but where it is general and not limited to any time, that shall be a
(...) ill forbearance, or at least a forbearance for a convenient time, and
that ought to be alleged for such a time, which the Court shall adjudge a
convenient time.

Lord Hobart agreed, but he said, that it is not a total forbearance, for then
it should be that he should not sue him at all, but that he will forbear, is
good by the subsequent forbearance; and there is no variation between the Count
and the Writ, but the Count illustrateth, and amplifies the Writ. Judgment pro
querente.

Pasch. 20 Jac. Suggs versus Sparrow.
IN a Scire facias against the Bail, Scire facias.
he plead that after the Judgment and before any Writ of Capias was sued out
against the Principal, he died: And upon Demurrer the Court adjudged it a good
plea; Bail is discharged where the Principal died before Capias awarded.
Tadcaster against Hollowell. Timberley and Calverly.
and i^ this case a Judgment was cited, Hill: 10 Eliz. Tadcaster brought debt
against Hallowell, Hobs was Bail, and the Plaintiff recovered: The Defendant
brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber upon a new Statute, and after
diverse terms Hall died, and after the Plaintiff was nonsuited, without mention
made of his death. Tadcaster brought two Scire facias against Hobs, and upon
two Nihils had Judgment: Hobs brought an Audita Querela, alleging the death of
Hallowell before Scire facias, and before Capias; and it was adjudged that the
Audita Querela well say, and Hill: 4 Jac: Rot: 975. between Timberley and
Calverly, Scire facias brought against the Bail, and he pleaded that the
Principal died before Capias returned against him; And Judgment upon argument
given against the Plaintiff: The like Judgment between Justice Williams, and
the Sureties of one Vaughan.

Hill. 19 Jac. Rot. 312. or 3125. Walrond versus Hill.
London,
Debt.
WAlrond brought an action of debt upon an Obligation of three hundred pounds
against William Hill, with Condition, that if Thomas Harris and Elizabeth his
Wife, One bound to levy a Fine before such a day who shall do the first act.
before the end of Easter Term next, shall levy a Fine before the Justices of
the Common Pleas, by due course of Law, to the use of the Plaintiff; that then,
etc. the Defendant pleaded, that before the end of the said Easter Term, the
Plaintiff did not purchase any Writ of Covenant, pro fine leuand. whereupon a
Fine might be levied according to the course of Law. The Plaintiff replied,
that the fifteenth of April, the said Thomas for money enfeoffed another of
parcel of the Land that was to be conveyed by the Fine: And that the said
Thomas and Elizabeth his Wife have not any Estate or Interest in the said
parcel so conveyed, whereof they may levy a Fine: And upon this Replication the
Defendant demurred.

Harvey for the Plaintiff, and Sergeant Henden for the Defendant; the first
question was, If the Bar be good, Intant que le Defendent est oblige. That
Thomas Harris and Elizabeth his Wife shall levy a Fine, he ought to procure
that to be done at his peril, semble al 4 H. 7. and 3 H. 6. Condition that
John S. a stranger shall take Alice D. to his Wife, before Mich. If I. S.
refuse, the Obligation is forfeited: And therefore it was urged that he ought to
procure a Writ of Covenant at his peril. But the Lord Hobart held that the
Plaintiff ought to procure the Writ of Covenant, to have made himself capable
of the Fine: And he put this case, if I. S. be obliged that I. D. shall enfeoff
I.N. the Obligee, such a day I. N. ought to be upon the Land, or ought to make
a Letter of Attorney to receive the Livery, or otherwise the Obligation is not
forfeited: And when a Covenant is to levy a Fine, he which is to do the first
act, etc. vide Palmers case, Coke lib: 5. fol: 127. and 4 E. 3. 39. 18 E. 3.
27. 11 H. 4: 18. 21 E: 4. 2.

Thomas Harris had made a Bargain and Sale of part of the Land to another
before, so that he was disabled at the time to levy a Fine: And we all agreed,
that the Condition was impossible, and is all one as if he had disabled himself
afterward; as in Maynes case, Coke lib: 5. 21. where the Covenant was to make
a new Lease upon surrender of the former Lease, there if he which ought to make
the new Lease, disables himself to make a new Lease, and to accept of the
Surrender, by granting the Reversion for years, he ought not to do the first
act, viz. Surrender, but the Covenant is broken: And in this case it is all
one, as if one (who had granted the Reversion for years or for life) Covenant
that he upon Surrender will make a new Lease, he had broken this Covenant,
being disabled at the time: And it was said and agreed by the Court, that the
Fine to be levied ought to be an effectual Fine, which might operate to convey
the Land according to the Covenant.

Burnell and Brook.
One case was vouched in this case to be between Burnell and Brook, where the
Condition was, that he should acknowledge a Judgment, and a good Bar, that the
Plaintiff had not purchased an Original Writ, for he ought to make himself
capable of Judgment acknowledged to him, vide 34 E. 1. Fitz: Debt 164. A
Condition that if he present the Obligee to a Benefice, that then, etc. Though
the Obliges taken Wife, by which he is disabled to take it, put he ought to
present and offer him to the Ordinary to refuse him.

Vide 28 E: 4. 6. where parcel of the Land was recovered, yet Debt lies for
entry, Damages recovered in a Court of ancient Demeasn, which case was then
vouched, but it is not much to the purpose: And afterward we all agreed that
the Plaintiff should have Judgment.

Hord versus Cordery. A President was shown which was thus.
IN the County of Wiltes, Richard Hord Clerk, Vicar of Chute, Case.
brought an action upon the Case against William Cordery, and Bridget his Wife,
and Dorothy Cox; Conspiracy.
for one malicious confederacy of charging the Plaintiff with the felonious
Raye of the said Dorothy Cox, and procured him to be examined before Sir
Anthony Hungerford a Justice of Peace, and thereupon was bound in a Recognizance
to appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace at Devises, and from
thence was bound over to the Assizes: And there the Defendants An: 15 Jac:
before Sir Thomas Flemming and Tanfield Justices of Assise preferred one Bill
of Indictment of their malice aforesaid, and by the procurement of the said
William and B. the said Dorothy showed to the grand Inquest, whether it were
true or false.

And the Jury perceiving the malice and the falsi^y, did not find it to be
true, and gave their Verdict by Ignorance. Upon Not guilty pleaded by William
and Bridget, and non informatus by Dorothy, the Jury found for the Plaintiff,
and after a Writ of Error, An: 15 Jac: and 20 marks costs for the delay, Ego
vidi recordum, and est bien and pleivement aver, que il ne ravish le feme, and
est ent. Hill. 10 Jac. Rot. 92. 1. 1.

Trin. 20 Jac. Hawkins versus Cutts.
HAwkins brought an action upon the case against Cutts, Case.
and declared that he was of good Fame, etc. and for the space of eight years
last past, had used the Art and Mystery of a Baker Pandopatoritae, and had
gained his living by buying and selling; the Defendant said of him, He is a
Bankrupt Knave: And not guilty, Words*
it was found for the Plaintiff: And in Arrest of Judgment it was moved, that
it is not shown that he was a common Baker, neither had used the Trade, but
used the Art and Mystery of a Baker: And there is (as Sergeant Hobart said) as
much skill and art used by Bakers of Bread in private men's houses, as by common
Bakers; And every ^ooman which bake in private (if she be a good Housewife) use
the art and mystery of a Baker.

And if a man had said generally, that he had gained his living by buying and
selling, and not shown what Trade he had used, it is not good: Therefore the
Trade ought to be alleged, and so sufficiently, that the Court may judge him
such a person, as is within the Statute of Bankrupts. Also Winch said, that it
is not alleged, that he gained his living by buying and selling any thing
which concern his Trade: And I was of the same opinion, and relied upon the
case of 11 H. 4. 45. An nation upon the case against an Inn. keeper, and showed
that he was lodged there, and his Horse was stolen: And the Defendant pleaded a
plea, that he delivered to him the Key of the Stable, etc. And by the Court the
Writ shall abate, because he did not show that he was a common Hostler: And
therefore Judgment arrested.

And the Court agreed that if the Count were good, the words would maintain an
action; for a Baker is a Trade mentioned in the Statute 5 Eliz. but it ought to
be a Common Baker.

Trin. 20 Jac. Whiteguift versus Eldersham.
Second deliverance.
JOhn Whiteguift brought a Writ of second deliverance against Richard
Eldersham, for taking of his Cattle at Clanding, in quodam loco vocat. Corles
Paud. The Defendant makes Conuzance as Bailiff to Sir Francis Barrington,
because that the place, etc. was parcel of the Manor of Curles, and that John
Curles was seized before the time, Avowry.
etc. thereof, and held it of Sir Francis Berrington as of his Manor of
Clanding by Knights servies, viz. by Homage, Fealty, and survitium scuti, and
by the Rent of ten pounds, payable yearly at two Feasts, of which Rent the said
Sir Francis was seized by the hands of the said John Whiteguift, as by the
hands of his very Tenant, in his Demsn as of sea, and Avow put Homage infect.
whereupon the Plaintiff demur.

And show for cause, that the Defendant had not shown any Title to have Homage
of the said John, and that the Cognizance is repugnant and no sufficient Seisin
alleged of the Services, and that the showing of the Seisin is not formal,
vide Bevils case, Coke lib: 4. fol: 6. Seisin of Rent is the Seisin of the
Services, and he might have traversed the Tenure, and the other party ought to
show whether he had done Homage before, vide 44 E. 3. 41. when an Avowry is
upon the Baron for the Homage of the Feme, it is sufficient Avowry without
showing that he had Issue by her; and yet if he had not Issue, he could not
avow upon the Baron, but that ought to come on the other party, vide 5 E. 2.
Fitz. Avowry 209. A man avow for Homage, and allege Seisin of Esenage without
Homage, and good.

And after upon motion this Term, Judgment was entered for the Defendant.

Trin. 20 Jac. Sherwells Case.
MAry Sherwell brought a Writ of Dower, Dower.
and in But thereto it was pleaded, that the Father of the Husband of the
Demandant was seized of one house and sixty acres of Land in Fire, and made a
Feoffment to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of the Husband
and the said Mary for their lives, Jointure which bars Dower.
for the Ioynture of the said Mary, the remainder to their Heirs: And that
afterward the Father died in the life of the Husband, and aftre the Husband
died: And adjudged that this is no Ioynture to bar Dower; according to the
opinion in Varnons Case, because that the Estate of the Wife at the
Commencement, take not effect immediately after the death of the Husband, Et
quod abinitio non valet, tractu temporis non convalefeit: And if a Feoffment to
the use of the Baron for life, the remainder to I. S. for years, remainder to
the Feme for her Ioynture, this is not a Ioynture he bar Dower.

Trin. 20 Jac. Francis Curle versus James Cooks.
AN action of the case was brought, and Count, Case,
that the King by his Letters Patents, An: 12 Jac. reciting the Statute of 31
H. 8. for erecting of the Court of Wards, and the Officers thereof; and that two
persons shall be named by the King and his Successors, who shall be Auditors of
the Land of the Kings Wards: And reciting the Statute of 33 H. 8. for the
making of the Master of the Wards and Liveries, and his power, had made him the
Plaintiff one of his Auditors, and granted to him the Fees due and accustomed
to be had, and 40. Marks fee, and gave power to him as one of his Auditors,
according to the said Statute, and to exercise it with the Fees in as ample a
manner as others had used: And averred that at the time of the Patent made, and
at all times after the erection of the said Court, the Auditors had engrossed
all the Accounts of the Feodaries, and that they had taken therefore two
shillings, and showed that he was sworn and exercised that Office, and showed
the Oath specially, and that he had by virtue thereof engrossed diverse Accounts
of the Feddaries, and had taken therefore two shillings; and that the Defendant
having conference with the Plaintiff concerning his Office, and his bone
gesture therein, said to him, You have received money for ingrosement of
Feodaries ( innuendo the said Fees for ingrosement of the Accounts of the
Receivers, Feodaries, and other Officers aforesaid) which I will prove is
Cousenage: And then and there spoke further, You are a Couse^er (innuendo the
said Francis decepisse Dominum Regem 8. subditor in executione officii
praedicti) and you live by Cousenage, and deceptionem dicti Domini Regis and
subditorum shorum in executione officii full. Non Culp. verdict. pro Plaintiff.
and Damages thirty three pounds.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment by Attho, that first it is alleged, that
the Fee of two shillings is lawful, and that he said, You have received moneys
for ingrossement of Feodaries, which I will prove is Cousenage ( innuendo the
Fees aforesaid which are lawful) and then by his own showing it is not
Cousenage.

2. It is insensible, Ingrossements of Feodaries, for they cannot be engrossed,
but their Accounts.

3. That Ad tunc and ibidem, for the other words are for other words spoken at
another time of the same day, and they are not actionable, for they do not
relate to his Office. Also the words will not maintain action, for the word
Cousenage is general, and of an ambiguous interpretation, and therefore no
action lies for that: And he resembled it to Sir Edmund Stanhops case; He has
but one Manor, and has got it by swearing and forswearing: Midlemore and
Warlow.
And to the Case of Midlemore and Warlow, An. 30 Eliz. Thou art a cousening
Knave, and have cousened me of forty pounds; And adjudged that no action lay,
vide Coke lib: 10 fol: 130. in Osbornes Case, Thou art an arrant Knave, a
Cousener, and a Traitor; Action lies only for the word Traitor, and yet all
being spoken at one time aggravate, and Damages shall be intended to be given
only for these words which are actionable, vide ut supra fol: 131. if the words
be alleged as spoken at several times, and as several causes of actions,
there if the Damages be entire, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment, if any
of the words do not bear action.

Stanley and Buddens case.
And other cases were cited that Cousenage is not actionable: And Mich: 40 Eliz:
Stanley and Buddens, or Boswels case; there an Attorney brought an action of
the case for these words. Thou art a cousening Knave, and gettest thy living by
Extortion, and did cosen one Pigeon in a Bill of Costs of ten pounds:
Adjudged that the last words were actionable.

This case was adjudged for the Plaintiff, but I was absent in Chancery, and
heard not their reasons, for it was doubtful.

Hill. 17 Jac. Empson versus Bathurst.
Debt.
FRancis Empson brought an action of Debt upon an Obligation, against George
Bathurst; the Defendant pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. That an Obligation
taken Color officii, of any one in their Custody, Obligation voided by the
Statute 23 H. 8.
with any other Condition then for appearance at the day mentioned in the
Process shall be void: And showed that an Extent issued out of the Chancery,
to extend the Land of Robert Leigh upon a Statute Staple of twelve thousand
pounds, in which he was obliged to the Plaintiff: And that Anthony Thirrold was
Sheriff, and Charles Empson was under Sheriff, and shown an Extent of the Land
returned, and before any Liberate it was agreed that the Defendant should pay
to the under Sheriff two and thirty pounds ten shillings, and that he should be
bound to the Plaintiff his Brother, for the security thereof, to the use of the
said Charles, and thereupon he entered into the said Obligation, which by the
said Statute is void, the Plaintiff replied and showed, that by the execution
of the Extent he agreed to pay him the said two and thirty pounds ten shilling,
and pleaded the Statute 29 Eliz. cap. 4. whereupon the Defendant demurred.

And it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, Extortion.
for this Obligation is extortion, and Color officii, and void by the Commen
Law.

Extortion is when any one Color officii extorquet feodum non debitum, plus
quam debitum, aut ante quam debitum, vide Dive and Maringhams case, an
Obligation made by Extortion is against Common Law, for it is as Robbery, vide
Coke lib: 10. fol: 100. Dyer 144. And in this case the opinion of the Court
was, that no Fee is due to the Sheriff by the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap; 4.
because the Fee is not due until execution, Copulative extent, and delivered
in execution, if it were a Statute-Merchant, in which is a Liberate included,
then the Fee is due.

Also it was agreed that by the Statute the Sheriff ought to have six pence in
the pound, where the sum exceed a hundred pounds for all, and not twelve pence
in the pound.

Mich. 20 Jac. Bullen versus Gervis.
RObert Bullen brought an action of Debt for 12 l. upon an Obligation, against
William Gervis Administrator of Owen Godfrey; Debt. It is no plea for the
Administrator to say, the Intestate died outlawed. Young and Pigot.
The Defendant pleaded that the Intestate was outlawed at the Suit of Francis
Murrell, after Judgment, and pleaded it specially, and being so Outlawed died,
and that Outlawry is in full force, Judgment si Action, whereupon the Plaintiff
demurred.

8 E. 4. 6. There by Littleton, between Young and Pigot, in an action of Debt
against Executors, it was holden a good plea to say, that their Testator was
Outlawed, for they are charged to the King for the Goods. Genny said, that the
plea amount only to this, that they have not any Goods, and so answer
argumentative. And 21 E. 3. 5. By Brian, in a Writ of Debt brought against
Executors, it is a good plea to say, that their Testator was Outlawed sans luy
entitle.

36 H. 6. 27. By Prisot in Debt against one as Executor of Jane, the Defendant
said, that the said Jane was his Wife, and demand Judgment si action, and it
seems this is no Plea, because that a Feme Covert may have many things which
the Husband shall not have, as Chooses in action, and she may make Executors if
the Baron agree. And Prisot said, Sir, It seems to me that it is no good plea
for an Executor to say, that his Testator died Outlawed Cansa qua supra. Quare
cur hona materia.

Upon the reading of the Record, it seems that it is no plea, for it is only by
Implication, and that may be given in evidence. Also the Executor or
Administrator may have diverse things which are not forfeitable to the King; as
if the Testator had Mortgaged his Land upon Condition, that if the Mortgagee
pay not at such a day to him, his Executors, or his Heirs, a hundred pounds,
that then it shall be lawful for him, or his Heirs to re-enter, and after and
before the day the Testator is outlawed, and makes his Executors and dies, and
at the day the Mortgagee pay the money to the Executors, that is Assets, and
not forfeited is the King.

So if Tenant for life of a Rent be outlawed, and the Rent arrear, and makes
his Executors and die, this arrearage is due to the Executor, and is Assets,
and not forfeited, for the Rent was a Freehold, for which during his life no
action of Debt lay, and these arrearages recoverable by the Executors are
Assets.

Also if this should be a good plea, which is only by Implication, he might
thereby prevent the Plaintiff of his recovery.

Also though chooses in action are by information in the Exchequer recoverable,
yet if the Executor bring a Scire facias upon the Judgment, he shall recover,
and shall be accountable to the King therefore; and the Debtors of the Intestate
(though he was outlawed) may pay the debts to him, and his release is a good
discharge to them.

Also it was agreed, that an Executor or an Administrator might bring a Writ
for the reversall of the Outlawry, and the Outlawry is not a Bar to him:
Woolley versus Bradwell. Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 2954.
And one case was vouched by Attho, which was adjudged upon the like plea in
this Court, Trin: 37 Eliz: Rot: 2954. Woolley against Bradwell and his Wife,
Executors of Sir Thomas Mannord, and the matter depended a year and was argued,
and adjudged that it was no plea, for it is but by argument, and so being,
Sergeant Hobart said, this Argument ought to be infallible, also this is the
matter and not the form, for in this case the Demurrer was general: and the
Book of 3 H: 6. 14. and 32. there it is well argued, and the better opinion,
that it is only by argument: And a man outlawed may make an Executor, and this
Executor may have a Writ of Error to reverse the Outlawry: And thereupon and
upon the view of the Record in Woolleys case, the Court gave Judgment that it
is no plea.

Lightfoot versus Brightman.
Covenant.
LIghtfoot brought on action of Covenant against Brightman, and count, that the
Defendant being possessed of an Advowson in gross for term of years,
covenanted that he would not grant nor assign his Interest to any, Grant of an
Advowson pleaded without alleging to be by deed, good if the issue be taken
upon collateral matter.
without offer thereof first to the Plaintiff, and that he should have it fifty
pounds better cheap then any other, and allege breach of the Covenant, that he
granted the said Advowson and his term therein over, without offering it to the
Plaintiff, and Issue joined upon non concessit, and found by Verdict quod
concessit, and damages fifty pounds. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that it is not alleged, that the Grant upon which the Issue is joined, was by
Deed, and then no breach assigned: I at the first was of opinion that the
Judgment should stay; but after upon advisement, I concurred with Sergeant
Hobart, and Justice Winch, that it was averred by the Verdict, for now it being
a perfect Grant, it shall be intended that upon the Evidence a Deed was shown;
as upon Issue joined upon Grant of a Reversion, where it is not alleged that
it was by Deed, or that the Tenant atturned, yet if it be found it shall be
good: And so in Avowry for a Rentcharge, where the Grant thereof is pleaded not
by Deed, and Issue is joined fur concessit, and found quod concessit, that is
good by the Verdict, like to Nichols case, Coke lib: 5. Debt upon a Bill,
payment pleaded, and Issue found for the Plaintiff, he had Judgment: But it
seems, if it had been found for the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment, for the Bar confess the action, as in the 9 H. 6. Debt upon an
Obligation, the Defendant plead that he delivered it to the Plaintiff to be his
Deed, when certain Conditions were performed: And he pleaded that the
Conditions were not performed, if it be found accordingly, yet the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment, Coke lib: 2. fol: 61. Wiscots case, a Lease by Baron and
Feme, which ought to be by Deed pleaded generally, and found the Plaintiff had
Judgment, vide Smith and St^pl^tons case.

Mich. 20 Jac. Chittle versus Sammon.
CHittle against Sammon in Replevin, Replevin. Avowry for Rent granted to the
Father in see, without alleging that it was arreare after the death of the
Father.
Counsance for Rent as Bailiff to Sir John Reves, upon a Grant out of the Land,
whereof the place in which, etc. was parcel, upon a Grant made to the Father of
Sir John, and for Rent arrear, etc. Issue was joined upon this point, if the
place was parcel of the Land out of which the Rent was granted, and found by
Verdict that it was: And now moved by Attho in Arrest of Judgment, that it is
not alleged that this Rent was arrear after the death of the Father, as it
ought to be, and therefore it may be intended that this Rent was arrear in the
life of the Father: But the Court agreed and resolved that it was good after
Verdict, for now it is pleaded that it was arrear, and not paid to him, Ergo it
was due to him; and though it might have been more fully pleaded, yet after
Verdict it is sufficient.

Fletcher versus Harcot.
AN action upon the case was brought by Fletcher of Otely against Harcot, and
count, Case.
that whereas the Defendant had arrested one Batersby by a Commission of
rebellion, Assumpsit in consideration that the plaintiff (being an Hostler)
would keep a Prisoner to save him harmless.
issuing out of the Court of the Lord President and Council of the North, as
he affirmed: And whereas the Plaintiff keeps a common Inn in Otely, and had
kept it by the space of five years, and had entertained men. The Defendant
requested the Plaintiff to keep the said Batersby in his Inn at Otely, by the
space of one night, as a Prisoner, and that he would keep and save him
harmless, and show that he had kept him for that night as a Prisoner: And
Batersby afterward brought an action of false Imprisonment against him for the
said keeping of him in his house, and that he had expended and laid out in
defense thereof ten pounds: And that he had required him to save him harmless,
and he refused. Non assumpsit found for the Plaintiff, and moved by Harvey in
Arrest of Judgment, that it is no sufficient consideration, because it does not
appear that he had lawfully arrested the said Batersby, for it is not
affirmatively alleged, but (as he said.) Also it does not appear that the
recovery in the action of false Imprisonment was for the same cause; but in
that he had misinformed, for it was in the Record Pro custodia praedicta, and
ex causa praedicta. And for the other matter the Lord Hobart seemed at first to
doubt, if it did not appear that it was a lawful Arrest, then there was no
consideration: But because the diversity, when the consideration appears to be
for doing of a thing which is unlawful; As if one at the request of I. S.
promise to better I. D. and he promise to save him harmless, this is a void
Consideration; But if one request I. S. to enter into the Manor of Dale, and
drive out Cattle, and that he will save him harmless if he does so, and after
Trespass be brought against him, and recovery had, he shall have his action:
So if a Sheriff pretending to have a Writ, where he has none, arrest one, and
request an Inne-keeper to entertain him in his house, or hire one to conduct
the Prisoner to the Gaol; and promise to keep him without Damage; if an Action
be brought, and recovery had thereupon, the party shall have an action of the
case against the Sheriff upon this promise, for he which does a thing which may
be lawful, and the illegallity thereof appear not to him, he which imploys the
party and assume to save him harmless, shall be charged: And Judgment was
entered for the Plaintiff*

Mich. 20 Jac. Parkers Case.
Debt. Hue and Cry.
AN action of Debt was brought against the Hundred of (...) in the County of
Stafford, by William Parker, upon the Statute of Winchester, cap: 1, and 2.
reciting the Statute, That forasmuch as Robberies do daily increase. Murders,
and burning of houses, and Theft be more often used then they have been
heretofore, Amendment of a false Abreviation.
and Felons cannot be attainted by the Oaths of the Jurors, which had rather
suffer strangers to be robbed, and to pass without pain, then to indite the
Offenders, of whom great part be flock of the same Country, etc. And upon Nil
debet pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff: And it was moved by Sergeant
Bawtry, that the Writ had recited the Statute otherwise then it was, for the
Writ says, Indicari pro indictari, and it ought to be written by this
Abbreviation Indica^uri: And the word Indictari is a word by it self, and he
resembled it to Freemans case, Coke lib: 5. fol: 45. Fecit vastum vendico^nem
and destrictionem, for destructionem, and not amendable. Also Coke lib: 4. S.
Cromwells case upon the Statute of Rich: 2. de scandalis magnatum, the word
Messoignes is said Messuages, and not amendable. Harris answered that the
Cursitor had a Note drawn which was well; and it was only his mis-priston.

Secondly, that there is no such Passive Verb as Indicari, and so being
insensible, shall be amended: And for that vouched 11 H: 6. 2. and 14. adjudged
upon the Statute of forging of false Deeds, Immaginavit, were it should be
Immaginatus est, and amended.

3. This Abbreviation is sufficient: Also he said that it is only the preamble
of the Statute, whereupon the action is not founded, but upon the body of the
Act. Sir George Wrothies case in Ejectment, the word Demisit was amended and
made Divisit.

Brickhead against the Bishop of York, and Cook for the Ticaridge of Leeds,
the Writ was Vacariam, and for that the Cursitor was examined, and his
Instruction being Vicariam, it was amended there, An: 14 Jac.

1. The Lord Hobart inclined strongly, that it should be amended by the
instruction which was delivered to the Cursitor, but as to that Winch and I
differed, because that this matter of Instruction is not a thing which ought to
be informed by the party, as all matters of fact are: As whether it be a
Vicaridge or a Church, or in debt for twenty pounds in the Instruction, and he
make it thirty pounds, that shall be amended: But in this case it is matter of
skill, and no difference between this case and Freemans case: And in debt if he
had Instruction in the Debet and Detinet, and makes the Writ in the Detinet
only, that shall not be amended.

2. The Lord Hobart inclined, that this recital is but in the Preamble, and
may be omitted; to which we disagreed, he inclined that the Abbreviation was
sufficient to supply all the word.

This Case being long debated, the Court Ex assensu ordered that the Defendants
should give 80 l. to the Plaintiff.

Mich. 10 Jac. Rot. 641. Poole versus Reynold.
John Poole brought a Prohibition against Richard Reynold Farmer of the Moiety
of the Rectory of Colleton, Prohibition. Prescription to have Deer out of a
Park in discharge of all Tithes, and after the Park is disparked.
with the Chapel of Shute annexed to the said Rectory: And the Surmise was,
that of time whereof memory, within the Parish of Colleton, there was a Rectory
appropriate, and the Cappell of Shute annexed thereto, Et una Vicaria perpetua
ejusdem Ecclesiae de Colleton dotat.

And whereas the said John Poole for six years last past, had occupied one
house, a hundred acres of Land, twenty acres of Meadow, forty acres of Pasture,
called Shute Park, in Shute aforesaid, within the Parish of Colleton; which
said Tenements were anciently a Park, and now dis-parked, which Park De temps
d'out memory, etc. until the dis-parking thereof was used and filled with Deer,
and severed from other Land, and was dis-parked. An. 10 Eliz. and converted
into the said house, a hundred acres, etc. And that all the Occupyers of the
said Park called Shute Park, de temps d'out memory, etc. until the
dis-parking, had paid to the Vicar there, his Farmer or Deputy one Buck of the
Summer season, within that time upon request, and one Do of the Winter season,
within that time, etc. in discharge of all Tithes of the said Park, until the
dis-parking; and after the dis-parking in discharge of all Tithes of the said
Tenements, which they had accepted for all the time aforesaid, until the
dis-parking and after, or otherwise agreed with the Vicar for them: And
traversed this Prescription, and found for the Plaintiff.

And now in Arrest of Judgment it was moved by Henden, that this Prescription
extends to the Land quatenus it is a Park, and that being destroyed, the
Prescription is gone, for a Tenurs to cover a Wall or Thatch an house, if the
party destroy or pull it down, the Tenure is extinct, 32 E 14: Avowry: And it
shall be presumed that this was by grant when it was a Park, which is collected
by the thing which is to be paid; and if it be to be paid or delivered out of
the Park, then it is determined, vide Lutirels case, Coke lib: 4 Also this
Prescription is against the benefit of the Church, and shall not be enlarged;
And the Wood which is sold out of the Park shall not be discharged, 14 Jac. in
Conyers case in this Court; Conyers case.
Prescription that the person had two acres of Meadow given in discharge of all
Tithes of Hay ground, viz. of all the Meadow in the Parish, it any arrable Land
be converted into Meadow, it extends not to discharge that, vide Lutirels case,
Coke lib: 4 fol: 86. That an Alteration in prejudice of the party determine the
Prescription; but vide the principal case there adjudged, that building of new
Mills in the same place, and converting of Fulling Mills into Corn Mills, alter
not the Prescription, vide Terringhams case, lib: 4. He which has Common
purchased part of the Land, all is extinct, for it is his own act: And he cited
a case which was in this Court argued at Bar, and afterward at Bench, between
Cooper and Andrews, Mich: 10 Jac: Rot: 1023. for the Park of Cowhurst, vide 32
E: 1 Fitz: avowry 240.5 E: 2. Fitz: annuity 44.20 E: 4.14.14 E: 4.4.

But this case was adjudged for the Plaintiff, Quod stet prohibitio, and that
which is by the name of Park is for the Land, and is annexed to the Land by the
name of Park, if the Prescription had been to pay a Buck or a Do out of the
Park, then it would alter the case: But it is general, and had been paid also
after the Park dis-parked, viz. the tenth of Eliz. And the case of Cowper and
Andrews, was the third shoulder of every Deer which is killled in the Park,
and two shillings in money, and that case was never adjudged.

Hill. 10 Jac. Meredith versus Bonill.
Case.
HUgh Meredith a Justice of Peace in the County of Monmouth, brought an action
upon the case against Bonill, Words.
for these words, I will have him hanged for robbing on the high way, and for
taking from a man five pounds and an Horse. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were not actionable, for they
are not Affirmative or Positive, but a supposition only; as if he had said,
Nowels case.
I will indite him for such a matter: it was vouched to be adjudged 51 Eliz. in
Nowels case, that to say of an Attorna^^. That he was Cooped for forging Writs
maintain an action: And 14 Eliz. He is infected of the Robbery, and he smells
of the Robbary, adjudged actionable.

In balls case, There is never a Purse cut in Northamptonshire but Ball has a
part of it, will not bear action: But the Court would not declare their
opinion, Quia sub spe Concordiae.

Griggs Case.
GRigg which is the Examiner at Chester, preferred there this Bill in the
Chancery, vocat. the Exchequer, Prohibition ^i Chester.
against one which inhabit within the same County, and another which inhabit
in London. being executors to one, to whom the said Grigg was indebted by
Obligation (which Obligation was put in suit in the Court of Common Pleas, and
there proceed to process before the Bill exhibited) and the Bill concern
equity of an Agreement, that the Testator had promised, that one Robert Grigg
should assign a lease of Tithes to the Plaintiff in consideration of his entry
into the said Obligation; and if he could not procure it, that then the
Obligation should not be prejudicial to him; and he which was distributing in
Chester answered thereto: And an Order was made by Sir Thomas Ireland,
Vice-Chamberlain, that Process should be awarded to him which dwells in
London; And an Inquisition was granted to stay the proceedings at Common Law:
And afterward upon the motion of Sergeant Hitchar^, Sir Thomas Ireland was in
Court, and show all that he could to maintain the Jurisdiction, viz. That the
Contract was made in the County Palatine, and that the privilege pursued the
Plaintiff; and ipse qui est reus, non potest eligere, etc. Yet it was resembled
to ancient Demesne and Guildable: And by Lord Hobart, he which inhabit at Dove^
by this way, may be enforced to come and answer to a Bill in Chester, which
would be infinite trouble, and the matter is transitory: And it was resolved,
that the Court of Chester had not power in this case, but it belonged to the
Chancery of England.

And a Prohibition was granted.

Hill. 20 Jac.
ONe case was in the Kings Bench, viz. Trespass.
Baron and Feme brought in action of Trespass Quare clausum fregit, Trespass
by Baron and Feme, for breaking the Close of the Baron, and for the Battery of
the Wife.
and for Battery of the Feme, the Defendant pleaded a License to enter into the
Close made by the Baron; and not guilty as to the Battery. And the Court was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the Husband and Writ could not ioyn for
the weaking of the Close of the Baron, the Writ shall abate for all. But the
Lord chief Justice and Justice Dodderidge were of opinion, that the Plaintiff
should have Judgment: And it seems that the Law is clear accordingly, vide 9 E:
4. 51. Trespass by the Husband and Wife for the Battery of them both the Jury
found so much for the Battery of the Husband; and so much for the Battery of
the Wife, and so Damages assessed severally, because the Wife could not soon
with the Husband in an action for the Battery of the Husband, for that part the
Writ shall abate; and for the Battery of the Wife they shall recover for, for
that they ought or join in an action, vide 46 E: 3. 3. Baron and Feme brought
Trespass for the Battery and Imprisonment of the Wife, and the Writ was ad
damnum ipsorum, and yet good, vide 9 H: 7. in the case of Rescous, and 22 E: 4.
4. there is a good diversity when the Writ is falsified by the showing of the
party himself; and when it is found by Verdict. And Justice Haughton and
Justice Chamberlain were of opinion, that the Writ should abate; for it is
apparent, that as to the Trespass Quare clausum fregit, the Wife had no cause
of action: But this case being debated at Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, at
the Table, the Lord chief Baron was of opinion that Plaintiff should have
Judgment for that part, and he held the Writ good in part, and Reddenda singula
singulie, Me^enest issint, as it seems no more then in the case of 9 E: 4. for
there the Writ shall avate for part. And if an action of forgery of Deeds be
brought against two, for forging and publishing, and found that one forged and
the other published, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment.

Howell versus Auger.
Trespass.
IN an action of Trespass brought by Noy Howell against Auger, for breaking of
a house and five acres of Land in Fresham, upon Non Culp. pleaded, the Jury
gave a special Verdict.

Devise of a Fee after a Fee.
Robert Howell seized of the Land in Question, and of other Land, by his Will in
writing devised this Land to Dorothy his Wife for life, and devised this Land
to Thomas Howell his younger Son, to him and his Heirs in Fee, under the
Condition which shall be afterward declared: And the other Land was also
devised to Dorothy for life, and to the Plaintiff and his Heirs in Fee, under
the Condition hereafter limited: If Dorothy died before the Legacies paid, then
he will that they shall be paid by Noy and Thomas his Sons, portion-like out of
the Houses and Lands given them: And if either of my Sons dye before they
enter, or before the Legacies paid, or before either of them enter; Then I will
that the longer liver shall enjoy both parts to him and his Heirs: And if both
dye before they enter, then his Executors or one of them to pay the Legacies,
and to take the profits till they be paid, and a year after, and made Dorothy
his Wife, and Christopher Roys his Executors, and died. Dorothy entered, the
Plaintiff Noy by his Deed, In: 33 Eliz. in the life of Dorothy released to
Thomas all his right, etc. with Warranty: Release of Lands devised before they
be vested.
Thomas by his Will devised the Land, for which the action is brought, to Agnes
his Wife, and died in the life of Dorothy, and before Legacies paid Dorothy
died, and Agnes entered and took to Husband Henry Ayleyard, who leased to the
Defendant, upon whom Noy entered, and the Defendant re-entred: And Si super
totam Materiam, etc.

And this Case was well argued at Bar in two Terms; and the first question was,
If this Devise of a Fes after a Limitation be good or not, much was said for
it, and they relied upon a case which was adjudged in the Kings Bench, between
Pell and Brown, of such a limitable Fee: Pell and Brown.
And many Cases put that this operate as a future Devise Executory, as well as
one may by his Will Devise, that if his Son and Heir dye before he marry, or
before that he come to the age of font and twenty years, that then I. S. shall
have the Land, and it shall be good, vide Dyer 33. Coke lib: 10.46. Lampets
case.

But Tuesday the eleventh of February, the Lord Hobart by our direction
(because that we were straightened of time, and Howell was so importunate for
Justice, that we could not argue) delivered the opinion of the Court, that
Judgment should be given for the Defendant: And he declared, that as to the
point of a Fee-simple, which he called the mounting of one Fee-simple upon
another, we now declared no opinion; But we all without difficulty resolved,
that this release of Noy, be it a Condition or not, had discharged it: And as
to him, it is an Interest used by the Devise, but not executed until it
happen: And therefore in Lampers case, there the Release discharged it, for
there he had no Title executed, but vested and commenced, and so may have Noy
Howell the Plaintiff in this case; and it is not like to an Heir in the life of
the Father, for be is a stranger, and he has no Title at all, and yet his
Release with Warranty bars him; and here this Release is accompanied with
Warranty, of which nothing was spoken: Also as to Noy it is a Condition
according to the words of the Will, and therefore sans question that Noy had
barred himself.

The Vacation after Hill. 20 Jac.
MEmorand. That on Monday the seventeenth of February, at Sergeants Inn, upon
the assembly of all the Justices, to take consideration upon the Statute of 35
Eliz. cap. 1. for the Abjuration of Sectaries; the Atturney-generall, and
Sergeant Crew being there, Resolutions upon the Statute of Eliz. cap. 1.
concerning Sectaries:
after the perusal of the Statute, and the Continuances thereof, it was first
upon debate considered, whether this Statute was in force, or discontinued, and
upon the perusal of the Proviso in the Statute of Subsidy, and upon reasoning
the matter, these Points were resolved.

1. If a Parliament be assembled, and diverse Orders made, What shall be said a
Session of Parliament
and a Writ of Error brought, and the Record delivered to the higher house, and
diverse Bills agreed, but no Bills signed: That this is but a Convention, and no
Parliament, or Session, as it was An. 12 Jac. in which (as it was affirmed by
them which had seen the Roll) it is entered that it is not any Session or
Parliament, because that no Bill was signed, vide. 33 H: 6 Brook, Parliament
86. every Session in which the King signs Bills is a Parliament.

2. It was agreed, that if diverse Statutes be continued until the next
Parliament, or next Session; and there is a Parliament or a Session, and
nothing done therein as to continuance, all the said Statutes are discontinued,
and Beriatim, Jones, Chamberlain, Hutton, Denham, Haughton, Dodderidge, Winch
and Bromley declared their opinions, that this Statute is discontinued: And
that the Statute of Subsidy is a Parliament, and that every Parliament is a
Session, but not e converso, for one Parliament may have diverse Sessions, as
the Parliament 1 Jac: had four, and ended An: 7 Jac. vide 33 H: 6. Br.
Parliament 86. And that this Proviso is not to any other purpose, but to
continue their proceedings in the same Estate, as if this Act had not been
made; and if this Proviso had not been, then this Statute had been discontinued
by this act of Subsidy, but when this ends and is determined, then is the
Session ended, then it is a Session scilicet a Parliament, which ought to be
pleaded, at the Parliament holden, etc. and all the Commissions of Subsidy are
accordingly; and the Proviso call it a Session: Then this being done, the Lord
chief Baron did not deliver any opinion, for he said, that he had not
considered the Statute; and afterward it was desired that the Lords would
deliver their opinions, and thereupon the Lord Hobart declared his opinion
accordingly; That it seemed to him that it was a Session, and that it was not
safe to meddle with such Law, and that he would never refuse to declare his
opinion with his Brethren: After the Lord chief Justice Ley made a long
discourse, concerning the purpose and intent of Parliament, scilicet. That it
was not their purpose to destroy so good Laws, and therefore it was not any
such Session as was within the intent of the preceding Parliament, which was,
that these should determine when it is a Parliament or Session, in which good
Laws are made.

And Doderidge said, that it was fit to see the Commission, and that that which
has been said, was not to bind any one, but every one spoke what then he was
advised of, and peradventure might change upon better consideration. And
afterward upon Tuesday on an Assembly of the two chief Justices, the chief
Baron, Justice Haughton, Baron Denham, Hutton, Chamberlain, and Jones, the
Attorney-generall brought the Commission de 12 El. June 1. and that had these
words, Pro eo quod nullus Regalis Assensus, nec responsio per nos praestat.
fuit, nullum Parliamentum, nec aliqua Sessio Parliamenti lata. aut tent. fuit,
They have power to adjourn this Parliament thus begun: And the Commission to
dissolve this Parliament, 38. Feb. An. 19 Jac. had the same words, saving that
he recite, that he had given his Royal assent to an act of Subsidy, by which
was intended that it should not be a Session: And upon view of the Commission,
the Lord chief Justice moved that the King was mistaken in this, that he had
given power to dissolve this Parliament, which had not any Session, and if it
be a Session, then he had no power to dissolve it, and then it is, as it were,
a recesse; and a Parliament cannot be discontinued, or dissolved but by matter
of Record, and that by the King alone; and if the Parliament yet continue, then
this Statute also continue during the Parliament by the Proviso: but that would
not serve, for first, it is against the intent of the King, and against his
Proclamation: And also the case is truly put in the Commission, as to the
matter in fact, and he is not misinformed, but mistaken in the Law, and then
the Commission for the dissolving is good, semblable to the Lord Shandoi's
Case, and other Cases, vide in Cholmleys case: But because that all the Judges
were not at this Conference, therefore it was deferred until the next Term; and
in the interim, the Grand Secretary and the Attorney-generall were to inform
the King that the Statute is obscure, and had not been put in ure, and that we
could not agree.

Mich. 20 Jac. Rot. 2805. Bawtry versus Skarlet.
Sussex.
JOhn Bawtry Clerk, Case.
brought an action upon the case against Benjamen Skarlet, one of the Attorneys
of this Court by Bill, and count, In consideration that the Plaintiff will
confess Judgment, the Attorney promise to defer the entry of the Judgment, etc.
that whereas one William Carter, Trin. 20 Jac. brought an action of debt
against the now Plaintiff, upon an Obligation of a hundred and twenty pounds,
to which the now Plaintiff appeared by his Attorney, and required a
Declaration, and the now Defendant on the part of the said William Carter his
Master gave the said Declaration, and required the now Plaintiff to confess
the action; and pendente Pl. he the now Defendant in consideration that the
Plaintiff would give order to his Attorney to confess the action, and to
suffer the said Defendant to have Judgment in the said Plea, for the said
William Carter his Master, assumed to the Plaintiff, that no Judgment should be
entered, until after Crast. Annunciat. And that no execution shall be sued out
until after the end of Michaelmas Term next, and show the performance thereof
by him, and the breach of the Defendant: And after Verdict it was moved that it
is no sufficient consideration, and that was impossible for him to perform,
that Judgment should not be entered in the Term, in which Judgment is given, but
that is in the discretion of the Court; and afterward Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

Pach. 19 Jac. Rot. 3014. 21 Jac. Jennings versus Pitman.
RIchard Jennings brought an action of Covenant against George Pitman, upon an
Indenture of an Apprentiship, Covenant of an Apprentiship.
by which the Defendant had put himself to be an Apprentice to the Plaintiff in
Ipswich, to the Trade of a Linen Draper; and there were diverse clauses in the
Indenture, according to the usual form, and assign for breach, the wasting of
several sum of money.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 5 Eliz. by which it is enacted, That it
is not lawful for any one inhabiting in any City or Town Corporate, using the
Trade of a Merchant over the Sea, Mercer, Pannary, Goldsmith, Iron-monger,
Imbroyderer, or Clothier to take any Apprentice to be instructed in any of
these Trades, if it be not his Son, or that the Father or Mother of such
Apprentice, had at the time of the taking of him, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, of Inheritance or Freehold, of forty shillings per annum, to be
certified by three Justices of Peace, under their hands and Seals where the
Land lies, to the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other head Officer of the City or Town
Corporate, and to be enrolled, entered, and recorded there, and pleaded the
clause of the Statute which makes Obligations and Covenants void, which are
taken against it. And averred that Ipswich was a Town Corporate at the time of
the making of the Statute.

The Plaintiff replied, that his Father had at that time when he was bound,
Lands and Tenements in great Bealing, viz. ten acres, to the Value of forty
shillings per annum.

The Defendant by Rejoinder offer to join Issue, that his Father had not Lands,
etc. whereupon the Plaintiff demurred.

And the question was, If this part of the Statute, To be certified by the
Justices, etc. be such an essential part thereof, that the Covenant be void
without it: It was agreed, that it had not been put in use after the Statute;
but it seems that it is Essential, and it ought to be so, at the time when he
is put to be an Apprentice, but it may be enrolled afterward, for the Statute
in another part provides a penalty for the not Inrolling: Like to the Case upon
the Statute of 18 Eliz. That they which claim any Estate of them which were
Attainted in the Rebellion, they brought their Conveyances to the Exchequer to
be enrolled within one year, if they bring and deliver these Conveyances,
though they be not enrolled, yet they have performed as much as was in them:
And if the Certificate be not at the time when the party is put to be an
Apprentice, the Statute was to no purpose.

If this Bar be good, then the Replication is a departure, and the Rejoinder
also, and the Bar being good, Judgment shall be given against the Plaintiff,
but if the Bar be not good, then for the Plaintiff, for the Count contains
matter certain.

But the Court moved, whether this Covenant lay against an Insant, for although
it is by the Statute provided, that he shall be bound to serve as a man of full
age, yet that makes not the Covenants good, and it is like to a Custom, which
shall be taken strictly.

Trin 20 Jac.
This Case between Jennings and Pitman was moved this Term; And the Lord Hobart
was of opinion, that this Statute (being that it appears that he was within
age, scil. sixteen years) will not bind him to any Covenants which are not
employed in the Indenture of serving: For the doubt was, whether an Infant was
an Apprentice out of London, though that he put himself to serve: And the only
matter which binds him in this Statute, is, that he shall be bound to serve,
when he is bound by Indenture, being within age, as well as if he were of full
age; and if the Covenant be only a Covenant to serve, no Covenant lies for
Imbeziling of Goods: And if the Covenant be to serve him faithfully and
diligently, that shall not bind him upon this Covenant. And I was of the same
opinion, for it is only made good as to the serving; and there are many
Covenants and Clauses besides in this Indenture, which bind him not; As not to
play at unlawful Games, etc. And a Custom, that an Infant at such an age may
sell his Land, shall be taken strictly, viz. that he cannot give it, etc. But
my Brother Winch was of opinion, that it was a thing incident, and a quasi
Consequent, viz. That if he shall be bound to serve, by consequence he shall be
bound to serve faithfully and truly. He resembled it to the case of a Fine
levied by an Infant, and not reversed during his ^onage, that shall bind him;
and by consequence the Indenture which leads the uses of the Fine, and when the
Law enables to any thing, that which is incident, and without which the other
thing cannot be, is employed.

Trin. 19 Jac. Rot. 1734. Blemmer Hasset versus Humberstone.
Norf.
JN an Ejectione firmae brought by Ralph Blemmerhasset against William
Humberstone for Land in Pucklethorp, Ejectione firmae.
upon a Lease made by John B. upon a special Verdict found, it was resoved, A
Copyhold may be extinguished without an actual surrender.
that when a Copyholder bargain and sell his Copyhold to the Lord of a Manor,
which has the Manor in Lease for years, that thereby the Copyhold Estate is
extinguished: And the Lord Hobart said, that if a Copyholder come into Court,
and says, that he is weary of his Copyhold, and request the Lord to take it,
that is a Surrender; for between the Lord and the Tenant, a Conveyance shall
not need to be according to the Custom, for the Copyholder has no other use
of the Custom, but only to convey the Land to another, vide Coke lib. 4. That
a Release by him which has Right to a Copyhold, to one which is admitted
Copyholder, extinguisheth the Right of the Copyhold by Deed: And if a
Copyholder release to the Lord, that extinguisheth the Copyhold, although it be
contrary to the nature of a Release to give a possession. It was agreed here
that this Copyhold is not extinct, but the Lord (which is Lessee for years)
Dominus pro tempore, may grant it by Copy de novo.

Mich. 21 Jac. Aris versus Higgins.
ARis brought an action upon the case against Higgins for saying these words,
He is a Thief, and has stol^ my Corn, Case. Words.
and made me no satisfaction: And it was found for the Plaintiff, and
afterward moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words were not actionable,
for Verba ambigua in mitiori sensu sunt accipienda: And therefore Coke. lib: 4.
fol: 19. Thou art a Thief, for thou have stolen Apples out of my Orchard, or
thou have robbed my Hop gound; the latter words qualify the generality of the
former; Also an Innuendo will not make either the person or the matter certain,
Coke lib: 4. fol: 10. Barham did burn my Burn, Innuendo a Barn with Corn, not
actionable; and that he had not satisfaction, that proves that it was for Corn
growing, for otherwise if it were Felony, the party shall not have
satisfaction: But Justice Winch was of opinion, that the action lay, and that
the words, He is a Thief, he has stolen my Corn, are both actionable, and not
like to Robbing my Orchard, or stealing my Apples in my Orchard, for Apples in
an Orchard are commonly upon the Trees: And as to the words, Thou have made me
no satisfaction, these do not qualify the former words, Thou art a Thief, and
have stolen a bundle of Fitches, adjudged actionable: Justice Jones was of the
same opinion, for stealing of his Corn shall be intended of Corn severed, for
otherwise it is acres of Corn, or Corn growing. Sergeant Hobart was of opinion,
that the words shall be intended in mitiori sensu: And we all agreed, that that
which qualifies or extenuates words, ought to be full and not ambiguous.

Rud versus the Bishop of Lincoln.
Quare Impedit.
IN a Quare impedit brought by Edward Rud against the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord
keeper, Drury and Stubbin, for the Church of Dackworth, upon Evidence at Bar,
these Points were resolved in the Court.

Quare Impedit.
1. When one usurps upon a Lease for years, that this Usurpation gains the Fee,
and puts the very Patron out of possession; And though by the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 5. he in reversion after the Lease may have a Quare Impedit
when the Church is void, or may present, and if he present, and his Clerk be
admitted and inducted, that then he is remitted, yet until it be recovered, or
his Clerk be in, the Usurper has the Fee, and against him lies the Writ of
Right, and that descends to his Heirs, and his Wife shall be endowed.

2. When the King present one by Laps, not having any Title of Laps, and a
recovery is had against him in a Quare Impedit by one which had no Title: If
this gain the Patronage; And it is clear the King had no Title to present; and
although he which comes in by such Laps, is not Incumbent, nor gains the
Patronage, yet he is Incumbent as to all Ecclesiastical matters, to have
Offerings, Tithes, etc. for it is only as to the rightful Patronage, no
gaining of the Patronage, but he may present, vide Greens case, Coke lib. 6.
fol. 29.

3: It was resolved by the Court, that when one recover in a Quare Impedit,
although that no Writ be awarded to the Bishop, yet if upon non presentment the
Bishop will admit and institute his Clerk, and he is Inducted: And that is
good, as well as a man may enter without a Writ of Habere factas seisinam after
recovery, so may the Patron which has recovered in a Quare Impedit present,
and that being accepted, and Institution and Induction pursuing thereupon, it is
good.

4. Also, whore the Issue was, whether the Church was void at the time of the
presentment of Palu or not; and it appears that the case was, that Thomas Rud
after the Church was void by the death of Clement Rud, and after that one
Taxall was presented by Laps and Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted where the
King had not Title, the said Thomas Rud having good Title to present, made a
writing of presentation of the said Paul, and after (be it then exhibited to
the Bishop, or no) The said Thomas Rud brought a Quare Impedit, and recovered,
and afterward this Presentation is exhibited to the Bishop, and he admit,
institute, and makes a Mandate for Induction, which also is afterward done
accordingly. Now the Issue being, whether the Church was void at the time of
the Presentation of Pain, the time of this Presentation shall now be the time
of exhibiting thereof after the Judgment: And then as to Rud which had recovered
against him, the Church was then void, for whenever the Bishop had the
Presentation exhibited, at that time he ought by the Law to admit, institute,
and give a Mandate for Induction, the then Church is void: But after the
Judgment the Bishop ought to accept that, and admit and institute, Ergo at that
time the Church was void, and that is to be the time of the Presentation.

5. When one having good Title to present, and an Incumbent by Usurpation is
admitted, instituted, and inducted, and after that the Patron present, and the
Bishop refuse, and after the Patron recover, and then he which had this
Presentation exhibit it to the Bishop, this is now a good Presentation; and
the Patron cannot revoke or give him a new Presentation, but if the Patron
before the death of the Incumbent makes Letters of Presentation, that is void,
because he had no Title to present.

Hill. 20 Jac. Rot. 1942. Pleydell versus Gosmoore.
Wilts.
EDmond Pleydell brought an action of Trespass against Richard Gosmoore,
Trespass. Where one may fetter an Estray.
and William G. for the taking and chasing of a Colt and fettering of him, with
a Continuando as to the fettering.

The Defendant convey the Manor of Sharston to Francis Earl of Hertford: And
that the Earl, and all those whose Estates, etc. had the Estrayes which come
within the said Manor, (...) that the Tithing-men for the time being, seized
the Estrayes and proclaimed them at the next Market or Fair, etc. and kept them
until they be claimed or forfeited: And that he was a Tithing-man, and seized
this Colt as an Estray; and because this Colt was so feirce, etc. that he could
not be kept in Pasture, he fettered him, and kept him in his Pasture within the
Manor, and that for the space of two weeks, and the Plaintiff having notice
claimed him, and had him delivered, etc. The Plaintiff demurred generally.

Attho said, that he had not avorred that he continued feirce, etc. but at the
time of taking was so: To this it was answered, That the Count charge not the
Defendant absolutely with all the time, but Diversis diebus and vicibus: And
also he justify for two weeks, which is the same Trespass: Then upon the
matter the question is, if he which has Estrayes or Waifes, if he seize an
Estray qui est ferox, whether he may fetter such Estray.

It was agreed by the Court, that when an Estray comes within a Manor and walk
there, this is a Trespass, and the party in whose Land the Estray is
Damage-feasant, may chase him out of his ground.

Also it was agreed, that until the Lord, or his Bailiff, or Tithing-man seize
the Estray, that shall not be said an Estray; but when the Lord seize, than he
has the Commencement of a property thereby, and he is chargable against all
others for the Trespass which this Estray does; and if this Estray within the
year estray out of the Manor, the Lord may chase back the Estray, until he be
seized by another Lord which has Estrays: But if he be seized by another Lord,
then the first has lost all his possibility of gaining the property, and the
other Lord ought to proclaim it de novo.

It was moved, that if a Lord of a Manor which has Estrayes, and has seized
an Estray, suffer that Estray by negligent keeping to stray away, and never can
be found again, the Owner may have an action upon the case of Trover and
Conversion against the Lord, Quare vide 44 E: 14. there the Lord seized an Ass
for an Estray, he to whom the property did belong came and challenged the
Estray, the Lord may detain him until he tender sufficient recompense for the
Pasture, vide purc. 20 H 7. 1. by Vavisor, and 39 E: 3. 3. That the Owner
cannot take an Estray until he tender recompense; likewise the Lord after
seisin of the Estray, if he took him not Damage-seasant, may have Replevin, and
he ought to make him amends.

The Lord cannot work the Estray, but may keep him in his Stable: And if the
Sheriff upon a Fieri facias fetter the Colt, and after the Defendant redeem him
for money, he shall not have trespass, vide 6 E: 3. 8. it is not alleged that
the fettering was to any damage of the Estray, vide 22 Ass. 56.

Entered Pasch. 18 Jac. Rot. 650. Treherne versus Cleybrooke.
Debt.
John Treherne brought an action of Debt against Cleybrooke, and count of a
Lease made by John Treherne Grandfather to the Plaintiff, of Lands in S.
Olives in Surrey, and entitled himself by the Will of the Grandfather, by
which he devised the Lands to the Plaintiff in tail, Devise.
the remainder over to Leonard. Upon Nil debet pleaded, the Jury found
specially, scilicet, the Devise of the Reversion in tail, the remainder over to
A. in tail, the remainder of one Moiety of the Land to one Daughter in tail,
and the other Moiety to another, with Proviso, that for the raising of a Stock
for John Treherne the Grandchild, when he come to the age of one and twenty
years, or if he dies, for the raising of a Stock for Leonard in like manner, he
willed that Edward Griffin and Anne his Wife shall take the profits, and shall
receive all the rent of the Land devised to John Treherne, to their own use,
until he come to the age of one and twenty years, upon Condition, and so as
the said Edward Griffin and Anne shall within three months after the death of
the Testator become bound to his Overseers in an Obligation, with such penalty
as the said Overseers shall think fit to pay to the said John, or if he dye
without Issue to the said Leonard, within three months after he come of age,
such a sum, the Condition to be drawn and devised by his Overseers: And if
Edward Griffin and his Wife refuse, then the Overseers should receive the Rent
and Profits to their proper use: (But the Condition appoint not to whom the
Overseers shall be bound.) And made Edward Griffing and William Iremonger his
Executors, and I. and others Supervisors, and died; and that within fourteen
days after the death of the Testator, the Will was read to the said Overseers:
And that they did not devise or draw (within the time appointed) any
Obligation, nor tendered any within that time, and that notice thereof was given
to the Defendant, and that the Rent was demanded, and the Reversion claimed by
the Plaintiff, sed utrum, etc.

Upon the Argument of Sergeant Harris which argued for the Plaintiff, and
vouched 21 H. 6. 6. That when one made Executors, and also Coadjutors, the
Coadjutors are not Executors, and that it is a Condition precedent, vide 14 H:
8. 22. Wheelers case, 46 E: 3. 5. Truels case, Coke lib: 5. 127. Palmers case,
4 E: 3. 39. 11 H: 4. 18. And because that in this case the said Edward Griffin
and his Wife are to have benefit, they ought to require them to nominate the
sum: But because it appears to the Court that this Action is founded upon a
Contract in Law, therefore it ought to be brought in Surrey; as it was agreed in
Ungle and Glovers case, An: 36 Eliz: vide Coke lib: 3. fol: 23. Nota, that the
Judgment is special for this cause, and no costs upon the Statute of 23 H: 8.
for the Defendant, for the Statute says, that upon a Contract made by the
Plaintiff, the Defendant shall have costs, and yet upon this Statute if the
Executor be nonsuited, or Verdict given against him, he shall not pay costs,
Where costs shall not be against Executors.
by common experience always after the Statute; and yet he shall have costs if
he recover. And in this case the Plaintiff shall have costs if he recover, and
yet it seems upon this Judgment the Defendant shall not have costs against him,
and especially because that they are express words in the Statute, that the
Defendant shall have costs after Nonsuit, or lawful trial against the
Plaintiff, and here is neither Nonsuit nor lawful trial, vide Statute 4 Jac:
cap. 3. seems to be full in all cases where the Plaintiff shall have his costs
upon Nonsuit, or when the Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall have
costs, yet it has been taken that it shall be intended in actions of Debt upon
the Contract of the Plaintiff himself, for Executors neither upon Verdict nor
upon Nonsuit shall pay any costs, because that their actions are brought upon
Debts or Contracts, not made between them and the Defendants, vide the Statute
of Gloucester, cap: 1. that where a man recover damages, there also he shall
have costs.

Hickson versus Hickson.
HIckson Demandant in Dower against Hickson; They are at issue, the Tenant
offer to be essoined upon the Venire facias, and for want of the Adjornment
thereof by the Demandant, Essoin shall not be allowed in Dower.
the Tenant had procured a Nonsuit, and yet the Demandant proceeds with the
Issue. And at the Nisi prius, the Tenant relying upon the Nonsuit, it appeared
not by whom the Petit Cape is awarded.

And now upon motion by Sergeant Henden, who relied upon the Nonsuit, and that
the Essoin was allowable by the Statute of Westminster 2. post exitum habeat
unicam Essoniam; but it was ruled, and the Prothonatories all said, that it had
been the constant use, that no Essoins are allowed in Dower, which is festinum
remedium, vide Stat. 12 E: 2. cap: 1. has tolled the Essoin of the Service of
the King in many cases, and given to the Demandant in many cases power ad
callumpniand. Essoniam: And the words of the Statute are, Non jacet in breve de
dote, quia videtur deceptio and prorogatio juris, vide Dyer 324. There after
the Issue joined, Essoin at the day of the Venire facias, though no Venire
facas be sued out, but only awarded upon the Roll.

Mich. 21 Jac. Linleys Case.
An Information against an under Sheriff, for taking of 30 s for making of a
Warrant upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum.
AN Information was exhibited against Linley under Sheriff, to Sir Gny Palms
Sheriff of York, upon the Statute 32 H: 6, and it was shown, that he being
under Sheriff, a Capias ad satisfaciendum was delivered to him, to Arrest one
Francis Lancaster upon a Judgment for a hundred and three pounds: The Defendant
Color officii took of the Plaintiff thirty shillings for making of a Warrant
upon this Writ, against the form of the Statute, whereby he has forfeited forty
pounds.

Upon not guilty pleaded, and Verdict against the Defendant, it was alleged in
arrest of Judgment, that the making of a Warrant upon a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, which is for Execution, is not within the Statute, because the
Statute speaks first, of Fees to be taken upon the Arrest of the party, when he
is bailed, viz. twenty pence to the Sheriff, and four pence to the Baily, then
appoints that the Sheriff lets to Bail every one that is taken upon Bill or
Plaint, besides them which are taken for execution, Outlawry, etc. and then
comes the clause, That nothing shall be taken for making of any Precept, or
Warrant, but four pence; and provision for the Obligation, Condition, and Fee,
and that all Obligations taken by any Sheriff Color officii, that these shall
be void, and that for every offense committed against the Statute, he shall
forfeit forty pounds.

The Lord Hobart inclined, that this making of the Warrant upon the Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and the taking of thirty shillings is within this Statute; and
he resembled it to Dive and Maninghams case in Plowden, where an Obligation
taken of one in Execution is void by this Statute: vide, that the clause in
this Statute for the Obligation is absolute, without any restraint, but that
all obligations taken by color of his Office, with any other Conditions are
made void.

This taking of thirty shillings for making of a Warrant upon a Capias ad
satisfaciendum is extortion at the Common Law, for which he may be indicted, but
whether it be within this Statute or no is doubtful.

Another Exception was taken to this Information; That it does not appear by
this, that this Writ of Capias was directed to the Sheriff of York, or to any
other Sheriff: And then admitting this to be a Capias ad satisfaciendum
directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, and it is delivered by an ignorant hand to
the Sheriff of York, to make a Precept thereupon, and he makes a Precept, and
takes thirty shillings, this is not within the Statute; also Color officii
will not serve, for it is general, and it ought to be shown that it was a
Capias, and to whom it was directed: And although that all Process should be
generally directed to the Sheriff, yet some may be to the Coroners, or some (by
the mis-prision of the Clerks) may be omitted; as Jacobus Dei gratia etc. tibi
precipimus, and say not, Vice-Comiti Eboracensi salutem. And an Information
ought to be certain to all common intents, and it is like to an Indictment. And
in an action upon the case against an Attorney, because that he Corruptive and
in deceit of the Plaintiff, and in his name had acknowledged satisfaction to
his damage, and says not, whereas Revera non fuit satisfactus, that is not good.

And the Court was of opinion for this cause, that the Plaintiff should not
have his Judgment.

Bickner versus Wright.
AN action upon the case was brought by Richard Bickner against John Wright,
Case. Prescription.
for the making of a Cony-borough in damage of his Common; The Plaintiff
prescribe to have Common omni tempore anni, and says not Quolibet anno: And
after Verdict adjudged good.

Trin. 22 Jac. Goldenham versus Some.
GGoldenham brought a Writ of Dower against John Some, Dower. Judgment in Dower
upon Voucher.
who vouched the Heir of the Husband, who entered into the Warranty, and said
that he had no Assets: The Demandant had Judgment for her Dower (because
nothing is said to the contrary) against the Tenant, with a Cesset executio,
until the Warranty be determined: And the Tenant which vouched, when the
trial was at Assizes made default, but it was said that it should be the
default of the Vouchee, for he was dead before the Assizes: And now it was
moved that the Demandant might have execution. And by Henden it was said, that
the Voucher is not determined, for he might vouch the Heir of the Vouchee: But
it seemed that the Voucher was determined, and that he shall have the benefit
of his Warranty (by Scire facias) out of the Judgment; but the Court doubted if
the Plaintiff shall have Judgment against the Vouchee conditionally (if he had
Assets, if not, against the Tenant) or absolutely, vide 3 H: 6. 17. Dyer 202.
there it is conditional, vide Dyer 256. there the Judgment is against the
Tenant upon Vouchee of the Heir in Ward to the King, and that presently, with a
Cesset executio, vide 46 E: 3. 25. If the Vouchee be Counter-pleaded, the
Demandant shall have Judgment presently, vide 48 E: 3. 5. Br: Voucher 38. the
Judgment shall be against the Heir conditionally, which is vouched in Dower,
vide 2 H: 4. 8. there upon the Voucher of the Heir which makes default upon the
Summons, and sequatur suo periculo, the Judgment is against the Heir
conditionally, if not, against the Tenant, and so Judgment against one not
party to the Suit, and which never appeared: And in this case the Judgment
against the Tenant, with a Cesset executio may be good, because that it does
not appear by any of their Pleas, but that the Demandant is confessed to have
her Dower, none of them say, that he is ready to render her Dower (as the Heir
ought when he enter into the Warranty.)

This Term Sergeant Finch moved the case, and prayed Judgment, for he said, the
ancient Books were many for Judgment conditionally; but some to the contrary,
viz. when the Heir is vouched within the same County, and is within age, there
Judgment presently against the Tenant, with a Cesset executio: And when the
Heir enter into the Warranty, and is taken to render the Dower, there is
Judgment against the Heir, and that the Tenant shall hold in peace: But he said
that Mich: Ashburnham against Skinner.
38, and 39 Eliz. Rot. 1208. Mary Ashburnham brought Dower against Skinner, who
vouched the Heir of the Husband in the same County, who presently entered en le
garranty, and said, that he had no Assets, there the Judgment was given
presently against the Tenant, with a Cesset executio: And after the Issue was
tried, and found that the Heir had not Assets, and the Wife had Execution, but
it was said, that Error was brought thereupon, yet the Feme continued the
Possession.

Henden said, that the Tenant otherwise shall lose the benefit of his Warranty,
vide 13 H: 4. Judgment 241.

The Court adjudged this case for the Demandant, upon view of the said
President of 38, and 39 Eliz. And as this case is, the Demandant upon necessity
ought to have Execution, because that the Tenant which ought to have the
benefit of the Warranty made default: And if it was so that the Vouchee was
dead, the Tenant shall not have any other Voucher, for the Dower ought not to
suffer delay: And likewise when Judgment is given against the Tenant, with a
Cesset executio, all is one, as a conditional Judgment against the Tenant, for
if Assets be found, then Quia compertum est, etc. with Judgment against the
Heir, and that the Tenant shall hold in peace.

It was objected, that Judgment ought to be conditionally at first, and not to
give one Judgment against the Tenant, and afterward if Assets be found,
another Judgment against the Heir; but that is no inconvenience. Some say, that
when such Judgment is given against the Tenant, with a Cesset executio, there
if Assets be found, the Demandant shall not have execution against the Heir,
but against the Tenant, and he shall have ad valentiam. Quaere.

Potter versus Brown.
Case. Words.
NIcholas Potter brought an action upon the case against Brown for these words
spoken of the Plaintiff, He is as arrant a Thief as any is in England, and he
broke up the Plummers Chest with other men's Tools, which stood in my Lord of
Suffolks house, and took money out of it. The Defendant pleaded Not guilty, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff: And upon the motion of Henden to Arrest, and
Richardson to have Judgment; The Court resolved that the Plaintiff should not
have Judgment. The first reason is, because that there is not any affirmative
directly, that he is a Thief, but as arrant a Thief as any is in England, And
avers not that there is any Thief in England: And the Law will not presume any
thing that is evil, Iniquum in lege non presumitur. And as Lacies case was, He
is as great a Thief as any is in Warwick Goal, He ought to aver that there was
a Thief there at the time of the speaking of the words: And it is the same
reason in this case.

Then the latter words are ambiguous, and admit of a double interpretation, and
the better shall be taken.

Querens nil capiat per breve. Mich. 22 Jac. Methell versus Peck.
MEthell brought an action upon the Case against Peck, and count, Case.
that the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff had paid to one
Playford forty pounds, to the use of the Defendant, Where the request of a
collateral thing shall be alleged.
and by his appointment he assured upon request to deliver an Obligation, in
which he and another should be obliged to the Plaintiff in a hundred pounds.
And that the Defendant Licet saepius postea requisitus, did not deliver the
said Obligation; upon Non assumpsit pleaded, Verdict for the Plaintiff: And it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment by Hitcharn, that the Plaintiff had not
alleged any sufficient request, by showing such a day, and such a place, which
is issuable: And being collateral matter, the request is part of the substance
of the action; But where it is upon Debt or Contract, and not severed from the
duty, then a Licet saepius requisitus is sufficient.

But the Court were of opinion that the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; and yet
they agreed the diversity, when a Request shall be alleged as part of the
thing to be performed, and when it is but employed in the Debt: For when it is
collateral, there it ought to be alleged, and for the time it is sufficient,
viz. Postea, but the place of the Request is omitted: And if Issue had been
tendered thereupon, it might be supplied afterward where it shall be tried,
where the action was brought; And Non assumpsit allows the request; as if the
Defendant had pleaded concord and satisfaction, the Request is not to be proved
in Evidence, vide 10 H: 7. 16.

But it is said, that this Judgment was reversed in the Kings Bench, because
that the Request being upon Collateral matter, which was the cause of the
Action, it is material.

Mich. 22 Jac.
Ejectione firmae.
AN Ejectione firmae brought, and counted upon a Lease at Haylesam, of Tenements
there: The Defendant pleads, that Haylesam, ubi tenementa praedicta jacent, is
within the Cinque Ports, Ubi breve Domini Regis non currit, and plead to the
Jurisdiction. The Plaintiff reply, Town shall be intended all the Town.
that the Tenements are in the County of Lancaster, absque hoc, that the Town
of Haylesam is within the Cinque Ports, whereupon the Defendant demur, and
adjudged no cause of demurrer. For Haylesam is all Haylesam, and the Court will
not intend any Fractions in the Town, viz. that part shall be in the
Cinque Ports, and part without (as it was affirmed the truth was) but that
ought to come upon the showing of the Defendant an his Bar, vide 50 E: 3. 5.
Sir William Ellinghams case.

Defend. respond. oust. THE FIRST YEAR OF KING CHARLES.
Termino Pasch. Hitcham versus Brook.
SIR Robert Hitcham Sergeant at Law, and to the King, Case.
brought an action upon the case against one Brook, a Justice of the Peace, and
which had been Sheriff of Suffolk; and count, that he for diverse years last
past, had been one of the Kings Sergeants, and had demeaned himself well and
loyally in the discharge of his duty, and had gained good opinion, and had
acquired by his practice a good Estate for the maintenance of him and his
Family; The Defendant said, Words.
I doubt not but to prove that the Plaintiff has spoken Treason ( Innuendo
Treason against the King:) Verdict was found for the Plaintiff; And it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words are not actionable.

First, because no time is alleged when the Plaintiff is supposed to speak
Treason, and it might be when he was an Infant, or that it is pardoned: To
which it was answered by the Court; First, That these words ought to be
alleged as they were spoken, and that was Indefinite. 2. The time is not
material, unless the Defendant make it material by his plea, viz. When he
was in giving Evidence for the King against a Traitor, and then he repeated
such words; or when that the Plaintiff was frantic, and of that he intended,
and so justify, there the time may come in question.

2. The second Exception was, that there is not any express affirmative: to
that it was answered by the Court, that it was more then an Affirmative, for he
had (as he said) proof thereof, and not a report or hearsay: And if one say, it
is reported, etc. that will not bear action, unless he justify the report, by
charging it upon him which was the Author of the report.

3. Also it was objected, that the speaking of treason was not treason; But it
was holden clearly, that it is as well as Preaching, or writing, Et Index animi
Sermo.

4. Also it is not said what treason, and it may he high or petit treason: To
which it was answered, that when he speaks generally of treason, it shall be
intended according to the common intendment, which is treason against the King,
vide Sir William Mulgraves case, Coke lib: 4. And two Cases were vouched to be
adjudged in the Point, Johnson and Atewod.
one between Johnson and Atewood, 8 Eliz. Thou have spoken Treason, and I will
hang thee for it, adjudged actionable. The other was between Pewall and
Vardoffe, Pewall and Vardoffe.
9 Jac. Thou have spoken treason, and I will prove it, adjudged actionable.

And it was resolved by all that the Plaintiff should have his Judgment.

Flight versus Gresh.
Case.
THomas Flight brought an action upon the case against Gresh; and count, that
whereas the Plaintiff and one Baleman were bound in an Obligation to the
Defendant, In consideration that the Obligor pay the sum, the Obligee assume
to deliver the Bill.
for the payment of such a sum at such a day: The Defendant in consideration
that the Plaintiff would pay to him the laid sum at the day, assumed to
deliver the Obligation to the Plaintiff, and showed that he had paid the money
at the day, and the Defendant did not deliver it, but after sued it and
recovered, and had the Plaintiff in prison in execution by the space of a year.

The Defendant protestando, that he did not assume, for plea says, that the
Plaintiff did not pay it; and thereupon Issue, and found for the Plaintiff. And
it was moved by Sergeant Gwin, that this action lies not for want of
consideration, for the Plaintiff did nothing but that which he was obliged to
do, and no profit to the Defendant, for if he had not paid the sum, the
Obligation had been forfeited: And he resembled it to the case of 9 E: 4. 19.
An accord (in Trespass) that the Defendant should deliver to the Plaintiff his
Evidences, and permit him to enter into his Land, is no good Bar: So in an
Arbitrament, 12 H: 7. that the one permit the other which was disseised to
enter, and that he should give to him his Charters and Evidences, is not good:
And he vouched one to be resolved in the Kings Bench, Greenwood and Becket.
between Greenwood and Becket, where one had forfeited three Bills, in
consideration that the Plaintiff will pay the three several sums three days
after, he would deliver them to the Plaintiff: And the Court was of opinion
that it was no sufficient consideration.

Richardson to the contrary, and said that the payment without Suit, was for
the advantage of the Obligee, to be sure of his money, and may be more
available to him at this time, then the forfeiture afterward: And he vouched a
Case to be adjudged, that where one had bought, Cattle in a Market, and had
paid for them, and the party which had bouoght them (because that he which
bought them had them in possession, and would not deliver them) in
consideration that the party would deliver them, promised to pay him a certain
sum, an action lies thereupon.

And the opinion of the Court was, that the action lay, for (for any thing that
appears) the moneys were paid before the time that in Law they might be paid,
viz. before the setting of the Sun: And it is without question, if a man to
whom money is to be paid, come to the party the same day, and pray him to pay
it in the morning, and that in considerations thereof, promise to pay him five
pounds, to abate five pounds, or to deliver an Obligation, this is good: And a
voluntary promise to do that which is in good conscience good and just for him
to do, shall bind him, and the rather because he had benefit, viz. to be sure
of the performance: And the forfeiture is but means to obtain the principal
sum: And if one had Judgment, and in consideration that he will not sue
execution, the other promise to pay, it is good: And because that in this case
it appears, that by the nonperformance of this promise the Plaintiff had
prejudice, and the Jury had found solvit, the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Hill. 21 Jac. Rot. 3150. Trevors versus Michelborne.
EDmond Trevors brought a Scire facias against Michelborne Sheriff of Surrey,
Sci. fac. Sci. fac. against the Sheriff for taking of insufficient Pledges.
for the returning of insufficient Pledges in a Replevin brought by one Ray
against the now Plaintiff, in which the said Richard Ray made default, whereupon
a Retorn. habend. was awarded, an Averia elongata returned, and then a
Withernam, and then a Nichil, etc. And for this taking of insufficient Pledges,
this Scire facias is brought, upon Westminster 2. cap. 2. And the Defendant
demurred, Somerford and Beamont.
vide the lake President, Hill: 11 Jac. Rot. 3563. between Somerford and Beamont.

Hill. 1 Car. Uvedall versus Tindall. Enter Hill. 21 Jac. Rot 705.
Southamp.
SIr Richard Uvedall brought an action of Trespass against William Tindall
Clark, Vicar of Alton, Trespass.
What things are small tithes and what great.
and John Loveland for taking bona and Cattella, and count for the taking of
two Carectac. glaci, Anglice Wood: And upon Not guilty pleaded, the Jury gave
this special Verdict; Viz. For the Moiety of a Lead of Wood, Si videbitur
Curiae quod decimae glasi ne sunt minutae decimae, then the Defendants not
guilty, but si sunt minutae decimae, then they are guilty.

And this case was argued at Bar by Sergeant Bridgeman, adn Sergeant Henden:
And the Court unement agreed, that for ought that here appears, this Verdict
being found without any circumstance, that this Wood shall be taken to be
Minuta decimae.

It was agreed by Henden, that if it had been found Wood growing in a Garden,
then minutae decimae.

And it was agreed by the Court, that it might have been so found, that it
should be Majores decimae, and pr^^diall; as if all the Profits of the
Parsonage consist of such Tithes. And so of other things, which in their own
nature are minutae, may become majores, if all the profit of the Parish consist
therein: As in some Countries, a great part of the Land within the Parish is
Hemp, or Lime, or Hops, there they are great Tithes, and so it may be of Wholl
and Lambs.

Beddingfields Case.
Pasch: 3 Jac. in the Kings Bench, Beddingfeilds case, Farmer to the Dean and
Chapter of Norwich, who had the Parsonage Impropriate, and had used to have
Tithes of Grain and Hay, and the Vicar had the small Tithes: And a Field was
planted with Saffron, which contain forty acres: And it was adjudged that the
Tithes thereof belong to the Vicar.

Potmans case.
There was a Case in this Court as it was vouched by Henden, 3 Jac. between
Potman a Knight, and another: And the question was for Hops in Kent, and
adjudged that they were great Tithes; but as for Hops in Orchards or Gardens,
these were resolved to belong to the Vicar as Minutae decimae.

There was a Case in this Court for tithe of Weild, which is used for Dying,
and that was in Kent, and it was sown with the Corn, and after the Corn is
reaped, the next year without any other manurance, the said Land brings forth
and produce Weild: And that was a special Verdict, whether the Vicar shall
have the tithe of it, or the Parson, but one of the parties died before any
Judgment. And if Tobacco he planted here, yet the tithes thereof are Minutae
decimae: And all these new things, viz. Saffron, Hops, Wood, etc. if it does
not appear by material circumstances to the contrary, shall be taken as
Minutae decimae: And so this case was adjudged for the Defendant.

Hill. 1 Car. Townley versus Steel.
FRancis Townley, and three others, the Executors of William Peacock, brought a
Writ of Ravishment of Ward against Richard Steel and Anne his Wife, for the
Ravishment of the body of Ralph Smith Cousin and Heir of Ralph Smith; In
Ravishment of Ward brought by Executors, are Nonsuited, whether they shall pay
costs.
and count of the Tenure by Knights-service in Ralph Smith of William Peacock,
and that Ralph Smith died, the said Ralph his Cousin and Heir being within age;
and that William Peacock the Testator seized of the body, and died possessed
thereof, and made them his Executors, and they being possessed of the said Ward,
the Marriage of whom belong to them, the Defendants Rapuere illum and abduxere:
And upon Not guilty pleaded, the Jury was at Bar, and the Plaintiffs after
Evidence were Nonsuited.

And whether the Defendants shall have costs in this case was the question,
upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 15. or by the Statute of 4 Jac. cap. 3. And
it being argued by Davenport and Attho, the Court this Term (the chief Justice
being absent) gave their opinions.

And Justice Crook argued that they should not have costs, and put many cases,
when Executors bring actions, they shall not pay costs, and so is Common
Experience (after the Statutes) which is the best Interpreter of the Law: And
if it should be otherwise, Executors would be discouraged to bring actions for
the debts of their Testator.

And Justice Harvy was of the same opinion, but Justice Yelverton and Hutton to
the contrary: And they agreed, that in all actions brought by Executors, upon
Contracts, Obligations, or other things made to the Testator, there shall be no
costs, for that is not within the Statute, viz. Contracts, or Specialties made
to the Plaintiff; or if an action be De bonis asportatis in the life of the
Testator, or upon any Tort supposed to be done not immediately to the Plaintiff,
there shall be no costs, because that the Statute gives not costs in these
cases, 20 Mariae, Debt upon a Demise for years, if the Plaintiff shall be
Nonsuited there shall be costs, for it is upon Contract, though in some sort
real. But in this case, though the Plaintiffs are named Executors, and their
Title is derived from their Testator, yet the action is brought upon an
immediate Tort done to themselves; and it is within the very words of the
Statute: and this Statute which is to prevent Vexatious Suits, shall be taken
favorably.

If Executors have a Lease for years, and they demise it rendering rent, and for
Rent arrear they bring an action, it shall be in the Debet and Detinet, and
they shall pay cost; if they be Nonsuited, and yet their Title is as
Executors, but it is founded upon their own Contract, so if they bring an
action of Trespass for the taking of Goods which came to their possession,
which Goods were in truth tortiously taken by the Testator, and he died
possessed thereof, and they being Nonsuited they shall pay costs: And Executors
in actions brought against them shall pay costs, and if they have no Goods of
the Testator, it shall be De bonis propriis. And vide, that upon Contracts made
by them, or Rent arrear in their time, the action shall be in the Debet and
Detinet, vide Coke lib: 5, Hergraves case. But when Debt in brought by
Executors, and recovery had, and after a recovery an escape, and Debt upon this
escape, this shall be in the Deticet only, according to the first cause of
action. And this Ravishment of Ward is an action within the Statute of 23 H: 8.
and the Statute of Westminster ^. gives no Damages, and therefore costs by the
Statute of Gloucester cap: 1. and the Statute of 4 Jac. enlarge the actions, and
not the persons.

Hill. 1 Car. Beverley versus Power.
Upon an Assembly (this Term) of all the Justices at Sergeants Inn, by virtue
of an Order of the Star Chamber made the last Term, at reading the Case was.

James Beverley was Plaintiff against Robert Power, Pardon.
and Mary Beverley, and others, which Bill was exhibited Hill: 16 Iac. and the
Bill was for scandalous matter not examinable in this Court, and for other
matter which was examinable, and Witnesses examined and published: And then the
19. of Febr. 21 Iac. the general Pardon is made by Parliament, by which all
Offenses, Contempts, and Misdemeanors, del 20. December. before (except such
Offenses, contempts, etc, whereof or for which any Suite or Bill within eight
years before was exhibited into the Star Chamber, and there remaining to be
prosecuted this last day of this present Parliament:) And afterward, viz.
Mich. 1 Caroli, the Cause came to hearing at the Suit of the Defendant, and
upon the hearing Power was fined two hundred pounds; and for the abuse and
contempt to the Court for exhibiting the scandalous matter, the Plaintiff was
fined five hundred pounds, and for damage to the Defendant five hundred marks.
And yet because of the difficulty and diversity of opinion which was between
the Lord chief Justice, and the Lord Hobart, the now Lord Keeper and the Lords
by an Order respited this matter, as to the Fine of the Plaintiff, and gave
damages to the Defendant, and referred it to the opinion of all the Justices.
And they all (una voce) except Justice Harvey (who insisted upon the damages
given to the party, that they should not be pardoned) agreed that the Contempt
and Offense for the scandalous Bill exhibited, was pardoned, and not within the
Exception; for it cannot be intended, that the Plaintiff exhibited a Bill, upon
which he should not be fined, but this exception was of that which was laid to
the charge of the Defendant, and the Defendant may have his remedy at Common
Law, and the Contempt which is accidental to the Offense is pardoned, and by
consequence the Fine.

Pasch. 2 Car. Crane versus Crampton.
Case.
CRane brought an action upon the case sur assumpsit against Crampton, and
count, that in consideration of moneys paid, the Defendant did assume to give
to the Plaintiff a Ruff-band at the day of his marriage: And he alleged in
facto. that such a day, and at such a place he was married; Notice.
and that the Defendant notwithstanding that he was requested such a day, and a
year after the said marriage, had not given to the Plaintiff the said Ruff: And
upon Non assumpsit it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not alleged any notice given to the Defendant
of his marriage.

And by the opinion of me and my two Brothers Harvey and Yelverton. Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff; For the Defendant ought to take notice thereof at
his peril, unless he had provided to deliver the Ruff after marriage, and
after notice thereof for if he ought to have notice (no place being agreed upon
where it shall be given) then he should be compelled to enquire and to find
him, and give notice, and paradventure he could never give him notice. Also it
is agreed, if one be obliged to pay to another twenty pounds, within three
months after he come from Rome, there shall no notice be given of his return,
but the Obligor ought to take notice at his peril: And if it were with a
Condition that I. S. (that is not party to the Obligation) shall do such a
thing, there shall not be notice: And this case of an Obligation is more
strong, for there is a penalty: and if it were to pay ten pounds when a Fair
shall be at Dale, there he ought to take notice: And they agreed the case of 8
E: 4. fol. (...) an Obligation to perform an Arbitrament, there no notice is
necessary, for it is the act of a third person: And if any notice be requisite,
the Request imply it; as it was adjudged in the Kings Bench, between Hodges and
Baldwin: Hodges and Baldwins case.
But my Brother Crook seemed to be of a contrary opinion, for when the duty
arise upon the notice, there notice ought to be. Judgment pro Querente.

Laicon versus Barnard.
Lincoln.
LAicon Plaintiff against Barnard one of the Attorneys of this Court, Case.
for Trover and Conversion of a hundred Sheep, the Defendant said, that he
brought Debt in the County Court of Lincoln, Recovery in trespass for taking of
goods, is no ba^ to an action upon the case sur trover.
against one Hacliff, for two hundred and eighty pounds, upon an Obligation by
Justices, and recovered, and that these Sheep were delivered to him in
Execution, as the Sheep of the said Hacliff: And that afterward and before
this action, the Plaintiff brought an action of Trespass against the now
Defendant for taking of these Sheep, Quare caepit and abduxit. And it was found
for the Plaintiff, and Damages to two pence: And averred that they were the
same Sheep; and the Plaintiff replied that the Damages found by the Jury, were
only for the taking and chasing, and not for the value: And that this Action
was for another Trespass, whereupon the Defendant demurred, and it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff: for, for any thing that appears (which the Defendant has
confessed upon his Demurrer) it is not for the same Trespass: Also the Damages
of two pence cannot be given for the value of the Sheep: Also the Plaintiff
when a Trespass is done to him, may retake his Goods, and yet he shall have an
action of Trespass for the taking of them: And every taking, viz. (abduxit)
import a chasing; and no man will say, that by the recovery in Trespass, when
the Plaintiff had his Goods, that thereby the Defendant shall have the property:
But it is true, that if the Plaintiff recover the value, thereby he waves the
property, and by this way the Defendant shall have the property, vide 2 R. 3.
14. 4 H: 7. 5. 6 H: 7. 8. and Judgment for the Plaintiff. Yelverton at first
baesitavit, but afterward agreed.

Pasch. 2 Car. Wades Case.
AN action upon the case was brought by a Feme, Case.
as Administratrir against the Lady Wade Executrix of Sir William Wade, Non
assumpsit was pleaded, the Venire facias was well, but the Hab: Corp. Nisi pr.
was entered, the Plaintiff, Where the Nisi prius shall be amended.
etc. and the Defendant Executrix of Sir H: Wade, etc. And it was amended by
the Court, and there was the difference taken, that when the Nisi prius is so
mistaken, that if it should be amended, the Jury should be prejudiced, viz.
that it may falsify their Verdict, then it shall not be amended, but in this
case, it is but the Writ by which the Jury is warned to appear: And the
authority of the Justice of Nisi prius is not by that, but by the Juras, which
was well and as it ought to be.

Also they have their Authority by the Statute of Westminster: 2. vide Diet 106. In
Wootons Case, there the Jurat. was well, and omitted in the Nisi prius, Anthony
Coke: Also the Issue was between Wooton and Cook, and Temple, where Temple had
confessed the action, vide there, that many omissions of the Record of Nisi
prius, are to be amended. Brown was of the contrary opinion to Walsh, Weston
and Dyer.

Trin. 2 Car. Farrington versus Arrundell. Entered Hill. 22 Jac. Rot. 4462.
Debt.
AN action of Debt was brought by Lionell Farrington, Qui tam pro se quam pro
Domino Rege, Debt upon a penal Statute is not gone by the death of the King.
etc. against Thomas Arrundell, upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. for not coming to
Church; and the Defendant demurred upon the Count: And then King James died,
And if this action be abated or not by the death of the King, was the Question.

Vide the Statute of the 1 E. 6. cap. 7. vide Coke lib: 7. fol: 30. And
concerning this was diversity of opinion in the Common Bench; for my Brother
Yelverton and I were opinion, that the Debt is gone, for it is at the suit of
the King, and Judgment is given for the King: And there shall be an answer to
the King. And we relied upon the cases vouched by the Lord Coke; but Justice
Harvey and Crook to the contrary: And upon conference with all the Justices of
Sergeants Inn, it was resolved, that this action was at the suit of the party,
for he might be Nonsuited, vide 25 H: 8. Br. Nonsuit, that the Informer may
be Nonsuited, vide 6 E. 2. Fitz Nonsuit 13. when the Jury come again to
deliver their Verdict, the King cannot discharge them and be Nonsuited, and
the King cannot discharge this action. And his Attorney reply not as in an
Information.

Clotworthy versus Clotworthy. Amendments.
Debt.
SImon Clotworthy brought an action of Debt against John C. Cousin and Heir of
Bartholmew C. And the Imparlance Roll is, Quod cum praedictus B. cujus
consanguineus and here is idem Johannes est, viz. filius Johannis Clotworthy
fratris praedicti B. C. And upon the Plea Roll, upon which Judgment is given,
this space was perfected, and Judgment for the Plaintiff; and now the Defendant
brought a Writ of Error, and it was moved to be amended: And if the Imparlance
Roll shall be amended, which is the foundation of the subsequent Rolls, is the
question: For it is commonly holden, that the Plea Roll shall he amended by the
Imparlance, but not e converso.

Hill. 18 Jac. Rot. 67^. Walker versus Worsley. Amendments.
WAlker brought an action of Debt against Worsley, Debt,
as Son and Heir of Thomas W. in the Imparlance Roll which was entered, Mich: 18
Jac: Rot: 576. the words which bind the Heir were omitted, viz. Ad quam quidem
solutionem obligasset se and Heredes suos, but they were in the Plea Roll: And
after Judgment that was assigned for Error in the Kings Bench, and it was
amended in the Common Bench by the Court, vide there, that it was by the fault
and mis-prision of the Clerk, who had the Obligation, and so amendable by the
Statute of 8 H: 6. cap: 15. 1.

Hill. 9 Jac. Rot. 516. Govard versus Dennet.
GOvard against Dennet, and Judgment, and the name of the Attorney, viz. Henry
was omitted in the Imparlance Roll, and it was in the Plea Roll Henry, and
after Error brought it was amended.

Mich. 16 Jac. Rot. 581. Arrowsmith's Case.
THe Imparlance Roll, Trin: 16 Jac: Rot: 1727. Debt for three hundred pounds
against Arrowsmith, for part sur emisset, and the other part sur in simul
computasset: And in the Imparlance Roll, both parcells did not amount to three
hundred pounds, but wanted six pounds thereof, and after Error brought it was
amended,

Pasch. 12 Jac. Rot. 420. Godhow versus Bennet.
REplevin by Godhow against Bennet, diverse spaces in the Imparlance Roll were
supplied in the Plea Roll after Verdict.

Hill. 12 Jac. Rot. 420. Parker versus Parker.
THe Imparlance Roll was, Mich: 12 Jac: Rot: 547. Parker against Parker in
Trover and Conversion, the Imparlance Roll wanted the day and year of the
possession and conversion, but the Issue Roll was (after the Verdict and motion
in Arrest of Judgment) amended.

Mich. 2 Car. Crocker versus Kelsey
JOhn Canterson and Agnes his Wife, Tenants in special tail, had Issue a Son,
Lease made by Feme in special tail.
viz. John, and John the Father died, John the Son levied a Fine with
Proclamations to the use of himself in Fee, Agnes leased to John Herring and
Margaret his Wife (Lessors to the Plaintiff) for one and twenty years, rendering
Rent, etc. by virtue whereof they entered: Agnes died, John the Son entered, and
afterward the said John Herring and Margaret his Wife entered; And the said John
the Son made his Will in writing, and by that devised the Land to Kelsey the
Defendant, and another in Fee, and died. John Herring and Margaret leased to
Crocker the Plaintiff, who entered, and being ousted by Kelsey, brought
Ejectione firmae: And this special Verdict being found, Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff; and now affirmed upon Error brought in the Exchequer Chamber.

Mich. 2 Car. Franklin versus Bradell.
FRanklin a Woman servant, brought an action upon the case upon a promise
against John Bradell: Consideration in an Assumpsit, ex post facto.
And count, that whereas she had served the Defendant and his Wife, and done to
them loyal service, the Defendant after the death of his Wife, in
consideration of the service which the Plaintiff had done to the Defendant and
his Wife, promised to pay her thirteen shillings four pence upon request, and
alleged request and non-payment; And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, upon the Book of 13 Eliz. Dyer, that this is no
sufficient consideration, because that it is not alleged, that the Plaintiff
at the request of the Defendant had served him: Also it was not sufficient,
because that it was done after the service performed. And it was answered, that
it was a good consideration, and that the service was to the benefit of the
Defendant: And therefore in consideration that the Plaintiff had married the
Daughter of the Defendant, he promise to pay twenty pounds, it is a good
consideration; and so in consideration that you have been my surely to such a
man for such a Debt, I promise to save you harmless. And in consideration that
the Plaintiff was Bail for the Defendant, he promised to give him a Horse,
this is good: And in consideration that I.S. being a Carpenter had well built
my house, I promise to give him five pounds. And Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 2 Car. Hearne versus Allen. Entered 22 Jac: Rot: 1875.
Oxford. 1.
RIchard Hearne brought an Ejectione firmae against John Allen, Ejectione firmae
for two acres of Land in Langham, upon a Lease made by Anne Keen, which was
the Wife of Edward Keen; and upon Not guilty pleaded a special Verdict was
found.

Richard Keen was seized of an house in Chippin-norton, Devise.
and of two acres of Land there in Fee, and of two acres of Meadow in Langham
in Fee used with the said Message, which were holden in Socage: And by his
Will in writing, dated the 20. May, 30 Eliz. he devised the said house Cuni
omnibus and singulis ad inde pertinentibus, vel aliquo modo spectantibus, to
Tho. K. and his Heirs for ever: And for want of Heirs of him the said Thomas,
then to one Anne K. the Daughter of the Devisor, and her Heirs for ever: And
for default, etc. then to John K. his Cousin, and his Heirs for ever; And by the
same Will devised his Goods and all his Lands to Eliz. his Wife, during her
Widow-hood, and died. Elizabeth his Wife entered. Thomas the Son entered upon the
Wife, and disseised her, and having enfeoffed one Edward K. in Fee died, and
Tho. K. also died without Issue: Edward K. by his Will devised the Land to Anne
his Wife, the Lessor of the Plaintiff for life, and died, Anne entered and made
a Lease to the Plaintiff, Et si super totam materiam, etc. And it seems that
the Defendant Allen claim under the Title of Anne K. the Daughter, but that was
not found, nor no other Title for the Defendant; and therefore of necessity
Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff. And this case was well argued by
Crawley for the Plaintiff: And Henden for the Defendant. And three Points were
argued.

1. If the two acres in Langham passed by the words Cum pertinentiis; and it
seemed to the Court that they did not pass, without saying Cum terris eidem
Messuagio spectantibus vel pertinentibus: And that is agreed in Hill and
Granges case, by Conveyance, and 23 H. 8. 6. and it is all one in a Will. Also
in this case it is not found for what time these two acres had been used with
the house: And there was sufficient to supply the words Cum pertinent for ought
that appears: And if the Law be so, the two acres do not pass, but descend to
Thomas Keen, and the Feoffment good.

2. If by these words it be an Estate-tail; as in Beresfords Case, Coke lib: 7.
fol: 41. 9 E: 3. Fitz: tail 21. 12 E: 3. 7 E: 6. 16 Eliz: in Chapmans case, or
a Fee-simple: And yet Yelverton and Crook inclined that it was an Estate-tail;
but Lord Richardson, Hutton, and Harvey to the contrary, for an intent against
Law shall be void, vide Abraham and Twiggs case, Come lib: 7. fol: 41.

3. If the Collateral Warranty which descended had extinguish^ and barred the
right of Anne Keen. Henden would have maintained it, because that the Warranty
is special, although it was collateral, that it did not Bar, which is san^
question (be it special or general) it bars the others upon whom it descends,
vide Coke lib: 15. Seniors case, he held no descent, and then no Bar, 12 E: 4.
discontinuance 50. 7 H: 6. special Warranty shall be used by Rebutter, but not
by Voucher. And Judgment for the Plaintiff.

If a Feme shall have a supersedeas upon an Exigent against Baron and Feme.
Un supersedeas fuit Mis^ for the Feme upon an Exigent against Baron and Feme:
And upon much debate; it was agreed, that the Feme (for the safeguard of her
self from imprisonment) being returned upon the Exigent, or upon the Capias,
viz. upon the one Quod reddidit ^^ upon the other Caepi, and as to the Husband
(Non est inventus) may appear; and so long as the Process continues against
the Husband, she shall have idem dies: But when the Baron is returned
utlegatus, she shall be discharged sans idem d^es: And that stands well and
raconciles all the Books. But whether she shall have a Supersedeas de non
molestando, is doubtful, for by the 11 of H: 4. 80. and Dyer 271. if the Baron
be outlawed, and the Wife W^ived, and the King pardon the Feme, that shall be
allowed, and she shall go sine die, and vide 4 E: ^. 34. and 14 H: 6. 14. 13 H:
4. 1. And it seemed by all to be agreed, that the Baron after he purchases his
pardon, or after he come and reverse the Outlawry, he shall not have allowance
of his Pardon, nor his appearance received, si non qui il amesne sa feme qui
par le presumption de leye est amesnable per luy, mes les baron n'est amesnable
per le feme, vide 18 E: 4. 4. there the case was, that a Feme Covert was sued
as Feme sole, her Husband being beyond Sea, and not known to be alive, and she
was outlawed, and then her Husband came again, and brought a Writ of Error for
the reversall thereof in his name and in the name of his Wife; And there it is
said that it is questionable, being that he was not party to the Suit. And then
one said, that it would be a good way to be rid of a Shrew. And the
Prothonotaries said, that no Supersedeas was ever granted for the Wife in such
a case.

Hill. 2 Car. Sir Charles Howards Case.
MEmorand. That the Earl of Marleborough, Lord Treasurer of England, came to
Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, 6. Febr. and there assembled all the Justices
to have their opinion, upon a Case which was depending in the Exchequer
Chamber, Where the office of the keeper of a Park is gone if the King dispark
it.
upon an English Bill for the King by the Attorney-generall, against Sir
Charles Howard, for avoiding the possession of a Lodge, and desisting from
taking the profits of a Park called Putney Mooreclapp; the Custody of which
Park, and three pounds annual Fee, with the Windfalls, etc. and the custody of
the Lodge was granted to him. The King which now is, by his Charter disparked
the Park, and after granted all the D^er to Sir Richard Weston Chancellor of
the Exchequer: And whether by this disparking of the Park the office of the
Keepership he determined, or no; then whether the annual Fee be determined;
then if the casual profits, as Windfalls, etc. may be yet taken by Charles
Howard who is the Patentes.

And upon debate it was unanimously agreed, that the King might dispark his
Park; and that by the disparking thereof, the Office of the Keepership is gone
and determined: for Sublata causa tollitur effectus, and this Office is not of
necessity, and such Offices are not prefumed in Law to be altogether for the
benefit of the Patentes, but reciprocally for the Commodity of the King, and by
the disparking of the Park, the labor and charge is gone.

It was also agreed, that the King might discharge the Patentee of this Office,
although the Park continue. And i^ one grant the Stewardship of a Manor, and
he dismember the Manor, the Office determines; And if a Corporation grant the
Office of Town Clerk, or of Recorder, and after surrender their Patent, and
take a new Patent, which incorporates them by a new name, all the Offices are
determined. It was agreed that the annual Fee certain remain in both cases, be
he discharged, or be the Park disparked, vide 5 E: 4. 9. 4 E: 4. 22. 18. E: 4.
9 Dyer 71. 6 H: 8. Kelway 171. Plowd: Sir Thomas Wrothes case.

The Earl of Lincolns Case.
Star Chamber.
MEmorand. That the Solicitor General moved, that Sir Henry Fines had
preferred a Bill against the Earl of Lincoln in this Court: Where a Lord may
bri^ sworn.
And there was a Commission De dedimus potestatem granted to take his answer
upon Oath; and he offered his answer upon his Honor. And the Commissioners
returned this special matter, and he prayed an Attachment: And this case was
propounded to the Iudgges, and it was resolved by them, the Lord Keeper, and
all the Court of Star Chamber, that he ought to answer upon his Oath, for it is
Juramentum purgationis, and not promissionis; Also it is not demin^tion of his
Honor, to be sworn concerning that which he would not have to be put upon his
Honor. Also it is a good Rule. Testi non jurato non est credend, in judicio:
And Princes are sworn to all their Leagues and Confederacies, which is called
Jeram^ntum confirmationis.

Hill. 2 Car. Winsmore versus Hobart. Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 850.
Wilts.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Thomas Winsmore, against Micha^l Hobart,
upon a Lease made by Edward Long, the Jury gave a special Verdict.

Habendum to parties not named in the Deed.
William Lord Sturton, seized of the Tenements (in the Count) in Fee, by
Indenture demised them to Thomas Hobart, habendum to the said Thomas Hobart,
and to the said Michael Hobart, John Hobart and Henry Hobart, Sons of the said
Thomas for their lives, and the life of the Survivor of them successively; By
virtue whereof the said Thomas entered, and was seized for life. And the Lord
Sturton granted the Reversion to Thomas Long in Fee, to whom Thomas Hobart
attorned, Thomas Long devised it to Edward Long in tail, Edward Long died
seized, and the Reversion descended to Edward his Son, the Lessor of the
Plaintiff, Thomas Hobart and Henry died, Michael and John survived, Michael
entered, Thomas Long entered upon him, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who
entered, and was possessed, until the Defendant ousted him. And Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

The Habendum was void as to all them which were not parties to the Deed.

Pasch. 3. Car. Hartox and Cock's Case. Entered Pasch. 2 Car. Rot. 1761.
Hertf.
A Quare Impedit was brought by George Hartox and Cocks against the Bishop of
Lincoln, Advowson in gross for life.
Lord Keeper of the great Seal, Mary Hewes, and David Dublin Clark for the
Church of Essington. The Issue being joined by the Incumbent, upon the
Appendancy, the Evidence given to the Plaintiff to prove it was such.

Henry 6. was seized of the Manor in Fee, and granted it to Mary his Consort
for life, Habendum una cum advocatione of the said Church: The Queen Mary
presented, and after there was a Presentment by Laps, then the said Queen
presented again; And afterward Edward the fourth seized of the said Manor,
presented, and then Henry the seventh, and Henry the eighth: And the King
Edward the sixth granted the Manor and other Manors, and the Advowson to Sir
John Pawlet in Fee, reserving Tenure in Capite for the Maonnrs, and Socage
Tenure for the Advowson: And the said Sir John Pawlet granted the Manor and
the Advowson to William Took in Fee, who presented the last Incumbent; and
under this Title the Plaintiffs entitle themselves.

The Defend. said, that the said Will. Took was seized of the said Advowson, and
it defended to William Took the Son, and granted the next avoidance, and it
came to Mary H^wes who presented the Defendant Dublin, and the Evidence to
prove that it was in gross, was, Henry the third being seized in Fee of the
Manor of Essinton, made a Lease thereof to his Brother for life, and excepted
the Advowson, and then upon the expressing of the Advowson, upon the Grant of
Edward the sixth, and the reservation of several Tenures; And this was their
Evidence.

And Sergeant Henden maintained, that by this exception of the Advowson, when
it was granted for life, made it to be in gross for ever: And he vouched 38 H:
6. 13. Quare Impedit by the King against the Abbey of Sion, and the Incumbent
there, by the Exception of the Advowson it was become in gross, and there one
said, at least during the Estate for life, and that is all which is employed by
the Book, for the Judgment is for the King, because that it being not
appendant, is passed not by the Grant, by the Habendum una cum, etc. And though
that the Court unement agreed that it is but in gross, for the Estate for
life, and that it is all one, as if the King had granted the Advowson which is
appendant for life, and the Grantee dies, and the Advowson is appendant again,
and yet he insisted and persisted to have a special Verdict found thereupon:
And I moved my Brother Yelverton, that before we admit of a special Verdict
(as it has been used in former times) to go to the Judges of the Kings Bench,
and to put the case to them, to know their opinion, and when he came again, and
declared it, we put it upon the Jury to try the matter, and they came in and
found for the Plaintiff; And after that the Demurrer, which was joined for the
other Defendant Mary, was by consent entered for the Plaintiff, vide Dyer 34 in
appeal, vide 7 H. 6. 37.

Chidley's Case.
CHidley brought a Quid juris clamat, and had Judgment against the Defendant;
and the Plaintiff had made a Warrant to his Attorney for the receiving of his
Attornment, Quid juris clamat.
and the Defendant would have attorned, but would not do his Fealty: And the
Presidents were. that he ought to be sworn in Court; and the entry of the
Judgment is, that he did attorn: And fecit fidelitatem, and so he was sworn in
Court, vid. 37 H: 6. 14. If he refuse to attorn being in Court, he shall be
committed for contempt: Moyle said, that that is Attornment, but Prisot said,
that he should not have a Writ of Wast, nor arraign an Assise until he assent.

Trin. 3 Car. Rot. Humbleton versus Buck.
Lincoln.
SImon Humbleton brought an action upon the case against Buck, Case. Assumpsit
in consideration of defending Suit in maintenance of a Title of Common.
and counted, that whereas a Controversy was between the Inhabitants and
Tenants of Fletam, and one Palmer, for and concerning the having of Common in
one parcel of Land which was a Sea-bank, in which they had Common of Pasturs,
for taking by Cattle, and also by taking and cutting the Grass: And whereas
the said Palmer had brought an action of Trespass against the now Plaintiff,
for entry made by him in the said close, and for taking his Grass, pretending
that the said Land in which he claimed Common was his several, and free from
their claim of Common, the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff had
given to him a Iugg of Beer, and that he at the request of the Defendant would
prosecute and defend ^he said Suit for the maintenance of their Common against
the said Palmer, until the determination thereof, he promised to pay to the
Plaintiff one moiety of his charges, and over and besides twenty pounds, and
that thereupon he defended the said Suit, and pleaded Not guilty, and at the
trial thereof Palmer was nonsuited, and that, that was for the maintenance of
the Common, and that he expended in defense and prosecution of the said Suit
forty pounds.

The Defendant confessed all the Inducement, and also a promise sub modo, and
said, that the said Palmer had brought Trespass, to which the Plaintiff had
pleaded Not guilty, absque hoc, that the said suit and trial was for the said
Common; And Issue being joined it was found for the Plaintiff, and Damages to
twenty pounds. And in Arrest of Judgment it was moved, that now it appears,
that it was not for the maintenance of the Title of Common, and that it could
not be for the trial thereof, because he did not plead the Title of Common,
which had been the proper and apt way for the trial thereof: And when the Jury
find that which is contrary and repugnant to Law, that is repugnant and not
good. And this case was strongly argued by Sergeant Davenport in Arrest of
Judgment, and by Attho for the having of Judgment: And first he said, That
although there was a Parlance and Communication concerning the Common, yet the
promise is to defend this action brought by Palmer, and is pro defentione of
the Common, not generally, but against Palmer, and the promise is to pay the
Moiety of the Charges, if he prosecute the said Suit, until the determination
thereof, so that if it had been found against the now Plaintiff, the now
Defendant ought to have paid the Moiety of the said charges: And it is not
agreed that he shall plead title by Prescription for the Common, but that he
should prosecute it until the determination of the Suit, for the maintenance
of the Common. And the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, for it might be
for the maintenance of their Common against Palmer, for if he had not the Soil
thereof, but had enclosed it as part of his Wastes, the Plaintiff could not plead
the Title to Common without admitting the Soil and Freehold to be in Palmer:
And if one had been of council, and to advise a Plea, if he had not discovered
that Palmer had no Title, he would have advised him to have pleaded Not guilty;
for if the said Palmer had no Title to the Soil (which the now Plaintiff could
not know) it should be found against him; and so this Plea might have been in
maintenance of Common.

And the Lord Richardson who at first doubted, now concurred, and said, that he
was fully satisfied.

Trin 3. Car. Chapman versus Chapman.
Debt.
REbecca Chapman brought an action of Debt against Henry Chapman, upon an
Obligation with Condition to perform the Covenants contained in certain
Indentures. The Defendant pleaded a general performance, the Plaintiff replied
and showed, that she made a Lease to the Defendant of certain Cole-pits,
rendering eighty pounds Rent, and that the Defendant did not pay the Rent at the
day, Obligation conditioned for the payment of Rent, demand is not necessary to
be alleged after general performance pleaded.
whereupon the Defendant demurred.

And it was adjudged upon Argument for the Plaintiff: but the matter upon which
the Defendant justified came not in question, viz. If the Plaintiff ought to
have demanded the Rent: And that the Obligation had not altered the nature of
the Rent, it being general to perform all Covenants; and the reason is
apparent, for when the Defendant plead performance of all the payments, that is
intended an actual payment, for he cannot now rejoyn, that he made tender, for
that shall be a departure from his Plea. And that was the reason of the
Judgment which was Pasch. 43 Eliz. between John Specot Plaintiff, Specot and
Shere.
and Emanuel Shere Defendant, upon the like case in debt upon an Obligation,
whereas the Defendant had granted an Annuity or Rent of six and twenty shillings
eight pence to the Plaintiff, for one and twenty years, the Condition was, that
if the said Shere perform all the Covenants, etc. contained in the said
Writing, so that the Plaintiff may enjoy the Rent according to the intent
thereof, then, etc. the Defendant recited the Deed and pleaded performance, the
Plaintiff replied that the Defendant had not paid the said eight and twenty
shillings eight pence upon such a Feast, whereupon the Defendant demurred, and
adjudged for the Plaintiff. And the Lord Coke in his private Book (as the Lord
chief Baron said) had shown this reason: If the Defendant had pleaded
specially, That he was upon the Land, and ready to pay, and to make tender, but
the Plaintiff did not come to demand it, then the Plaintiff ought to show that
he did demand it, which seems to be agreed, 14 E: 4. 4. 2 H. 6. 57. 11 E: 4.
10. 21 E: 4, 42. but Brook 6 E: 6. Tender, makes this diversity, when the
Condition is expressed to pay the Rent, that alters the nature of the Rent: But
otherwise when it is to perform Covenants. And the Judgment given in the Kings
Bench was affirmed.

Trin. 3 Car. Stephens versus Oldsworth.
IN a Quare Impedit brought by Stephens and Cross against Oldsworth and Holmes,
for the Church of Lechamseed, the Incumbent pleaded, Quare Impedit. Tenure.
that he was Parson Imparsonee to the Church, of the presentation of the King,
and confessed the Seisin of Sir Anthony Greenwood (under whom, by the grant of
the next avoidance the Plaintiffs claim) but said, that the said Sir Anthony
held the said Manor of the King, per redditum ac wardam Castri Dower, to be
paid yearly 8 s. 1 d. ob. q. And among other matters (which I omit) it was
resolved that it was Socage Tenure, for a Rent for Castleguard is Socage, vide
Littleton 26. Coke lib: 4. fol: 6. 5 E: 4. fol. 128. F.N.B. 256. a

Mich. 3 Car. Young versus Young.
Formedon in Descender, Act of Court shall be amended.
IN a Formedon in the Descender, brought by Young against Young, the Demandant
was within age, and was admitted to prosecute by his Guardians, and that
appears by a general admittance, before Justice Jones: And this admittance was
first entered in the remembrance of Gulstons Office, and afterward in the Plea
Roll: And the Demandant which is admitted by the Court, viz. per Guardianos ad
hoc per Curiam admissus, and there the Concessit per Curiam quod prosequatur
per Gardianos is entered, and so is the Roll upon the View* And in the Philizers
Roll the recital is, That the Demandant per Gardianos admissus obtulit se. And
in this Roll the Concessit per curiam of admitting the Demandant to prosecute
by his Guardian is not entered. And after Verdict, and Judgment for the
Demandant, a Writ of Error was brought, and that assigned for Error: And it was
moved that it might be entered upon the Philizers Roll. And it was resolved by
all the Court that it should be supplied and entered upon the Philizers Roll;
and the principal reason was, because that this admittance by his Guardians,
is the act of the Court, and not like to the entry of the Warrant of Attorney,
nor to the Essoin Roll, vide Dyer 330. otherwise it is of Admission by Prochein
ami, Where an Infant ought to appear by Guardian, and where by Prochein amy.
vide Rawlins case, Coke lib. 4. fol: 53. The use of the Kings Bench is never
to enter the Admission, but only to recite it in the Count, vide 11 H: 7. Rot:
412. In a Writ of Right by Baron and Feme, and another Feme Infants, there per
custodes good, vide 8 E: 4, 5. for the Mainprise entered in another Term, lib:
Intractionum fol: 366. It was vouched by Croke, and affirmed by Yelverton in
one Simpsons case in Durham, Simpsons case.
where the Tenant was by Prochein amy, where it should be by Guardian, was
Error. The Presidents are, that an Infant when he sue, may be by Guardian, or
Prochein amy, the one or the other; but when he is sued, it shall be by
Guardian.

Mich. 3 Car. Wolf versus Hole.
Wolf an Attorney Plaintiff against Hole, by a Writ of Privilege, Amendment.
and he Count upon an Assumpsit: And after Verdict given and Judgment, a Writ
of Error was brought, and moved that there was a default in the Imparlance
Roll: viz. fault de trover pledges, which was as it ought to be in the Plea
Roll: And it was moved that it might be amended, and after debate at Bar, by
Henden and Davenport, it was resolved that the not finding of Pledges is not
matter of form, but matter of substance, and it concerns the King, for if the
cause to amerce the Plaintiff, the Judgment is, Ideo le Plaintiff and ses
pledge; sont Amerce, and that it is not aided by the Statute of 18 Eliz. quod
quaere, and vide 12 Eliz: Dyer 288. there is a Case written by me, that An: 17
Jac: was amended after the Verdict; and in one Hillaries case, and vide th^re
in Dyer, that the Plaintiff when he is sued by Privileges, ought to find
pledges, and that as well, as when a Bill is filed against an Attorney. But
now, because that it was assigned for Error, and that if it be amendable, the
Justices of the Kings Bench would amend it, this Court would not; but if it had
been in the Imparlance Roll, and omitted in the Plea Roll, it should be
amended, vide 18 E: 4. 9. that Pledges may be entered at any time.

Hill. 2. Car. Rot. 565. Hilton versus Paul.
RIchard Hilton brought an action of Trespass against Robert Paul, Trespass.
Which shall be said a Parish Church within the act of 43 Eliz. for the
maintenance of the poor.
for the taking of a Saddle at Stoke-Goldenham: And upon Not guilty pleaded,
the Jury gave a special Verdict, Viz.

That the Parish of Hinkley was de temps don't memory, etc. and yet is an
ancient Rectory, and a Church Parochial; And that the Town of Stoke-Goldenham
is an ancient Town, and parcel of the Rectory of Hinkley. And that from the
time of H. 6. and afterward until this time, there has been and is in the
Town of Goldenham, a Church, which by all the said time has been used and
reputed as a Parish: And that the Inhabitants of Stoke-G. by all the said time
had had all Parochial Rights, and Churchwardens; And that the Tow^^ of
Stoke-Goldenham is distant two miles from Hinkley. And the Verdict concluded,
it it should seem to them, that Stoke Goldenham is a Parish for the relief of
Poor, within the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 2. then they find for the Plaintiff,
if not for the Defendant.

And this Case was argued by Sergeant Barkley, and he vouched Linwood fol: 89.
and said, that there is Ecclesia major and minor, and a dependant Church upon
the principal, and another Church, and which is found to be used and reputed,
ergo it is not a Parish. And that the Exception of the Chapel of Foulnes,
which by the Statute is made a Parish, proves that Chapel and Parish are not
within the Statute: he vouched 4 E: 4. 39. and 5 E: 4. to prove that diverse
Town may be one Parish.

And the Lord Richardson said, that it is a clear case, that this is a Parish,
within the intent of the Statute of 43 Eliz. for the relief of Poor; And that
the Churchwardens and Overseers of Stoke-Goldenham might assesse for the
relief of the Poor. And though it be found that after the time of H. 6. and
until now, it had been used as a Parish Church, that does not exclude that it
was not used so before. And a Reputative Chantery is within the Statute of
Chantries, 1 E: 6. And this Statute being made for the relief of the Poor, and
that they might not wander, therefore the intent of the Statute is to confine
the relief to Parishes then in esse, and so used: And every one of the Court
delivered their opinion, and concurred: And so Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Hill. 3 Car. Peto versus Pemmerton. Mich. 3 Car. Rot. 414.
Replevin.
SIr Edward Peto Knight, brought Replevin against Robert Pemmerton and Giles
Thompson; The Defendants made Conusance as Bailiffs to Humphrey Peto, Where
Grantee of a Rentcharge takes a Lease of part of the Land, and surrenders it,
the Rent shall be revived.
and that Humphrey the Father of the said Humphry (was seized of the place in
which, etc. in Fee, and by his Deed granted the Rent of six pounds to the said
Humphrey his Son for life out thereof, to Commence after the Death of the
Grantor, and showed that Humphrey the Father died, and for Rent arrear, etc.

The Plaintiff in Bar to the Avowry confess the grant and seisin of the Land,
and that the said Humphrey died seized of the Land out of which the Rent was
granted, and that that descended to William, and from William to the Plaintiff,
who entered, and demised to the said Humphrey the Son, parcel of the Lands unde
etc. for five hundred years, by force of which Lease, the said Humphrey had
entered and was possessed.

The Defendants replied, that afterward and before any part (for which they
made Conusance) was arrear, the said Humphrey the Son surrendered the said Lease
to Sir Edward Peto, to which surrender the said Sir Edward agreed, whereupon the
Plaintiff demurred.

And this Case was argued by Henden, and he said, that when the act of him
which had the Rent made the suspension, his act alone could not revive it; But
a Rent suspended might be revived by the act of Law, or by the joint act or
agreement of the parties by whom the suspension was made, 21 H. 7. 7. 19 H: 6.
4. 19 H: 6. 45. 7 H: 6. 2.

As for the personal things, when they are suspended, they are extinct,
unless it be in auter droit, as if Feme Executrix take the Debtor to Husband,
and the Baron dies, the Wife shall have an action of Debt against his Executors.

One reason in this case is, because that by the surrender which is accepted,
the Contract is determined, and that is by the act of both.

And by the surrender the Estate for years is extinguished to all purposes, as
to that to which the surrender was made; as if he had granted a Rent, now it
shall commence, and he is seized in Fee, and may hold it charged with both the
Rents, 2 H: 5. 7. 5 H: 5. 34. Ass. 15.

And this Estate surrendered is in Esse, as to the benefit of strangers, but not
as to the benefit of him who accepted it, for he is seized in Fee, vide
Lillingstons case.

And the Court was of opinion, that the Rent was revived, and that the Contract
is now determined. Nota, that this grant to Humphrey the Son for years, was but
upon confidence to assign it over.

If Grantee of an Estate for life of a Rent, take an Estate for life of part of
the Land, and surrender it, yet the Rent is not revived, for it was extinct in
this case, if he had granted his interest, quere, and if he had granted his
interest over to I. S. and he had surrendered it, that shall not revive the
Rent, because that he had by his granting over of his interest, discharged of
the Rent extinguish it, quaere: but in the principal case the Rent was
suspended by the acceptance of the Lease, and is revived by the surrender. And
it was agreed; that where Lessee for years surrender, to which the Lessor
agree, and accept it, the possession and the interest is in him without entry.

Hill. 3 Car. Sandford versus Cooper.
SAndford brought a Scire facias against Cooper to have execution of a Judgment
for sixteen pounds, Sci. fac.
which Judgment was de Oct. Hill. An. 2 Car. And one being returned Ter-tenant,
pleaded that after the Judgment, viz. 22 Jan. he (against whom the Judgment
was) viz. John Bill acknowledged a Statute-staple, and shewe^, that by that the
Land was extended, and after upon liberate delivered in Execution, and demand
Judgment, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred.

And the sole question was, to what day the Judgment shall have relation, for
it appears in the pleading, To what day a Judgment shall have relation.
that the twentieth day of January was the day of Essoin; and it seemed to the
Court that the Judgment should have relation to the first day of this return,
as well as if it had been a return in the Term, viz. 15 Hill. for otherwise it
should be uncertain. And he may be Nonsuited upon this day, vide 5 Eliz. Dyer
fol. 200. That a recovery being in the first return, the Warrant of Attorney
made and dated the fourth day, is taken to be a Warrant after Judgment, and
vide 33 E: 6. fol: 45, 46. the principal case there: If a Nisi prius taken
after the day of Essoin, shall be good, and it is adjudged not, for the first
day is the return: And it was agreed, that in Common Parlance, the first day of
the Term is the fourth day, viz. If one be obliged to appear, or to pay moneys
the first day of such a Term. Loquendum est ut vulgus. But the Law relate the
Judgment to the first day of every return, vide Dyer 361. a Release pleaded
after the Darrein Continuance, which was dated the one and twentieth of
January, which was the day after the Essoin day, and it was not good, for it
ought to be before the utas Hillarii: Gillinghams case.
And my Brother Harvey and Crook vouched one Gillinghams case, viz. A Release
of all Judgments before the fourth day, and after the day of Essoin would not
release this Judgment, which was de Octab. Hill. vide many cases vouched to this
purpose, 4 E: 3.34 H: 6. 20. a Writ of Error brought after the utas, and before
the fourth, that is good, and brought after Judgment, vide 22 H: 6. 7. a. a
Writ of Error ought to be brought after the Judgment rendered, or otherwise no
Execution shall be stayed* And all the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff in
this Scire facias.

Hill. 3 Car. Holt versus Sambach. Trin. 2 Car. Rot. 731.
Replevin. Tenant for life with a remainder to him in tail expectant, and
remainder in fee, grant a rent in fee, and afterward had fee by fine.
SIr Thomas Holt brought Replevin against Thomas Sambach, in which upon Demurrer
the Case was.

Sir William Catesby (being Tenant for life of Land, the remainder in tail to
Robert his Son, the remainder in Fee) granted a Rent of ten pounds by the year
out thereof to William Sambach in Fee, and Sir William and Robert his Son levied
a Fine with Proclamations, which was to the use of the said Sir William in Fee,
and afterward the said Sir William enfeoffed Sir Thomas Holt, and died; Robert
had Issue Robert and died: And the Court was of opinion, that this Grant in Fee
is good, for he had an Estate for life in possession, and an Estate of
remainder in tail, and remainder in Fee, in himself to charge, and then the
Fee-simple pass by the Grant: And although that Robert the Son might have
avoided it, yet when he had barred the Estate-tail, etc. by Fine to the use of
Sir William, now Sir William Catesby had by this acceptance of this Estate to
himself, avoided the means by which he might have avoided the Rent. And
although that in Bredons case, in the first Book, when Tenant for life, and he
in the remainder in tail join in a Fine, rendering Rent to Tenant for life, that
passes from every one, that which lawfully might pass, and that the Rent
continue after the death of him in the remainder in tail without Issue; yet in
this case the Estate is barred by the Fine, and united to that Estate, which
William the Grantor had, and now William is seized in Fee, and this Rent made
unavoidable.

The Case was well argued by Henden and Davenport, but it appeared that the
Conusance was for twenty shillings, part of the rent of fifty pounds behind,
and for fifty pounds, parcel of two hundred pounds arrear for Nomine poenae,
and did not say in his Avowry, that he was satisfied of the rest: And therefore
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, vide 20 E: 4. 2, a. 48 E. 3. 3.

Chichley versus the Bishop of Ely.
Quare Impedit
DAme Dorothy Chichley brought a Quare Impedit against Nich: Bishop of Ely, and
Mark Thompson the Incumbent for the Church of Wimple, and counted, that Thomas
Chichley was seized of the Advowson of the said Church in Fee as in gross, and
presented to it being void, Edward Marshall which was Instituted and Inducted,
and afterward the said Thomas Chichley died seized, and the Advowson descended
to his Son and Heir Sir Thomas Chichley, Traverse upon Traverse.
who by his Deed indented, etc. for the increase of the Ioynture of the
Plaintiff, granted the said Advowson to Thomas East, and Edward Anger and their
Heirs, to the use of the said Plaintiff for life, and afterward to the use of
the Heirs Males of the body of Sir Thomas Chichley; and that by force thereof
she was seized for life: And the Church being hold by the death of the said
Edward Marshall she presented, and the Defendants disturbed her.

The said Bishop died, and the Defendant plead that he is parsona imparsonata
ex presentatione Domini Regis nunc: And said, that Sir Thomas Chichley was
seized in Fee of the said Advowson, and also of the Manor of Preston, and
diverse other Lands in the County of Cambridge, which Manors and Lands were
holden of King James in Capite by Knights-service, and being so seized he died,
and that this Advowson and the Manor descended to Thomas Chichley his Son and
Heir, who at the time of his death was within age: And that afterward by force
of a Writ of Diem clausit extremum this matter was found, whereby the King
seized the body, and was possessed of the Manor and of the Advowson, and that
the said King James died, and the King which now is suscepit regimen hujus
regni, and was possessed, and the Church became void; And the King by his
Letters Patents under the great Seal, presented the Defendant Thompson, and
traversed the Grant made by Sir Thomas Chichley, to Thomas East and Edward
Anger of the said Advowson, as the Plaintiff had alleged.

The Plaintiff replied protestand^, that the Defendant is not Parson
Imparsonee, and that the Plea is insufficient, Pro placito dicit, quod non
habetur aliquod tale recordum, talis inquisionis post mortem praedicti Thomae
Chichley militis modo and forma prout, whereupon the Defendant demurred.

And after many Arguments at Ba^, by Attho, Henden, Davenport, and Hedley, it
was adjudged for the Defendant. And that the Title of the Plaintiff being
traversed, brought to have been maintained, and not to traverse other matter
alleged by the Defendant, for Traverse upon Traverse is only when the matter
traversed is but Inducement: Also it appears fully that the King is entitled
to this Presentation, though there was not any Office, vide 21 E: 4. 14 H: 7.
and then all the Titles of the King should be answered, and therefore the
denial of the Office is not material: for if he dies seized the King may
present without Office, vide Bendoes case, 21 Eliz: Rot: 1378. Crachford
against Gregory Lord Dacren, when the King is entitled by Office to an
Advowson, though the very Title be in a stranger, yet if the Church be void,
and he which has Title present, this is but Usurpation.

Vide 17 H: 7. Kel: 43. 11 H. 8. ibid. fol. 200. vide 21 E: 4. 1. 5 E: 4. 3. or
13. of things which lie in Grant, the King is in actual possession, Crachfords
case.
20 E: 4. 11. Stamf. fol: 54. 2. R: 3. issue 7. 28. 23 H: 8. Kel: 97. new Book
of Entries fol: 130. vide there that Traverse is allowed to be taken upon
Traverse, vide for that 9 H: 7. 9. 10 E: ^. 49. Dyer 107. 10 E: 4. 2. 3. 6 E.
3. ^.

When two Titles appear for the King as here, the dying seized of the Advowson
of Sir Thomas C. who also died seized of the Manor of Preston holden in
Capite, that is a good Title, and the Office found is another Title, and ^oth
ought to be answered in case of the King, vide for that matter, 37 H: 6. 6. 24
H: 3. 27. 46. E. 3 25 9 H: 6. 37. 39 H: 2. 4. 40 E: 3. 11. In case of several
charges to the King, although the King be not party, yet they ought to be
answered.

Hedley Sergeant argued for the Plaintiff, that the presentment of the King
tolls all the right of the Plaintiff, and therefore only ought to be answered,
and he ought not to traverse the Title of the Plaintiff, which by the Plea was
tolled; but notwithstanding that, he answered not the dying seized of the
Advowson, and the Tenure, by which the King is entitled upon the Office, and
therefore all is one: And the Plaintiff had waved his Title, and not maintained
it: And therefore Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Pasch. 4 Car. Congham's Case.
Rescous by the Plaintiff in the primer action.
IN an action upon the Case against Congham and his Wife, That whereas the
Plaintiff has recovered in Debt against one, and had a Writ of Capias ad
satisfaciendum directed to the Sheriff of Cambridgeshire, and the Sheriff had
arrested the party, and had him in Execution for the Debt, the Defendants
rescued the party, and he escaped: Upon Not guilty pleaded the Feme was found
guilty of the Rescous: And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment by Aleph, that
this action lies not, because that Debt lies against the Sheriff: And the
Sheriff shall have an action for the Rescous, vide F: N: B. 102. And properly
this action of Rescous lies where it is upon mean process, and that is for the
delay by the Rescous, and damage may be greater or lesser accordingly: And the
Rescous is according to the condition of him, which is arrested, for if he may
be easily taken again, and that he becomes not more poor, that then the damage
is the less, vide 16 E: 4. fol. 3.

But after diverse motions at Bar Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: And the
Lord Richardson held strongly that it lies. And this Tort may be punished at the
Suit of the party who had damage thereby, viz. the party, the Sheriff or Baily:
And Harvey and Crook agreed, but Yelverton and my self doubted thereof, because
that it is an immediate wrong to the Sheriff or Baily, and the party had no
prejudice in common presumption, because that his action is transferred to the
Sheriff, who has more ability to satisfy him.

Farrington versus Caymer.
LIonell Farrington qui tam pro se quam pro, etc. brought an Information
against William Caymer, Information where it shall be brought.
upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 4. against Ale-brewers and Bear-brewers, for
selling Bear at higher prises then were assessed by the Justices, upon Not
guilty pleaded, the Plaintiff had a Verdict at Norfolk Assizes.

And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Information was brought in
the Common Bench, and yet it was brought and tried in the proper County where
the Offense was committed, whereas by 33 H. 8. cap: 10. 37 H: 8 cap: 7. 21 Jac:
cap: 4. it ought to be brought in the Country, and not in the Common Pleas.

And upon grand deliveration and hearing of council of either part the Court
resolved that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff. And first it was
agreed, that (whereas by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 4, which appoint that the
Justices of Peace assesse the prises of Barrels and other Vessels of Beer; and
that they which sell against that rate forfeit six shillings, etc. to be
recovered by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of
Record, in which no wager of Law, etc. and gives one Moiety to the party which
will sue, and the other to the King, no action may be brought in any Court of
Record, but only in one of the four Courts of Record at Westminster.

And the proof thereof, see Coke lib: 6. fol: 19. Gregory's case, and Dyer 236.
a.

Then the principal and sole point will be, if this Offense will be by the act
of 33 H: 8. cap: 10. made presentable and punishable by the Justices of Peace;
at their six weeks Sessions; and it was unanimously agreed that it is not.
First, because the preamble of the act recite, that the Offenses recited therein
escape punishment, and for their more speedy and effectual punishment, and
repeat the particulars, but therein name not Brewers by express words, and it
cannot be intended that the intent of the Statute was to give them at their six
weeks Sessions, to intermeddle with things not determinable at their general
Sessions. And it was objected by A^tho, that Lambert and Crompton had put it as
an Article of their charge: To which it was answered, that it was in some
respect inquirable at Common Law, viz. Misdemeanors in Bear-brewers,
Conspiracies and agreements to sell at such prises, and the making of wholesome
Beer. Also it might be that they ^ake the Law to be upon the Statute of 23 H:
8. that the Sessions being a Court of Record was within this act, that says in
any Court of Record: And then if it be not suable by Information before the
Iustice^ of Peace, the consequence is plain, that the Statute of 21 Jac. cap:
4. extends not thereto, and the Statute of 37 of H: 8. makes not any thing in
this case, but tolls the six weeks Sessions, and makes it inquirable at the
general Sessions.

Ideo Judgment for the Informer.

June 19. An. 22. Jac.
MEmorand. That upon a Conference at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, it was
resolved and agreed, by the Lord chief Justice Sir James ^ea, the Lord Hobart,
Baron Bromley, Baron Denham, Justice Hutton, and Justice Jones; That any one
may erect an Inn for lodging of Travelers, without any allowance or License,
Resolutions concerning Innes, and who may keep an Inn, and how they may be
suppressed.
as well as any one before the Statute of 2 E: 6. might have kept a Common
Alehouse, or as at this day one may set up to keep hackney Horses, or Coaches,
to be hired by such as will use them: And all men may convert Barley into
Malt, until they be restrained by the act of Parliament made for that
purpose. And as all men may set up Trades not restrained by the Act of 5 Eliz.
which directs, no man that has not been bound, or served as an Apprentice by
the space of seven years, or by restraint of setting up Trades in Corporations,
by such as be not free, by the like reason all men may use the Trade of
Inne-keeping, unless it could be brought to be within the Statute of 2 E: 6.
which has never been taken to be subject to that Statute in point of license:
And vide that an Hostler is chargable to the party which is his Guest, for the
restoring of that which is lost in his House, and that by the Common Law of the
Realm, vide 11 H: 4. fol: 45. see also, 11 H: 4. fol: 47. That in an action
upon the case brought by the Schoolmaster of Gloucester, for erecting another
School to his prejudice, adjudged that no action lies; and also it is there
said, that if I have a Mill, and another erect another Mill, by which I lose my
Custom, no action lies unless he disturb the water. And it was said by the
chief Justice, that it was so resolved before by the Judges, and that Justice
Doderidge, Justice Haughton, and Justice Chamberlain were of the same opinion,
and so now was my Brother Crew, the Kings Sergeant, who went the Circuit of
Surrey, Kent, and Essex; but the chief Baron Tanfield was of a contrary
opinion: And it seemed to him that Innes were licensed at first, and Originally
by the Justices in Eire; but nothing could be shown to that purpose: But all
the Justices were of a contrary opinion, and said, that that was the ground
that begot the Patent and Commission to Mounperson, viz. That the King might
license them, if the Judges might.

And it was said by the Lord chief Justice, that there was not any such thing
in the Eires; but because that strangers which were aliens were abused and
evilly entreated in the Inns, it was (upon complaint thereof) provided that they
should be well lodged, and Inns were assigned to them by the Justices in Eire.

The second question was, if an Inn be erected in a remote and inconvenient
place, so that it is dangerous to Travelers, and there harbor men of bad
same, which are apt to commit Robbery, whether that might be suppressed: And as
to that all agreed that it is a common Nuisance, and may be suppressed, and that
to be by Indictment and presentment, to which the party may have his Traverse.

The third question was, whether when one which had erected an Inn be a man of
bad behavior, and such a person as is not fit to keep an Inn, how it should be
aided and helped: And it was agreed by all, that upon Indictment or presentment
thereof he may have his Traverse, and if he be convicted, then to be suppressed,
viz. that he which had so misdemeaned himself, should not keep it as an Inn,
nor use it: But that it being an Inn, it may be used afterward by another.

Fourthly, how and by what way or means the multitude of Inns might be
prevented, by being suppressed, or redressed upon complaint, or how the number
might be stinted. This Point seemed to be difficult, and to contradict the
resolution upon the first question: And therefore it was agreed that they should
advise concerning it; and the best way is, that they be strictly enforced to
keep the Assise, and not to suffer any to tipple in their Inns; and by this way
they would desist from their Trade.

Mich. 4 Car. Mackerney versus Ewrin.
RIchard Mackerney brought an action upon the case against Jeffrey Ewrin, and
count, Case.
That wherea^ one I. S. was indebted to the Plaintiff in seven pounds four
shillings for pasture, feeding, and Oats for an Horse kept in the Stable of
the Plaintiff: Consideration in an Assumpsit
The Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff at his request would deliver
the Horse to him, to the use of the said John S. promised to pay the said seven
pounds four shillings. And upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and Verdict for the
Plaintiff, Sergeant Callis moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it is no good
consideration, for the Plaintiff had not any property in the Horse, and he is
not is do any other thing then the Law enjoin him to do: As if I lose my goods
and another find them, and in consideration that he will deliver them to me I
promise to pay him two hundred pounds, that is not sufficient matter to ground
an Assumpsit thereupon; But if a Tailor had made a Suit of Apparel for I. S.
and I. D. request him to deliver it to him, and he will pay for the making
thereof, that is a good consideration, vide Coke lib: 8. fol: 147. And in this
case all the Court were of opinion, that the consideration was good, for whereas
he might have detained the Horse until he had been paid for the pasture and
feeding, he at the special request of the Defendant had delivered the Horse to
him, to the use of the Owner, which is to the prejudice of the Plaintiff, and
alienest to him to whose use he was delivered.

And Justice Harvey vouched a case which was in this Court adjudged, which was
in consideration that the Plaintiff had promised to pay to the Defendant ten
pounds at a day, according to the Condition of an Obligation, the Defendant
promised to deliver the Obligation, and adjudged a good Consideration.

Turner versus Hodges.
THe Custom of the Manor of (...) is found to be for the Copyholders (without
the License of the Lord of the Manor) they being seized in Fee, may make any
Lease for a year, Custom in a Manor to make a^ Lease for years.
or many years, and when they dye, that ^^e (...) shall cease, and that the
Heir or Heirs may enter.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this was a bad Custom, and that the
Copyholders had by Custom an Inheritance, and might by the general Custom of
the Ream make a Lease for one year; And that tenor the general Custom of the
Realm, but the Custom of every Manor within the Realm, vide Coke lib: 4. fol:
26. in Melwiches Case.

Custom creates the Estate, and the Custom is as ancient as the Estate, and is
casual, and upon the Act of God, and is reasonable, that the Heir who is to
pay the Fine should have the Possession: And yet a Custom, that if the
Copyholder had surrendered to the Lord, that the Lease should be void, had been
a (...) Custom, because that he might subvert and destroy by his own act that
Estate that he himself had made, and he which took the Lease ha^ing notice of
the Custom, takes the Lease at his peril, for otherwise he might have procured
the License of the Lord; and then by this License the Lord had dispensed
therewith, and that is, as it were, the Confirmation of the Lord: For if a
Copyholder makes a Lease for twenty years, with the License of the Lord, and
after dies without Heirs, yet the Lease shall stand against the Lord by reason
of his License, which amounts to a Confirmation. And the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Hill. 4 Car.
EJectione firmae was brought, and count upon a Lease made by Husband and Wife,
Lease by Baron and Feme without reservation of any Rent.
and that was by Indenture: And upon Not guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was
given, in which the sole question was, Whether this Lease was made by Baron and
Feme, being there was no Rent reserved thereby.

It was objected, that this Lease could not be made good by the Feme by any
acceptance, and therefore it is not the Lease of the Feme, no more then if the
Verdict had found that the Lease was by an Infant, and no Rent reserved, that
had been a void Lease.

But it is contrary of a Baron and Feme, for the Baron had power, and the Feme
joining in the Lease, it is not void, for she may affirm the Lease by bringing
a Writ of Wast, or she may accept Fealty: And so was the opinion of the Court,
and Judgment entered accordingly, vide Coke lib: 2. fol: 61. in Wiscots case.
Count of a Lease by Baron and Feme, and show not that it was by Deed, and yet
good, vide Dyer 91.

Pasch. 5 Car. Paston versus Utber.
JOhn Paston brought Ejectione firmae against Barnard Utber, upon a Lease made
by Mary Paston: And upon Not guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was found at
the Bar, and the Case was thus.

Custom, that the Lord have a Feild-course over the Lands of his Coppyholders
if the Tenant enclose it is no forfeifture.
Barnard Vtber seized of the said Land to him and his Heirs by Copy of
Court-Roll, according to the Custom of the Manor of Binham: And that within
that Manor there is such a Custom, that the Lord had had one field course for
five hundred Ewes in the North-field, and the West-field (whereof these fifteen
acres were parcel) from the Feast of Saint Michael, if the Corn were inned,
and if it were not, then after the Corn were inned, until the Feast of the
Annunciation, if it were not before that time sown again with Corn, in all the
Lands of the Copyholders not enclosed. And that it is a Custom, that no
Copyholder may enclose any Copyhold Land without the License of the Lord: And
if any be enclosed without License, then a reasonable fine should be assessed
by the Lord or his Steward, for the Enclosure, if the Lord would accept thereof.
And it is also a Custom that if the Lord will not accept thereof, then the
Copyholder which so incloseth, shall be punished at every Court after, until
he open that Enclosure. And the said Vtber enclosed the 15. acres with an Hedge
and Fence of Quick-set, 3. feet deep, and 6. feet broad; and that he had left
4. spaces of 9. feet broad in the said 15. acres: And that the said Vtber was
required by the Steward to lay open the said Enclosure, and he did it not,
whereupon there was a command to the Bailiff to seize them as forfeit, which
was done; And the said Mary being Seignoress of the Manor entered, and leased
to the Plaintiff, and the Defendant entered upon him.

Sergeant Davenport argued that it is a forfeiture, and against the Custom
which creates the Feildage for the Lord, as well as the Estate of Copyhold for
the Tenant, and that this leaving of four spaces is a fraud and device; and
that it is against his Fealty, and is to the damage of the Lord, and a thing
unlawful, vide Dyer 245. 34 E. 1. Formedon 88. 15 A: 7. 10. 29 E: 3. 6. That
if the Tenant enclose, the Commoner may break his hedges. And though by
Littleton an Enclosure which is a Disseisin, is a total Enclosure, whereby he
which has the rent cannot come to distrain, yet this also is an Enclosure,
because that it obstructs the feild-course, for they cannot come so freely,
without interuption or damage, for the hedges may deprive the Sheep of their
wool: And he compared it to the case of 3 H. 7. 4. One is obliged to make an
Estate of his Manor of Dale if he alien part and then make a Feoffment, the
Condition is broken, and vide 5 E: 3. fol: 58. a Recognizance with Condition to
make a Feoffment to I. S. of the Manor, if he alien part thereof, he forfeit
his Recognizance, he vouched 42 E: 2. 5. and Coke lib: 4. that denial of
Services, or making of Wast is a forfeiture. 22 H: 6. 18. 41 E: 3. Wast 82.
Dyer 364. And though that the Lord may proceed by five to enforce him to lay it
open, yet these Affirmative Customs do not toll the Negative. And to prove that
the Lord had an Inheritance therein, he vouched 14 E: 2. Fitz. Grant 92. A Rent
granted to one and his Heirs, out of the Manor of Dale, which he hold of the
Manor of D. this is an Inheritance. And if this shall not be a forfeiture,
then this Customary Inheritance, which the Lord had in the feild-course, might
be tolled at the will and pleasure of the Copyholder. Sergeant Hitcham argued
strongly to the contrary. First, That it is no Enclosure, because that all is
not enclosed. Secondly, The forfeiture of a Copyhold is always by some thing
done to the Copyhold land it self, but this is done (as it is supposed) to the
feild-course of the Lord, which is not Copyhold, and it is better for the
Copyhold, and makes the land better, and also the Feild-course is thereby made
better, and more beneficial to the Lord; and therefore the Copyhold land is not
altered, but is meliorated, and it is like so the case in Dyer 361. Althams
case, after no Wast done, the Evidence was, that a Trench was made in a Meadow,
by which the Meadow was Meliorated, and adjudged no wast, which might be given
in evidence: But he said that in Brooks case, at the first coming of Popham to
be chief Justice, it was adjudged, that if a Copyholder build a new house, it
is a forfeiture, for that altoreth the nature of the thing, and put the Lord to
more charge. So if Tenant for year makes a Hay-yard in the land, that is wast.
He said, that this Custom is qualified by taking a Fine, if he would, or by
imposing a pain in the Court, to enforce the Defendant to lay it open. And all
the Court were of opinion, that this is no forfeiture, for the reasons before;
and that this Feild-course is a thing which commence by agreement, and is but a
Covenant, and not of common right: And Forfeitures (which are odious in Law)
shall be taken strickly.

Trin. 5 Car. Starkey versus Tailor.
Case.
STarkey an Atterney of this Court, brought an action upon the case against one
Mr. Tailor of Lincolns Inn, for saying of these words to him; Words.
Thou art a common Barretor, and a Judas, and a Promoter. And it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that these words maintain not action, for the generality,
and uncertainty, that he shall be called a common Barretor.

And the chief Justice seemed to be of opinion, that those words are not more,
then if he had said, That he was a common Brabler or Quarreller. But it was
urged by Sergeant Hicham that the action lies, and that it is a general Rule,
Quod sermo relatur ad personam; As in Birchley's Case, He is a corrupt man, And
in Mores Case, it was said of an Attorney, That he was a cousening Knave: And
if these words were spoken of a common person, he doubted if they were
actionable, but being spoken of an Attorney, action lies. And if these words
were spoken of Judge, without doubt they were actionable: And in this case
being spoken of an Attorney, who is a Minister of Justice, and who has the
Causes of his Clients in his hands, to gain them, or to lose them. The Statute
of Westminster says, the Sheriffs are charged to expel all Barretors out of
their Countries: And in the Statute of 34 E. 3. is the description of a common
Barretor, and his punishment, who is a stirrer of false and unjust Suits, and
that he shall be imprisoned during the pleasure of the King, bound to his good
behavior, and fined. And Littleton in his Chapter of Warranties faith, they
are hired to keep Possessions, and therefore an action lies. But to say of
another man, That he is a common Barretor, is not actionable, unless he says,
that he is convicted.

Hill. 3 Car Rot. 1302. Watt versus Maydewell.
Leicest.
WIlliam Watt brought an Ejectione firmae against Laurence Maydewell, Where
acceptance of a new Lease for years, makes a surrender of the former.
upon a Lease made by Robert Rome, upon Not guilty, and a special Verdict
found, the Case was thus.

Francis Griffith seized of Land in Fee, by Indenture, bearing date the
fourteen of November, and 14 Iac. demised the said Land whereof, etc. for one
and forty years, to Robert Rome, rendering two shillings Rent, to commence from
the Annunciation which shall be An: 1619. and after the same year by another
Indenture, bearing date the third of December, 15 Iac. to commence from the
Annunciation last, demised the same Lands for ninety nine years to Dame Frances
Perroint, who entered and was thereof possessed; And after that, the said Francis
Griffith by another Indenture the same year, bearing date the fourteen day of
November, 16 Iac. to commence from the seventeenth of November, An. 1619.
devise it to the said Robert Rome, for one and forty years, who accepted it,
and afterward entered, and being possessed made his Will, and appointed
Executors, and died, the Executors administered, and made the Lease to the
Plaintiff, who was possessed, until he was ousted by the Defendant.

And the only question of this Case was, if the acceptance of the second Lease
by Robert Rome, had determined, discharged or extinguished the former Lease.

And after Argument it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, the reason was, because
that by the Lease made to the Lady Perpoint for ninety nine years, and her
Entry, Francis Griffith had but a Reversion, and could not by his Contract made
afterward with Robert Rome, give any Interest to Robert Rome. This Lease made
to Robert Rome, viz. his former Lease was good in Interest, being to commence
at a day to come, and is grantable over, and may be surrendered or determined by
matter in Law before the Commencement thereof, as if he take a new Lease to
commence presently, which see in 37 H. 6. 29. 22 E. 4. for it tuures in
Contract.

And in this case it had been without question, that the taking of the new
Lease had been a surrender of the former, if it were not by reason of the Lease
for ninety nine years, which is for so great a number of years, that disables
him to contract for one and forty years, 37 H. 6. 17. 18. 14 H. 7. 3. Dyer 140.
Vide Smith and Stapletons case in Plowden, If a man makes a Lease for one and
twenty years, and after makes a Lease for one and twenty years by Paroll, that
is merely void, but if the second Lease had been by Deed, and he had procured
the former Lease to Attorn he shall have the Reversion, vide Ive's Case, Coke
lib: 5. fol: 11. there it is adjudged that the acceptance of a Leese for years,
to Commence at a day to come is a present surrender of a former Lease.

These Cases were vouched in this Case. Baker and Willoughby.
Sergeant Bakers Case in the Court of Wards, with the Lady Willoughby, that a
latter Lease taken by him which was void, did not surrender his former Lease
which was good.

Sir Rowland Heywards Case, the Lessee had Election to take as a Lease, or as a
Bargain and Sale, and that it is not by way of Estoppell, because it was
contracted out of the Reversion.

Trin. 14 Jac. Rot. 3308 Thompson against Green, Thompson and Green. Mills and
Whitewood.
adjudged that when one grants Proximam Advocationem to mother, this is merely
void.

13 Eliz. Rot. 1428. Ejectione firmae brought by Mills against Whitewood,
adjudged that where Lessee for years takes a new Lease after the death of his
Lessor, of the Guardian in Socage, this is no surrender of his Lease.

42 Eliz. Rot. 105. In Sir Arthur Capels Case, adjudged (...) Rud who was
Lessee for sixty years of an Advowson, when the Church was void, took a
Presentation to himself of the Lessor, and is admitten and inducted, this was a
Surrender of his Lease.

Mich. 5 Car. Baker versus Johnson.
A Jury was at the Bar in an Ejectione firmae brought by Henry Baker against
Bartholomew Johnson; upon a Lease made by James Baker, which was seized of two
Marshes among others called Knightswick and Southwick, In a recovery if the
Town be omitted the Land do nor pass.
which lie in an Island called Camby, in the Parish there called
North-Benfleet: And he being Tenant in tail, and intending to dock it, and to
make himself seized in Fee, by Indenture, the 10. of Eliz. Covenanted to suffer
a recovery of these two Marshes by name, and of many other Lands, and that it
should be to the use of himself in Fee; and the recovery was had, and therein
South-Benfleet and many other Parishes named, and Camby, but the Parish of
North-Benfleet was omitted: And if the Lands in North-Benfleet passed or no;
was the Question.

And it was strongly argued by Crew and Henden to have it found specially, it
being in a Common Recovery, which is but a Common Conveyance. But all the Court
agreed, that the Town and Parish being omitted, although that Camby was a place
known (but it appeared that that extends in and to ten Towns) yet being in a
Town, that the Recovery extends not thereto, no more then if one had a Manor in
the Town of Dale, which Manor is called Bradford; and within the said Manor
is a place known which is called Braisty Wood, and he omit the Manor and the
Town, and say, the hundred acres of Land in Braisty Wood, that is not good. And
the Court agreed, that a Common Recovery is good in a Town, Parish, or Hamlet,
and peradventure in a place known out of the Town, Parish, or Hamlet, as in the
Forest of Inglewood, in Insula de Thamete, etc. But if it should be admitted
that a Common Recovery shall be good in a place known in a Town or Hamlet, that
shall be absurd, for there is no Town, in which there are not twenty places
known; and it had been adjudged, that a Venire facias de viceneto of a place
known in a Town, without making the Visne of the Town, is not good.

Mich. 5 Car. Bill versus Lake.
London.
Case.
FRancis Bill brought an action upon the Case against Sir Aurthur Lake, and
counted, that whereas at the special instance of Lettice Wife of the Defendant,
Where the request is the cause of action
he had provided for the said Lettice a Tasfety Roll, the Defendant did assume
to pay as much as it was worth upon request And so in like manner for providing
of Linen stuff, etc. and making of several Garments for the Wife, and aver
that the several things bought amount to such a sum, and the making thereof
was worth such a sum, which in toto, etc. and allege the request: And aver
that they were necessary Vestments, and convenient for the degree of the Wife,
and after the making of them, he had delivered them to the Wife.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 21 of King James for Limitation, and
said, that the Plaintiff within six years after the promise supposed, nor
within three years after the end of the Parliament, had not prosecuted any
Original, or any Action upon this promise and Assumpsion, whereupon the
Plaintiff demurred.

And upon Argument at Bar by Sergeant Brampton for the Plaintiff, and Davenport
for the Defendant, the matter was reduced to this Question.

Whether the cause of Action shall be said upon the request, Quest.
or upon the promise.

Brampton agreed, that where it is found upon an Assumpsit in Law, and that the
request is but for increase of Damages, and not issuable, there the Assumpsit
is the cause of the Action. But this cannot be founded upon an Assumpsion in
Law, because that it is not certain, but to be made certain; first, by the
Plaintiffs buying and providing of the Stuff: Secondly, by the Plaintiffs
termining and making thereof; and then the matter of promise is for the payment
of so much money as it should be reasonably worth, and therefore the request is
there collateral, and then it is the cause of the action; and so within the
Statute; if it be an action which is founded upon an Assumpsit in Law, then it
does not charge the Husband: see the difference when request is material and
shall be alleged, and when not, in Mecholl and Pecks Case before, and a Feme
Covert is not capable to make any Contract, because she is Sub potestate viri:
And though it be for necessaries of Diet and Apparel, that shall not charge
the Husband: Sir William Alephs Case.
But an Infant is capable to make Contract for Diet and Apparel necessary. An:
25 Eliz: Sir William Alephs case was adjudged, that where an Infant had taken
so much for his necessary Apparel and Diet which amounted to fifty pounds,
which was paid by Sir William Aleph; And he took an Obligation with a penalty,
adjudged that it did not bind him in regard of the forfeiture: And Dyer 234.
Sir Michael Penits case, the Wife took Satin and Stuff to make her a Gown, and
Sir Michael paid the Tailor for the making thereof: And yet upon an action of
Debt brought against the Husband, it was resolved that it did not charge him.

And that the request to the cause of the action, he vouched Dyer 31. 18 E: 4.
4. solvend sur request, and 9 H: 7. fol: 22. Replevin and Tenure for plowing
the Land when he shall be required, he ought to allege the request; and he
concluded with a Case adjudged, Hill: 4 Car: Rot. 710. Banco Regis, between
Shuesouth and Fernell, an action upon the Case, and count, that the Defendant,
An: 1618. had kept a Dog, which he know had used to woory Sheep, and that the
Dog had wooried and killed diverse Sheep of the Plaintiffs: And the Defendant in
consideration thereof promised to satisfy the Plaintiff what he was damnified
when he should be required thereto; and the promise was An: 18 Jac. and the
request and refusal was within the time of six years, and it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, because that the request is the cause of the Action, for without
it he could not have his action.

And the sole matter upon which Davenport insisted, was, that this was a
Contract by the Husband, whereupon the Plaintiff might have an action of Debt
against him, and then it is but an Assumpsit in Law, and the request is not
cause of action: And therefore he said, as well as Debt lies upon the delivery
of Cloth to a Tailor for the making Garments thereof; so an action of Debt lies
for the sum accompanying the special matter, viz. for the payment of so much
as the making shall be reasonably worth, vide Coke lib: 4. fol: 147. so Debt
lies as well against the said Sir Arthur, upon this promise being made then and
there, he vouched 34 E: 1. Fitz: Debt 167. vet. N. B. fol: 62. 30 E: 3. 18. 19.
27 H: 8. Tatams case.

But the Court inclined that no action of Debt lay against Sir Arthur upon this
Assumpsit, but only an action of the case upon the request.

Mich. 4 Car. Treford versus Holmes.
Case. Assumpsit in consideration of forbearance
TReford brought an action upon the Case against Holmes as Executor, and
counted, that whereas the Testator was indebted to the Plaintiff, the Defendant
in consideration that the Plaintiff would forbear the said Debt for a
reasonable time assumed to pay it: And this promise was made in December, and
he show forbearance until March next; And upon Non assumpsit pleaded, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff, Sergeant Thinn moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it
is no sufficient consideration, for the incertainty of the time, if it had been
for a little time it had not been good: But the Court adjudged it good, for the
Court ought to judge of the time whether it be reasonable, vide Isaac Sidleys
case before: Then he moved another Exception, which was, that he had not shown
and averred in the Count that the Defendant had Assets at the time of the
promise, vide Coke lib: 9. fol: 93. and 94. Baines Case, that ought to come on
the other part, or otherwise it shall be upon Evidence, if it be necessary.

And Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 5 Car. A strange increase of Water in Westminster Hall.
MEmorand. That on Friday the twenty third day of October, by reason of the
greatness of the Spring-tyde, and a great Flood, the Hall of Westminster was
so full of water, that neither the Sergeants could come to the Bar, nor any
stand in the Hall, for there was a Boat that rowed up and down there, and
therefore all that was done, my Brother Harvey went to the Stairs which came out
of the Exchequer, and rode to the Treasury, and by this way went and set in the
Court, and Adjourned all the Iuries, for it was the fourth day del tres Mich.
And after that we were in the Exchequer Chamber, and heard four or five motions
of the Prothonatories there.

This coming into Court was not of necessity, unless it had been the Essoin
day, or that the Court should be Adjourned as Craft. Animar.

The Chancery and Kings Bench sat, for they came by the Court of Wards.

Freeman versus Stacy. Mich. 5 Car.
BEtween Freeman and Stacy, upon a special Verdict the Case was;y The
Plaintiff count upon a Lease by Indenture for one and twenty years, rendering
Rent, and in debt for the arrearages of this Rent; it appears, that the
arrearages of the Rent for which the action was brought, were due six years and
more before the action brought.

And the Lord Richardson was of opinion, Arrearages of Rent reserved by
Indenture is not within the act of 21 Jac. of Limitations.
that Judgment should be given against the Plaintiff, because the Statute of
the 21. of King James, cap. 16. extends to Debts for arrearages of Rent
expressly.

But I, and my Brother Harvey, and Brother Yelverton concurred, that this
action of Debt being upon a Lease by Indenture, is not limited to any time by
this Statute, but is out of it, and shall be brought as before the making of
this Statute. The words are, All actions of debt, grounded upon any lending or
Contract without specialty: All actions of Debt for arrearages of Rent, etc.
And this is an action upon a Contract by specialty, 4 H: 6. 31. he ought to
declare upon the Indenture, and it is a Contract, viz. a Lease: And there is
cause of using the Indenture every half year. And it was resembled to the case
upon the Statute of 32 H: 8. of Limitation, a Rentcharge which is founded upon
a Deed or a Reservation of a Rent upon a Fee-^^mple by Deed, are not within the
Statute of Limitation. And nothing in this Statute was intended to be limited,
which was founded upon a Deed: And the words, Debt for arrearages of Rent, are
supplied and satisfied by the arrearages of Rent upon a Demise without Deed.

And as to the Obligation, that he proof of payment might be wanting when the
occasion is brought so long after the Rent became due, that might be objected
to Debt upon an Obligation, where the day of payment is for a long time past.

And afterward the Lord Richardson mutata opinione agreed with us; And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 6 Car. Shervin versus Cartwright.
SHervin brought a Writ De rationabile part bonorum against Cartwright, and
counted of Custom in the County of Nottingham, Rationabl. pars. bonorum is not
within the ^ Statute of 21^ Jac. of Limitations.
and show all specially, and the conclusion was, that he detaineth particular
Goods of the party Plaintiff, which appertained to him as his part and portion:
And upon Non detinet pleaded, it was found that the Plaintiff was entitled to
this Action many years before the Statute of 21 Jac. and that he had not
brought his action within the time limited by the said Statute. And upon the
special Verdict, the Case being argued by Sergeant Ward for the Plaintiff, it
was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

First, because that this Action is an Original Writ in the Register, and is
not mentioned in the said Act, and though that the Issue is Non detinet, yet
this is no action of Detinue, for a Writ of Detinue lies not for money, unless
it be in bags, but a Rationabile part bonorum lies for money in Pecuniis
numeratis, vide the Book of Entries, Rationabile part bonorum: And this action
lies not before the Debts be paid: And the Account was, that thereby it might be
known for what it should be brought, and that in many cases requires longer
time then the Statute gives.

Another reason was, that Statutes are not made to extend to those cases which
seldom or never happen, as this case is, but to those that frequently happen.

Also this Statute tolls the Common Law, and shall not be extended to equity.
And upon all these reasons the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff: And
Sergeant Ward argued well, and vouched diverse good Cases.

The Writ of Detinue supposes properly in the thing demanded, vide 50 E. 3. 6.

Cook versus Cook.
WIlliam Cook alias Barker, brought an Action of Wast against George Cook
alias Barker, and count against him as Tenant for life, How a Writ of Wast
shall be where there is a lease for life, remainder in fee.
of the Lease of George Cook, and entitle himself to the Reversion, Ex
assignatione of the said George, and shows that George Cook being seized in
Fee, and the Ter-tenant in Socage, devised the Land to the Defendant for life,
the remaineer in tail to the Plaintiff: And upon the Count the Defendant
demurred.

And the Question was how the Writ should be, where a Lease is made for life,
the remainder in Fee, for it cannot be, Quod de ipso tenet; And it seems that
the Writ shall be special upon the Case, as a Fine levied to one for life, the
remainder in Fee, the Writ shall be special upon the Case: And it seems that
it shall never be Ex assignatione, but where the Reversion is granted over,
vide 38 E: 3. fol. 23. the direct Case: and vide 38 H. 6. fol. 30. in the Writ
of Consimili casu, vide F: N: B: fol: 207. in the Writ of Consimili casu, qui
illud tenet ad vitam D. ex Assignatione praedicti B. quam I. filius and here is
R. qui quidem R. illud praefat. D. demisit ad eundem terminum, inde fecit
praefat. B. etc.

The Estate for life with a Remainder over, is but one Estate, and it was a
question at Common Law, if he in remainder shall have an action of Wast, vide
41 E: 3. 16. 42 E: 3. 19. 50 E. 3. 3. Reg. 75.

But at this day the Law is clear, that he in remainder shall have an action of
Wast, F: N: B: fol: 207. but these Books prove that the Writ of Wast ought to
be Ex divisione, non ex assignatione.

Mich. 6 Caroli.
Case. Words.
AN action of the case was brought for these words: Thou art a Thief, and have
stolen one Passions Lamb, and marked it and denied it: And upon Not guilty
pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff: Sergeant Ashley moved in Arrest of
Judgment, because that it is not shown whose Lamb, for Passions is no word of
any signification without the name of Baptism. And the Court was of opinion
that the Count was good, for it had been sufficient to call him Thief, and then
the subsequent matter and words aggravate, and contain matter of Felony: And it
is a general Rule, that when the first words are actionable, the latter words
which toll the force thereof, ought to be such as do not contain Felony.

Babbington versus Wood.
BAbbington brought an action of debt against Wood, upon an Obligation of 600
l. the Condition was, That if Wood resign a Benefice upon request, that then
the Obligation should be void. A Cond^tion to resign a Benefice upon request,
And the Condition was entered; the Defendant demurred, and Judgment in Banco
Regis pro querente: And upon Error brought, Judgment was affirmed in the
Exchequer Chamber; for this Obligation is not voidable by the Statute of 14
Eliz. which makes Obligations of the same force, as Leases made by Parsons of
their Gleaves, viz. Per non residency; And it does not appear by the Plea of
the Defendant, that it was not an Obligation bona fide which might be lawful:
As if a Patron which has a Son, which is not yet fit to be presented for
default of age, and he present another with an agreement, that when his Son
comes to the age of 24. years, be shall resign it, it is a good Obligation. And
this Case, viz. an Obligation with Condition to resign had been adjudged good
in the case of one Jones, An: 8 Jac. And the Council said, that he who is
presented to a Church is married thereto, Jones Case.
and it is like as if a man who has married a Wife, should be bound to be
divorced from her, or not co-habit with her, these Conditions are void. But
these resemble not our Case.

Wilson versus Briggs.
WIlson brought an action of Account against Briggs, as Bailey of his Manor in
the County of Cambr. Trial of an action of Account upon receipt in two Counties.
and also as Bailey to another Manor in the County of Suff. And this action was
brought in the County of Cambr. and found for the plaintiff, and Judgment to
account, and found in the arrearages, and Judgment given. And now the Defendant
brought a Writ of Error, and Judgment was reversed because it was mis-tryed,
for it should be tried at the Bar by several Ven. fac. to be directed to the
several Sheriffs. First it is agreed, that a writ of Account against one as
Bailiff of his Manor, cannot be brought in another County, but only in that
County where the land lies, vi. 8 E. 3. fol: 46. Fitz. Acc. 93. see there that
two actions of Account brought against one for receipt in two Counties. And
there it is said, that it being upon a day, that he may have one writ, and
count in the two Counties. But to that it is said, that that proves not but
that he might have two Writs whereby it might be awarded that he should answer.
But in this case it was resolved, that it was a mis-tryall, for it ought to be
by two Ven. fac. and tried at Bar, and it is not aided by the Statute of 21
Jac: cap: 13.

Trin. 8 Car. Purnell versus Bridge, Hill. 6 Car. Rot. 1235.
Fine to two, and the heirs of one to the use of them two in fee.
HEnry Pernell brought Replevin against William Bridge, Robert Bridge, and two
others: William Bridge plead Non cepit, and the other made Conusance, and upon
Demurrer the case was such.

Richard Braken was seized in Fee of sixty acres of arrable Land, and forty
eight acres of Meadow and Pasture, whereof the place in which, etc. was parcel;
And he the sixth of Febr., An: 18 Eliz. by Deed granted an Annuity or
Rentcharge of thirteen pounds six shillings out thereof, to Edward Steward in
Fee, payable at the Feast of Saint Peter, or within eight and twenty days
after: And if it be arrear for eight and twenty days after the said Feast,
that then he forfeit for every Fine after forty shillings, with a clause of
Distress as well for the said Rent, as for the said forty shillings, if it
shall be arrear.

Edward Steward seized of the Rent died, whereby it descended to Joan Iermy Wife
of Thomas Iermy, Daughter and Heir of the said Edward Steward, and they being
seized thereof in the right of the said Joan, An. 41 Eliz. in Crastino animarum
levied a Fine of the said Rent to Robert Brook, and Isaac Iermy, and to the
Heirs of Robert, which Fine was to the use of the said Robert and Isaac, and
their Heirs for ever: by force thereof, and of the Statute 27 H 8. they were
seized of the said Rent in Fee, and after the said Robert died, and Isaac
survived, and is yet seized Per jus Accrescendi, and for Rent arrear, etc. and
for the said forfeiture of forty shillings, they avow, whereupon the Plaintiff
demur.

And upon Conference between the Judges, they all agreed, that by this Fine
which granted to Brook and Jermy, and the Heirs of Brook, to the use of Brook
and Jermy, and their Heirs, that they were in by the Statute of 27 H: 8. and
were Ioyn-tenants of the Rent, for otherwise there would be such a Fraction of
the Estato, that Brook should be in by the Common Law, and Jermy by the
Statute, and that is not according to the Statute: And it appears that the use
was limited by the Fine it self, and not by any Indenture.

And the principal reason is upon the Statute of 27 H: 8. which is, where two
or three are seized to the use of one or two of them, Cestui que u^e shall be
adjudged to have such Estate in possession, as they have in use. Judgment pro
Defendent.

Memorand. That in this Term a motion was made for the filing of a Writ of
Entry in a Common Recovery suffered by Sir John Smith upon a Purchase, and all
was well done, and the Writ made and sealed, Filing of a Writ of Entry many
Terms after
but by the negligence of the Attorney it was not filed; and it was Unanimo
assensu resolved that it should be filed, and that after the death of Sir John
Smith, for it is but to perfect a Common Recovery which is a Common Conveyance:
And this was denied in the case of one Allonson, for there Error was brought
and Diminution alleged, and a Certificate that there was no Writ by the Custos
brevium.

And it is ordinary to file these Writs at any time within a year, without
motion.

Mich. 8 Car. Harbert versus Angel.
CHarles Harbert Plaintiff, against Angel, Case. Words.
in an action upon the case of words, which were, Thou art a Thief, and have
cousened my Cousin Baldwin of his Land: And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words would not maintain action.

And at the first, Justice Crawley and Justice Vernon were of opinion, that the
former part of the words were actionable, and that they were not extenuated by
the subsequent words; but they agreed, if it had been, for thou have robbed,
etc. it would be otherwise. And the Lord Heath and Justice Hutton were of a
contrary opinion, and that the words And, and For, are in this case to have one
effect, and declare what Thief he intended: And they relied on Birtridges case,
Coke lib: 4. And upon this diversity of opinion the Lord Heath conferred with
the Justices of Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, and we with the Lord Richardson,
and they all agreed, that the subsequent words explained his intent and
meaning, viz. the Robbery and cousening of the Land: And Verba sunt accipienda
in mitiori sensu; As to say, Thou have stolen my Corn, it shall be intended Com
growing: so in Arrows case, Arrows case.
19 Jac. Thou art a Thief, and have stolen ten Cart-loads of my Furzes; adjudged
not actionable, for it shall be intended of Furzes growing.

Quaerens nil capiat per breve. Ram versus Lamley.
Norff.
RAm brought an action upon the case against Lamley, and declared, That whereas
he was Bonus and legalis homo, and free a suspitione feloniae, the Defendant
maliciously want to the Major of Linn, and requested a Warrant of him (being a
Justice of Peace) against the Plaintiff for stealing his Ropes: The Major said
to him, Be advised and look what you do, the Defendant said to the Major, Sir,
Words.
I will charge him with flat Felony for stealing my Ropes from my Shop, Quorum
quidem verborum, etc. And after Not guilty pleaded, and Verdict for the
Plaintiff, Hitcham moved in Arrest of Judgment; And the Court unanimously
resolved that these words being spoken to the Justice of Peace when he came for
his Warrant, which was lawful, would not maintain an action, for if they
should, no other would come to a Justice to make complaint, and to inform him
of any Felony.

Quaerens nil capiat per breve. Mich. 8 Car. Lamb versus West. Trin. 8 Car.
Rot. 333.
SIr John Lamb Knight, brought Replevin against Thomas West, and count,
Replevin.
that the Defendant took his Beasts at Blisworth, in quodam loco vocat. Thorny
Close.

The Defendant avowed as Bailiff to Sir William Sheapherd, and derived Title by
a Lease to Michael West for ninety years, if he and Thomas West the Defendant,
Demand of Rent.
and one Hutton West should so long live: And the said Michael, 19. Aprilis,
An: 20 Jac. granted a Rentcharge of ten pounds per annum to the said William
Shepherd and his Executors, out of the place in which, etc. for the residue of
his Term, to be paid at the house of Thomas West in S. And the said Mich.
granted, that if the Rent he arrear by eight and twenty days, being lawfully
demanded at the said house, he should forfeit twenty shillings for every day,
that it should he arrear, and if it be arrear by six months, being lawfully
demanded at the said house, then he might distrain for that, and the Nomine
poenae: And for Rent arrear by a year after demand due, etc. he makes
Conuzance; And thereupon the Plaintiff demurred generals.

And after many Arguments at Bar, the Justices delivered shortly their opinions
severally, and all argued that it is a Rentcharge: and then a Distress is
incident to a Rentcharge, which is in its creation a Rentcharge; as well as
if one makes a Lease for life or years, rendering Rent, and if it be lawfully
demanded, then it shall be lawful to distrain for it. None will deny, but that
he may distrain for this Rent, without any demand: And the diversity is between
a Penalty and a Rent, for if the Avowry had been for any part of the Nomine
poenae, then without actual demand at the day he could not have distrained
therefore, vide Maunds case, Coke lib: 7. fol: 28. And all agreed, that when a
Distress is for Homage, if it be once tendered and refused, he cannot distrain
without demand, vide Litt: 34. 21 E: 4. 6. 16, 17. 7. E: 4. 4. That where a
Rent is reserved upon a Lease, and an Obligation to pay it, yet that alters not
the nature of the Rent, 22 H: 6. a good case. Rent is reserved upon a Lease,
and an Obligation to perform Covenants, that extends not to the Rent reserved,
but if it be to pay the Rent, then it shall be demanded, there it is said, that
if Rent be tendered and refused, the Lord or Lessor may distrain without demand.
It was agreed, that if Rent he reserved at the time of the Distress, and it be
refused, and a Distress taken, that is Tortious, 30 Ass: 36. 20 H: 6. 31. 48
E: 3. 9. 2 H: 6. 4.

And in this case it was said, that Reddenda singula singulis, that the demand
shall be used when the Penalty of the Rent comes in question, and not for the
Rent: And though it be reserved payable at another place, thal changes not the
Rent, but it is issuable out of the Land and distrainable upon the Lands.

And lastly, it has been diverse times adjudged, that the Rent is payable upon
the Land, 1 Jac: Rot: 1818. Nich and Langford. Skinner and Amery. Borman and
Bower.
In Replevin between Nich and Langford.

Trin: 16 Jac. Rot. 954. Between Skinner and Amery, vide before between Crawley
and Kingswell.

Trin: 3 Car: Rot: 2865. Rent reserved payable out of the Land: And although
that the Judgment is by confession after demurrer, yet it was for the reason
before recited.

Judgment for the Defendant

The Lord Audley's Case.
Wilts.
JUratores pro Domino rege super sacramentum suum present. Quod Martinus
Dominus Audley nuper de Fountell Gifford in Comitatu Wilts. and Aegideus
Broadway de Fountell Gifford praedict. in Comitatu praedicto generosus, timorem
Dei prae oculis suis non habentes, Indictment for Rape.
sed Instigatione Diabolica moti and seducti vicessimo die Junii, Anno regni
Domini nostri Caroli dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, fidei
defensoris sexto, Apud Fountell Gifford praedict. and Comitatu praedicto vi and
armis, etc. in and super Annam Dominam Audley Uxorem praefati Domini Martini
Audley in pace Dei, and dicti Domini Regis ibidem Existent. insult. fecerunt.
Et praedictus Aegidius Br. praedictam Annam Dominam Audley vi and armis, contra
voluntatem ipsius Annae ad tunc and ibidem violenter and felonicae rapuit, ac
ipsam Annam ad tunc and ibidem contra voluntatem suam violenter and felonice
carnaliter cognovit, contra pacem Domini Regis nunc coron. and dignitat. suas
and contra formam statuti in hujusmodi casu edit. and provis.

Et ultim Juratores praedicti dicunt super sacramentum suum praedict. Quod
praedictus Martinus Dominus Audley praedicto vicesimo die Junii, An. sexto
supradicto Apud Fountell Glifford praedictam, in Comitatu praedicto felonice
fuit presens, auxilians and Confortans, abettans, procurans, ^adjuvans, and
manutenens praedictum Egidium Br. ad feloniam praedictum in forma praedicta
felonice faciend. and perpetrand. contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc Coronam
and dignitatem suas, ac contra formam statuti praedicti.

Wilts.
IUratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum present. Quod Martinus
Dominus Audley nuper de Fountell Gifford in Comitatu Wilts. Deum prae oculis
non habens, nec naturae ordinem respiciens, Indictment for Buggery.
sed instigatione Diabolica motus and seductus primo die Junii, An. Regni
Domini nostri Caroli, etc. sexto, Apud Fountell Gifford praedictam in dicto
Comitatu Wilts. in domo Mansionali ejusdem Martini Domini Audley, ibidem vi and
armis in quendam Florence Fitz-Patrick Yeoman insult. fecit and cum eodem
Florente F. ad tunc and ibidem nequit, Diabolice, felonice and contra naturam
rem veneream habuit, ipsumque F. ad tunc and ibidem carnaliter cognovit,
peccatumque illud Sodomiticum detestabile, and abominandum, Anglice vocat.
Buggery (inter Christianos non nominandum) ad tunc and ibidem cum eodem
Florence F. nequit. Diabolice, felonice and contra naturam Commisit and
perpetravit in magnam Dei Omnipotentis displicentiam, ac totius humani generis
dedecus, ac contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem su^s,
and contra formam statuti in hujusmodi casu edit. and provis.

The like Indictment for the same Offense, with the same person, 10 June, the
same year at new Sarum, in the Mansion house of the said Martin, etc.

Memorand. That these Indictments were sound 6 April, An. 7 Car. at new Sarum,
by virtue of a Commission before Edward Lord Georges, Nich. Hide Knight, chief
Justice ad placita, etc. Thomas Richardson chief Justice de Banco. John Denham
Knight, one of the Barons, etc. Edward Hungerford Knight, Walter Vaughan
Knight, Laurence Hide Knight, Thomas Fanshaw Knight, by Letters Patents, Ipsius
Domini Regis pro eis and quibuscunque tribus vel pluribus eorum inde Confect.
ad Inquirendum, etc.

Memorand. That the 25. day of April, An. 7 Car. A Commission was made for the
Arraignment of the said Lord Audley upon the said several Indictments, by his
Peers, in which the Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, was made high
Steward: And the Peers were in number twenty seven. And he pleaded Not guilty:
And one question was propounded to the Judges which did attend, viz. The Lord
chief Justice of the Kings Bench, the Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
the Lord chief Baron, Baron Denham, Justice Jones, Justice Whitlock, Justice
Harvey, and Justice Crook.

If the Wife might be produced as a Witness against her Husband.

Where a Wife may give Evidence against her Hu^band.
And it was resolved that in case of a common person, between party and party
she could not, according to the opinion in Cokes first Institutes, fol 6. but
between the King and the party, upon an Indictment she may, although it
concerns the Feme her self, as she may have the Peace against her Husband.

Buggary sans Penetration.
Also it was reported to the Lords, by the Lord chief Justice, when they were
demanded, whether (this matter of Fact being as it was proved) that Pollution
and using of a man upon his Belly Sodomitically without penetration was Buggery
by the Statute of 25 H: 8. the Lord Richardson was of a contrary opinion upon
the Conference, yet his opinion was involved in the general.

But as he said to me, their opinions we delivered only upon this case and upon
these examinations, if the Lords gave credit to the matter in fact, that it was
Buggery, but they gave not a general opinion, that may be a rule in other
cases, but upon the foulness and abominablenesse of this Fact.

And afterward the Lords were not unanimously resolved that it was Buggery,
but this Point was resolved, that they ought to believe and give credit to the
Law, as the Judges had declared it. And it seems that they could not give a
special Verdict upon this trial, for it never was seen: Also the Commission
determines after Judgment given, And the Staff of the high Steward shall be
broken.

And after long debate, they seriatim (laying their hands upon their hearts, as
the Manor is) said, that he was guilty of Rape, beside the Lord North.

And for the Buggaries twelve of the Lords acquitted him, and fifteen found him
guilty, and so he had Judgment.

And at this Arraingnment the Judges assistant sat with their heads covered,
as the ancient use has been; But the Sergeant at Arms was commanded to make
Proclamation, That the Judges, and all the Lords (not being his Peers) and all
of the Privy Council should be covered, and others not. And this was only in
relation to the precedent usage, and the right which appertain to the Judges:
For in Parliament, they being called by Writ, use to be covered as often as the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal (which is Speaker) puts on his Hat;
But now it is used, that they put not on their Caps, until they have been
requested by the Lord Speaker. And when they are called into the Star Chamber,
or to Errors in the Exchequer Chamber, they set covered with their Caps.


Pasch. 7 Car. Risam versus Goodwin. Mich. 5 Car. Rot. 2512.
IN a Writ of Scire facias brought by William Risam against John Goodwin and
Richard Peat, Administrators of Thomas Cammon, the Case was such. The Court of
Common Bench award not execution upon a Judgment given in grand Sessions in
Wales.


The now Plaintiff William Risam recovered against Thomas Cammon a hundred
pounds Debt, and ten shillings Costs, at the Grand Sessions holden at
Carm^rthen, and execution awarded, and Nulla bona returned. And upon Surmise
that the said Thomas Cammon was dead, and that the now Defendants had taken
Letters of Administration, a Scire facias issued against them, and Nichil
returned, and after a Writ of Execution, and that afterward being returned by
the Sheriff of the County Nulla bona testatoris, a Writ issued to the Sheriff
of the County of the Town of Carmarthen, who returned Devastavit: And because
that the now Defendants had not Goods within the said County, or within the
County of the Town of Carmarthen, or Jurisdiction of the Grand Sessions, the
Plaintiff procured a Certiori to the Justices of the Grand Sessions, who
certified the Record to the Chancery, and by Mittimus it came to the Common
Bench, with directions Quia executio judicii praedicti adhuc restat. faciend,
Mandant quod, at the prosecution of the Plaintiff, Vos fieri faciat. de more,
and secundum legem and consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae fuit faciend.
Whereupon a Writ of Scire facias was awarded to the Sheriff of Hereford against
the said Defendants, to which they appeared: And after many Imparlances they
demurred upon the insufficiency of the Writ of Scire facias.

And this case was argued by Berkley for the Plaintiff, and by Henden for the
Defendant. And the Cases put by Berkley were F: N.B: 243. a. b. 39 E. 6. 3 and
4 Ass: in ancient Demesne, and for the Damages surmised, that he had nothing
within ancient Demesne, 21 E, 3. 49. 21 H: 7. 33. 8 Ass: 27. 30 H: 6, 7. 3 H:
4. 15. 1 Justitutes 59. in Frankalmoigne: That Wales is parcel of England 1 E:
3. Jurisdiction 45. 22 H: 6. 58. 47. E: 3. 6. 3. E: 3. Quare Impedit 38. 35 H:
5. 30. 19 H: 6. 12. and 52. vide the Statute of 34 H: 8. for Wales and Writs of
Error.

Henden argued to the contrary; and his first reason was, 1. That this Court of
the great Sessions is an inferior Court. 2. The Record it self comes not but a
Transcript. 3. The Statute of 34 H: 8. has appointed the Execution, and that
should be pursued. 4. This Innovation is perilous, and never put in practice.
And he relied upon the diversity. When Judgment in a peculiar inferior Court,
comes into the Kings Bench, or into this Court by Writ of Error, and is
affirmed, then the Superior supplies it, and add strength to the Judgment: But
when Judgment is given in a Court of a Corporation, and that is removed by
Certiorari, and sent by Mittimus, that shall not be executed there, vide 45 E:
3. 25. Formedon in London, vide 14 E: 3. Trials 23. 15 E: 3. Record 35. New
Book of Entries, the last case in Writ of Error, vide 8 E: 3. 10. 26 H: 6 8. 3
H: 6. 16. 7 H: 4. 8. 14 H: 4. 25. H: 5. 11. And he relied upon 21 H: 7. 35. and
the case of 39 H: 6. 3, and 4. and the case of ancient Demesne, 7 H: 9. 18. 37
H: 6. 16. Dyer 369.


And upon this Case the Judges consulted and agreed, that the Writ was
insufficient: And so Judgment was given against the Plaintiff. But it was said,
that upon this Judgment so sent to this Court, the Plaintiff might bring an
action of Debt, and so have execution: But to make this Court an Instrument to
serve an inferior Court, and to extend their Jurisdiction by this way, as it
were by a Windlace, it is not lawful.

Hill. 7 Car. Napper versus Sanders. Pasch. 6 Car. Rot. 1148.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Robert Napper against Henry Sanders, upon a
Lease by Deed indented, made by John Napper and Elizabeth his Wife, and Francis
Sanders, upon Not guilty pleaged, Remainder where it shall be said Contingent.
the Jury gave a special Verdict, whereupon the Case was such.

Margaret Sanders seized in Fee, makes a Feoffment to the use of her self for
life, without impeachment of Wast, and after to the use of the Feeoffees for
eighty years, if one Nicholas Sanders and Elizabeth his Wife should live so
long, and if the said Elizabeth survive Nicholas her Husband, then to the use
of the said Elizabeth for life, without impeachment of Wast, and after the
decease of the said Elizabeth, to the use of Postumus Sanders, Son of the said
Nicholas and Elizabeth in tail: And for default of such Issue, to the use of
Elizabeth, Wife of the said John Napper and Dorothy Sanders, and the said
Francis Sanders one of the Lessors, and to the Heirs of their bodies, remainder
to the right Heirs of Margaret the Feoffor: And there was a clause in the said
Indenture, that the intent of the Estate for years to the Feoffees was, that
the said Elizabeth Sanders might have the profits, and not Nicholas her
Husband, who was a Prodigal. Margaret Sanders dies, and Dorothy dies without
Issue, the Feoffee enter, Elizabeth Sanders dies, Nicholas is yet alive, and
Posthumus dies without Issue, John Napper and his Wife, and the said Francis
entered and were possessed, until the Defendant as Son and Heir of the said
Margaret, entered and ousted them. Et si super totam Materiam, etc.

And the sole question was, whether the remainder in tail to Posthumus, and the
remainder in tail to Elizabeth, and Francis were contingent or executed: And it
was resolved by all the Court, that the remainders were not contingent in the
Estate for life which was to come to Elizabeth Sanders, the Wife of the said
Nicholas, but were vested presently. And it was agreed, that the Estate for
life, if she survive her Husband, was contingent; and when that had happened,
being by way of Limitation of an use, it shall be interposed when the
Contingent happen, as in Chudleys case, Coke lib: 1. fol: 133. a Feoffment to
the use of the Feoffor for life, and after his death to his first Son which
shall be afterward born, for his life, and so to diverse: And afterward to the
use of I. D. in tail: It is resolved that all the uses limited to-persons not
in Esse are contingent, but the uses to persons in Esse vest presently, and yet
these contingent uses when they happen vest by interposition, if the first
Estate for life which ought to support them be not disturbed. And in this case
it was a good Estate for life in Margaret: And then gives the remane in the
Feoffees for eighty years,, if Nicholas and Elizabeth Sanders so long should
live, and if Elizabeth survive Nicholas, then to Elizabeth for her life, and
after her decease to Posthumus in tail, and after his decease to the said three
Daughters in tail, so that there the Estate for years determines upon the death
of Elizabeth, and so also the Estate for life to Elizabeth which was
contingent, determines by his death.

And the Lord Darbies case, a Feoffment to the use of Edward, The Lord Derbies
case.
late Earl of Derby in tail, and then to the use of the two Feoffees for eighty
years, if Henry late Earl of Darby should so long live, and after his decease
to Ferdinand, and to the Heirs Males of his body, and for default of such
Issue, to the use of William now Earl of Derby. And it was adjudged that the
remainders vest presently: And this possibility that Henry might have over
lived the eighty years, will not make the remainders contingent. And in a Suit
which was at Lancaster between Farrington and another, Farringtons case.
upon a special Verdict there found about 8 Jac. and many times argued at
Sergeants Inn, it was afterward adjudged a good remainder and not contingent;
And the same case in this Court upon a Scire facias for two have executor of
certain Land, for debt recovered against the Earl of Derby, which Land was
intailed by the same Conveyance, etc. brought against the Earl of Bridgwater
and his Wife, one of the Coheirs of Ferdinand, Earl of Derby, was adjudged in
this Court, vide Borastons case, Coke lib: 3. fol: 20. 14 Eliz: Dyer 314.
Lovies case, Coke lib: 10. 27 H: 8. 24. 38 E: 3. 26. 5 E: 3. 27. 30. E: 3.
Collthurst and Bemchins case was urged, that the remainder limited to B. for
life, and after that C. has married Ja. S. then to the use of C. in Fee, this
is contingent, and is collateral; And this case is not like to that.

And after Argument at Bar, this Term (it being argued before that the Lord
Richardson was there, who was of the same opinion) we all concurred, and
Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 8 Car. Metcalfe versus Hodgson.
Case.
MEtcalfe brought an action upon the case against Hodgson and Wharton late
Sheriffs of the City of York, and count, That whereas time out of memory, etc.
there has been a Court of Record holden before the Sheriffs of the said City,
upon the Bridge called Ousbridge, An action of the case lies not against a
Sheriff, for taking of insufficient Bail being Judges.
and that in this Court, every one having cause of action arising within the
said City, had used to commence any action for debt there, and that the
Defendants being arrested by their bodies, the Sheriffs had used to take Bail
of them, and to let them to Bail, finding sufficient sureties, and that the
Sheriffs are also, and time out of memory, have been Keepers of the Gaol there.
And whereas the Plaintiff had brought an action against one Smith, and
recovered, the now Defendants (being Sheriffs) had taken insufficient Bail of
him, etc. And upon Not guilty pleaded, it was tried before the Lord chief Baron
at York, for the Bail are supposed to be taken at Wakefield, but that was not
alleged, for any thing which appears, to be out of their Jurisdiction: And the
Jury contrary to the direction of the Lord chief Baron gave Verdict for the
Plaintiff.

And after many motions in Arrest and praying of Judgment, it was resolved,
that this act was done by them as Judges, and for this Judicial Act no action
lay: And though that the Bail by the event appear to be insufficient, yet there
is no remedy by action upon the case, it being without fraud or corruption, and
not for reward.

And this Case differs nothing from the ordinary cases of all insufficient
Bailes, taken by any of the King's Bench, Common Bench, or Exchequer: And that
they having two Authorities in una persona, it shall be taken to be done by
that Authority by which they have power to vail, and that is as Judges of the
Court, and not as Gaolers, for by this they have no power to Bail any, and in
this capacity they are only subject to an escape, vide Dyer 163. Error cannot
be assigned in that which the Court of Common Bench do as Judges, vide 12 E: 4.
19. Conspiracy lies not for that which a Justice does as Judge of Record.

Quaerens nil capiat per breve. Mich. 8 Car. Hickes versus Mounford. Trin. 7
Car. Rot. 514.
Replevin.
REplevin brought by Walter Hickes against Simon Mounford, and others, the
Defendants make Conusance as Bailiffs to Sir John Elliot, Executor of Richard
Giddy: And that the place contain twenty acres, and was parcel of the Manor
of Trevelun: And that Thomas Archbishop of York, and Cardinal, and three
others were seized of the Manor whereof, etc. in Fee, Traverse of a day.
and the third of June 11 H: 8. by Deed enrolled granted to King H. 8. a
Rentcharge of fifty Marks per annum out thereof in Fee, with clause of
Distress, and convey the Rent by descent to E. 6. Mary, and Elizabeth, who by
her Letters Patents granted it to Richard Giddy for life, who made the said Sir
John Elliot his Executor, and died, and for such a sum arrear they Avow, etc.

The Plaintiff pleaded in Bar to this Avowry, and confessed the Seisin of the
said Archbishop, and the others, and said, that the said Archbishop and the
others, the fourth of June, 11 H: 8. enfeoffed Peter Edgecombe in Fee of the
said Manor, who conveyed it to Richard Edgecombe Knight, who entered, and
licensed the Plaintiff to put in his Beasts, which he did, and that they were
there, until by the Defendants distrained, absque hoc, that the said
Archbishop and the others, the aforesaid 3. June, 11 H: 8. granted the said
Rent to the said King and his Heirs, Modo and forma prout the Defendants
alleged, Et hoc paratus est verificare.

The Defendants say, that the Archbishop and the others granted the Rent to
the King modo and forma as they had alleged, and Issue thereupon, and the Jury
found.

That the said Archbishop and the others 11 H: 8. recovered this Land against
Sir Peter Edgecombe, and it was to the intent of granting the Rent to the King
and his Heirs, and then of the recovery of the Manor, out of which, etc. to
the said Sir Peter Edgecombe in tail, the remainder to the King, and they being
seized by their Deed, dated the third of June, 11 H: 8. sealed and delivered,
which is found in haec verba, and that it was enrolled afterward, viz. 7.
June, granted the said Rent to H: 8. Et si super totam materiam, the Court
adjudged it a Grant by Deed the third of June, 11 H: 8. then for the Defendant,
etc.

And upon Argument at Bar, and conference had, we all declared our opinion, and
agreed that Judgment should be given for the Defendants.

The first reason was, that the Issue is joined upon the Grant modo and forma,
and not upon the day, as is offered by the Traverse, but upon the Grant modo
and forma: And the matter found is generally as is alleged, vide Littleton,
Title Release, that modo and forma avoid and prevent the matter of day, and
goes solely to that which is material: And by any thing which appears by the
Verdict, there is no intervening matter after the third day, and before the
seventh when the Deed was enrolled, and then it is a good Grant of the third of
June, vide H: 7: 31. Then the special Conclusion found, which is contrary to
Law, shall not conclude the Judges to give Judgment according to Law.

And so Judgment was given for the Defendants.

Mich. 8 Car. Col. versus Wilkes.
SAmpson Cole brought an action of Debt upon the Statute of 2 H. 6. against
Leonard Wilkes, Trial at the Bar: Debt. Debt upon the Statute of the 2 E. 6.
for Tithes.
A Lease was made to two, they enter and occupy, and set not out their Tithes,
Debt was brought against one of them, it lies not.

But here it was found, that one only occupied the Land, and therefore the
action well lies.

Sir John Gerards case.
And a Case was shown, Mich: 8 Jac. An action of Debt was brought upon this
Statute, by Sir John Gerard against two Tenants in Common, and it appeared that
one of them set out his Tithe, and that the other afterward took it and
carried it away, and adjudged that the action lies only against him which
carried it away.

Pasch. 9 Car. Strilley's Case.
Amendment of the proclamation of a fine.
Upon motion made in this Court for the amendment of a Proclamation of a Fine
levied by Strilley of Lands in Nottinghamshire, Mich: 11 Eliz. The
Proclamations endorsed by the Chirographer upon the Fine were well, but in the
Transcript and Note of the Fine which is delivered to the Custos brevium by the
Chirographer according to the Statute, the second Proclamation was entered to be
made the twentieth of May, where it should have been the twenty third day of
May, and that by the misprision of the Clerk: And it was moved that that might
be amended.

And the Court was of opinion that it should be amended, for the Ingrossement
upon the Fine by the Chirographer is the foundation, and that being well it is
sufficient Warrant to amend the other. And the Court was of opinion, that it
was a good Fine without any amendment: But it being the misprision of the
Clerk, it shall be amended, as in the case Coke lib: 8. Blackamores case.

The Proclamation made and entered before the Original shall be amended.

And it was objected, that this Fine and Proclamations as they found in the
Office of the Custos brevium, are exemplified under the Great Seal, and
therefore by a Clause in the Statute of 23 Eliz: cap. 3. could not be amended
after such exemplification.

To that it was answered, that that Statute extends only to Fines before
levied, which should be exemplified before the first day of June, An: 1582. And
the latter clause in the said Statute does not extend but to Fines exemplified
according to the said Statute.

And therefore it was awarded to be amended.

Pasch. 9 Car. Glasier versus Heliar.
Sussex
Case.
GLasier brought an action upon the case for words against Heliar, and showed,
that three Colliers being in an house in Sussex, were feloniously burnt in the
said house, and showed, that two or three men were indicted, convicted, and
executed for the said Murder, the Defendant knowing thereof, and intending to
bring the Plaintiff in peril of his life, Words.
as accessory to the said Murder, said to him, Thou did bring Faggots a mile
and a half to the burning of the Colliers: And after Verdict for the Plaintiff,
and motion in Arrest of Judgment, it was adjudged that the words were
actionable: For if a Mansion House be burnt feloniously, to say, You brought
fire to set in the Thatch of the house which is burnt, it is actionable.

Judgment pro quaerente.

Smith versus Cornelius.
Southamp.
JOhn Smith Town-Clark of Southampton, Case.
brought an action upon the case against one Cornelius an Attorney of this
Court, and show, that the Plaintiff was of good fame, and Town-Clark of the
Major and Burgesses of Southampton, and was their Scribe, and had the custody
of all Rolls, Pleas, and Certificates, Words.
and other proceedings before the Major and Burgesses in the Court before them
to be holden: And the Defendant intending to draw him into Infamy, and to cause
him to lose his Office, said to him, Thou have made many false Certificate to
the Major and Burgesses in that Court, and the more thou stirrest in it, the
more it will stink.

And it was adjudged that these words are not actionable.

1. Because that it is not alleged that there was any Colloquium concerning
his Office of Town-Clark.

2. Because that it appears not in the Count that the making of Certificates
belong to his Office, but only that he had the custody of them.

3. It might be false, and yet no blame to him, if he did know them to be
false, or that he had made them false maliciously: And therefore Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

And this Case was moved again by Hitcham, the first day of Trinity Term next,
And then Judgment was affrmed.

Hill. 9 Jac. Edwards versus Laurence. Trin. 9 Car. Rot. 2488.
Suff.
RAchel Edwards brought an action of Trespass against Richard Laurence for
breaking of her Close. Trespass.


The Defendant in Bar to the new Assignment, plead, Traverse of Seisin.
that before the time of the Trespass supposed to be done, one Francis Tailor
was seized in Fee of the Tenements whereof, etc. and so being seized died,
whereby it descended to Francis his Son and Heir, who being seized thereof 8 Car.
demised it to the Defendant for two years, by virtue whereof he entered, and
gives color to the Plaintiff by a Grant made to him by Francis the Father,
where nothing passed thereby, and so justify.

The Plaintiff replied, that long before Francis Tailor the Son had any thing,
one Francis Tailor Grandfather of the said Francis was seized in Fee, and
before the time of the Trespass supposed, viz. 8 Jac: in consideration of a
Marriage to be between the said Francis his Son, and the Plaintiff, for her
Ioynture made a Feoffment thereof to the use of the said Francis, and Rachel the
Plaintiff, and to the Heirs of the said Francis, upon the body of the Plaintiff
begotten, the remainder to the Heirs of Francis in Fee, and showed the
marriage, and that by force of the Statute of 27 H: 8. they were seized ut
supra is limited, Absque hoc, that the aforesaid Francis Tailor the Father of
the aforesaid Francis the Son, died seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, de nova assignat. in his Demesne as of Fee, Modo and forma prout
praedictus defendens superius allegavit, and hoc paratus est verificare, etc.
unde, etc. whereupon the Defendant demurred.

Vide 3 H: 6, Brook Traverse, 30 H: 6, 7. Brook Traverse 359. In Trespass the
Defendant plead his Freehold, the Plaintiff plead the dying seized of his
Father, and that he is Heir and entered, and that the Defendant disseised him,
the Defendant traversed the Disseisin, and not the dying seized of his Father,
and good, vide the said Book of 30 H: 6. 7. by Prisot, if I in Assise plead
that my Father died seized in Fee, and that I entered as Son and Heir to him,
and was seized until by R. disseised, who enfeoffed the Plaintiff, upon whom I
entered, here the Disseisin is not traversable, but the dying seized, vide 33 H:
6. 59. Wangford put this case, In Assise if the Defendant plead that his Father
was seized and died seized, and give color to the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff
ought to traverse the dying seized, and not the possession of the Father, which
is the cause of the dying seized.

Vide 30 H. 6. fol: 4. Entry in nature of an Assise, the Defendant plead that
W. was seized in Fee, and enfeoffed him, and give color, the Plaintiff replies
that W. was seized in jure Uxoris, and that he had Issue, and his Wife died,
and he was Tenant by the Courtesy, and made a Feoffment, sans ceo, that W. was
seized modo and forma, and Issue taken, and there it is said, that the Issue is
well taken.

This case was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because that no dying seized is
pleaded, so that it might be traversed, but with a Sic scisitus obijt. Also the
matter only traversable here, is the seisin in Fee modo and forma, for by the
Replication Seisin jointly with the Plaintiff, and to the Heirs of the body of
the said Francis, with a Fee-simple in him, is confessed, and that is good with
the Traverse.

Memorand. That this Case was moved by Sergeant Hitcham, Trin. 10 Car. And
Sergeant Hedley moved for the Defendant, and vouched 5 H: 7. 7. and the Record
was read, and all the Court agreed that it was a good Traverse, And that
Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 10 Car. Dawe versus Palmer.
Case.
JOhn Dawe Plaintiff against William Palmer, in an action upon the Case, and
count, that whereas he was a Fuller, and had used the Trade of Falling, and
thereby acquired his livelihood, and was of good Credit, Words.
etc. The Defendant said of him, Trust him not, for he owes me a hundred pound,
and is not worth one Groat: And at another day he said, He is a Bankrupt Rogue;
And upon Not guilty pleaded, the Jurors found for the Plaintiff, and gave
entire Damages.

And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the first words were not
actionable, and then the Jury having given entire Damages, the Plaintiff should
not have Judgment for any part, vide Osbornes case, Coke lib: 10. But in this
case after many debates, it was resolved by the Court, that the Plaintiff
should have Judgment. For the first words are actionable at Common Law before
the Statute, Trust him not, he is not worth one Groat. Go not to buy of I.S. (a
Merchant) for he will deceive you. Of an Inne-keeper, Go not to such an Inn,
for he is so poor that you can have no good entertainment. Of an Attorney, Use
him not for ^e will cosen you All these words are actionable. He will be a
Bankrupt within seven days.

And for the other words, That he is a Bankrupt Rogue, that is resolved Coke
lib. 4. to be actionable: And it was a Case Pasch: 10 Car. in a Writ of Error
brought in the Exchequer Chamber, upon Judgment given in the Kings Bench,
between Dunkin and Laycroft, Dunkin and Laycroft.
for words spoken of a Merchant, who had been at Hamborow in partibus
transmarinis, and there h^d used the Trade of a Merchant and Factor. Thou (
innuendo the Plaintiff) came over from Hamborow a broken Merchant; And
adjudged actionable, and so affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber. And upon all
these Authorities the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 10 Car. Deanes Case.
DEane being robbed in an Hundred in Kent, brought an action upon the Statute
of Hue and Cry, and a special Verdict being found, t^^ Dourt intended was,

If one be assaulted to be robbed in one Hundred, Hue and Cry.
and he escape and fly into another Hundred, and the Thieves instantly pursue
him, and rob him there, if the Hund. in which he was robbed should be solely
charged.

And the opinion of the Court was, that it should; but upon reading the Record,
this appeared not to be the Case. And the Court was informed, that the Sheriffs
had taken the Goods of one in execution, who was not inhabiting within the
Hundred at the time of the Robbery committed, but came afterward: And the
Court was of opinion that he was not chargable.

Mich. 10 Car. Knight versus Copping.
RObert Knight brought an action upon the case against Valentine Copping one of
the Attorneys of this Court, and count, Case.
That whereas one Edw. Loft had brought an action of debt for 30 l. against him:
And thereupon such process was, that a non pros. was entered, and costs of 30 s.
assessed for the now Plaintiff, An action of the case for ^ entering Judgment
after non pros.
the now Defendant being Attorney for the said Ed. Loft having notice thereof,
unduly and maliciously procured a judgment to be entered for the said Ed. Loft,
against the now Plaintiff, and sued execution against him, whereby he was taken
and imprisoned, until he was delivered by a writ of Supersedeas.

The Defendant Protestando, that there was no such Judgment for the said Edward
Loft, against the said now Plaintiff, nor that he was taken in Execution
thereupon, for plea says, that there is not any Record of the said Non pros.

The Plaintiff replies, that at the time of the said Judgment entered for the
said Edward Loft; And when the now Plaintiff was taken in Execution and
imprisoned thereupon, the said Judgment of Non pros. against the said Edw. L.
and the Award of Costs were in full force and effect: But that afterward, viz.
such a time, as well the said Judgment de non pros. as the said Judgment of
thirty pounds Debt against the now Plaintiff were evacuated, whereupon the
Defendant demurred.

And it having been often debated by Hitcham for the Defendant, and Henden for
the Plaintiff: And now upon Oyer of the Record and of the Judgment, the Court
gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

And the Lord Finch said, that this action upon the case is grounded upon two
misdemeanors:

1. The procurement of the said Judgment for Edw. L. after a Non pros. entered
for the Defendant: And though the Judgment was erroneous, yet the now Plaintiff
was vexed and imprisoned thereby, which indeed is the cause of this action.

2. The taking thereof unlawfully, when the first Judgment de non pros. was in
force, and the Plea of Nil tiel Record go only to one of the Causes: And
admitting that there was never a Judgment de non pros. but that the Defendant
had unlawfully procured a Judgment, and taken Execution thereupon, and procured
the Plaintiff to be taken in Execution and Imprisoned, this is cause of action:
And to that he has not answered, and therefore he ought to have pleaded Not
guilty to that which he takes by protestation.

Judgment pro quaerente.

Pasch. 11 Car. Baker versus Hucking.
Adjudged B. Rs.
Tenant in tail and he in Reversion make a I. case Pro ut. aut. vic.
TEnant in tail, and he in Reversion join by Deed in a Lease for life, he in
Reversion devise the Land by his Will to one in Fee, and dies, Tenant in tail
dies without Issue, and the Heir of him in Reversion, and the Devises claim the
Land.

And the sole question is, if this Lease be a Discontinuance, and it was
adjudged a Discontinuance, and then the Devise void, for he had not a Reversion.

And the difference was taken, when Tenant for life, and he in Reversion join
in a Lease by Deed (for without Deed it is first a Surrender, Discontinuance.
and then the Lease or Feoffment of him in Reversion) it shall be the Lease of
Tenant for life, so long as he live, and after the Lease of him in Reversion,
and yet they shall join in a Writ of Wast.

And in this case there is no question but if the Lease had been made solely by
Tenant in tail, that then it were a Discontinuance, and the joining of him in
Reversion alters it not, for that amounts to nothing but as a Confirmation, and
is not like to Bredons case, Coke lib: 1. fol: 76. Where Tenant for life, and
he in remainder in tail levy a Fine, for every one there passes that which
lawfully he may.

And upon Argument it was adjudged, that it was a Discontinuance and not the
Lease of him in Reversion, but his Confirmation.

Justice Crook differed in opinion.

Mich. 11 Car. Lashbrookes Case.
Somerset.
Jews Lashbrook an Attorney of this Court, brought an action of Trespass
against I. S. for entering into his house and breaking his Close: And in the new
Assignment he alleged the Trespass to be in a house called the Entry, and in
a house called the Kitchen, and in his Garden, and in one Close called the
Court.

The Defendant as to the force, etc. and to all besides the Entry plead Not
guilty; And as to his entry into the Court and Kitchen, A Warrant to four, and
two of them execute it.
and the Tenements aforesaid of the new Assignment, he plead that he had
brought an action against a woman for Trespass, and had so proceeded that he
recovered, and had execution directed to the Sheriff of Somersetshire, and
thereupon a Warrant directed to four special Bailiffs, to arrest the said
Woman, and two of them at Minehead, in the County of Somersetshire, arrested
her, and carried her to the house of the Plaintiff in Minehead, being a Common
Inn, and the Defendant entered into the said houses called the Entry and
Kitchen, and the Tenements aforesaid of the new Assignment, to speak to the
Bailiffs, and to warn them to keep her safe: And as soon as he could he
returned, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred.

And now Henden took two Exceptions, the first was,

1. That the Defendant had not pleaded to all the Closes, but that was
overruled, for he justified in the tenements aforesaid of the new Assignment.

2. The second was, that the Warrant to the Bailiffs was to all, and not
Conjunctim and Divisim, and therefore it should be by all, and not by two only.

To that it was answered and resolved, that when a Sheriff makes such a
Warrant, which is for the Execution of Justice, that may be by any of them, for
it is Pro bono publico: And the very Case was adjudged 45 Eliz: between King
and Hebbs, Coke Littleton 181. b.

And Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Hill. 11 Car. Davies Case.
Hereford.
DAvies an Attorney of this Court, brought an action upon the case for these
words, If I list I can prove him Perjured: Words.
And the opinion of the Court was, that they were not actionable, for there is
not any Affirmative, that he was perjured, but a thing which is Arbitrary, and
says not that he would do it. Judgment pro Defend.

Mich. 7 Car. Rot. 1097. Alston versus Andrew.
Suff.
P^ter Alston Executor of Peter Alston, brought an action of Debt upon an
Obligation of a hundred and twenty pounds against William Andrew, The Obligor
and the Obligee make the same person Executor.
and Edward Andrew, and count, That the Defendants and one Francis A. became
obliged to the Testator, etc. and that they did not pay it is the said Testator
in his life, nor to the now Plaintiff, and one Francis Andrew Co-executor with
the Plaintiff, who is summoned, and the Plaintiff admits to prosecute alone
without the same Francis, etc.

The Defendants demand Oyer of the Obligation, which is entered in haec verba,
and plead that Francis A. in the said Writing named, after the making thereof,
made the said Francis Andrew and Barb. A. his Executors and died: And that the
said Francis A. accepted the Burden of the Testament: And after the said Peter
Alston the Testator made his will, and Constituted the Plaintiff and the said
Francis his Executors, and died, Et hoc paratus est verificare, unde, etc.
whereupon the Plaintiff demur.

Trugeon and Meron.
Mich 2 Jac. Rot. 2663. Garret Trugeon Plaintiff against one Anthony Meron and
others the Administrators of Benjamin Scrivin upon a single Bill: The
Defendants demand Oyer of the Bill, whereby it appears, that one John Simcocks
was obliged to the said Trugeon jointly and severally with the said Scrivin,
Quibus lectis and auditis, the Defendants said, that the said Simcocks died
intestate, and that the Administration of his Goods was granted to the now
Plaintiff, who accepted the Burden of the Administration, and Administered, the
Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment against the Plaintiff.

8 E: 4. 3. 21 E: 4 2. Lit. 264. b. 20 E: 4. 17. If the Debtee makes the Debtor
and others his Executors, the Debt is discharged.

Mich: 9 Car. Banco Regis, Rot: 373. Anne Dorchester Executrix of Anne Row,
Dorchester and Webb.
Plaintiff, against William Webb, in Debt upon an Obligation of five hundred
pounds, the Defendant demanded Oyer, whereby it appears, that the Defendant and
one John Dorchester were obliged jointly and severally in the said Obligation.

The Defendant plead in Bar, that the said John Dorchester made the Plaintiff
his Executrix, who proved the Will, and had Goods sufficient in her hands to
pay the said Debt.

The Plaintiff reply, that before the death of the said Anne Row the Obligee,
she had fully Administered all the Goods of the said John Dorchester. Demurrer
and Judgment for the Plaintiff.

And in this case it is not shown, that the said Francis and Peter, or any of
them proved the Will of the said Obligee, or that they administered his goods,
or that they had any goods of the Obligor to administer, at the time of the
death of the Obligee, as it ought to have been shown: And the said Francis
Executor of the Obligee, and also of the Obligor, refused to be Executor to the
Obligee, and never Administered, and never meddled with the Goods of the
Obligee, and so the Debt is not released in Law, as by the said Case and former
Judgment appears.

This case had been often argued by Sergeant Hedley, and of the other part by
Sergeant Hitcham, and affirmed, that once Judgment was given for the Defendant,
but it yet depends.

Trin. 12 Car.
MEmorand. Upon Petition exhibited to the King by the Prisoners of quality,
which were in execution in the Fleet, Liberty may not be given to Prisoners by
force of a Habeas Corpus.
Kings Bench, and Marshalsey, to have liberty in the time of Infection, and for
preservation of their lives, to have liberty by Writs of Habeas Corpus to go
into the Country, upon security to be given to the Warden and Marshall for
their return. The King (out of his great care of their safety) referred their
Petition to the Lord Keeper Coventry, and that he, with the advice of the
Judges, should consider by what way it might be done: And the eighteenth day of
June we attended the Lord Keeper at Durham-house: And thereupon conference and
consideration of a former Resolution which was at Reading in Mich. Term last,
before the said Lord Keeper (where were present all the Judges, besides my
self.) That these abusive Habeas Corpus were not lawful, and that the Warden
and Marshall were then called and warned, that they should not suffer their
Prisoners to go into the Country, as they had used to do, by color of such
Writs: This which follows was subscribed.

WE are of Opinion, that the Writ of Habeas Corpus is both Ancient and Legal;
But as the Writ does not, so no Rule can Authorize the Keeper of the Prison to
give liberty to his Prisoner, by color of such Writ, but the same is an abuse
against Law, and an Escape in the Keeper, if he let the Prisoner go by such
Writ.

We find, that neither in the twenty fourth year of Eliz. when the Term was
Adjourned to Hertford. Nor in the 34. of Eliz. in which year it was Adjourned
to Hertford. Nor in the 35. of Eliz. in which year it was Adjourned to St.
Albans. Nor in 1 Jac. in which year the Term was Adjourned to Winchester. Nor
in the first of King Charles, in which year it was Adjourned to Reading. (In
all which years there were great and dangerous Infections of the Plague) there
was no such course to set Prisoners out of Prison by Habeas Corpus; but we find
it a Novelty begun of late years.

But We think, that if the danger of Infection shall grow so great, as it shall
be found necessary to provide for the safety of the Prisoners (who may at all
times provide for themselves by paying their Debts, and yiedling obedience to
Justice) then a course may be taken that some certain house may be assigned
for the Warden of the Fleet, in some good Town, remote from the Infection, and
the like for the Marshall of the Kings Bench, in some other Town, where they
may remove such Prisoners as have been Petitioners to his Majesty, and there
keep them as Prisoners, Sub arcta and salva Custodia, as they should be kept in
their proper Prisons, and not to be as Housekeepers in their own houses; and
by this means they will have the like to avoid the Infection, as other Subjects
have, and not make the Infection a cause to abuse their Creditors, or delude
the course of Justice.

John Bramsion 1. Richard Hutton 2. George Crook 3. George Vernon 4. Francis
Crawley 5. Humph. Davenport 6. William Jones 7. Thomas Trevor 8. Robert Barkley
9. Richard Weston 10.


To Sir John Bramston Knight, Lord chief Justice of England.
My very good Lord,
I Have acquainted his Majesty with your resolution, and your Brethren, about
Writs of HABEAS CORPUS, his Majesty does exceedingly approve the same, And has
commanded me to let you know, that his Majesty would not recede from that which
you have certified, And prays you and the rest of my Lords the Judges, to
observe it constantly, attending to that resolution under your hands:

Hampton Court, 19 June, 1636. Your Lordships assured Tho. Coventrey, C. S.

Mich. 14 Car.
MEmorand. That 28. Aprilis, 14 Car. Justice Hutton argued in the Exchequer
Chamber in the Case Adjourned thither, upon a Sc^re facias by the King against
Hampden for Ship Money, in which he was of opinion, that as well for the matter
as for the form, upon diverse exceptions to the pleading, Judgment should be
given against the King.

Afterward, viz. 4. Maij. Thomas Hanson Bachelor of Divinity, and Parson of
Creake in Northamp. came to the Court of Common Bench (Justice Hutton, and
Justice Crawley then being there giving Rules and Orders) and said, Words
against Justice Hutton.
I accuse Mr. Justice Hutton of high Treason, for which he was committed to the
custody of the Warden of the Fleet by Justice Crawley; and after by the
direction of the King, he was indicted in the Kings Bench, and convicted and
fined to five thousand pounds to the King: And Justice Hutton preferred his
Bill against him there, and recovered ten thousand pound Dameges.

Lord Digbies Case.
MEmorand. That in the Parliament holden primo Car. It was resolved by the
Judges upon conference concerning the Lord Digby, That when any Peer shall be
proceeded against for Treason, that ought to be by Indictment, and that being
done, Where trial of Treason by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. shall be, and
how.
then the King is to appoint a Peer to be Steward for the time, and then to
proceed to Arraign him, or otherwise to transmit this Indictment by Certiorari
to the Parliament, and there to proceed, vide 10 E: 4. 6. 1 H: 4. 1. vide Coke
Lit: fol: 261. b. Or otherwise to prefer a Bill in the Parliament, which ought
to be passed by both houses, and then it is Attainder by Parliament, and so it
was done, 5 R: 2. 54.

But in this Case, it being that part of the Treason objected against him, was
supposed to be done Oust le mere, and made Treason by the Act of 3 Jac: cap: 4.
that cannot be tried but by Indictment, to be taken before the Justices of
Assise, and Jail-deliver, where the party was taken, or before the Justices of
the Kings Bench, and Law, Custom, Statute, or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding; And so it cannot be tried by the Statute of 35 H: 8. cap: 2.
in what place or Shire that the Kings Bench shall be, for this Statute had for
this Treason prescribed a special form of Trial, and the place where he shall
be taken shall be expounded, the place where he is misprisoned, as upon the
Statute of Soldiers: And he which is charged to have two Wives living, shall be
tried in the place where he is taken, which is the place where he is
imprisoned, vide 2. Inst. 49.

Trin. 12 Car.
Quaeries concerning Aliens.
QUaeries upon the Statutes of 1 Riz. cap: 9. 1 H: 7. cap: 2. 14 H: 8: cap: 2.
the Decrees in the Star Chamber made 20 H: 8. and confirmed 21 H: 8. cap: 16.
22 H: 8. cap: 8. 32 H: 8. 16. and other Statutes concerning Aliens, and the
Statute of 5 Eliz: cap: 4.

1. Whether the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap: 4. does repeal the former Statutes
concerning Aliens, taking Apprentices, Iourny-men, and Servants.

2. Whether Aliens made Denizens, may use any handycraft within the Realm,
otherwise then as Servants to the Kings Subjects.

Memorand. That on the seventh day of July, We met at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet (Mr. Attorney-generall being there) and We debated the matter, and
upon perusal of the Statute of 1 R: 3. cap: 9. and the other Statutes: And
upon some mis-recitall of the Statute 1 R: 3. by the Statute 32 H: 8. cap: 16.
And upon differences of the Printed Statute from the Parliament Roll, as was
supposed, upon showing of an old Book of Statutes, which was in French, and
brought by my Brother Crook; and upon the intricacy of the Statute, We could
not resolve on the sudden, upon these Questions at this time, nor unless the
Parliament Roll might be seen.

But upon perusal of the Statute of 5 Eliz: cap: 4. We all resolved and agreed.

That all Aliens and Denizens are restrained by the Statute of 5 Eliz: cap: 4.
That they may not use any Handycraft mentioned in the said Statute, Resolves
upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4. concerning Aliens.
unless they have served seven years as Apprentices within this Realm,
according to the provision of this Statute: This was set down in writing by Sir
John Banks his Majesty's Attorney General present: Sir John Bramston chief
Justice of England, Sir John Finch chief Justice of the Common Bench, Sir
Humphrey Davenport chief Baron, Baron Denham, Justice Hutton, Justice Crook,
Baron Trevor, Justice Crawley, and Baron Weston, the other Judges being absent,
viz. Jones and Vernon.

Hill. 12 Car. Souser versus Burton.
ONe Widow Souser brought an action of the Case against Burton, for these
words, Thou old Witch, thou old Whore, leave often thy witching, or else thou
shall be hanged or burned, if I can do it. And upon Not guilty pleaded, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment; And it seemed to
Lord Finch, Hutton, and Vernon that the action lay not, without showing that
she did any act of Witchcraft, for which the pain of Pillory and Imprisonment
for two years should be inflicted, and the second time Felony: And that the
words, Words.
Thou art an old Witch, or go away thou old Witch, are usual words, and old
Whore bears no action: And as to say, Thou shall be hanged if I can do it, it
is not possible that he could do it.

But Justice Crawley doubted of it at first, because that it was alleged, that
it had been adjudged in the Kings Bench, that an action lies for calling one
Witch; But afterward he said, that he had spoken with the Justices of the
Kings Bench of their reason, who said, that they adjudged no such thing,
unless that he spoke further, that the party had done any act of Witchcraft
punishable by the Statute.

Hugles versus Drinkwater.
AN action of Account by William Hugles against Thomas Drink-water, for receipt
of eighteen pounds, In Account payment by appointment of the Plaintiff, is no
plea before the Auditors where the Issue was Ne unques receivor.
by the hands of one William Appowell, to the use of the Plaintiff, the
Defendant plead Ne unquer receivor per manus, etc. and found or the Plaintiff:
And the Defendant before the Auditors plead, that he by the appointment of
William Appowell had paid it to one John Marsh for the Debt of the Plaintiff,
and thereupon Demurrer. And adjudged a bad Plea, and against his former Issue:
And the said Appowell by whose hands he received the said sum, had not any
power to appoint the Defendant to pay it to John Marsh, to whom the Plaintiff
was indebted; and if that had been pleaded in Bar, of the Account to have been
done by the appointment of the Defendant, it had been a good Bar, vide Dyer 29.
196. after ne unques receivor, and the truth was that he had been Receiver, and
had paid it over by the appointment of the party, and yet by this Plea be has
lost the advantage thereof.

An. 2. Car.
MEmorand. That the 19. day of May, An: 2 Car. all the Judges being assembled
at Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, by the commandment of the King, the Attorney
General propounded, In what cases a prisoner, arraigned shall have Council.
that the King would be satisfied by our opinion, Whether any person which is
arraigned of Treason of Felony, ought by the Fundamental Laws of this Realm
to have Council; And We all una voce answered.

That when any one is indicted of Felony or Treason, or any other such offense,
the party ought not to have any Council, unless it be upon matter in Law, as
where he demand Sanctuary, or plead any special matter, and that is agreed by
Stamford, fol. 151.

Also this extends as well to Peers of the Realm, as to others, vide 1 H: 7.
23. and the 9 E: 4. 2. and so it was agreed by all, that although the party
shall have Council in an Appeal of Murder, yet if he be nonsuited, and the
party be arraigned upon the Declaration, then he shall have no Council.

Also it was resolved, that when the party who prosecute, suppose that the
Grand Jury will not find the Invictment, and therefore requires that the
Evidence should be given publicly to the Jury at Bar (which is sometime done)
yet the party who shall be indicted, shall not have Council. And the Attorney
General was commanded to report our opinion to the King: And this happened to be
demanded upon the general inconvenience that might after ensue in the Case of
the Earl of Bristoll, to whom the King had allowed Council.

Mich. 3 Car.
MEmorand. That the fifth of November, at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, there
assembled the Lord Hide, Lord Richardson, Lord Walter, Justice Doderidge, Baron
Denham, Justice Hutton, Justice Jones, Resolves concerning Soldiers.
Justice Whitlock, Justice Harvey, Justice Crook, Justice Yelverton, and Baron
Trevor, to consider of a Case which was propounded, which was;

One receives Presse-money to serve the King in his Wars, and is in the Kings
Wages, and with others is delivered to a Conductor, to be brought to the
Seaside, and with-draweth himself and runs away without license.

The Question was, if it were Felony.

And time being given before to advise concerning it, all agreed besides
Yelverton and my self that it was Felony.

And the sole question is, if a Conductor be a Captain within the 7 H: 7. cap:
1. and the 3 H: 8. cap: 5. And they said, that it is not necessary that he
should be such a Captain as is to lead and command them in the War, or that
has skill to instruct; But such as has the leading of them by agreement,
between the Deputy Lievtenants, and them, and that ought to provide for the
Billeting of them, and to carry them to the place of Randesvous. And one part
of a Captain is to conduct, although that Conduxit be properly to hire a
Soldier, yet this name Conductor, with whom it is so agreed by Indenture to
conduct the Soldiers, is a Captain, within the intent of those Statutes; and
if it should not be so, these Statutes (which are for the defense of the Realm)
shall be of little force.

But it was agreed by them, that if these Conductors (which are so called of
late times) be hired to carry them but to one place, and there another
Conductor to receive them, this is not within the Statute; And it ought to be
such a Conductor that can give license upon just cause to proceed. It was said,
that they used to send Captains into the Country, but then they were so
chargable to the Country, and full of disorder, that upon complaint of the
Justices of Peace, about 43 Eliz. this course was invented, viz. That the
Deputy Lievtenants should provide for them that were pressed, for Coats and
Conduct, and they sent their Soldiers to a place appointed to be delivered to
certain persons, whom the Queen appointed, to receive them. And it was said,
that though this Case as it is propounded might be clear, yet there are many
Circumstances which ought to be proved, and that are loft to the discretion of
them before that he should be tried.

It was unanimously agreed, that if one takes Presse-money, and when he should
be delivered over, he withdraw himself, that is not Felony, although he is
hired and retained to serve.

But my Brother Yelverton and I were of opinion, that this new name newly
invented, is not Captain within these penal Statutes, which ought to be taken
strictly, vide Plowden 86. that penalties which concern life shall not be taken
by equity, but if they be within the words of the Statute, then they shall: As
to kill his Mistress, is within the words, for Mistress is Master.

Another reason was, that the Statutes provide punishment for Captains which
want of their number, or which pay not their Soldiers within six days after
they have received their pay, upon pain of forfeiting all their Goods: And the
Statute did not intend other Captains in this point, then was in the former and
latter part thereof.

But admitting that a Conductor is such a one to whom the Soldiers are
delivered by Indenture with all Covenants usual, viz. To pay to them their
Wages, and to convey them to their appointed place, and that he may give
license to depart; yet they agreed, that it is the better and clearer way that
they should be made Captains, and so named in the Indentures, for the King may
change the Captain at his pleasure, and then it should be no question.

It was agreed, that 7 H: 7. cap: 1. extends only to them who are retained and
pressed to serve the King upon the Sea, or upon the Land beyond the Sea; And
the Statute of 3 H: 8. cap: 5. adds only the Land here: And the Statute makes
departure without license from the Captain Felony, and the Statute 3 H: 8.
without license from the Lieutenant: And the Statute of 7 H: 7. makes the
trial to be in the County where they shall be taken before the Justices of the
Shire, as they may try other Felonies within their Commission: The Statute of 3
H: 8. makes their trial before the Justices of the County, where they are
taken; and this being a new Felony and made tryable against the Common Law
(which appoint trials by Jurors of the County where the Fact is committed) and
appoint a special Judge, viz. Justices of Peace, that is only tryable before
them, and not before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, who cannot try any
thing, but that which is done in the same County: But this, if all be not done
in that County where they are taken, makes it tryable only before the Justices
of Peace of the County where they are taken.

In this point all were not resolved, but required longer-time, vide 2 Inst 56.

Sir Richard Champions Case.
A Writ of Covenant is prosecuted, Jan; 23. returnable Oct. Purisicat. A Fine
of Oct. Puris. where the Caption was, Feb. 14. 1.
The Dedimus potestatem is tested 23 Jan: the Judge certify the Concord takes
Febr. 14. which is two days after the Term, at which time the Writ of Covenant
is not depending, the Fine is haec est finalis Concordia facta in Oct. Purif.
And after it is recorded in 15 Pasch. and yet adjudged a good Fine, vide the
Statute of 23 Eliz. 3. Dyer 220. b. Carels Case.

Mich. 4 Car. Jones versus Powell.
JOhn Jones Plaintiff, against James Powell Defendant, in an action ^^ on the
Case for a Nuisance, count, That the Plaintiff, 10. August, 1 Caroli, was, and
is, and for forty years last past, has been possessed for diverse years yet
during, of a Message, Nusans 1.
in which he and his family did by the time aforesaid dwell: And by all that
time has been Register to the Bishop of Gloc. and kept his Office there, that
the said Defendant the tenth day of August, and ever since has held in
possession another house over against the Plaintiffs; And they being so
possessed, the Defendant the said 10. of Aug. erected a Brew House, and a Privy
in the said house, and burned Sea-coles in the said Brew House, so that by the
Smoke, stench, and unwholesome vapors coming from the said Coals and Privy, the
Plaintiff and his family cannot dwell in the said house without danger of their
health. Not guilty pleaded, Verdict for the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff prays
Judgment, and does offer for Authorities in this Case.

Smith and Mopham.
4 Ass. 3, 4 E: 3.37. 5 E: 3.47. new Book of Entries, fol: 19. in 5 Jac. between
Smith and Mopham, an action upon the case for erecting a Tan-fat, with averment
of corrupting the Air and water, to the annoyance of the Plaintiff, and
adjudged for the Plaintiff after Verdict.

Coke lib: 4. Aldreds case pleaded in new Book of Entries, fol: 106. an action
of the case for erecting a Hogsty, Ad nocumentum aeris adjudged.

22 H: 6.14. by Newton, an action upon the case lies expressly.

Blande against Mosely.
Trin. 29 Eliz Bland against Mosely, an action of the case for stopping Lights
in London, adjudged a void Prescription, to build so high that the Neighbors
lights are thereby stopped in a City.

Old Book of Entries, fol: 406. in the Edition 1596. action upon the Case
brought for annoying a Piscary with a Gutter that came from a Dye-house. 1.

And there an action brought against a Dyer, Quia fumos foeditat. and alia
sordida juxta parietes querentis posuit, per quod parietes putridae devenerunt,
and ob metum infectionis per horridum vaporem, etc. ibid. morari non audebat.

13 H: 7.26, An action lies against a Glover, because he with a Lime-pit so
corrupted the water, that the Tenants departed.

F. N. B. 185. b. A Writ lies to the Major of a City to cleanse the Streets
from filth, whereby infection might grow.

By which cases it appears, that although Sea-cole be a necessary Fuel to be
used, and that Brew-houses are necessary, yet the Rule in Law is, Sic utere
tuo, ut alienum inon laedas: And Chimneys, Dye-houses, and Tan-fats are also
necessary, but so to be used, that they be not prejudicial to their Neighbors.

And in this Case the Jury found that this new Brew House and Privy was
maliciously erected to deprive the Plaintiff of the benefit of his Habitation
and Office, and that the Plaintiff was hereby damnified, as in the Declaration
is alleged.

And upon Conference and Consideration of the Case, all the Judges did concur
that Judgment should be given for the Plaintiff.

THE TABLE Reciting the heads of all the PRINCIPAL^ CASES. in this BOOK.
A
Account, payment by the appointment of the Plaintiff, is no good plea before
Auditors, where the issue was Ne unque receivor 133 Acceptance of a new Lease
makes a surrender 104 Action of the case for giving evidence 11 Action brought
by the Committee of a Lunatic 16 Action by the Feme for Frankbank before
admittance 18 Action brought for Rent by the Husband of a Feme to whom the land
was granted by a former Husband by his Will, until the Daughter of the Devisor
came to the age of eighteen years, with a Condition 36 Act on brought against
an Attorney for procuring a Judgment to be entered against the Plaintiff, and a
special plea thereupon 125 Amendment in a Judgment 41 Amendment, where it shall
be 41, 42, 56, 81, 82 83, 84. Act of the Court shall be amended 92 Amendment
shall not be of the Pledges left out in the Imparlance Roll, upon Bill, by an
Attorney 92 Amendment of the Proclamation of a Fine 122 Annuity to commence
after eight years contained in the Will, and no mention thereof in the Will by
which it is given 32 Annuity out of the clear gains of the Allome Mines 33
Arbitrament of all actions, until the date of the Award. 9 Administrators
cannot plead that the Intestate died outlawed 53 Advowson in gross for life 88
Assumpsit by the Husband to the Wife before marriage 17 Assumpsit upon request
to procure assent 39 Assumpsit in consideration to maintain Suit in defense of
a Common, and the Title thereof 89 Assumpsit in consideration of forbearance 46
Assets need not to be alleged in an action upon the case against Executors 27
Arbitrements 29 Assumpsit lies not for Rent 34 Assise of Darrein presentment
abates by a Quare Impedit 3 Avowry for Homage 50 Attaint, how a Prisoner
convicted and let at large shall be brought to execution 21 Avowry for Rent
granted to the Father, without alleging that it was arrear after the death of
the Father 55
B.
BAil, insufficient taken by the Sheriff no action lies for it 120 Bail
discharged where the Principal died before the return of the Capias 47 Bail,
action lies not against the Sheriff for taking insufficient bail 77 Baron and
Feme, at Exigent, whether the Feme shall have Supersedeas alone 86 Bankrupt,
how the distribution of his Estate shall be 37 Bankrupt upon a fraudulent
conveyance 42 Bar, recovery in trespass for taking of Goods is no Bar to an
action of the case of Trover 81 Buggery 116 Bylawes 5 Burglary 20. 33
C.
CHallenges 24 Condition not to be assistant to another in any action; and
after he bring a Writ of Error with another upon a judgment against him and the
other 40 Condition to levy a Fine, who ought to do the first act 48 Condition
to perform Covenant, etc. concerning Rent, where demand is necessary inde 114
Condition to resign a Benefice upon request 111 Consideration of forbearance
46. 108 Consideration to save one harmless, if he (being an Innkeeper) would
safely keep a Prisoner 55 Consideration to confess a Judgment, and a promise
thereupon to defer the entry thereof 63 Consideration, that if the Obligor would
pay the money the Obligee would deliver up the Bond 76 Consideration, Ex post
facto 84 Consideration, that whereas one was indebted to the Plaintiff in seven
pounds, for keeping an Horse, if the Plaintiff would deliver the Horse, the
Defendant promised to pay the seven pounds 101 Conspiracy 49 Copyhold may be
extinguished without actual surrender 65 Copyhold land enclosed, where the
Lord has a Field course, if it be a forfeiture or no 102 Costs upon Non-suits
where the Plaintiff has no cause of action 16 Costs shall not be allowed upon
the Statute of 5 Eliz. for Perjury 22 Costs against an Informer upon a Statute
repealed 35 Costs shall not be allowed against Executors 69 Costs shall be
allowed against Executors upon Nonsuit in a Writ of Ravishment of Ward 78
Council, to what persons it shall be allowed, to Prisoners arraigned 133
Counter-plea to the view 44 Custom of London to give security for the payment
of Orphans Portions 30 Custom of Copyholders to make a Lease for years 101
Covenant of an Apprentice, and when an Infant shall be bound thereby 63
D.
DEvise to a Feme, a term upon condition 36 Debt against a Sheriff for moneys
returned levied by him 11. 32 Demand not necessary in Avowry for a Rentcharge
23 Demand of Rent with a Nomine poen^e 114 Demand of Rent where necessary, or
not 42 Discontinuance, where Tenant in ^ail, and he in Reversion join in a
Lease pur aut vie 126 Devise of a fee after a fee 60 Devise, and what said in
tail inde 85 Dower barred by Jointure 51
E.
ELegit, the Sheriff ought to deliver the Moiety by meets and bounds 16
Essoign, though the Writ be not returned 28 Essoin upon return of an alias
Summons 43 Essoine shall not be allowed in Dower after Issue 69 Error in
omission of additions 41 Estate derived from one, and shows not how 15
Ex^cutors, to what intents they shall be before probat of the Will 30 Executor,
the same person made by the Obligor and by the Obligee 128 Execution shall be
de bonis testatoris, where the Executors break the Covenants of the Testator
35 Execution shall not be awarded upon Judgment given in the grand Sessions of
Wales 117 Extortion 53, 78 Estrayes, where they may be fettered 67
F.
FIne to two, and the Heirs of one, to the use of them two and their Heirs 112
Fine de Oct. puris. where the Caption was 14. February 135
G.
GRant of an Advowson without alleging it to be by Deed 54 Grantee of a
Rentcharge takes a Lease of part of the Land, and after surrenders it, the
Rent shall be revived 94 Tenant for life with a Remainder to him in tail
expectant, and remainder to him in fee 96 Grant a Rent in fee, and after had
fee by Fine 96
H.
HEriot, where the Lord shall loose it, when the Tenant has none 4 Habeas
Corpus, liberty cannot be given to a Prisoner thereby 129 Habendum, void to
parties not named in the Deed 88 Hue and Cry, and Debt upon that Statute 125
I.
INdempnitas nominis and supersedeas inde 45 Infant, where he shall appear by
Guardian, and where by Prochein amy 92 Inditements for Rape and Buggery 115
Inns, how they may be erected, or restrained 99 Information against a Subject
for Extortion 53 Information where it shall be brought 98 Intermarriage, where
it is a release of a promise, etc. before marriage 17 Jurisdiction, a Plea
thereto where part of the land lies in the Cinque Ports 74 Judgment, to what day
it shall have relation 95 Jointure bars Dower 51
L.
A Lord, where he may be sworn 87 Lease by Feme in special tail 84 Lease by
Baron and Feme, without reservation of any rent 102 Lease, where the acceptance
of a new Lease makes a surrender of the former 104
N.
NOtice where it shall be upon a promise 80 Nusances 136
O.
OUtlawry where it may be pleaded 53 Obligation by the Sheriff where void 52
Office of a Park-keeper is good, if the King dispark the Park 86 Obligation to
levy a Fine before a day, who shall do the first act 48
P.
PArdon 79 Parliament, what shall be said a Session 61 Pleas several, and by
several Defendants upon joint Contracts 26 Prescription for a way, and no
place to which, etc. issue joined on the Prescription 10 Prescription to have
Herbage 45 Prescription to have Deer in discharge of Tithes 57 Plea, as Heir,
and shows not how 15 Prescription to have Common omni tempore anni, without
saying quolibet anno 1 Plea of Grant of an Advowson, without alleging by Deed
54 Prohibition 22 Prohibition to Chester 59
Q.
QVire Impedit. etc. 31. 36 Quid juris clamat 89 Quod permittat 28
R.
REcord shall be good, where the conveyance is delivered to be enrolled, but is
not enrolled 1 Release of land devised before it be vested 60 Rationabile part
bonorum 109 Recovery, if the Town be omitted therein the Land does not pass 106
Record, matter of Record tried per pais 20 Remainder, where it shall be said
Contingent 118 Rent tendered at the day 13 Rent, Assumpsit lies not for it 34
Rescous by the Plaintiff in the first action 98 Request, where necessary 2. 73.
106 Return insufficient of a Writ of Quare Impedit 24
S.
Statutes What shall be said a Parish Church within the Statute of 43 Eliz. 93
Resolves upon the Statute of 3 H. 7. cap. 2. 2 Resolves upon 35 Eliz. cap. 1.
concerning Sectaries 61 Resolves upon 5 Eliz. concerning Aliens 132 Resolves
upon the Statutes concerning Soldiers 134 Upon the Statute of Hue and Cry 125
Statute-Merchant without day of payment 42 Statute of Limitations extends not
to Arrearages of Rent reserved upon Indenture 109 So De rationable part
bonorum 109 Debt upon a poenall Statute is not gone by the death of the King 82
Sci. fac. against a Sheriff to have Execution of moneys returned levied by him
32. 11 Sci. fac. by Baron and Feme, the death of the one shall abate it 37 Sci
fac. against the Sheriff for taking insufficient Pledges 77 Surrender by Baron
and Feme of the Estate of the Feme for life, and the King in consideration
thereof makes a new Lease 7 Suspension of things where they may be revived 94
Supersedeas by the Wife upon an Exigent against Husband and Wife 86
T.
TEnder of Rent at the day 13 Tithes, and action thereupon 121 Tithes of Wood,
and small tithes 77 Trespass by Baron and Feme, for breaking the Close of the
Baron, and for the Battery of the Wife 59 Trial where null tiel vill. it
pleaded 31 Traverse upon Traverse 96 Traverse of a day 121 Town shall be
intended whole Town 74 Traverse of Seisin 123 Tenure by Castleguard is Socage
Tenure 91 Trial of Treason how it shall be 131 Trial of an action of Account
upon receipt in two Counties 111 Trial of matter of Record by the Country 20
Trover and Conversion, the Defendant justify without confession of the
Conversion 10 Treason, persons attainded thereof, and set at large, how they
shall be brought to execution 21
V.
VEnire fac. from a Town within a Parish 6 Ven. fac. from diverse Towns 27 39
Ven. fac. where null tiel vill. is pleaded 31 Ven. fac. of a Visne from a place
known in a Town, without making it from the Town 106 View counterpleaded 44
View upon a Quod permittat 28 Usurpation 66 Judgment in Dower upon Voucher 71
W.
Water, increase thereof in Westminster Hall 108 Waifes where they may be
fettered, and other learning thereupon 67 Warrant to four, and two only execute
it 127 Warranty lineall bind not without Assets 22 Wast in cutting wood to make
Cole-mines 19 Wast, and inquiry of damages thereon 45 Wast, how the Writ shall
be made where a Lease for life is made the remainder in fee 110 Writs, and
filing thereof 112
WORDS.
I. S. is in Leicester Jail for stealing a Horse 2 Welsh words 8 He is a
cousening Knave, and so I have proved him before my Lord Major for selling of
me a Sapphire for a Diamond 13 George is a cousening Knave, and cousened a poor
man of a hundred pounds, and all the Georges are Knaves 14 He is a cousening
Knave, and has cousened me of forty pounds 14 He is a false Knave, and keeps a
false Debt-book, for he charge me with the receipt of a piece of Velvet, which
is false 14 Thou art a pilfering Merchant, and have pilfered away my Goods from
my Wife and Children 14 She is a cousening woman, and has cousened one of her
Neighbors of four pounds and I will bring good proof of it 14 I doubt not but
to see you indicted for Sheep stealing 18 Forgery spoken of an Attorney 29 Thou
have forsworn thy self in the Council before the Marches 34 Thou art a
filching fellow, and did filch four pounds from me 34 I charge thee with
Felony for taking money out of I. S. pocket, and I will prove it 38 I have
matter enough against thee, for I. S. has found Forgery against thee, and can
prove it 41 Forsworn where actionable, and where not 44 He is a Bankrupt,
spoken of one not a Tradesman 45 He is a Bankrupt, spoken of a Baker, without
alleging him to be a common Baker 49 Cousening Knave, whether actionable or
not 52 I will have him hanged for robbing in the highway 58 Thou art a Thief,
and have stolen my Corn 15 He is as arrant a Knave as any in England 72 I doubt
not but to prove that the Plaintiff has spoken Treason 75 Thou art a common
Barretor, a Judas, a Promoter, spoken of an Attorney 104 Thou art a Thief, and
have stolen Passions Lamb, and marked it, and he denied it 110 Thou art a Thief,
and have cousened my Cousin Baldwin of his Land 113 I will charge him with flat
Felony for stealing my Ropes from of my Shop 113 Thou did bring Faggots a
mile and half to burn the Colliers 123 Thou have made many false Certificates
to the Major and Burgesses in that Court 123 Trust him not, he is not worth
four pence, of a Tradesman 125 If I list I can prove him perjured 127 Thou old
Witch, thou old Whore I will have thee hanged, if I can do it 132 I accuse Mr.
Justice Hutton of high Treason 131 He is a Witch, and an Inchanter, and has
bewitched the Children of Strong 13
Errata.
PAge 1. line 28. for Bormis Inn, read Bozuni's Inn, p. 3. l. 19. r. grant, p.
7 l. 25. blot out by. p. 13. l. 2. r, Witch, p. 22. l. 20. for to the
Secondary, r. secondarily, p. 24. l. 27. r. of p. 28. r. Quod permittat, p. 49.
l. 8. r. entire, l. 24. r. Ignoramus, l. 36. r. Lord Hobart, the same p. 54. l.
18. the same, L. 38. p. 56. l. 42. r. Vicaridge, l. 54. r. folk, p. 61. l. 9.
r. vested, p. 65. l. 37. r. Lord Hob. p. 76. l. 38. r. sold, p 81. l ^^. r.
Justices, p. 88. r. Hartopp, p. 99. l. 25. r. unwholesome, p. 104. l. 35. r.
Perpoint, l ult. r. demised, p. 105. l. 23. r. Lessee. l. 33. after One, add
Grants proximam Advocationem to and after, l. ult. r. admitted, p. 107. l. 10.
r. founded, l. 15. r. trimming, p. 109. l. 24 r. objection l. 25. r. Action, p.
110. l. 14. r. property, l. 19. the Ter-tenant, r. and held the said lands, l.
37. r. dimisione, p 112. l. 10. r. time, l. 24. put out which granted, p. 214.
l. 8. r. agreed, l. 35. r. rendered, p. 116. l. 5. r. Georges, p. 117 l. 24. r.
Certiorari, p. 119. l. 23. r. her, l. 35. r. to, p. 130. l. penult. r.
according.


