THE Gospel-Feast Opened: OR, THE Great Supper of the Parable, DISCOVERED In
several SERMONS.

By JOSEPH HVSSEY, Pastor of a Congregation in Cambridge.

Isa. 25.6. And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all People a
Feast of Fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of Fat Things full of
Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined. Prove. 9.5. Come, eat of my Bread,
and drink of the Wine which I have mingled. Matthew. 22.2. The Kingdom of Heaven
is like unto a certain King, which made a Marriage for his Son. We are God's
Trustees, to whom he has committed the Gospel, and we are false to our Trust,
if we don't Preach Christ, who is the Sum and Substance of the Gospel. Frost's
Sermons, page 276. Dulce est nomen Jesu, mel in ore, melodia in Aure, in Cord
plusquam jubilaeum. D. Hen. Wilkinson. conciones ad Academicos Oxonienses, de
Scientia Christi. p. 157. Christus est Liber vitae in quo scriptus es. Luth.
loc. com. class. secund. p. 95. Si quos Christi taedium capit; ij Christum
nunquam gustaverunt. Camer. Myroth. Evang. p. 151. LONDON, Printed by J.
Astwood for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun, over against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil. 1692.

To that particular People of God in Cambridge over whom by a special Call I am
fixed, as a Watchman in the Gospel, and a Minister of our Lord Jesus Christ.
DEAR FRIENDS,
THE Great Work of Faithfulness and Labor which by Fervent Prayer and a
Unanimous Call you have prevalled on me to come hither and undertake, for the
promoting the Honor of Jesus Christ, the Edification of your own Souls, and
the Conversion of poor, lost Sinners, does much influence and incline my
Spirit, almost to do, or be any Thing, in order to these Blessed Ends. As the
Divine Providence has cast my Lot among you, so now a Divine Precept does make
me to be in all Things for your Good, 2 Cor. 4.5.
your Servant for Jesus sake. I have therefore in this poor Essay before you,
at your own Instant and joint Applications, brought forth, as far as I, Mat.
13.52.
a poor Scribe, instructed unto the Kingdom of God, am able, out of Christ's
Treasury Things new and old. Rev. 1^.14.
These are the Fruits which your Souls have lusted after, and the Fruits for
which you have been crying, Give, Give: i. e. Prove. 30.15.
you have asked them from the Pulpit, and some of you have thought long before
the Week was gone about, to take them in the Great Congregation: Psalm. 40.9, 10.
You have now asked them again from the Press; and lo! here is the Savoury Meat,
Genesis 27.7.
such as your Soul loves! I desire to bring no other into your Chambers, than
what the Lord your God has brought me: v. 20.
I hope I dare not tender you Stones for Bread, Luke 11.11, 12.
or venture to bring in a Scorpion to you that ask an Egg. Indeed, I had not
once a Thought, that these Papers, without being burnt, must have lighted up a
Candle for any to see to Sup by; but now I judge, that so long as I am yours to
serve you, I must light up any Thing, if you may but shine the more. You have
professed a sweetness to your Taste at the first preparing of this Discourse,
when this Banquet (as now you see it) was only made ready for some Meals upon
the Lord's Days, 'till I had finished the Subject: And now I crave this
Blessing upon your Meat, that as you have chosen more than other Seven Days to
keep this Feast, 2 Chro. 30.23.
it may be also sweet and nourishing in your daily Bread at home! that however
the Covers may in process of Time be found moldy in some of your Houses, the
Provision it self may never be so in your Hands, much less putrify in any of
your Heads, Exo. 16.20.
'till it breed Worms and stink. I know it is possible in rich Feeding to
contract Diseases, and instead of killing Hunger, quicken some Mortal Sting.
But though Spiders will suck Poison out of the sweetest Flowers, Heb. 6.9
I am persuaded better Things of you, who profess to be New Creatures.

Now, that the Doctrine of Grace here offered may meet with the Principle of
Grace to receive it, and afford good Nourishment, when good Food and a
sanctified Appetite meet, is the Prayer of

DEAR FRIENDS, Your Faithful Servant in the Holy Work of the Lord, Joseph
Hussy.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
IT is sad and humbling, that Man's Nature is so prone to treat the Religious
Mysteries of the Gospel with scorn and indignation, and that, because we have
this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
Isa. 29.16.
it should be esteemed as the Potter's Clay: We must indeed expect that such as
sit in the Scorner's Chair, Psa. 1.1.
will never, with Ehud, Judge. 3.20.
rise up, though we have a Message from God to them. Until Men are Cured of a
spiritual Frenzy, they will be sure to reproach others as a Generation beside
themselves: Act. 26.24
But there is a Day approaching when they will in astonishment Curse their own
Madness; Luke 24.25
Oh Fools, and slow of Heart to believe!

I am sensible that the Captious Reader must, the Curious Reader will, and the
most Candid Reader may spy out abundant Failings in the Composing of this Work;
Though God's Feast be unexceptionable, yet Man's Cookery may not be grateful to
the Palate. The Composure of the ensuing Treatise is perhaps no ways adapted to
suit the Genius of any but the Godly, nor, it may be, can be expected to suit
but with some of them either. Undoubtedly, there have been many Hundred
Treatises suppressed which have better deserved the Light, and yet shall never
see it, but are condemned to be buried in a perpetual Grave of Darkness. These
Provisions in the Discourse are mostly for such as find their Appetite quick in
their Master's Work, to sit down and eat under Christ's Shadow; Cantic. 2.3
they are prepared for the needy, and would miss their End, if they should only
please the Dainty. I may herein use the Expression of one of my Mr. W. Green.
Author of the Book entitled Abyssus Mati, or the Corruption of Man's Nature.
Reverend Predecessors in this Place: These Things were not intended to Cram
the Full, but to Feed the Hungry, and to the Hungry every bitter thing is
sweet. The Subject is weighty, Prove. 27.7.
though the Management is contemptible. The Publication was desired for the
Profiting of Men's Souls, and I hope is so designed by the Publisher. If it
attains unto that Mark, and saves any, though of the meanest rank, I hope I shall
rejoice, though it can hit nothing else, and vain Spectators should laugh at the
Arrows, who were never pricked in their Heart. Act. 2.37.
I shall study submission to the Judicious, and beg amendment under the
Castigations of the wise, but desire only Patience under evil Censures and the
Reproaches of Christ from Fools. Heb. 11.26
There are some who have blessed God already for this Foolishness of Preaching,
1 Cor. 1.21 2 Cor. 11.1
and can bear with me (I will not say, a little, but much) in my Follies from
the Press. I confess it is God's Word, and he may use it how he will; he may
accomplish his own Ends either at first, or second Hand, or Both: If it
therefore tends this way to preserve the Original in the Hearers, it will
Answer more for all the Failures of the Copy than a Thousand studied Apologies.

The Phraseology will be thought by many to be too mean and illiterate, and the
Style too loose and Popular: But with me it is a very small Thing, 1 Cor. 4.3.
that I should be judged of such, or of Man's judgment; for I would choose
rather to come in Plainness of Speech, even to the Eyes as well as the Ears of
Men, than in the enticing words of Man's Wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.4.
It is often times more difficult to be Profitable than to be Eloquent; in the
latter our Education qualifies, and makes it easy to speak as Men, but in the
former, Joh. 3.27.
a Man cannot receive it, except it be given him from above. It is harder to
stoop below a Man's own Proportion, to go the same height with Children, than
to walk our full Length with Men. As on the other Hand, it is easier to Preach
or Write somewhat like an Academick, than like an Instructor of the Foolish,
Romans 2.20
or a Teacher of Babes, and to play the Orator than perform the work of a
Divine. It is more profitable, and yet a Task of greater Burden, to gather up
Matter from the Holy Text, than to utter it in fine words. It is harder to draw
the true Lineaments of the Face, than to mix the Paint: It Is more laborious to
dig in the Mines, than to gather loose stones upon the Surface, and to thresh
out the Grain, than refine the Heap, and blow away the Chaff.

What a sad Case were England in, if all the Books in Divinity that have been
written, had been published (suppose) in the Profoundest Eloquence, as many of
the Publishers (I doubt not, but) could have done, in reference to their
Intellectual Abilities, and spoken in a Scholastical Phrase consistently with
their Learned Education: But the vulgar may bless God for the Treatises that
have been written in such a Style as Dr. Preston, Sibbs, Mr. Bolton, Rogers,
Greenham, Perkins, Fenner, Sedgwick, Allein, and Hundreds more.

The plain Truth is, to publish Books for the common sort in our own Tongue
Nominally, and stuff them all along throughout the Body of the Discourse in
other Language really, savours too much of a Jesuitical Equivocation, while we
Condemn the Papist; for if they lock up the Scriptures, and take away the Key
of Knowledge, Luke 11.52
those would lock up other Good Books, and give the People a strange Key that
was never made to open them.

However, if Men at a Feast love to see fine Glasses at a Side-board, let them
look over to Margents, because it is Pity they should find more than is
needful, among the Guests, upon the Table.

Though we use Metaphors, yet it is no more than the same Popular, known way,
which Christ (the best Master of Language in the World) used, when he taught
his own Disciples. We are immersed so much in Matter, while in the Body, that
our Instructions had need be sensible to convey spiritual Things the easier.
These are oftentimes more Natural, and do accommodate the Expression to the
Thing beyond a Phrase Sublime, or Philosophical. As indeed it is too laborious
and impertinent to fetch Metaphors remote, or un-obvious, so it argues too much
Scorn and Disdain to trample those under our Feet which lie next us. As
therefore, Reader, thou find the whole likened to a Supper, Eccl. 5.8.
Marvel not at the matter, if sometimes thou find the Parts of it to be
expressed in such Vessels, as a Supper, or a Feast is wont to be served in
withal.

Let not an occasional use of some Expressions peculiar to Englishmen offend
any English Reader, because they will not bear a Translation verbatim; for in
this Feast we did not study to recommend it by Foreign Sauces, and therefore
are content to use what we find at home, and do recommend it to a Christian
Appetite accordingly. A blunt Anglicism (as we call it) may upon some occasions
be more affecting than a borrowed Latinism: A rugged, unpolisht Phrase, will
stick more on some minds, and to better purpose, than smoother Eloquence that
slides off from their Thoughts very inobservably; and if we herein do become
barbarous to gain the Barbarous, we are but in the same Point of yielding with
Paul, 1 Cor. 9. v. 20.22.
who became all Things to all Men, that he might by all means gain some; to the
Jews he became as a Jew, that he might gain the Jews; to the weak became he as
weak, that he might gain the weak!

Peradventare, the frequent use of the second Person in the singular Number
[Thou and Thee] may offend some; to whom I would seriously propose this, viz.
That these Sermons are here published in the same Applicatory Form they were
preached; and in Discourses of this Nature we cannot be too close and
particular. Bp. Wilkins, Gift of Preaching, page 37
A great Man says, that the Design of Preaching is to bring down General
Truths to particular Cases; I am sure it should be so; and it was so in a
Greater Preacher than He, and before a greater Audience than we are wont to
meet with, even in Nathan and David, when he began with a Parable, but at last
spoke plainly, unto himself, 2 Samuel 12.7
Thou art the Man. The Arrow does more Execution, 2 Kings 22.34.
when it enters between the Joints of the Harness, than when it flies at random.

The greatest Blemish which perhaps may appear throughout this Work in the Eye
of others, may be a co-incidence of the Argument, which indeed sometimes
unavoidably returns, and must occur, that every Part might be handled duly;
for otherwise if we had been more sparing to avoid the giving of too much, we
had impaired the Table, and taken too much away. I need not fly to the Writings
of Great Men to find a Sanctuary from the Reader's pursuit of me herein, but to
the best City of Refuge, Number. 35.13.15.
even one that has Foundations, Heb. 11.10
whose Builder and Maker is God: For the Holy Writings do abound with Parallel
Instances, that can never be judged by Pious and Sober Minds to be guilty of
(when they condemn) vain Repetitions. Matthew. 6.7.
I will not trouble the Reader with many Witnesses, only produce Two, Deuteronomy.
19.15
which is a sufficient Number for Proof to clear me, if my Crime were judged to
be Capital: See Matthew. 10.15. compared with chapt. 11.24. and Heb. 3.15.
compared with chapt. 4.7. And I may add, if a further Apology herein be
needful, that if the same Thing occurrs, where necessity requires, yet the
manner of opening and illustrating is distinct, and methinks the Diversity,
suppose it were separate from the necessity of the Case, might excuse, and make
it pardonable, if any should attempt to run it down with Tautology.

Let it be only Noted by the Courteous Reader, that the Texts often cited in
the Margent are not brought as Doctrinal Proofs, to clear the Truth of what is
laid down or opened, but Allusive, or Borrowed Scripture Expressions, which if
you look to the Text it self cited, will be found to be taken in a quite
different, perhaps sometimes contrary sense: The Reason of which frequent
Citation is only because the Language of the Holy Ghost is most pure, and
accompanied with such a secret Penetration that it will make its way, where our
own Language finds none. This oftener comes in the Demonstration of the Spirit,
1 Cor. 2.4.
and of Power. The Main Proofs of Doctrine are every where met with in the Body
of the Discourse it self, i. e. quoted in the Book, not in the Margent, unless
forgetfulness in the Transcribing now and then makes an Exception.

Well, I recommend the following Treatise to the Blessing of the God of Heaven,
that it may find faithful Readers to build them up, or be instrumental to make
them such, and bring them in as Guests to his Table, that his House may be
filled with them. I conclude this Epistolary Entrance with the Hearty Desire
and Prayer of my Soul, on the Behalf of such as either this Book by Providence
may be directed to, or who by the same disposing Providence may be directed to
this Book; and this shall be the Joy and Crown of one that has adventured to
cast in his Mite, Phil. 4.1.
to promote the Common Salvation. Jude 3.


Joseph Hussy.

ERRATA.
BY reason of the Author's distance from the Press, various Mistakes are crept
in, and therefore

Page 4. lin. 28. for ceatain read certain. p. 20. lin. 22. for Christ's Money
r. Christ, Money. p. 27. l. 28. in the Margent for Scriptura r. Scripturae. p.
35. in the Margent, dele ibid. p. 36. l. 2. for liberal r. literal. p. 50. l.
24. for obsturct r. obstruct. p. 50. in the Margt. for (...) r. (...). p. 52 l.
20. for month r. month. p. 59. l. 18. for great r. greatest. p. 78. l. 14. for
htro' r. through p. 86. l. 1. dele di- p. 89. l. ult. for Paradise r. Paradise.
p. 93. in the Margent, for literally r. literally. p. 93. l. 22. for Leaper r.
Leper. p. 105. for Epithet r. Epithete. p. 113. l. 5. blot out it
(Tautological) p. 113. l. 18. for Hipocrite r. Hypocrite. p. 113. l. 19. dele
out (Tautological) p. 123. in the Margent, for (...) r. (...). p. 124. l. 14.
for Jehojachim r. Jehojachin. p. 125. l. 8. for month r. month. p. 145. l. 22.
for literally r. literally. p. 148. in the Margent, for (...) r. (...) p. 156.
in the Margent, for credebile r. credibile. p. 161. l. 9. blot out the full
stop, and insert a Comma between Cloth you, and Oh ye of little Faith. p. 165.
l. 27. for cloth r. cloathe. p. 166. l. 3. for cloth r. cloathe. p. 168. in
the Margent r. Psalm. 44.21. over against Line the 8th. p. 180. l. ult. put the
Asterism after the full stop. p. 218. in the Margent, for (...) r. (...). p.
231. in the Margent, for he r. ha^c. p. 231. in the Margent. for Coron r.
Cotton. p. 232. in the Margent, for Refinings r. Refinings. p. 238. in the
Margent, for auraqu. r. auraque. p. 253. l. 16. for to r. do. p. 278. in the
Margt. for (...) r. (...). p. 300. l. 1. for Fornicaters r. Fornicatours. p.
307. l. 18. for nevertheliss r. nevertheless. p. 315. l. 19. blot out [ of the
Name] p. 324 l. 4. read refuse to eat Bread. p. 362. in the Margent for (...)
r. (...). p. 376. in the Margent, for Goodwyn r. Godwyn. ibid. for Weymse r.
VVeemse. p. 388. l. 20. for Iubitants r. Inhabitants. p. 398. l. 12. for months
r. months. ibid. l. 23. for profitted r. profited p. 421. l. 14. for off r. of.

THE Gospel-Feast OPENED, OR THE Great SUPPER of the PARABLE.
LUKE XIV. 17. latter part. -- Come, for All things are now ready.


THE Occasion of the whole Parable (beginning at the 16th, and ending with the
24th Verse) appears to be grounded upon an Expression that seems at the First
Taste to be Speech seasoned with Salt, Col. 4.6.
dropped from the mouth of a Pharisee that sat at Luke 14.1.
meat with Christ, in the House of one of the chief Pharisees. Christ under the
Roof of this Pharisee, accompanied with other Pharisees at the Table, and
Lawyers, ( i. e. not such Civil Lawyers as we have now in the State, but
Ecclesiastical Interpreters or Expositors of the Law of Moses, as the words in
the (...) and (...).
Original do signify in all the Evangelists,) had argued many Things
concerning Feasts, unto v. 15. and behold in the 15th, one of the Company
breaks forth into this Expression, Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the
Kingdom of God.

This Great Speech of the Rabbie (who indeed is thought by Vid. Peli Synop.
Critic. in locum.
Interpreters to have entertained but a gross Notion of the State of Heaven,
measuring it chiefly from the outward Dignity and Pomp of Pharisees and Lawyers
sitting there, yet) seems to be a Religious Utterance, and looks as if the
Speaker had been a Gracious Proselyte, and spoke as one that believed the Truth
in Christ, and lied not. But alas! you mistake the scope and sense of this
Doctor: he utters fine Plausible words without the root of the matter in him,
Job 19.28.
and none of his own saying neither, only he had picked up a Proverbial Speech
current among the Sententia crebra apud Rabbinos qui (...) imagine (...)
d^pingtbant. Grotins.
Rabbines, who drew in faint colors the Invisible Things of God by the Pattern
of Visible, and fancyed the gaudy Shine of their Long Robes, together with the
other splendor of such as fared sumptuously every Day, to be a Goodly Draught
of Heaven. We may gather from his Ignorance and Disaffection to true Spiritual
Things, that tho he uses refined Language, yet he is no more than an Unrenewed
Pharisee: for when Christ does afterward in the Parable propose and set
spiritual, celestial Food, the Bread of the Kingdom of God, before him, our
Lord seems to find no more Faith on the Earth in this Talking Zealot, than in
any other Pharisee, or Lawyer of the Company. The Mr. Sa^^. Cradock's Harmony
of the Evangelists.
Scope of our Savior's Parable argues, that howsoever these Pharisees (eo
nomine) might pretend to value the Kingdom of God; yet the Love of the World,
the Profits, Pleasures, secular Employments, and Avocations of this Life, would
prevail to keep them off from embracing the Calls of God, and shut them out of
Heaven.

Observe, There may, upon some Occasions, be Discourses of the Things of God
that drop from unsanctified Lips, where the Speakers have no inward Savor, or
true undestanding of those Things. The Language of Canaan may be got and used
by rote, where also men retain the speech of Ashdod under their Tongues. Neh.
13.24.
A Person like this Pharisee may discourse of the Kingdom of God, and yet be a
Child of Disobedience, in whom the god of this World rules.

But let me open the 16th Verse, where the Parable begins, and also the former
part of the 17th, to bring in the Text.

Then said he.] V. 16.
Christ hereupon takes the Occasion, and replies.

Unto him.] (...), in the Singular Number.
q. d. Unto the Pharisee that spoke at the 15th. Verse. before.

Christ observed the Saying, and taking the word out of the mouth of this
Pharisee, instructs him by a Parable, that taught the Way of God more
perfectly. Acts 18.26
The other Guests at the Table were silent, but this man spoke, and therefore
the Son of Man has somewhat to say unto Him, to state the matters of the
Kingdom, and discover how the Pharisees would dislike it, and then reject the
King that should reign over them.

A centain man made a great Supper, (...) 14.16
and b^de many.

A certain man.] This Evangelist Luke calls him indeterminately, describing him
by no Character or Degree; but Matthew expresses whom, and declares how great
a man he was, rendering him by that certain Pre-eminence, and Supreme Authority
which met in him: The Expression therefore is clothed with Royalty, A certain
King, or, Math. 22.2
as the (...).
Original reads it, a man, a King. This was none other than the Great God,
giving his own Son Jesus Christ to be married to our Natures and made like unto
us in assuming Flesh, Joh. 1.14.
when the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us.

As to the Reason why God is set forth in this Agency by a Man (according to
the Original of the Parable in Matthew, and our own Translation in Luke,) I
find Interpreters silent. However, I think it may satisfy, to remember, that
the Language of the Holy Ghost is Sovereign, he being at Liberty to use what
Idiom or Terms he pleases; and that he condescends and stoops in the
Expression to our Weakness, as he does in all other Metaphorical Allusions of
Scripture elsewhere, (The Eyes of the Lord, his Face, Arm, Hands, etc.)

Made a great Supper.] That is, says Mr. Sa^ Clark A^ not. on the N. T.
one, Appointed the Grace and Privileges of the Gospel, the Glory and
Happiness of Heaven consequent thereupon. He prepared Grace for the Benefit of
our fallen Nature, and Glory in the Second Adam, when we were recovered out of
the Ruins of the First.

(...). Luke 14.16
A Supper.] Yet Matthew. 22.4. (...).
Matthew varies in the Name, and calls this Entertainment a Dinner; Behold I
have prepared my Dinner. Both mean the Provisions of Grace made for Poor
sinners, and so agree in the Substance, where they vary in the Circumstance. It
was Grace made ready, whether we consider it as a Dinner at the Worlds
Noonday, when the Fullness of ^ime was come, as soon as God sent forth his Son:
Gal. 4.4.
or whether we consider it nearer the Evening of the World in those Ages that
border upon the Second Coming of the Son of Man,

As to the Circumstance of a Supper,

1. Luke might allude to the usual and ordinary time of Entertainments more
commonly (perhaps) observed in that Age. We may gather some Evidence out of the
Mouth of Two Witnesses to establish it, Mark and John. -- Herod on his
Birthday made a Supper to his Lords, High Captains, and chief Estates of
Galilee, Mark 6.21. And when Jesus came to Bethany, there they made him a
Supper. The Jews were not wont always to treat their Guests, as Joseph did his
Brethren, when he told the Egyptians, that these men should Dine with him at
Noon. And as the Name might be proper in reference to the Jewish Banquets, so
the aptitude of the Phrase seems to be further countenanc't in Scripture from
the Practice of the Thing among some Gentiles also. The Apostle leaves it upon
record as his Observation among the Greeks, that they that are drunken, are
drunken in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. The Church at Thessalonica to whom he there
writes was planted in Greece, A Drunken soil that was often drowned by Night;
for the Ancients, as a Mr. Joseph Mede. Solebant veteres vespertino Tempore
convivia agitare, and mero indulgentes, ad multam noctem p^^ducere.
Learned Man notes, were wont to banquet late, and falling afterward into
Intemperance by drinking Wine long, after they had Supt, were overcome, and
drunken with it in the Night. Tho alas! I may note it (obiter) by the way, that
now men will be drunk, while it is yet day, quickly after Dinner, before the
Night comes.

2. The Evangelist might allude to the Puschal Supper; for the Paschal Lamb was
to be slain in the Evening, Exodus 12.6. and to be eaten the same Night, The
Paschal-Supper typified and shadowed forth our Lord's own Supper, instituted
afterward as a Commemoration to show forth the Lord's Death until he come, 1
Cor. 11.26.
and twice called the Lord's Supper, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.20. Now as the
Paschal Supper typified, so this Supper of the Gospel might allude also to the
Lord's Supper. For indeed the Lord's Supper, not intended directly in this
Parable, is yet comprehended under it virtually, by a Synechdoche, as the Part
is contained in the whole. The Great Supper of the Gospel designs the utmost
extent of all Gospel Grace and Privilege, it reaches the full Mystery of
Godliness, and all spiritual Benefits that redound to any Soul by it. Well, a
Supper because alluding to the Paschal, and the Lords Supper.

3. He might allude to the Future state of Blessedness in Heaven, which is
called the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. Rev. 19.9.17.
For indeed the present state of Grace is an Emblem, or a (...).
Foretaste of Heaven. But I think chiefly in the last place, that

4. It alludes very naturally to the last Dispensation which we are now under.
The Name -seems to bear a Peculiar reference to the Gospel- Season. What fitter
Name than a Supper could be given to an Entertainment of Grace now in the
Evening of the World? The Days of the Gospel are in Scripture styled peculiarly
the last Days, 2 Timothy 3.1. Heb. 1.2. There is a careful Father which provides
in Heaven, who will have a Supper for his Children upon the Earth in these last
Times; to feast them upon Gospel Grace, before they go to Bed, that is, before
the Day of the World, or their own Day ends, Isa. 57.2.
when they must go and rest in their Beds, each one walking in his uprightness.
I handle it after this nature in the end of the Discourse.

And bade many.] Luke 14.16. last words.
God does not make Provisions of Grace in vain, or prepare a Great Supper, and
then have none to eat it. He sends first to the Seed of Abraham, and bade many
Jews. These had been a long while invited to accept of Christ, and be in a
readiness to embrace the Messiah, as soon as that promised Seed came. The Jews
had notice of this Approaching Supper very early in the Morning; they had
warning at the first Dawn of that Star of Jacob, to get ready, Number. 24.17.
and come in unto it.

And sent his Servant.] (...), v. 17.
That is, (says Servum illum unicum, nempe Filium Dei. Poli Synops. Critic. in
loc.
one) sent his only Son whom before he called his Servant, Isa. 42.1. Behold my
Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect (or Chosen) in whom my soul delights. This
of whom the Prophet speaks was none other than the Christ the Chosen of God,
1 Pet. 2.4. Thus Luke speaks of no more than one Servant, (and of him as the
Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Joh. 1.14. last words.
who was also the only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth,) but
Matthew uses the Term plurally, Chap. 22.3. -- sent forth his Servants, i. e.
his Ministers and Ambassadors, after the Mission of his Son, Christ tho a Son
by Nature, yea a Servant by Office of Mediation for our sakes. Pemble upon
Zech. p. 410.
to press the same Thing. Luke relates the Parable as Christ was sent in Person
to treat with Sinners, and Matthew writes, as the Ministers of Christ were
employed to come forth afterward successively in the same Treaty, even to the
end of the World still inviting Sinners. This two fold Testimony of Matthew and
Luke is not self-contradicting, or guilty of the least inconsistency: It is no
such Testimony for Christ, as that was found against him, Mar. 14.59
where neither so did their Witness agree together.

(...).
At Supper-time.] In the Hour of Supper, it is read. Christ came out of the
Bosom of the Father in the Time of Love to Souls, and the Dispensation of the
Gospel is that Supper-season in which Christ is now given and sent by the
Father to treat, in the Ministry of the Word with Sinners: This is the Hour
when the Gospel is made ready; This is the Evening-Time at which we may find
that all is ready dressed, and waits for Guests to come. The Readiness of the
Things is not delayed beyond the Supper Hour.

To say to them that were bidden.] As they had been before invited, so now the
Servant is sent to inform them it is High-Time to come. And therefore the
Message is,

Come.] This supposes a Distance, which they that are bidden stand in to God;
he sends a Call to overtake such as were yet afar off. The Grace of God did
once find all that are now in Christ so, Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus ye
who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ. And as there
was a Distance in such as are now made nigh, so there is a mighty Distance
still in the All that are afar off, Acts 2.39.
even the many that the Lord our God shall call. Now the Gospel-Invitation
which supposes a Distance from God, begins with a Call unto him, Come.

For all things are ready.] Not a Privilege, not an Encouragement, not any
kind of Gospel Grace excepted. Do thou want Pardon, Peace, Light, Strength,
Joy in the Lord? yet whatever thy Soul lusts after, who cryest after God, it
is all ready for thee, Come. Here is a Rich Feast, refuse no longer to be a
Poor Guest. Here is All, and All will be enough for thee. Where is the Tongue
of that Israelite that cried out, Psa. 78.19.
Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Who can question the Power of
Jehovah to prepare a Table, when they see all Provisions ready? And

Now ready.] The Supper of the Gospel is no such Banquet as requires any
further care to make it. The Law indeed made nothing perfect, Heb. 7.19.
but the Gospel needs no higher or clearer Revelations to perfect its own
Discoveries. God has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.2.
but from the Beginning, when he multiplied Visions, and used Signs, and
revealed his Counsels in Dark Speeches, then it was not so. The Provisions were
reserved in store, and he has kept the good Wine until now.

In the Words there are,

1. Plentiful Provisions made. All things ready.

2. An Invitation made unto Sinners, to partake of these things. Come.

3. A quickening Motive urged from the Season of Readiness, to prevail with the
Guests to come. Now ready.

I shall endeavor accordingly to manage the Discourse under these three
Doctrines: The Gospel is a large Feast, stored with all kinds of Spiritual
Provision in it. God makes an Invitation unto Sinners to come in to this Feast.
The Gospel is a Feast or Supper that has all its Provisions now ready.


The Gospel is a large Feast, stored with all kinds of Spiritual Provision in
it. All things ready.
In the Management of this Doctrine I would handle it in the following Method,
under these Nine general things. To show

Wherein the Resemblance of the Gospel to a Feast appears. I.


In what respect it is a large Feast. II.


What Things we have need of against the Feast. III.


What is the Bill of Fare. IV.


What excellent Properties there are in the Provisions of this Great Supper. V.


What suitableness from God appears in them to the Case of Man. VI.


Why it is a Feast with all things in it. VII.


What Hindrances do make it to many ineffectual. VIII.


To Apply it. IX.


The First Thing is to open the Resemblances of the Gospel unto a Feast. I.


First, 1 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the entireness of it. A Feast does not consist
in one kind, to yield Meat only, and withhold Drink, or to afford Drink and not
provide Meat; but it makes Both ready, Dr. Tho. Fuller, Pisgah-sight, p. 134.
1st. pt.
Esculents and Beverage too, as one terms them. The Feast is not entire but
incomplete, if either part be wanting. Thus, in the Gospel, the Provisions of
Grace are made in both kinds ready, that we need take no Thought as to any
Defect there, Mat. 6.31.
either what we shall eat, or what we shall drink in God's Kingdom, for we have
them both provided: He deals his Bread to the hungry, Isa. 58.7. chap. 43.20.
and gives Waters in the Wilderness, to give Drink to his People, his chosen.
When Wisdom entertaineth her Friends, they do not live by halves, she gives
them all together, Prove. 9.5. Eat of the Bread, and drink of the Dine which I
have mingled. Wine.] He can turn Water into Wine to create variety. Again,
Eat ye that which is good, Isa. 55.2. lat. part. And if any Man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink, Joh. 7.37. The Gospel discovers no Imperfection, for
though it be true, as to the Ceremonial Preparations in Moses, yet it does not
hold in respect of the Evangelical Provisions in Christ, Romans 14.17.
that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. It is a whole Feast, and
therefore in its entireness is like such an Entertainment.

Secondly, 2 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the Delicacies and Fatness of it.
Entertainments are wont to be made of the best the House affords. Abraham in
Entertaining of the three Angels, could he have gotten it, would have given
them Angels Food; however, he Ordered it to be prepared of the choicest
Morsels, and would make it as delicate as he could, to bring it before his
Guests. It Is said Genesis 18.6. He hastened into the Tent to Sarah, and said, Make
ready quickly three measures of Fine Meal, and he ran (himself) unto the Herd,
V. 7. and fetched a Calf, ('it is not said to be an ordinary one, but) tender and
good, and gave it unto a young man, and he hasted to dress it; and he took
Butter and Milk, V. 8. the best Ingredients to serve it in with, when he set it
before the Men, as they are also called, v. 2. Esau likewise, when Isaac his
Father bespoke that Entertainment for himself, Genesis 27.3, 4. is directed by his
Father, to go out, and take of the Dainties the Field afforded: Take now I pray
thee, thy Weapons, thy Quiver and thy Bow, and go out unto the Field, and take
me some Venison, and make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me,
that I may eat --

Thus, the Gospel is furnished with the choicest Viands, and God's Servants
behold an excellency in the very Crumbs which fall from their Masters Table.
The King does not slay any lean Kine, but in making ready for the Marriage, his
Oxen and his Fatlings are killed, Matthew. 22.4. When God makes Provision, his
Paths drop Fatness; Psalm. 65.11.
it is no common Furniture which is found on his Table. He has the Best of all
sorts there. He has not brought that which is torn, and the lame and the sick
to Us, though we have brought such a maimed, sick Offering to him: when he gives
us of the Corn of Heaven, Job. 31.40. Psalm. 81.16.
it is not Cockle instead of Barley, but also with the Finest of the wheat he
feeds us. The Blessings of this Gospel-Feast could be set forth by no higher or
richer Expressions than a Feast of Fat Things, and of Wines on the Lees well
refined, which comprehends the Delicacies of a Feast in the best of Meats and
the choicest Drinks, see Isa. 25.6. And in this mountain (that is, the Mount
Sion in Jerusalem, upon which the Temple or House of the Lord stood) shall the
Lord of Hosts make unto all People a Feast of Fat Things, a Feast of Wines on
the Lees; of fat Things full of Marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined. I
know Day upon that place.
some do make this Feast of Fat things to signify the Assyrians slain, and
Wine on the Lees to represent the Effusion of their Blood, which in that
slaughter God would shed round about Jerusalem. But Mr. Pool's English
Annotations.
others do more probably interpret it of A Feast made up of the most exquisite
and delicate Provisions, which is manifestly meant, says a great Author, of the
Ordinances, Graces and Comforts given by God in and to his Church. And indeed
the Fat of God's Sacrifices which were appointed under the Law, and should be
offered again upon that Mountain after the Captivity, does seem aptly to point
at the Dainties of the Gospel, even as the Law Ceremonies did to typifie the
State of the Gospel, or as Mount Sion and Jerusalem to shadow out the Church.
The Fat of their Meat Offerings, and the Vinous Juice, or Wine of their
Drink Offerings, were no obscure Emblem of the Gospel Feast, and seem plainly
by the Evangelical Prophet to foretell this great Supper. It is represented by
Fatness to intimate that nothing ordinary, or of a low Account is in it: It is
not such course Fare as Melzar gave those four Children, Duct. 1.16.
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Mariah, when he took away the Portion of their
Meat, and the Wine that they should drink, and gave them Pulse; Genesis 2^.34.
nor as ordinary as Jacob gave Esau in the Portage of Lentiles. The Gospel has
nothing course or common, but rare and extraordinary. Such as God has fed,
have fared sumptuously every Day, Luke 16.19
beyond the Rich Glutton. The Israelites had Quails and Mannah in the Desert,
God brought them Rich Provision in a Hungry Place; and an Israelite indeed
still finds Dainties, Isa. 55.2. Let your Soul delight it self in Fatness. The
Shepherd of Israel that provideth will take his Flock, Ezekiel. 34.14.
and feed them in a good Pasture.

Thirdly, 3 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the Freeness of it. Feasts are Free, though they
are Chargeable to the Founder, yet the Guests are wont to partake at Free-cost
in them. Joseph's Brethren indeed may think of no other Provision than what
they buy, but when they come into Egypt, they shall find Joseph will give them
their Diet free. Jacob's Sons may carry down the Man a Present, a little Balm,
and a little Honey, Spices and Myrrh, Nuts and Almonds, Genesis 43.11. and take
Double-money in their Hand, v. 12. but when the Steward of Egypt entertains
them, he will throw their Money back: His Servants shall slay, and make ready,
and let his Fathers House bring what they will to pay, these Men shall Dine
with him for nothing, v. 16. They like Traffiquers may bring in the Bag, and
talk hard of buying with their Money, when Joseph's Back is turned, but they
shall find he has left Orders with his Steward not to meddle with it, v. 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. Peace be unto you, fear not, your God and the God of your
Father has given you treasure; I had your Money. q. d. My Master Ordered me to
convey it privately into your Sacks, and send it home again; he Orders your
Entertainment gratis, and bestows all upon you freely: He will not allow it,
that you should live upon your own Purse in Egypt.

So likewise in the Gospel, Sinners are prone by Nature to bring something of
their own, and make exchange with Christ's, Money, the Work of their Hands to
purchase Grace, and buy a little Food of him. But if our Joseph nourish us, he
will take our Sacks empty; we must bring them to Jesus without Money in them;
his House is Free, we may Dine or Sup with Him for nothing; it is Eat, Cant.
5.1.
O Friends, and drink abundantly, O Beloved, but still without Money and
without Price, Isa. 55.1. The Lord draws out his Soul unto the Hangry, though the
Hungry cannot draw their Purse. The Gospel yields no such Bread, as we must not
eat till we work and earn it. Though a Poor Soul should cry out in another sense
with Peter, Silver and Gold have I none, Act. 3.6.
yet wherein dos this Poverty exclude from his Table, at a Feast where Christ
has paid for all? Thou have all given in for nothing, and shall never hear of
a Bill of Charges to be brought and laid to thine account: Isa. 55.1.
tho Christ bids thee buy Wine and Milk, it does not suppose thou can drop a
Farthing for it; for it is He that has no Money, yet encouraged to buy and
eat: The Holy Ghost seems to use that Language which men are first prone to
take up themselves, Come, buy; whereas it is only meant, they should take what
is bought already for them. Christ, as Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, Fountain Opened.
p. 214.
one says, never sells dear to the Poor. Free Grace will have no Pay but
Thanks. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift, 2 Cor. 9.15. We have no
self- worthiness in our best Estate; we could never move or oblige the King to
feast such as we at supper. The Lord's Bounty in feasting us, was to make us
Good, not as any Reward, because he found us so. Though in our Flesh there
dwells no Good Thing, yet when his Spirit furnishes our House, he does not
ask, or will ever take a Farthing; though his Supper cost him more than millions,
we need not lay out one mite upon it.

Fourthly, 4 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in regard of the Place of Entertainment. Feasts
are not made abroad sub Dio, in the open Air, or got ready in the Markets:
Things are sold, but they are not eaten in the Shambles. Luke 22.11.
-- The Master says, Where is the Guest-Chamber, where I shall eat the
Passover with my Disciples? The Provisions are at home, i. e. where the Master
dwells, and to be had in his Presence, at his House alone; The Guests must
not be found in other Houses, but where the Master of the Entertainment dwells.
So in Things pertaining to the Gospel, the Provisions of the Grace of God do
not ly in Shops and in Shambles, among our selves, but look unto Me and be ye
saved, Isa. 45.22. In buying and selling, we go only to our own Place, but in
receiving the Gospel, we are come to his Dewlling Place in Sion. Psalm. 76.2.
The Things of this Life are without-Doors, but if we taste of his Supper, we
must eat it within his Holy Place, that is, we must be brought at least into
the Church Universal. If we remain off from the Family, we shall come at no
Food in it; it is under Their Roof, that we partake of Their Repast. Grace is
not to be found out of its own Circle, and Nature finds out nothing but
Destruction on the other side: if we are fed, it must not be with the Wild
Beasts of the Forest, but the Sheep in Christ's Fold. If we have meat, we must
not wander abroad, but walk within the Pale of the Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus.
Church. There is no favor to be shown us from the King, if we keep away from
Court, no Privilege of God's Subjects, but in the Kingdom of Grace, which is
not of this World. As Paul said unto the Centurion and the Mariners, Acts 27.31
Except ye abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved; so unless you be with the
Master of the Feast, 1 Cor. 11.20.
this is not to eat the Supper of the Parable. It is necessary that we be of
the Body, to obtain a Relation to the Head, and that we be Members to possess
our Place among them. Provision is not to be every where had; but as we must
have our Place at a man's own Habitation, if we taste of the Bounty and
Generosity he shows in his House, so we must be set in the True Church with
Christ, to receive our Bread, and drink of our Cup at his Hand.

Fifthly, 5 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in limiting its provisions. Feasts are not
common, unexcepted Entertainments to make all men Guests. Such as are treated
themselves at the Master's House, do not there meet with every one they know. A
man may be at a Feast, where some of his own House are Strangers, whom he never
finds there. One that has lain in his own Bosom, one that has sprung from his
own Bowels, may Sup in another place. It is not strange then, if a man finds
not the whole Neighborhood, or all that dwell near him, at the Gospel supping
by him. Latter part.
I will take you one of a City, and two of a Family, and I will bring you to
Zion, Jer. 3.14. Nay, the wonder will abundantly lessen still, that the
multitude should be excluded Feasting at the Master's House. It Is no strange
Thing, that a Greater company than the Guests are walking through the the Streets,
or riding through the Town, and all passing by the Door, whom the Good man of the
House takes no notice of. His Dinner or his Supper is ready for them alone that
are bidden, whom he has sent to call in. Tit. 2.11.
The Grace of God in like manner that brings Salvation is manifested and
declared by himself, that it does not extend to all; Multitudes go by, that are
neither called, nor yet come in. Some have not the Knowledge of God, 1 Cor.
15.34. some again know him, and yet in works deny him, Tit. 1.16. They are
called, i. e. the Preaching of the Gospel calls upon them, and they profess to
go unto the Marriage, Matthew. 21.28.
but are like the Son that was sent into the Vineyard, who said, I go Sir, and
went not. V. 30.
Others may accidentally be mingled with the Holy Seed, but eat and drink not
in God's Kingdom, who yet may be Strangers, and no Guests, Men and not
Christians; for many are called, but Few are chosen, Matthew. 20.16. Chap. 22.14.
As God winks, when he pleases, at the Times of Ignorance, looks over them,
Act. 17.30.
as the (...).
word signifies, so he may look on the Times when more enlightened, and destroy,
as he pleases, the Wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the Understanding
of the Prudent. Isa. 29.14.
God's People fare well by themselves, 1 Cor. 1.19.
while others are fatned for the Day of Slaughter, and never come in to sup
with them. The Lord severs between the one and the other, in reference to the
true Goshen state, as he did heretofore between the Cattle of Israel and the
Cattle of Egypt. Exodus 9.4.
The Friends of the Bridegroom hear his Voice, when a Stranger does not
intermeddle. Prove. 14.10


I know the Foolishness of Preaching and Man's corrupt Wisdom in this Point do
no ways agree. 1 Cor. 1.21
Corruption is more tender of its own Deformed Brow, than of the Apple of God's
Eye, his Sovereignty. Nature is too high to stoop, though to the God of Nature,
here. This is a Knee that will not how to Jesus. Ambr^sius, Origenes,
Hieronymus censuerunt, Deum suam Gratiam inter Hemiues dispensare prout ta
quznque been usurr^^ praeviderit. Calvin. Instit. Chr. Rel. p. 320.6.8, initie.
Calvin has noted it concerning some of the Ancient Fathers, as Ambrose,
Origene and Hierome, that they supposed, God distributed his Grace no otherwise
amongst men, than as he foresaw the Improvement which men would make of it, and
the Good use they would put that Grace to: And adds, that Augustine too was
some while of the same mind, but afterward when he grew into a better
Acquaintance with the Scriptures, he not only retracted that corrupt Opinion,
but confuted it with great Strength of Argument, as his words declare in the
Add and Augustinum in ea fuisse aliquando Sententia; sed c^m melius in
Scriptura cognitione profecisset, non retractavit modo ut evidenter falsam, sed
fortiter confutavit. Ibid. (mihi) Octavo.
Margent. Men may throw his Glory whither they list, but God will never give it
away himself. The King will be Sovereign in his House, and have none to sup,
but whom he sends for. Thou would not, Oh man, thy self, and who art thou
that replyest against God? Is it fit for Thee; and shall it not be Lawful for
Him to do what he will with his own? ( Romans 9.20. Matthew. 20.15.)

Sixthly, 6 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the Order of the Guests that are placed to eat
and drink in Gods Kingdom. In Feasts it is usual for some to sit higher, others
lower at the same Entertainment. This is intimated to have been observed among
the Jews at Feasts, Luke 14.8, 9, 10. where, Christ condemns not such a Civil
Order but therein countenanceth the Degrees of respect that may be shown among
Men, while he makes an outward Difference between the Honorable and the Base.
It is thus at Our Tables, some are nearer, some are farther the upper end than
others. Some are placed more advantageously by the very Man of the House, where
they have the opportunities of a Freer converse with him, and a nearer intimacy
than another that sits by. Samuel took Saul and his Servant, 1 Samuel 9.22
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, where
they were more Honorable than the Thirty. So in the Gospel, we may see how God
spiritually makes a Difference, while of his Sovereignty, 1 Cor. 4.7.
for the Beauty and Order of the Church, he makes one to differ from another.
Indeed it is not our Business, or ought-herein to be our care, to mark out the
chief Rooms, Luke 14.7.
or the uppermost Seats in Synagogues (like the Pharisees); for Christ knows no
man after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.
that is, he does not respect the man for his Natural Precedence, or
Primogeniture, who comes to our Assembly with the Gold Ring, Jam. 2.2.
or in Goodly Apparel, and much beyond the Poor man that comes in in vile
Raiment: It is not therefore as to Civil Difference or External Order according
to the Flesh, which common Providence has made among Professors, that I here
assume the Parallel, but in a Spiritual Discrimination of Gifts and Graces, or
manifestations of the Divine Presence to some more than others. The order lies
in that. There are Diversities of Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.4 v. 5. v. 6.
differences of Administrations, diversities of Operations: God's People have
neither equal Gifts, nor equal Graces. Mal. 4.2.
As the Sun of Righteousness variously shines, so one Star will always differ
from another Star in Glory. Some partake of more, some taste of less, when
Christ puts of his Spirit upon them that sit under his shadow. Cant. 2.3.
He gives more out of his Col. 2.3.
Treasures in wisdom to some, in strength to others; they receive not alike of
his Joh. 1.16.
Fullness. There be Differences in the Experiences of God's People, a higher and
a lower, a Right hand and a Left at the King's Table. Lo! to one he says,
Friend, go up higher, q. d. Luke 14.10
Thou shall behold me, thou shall by Faith apprehend me more, and taste me
sweeter than another that has not thy Experience, and yet he shall receive a
Portion of me too. Some have greater Communications of the Love of God than
others. Some are in the Dark, others walk so much in the Light of Gods
Countenance, that, like Moses, they are got into the Mount, and seem to
converse with God Face to Face. The Influences of the Spirit may shine upon one
Believer with a comfortable Light, and a Gracious, clear Evidence, while
another lies darkened under some Eclipse, by the Cloud that comes betwixt.
God's Children are all at Table, but they cannot all look up, at Supper, and
see their Father every one alike. Peradventure, God has done more for thee
than others, thou art quickened with a larger sense, and a more lively Hope;
thou art trained up in thy Father's House under more intimate Acquaintance,
Gracious Discoveries, more Ravishing Contemplations than another in the same
Congregation that sits down sighing by thee. It is thus, under the
Administrations of Grace among the Guests unto our God. They are placed in
order, there are (through a manifold Dispensation) Elder and Younger Brethren, and
God will have them to sit at meat accordingly; Genesis 43.33.
the Firstborn (perhaps) according to his Birthright, and the youngest
according to his Youth. However, the King observes what order (only an order)
he will have at this Marriage-Supper, Mat. 11.26.
even so Father, because it seems good in thy sight. All his by the Blood of
Christ are nigh in their Relation, but yet as to the manifestations of his Free
Love, many may seem to sit down at Table a great way off. The Gospel is a long
Table, and there be many Degrees of Grace and Comfort where the Guests sit
down. Some may be cast down, others advanced as high as the upper end of
Assurance, Joh. 21.20.
even to lean upon Christ's Breast at Supper. The Church of God has Fathers
and strong men in Christ, 1 John 2.13.
and the same has Babes, and young Converts, little Children, newly brought
forth. There are Old Disciples, Act. 21 16. 1 Cor. 15.8.
and also such as are born ont of due time. There are such as are in Romans 16.7.
1 Cor. 6.4
Christ before, and others that are less esteemed in the Church. So that the
Gospel may be likened unto an Entertainment on respect of Order.

Seventhly, 7 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the Ministerial Watters and Attenders on it.
The Queen of Sheba being enterbain'd in the Court of Solomon, takes notice not
only of the meat of his. Table, 1 King. 10. v. 5.
and the sitting of his Servants, (or Nobles and Courtiers of State whom he
treated and brought up in Familiarity with him) but also of the Attendance of
his Ministers, that is, his waiting Servants, and his Cup bearers. Great Tables
must have great Attendance on them. Gen 40.21.
The Chief Butler gave the Cup into Pharaoh's Hand, and Nehemiah was the King's
Cup bearer. Neh. 1.11
So the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, Joh. 2.1, 2.
where Jesus also was present, had its waiters attending on it; v. 5.
for the Mother of Jesus says unto the Servants, and Jesus himself commands
them, Fill the water-pots with water, and draw out now, v. 7.
and bear unto the Governor of the Feast. v. 8.
The Guests in the Marriage-House were not put to serve themselves.

Now the Feast of the Gospel resembles it, and is alike in this, having it is
Officers and Ministerial Waiters serving at the Altar; 1 Cor. 9.13
these indeed in one sense are of them that sit at the Table with you, but in
another, they are properly of them that serve, and therefore your Servants for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5. When Ministers have done one part of their work, that
is, have called the Guests, the Master appoints the other part, to come in and
wait at Table. Hence it is, that we are called Stewards of the mysteries of
God, 1 Cor. 4.1. no other Rulers over his Household, than to give them their
Portion of meat in due season. Luke 12.42
The Gospel is a Table at which Ministers must wait, and work too, to serve the
Lords Guests. They ought to have no place to stand, or sit down in near the
Table idle. The Provisions made ready find work enough for Ministers to divide
the Word aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. last words.
and give unto every one a proper Portion. We are but menial Servants of Jesus
Christ, to bring in the Dishes, carve out the Food, and in Applications hand it
down to you. The Gospel must be opened by such as we, and its Provisions
allowed you through our Ministry. The Lord of the Feast has appointed the
Attendance of his Ministers and his Cup-bearers in a Resemblance to other
Feasts.

Eighthly, 8 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the Cheerfulness of the Guests that feed upon
it. Feasts are not wont to be sad, nor the Guests thereof melancholy. So long
as the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe and Wine are in their Feasts,
Isa. 5.12. (as the Jews used to have such Musical Instruments and Diversion
mixed with them.) They are filled up with cheerfulness, 1 Samuel 9.22.
and make Samuel's Parlour differ from the House of Mourning. Feasting and
Gladness go by couples, Esth. 9.17, 18. And Solomon who knew what it was to
prove his Heart with mirth, says, Eccl. 10.19
a Feast is made for Laughter and wine makes merry. For Laughter] that is for
it, as the occasion Vbi sese Laetiti^e obtulit occasio. Mercer.
offers. The innocent Design and Effect of Feasting may be a Refreshment of the
Mind by the Mr. Pools Engl. Annot.
Society of Friends, as well as the Body by the use of Creatures. Those public
Festivals, Zech. 8.19. after the sorrow of the Captivity was turned into Joy,
are called Cheerful Feasts: as if a sorrowful Feast had been a contradiction,
both to the Nature of the Thing, and the Letter of a Command too, Thou shall
rejoice in thy Feast, Deuteronomy. 16.14. So that neither in their common or Religious
Feasts they were ever wont to afflict their Souls.

And in this respect of cheerfulness, the Gospel retains the Similitude of a
Feast. God has kept such an open House under the Gospel-State to enlarge our
steps, that we may rejoice to run our Race. There are indeed some Hannah's, of
a sorrowful Spirit, that sit at Gods Table; and this does not proceed, because
they have eaten their meat with Him, but through Fear they have drunk poison by
themselves. Judge. 14.17
However, tho Samson's Wife should weep before him the seven Days while their
Feast lasted, yet we do not read in that Marriage-Banquet, that others besides
her did eat the Bread of Mourners. So, as to the Gospel, Hos. 9.4.
if some are dejected in the House of Feasting, yet the Guests do mostly eat
their Bread with joy, and drink their wine with a merry Heart, because God
accepts them. Eccl. 9.7.
It is a Musical Lev. 23.24. Number. 29.1
Feast of Trumpets that sound glad Tidings. Besides, this Spiritual Pleasure in
God's House is the Fruit of a Gracious Promise, that was to be made good under
the Gospel, Isa. 12.3. With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
Salvation; yea, he doubly fulfills the Promise, while at the Marriage-Supper,
together with our water, he makes our Conduits run wine. Ibid.
The House of Prayer was to be also made the House of Praise -- Them will I
bring to my Holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer, Isa.
56.7. The Children of Zion in coming to the Marriage of the King's Son, were
foretold should be joyful in their King, Psalm. 149.2. The Gospel is a joyful
Feast, of which he that truly eats, shall one Day truly praise the Lord.

Lastly, 9 Resemblance.
The Gospel resembles a Feast in the distribution of it is Broken meat among
others that are not the called Guests. We read in those Liberal Entertainments
with which Christ sometimes treated the Multitudes, when he multiplied the
Loaves, and fed many thousands with them, that they took up of the broken meat
that was left, seven Baskets full, Matthew. 15.37. and twelve Baskets full of the
fragments, and of the Fishes, when he entertained them miraculously again, Mar.
6.43. These Baskets of the Fragments (or Fragmenta a frangendo.
Broken meat, as the word signifies) that remained over and above unto them
that had eaten, might perhaps be distributed among others that had not partook
of the Meal with them. It is customary now a days with such as are given to
Hospitality, to distribute some of the Remainders of a Feast, even to such for
whom it is not prepared, being neither invited with the Guests, nor sitting in
the same Room among them, only come in upon their own account, or, as we say,
occasionally. Indeed Nabal at the entertaining of his Sheep shearers denied
such a Courtesy as this, when David and his men begged it; 1 Samuel 25.11.
Shall I take my Bread and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my
Shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be? Yet the Bounty
and Kindness of a Good man extends sometimes even to them that he knows not
whence they are, and when he calls together his Friends and his Neighbors,
is not forgetful, as the case may stand, to entertain Strangers also.

Now the Gospel resembles a Feast in this. God has made it indeed for his
Friends, and had not prepared it, if he had not designed it as an Entertainment
to treat them, and they only are capable to understand the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7.
for the inward Glory and Saving Benefit and virtue of it is hidden from other
men; Therefore speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing, see not; and
hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand, Matthew. 13.13. Yet however
it first happens through the common Bounty and Goodness of the Feast-maker, that
he sends Portions (tho it be in Parables) to them for whom nothing is prepared.
Nch. 8.10.
If Benignity did not prevail, Strangers should not have so much as Broken
meat. God made Ezekiel a Lovely Song to a company of Deaf Adders, Ezekiel. 33 32.
that would not hear the Charmers voice. The outward Parts and Privileges of
the Gospel are dispensed in the outward, as well as the inner Court, to
Foreigners as well as Friends in the Household of our God. The Sons of the
Alien that have no Portion in David, may yet have some of the Privileges of
David's House, and God may rain down Manna in the Gospel, as he does common
Rain from Heaven, Matthew. 5.45. Heb. 12.8.
upon the just and upon the unjust both. They that are Bastards, and not Sons
(as the Apostle distinguishes) may receive, as to Privilege, some Portion in
the Childrens meat, and Dogs may receive the Scraps, and gnaw a Bone or a
Crust, and lick up the Crumbs that fall from their master's Table. Matthew. 15.27.
God may throw in some common Blessings of the Gospel to Unbelievers, while the
Lot of his special Favor is cast into his People's Lap only. The one may have
so much of the Word, as to hear the Gospel- sound, but the other only have All,
and find Salvation by it.

The Second Thing is, II.
in what respects it is a Large Feast.

First, I.
It is large, if we count the Cost. It cost the Life of the Kings's Son to buy
it. The Bridegroom dies, before he could get his Bride a Supper ready. The
Purchaser gave himself, Ephesians. 5.25. Himself for Victuals, that she might be
entertained, when her Lord should come in and sup with her. Rev. 3.20.
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible Things, as
Silver and Gold -- But with the Precious Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 18, 19. Ye
redeemed.] When Christ bought up Victuals, he bought the Guests too that eat
it, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a Price. -- not redeemed with corruptible
Things, as Silver and Gold.] Christ did not bring so low a Treasure, as will
serve in other Markets; he had no Coin but was a Price beyond any Purse to
hold. The Banquet of the Gospel could not be gotten lower. I may say hereof, as
Job speaks of Wisdom, Job 28.15.
it cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for the Price
thereof; v. 16.
it cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the
Sapphire: v. 17.
The Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it, v. 18.
and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold, no mention shall
be made of Coral, or of Pearls: v. 19.
for the Price (of the Entertainment) is above Rubies: the Topaz of Ethiopia
shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure Gold. It is
corruptible Silver and Gold, but Precious Blood (that was Price enough to buy
it.) Every Drop of the Blood of Christ was a greater Sum than Thousands of Gold
and Silver. Christ went to Market in the Garden, and then on to the Shambles
upon the Cross. He was made a Curse, that we might have the Blessing. The First
Adam eat Bread himself in the sweat of his Face, Genesis 3.19.
but the Second Adam with Great Drops of Blood procured Bread for us. Now this
makes it so great a Feast, that Christ has with so great a Sum obtained it.
Silver and Gold will ransom a King, but it must be the Blood of Christ to
redeem a Beggar.

Secondly, the Occasion. It is a magnificent, stately Supper, because made at
the Marriage of the King's Son; Royal Cheer, because Earth is married to the
Royal Line of Heaven. You shall not find it like an ordinary, every Day's meal,
when you are come to a Wedding-Court to sup. The Day of our Espousals is such a
solemn Time of Love, that the Father Proclaims, It is meet that we should make
merry. Luke 15.32
The Gospel is the Day of our King, Hos. 7.5. and he will have his Coronation
kept. Though Sions King is Zech. 9.9, Mat. 21.5.
meek, and therefore comes with no such Majesty, as the Princes of this World,
because his Kingdom is not of it, yet the Kingdom of God comes not without
spiritual observation; though he does not assume an outward Glory, yet he will
have a Feast suitable to the high Occasion, that is all Glorious within. We
read of Great Things in Cana of Galilee, Joh. 2.2.
where Jesus was called to the Marriage; what mighty works then are they which
do show forth themselves in him, when he comes about his own Marriage. This
Supper is made an exceeding great and large Feast, to greaten the Day in which
thy Maker is thy Husband. Isa. 54.5.
If Abraham took Occasion to make a Great Feast the same Day that Isaac was
weaned, Genesis 21.8.
what an Occasion then was that which the Father took, when he married his only
Son to make ready the Gospel in this Great Marriage Supper.

Thirdly, Quantity of Provision. It is not only much, but all; Many Dishes had
been Great, but one of every sort is greater. Who can understand the
loving kindness of the Lord? Have thou entered into the Springs of the Sea? Job
38.16. V. 37.
or have thou walked in the search of the Depth? Who can number the Clouds in
wisdom, when he pours Manna forth? It is a Feast of Plenty, and plenteous is
joined with Fat in the Provisions of God's House, Hab. 1.16. Wisdom has laid
in of all sorts enough, Prove. 9.2. She has killed her Beasts, she has mingled
her Wine, she has also furnished her Table. As Feasts are usually the best, so
when provided, they are made the biggest of Entertainments. Fullness of Bread is
distributed in God's House, and Flagons of Wine are allowed his Guests. Canaan
has large supplies from Heaven, and her Country is nourished by the Kings
Country. Acts 12.20
As it is not in Handfulls of Barley, so neither in pieces of Bread: Prove.
28.19. Psa. 73.10.
He has a plenty of Bread for her, and makes the waters of a Full Cup return
hither. In the Dispensation of the Gospel, God goes not so low, Genesis 18.5.
as to fetch out a morsel of Bread; that is enough for Abraham, but not for the
God of Abraham, Chap. 15.1.
who is his Shield and exceeding Great Reward. When God prepares our Food, Job
36.31.
he gives meat in Abundance, spiritual Dainties as thick as Quails for Israel
in the Wilderness, Psa. 78.25.
when he sent them meat to the Full. When God comes at any Time under the
Gospel to make Windows in Heaven, 2 Kings 17.2.
he will pour out such a Blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. Mal. 3.10.
God does all Things in this Entertainment liberally; Psa. 44.17.
when he feeds us, then have we Plenty of Victuals; Psa. 78.15.
and when he gives us Drink to quench our Thirst, it is abundantly, as out of
the Great Depths. He that gives in spiritual Blessings Psa. 84.11.
withholdeth no Good Thing. The Gospel, Luke 12.16.
like the Ground of a certain Rich man has been seen to bring forth
plentifully; as the Fields of Egypt in the seven Plenteous years brought forth
by Handfuls, Genesis 41.47.
so there is a Storehouse in the Kingdom of Grace that supplies the Table and
his Furniture. There is a Fullness of Sufficiency for the many Thousands of
Israel, Number. 10.36. Math. 13.35.
when he makes the multitudes to sit down. The Feast will hold out, though the
House of God be full of Guests from one end to another. Isa. 16.33.
Bread shall be given them, their waters shall be sure, though all his Elect were
gathered from the four winds of Heaven.

The Third Branch of the Doctrine is, III.
to evidence and premise What things we have need of against the Feast. For
though the Provisions of the Gospel be first made ready, yet, as to our Benefit
or Participation, the Gospel must afford also some Antecedent Requisites,
before we can experience it to be a Feast good for Food.

First, Invitation beforehand. And here by an Invitation, I would not be
understood to intend no more than an External Call of the Sinner by God's
Messengers under the Word; for though it is necessary too that there be such an
Outward Call, Romans 10.17.
because Faith comes by Hearing, yet this alone will be insufficient to partake
of Gospel Grace: I would therefore be meant to set forth the necessity of some
Powerful, internal work of the Spirit upon the Heart, joined with the External
Call; that the Privileges, or highest Benefits and Graces of the Gospel may of
right belong unto the Called. The Gospel is set forth in the Parable as a
Wedding furnished with Guests, Mat. 22.10
both bad and good, answerable to these Two Calls: The external Call does
nothing, but brings in men bad as it finds them, and thence come the Bad
Guests, such as will say at last, Luke 13.26
We have eaten and drunk in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our streets;
to whom nevertheless the Master will reply, I know you not whence you are, Luke
13.27
depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity: whereas on the other hand, the
Inward saving Call first changes men into Good, and then brings them in, and
thence come the Good Guests, whose company the King with his own Gracious
Presence honors. If we obtrude our selves, and by an empty vain Profession
without true Grace, rush in upon Gospel-Priviledges among true Guests, it will
make the Master of the Feast angry, and say at last unto every such Bad Guest,
Friend, how came thou in hither? Mat. 22.12.
So to apply the Graces of the Gospel, or the Comforts of the Holy Ghost which
he no ways applies himself, is, though in a secret and invisible manner, to
become the Robbers of Churches, and snatch what God never carved to any such
Guests. If men are not called out of their wickedness, God will say unto the
wicked, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. We dare not meddle with the Gospel,
to apply its Privileges and Comforts to our own use, till we are bidden to lay
hold of them. We must be invited to the Great Feast, and receive a Ticket from
our Father to partake of the Children's Meat. So long as men are yet in their
sins, under a Profession of the Gospel, they rob God, as well as his Children,
Hos. 2.8.
to feed their own lusts: They take his Corn and Wine and Oil which he has
multiplied, and prepare them for Baal, for some Lust they prefer, while they
hasten after another God. Psalm. 16.4.
An Invitation therefore in some effectual work of Grace is a necessary
Antecedent, or one of the Things which we have need of against the Feast.

Secondly, Conduct. We are by nature strangers, and need a Guide to bring us to
our Father's House. Lead me O Lord in thy Righteousness -- make thy way strait
before my Face, Psalm. 5.8. If we are not led, we shall quickly lose our way. --
It is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23. If we are left
to trace the way our selves, we shall lose it through the Forest. It was not
ascribed unto the Israelites, nor yet to Moses, nor unto Joshua, though a Captain
of the Lord's Host, to come of themselves to feast in Canaan, but it is
attributed to a supreme Conduct, The Lord thy God brings thee into a good
Land, Deuteronomy. 8.7. A Land of Wheat and Barley, and Vines, and Figtrees, and
Pomegranates, V. 8. V. 9.
a land of Oyl-olive and Honey, a land wherein thou shall eat Bread without
scarceness. They could not have found the way through the Wilderness, to meet
with such a Table, if He that prepared it had not by the cloudy Pillar led
them. Psa. 78. ult.
It was not Their Eyes, but the skilfulness of his own Hands. And how should we
grope as Blind men in the Wilderness our selves, if we had not the Benefit of
that Promise, I will lead them in Paths which they have not known? Isa. 42.10.
The Shepherd of the sheep leads them out, Joh. 10.2, 3. And he must carry his
Lambs in his Bosom, Isa. 40.11.
to feed them as a Lamb in such a Large place. Hos. 4.16.


Thirdly, Protection. Conduct is not enough, if we have not a Captain to fight
our way through: Plead my Cause O Lord, with them that strive with me, fight
against them that fight against me, Psa. 35.1. If the Lord delivers not the
Soul of his Turtle Dove from the multitude of the wicked, Psa. 74.19.
the Hawks will intercept and seize it before it can fly as the Doves to their
windows. Isa. 60.8.
Deliver the Poor and needy, rid them out of the Hand of the wicked, Psa. 82.4.
Psa. 102.8.
when those that are mad, are sworn against them, he must keep them, who has
called them, and preserve them from this Generation for ever, Psa. 12.7. Such
as set their Faces toward Zion, Jer. 50.5.
do stand at last with their Psa. 122.2.
Feet within Jerusalem, because thou Lord defendest them, Psa. 5.11. He
compasses them with favor, as with a Ps. 5.12. Job 41.28
Shield, and therefore the Arrow cannot make them flee. The Devil would gather
up Instruments enough to stop us in our way, if we had not a Convoy to bring us
safely on. He would make a Prey of us, before we could otherwise come nigh our
own Provision. We should be in jeopardy of perishing, Number. 20.17.
if while we did go by the King's Highway, we had not his Protection.

Fourthly, Appetite, for to the Hungry every bitter thing is sweet. Prove. 27.7
latter part.
God requires an opening of the mouth, when he comes with a Hand of Grace to
fill it; Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psa. 81.10. We are not
Dickson somewhat changed.
straightened in God, but many a Blessing goes beside, because of our own
narrowness to receive it. A keen Appetite suits with a Great Entertainment. The
sharper our Hunger, the sweeter God's Provision. A man of an Evil Eye may
invite his Neighbors, and when they are come to his Banquet, Prove. 237.
may not look well upon them; now the wise man tells us, that such a Man's
Delicacies are not worth a Desire, Prove. 23.6. Eat thou not the Bread of him
that has an evil eye, neither desire thou his Dainty meats. He steels his
Victuals into Knives that may stab thee more than Hunger; but we may bring our
Appetite safe to swallow down morsels that we need not V. 8^
vomit up again. We cannot hunger and thirst too much upon the Road to Heaven,
Genesis 45.21.
when God gives us Provision for the way. When the Israelites fell a lusting in
the Wilderness, Number. 11.33.
they dug their Graves with their Appetite, while God gave them their own
Desires; Psa. 78.29
but Spiritual Desires can do us no harm, tho we have such choice Longings in
our Souls, that our Ardency is singular, and there is none upon the Earth that
we desire besides, Psa. 73.25. In a word, we shall disparage the full Table of
the Gospel, if we bring not an empty Stomach thither.

Lastly, Palate to distinguish it. Does not the ear try words, Job 12.11.
and the mouth taste his meat? As it is true naturally, so spiritually it is no
lie, chap. 34.3.
for the Ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat; the sanctified Ear tries
Gods Words, as well as the Natural Ear the common things of Man. A man that
has the Spirit of God savoureth the things that be of God; he can distinguish
between Husks that the Swine do eat, Genesis 27.9.
and savoury meat such as he loves. His Taste can discern between a Fish and a
Scorpion, he will tell you, the one satisfies, the other only stings him. David
had a Holy Palate, and could relish an holy Entertainment, Psa. 119.103. Oh!
how sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter than Honey to my mouth! The
Language of the New Testament speaks of Senses exercised, Heb. 5.14. or as
the Original renders it, (...).
Senses made naked, that the Object may not be intercepted, or the influence of
the thing kept off; as suppose by a Garment upon the Flesh to obsturct feeling,
or a covering hung before the Eyes to hinder seeing; J^^ 6, 30.
so a Palate made naked, that has no perverse thing as a medium to intervene
between a Spiritual morsel, and its own sensing it. Spiritual Senses are not
like natural, to decay in Old Age; an old Disciple need not complain of God's
Table, as Barzillai at fourscore did of the King's, Can thy Servant taste what
I eat, 2 Samuel 19.35.
or what I drink? he wanted a Palate at that Age to distinguish and savor the
Dainty Morsels of a Prince, and therefore David's Table at Court would be
fitted better by a young Chimham, than an old Barzillai: v. 37, 38.
Now it is not so with the Servants of the Lord, as with that old Servant of
David, but tho they have been of a long standing, yet their Taste still
remains, and their Palate can discern between Good and Evil. God's Children
though you blind-folded them that their Eyes could not behold their Teachers, yet
would tell you when their heavenly Father feeds them. Mat. 6.26.
Job 6.6.
They can distinguish between that which is unsavory, and Food convenient. A
Spiritual, Prove. 30.8.
judicious Palate will discern, Genesis 43, 34
though it be of a Benjamin's Mess, whether it be always with Grace seasoned with
salt. Col. 4.6.
And this is the Palate which we have need of against the Feast. If we come to
God's Provision without our Taste, we shall roll nothing under our Tongue, tho
we eat of the fat, and drink the sweet; Neh. 8.10.
but the most delicious Fare of the Gospel will afford us Morsels, of which we
shall say without a sanctified, Eccl. 12.1.
Gracious Palate, we have no pleasure in them. IV.


The Fourth Thing is to bring in the Bill of Fare, and open the Provisions of
this Gospel-store more distinctly.

It will appear that the Gospel is a mighty Table, enough to maintain the
Guests beyond our weak Faith, Isa. 59.1.
seeing the Lord's Hand is not shortened that has made all things ready. Moses
indeed thought when the People were six hundred thousand footmen, that it was
impossible to give them a sufficient Meal in that kind they asked, and still
more impossible to feed them with such a continued plenty, that they might eat
of it a whole month together, Number. 11.21, 22. Shall the Flocks and the Herds be
slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered
together to suffice them? which deserved that check from the Lord for his
Unbelief in the verse following, v. 23. Is the Lord's Hand waxed short? Thou
shall see now whether my word shall come to pass to thee, or not. Now as the
Lord rained down victuals in so great a measure to satisfy the Longing of that
mixed multitude in the Wilderness, Number. 11.4
so he has provided Plenty and Store enough in the Gospel for all the hundred
forty and four thousand which are redeemed from the Earth. Rev. 14.3. latter
part.
Indeed Solomon's Provision for one day amounted to a large Bill of Fare, 1
Kings 4.22.23. -- Thirty measures of fine Flower, and threescore measures of
meal, ten fat Oxen, and twenty Oxen out of the Pastures, and an hundred Sheep,
beside Hearts and Roebucks, and fallow-deer, and fatted fowl. But the Supper of
our God is in a Richer and more abundant store than that, as will appear when
served up in this following Account, viz.

Milk for Babes, Meat for strong men, the true Bread from Heaven, Living water,
Flesh to eat, Blood to drink, the Lamb of God, the fatted Galf for Prodigals,
the Marrow of rich Forgiveness, the food of Knowledge, the nourishment of
Faith, the feast of Holiness, (or the bunch of Hyssop in Sanctification of the
Spirit) the hidden Manna of Election, the Royal Dainties of Assurance, the
Evangelical honey comb dropping Free Grace, the fatness of God's house in
Ordinances, the Supplies of the Spirit of Jesus, the morsel of Hope for them
that fail not to sit with the King at meat, the full meal of Contentment for
them that have left all and followed Christ, the Refreshments of the Peace of
Conscience, the Oil of Joy, the Cup of Consolation with the Wine of the Kingdom
running over, the continual Diet of Perseverance in the sure mercies of David,
and the Fruit of the Tree of Life.

1. Milk for Babes, the sincere Milk of the Word, which the weakest of God's
Little ones may lie at the Breasts and suck. On this wise speaks the Apostle
Peter in his Exhortation, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born Babes desire the sincere milk
of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. The Holy Scriptures are made ready in
the Plainest Truths for a Hungry Infant that will not be quiet till it finds
the Breast out. Lam. 4.4.
The Tongue of God's sucking Children would cleave to the Roof of their mouth,
if they could not get to the Word, and there be, as one that has sucked the
Breasts of his Mother. Cantic. 8.1.
Heb. 5.12.
The first Principles of the Oracles of God are compared to Milk, because the
first sort of Truths that young Converts Learn, and are wont at the beginning
of the New Birth to be most affected with. The Apostle Paul speaking of the
Infancy of his Corinthian Church, tells them in his Epistle which he first
wrote unto them, 1 Cor. 3.2.
I have fed you with milk and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it, neither yet now are ye able. (...).
Fed you with Milk] I have given you a Liquid Food you might swallow easy;
Others have drank what I have given you to eat (as the Milk of Babes may by
strong men be eaten or drunk either. Not with meat, ye were not able to bear
it:] That is, ye could not digest the stronger and higher sort of Doctrines,
neither yet now are ye able. 1 Cor. 14 20.
Children in understanding must have the Food of their Souls, as their lack of
Age requires it, Philem^^ 9
and such a one as Paul the aged knew it. Our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ had
such weak Disciples with him, that he forbore a while feeding them with strong
meat, and stays till more cubits were added to their Spiritual Stature, before
he weans them from the milk of Babes, Joh. 16.12. I have many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. He dealt with them proportionably to
their present state and weaker Capacities in Christianity: So young Converts
must be fed with Food convenient, Prove. 30.8.
(not only convenient in the Quantity, and Measure as Agur meant it, but
convenient in the Quality and Nature of it) and not too strong for them. Weaker
Christians must be fed with weaker Diet, that their Souls may digest it, and be
made the better for the Truths they take in.

Now the Gospel has its Milk in Doctrines easy to be understood. 1 Cor. 14.9
Come ye therefore, says the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 55.1. and buy milk. It
is a sort of Victuals treasured up in our Fathers House, that when ye rceive
the Kingdom of God, Mark 10.15
as a little Child, I mean, with a very Childish and low Capacity, you may meet
with Provisions therein suited to you. Isa. 60.16.
Our Babes in Christ may suck the Milk of the Gentiles, that is, those plain
Revelations of the Son of God, who is now believed on in the World. 1 Timothy 3.16
They can milk out from these Breasts of consolation, Isa. 66.11
till they are delighted with the Abundance of her Glory; Jerusalem (God's
Church) the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.
has Breasts given her which her Children shall never draw dry. The Holy Ghost
stoops in very low Expressions, 2 Timothy 3.15
that from a Child a Believer may know the Holy Scriptures. Its Doctrines are
suited to the Understanding and Capacities of the meanest. The Gospel has a
Plenty that will furnish all sorts: Heb. 5.13.
The Unskillful in the Word of Righteousness is not left destitute, but may
receive the Word of his Grace, and use it is Milk, while he is a Babe. Though like
Zaccheus, Luke 19.3.
you are Little of Stature, yet you may reach of the Fruit, when you cannot
climb the Tree of Life before you. The Gospel abounds with a Treasure of Holy
Learning which some have received, though never brought up at the Act. 22.3.
Chap. 19.9.
Feet of Gamaliel, or the School of one Tyrannus. You may be taught the Truth
as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21. Luke 2.46.
and know the Master of the School that sat among the Doctors, though you be not
rankt among the wise and prudent. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes, Matthew. 11.25. The Word of God indeed has its Depths,
where there is no passing over, without swimming beyond your reach; but yet it
has its shallowes, where going lower you may wade or foord through. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Though it be the Mystery of Godliness, yet a Mystery so revealed, that the
ordinary Readers or Hearers may be taught to profit by it. Exodus 8.19.
There be plain Truths written with the Finger of God, and clear Truths copied
out, as with a Sunbeam from Heaven; God's Word is a Text-Hand, and he that
runs may read it. In a word, Isa. 7.22.
it has the Abundance of Milk for Babes, to nourish even the least in our
Father's House.

2. Meat for strong men, Meat, as the Apostle does in that forementioned place,
1 Cor. 3.2. and strong meat as he calls them, Heb. 5.14. which belongs to
them that are of Full Age, (that is, above New Converts; the Adult,) who by
reason of use have their senses exercised, to discern both Good and Evil: by
reason of Use,] or, as the word is (...).
rendered, through a Habit. Although young Children's Stomachs will not endure
strong meat, yet the Stomachs of grown men are habituated to receive Diet
according to their Age; their Constitution is stronger than Children's, and
therefore their Meat above them. Not, that any who are Isa. 28.9.
weaned from the Milk are above the Word, but they are by it grown taller in
Knowledge than just to reach unto first Principles, and are not still little
Children learning their Rudiments in the School of Christ. While others are 2 Timothy 3.7.
drawn from the Breasts, (that is, are yet as the Infant whom the Mother has
but newly taken off her Breasts,) these are gone higher in spiritual Gifts and
Seize, than when they were first coming to the 1 Timothy 3.13.
Knowledge of the Truth. They have taken a Good Degree under the Teachings of
Gods Spirit. The Gospel yields these Provisions of Strong meat for them.

There are indeed Doctrines in the Word of Righteousness, Heb. 5.13.
that contain the Great Mystery. To instance briefly in some, as, (1) Though
Faith cannot comprehend the Matter believed, yet it knows the Ground why it
does believe, namely, the Testimony of Gods Word which says it is thus and
thus. Anthon. Burgess, Exposition of the 3d. Chapt. of the 1 Epist. to the Cor.
page 71.
That Profound Mystery in the Trinity of Persons, the Father, Son, and Spirit,
that these Three are one, one God, and yet Three Persons for ever. This is a
High Mystery: For (as Culverwell, Light of Nature, page 148.
one says,) though the Unity of a Godhead is Demonstrable and clear to the Eye of
Reason, yet the Trinity of Persons, that is, three Glorious Relations in one
God, is certain to none but an Eye of Faith. Indeed (as another Dr. Bates,
Christian Religion proved by Reason, p. 187.
excellent Author well observes,) The Unity and supreme Equality of the Three
Persons in the Godhead, transcends our Conception, but Reason cannot prove it
to be impossible. The Doctrine of these Three Glorious Subsistences in one
single, uncompounded, indivisible, Divine Essence, is a Truth, but passes all
Understanding. Phil. 4.7.
(2) The Doctrine of Reconciliation in making Satisfaction to Divine Justice
for Man's Breach of the Law, by the Death of the Second Person in the Trinity,
Ephesians. 2.15.
so making Peace, is so much above our shallow Reason to comprehend, that *
some (rather Professors of Reason than Faith or Divinity) dare strike at the
Foundation, to see whether they can remove our Cornerstone. (3) The Mysterious
Hypostatical Union of the Two Natures in the Glorious Person of the Mediator
(or (...),) with other Doctrines contained in the sure Word of Prophecy, 2
Pet. 1.19.
are Truths above the Understanding of the Highest Christian, or the Greatest
Scholar in the World, though not to apprehend, yet to comprehend them.
Understandings (we may say) that are got to the Fullest measure of the stature
of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.
are yet out of their Reach, when they are walking in the search of the Depth,
Job 38.16.
and try to fathom these Deep Things of God. Alas! these are Mysteries in
Christ which they that are Col. 2.10
complete in Christ must sit down at the Wellhead of Life, and cry out with
the Apostle, (...).
O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11.33. Nay,
as Mr. Sam. Lee, Joy of Faith, p. 214.
one says, These are Things which the Glorious Angels strain at, and makes
their Wisdoms bend like an Ozier in a Storm (to look down into them) and can
never feel the Bottom of these Deeps without Drowning.

But however, there are Doctrines also in the Gospel which may very properly be
likened to the Strong Meat and Food of grown Christians. These also are found
among the Mysteries of Knowledge given us from the Spirit of Revelations; as
concerning the Decrees, Romans 11.7.
both touching the Election in Christ, and the (...), the rest that were
Blinded; Ibid.
and concerning Christ's Natures, that there are Two (setting the mysterious
consideration of the Modus in their Personal Union aside); concerning his
Offices, Prophetical, Sacerdotal and Regal; his Two States, of Humiliation and
Exaltation; his Accomplishment of all the Types in the Old Testament, Personal
and Mystical, those Dr. Tho. Tailor of the Types, p. 2.
Swadling-cloaths in which Christ was exhibited to the Fathers; All the
Glorious Prophesies of his Gospel Church state and Mediatory Kingdom to be yet
seen in the Kingdoms of this World; Rev. 11.15.
The Doctrines of the Resurrection, the Last Judgment, and an everlasting
Future state, are the strong meat at this Plenteous Entertainment for
Christians that have arrived to some Maturity in Knowledge, and with a
competent measure of understanding are able to digest what they feed upon.

3. The true Bread from Heaven. 3. Ruth. 1.6.
The Lord has visited his People in giving them Bread, Ezekiel. 5.16.
as well as Strong meat. Bread is the Staff of Life, take away Bread, and a
Morsel of strong Meat may be enough to overcome us; so take away Christ, and
when we had to do with some of the Doctrines in the Word of Truth without him,
they would be too strong for us, and make us spit them out again: For Example,
if we were left to consider the Infinite, naked Essence of God, his Divine
Immensity would swallow us; or if we were to consider the Infinite Holiness of
God, Hab. 1.13.
that is of purer Eyes than to behold evil, and that cannot without an
unspeakable Abhorrency, look on Iniquity; if we were to ponder his strict and
inexorable Justice, abstracting the consideration from the Person of the
Mediator, such a morsel of strong Meat would be so much beyond our Natures to
endure, that we could not take the Name of God into our Mouths. We are such
rotten Stubble since our Fall, that if we have not always to do with a God in
Christ, Psalm. 106.18. Heb. 12.29
the Flame will burn up the wicked, for our God is a consuming Fire. We must
never touch any strong meat, if we have not the Bread of God at hand. And we
must not approach unto God immediately, but come through Christ to God, that he
may behold us in the Son of his Love only. When we are famished, and cry unto
God for Bread, as the Liberal Entertainments in the Dearth cried unto Pharaoh,
he sends us for supplies to Christ; says Pharaoh, Go unto Joseph, what he says
unto you, do, Genesis 41.55. and says God, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him, Math. 17.5. Genesis 47.12
This Joseph was sent into Egypt to nourish all his Fathers household with
Bread, Chap. 45.7.
and save their Lives by a Greater Deliverance, than that other Joseph, when he
saved the Lives of his Father's Household in the Type. What is man, that he
should eat the Bread of his God! Psa. 8.4.
that he should have Christ at the meal, to eat with every morsel! And yet
through the Riches of Grace we have the True Bread to eat with Strong meat from
Heaven! Christ is our Bread at the Feast, or we could not live upon fat and
Plenteous meat without him. Hab. 1.16.


This is evident, and grounded upon those words, Joh. 6.32. My Father gives
you the true Bread from Heaven, which is called the Bread of God, and more
fully in the next Verse explained, Joh. 6.33.
For the Bread of God is He that comes down from Heaven, -- the Bread from
Heaven (...), by way of eminence; otherwise the Mannah of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, is called Bread from Heaven too, as Neh. 9.15. And gave them
Bread from Heaven for their Hunger; so Psa. 105.40. -- and satisfied them with
the Bread of Heaven. But yet considering how infinitely short that Mannah was
of the Blessings of Gospel Grace, Christ makes a Distinction between the Bread
of Moses, and the Bread of God, though Both came down from Heaven. He grants it
to be That which came down from Heaven, but it was not (...).
He that came down from Heaven. As if he had said, It was not Jesus Christ the
Son of the Father, though it was Bread real, yet it was not Bread personal; Moses
gave you not Him, or That Bread from Heaven, Joh. 6.32. middle part. To sum up
all, It is as if he had told them, The Bread which God nourished your Fathers
with miraculously, under the Dispensation of Moses, was not the intended,
spiritual, Gospel-Bread, which God would send under a new Dispensation, but I
am the Bread which my Father gives at Supper. The Israelites had Mannah, but
now my Father offers Me. Thus, our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ is such Bread as
is the Staff of Life to Faith.

Now in the Storehouse of the Gospel we are furnished with this Transcendent,
Mysterious Bread. Oh! who ever beheld among Men or Angels such another Glorious
Loaf as this! he was stamped in the Mill, and ground to Powder, and then molded
into Bread for us, when it pleased the Father to bruise him! Isa. 53.10.
Lo! now there is Bread enough in our Father's House to go the whole Table
round. This is the Bread that strengthens Man's Heart; Ps. 104.15.
it has a Faculty to preserve our Strength, and when our Strength is spent, a
power to renew our Vigor: Though man lives not by other Bread, Matthew. 4.4.
yet he lives by this Bread alone. It is Unleavened Bread, who did no sin,
neither was Guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2.22
It is Bread to be eaten; He that so loved the World as to give his Son, has
cast his Bread upon the waters among much People, to minister Bread for our
Food. They that sold him indeed for Thirty pence did not think him to be Two
hundred pennyworth of Bread to satisfy a multitude here in the Wilderness;
Psa, 34.8.
but we that have tasted that the Lord is good, must cry like the Daughters of
the Horsleech, Pro. 30.15.
Give, give, Lord evermore give us this Bread! Joh. 6.34.
And surely, as we should at all Times be affected, so more especially herewith
when he is known of us in Breaking of Bread and in Prayers. Acts 2.42.


4. The Living water. Bread and Water, Meat and Drink are coupled, they
virtually comprehend all, and contain the several Particulars of a perfect and
complete Entertainment. The Provision that may be eaten is commonly under one
General Term reduced to Bread, and the Portion to be drank, of whatsoever kind,
may also alike be comprehended under the Name of Water. So that here is the
Stay and the Staff, the whole Staff of Bread, and the whole stay of Water, Isa.
3.1. only it must be remembered in a Conformity to the Scope of the Parable (on
which this Spiritual Feast is grounded) that Bread Water, etc. are no more than
Metaphorical and borrowed Terms, to express in a Figure Christ and the Benefits
of the Gospel, representing them to our Faith under distinct and various
Notions. Well, at the Supper of the Parable there is the Gift of this Living
water: See Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the Gift of God, and who it is that says
to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee Living Water. The Woman of Samaria questioned from whence it came,
and did not believe it could be had in the manner Christ reported, Joh. 4.11.
From whence have thou that Living water? She apprehended no other than that
Well of Sychar on the Place, her Eyes were yet opened to see no more than a
common Well of water, she found out Jacob's, but saw not the Well of Jesus; and
therefore cries out, From whence have thou that Living water? But Christ
directs her to seek it in the Benefits and offer of himself, who could furnish
her with such a Water, as would never waste in using, but spring up into a Well
of it in Him or in Her that drank it, Joh. 4.13, 14. Whosoever drinks of this
Water (that is, of this Well at Sychar, or any other Earthly water like it)
shall thirst again; Quo plus sint potae, plus sitiuntur aquae.
(tho it may somewhat allay and slake the thirst at present, yet it never
advances the Partaker into the Fruition of any perfect Good) but whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him, Thirsts no more after any other
Thing, neither through necessity or variety. Shaw's Immanuel, p. 211.212.
shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting Life. Springing up.] The Benefits
of Christ which are set forth by Living water in this Gospel-Feast are like the
Loaves in the Miracle that multiply in the Distribution; Mark 8.19 20.
for the more we drink of this Living water, the more we shall see still
Flowing by. Christ is the Fountain of Life, Song 5.1.
and tho we drink abundantly, we shall never exhaust the ten Thousandth part of
this Living Fountainhead. This is the true Rehoboth, Genesis 26.22
the spacious well that has Room enough for every one that is athirst, Rev.
22.17
to come and drink round it. 2 Samuel 23 15.
This water of the well of Bethlehem comes without Contention, and we need not
call the Well Ezekiel: Genesis 26.20.
For as Christ now is Bread that we need not get with the Peril of our Lives,
so he is Water, Lam. 5.9.
that, to fetch, 2 Samuel 23.16.
we are not bid like the three mighty in David's Guard, to break first through an
Host that encamps against us. Psa. 27.3. Joh. 4.28.
This is a Well where we may leave our water-pot, since when we have drank of
the Water, we carry a well away with us. v. 14.
It is the Lamb's Fountain, and thou may wring more out of this Fleece, than
Gideon's Judge. 638
Bowl full, or Hagar's Genesis 21.15
bottle, or Elijah's four 1 Kings 18.33.
barrels of water. This is none of the bitter water that causes the Number. 5 22.
curse, but a Blessing, when it comes into the Ps. 109.^^
Bowels like water. Our other Drink is Hos. 4.1^
so^^r, but this is a Fountain that yields sweet water Jam. 3 11
. This Precious Liquor, this incomparable and true Aqua vitae, was set abroach
upon the Tree of the Cross, when one of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his
side, and there forthwith came out Blood and Joh. 19.34.
water. And lo! he continues still as a pure River of the water of life,
running plentifully down the Gospel by his Guests at the Table side. In a word,
he is water to cleanse our Filth, Rev. 22.1.
and water to quench our Thirst besides.

5. Flesh to eat. When the mixed multitude in the Wilderness fell a lusting, it
was to eat Flesh, Number. 11.4. insomuch that the Children of Israel wept again,
and said, who shall give us Flesh to eat? and can he provide Flesh for his
People? Psa. 78.20. last words. But lo! he that commanded the Clouds rained
down. Flesh upon them as Dust, and feathered Fowls like as the sand of the Sea,
v. 27. Who indeed would have looked for such a Shower? for when they tempted
God in the Desert, one might rather have feared he should have turned them to
grass with their Flocks and Herds, than have rained Flesh out of the Clouds
upon them. Yet though they had provoked God in the day of Temptation in the
wilderness, he tells them on the morrow ye shall eat Flesh, Number. 11.18. But
alas! what was their Flesh, though the Flesh of Quails, to the Flesh of Jesus
Christ? What was the Flesh he gave unto all this People, in comparison of the
Flesh of the Son of God, which he gives the Soul to feed upon by Faith? Jesus
Christ yields a variety to the Faith of God's Elect; Number. 21.5.
and it does not follow, that their Soul, like those Israelites, does loath him
as light Bread, because their Soul also longs for his Flesh to eat. But we
may here lawfully put in that wish in Job, Oh! Job 31.31.
that we had of his Flesh! God does not call you to eat the Flesh of your Sons,
Jer. 19.9.
but the Flesh of His; nor the Flesh of your Friend, Zech. 13 7
but the Flesh of the man that is his Fellow. What strange Flesh was that which
the Poor Woman in Samaria had, when she boiled her own Son for meat! 2 Kings
6.29. Isa. 13.18.
She parted with the Fruit of her Womb, being stricken through for want of the
Fruits of the Field! Lam. 4.9.
But it is a more astonishing wonder, that God parted with the Son of his Bosom,
that we might eat the Flesh of this Sacrifice! And there is no fear of making
our Brother to offend by eating this Flesh while the World stands. 1 Cor. 8.1^


This mysterious Delicate the Flesh of Christ, contains the Benefits of the
Gospel which make up this Royal Entertainment, that he purchased by his Death
and Sufferings in the Flesh, when he was put to Death in the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18
but quickened by the Spirit. This Doctrine of the Flesh of Christ given for
meat unto our Faith, is a further Exposition of the True Bread, Joh. 6.51. And
the Bread that I will give is my Flesh -- Now God must be first manifest in the
Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 8.3.
and in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and in this Flesh of ours die, to prepare
meat for us; for as the Creatures that have Life die, that we, a while in our
Bodies, by their Death might live, so it is the very Flesh of Christ and him
crucified that must give Life unto our Souls. His Flesh suffered, his Flesh was
pierced, he was hung upon that Flesh book of the Cross, when God gave him to be
meat unto us: His Flesh was powdered in the very Grave where other Things
corrupt, but his Flesh did not see Corruption, Acts 2.31.
to be made ready as a sweet and Dainty Morsel for us. The wrath of God broke
forth upon the Body he had prepared, Heb. 10.5.
and kindled a Fire in his Anger that even boiled him as Flesh within the
Caldron, Mic. 3.3.
and roasted him that his Flesh might be meat indeed for us, Joh. 6.55. his
Flesh was bored through and through, though not a Bone of him should be broken. Thus
was he bruised for our Iniquities, Isa. 53.5. or there should no Flesh be
saved. Hence he has spoken, Matthew. 24.22.
( Joh. 6.57. last words,) He that eats me, even he shall live by me. This
may serve to answer either the Jew's, or the unbelieving Gentile's Question,
Joh. 6.52.
How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? it being not to be understood of a
Sacramental eating, as the Rhemists gloss it, but a spiritual by Faith alone.
Oh! how may we stand amazed at the Provisions in Him whose Name is Wonderful!
Isa. 9.6.
This is the Fifth Dish, the Flesh of Jesus Christ.

6. Blood to drink. Perhaps our Ignorant squeazy old man may loath it, as the
Egyptians did to drink of the water of the River, Exodus 7.18.
after it was smitten with the Rod of Moses, and turned into Blood; but our
New-man redeemed by Blood will take great Delight in it. Alas! we have sinned
our selves into such a Feavour, that our own common Drink inflames; we have
kindled a Burning, which nothing but Blood, the Blood of Christ will quench: if
man tryes to put the Fire out by any Works of Righteousness which he has done,
Tit. 3.5.
the sweat of his Brows will drop in, and like Oil still increase the Flame.
Nay, it is not Water barely, separate from Blood, will quench our Anguish,
though we trusted that we could, Job 40.23.
with the Behemoth, draw up Jordan into our mouths, we must still have Blood to
drink. Oh! it requires great Faith in the Son of God to see it, for otherwise
Corruption will make us too nice to be entertained with Blood. Faith, and Faith
alone is kept alive by it; it cannot, it needs not live upon a more Generous
and Sprightly Liquor than this pure Blood of the Grape; Deuteronomy, 32.14. last
words. 1 Pet. 1.2. p^^t.
it makes every Morsel of the Banquet Savoury, that it is sprinkled with the
Blood of Jesus Christ! Flesh as before, and Blood now, do include the whole
Body, (...), an entire Christ, every Thing in him; it is not only Except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of Man, but (...), Except ye drink his Blood too, ye have
no Life in you, Joh. 6.53. It is not meant of a corporal Drinking him
Sacramentally, as the Papists say, that he speaks of in this Chapter, (as under
the former particular it was hinted to be neither spoken of a Sacramental
Eating of his Flesh) for then except ye partook every one of the Lords Supper,
ye could not be saved; whereas it might so happen, that no space is given (at
least to all) after Conversion to partake of any other Lords Supper, than the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb in Heaven. Besides, it is principally to be
considered, that the Lord's Supper was not instituted till afterward, and
therefore could not be here intended. Indeed it is most evidently a Truth, that
we have Blood both ways to drink; that is, we have it spiritually to receive by
Faith, when the Soul ventures out to fetch in all that it needs from the
Efficacy and virtue of this Blood; and we have it also Sacramentally, as
represented under the Element of Wine, while Love that bled, drops the earnest
into our Hearts, and seals it up in us, (this Consideration will fall in more
properly under the Cup of Consolation). We are now to consider the Blood of
Christ as it notes the special Application of it to the Soul for the Being and
Support of a New Creature. And thus, it is rendered infinitely richer to the
believing Soul than any vinous Liquor to make it fat and flourishing.

Drinking of the Blood of Christ implies an Act of Faith in the Soul which
receives all into it that was wrought by the Blood of Christ without it, or
takes hold of the Virtue of this Blood, and applies it to the proper Use and
End which God himself has given it. To make it more plain; it is Blood to 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. Rev. 7.14.
cleanse, Faith steps out to this Blood, and brings in a cleansing virtue from
it; it is Blood to Isa. 34.3.
soften, Faith makes out to it, and receives in the foftning Influence of this
Blood, till the Stone dissolves, and Ezekiel. 36.26.
mountains are melted with it: it is Blood to Col. 1.20.
atone, Faith runs for the Blood of Atonement hither: It is Blood to Acts
20.28. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1: 14. Rev. 5.9.
redeem, Faith takes in the Redemption by it, and knows that the Job 19.25.
Redeemer lives. It is Blood to justify, ( Romans 5.9.) Faith rests here for
absolution from Guilt, and real Imputation of a Perfect Righteousness without,
to appear at the Bar of God in: It is Blood to confirm, Zech. 9.11. Faith
believes it shall be even as God has spoken, and under its cloud looks up to
the Blood of the Covenant, and sees this Bow in it. In a word, it is Blood to
save, ( Romans 5.9, 10.) and Faith makes readily out to it, 1 Timothy 6.12.
to lay hold upon Eternal Life. It is every way, as the Scripture speaks
abundantly of this Precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1.19
that Faith drinks it in. The manifold Benefits of this Blood of Christ do make
it a Generous Drink to Faith, that as his Flesh is Meat, so his Blood is Drink
indeed, Joh. 6.55.

Blood under the Law was forbidden, Genesis 5.4.
but lo! here is Flesh with the Life, Lev. 17.10, 11.
(that is, with the Blood) thereof allowed us, Faith must receive it in the
Antitype, though Sense was to refrain it under the Type: we must in all our Food
have a recourse to the Mediator, and when we eat of his Banquet, drink his
Blood also. Job 31.17.
We must never eat of our morsel alone without the Heb. 12.24. pt.
Blood of Sprinkling. Indeed it could not have been a Banquet without Blood.
Our Feast had been otherwise spoiled, and all our fair Hopes spilled. Oh!
Blessed, yea, for ever Blessed be the Master of our Feast for this One Thing
among the All Things ready, even the (...) alludes both to the Sacrifices, and
the Place of the Sprinkling the Blood. Charnock, Vol. 2d. p. 896.
Propitiation which we have through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. A
Propitiation,] (...), the Grateful Offering unto God, that every way pleased
him. It was through the Scent of Blood, this perfumed Blood of Christ in the
Nostrils of Jehovah, that God was well pleased. In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, according to the Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. In effusione
Sanguinis fuit complementum Satisfactionis. Davenant in Ep. ad Col. chapter 1.14.
p. 91.
Satisfaction to Justice was completed, when he had filled the Ephah with his
Blood for the measure of our sins. Christ came not by Water only, though a
Fountain to wash in, or a Well to drink of, but he came by Water and Blood, 1 John 5.6. swimming htro' two Seas at once. Water may signify his coming to
sanctify Us, and Blood to satisfy God for us: Our Holiness springs from one,
as he is made of God to us sanctification, and our Happiness flows from the
other, as he is made both our Righteousness and Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.


The maintaining of Justification (as a Charnock, 2d. Vol. p. 1186.
Great man observes) by this Blood seems to be the Great contest between the
True Church and the Antichristian State. It has many Enemies, especially those
two Bands of Warriors, the Papists and Socinians, 2 Pet. 2.1.
that carry away the Beauty of the Cross by denying the Lord that bought them:
It seems to be the more deformed in the Latter, because they have renounced
many Romish Abominations, but will still retain the Greatest. And yet the
Socinians, to take off the Efficacy of Christ's Blood on the Cross, positively
assert that he now makes the Expiation, where he makes the Intercession.
Christ makes our Peace (say they) now in Heaven by the Virtute and Potestate
plena and absoluta quam a Patre consecutus est* Cateches. Racov. (mihi) 16o.
An. 1651.
Absolute Power he has with the Father there; which if true, must shut him
wholly out of Heaven as a Mediator of the Covenant, to admit him in as the
Second Person only in the Godhead. But our High Priest has not entered into the
Holy of Holies without Blood, Heb. 9.7.
which he once offered for the Errors of the People, nor yet as the High
Priests of Old, with the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood, he
entered in once into the Holy Place, (...), when he had found out, or obtained a
Redemption for us, it must not be construed in the present Tense.
having obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. so that our Redemption
is by his Blood, and was accomplished antecedently to his ascending into
Heaven, and sitting at the Right Hand of God. It is the Merit of his Blood he
carried up with him, and which he still, in his Intercession as a Priest,
pleads there. So that the Notion of Christ's reconciling us to God [ by an
absolute Power in Heaven,] without any reference to his Blood, shed on Earth,
is a Socinian Dream, which, with every one that is awake, and stands up from
the Dead, will vanish. The Gospel had been a Dry Feast, whatever Socinians
think of it, if He that made it, had not given us Blood to drink. In a word,
Phil. 3.18.
they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, who will not know him Crucified. And
we must contend earnestly for the Faith, Jude 3.
and for the Faith in his Blood, since a whole Vt prius.
School of Prophets would rob us of the Cup of the New Testament in Christ's
Blood (considered meritoriously,) Luke 22.20
as well as a College of Jesuits deprive us of the same Sacramentally by
denying the Cup in the Lords Supper.

7. The Lamb of God. Christ is still represented in the Scripture by a copious
variety at his Supper of the Parable. As we have the Blood of Christ provided,
so it is of the Lamb (...).
immaculate, 1 Pet. 1.19. a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot. The word
signifies one so perfectly every way accomplished, that a carping Momus which
finds fault with every thing, or the very Herodians that lie in wait to catch
him, shall yet find out no Righteous Charge against him, this Dish at our Feast
was Typically represented by the Paschal Lamb: For so we read in the
Institution of the Jewish Passover, Exodus 12.8. That all the Congregation of
Israel were to take every man a Lamb, Exodus 12.5
according to the house of their Fathers, a Lamb for a house. This male of the
first year taken out from the Sheep, or from the Goats, was a very apt
representation of the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World, as
we read in the Salutation of John, when he sees Jesus, Joh. 1.29. In the
Passover the Lamb was entire and undivided, in the Gospel it is a whole Christ
prepared, his entire Humane Nature united to the Godhead, his whole Body and
his whole Blood set forth collectively under one, as before we had him all
distributively under two, that is, Bread and Water, Flesh and Blood apart. We
may behold him here in the Lamb, as an entire mess that is served all in at
once. We read it particularly expressed, that when Samuel entertained Saul and
his Servant, there was a single joint provided, 1 Samuel 9.24. (and indeed one
was enough for Saul who had no portion with David,) The Cook took up the
shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul: but God required
the Jews to make ready their Lamb, as it consisted of every joint whole, not so
much as the Legs or Appurtenances thereof excepted, Exodus 12.8. to signify a
Redeemer that was not to be parted, but to be given all away. This is the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev, 13.8. latter part, that is, he was
determinately slain in the Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, being infallibly
ordained to it, and therefore looked upon by God that has yesterday, to day and
for ever always present before him, as if it had been done from thence
actually; and he was slain virtually, for Adam had the benefit thereof from the
beginning, when God promised the seed, Genesis 3.24.
before he drove out the man, as much as if the Act had passed. Well, the Table
of the Gospel has this most Glorious Provision on it of the Lamb slain, and
slain actually for the Entertainment in these last Days. Heb. 1.2.
Lo! God has pitied the Lost Sinner, like that poor wayfaring man, and has
not spared to dress of the Lamb that lay in his own Bosom for him. 2 Samuel 12.3.
This Lamb of the first year, this Firstling of the Flock is brought as a Lamb
to the Slaughter to be served up in meat for them to whom it is the Fathers
good pleasure to give the Kingdom. Isa. 53.7. Luke 12.32
This Lamb was a richer present from the King of Heaven, tho One, than that
which the King of Moab rendered unto the King of Israel in one hundred Thousand
Lambs, 2 King 3.4
and as many Rams with the Wool. It is true of Believers on Earth, as well as
spoken of such in Heaven, the Lamb shall feed them. Rev. 7.17.


8. The Fatted Calf for Prodigals. The Gospel and the Blessings of it by Christ
in the sumptuous Provisions made ready are set forth in a Parable by Christ,
under the very same Resemblance. We need not be any ways ashamed of Christ or
his words, Mark 8.38
in this adulterous and sinful Generation, nor think it low Divinity to preach,
or speak as Christ teaches us. He tells us, Luke 15.13. of a younger Son that
gathered all together, and took his Journey into a far Country, and there
wasted his Substance with Riotous living, and that he had V. 14.
spent all, though he went off at first with never so great a Stock, and he began
to be in want; but yet afterward, when he v. 20.
arose and came to his Father, his Father, when he was yet a great way off, saw
him, has compassion on him, embraces him, brings him into his House, and
presently orders a sumptuous, costly Entertainment to treat him at coming
home. v. 23.
Bring hither the Fatted Calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry. This
is the Parable, this is the Letter, but let us see how the Spirit gives more
life. 2 Cor. 3.6. last words.


The Great God in the dispensation of the Gospel deals after the same way with
Sinners. We Foolish Gentiles were once like this younger Son, happy and wanting
nothing in our Father's House, God made man upright, Jews and Gentiles were
both in Adam perfect: But we quickly grew Prodigal, and run into a great excess
of riot; Eccl. 7.29
[we sought out many Inventions.] Acts 11.18
But nevertheless under a new Covenant God has granted Repentance unto Life,
Heb. 2.10.
in the bringing of many Sons and Daughters unto Glory, and he has brought
forth an Entertainment upon his receiving of poor Gentiles home. These tender
mercies of our God were displeasing to the Elder Son, Luk 1.78.
and grievous in the sight of the Jews. These had, though the Parable does not
expressly note it, Genesis 21.11. 12.
been taken first, (after the Revolt in Adam) into their Father's House; they
had been brought into a Church State a great while before, and treated so well
with the Fatness of the Olive, they had forgot the Poverty and Distress of the
younger Brother, and grew angry to see how these Gentiles are treated with the
Riches of the Gospel; Romans 11.17.
whereas he had never bestowed more than the Beggarly Elements of the Law on
them, not so much as a Kid, nothing like this fatted Calf to rejoice or be
merry with. But lo! Gal. 4.9.
however it pleases the Father, Luke 15.29
though it angers his Eldest Son. He puts on Bowels, and is a Father of mercies
to a wandering, disobedient Son; he spares him, tho he were not a Son that
served him. Mal. 3.17.
He does not leave poor hungry, and Thirsty Travelers to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way, Psa. 107 40 Psalm 103.1^
but like as a Father pitieth his Children, he provideth a Gracious, Heavenly
Entertainment; kills the best to invite the worst to Supper; the Fatted Calf,
the Furniture of Gospel Grace to feast us, that we might have an Allowance at
the King's Table. 2 King. (...) 30.
The Woman at Endor killed a Fat Calf to entertain a di distressed Prince, 1 Samuel 28.24.
but the Father in the Parable kills his to entertain a distressed Prodigal.
^en. 18. v. 2.7.
Abraham killed his Calf for the sake of Three Angels, but He in the Parable
for any one Sinner that repents to cause a joy among Angels. Luke 5.10.


9. The Marrow of rich Forgiveness. The Forgiveness of Sins (where the poor
Soul has been made sensible of Sin and Wrath, both as guilty and condemned) is
such a Provision of the Grace of God, as well resembles Marrow. The Remission
of sins that are past, (Romans 3.25.) is a Hearty, supporting Diet for us, being
Pro. 16.24
Health unto the Soul, and a morsel that makes the Bones fat. Prove. 15.30.
When Christ speaks to the Paralytick, ( Mat. 9.2.) Son be of good cheer,
((...), take Heart, Son) thy Sins be forgiven thee. Tho his condition might
have sunk him to the Heart, as we may gather from the word, yet the News of
Remission was enough to recover his Spirits, and put him into Heart again. We
may take notice of many a Poor Soul, that has wanted the sense of Forgiveness,
or Pardoning Love to help it, as Jonadab observed of Amnon (one of the King's
Sons) that though he stood in so near a Relation to David, 2 Samuel 13.4
yet he was lean from Day to Day. But Forgiveness has helped a poor Servant of
the Lord's, tho lean-fleshed, that he has been satisfied (like David himself)
as with Marrow and Fatness, Psa. 63.5. The Forgiveness of our sins is Health,
but the Apprehension of our Guilt dries the bones. It breeds Marrow in us,
when it has been brought first as Marrow to us. Pro. 17.22
-- The Lord shall satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy Bones, Isa.
58.11. As there is a Present Refreshment, so it yields an after-Improvement of
our Souls, when we are feasted, or fed with the Gracious Sense of Pardon. A
Malefactor condemned to die would find a Feast unsavory, and a Banquet made
only to feed him against the day of Slaughter, Jam. 5.5.
but the news of a Pardon would make it sweet and Dainty. Now at the Table of
the Gospel there is this Dish of Marrow set. Christ has such a Plenty in
himself, as affords of this sort also, in whom we have -- the Forgiveness of
Sins, Col. 1.14. So Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you therefore, Men and
Bretheen, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. We
must come indeed in Repentance, and it is fit we should, to our Father, with the
Ropes about our Necks, 1 Kings 20.31.
but he meets us as he did the Prodigal, and gives Remission to us; as he makes
a Feast, so he pardons our Fault, that we may partake of all acquitted.

10. The Food of Knowledge. I call it so, as warranted from that expression,
Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to my Heart, that shall feed you
with Knowledge and understanding. Knowledge is Provision, your Souls are fed by
Knowledge, as your Bodies are by Food. This is a sort of Spiritual Repast that
may cause the Eater in some measure to express it like that of Solomon -- Yea
my Heart had great experience of wisdom. Eccl. 1.16
It is a Dish, that the more we take of, the clearer we find our He was
refreshed, and recovered his lost spirits, whereof part went into his optic
nerves and so cleared his sight, which was much darkened by Famine, as is usual.
Mr. Pool.
Eyesight. Jonathan when he put forth the end of the Red that was in his hand,
and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth, his Eyes were
enlightened, 1 Samuel 14.27. He was almost Blind with Famine, that is, Being
enfeebled with extreme Labor and Emptiness, his Eyes waxed dimm, which now by
this little refreshing were enlightened again. Arthur Jackson.
his Spirits were so weak for want of Food, that he could not discern as at
other Times; but a little refreshment revived him, fetched his Spirits again,
and made his Sight clearer; so when Wisdom enters into thine Heart, and
Knowledge is Pleasant unto thy Soul, ( Prove. 2.10.) it is a Provision that
gives Understanding to the Simple. This makes the Eyes of the Spouse like the
Fish-pools of Heshbon, (Cantic. 7.4.) Fuller, Pisgab Sight, pt. 1st. p 66.
of a clear and perspicuous vision in the mysteries of Christ.

Now in the Gospel-Entertainment there is this Food of Knowledge ready. Our
Great Provider when he makes a Feast does not starve our Judgments. He makes
ready enough to suffice the Faculties of a Man, or the Graces of a Christian.
This of Knowledge is a Portion of his Feast he sends our Understandings. He
provides Good Doctrine to rectify and inform a Bad Judgment. The Lord appoints
us his Truth, that hereby we may know (and avoid) the Spirit of Error, (1 John
4.6.) The Gospel is the Treasury of Wisdom, that however we may be 1 Cor. 4.10.
Fools for Christ, yet we may not appear Fools, and of no Understanding, in
him. We have lost our Knowledge which we had in Adam at our first Table in
Paradise, and therefore have Food again at our second Table in Christ, that
Col. 3.10.
renews us in Knowledge. We had gone so long Fasting, that we were empty of the
things of God, but now have a Gospel that we may be chap. 1.9.
filled with the knowledge of his Will. The Knowledge of the Gospel indeed
still increases our Appetite, whets our Mind, provokes us into more Enquiries,
and follows Us, Hos. 6.3.
until we follow on to know the Lord; but withal affords so large a measure,
that our utmost Capacities may run over, though the Hand that fills us does also
press our Measure down. The Gospel is a Feast that contains the utmost increase
of Knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.2. pt.
it has all Mysteries and all Knowledge, and he that partakes of the
Entertainment shall know of the things, what they are, and find how they are
all given of God, to increase our understanding. It is the Meat and Drink of a
Christian to know, as it was of Christ, to do his Father's Will. The Feast is a
Feast of Knowledge, and while you are feeding, you may be adding still to what
you have, not only to Virtue, Knowledge, as 2 Pet. 1.5. that is, one kind of
Grace to another, but even to Knowledge it self a larger measure and Degree of
Understanding.

11. The Nourishment of Faith. As in the Gospel you may be fed with Knowledge,
so also nourished up in the words of Faith and of Good Doctrine. The Apostle
does very expressly in that place, 1 Timothy 4.6. compare our Faith, or reception
of the saving Truths of the Gospel, to Nourishment. You may eat, but you will
not thrive without it. We may have the Word for our Food, but it will not
Nourish us, if it be not mingled with Faith to make it nutrimental, Heb. 4.2.
For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them, but the Word preached
did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Not
being mixed,] or as the (...).
Word may import, not incorporated by mixing. The Food must unite, incorporate,
be turned into In succum and sanguinem.
an Alimentary Juice, mingle it self with our Blood and Spirits to make it
nourishing. Thus, Faith must unite and incorporate, mix the Provisions with the
New Creature, before we are by the Word of the Gospel nourished up in our
Father's House. Faith is so nourishing a Provision to the New Nature, that the
just are said to live by it, Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38. The Doctrine of Faith in the
Gospel, and the Grace of Faith in the Soul, do make a blessed Nourishment in
the New Man, when Both meet together. Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and
the Fruit of Christ's meritorious Purchase, it is given in the behalf of
Christ, Phil. 1.29. Faith, as Mr. Anthony Burgess, Spiritual Refinings, Fol.
1st. pt. p. 62, and p. 169.
one expresses, has several Acts, Knowledge, Assent, Fiducial Application;
and the Scripture does by a Synechdoche express the whole Nature of Faith by
one Act of it. Now the Gospel-Provision affords and maintains such a Principle
in the Soul, as exerts Faith in the Complex, and produces it in all its
various Acts. Heb. 8.2.
There is not a Guest of the True Table which the Lord has pitched, and not
Man, but he has Ordained among other Provisions for him like precious Faith
with Us. 2 Pet. 1.1.
There Is not a Saint but shall find it in the All things ready; Luke 14.17.
it is one of the Parts, and not the least of the Entertainment; and it is a
Dish to be had at this Feast only. A Man full of Faith, like Stephen, Acts 6.8.
is one whom the Entertainment nourishes and cherishes, Ephesians. 5.29.
Psalm. 17.14.
and has had his Belly filled with hid Treasure. Romans 10.8.17.
The Word of Faith which we preach, and your Faith that comes by hearing is
some of the Royal Provision of the King's Meat, Dan. 1.5.
to be found at God's Table only.

12. The Feast of Holiness, inward Sanctification of the Heart by a cleanly
purifying Bunch of Hyssop, better than a Dinner of any other Herbs. This clean
Hyssop may be said for the Virtue of it, as was of the grown Mustard Seed for
its Dimensions, Mat. 13.32.
to be the greatest among Herbs. Nay, indeed we are not here speaking of such a
poor, low statur'd Hyssop as with us runs upon the ground, but of that which
runs up in the Man whose Name is the Some indeed affirm literally that haec
Planta in Judae^ arborescet. Grotius in Joh. 19.29*
Branch, (Zech. 6.12.) into a Tree as high as Heaven: It is from hence that
this purifying Branch, or Holy Bunch is gathered. Christ is He who of God is
made unto us -- Sanctification -- 1 Cor. 1.30. I ground the Comparison on the
Ceremonial Cleansing of the Leaper, as was instituted under the Law, Lev. 14.4.
where among other purifying Ingredients, this of the Hyssop is one, to which
David alludes, as it Typed out the righteous Branch to be raised to David, Jer.
23.5. when he cries out in the Bitterness of his Soul for this sweet Herb in
the Garden of God, Ezekiel. 28.13, etc.
to dress his other Meat; see Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be
clean: as if he had broken out into this Self-abhorrency, I am a filthy Leaper,
Joh. 13.10
and I need to eat of the Dish that is most fit to cleanse me, let me be
therefore every whit clean through this sanctified Provision made ready, 1 Pet.
1.16.
Rev. 22.11
being neither Act. 11.8.
common nor unclean it self. I would be Holy as God is Holy, and though by Nature
and Practice I am now otherwise, yet I would not remain filthy still.

Now in the Gospel our Feast-maker has also provided this blessed Dish ready:
God has prepared his Table of hallowed Bread, Holy, as well as Evangelical
Furniture, Holiness it self to Feast you with a pure Conscience. 1 Timothy 3.9.
As this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. so it is
the Work of God to form it, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. As the Precept of the Gospel
requires Holiness, Heb. 12.14
without which no Man shall see the Lord, so the Promise does encourage it, and
the Spirit by an Almighty Operation works it: He creates a Principle within
that yields it, and a Life without that acts it; for 'till Grace be infused
into the Heart, it cannot in the Conversation be diffused or shed abroad.

There is Sanctification enough provided to supply our utmost wants thereof; a
Stock of it prepared, to serve for Spirit, Soul and Body, as the Apostle
Prays for his Thessalonians to be thoroughly Feasted with it, 1 These. 5.23.
And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole
Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. God would not have a Feast to be made under the Gospel without a
universal Holiness, to run through all the Parts of it: Provision that
sanctifies, and Provision sanctified, Holy it self, and to make Us Holy too.
Indeed (as he says Isa. 3^.24.
) if the very Oxen and the young Asses that ear the ground, should eat clean
Provender, which had been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan, much more
would he assign holy Diet for his Table in these days of our Purification.
Corrupt Mal. 1.7.
Priests may, but our Great High Priest will never set any Polluted Bread upon
his Altar.

13. The Hidden Mannah of Election. This is one of the glorious Dishes of our
Feast, and was garnished from Eternity, to be served up before our Face in
Time: Mat. 13.35
Though it has been a secret kept hid, Psalm. 25 14.
yet the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. If the Lord open a wide
Door, Rev. 3.8.
his People may look in and see what God has done for them from Eternity in an
1 Kings 22.25.
inner Chamber. Our Work here is to 1 Timothy 6.12.
fight, and hereafter to him that overcomes will he give to eat of the hidden
Mannah, Rev. 2.17. This overcoming indeed will be fully known in Heaven, and
yet the Saints shall obtain lesser Victories before. 2 Timothy 2.3.
The good Soldiers shall gain the 2 Timothy 2.5. 1 Cor. 15.57.
Mastery, though not the Crown here, through our Lord Jesus Christ that gives us
the Victory. For when we have so much of that Faith (spoken of under the
eleventh particular) as to have Victory over the World, 1 John 5.4.
and other Enemies by it; this is the overcoming in this Life, that so far as
is consistent with the Knowledge of our Election here, we are become the
Brethren beloved of God, and knowing also our Election, 1 These. 1.4. Indeed the
Saints do rather taste than eat of this Hidden Mannah here: God gives them
some, Job 26.14.
but lo! how small a Portion is it now? it is no more than just to save their
longing; he reserves it as it were for Glory, Exodus 16.33.
to bring forth the whole Pot hereafter: It Is too rich a Dish for every Saint
while on Earth to spend upon in common. Thou must be contented to see this Dish
as it were but now only served in, and must not murmur at the good Man of the
House, Matthew. 20.11.
if it be carried off (as to a great part) again, and laid up in the Secrets of
God, from whence it came forth, to be kept unto the Marriage-Supper of the
Lamb. Rev. 19.7.


It is clear from the Spirit of Revelation that there is an Election of
Persons, though some would throw in their Vote, to decide it for Propositions,
being Enemies to the Apostle's word Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.5. 1 Cor. 2.16.
Predistinated, and bring in that vain thing, Post-destination; but the Apostle
who had the mind of Christ, has given us a clear light shining in this dark
Place, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in Him before the Foundation of
the World. The Father pitched upon an Elect Company, whom first he gave to
Christ, and afterward bestowed Christ on them; so 2 These. 2.13. God has from
the beginning chosen you to Salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the Truth: Which place discovers the Election of Means, as well as
the End, Faith and Holiness here, as well as Salvation in Heaven. That also is
a full Text and a comfortable, 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the Foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. We may
look upon our selves as the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, Matthew. 15.24.
Joh. 10.14.
but the Good Shepherd knows the Sheep by a Mark the Sheep see not. The
Scripture also speaks individually, and in the Distribution of this hidden
Mannah, gives a Portion as it were to seven, Eccl. 11.2.
and also to eight; a few particular Women, with Clement also, and other
Fellow Laborers with the Apostle, whose Names are in the Book of Life, Nomina
non nisi singulo^um.
Phil. 4.3. The Doctrine of Election is so personal, as well as express, that
the Spirit of God in the Scripture descends so low as to a Rufus, chosen in the
Lord, Romans 16.13. and the Elect Lady, 2 Epist. Joh. v. 1. Thus we have a
manifestation through the Word, of the Secrets in this Pot of Mannah, being the
Mystery of his Will, which he has purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1.9. The Scripture
also lays it down absolutely, without any limitations of it to the foreseen
Conditions of Man's Faith and Obedience: It is he has Chosen, not as he
foresaw we would be Holy, Ephesians. 1.4.
but positively that we should be Holy. The Lord in tender as well as sovereign
Mercies, did not look to what we might be, (That had left Salvation uncertain
to every one) or to what we would be, (That might have concluded us all
immediately under Wrath) but he looked to his own Pleasure, what we should be,
Romans 9.23.
when he made us Vessels of Mercy (and that makes Salvation certain unto some.)
I say, the Scripture lays it down absolutely, without any conditionality: Names
are written so close in the Book of Life, that it leaves not room to put in an
[ If] between. -- The Children being not yet born, neither having done any good
or evil, that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls, Romans 9.11. I know See Dr. Hammond upon the
Place.
some do Interpret the Place by restraining it to point out God's Election of
Jacob to a better Condition than Esau in the Temporals of this Life: But, 1.
Esau's Temporal Portion compared with Jacob's was not so much behind his
Brother's, as to make a Parallel to the Divine Love or Hatred, v. 13. Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Now, though God did not bestow the Land of
Canaan upon the Posterity of Esau, yet he gave them Mount Seir, Deuteronomy. 2.5. and
he seems to bestow more in outward Things upon his Person, than he did on
Jacob, sets him up as my Lord Esau with four hundred Men, Genesis 32.4. v. 6.
which were large Crusts and Parings of Common Bounty, to throw a Dog with this
Motto on his Collar, Romans 9.13.
Esau have I hated. 2. These Men which speak of an Election from foreseen Works
in the matters of Eternity, would do well to give us some fair Account why the
Election then here in Temporals (as they suppose it) is yet an Election not at
all of Works. Now sure if Works take so much with God, that he chooses from
the foresight of them to an everlasting State of Happiness, it might seem the
more congruous to Reason, that God should have chose the Temporal Lot and
Condition of those two Brothers, from the same things foreseen: If they resolve
it, as they must, into the good Pleasure of God, that he acted as a Sovereign
in this Election to Temporals, being said expressly, Romans 9.11.
not of Works, but of him that calls; then why must not God be allowed as
well to be sovereign in the other, but tied to our Works there? Alas! what
should we gain by Limiting the Holy One of Israel? Psalm. 78.41.
for the allowing God a Sovereignty does (as was said before) make Salvation
sure unto some, whereas the leaving it upon the Mutability and unstedfastness
of our Wills, had been to make Salvation equally uncertain, and very doubtful,
if not impossible to all.

The Spirit of God fixes upon a variety of (...) Mat. 11.26

(...) Romans 9.11.

(...) Act. 2.23.


Words in the New Testament, to express this Doctrine of Election by, and
discovers that the very Calling, that is, an Efficacious, saving Call of Grace
in working the New Creature, is but subservient to an Eternal Purpose, Romans
8.28. but that Purpose carries security in its Bosom, for the Election has
always obtained it, Romans 11.7. They are not vain words, but Deuteronomy. 32.47.
it is your Life, in those words of Peter, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather,
Brethren, give diligence to make your It is dangerous to tread on the highest
round first, and here it is impossible Culverwet The White Stone, p. 167.
Calling and Election sure. God does not only write down the Names of his Elect
in the Book of Life, but he writes such a Nature or Law within their Hearts,
that they may at last be brought to read their Names in that other Volume of
his Book.

I know this Mannah we are treating of does not please every Man's Taste: though
Grace counts it pleasant, Corruption calls it fulsom, and the Old Man in our
Flesh spits it up again. Election! Joh. 6.60.
Election! This is a hard saying, who can hear it? alas! it savours so much of
the Sovereign Grace of God, that Man is too prone to rebel, and fight against
God. We have a clear Specimen or Proof hereof from the Jews, when Christ
Preached up this Subject to that untoward generation; Acts 2.40.
see Luke 4. from the 25th. to the 29th. Verse; they bore his Discourse, 'till
he came to Limit the Grace of God unto some, Jude v. 22.
making a Difference, as, Though there were many Widows in Israel, in the days
of Elias, yet unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a City of
Sidon, unto a Woman that was a Widow; and many Lepers were in Israel in the
time of Elizeus ( or Elisha) the Prophet, and none of them was cleansed saving
Naaman the Syrian: And lo! now they can bear no longer, but break out into a
Rage, and would have cut off the Preacher, though the Prince of Life; Acts 3.15.
and murdered him, if they could, before the time. -- All they in the Synagogue
when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust
him out of the City, and led him unto the Brow of the Hill, (whereon their City
was built) that they might cast him down headlong: They grew outrageous, (...),
they were filled with a Stomachful wind, and would have let out That, and the
Blood of our Lord at the Brow of the Hill together: Their Fury was precipitant,
and would have Tumbled him (if it had been possible) into Hell, for Preaching a
Doctrine he brought them down from Heaven.

It is true, 2 Cor. 12.1
that the Grace of the Gospel does not bring the Elect to Visions and
Revelations, and unwritten means of knowing it; v. 7.
it does not exalt them above measure, to carry them into the Heights, and open
the Book of Election immediately, as it lies before the Face of God. 1 Cor. 4.6^
This is to be wise above what is written, and to pretend to open what is shut
up in the Purposes of Eternal Counsel: For Election was first in God, but it is
to be last seen of Us; He began, but we must end with it. We are not to look
only to the Purposes of Grace in God's mind from everlasting, but must take in
his Operative Grace (as Dr. Goodwin's Works Fol. 2d. Vol. on Election. p. 9.
a great Man expresses it) in Calling, comprehended under it. The Grace of the
Gospel instead of leaving us to climb up to the Throne of God, carries us
humbly to the Foot of Jacob's Ladder, and sets us up upon the Round of
Sanctification that stands next to us, from which though our Beginnings are
small, Job 8.7.
yet our latter End shall greatly increase, 'till it reach out from the
Root-Grace in Election, to the Top-stone in Glory: Zech. 4.7.
It carries us unto the Bible in the written Word, and directs us to read the
Transcript, or the Handwriting within our Heart, Col. 2.14.
and by the Help of this Fescue we may see whose Image and Superscription we
bear, Matthew. 22.20.
and when we discern Grace, we may surely read both our Election and the
Epistle of Christ together. 2 Cor. 3.3.
This brings in

14. The Royal Dainties of Assurance: Election and Assurance are both so nigh
of kin, Ephesians. 2.15.
that of twain they make up (in the Point of Comfort and Satisfaction about our
State) one clear Evidence in the New Man. From the Knowledge of our
Sanctification springs the Knowledge of our Election, and from the Knowledge of
our Election springs up Assurance. The Chain of Salvation is fastened with sure
Links, though some of the poor Saints can discern neither end of it. Romans 8.30.
Moreover whom he did praedestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Royal
Dainties of Assurance.] It deserves a high Name: Jacob in blessing Asher his
second Son by Zilpah, whom she had Named the Son of her Happiness, Genesis 30.13
bestows this Kingly Epithet upon his Table, Genesis 49.20. Out of Asher his
Bread shall be fat, and he shall yield Royal Dainties. Assurance is the
white-stone, on which the New Name Copied out of the Book of Life is written,
Rev. 2.17. latter part. -- And will give him a White Stone, and in the Stone a
New Name written, which no Man knows, saving he that receives it. The Holy
Ghost seems to allude, as Durham.

Dr. J. Collings, Supplement to Mr. Pool's Engl. Annotations.


Interpreters observe, to the Judicial Custom of some Heathen Nations, in their
Acquitting and Condemning Malefactors, as also in their Elections of men to any
Trust or Honor, in all which they were wont to take white and black Stones; on
the white Stones were written the Names of the Persons absolved or chosen, and
on the black Stones was no Name written: Now he that received the Black Stone,
if a Malefactor, was surely Cast and Executed; if a Candidate, or one that
stood for an Election, yet (nigro carbone notatus) he was rejected; but He that
had the White Stone, with his Name upon it, was acquitted from the Punishment,
or honorably Chosen into Place or Privilege: So the Assurance of the Favor
of God in Electing or Accepting Grace and Love, is compared to the Name written
upon the White Stone of him that was saved alive, or made Choice of. These are
the Royal Dainties of the Gospel, which are made ready at this Supper of the
Parable, and unto some are given, though our Father which is in Heaven does not
Carve them to every one that eats of the Childrens Bread. Truth of Grace, and
Assurance of Grace, are a Blessed Couple, though they often dwell asunder. The
Apostle speaks of a (...).
Plerophory, or a Full Assurance, Heb. 6.11. and Chapt. 10.22. But the Spirit
does not fill every Sail we hoise, but often breaths in a lesser Gale, when we
make toward Immanuel's Land. The Knowledge of our Personal Election and
Assurance of Eternal Life, are Royal Dainties that none can receive, except it
be given him (in a peculiar manner) from above. Joh. 3.27.
We read our Evidences for Heaven (says Dr. Bates, Sermons on Death, p. 171.
an eminent Divine) in the Light of God's Countenance: And as he was a free
Agent at first to cast his Eye, so he is still at sovereign Liberty where he
will cause his Face to shine. Psalm. 67.1.


15. The Evangelical Honeycomb dropping Free Grace. A Honeycomb of it self
drops, you need not wring out the sweetness of it. 1 Samuel 14.26.
And when the People were come into the Wood, the Honey dropped: The coming of
the People into that Wood had no Influence upon the Honey, nor their
continuance by it any Virtue upon the Distillation, but it dropped from its own
i. e. A Natural Disposition while it flows, to fall down in Drops.
intrinsic fluency: So the Grace of God distills of its own accord, it drops
upon the Creature freely, this Honey- Dew that descends upon the Mountains of
Sion comes of its own accord. Psalm. 133.3.
The Lord commands the Blessing, and it tarries for no concurrence in any of
the Sons of Men. Mic. 5.7.
If God does but break his Love to Us, it is a Love that drops, a Love that
distills so fast, we need no Hand to squeeze it. Now the Gospel is the Treasury
where it drops, this is our Canaan now that flows with Milk and Honey. Numb.
13.27.
Lo! here God has provided the Rivers, Job 20.17.
the Floods, the Brooks of Noney and Butter. Grace is a Stream that is Free, and
runs without Desert, or else it would be a River like Jordan, Psalm. 114.3.
quickly driven back.

When he has brought Us into his Banqueting House, we shall see it to be his
Arms drawn over the Banner of Love; Cantic. 2.4.
I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4. It is a Free Gift, and we need not be shye
to take it: This is a Honey that Bring's the King's Blessing, a Jonathan may
come in, and need not fear a Readiness Curse to eat it. 1 Samuel 14.27, 28.
This Honeycomb of Free Grace may be mixed with all our Acknowledgments we make
to God, Psalm. 101.1.
when we sing of Mercy. Though common Honey was forbidden to be used in any
Sacrifice under the Law, Lev. 2.11. yet we cannot offer the Sacrifice of Praise
under the Gospel, Zech. 4.7. lat. pt.
if we mix not This Honey, and cry Grace, Grace, unto it. This has a sweeter
Taste than any, it is beyond any Corporal Preparations, being sweeter than
Honey or the Honeycomb: How sweet are thy words unto my Taste, yea sweeter
than Honey to my Mouth! Psalm. 119.103.

16. The Fatness of God's House in Ordinances: He has made ready the Ministry,
which he has given to be Meat, and Ordinances as the Dishes in which the Feast
is served. He appoints Divine Institutions as Food for Nourishment, and Divine
Officers to administer the Banquet too: He affords a Divine Presence in his own
Appointments, which fattens and fills them up unto us: His Paths drop Fatness,
Psalm. 65.11
when he walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks. Rev. 2.1.
There be Fat Sacrifices in God's House, though we can perform but poor lean
Service. When we bring our own, we offer lean Kine; but if we offer his, they
are Fatlings that come up with Acceptance upon his Altar. Isa. 60.7.
We are apt indeed to wait upon the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.35.
and attend with much Distraction, but lo! in God's House when we see what he
has done, there we shall behold the Fat and the Head in Order. Lev. 1.12.
God's House is rich, you shall meet with enough to spend on there, and to
carry home besides. Many a Favorite of God's, when he has gone from an
Ordinance, has found that a Mess of Meat has followed him from the King. 2 Samuel 11.8.
Oh! the Stores that God has brought forth in Ordinances, as Scriptures,
Sermons, Sacraments, and a House-full of Prayer and Praise, by which he says,
(as to his People, at the slaughter of Gog) Ye shall be filled at my Table!
Fzek. 39.20. form. part.
If you go into the Sanctuary and enquire, you shall find God does not keep an
empty House for you, but he makes such Provisions in the Ordinances for his
Guests, Psalm. 36.8.
that they shall be satisfied with the Fatness of thine House.

17. The Supplies of the Spirit of Jesus. Ordinances will not of themselves be
a Feast without God's Spirit: Romans 1.4.
He must be a Spirit of Holiness to regenerate, and a Spirit of residence to
inhabit, a Spirit to change, and a Spirit to dwell in us, that may abide with
us for ever. Joh. 14.16
Now at this Feast he is wont to shed on us the Renewings of the Holy Ghost.
Tit. 3.5.
It is the Office of the Spirit here to put us into a Capacity to glorify God
and enjoy him. The Spirit stamps a Divine Impression, and then witnesses to us
that we are the Children of God. Romans 8.16.
We lose much of the Savor of the Word, when we have forgotten how it sounded
forth; the Spirit therefore is provided to quicken and refresh our Memories and
Understandings, when it brings all things to our Remembrance: Joh. 14.26.
It is to help our Infirmities in Prayer; Romans 8.26.
we know not what to Pray for as we ought, 'till the Spirit works a Sense of
what we need, and stirs up a Praying Frame in us. Christ had the Spirit
without measure, Joh. 3.34.
an inexpressible Effusion of the Holy Ghost was poured forth on him, and he
has made ready some Droppings of that Spirit to descend on Us, as we sit at
Meat. When your Spirit is faint, still he has the Residue of the Spirit for
you, Mal. 2.15. when you cannot eat as you would of the King's Venison, God
has then provided you his Spirit to quicken you to your Meat, and make your
Stomach sharper. You need not rise without a Supply of the Holy Spirit, where
you may (like the Disciples) according to your measure, Act. 13.52.
be filled with the Holy Ghost. God's Spirit will make up the Imperfections of
our own, and be helpful still to furnish us, though we want spiritual Blessings
in any heavenly things whatever: I will pour out my Spirit unto you, Prove.
1.23. I will put my Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36.27. If you have had a little
measure of the Spirit of God at one time, he has prepared enough to infuse a
Double Portion, which you shall receive perhaps at another time from the
Fullness of the same Spirit. It is not only a Stook that will reach to some few
Individuals, as suppose a Portion to Me and to Thee, but a supply for the whole
Israel of God. And we may now under the Gospel expect a more plentiful
Effusion of the Spirit to come, than has been seen yet in Drops, and wait for
the full Shower, until the Spirit be poured from on high, Isa. 32.15. And in a
word then, if you were never so greedy after this New Wine, you might still be
filled with the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.18.


18. The Morsel of Hope for them that fail not to sit with the King at Meat. We
are saved by Hope, Romans 8.24. We are sometimes tossed in a Storm at Sea, we are
ready to be drowned with our own Tumultuous Waves, but Hope steps in as an
Anchor of the Soul, and saves our Ship from splitting, that we make no Wrack
upon the Fair Havens side. The Sea is safe, though it it be not smooth, thou
sailest on to Heaven: Thy Ship may reel, thy Table shake, thy Banquet for a
little moment lose its relish; thy Fears may cause thee to apprehend the Storm
will surely make thee lose thy Meal, but so long as thou keepst thy seat, and
holdst by Christ that sits at Table with thee, thy Fears will shortly vanish,
and thou shall find a Hand to pick thy Morsel up: Though long at Sea, yet thou will quickly get a View of that Cape of Good Hope through Grace: 2 These. 2.16.
Job 8.13. Prove.
The Hope of the Hipocrite may even dash him out out of Countenance, but the
Hope and Expectation of the Righteous is found at this Banquet to be a Hope
that makes not ashamed. He that feeds at home, Romans 5.5
that is, hopes God will be merciful, because he is temperate in all things,
or wrongs and defraudeth none, has not one solid Morsel that will yield saving
Nourishment; but he that sets his Hope on Jehovah, apprehending none but a God
in Christ to save him, has obtained the Better hope, and got a true Portion of
the Feast. This Entertainment has all in every kind we need, and our Days
would be spent without Hope, if our Help did not ly here; but as the Prophet
speaks, the Lord will be the Hope of his People, and the Strength of the
Children of Israel, Joel 3.16. latter part. And again, The Eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, Psa. 33.18. If thou
have yet obtained help of God in no other kinds, thou may however, so long as
thou art found at Gods Feast, Psa. 71.14
find hope continually. If thou art not plentifully rich in Faith, thou may
be poor, and yet meet with Hope, Job 5.16. So the Poor has hope, low in thy
Spirits, and yet lifted upwards, that thou do not sink into Despondency, or
stick, when thou art sunk in the miry Clay.

19. The full meal of Contentment. When thou have eaten and art full, thou
shall surely feel quietness in thy Belly. Thou shall obtain so much to make up
a Spiritual Interest, that thy Portion in God will quiet thee, tho thou have
not thy Part in many other Things. -- I have learned in whatsoever state I am
therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11. Tho carnal desires will be discomposed,
yet a Gracious mind will be settled, when the will of the Flesh is
contradicted. The whole World will be a common Ordinary, and too light, when
this Feast of the Lord in the Balance is weighed against it. If the World
leaves thee poor, and the Gospel makes thee rich, thou will not repine at the
loss of their Skins and Dung, when the Fatlings themselves are ready. Thou
shall see so much in Christ at this Plenteous Table, Job 31, 24*
that thou will not regard to make Gold thy confidence, or fine Gold thy trust;
Silver will be unto thee as Dross, that is, thou will take the World as it is,
Heb. 13.5.
and be content with such things as thou have; having Food and Raiment (I mean
spiritually, Food and Raiment out of the King's Stores) thou will be therewith
content (far more delighted with thy Treasure, 1 Timothy 6.8
than if another King should open thee his rich Exchequer.) If thou have thy
Father's Inheritance, thou will leave other Children Rattles. Psa. 4.6. Hos.
2.8.
Others may cry out for Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and think they can never have
enough of this World, tho they had never so much of the Gospel with it, but a
Barrel of meal and a Cruse of Oil (a little of this World) shall suffice a poor
Woman in Sarepta, when God sends an Elijah to her. A Generation of Murmurers
and Complainers may use their Language which came out of the Wilderness, Jude
v. 16.
Would God we had been content, Josh. 7.7. last words.
and dwelt on the other side Jordan: But an Israelite indeed, a Soul in Christ,
Joh. 1.47.
is content, tho he has some Number. 33 55.
Pricks in his Eyes, and Thorns in his side, because the Lines are fallen on
this side of it. The Increase of God contents him, having gained an Interest in
his Son Christ Jesus, who is all in all to him.

20. The Refreshments of the Peace of Conscience. A good Conscience seems to be
a Table spread in the very Soul, where we may sup by our selves in an inner
Chamber: for as Solomon says, He that is of a merry Heart has a continual
Feast, Prove. 15.15. Peace in thy Soul is a little, private Banquet, the King
sets by, Job 31.17
where thou may eat of thy Morsel alone. When the Blood of Sprinkling (we
spoke of under the sixth Particular) is drank down, it fetches out all the
Evil Spots of Conscience, -- having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, Heb. 10.22. Conscience would quickly cry against us, if God had not
provided at this Feast enough to stop its mouth; yea, the Soul would die, if
the Conscience had not the Food of God to live on, as the Child would be
starved, if the Nurse were not fed. But lo! Psa. 72.7.
the Gospel has a Table that has abundance of Peace upon it, Peace to feed on
publicly, when at an Ordinance, there be others that are dipping their hands
with us in the Dish, Mat. 26 23
and Peace to feed in our Solitudes, while no Eye beholds us. Lnk. 2.14
The Invitation unto the Feast is Peace on Earth, the Ministerial Waiters at
the Table are Act. 10.36
preaching Peace by Jesus Christ, the things ready are the things that do Luke
19.
belong unto our Peace; the Apostle wrote not one Epistle, when he sent Messes
unto the Churches, but it came still to them with these Refreshments, Romans 1.7
1 Cor. 1.3.

2 Cor. 1.2 Gal. 1.3.

Ephesians. 1.2 Phil. 1.2.

Col. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1

2 These. 1.2 Exodus 32.17. Nahum 2.4. Isa. 19.2 Exodus 2.1^


Grace and Peace to you. The Gospel serves it in most excellently, Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Tho there is a noise of War in thy Camp, thy Corruptions fight, and
justle one against another: nay, not only Egyptian against Egyptian, but an
Egyptian smiting an Hebrew; Corruption opposes Grace, and makes an uprore in
thy Soul; yet the Gospel has a Prince of Peace to allay the Tumult, Heb. 7.2.
Psa. 147.14
and to make Peace in thy Borders. There is Provision made for a Blessed Calm
upon thy Soul, when the Son of God shall rebuke thy Storm, and say to the Winds
that made it, Mark 4.39
though furious Blasts from Satan, Peace, be still. Thou shall see it to be fair
weather upon the Kings Feast Day. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto
you, not as the World gives, give I unto you, Joh. 14.27. In a word, here is a
Feast you may Sleep well after, not in Sin, or Security, but in a Refreshment,
or Repose of your Spirits in the Peace of Conscience.

21. The Oil of Joy Isa. 61.3
. It was the Blessing of Asher, that he should dip his Foot in Oil, Deuteronomy.
33.24. and be as it were over shoes in his Inheritance where God's Paths
dropped fatness. Psa. 65.11
It is clear in Scripture, that Oil by the Appointment of God was put to
various uses. The Children of Israel were commanded with Oil to Exodus 25 6. and
v. 37. compared.
dress their Lamps, and with a finer to dress their Lev. 2.4, 5. etc.
meat in the Legal Sacrifices, and with a most refined Ointment made of various
Exo. 30.23.25.
Spices after the Art of the Apothecary, to v. 26.
anoint the Tabernacle, and his v. 27. etc.
Furniture, by all which was Typified that Spiritual Oil which the Gospel now
affords: we have now an Oil, an Oil of Joy that feeds the Oleum flammis
alimoniam suppeditat, Moller, enar in Psalmos. Ps. 45.7.
Candle of the Lord, and makes it burn comfortably; an Oil of Grace that feeds
the Lamp of our Profession, that we be not in the Dark at Mat. 25.3, 4, 5, 6.8.
midnight, when we should see to go out and meet the Bridegroom; we have now
also an Oil to dress our Sacrifice, since we have received an Unction from the
Holy One, 1 John 2.20. an Oil that fattens our Entertainment, and an Oil, as we
sit at meat, Psa. 104.15.
that makes our Face to shine. There is an Oil of Joy communicated to the Head,
our Lord Jesus Christ, and an Oil of Joy imparted to his Members. This Box of
precious Ointment was poured on his Head by a greater than Mary Mat. 26.7 Joh.
11.2
Magdalen; God anoints him, Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the
Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows, Psa. 45.7. latter part. So Isa. 61.1. The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me -- He is
therefore in the New Testament styled by way of eminence the Christ of God, and
(...), Luke 2.26. part.
the Lord's Christ, which signifies the Lords Anointed. Now at the Feast his
Members, in some Conformity to their Head, are anointed also. He that ordained
a Lamp for his anointed, and made the Horn of David to bud, has also a Horn of
Salvation to pour the Anointings of the Spirit on us. God's Children may suck
in this Oil plentifully at the Feast, where there be Springs of Joy to feed a
chosen Vessel. Thou preparest a Table before me, -- thou anointest my Head with
Oil, Psa. 23.5.

22. The Cup of Consolation with the Wine of the Kingdom-running over. The Cup
of Consolation was a Cup for Mourners, a Portion mingled more especially to
support them at the Death and Loss of Dear Relations, and though used commonly
among the Jews, yet was denied them, Jer. 16 5. latter part.
when God had taken away his Peace from them, even loving kindness and mercies;
-- neither shall men give them the Cup of Consolation to drink, v. 7.
for their Father, or for their Mother. The Cup of Consolation was a little to
sweeten the Bitterness unto their Children after their Parents had tasted
Death. Now the Feast of the Gospel has its Cup of Consolation to wash off
sadness from them that mourn in Zion; it has the Wine of the Kingdom for the
Children she brings forth, when they are bowed down heavily, as one that
mourns for his Mother, because of the Afflictions of the Church of God. Nay,
suppose the Trouble should arise more from a Reflection upon their own Personal
State, this Cup of Consolation is then to wash off their Fears, Rev. 14.10
least they should drink of the Wine of wrath out of the Cup of Indignation.
The Wine of the Gospel is a refreshing Cordial from the Grace of God, to cheer
up drooping Spirits, and comfort heavy Hearts. It is a Cup of Salvation, Psa.
116.13. to a poor Soul that has been afraid of that Red-wine in the
Threatening, lest he should pledge it in the Second Death. A Man's Body, when
his Spirits are low, needs Recruits, Prove. 31.6. Give strong Drink unto him
that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy Hearts, and so in
Paul's Advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer water, (that is, such as
was commonly used at Meals in those hotter Climates, as we drink Beer) but use
a little wine for thy Stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities. In like
manner the Spirit of a Man, when wounded, or broke and sunk within him, does
need Wine, the Wine of the Kingdom, that is the manifestations of the Love of
Christ to cheer it; for the Spirit of a man may sustain his Infirmities, (that
is, he may bear up under outward Trouble he meets with in the Flesh) but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. Such a one must have the Cup of
Consolation from Christ's own Hand, for his Love is better than wine, Song.
1.2. The Roof of his mouth when he speaks a kind pleasant word, like the best
wine, goes down exceeding sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to
speak, Song. 7.9. If God's Children be sunk down through long heaviness, and
begin to sleep the Sleep of Death in their own sad Apprehensions, Psa. 13.3.
yet a Cup of this pleasant Wine from Christ, on a sudden makes an Alteration,
and breaks out in Praises, Psa. 118.17
I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Blessed
Consolation! Now the Gospel has provided a Full Cup of this. This, is that
precious Cluster, Isa. 65.8.
where the new wine is found in it. He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him, Joh. 14.21.
latter part: So v. 23. latter part, My Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him. What a Heavenly Nectar is this Cup of
Consolation! you may drink it at Ordinances in the Golden Vessels of the
Temple, Dan. 5.2. Esth. 5.6.
where there needs at this Banquet of wine to be no (...), inspectores vini.
Weemse Christian Synagogue. page 209.
Inspectours or Overseers set to mind you, least you prove Spiritual
wine-bibbers at these Vessels filled up to the Brim; no (...) Godwins
Hebrew-Rites, page 45. Song. 5 1.
Eyes of the Feast, to see you do not drink too much, as is reported to have
been customary at the Oriental Feasts, among the Jews and Persians: But you may
drink abundantly of the Love of Christ, and yet not be drunk with Wine. This
Cup of Consolation is most excellently represented in the Cup of Blessing, 1
Cor. 10.16. Mat. 26.27
where at the Communion of the Blood of Christ, he says unto his Friends,
Drink ye all of it. Lo! Prove. 23.31. 1 Cor. 11* 26.
there it is seen how it gives its color in the Cup, and moves it self
aright, by showing forth the Lord's Death until he come (even a second time to
Judgment.) The Gospel is like those water-pots that stood in Cana at the
Marriage Feast, Joh. 2.7.9.
they yielded water at the beginning, but afforded wine unto the Guests before
they rose up: So, as Christ was represented first by water, his Love is now
shed abroad like Wine: Oh! Blessed is the Benjamin in whose Sack this Silver
Cup is found! Genesis 44.12
These Consolations of our God abound, Psa. 23.5.
my Cup runs over. Oh! the Depth of these Streams of Love, when we swim in
the Rivers of his Pleasure! how incomparable is the Wine of the Kingdom, Dent.
32.14.
beyond any other Blood of the Grape.

23. The continual Diet of Perseverance. It Is said of Jehoiachim, that he was
so provided for by the King of Babylon, that he did continually eat Bread
before him all the Days of his Life; and for his Diet, there was a continual
Diet given him of the King of Babylon, every Day a Portion, until the Day of
his Death, all the Days of his Life, Dan. 1.5.
Jer. 52.33, 34. So in the Gospel there is a Daily Provision of the King's
meat, Grace to feed thee every Day for new work fresh: He will persevere to
relieve thee on thy way, that thou may persevere to come thy Journeys-End
home: He will continue thy Meat, because he will not have thee to break thy
Work off, before thou have made a Full end of it. He will feed thee, because
Grace will finish what Grace has once begun: He that has begun a good work in
you, shall also confirm you unto the end, Phil. 1.6.
1 Cor. 1.8. Thou shall not be kept upon the Corn of Heaven for one Day only,
or ten Days, or Twenty Days, Number. ^^. 19
or a whole Month, as they did eat of the Quails in the Israelitish Camp, but
thou shall have Grace to stablish, strengthen, settle thee to thy Live's end,
and keep thee on through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.5.

24. Lastly, Rev. 2.7.
The Fruit of the Tree of Life. Fruit is wont at Entertainments to be last
served in, and so I place it last; for Glory which is the Fruit of the Tree of
Life, shall begin where Grace here ends. There may be indeed some (...), Rev.
19.9.
some Foretasts of the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and it is enough for an
Israelite, so long as in the Body; Number. 13.23.
to have a Cluster or some few at most from the Edge of Canaan; he must be
caught up into Paradise before he can gather the Full Vintage; 2 Cor. 12.4
he must take possession of that better Country, before he can eat of the Tree
of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. It is fit, my
Brethren, that both you and I should be now content with Grace: though I have
been enabled to lay before you the Meat and Drink which will enable us to do
the Will of God, Joh. 4.34.
yet I cannot climb the Tree of Life for you, Rev. 3.12. Rev. 22.2.
to bring down out of the New Jerusalem any one of those Twelve manner of
Fruits, which grow in Plenty upon this Tree of Life above. It will be the work
of Eternity, when our Days are as the Days of Heaven, Psa. 89.29.
to behold these Precious Things that are put forth by the Sun, Deuteronomy. 33.14
Mal. 4.2. 1 Cor. 2.9.
the Sun of Righteousness in Heaven; for Eye has not seen them here, save the
Eye of Faith only. And therefore so much may suffice us at the Threshold of our
Father's House, Joh. 7.37.
on this Great Day of the Feast.

The Fifth General Thing propounded was to show what Excellent Properties there
are in the Provisions of this Great Supper.

1. Transforming. 1 Property
There is a mavelous Efficacy put into these Provisions, that begets a Divine
Likeness. Ye shall be like God; not in that bad, lying sense the Devil intended
it, when he deceived our first Parents with a Deceitful Godlikeness, Genesis 3.5.
Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil, whenas it only transformed them and
their Posterity into the Black and Filthy Image of the Devil. We are by Nature
Partners with that which entered into the World, Romans 5.12.
and defiles, but by Grace are made Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. When it is said of the Poor, they have the Gospel preached to them, Mat.
11.5. last words.
the Original expresses it in the (...).
Passive, are Gospellized, transformed into the Image of the Truths they hear,
made other sort of Creatures. Thus, the Provisions of the Gospel Feast have an
efficacious, converting influence through the Operations of the Holy Ghost, that
by our Participation, 2 Cor. 3.18
we are changed into the same Image of God we see.

2. VVholsom. Other Diet, 2 Property
if we eat it, we may prove the worse after; in killing hunger it may create
Diseases, but this is for your health. Acts 27.34
The Gospel is wholesome in every part of it. The Guests at this Entertainment
may safely feed of any Dish that God has set before them. Psa. 68.21.
Indeed wicked men that are resolved to go on still in their Trespasses, may
cry out like those Sons of the Prophets, 2 Kings 4.40. Oh thou man of God!
there is Death in the pot. But if God throws in Meal, or mixeth his Loving
Kindness and mercies with it, let others throw in their Lap full of wild
Gourds, there is still no harm in the Pot. 2 Kings 4.39, 40.
Every Guest may adventure safely, it is Food that will need no Physic, unless
we abuse our Morsel, and play the wanton with it. It is wholesome, and never
hurts any, but such as provoke the wrath of God to fall upon them, while it is
yet in their mouths, like those Israelites, while chewing Dainties in their
Teeth, that provoked the Founder of the Feast, Psa. 78.30 31.
who slew the fattest of them.

3. Delightful to every renewed Palate. 3 Property
Christ to a Believer has no ill Taste with him. Christ, tho considered in his
lowest Estate of Humiliation (in the Grave) where others have looked upon him as
a Carcass, yields meat unto our Faith in a Pleasant Vessel. Rev. 5.5.
We may say of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Judge. 14.5
as Samson did of that young Lion that roared against him by the Vineyards of
Timnath, v. 14.
Out of the Eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness.
It seems to be represented well by the Israelitish Manna in the Pleasantness of
its Taste, which relisht according to what every Man liked best, as Augustine
has Noted out of the Rabbis, though Fuller's Pisgahsight, 2d. pt. p. 53.
others conjecture that Rabbinical Tradition fabulous. However as to the
Celestial Mannah, or Bread that came down from Heaven, we may cite the
Experience of every Christian that has tasted the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8.
to evince its Delicacy to the Palate; who will agree not only to say an
Equality unto any thing they like, but to witness a Transoendency herein above
all Creature-sweetness. There is nothing bitter in this Evangelical
Entertainment, but the People of God in all can experience that he has given
them Pleasant things for Meat: Lam. 1.11.
I sat under his shadow, (says the Church) and his Fruit was sweet unto my
taste, Song 2.3. The Food of Heaven is not first sweet in the Mouth, Rev. 10.10
and then like the Book in the Revelation, as soon as it is eaten the Belly is
bitter: But as it is sweet in the Mouth, it retains the Property, and becomes
sweet in the Stomach also. It is Cordial in the Act, and Comfortable in the
Remembrance too; for it is the Morsel only of the Sinner, when he eats the
Fruit of his own Doings, Isa. 3.10.
that breeds so ill a Digestion, as when he has eaten, Job 20.20.
surely he shall not feel quietness in his Belly.

4. Sufficing. 4 Property
This Feast is enough for Ministers, and enough for People too, Jer. 31.14. I
will satiate the Soul of the Priests with Fatness, and my People shall be
satisfied with my Goodness, says the Lord: So Psalm. 132.15. I will abundantly
bless her Provision, I will satisfy her Poor with Bread. Zion's Poor (in
Spirit) shall have Bread enough for an Alms at the Door of God's House: Yea,
Christ will have them come in, and sit down at his Table, Prove. 7.18.
and take their fill of Love.

5. Not Surfeiting or Cloying. 5 Property
There is no Intemperance in the Gospel, when we feed in the highest Degree
upon it. In other Feasts the Guests can take but Part, and in that may take too
much, but in the Gospel, if we do not take of all, we shall take, and have too
little. Literal Provisions will surfeit, we may nauseate and through an Excess
bring them up again. Have thou found Honey? says the Wife-man, eat so much as
is sufficient for thee, Prove. 25.16. but v. 27. intimating an Excess, he
adds, It is not good to eat much Honey; the end of the foregoing sixteenth
Verse is a Reason, lest thou be filled therewith and vomit it. There may be an
overcharging The Throat is a slippery place, and a sin may get down e're you
are aware, Dr. Manton on Jude, p. 414. Luke 21.34 Psalm. 69.22 Jude v. 4.
with surfeiting and drunkenness at our own Tables, while our Table may become
a snare unto us, but we can never surfeit upon Spiritual Provisions, 'till our
Corruption turns our Stomach, and we turn the Grace of God into Wantonness. A
Holy Guest, though he be filled with the Wine of the Gospel, is filled at a Feast
in which is No Excess: Other Wine will intoxicate, Ephesians. 5.18.
but the Wine of the Spirit which possesses our Heart, will never hurt the
Brain. Luke 13.26
The more we have eaten and drank in his Presence who has prepared our Table,
Psalm. 23.5:
the more ready we may find our selves to go about our Father's Business, Luke
2.49.
contrary to the effect of other Tables, which indispose both the Body and the
Mind, when the Belly is filled with Meats. In a word, we need not at this Feast
of the Parable, fear Intemperance, as Daniel did, Dan. 1.8.
when he took care lest he should be defiled with the Portion of the Kings
Meat, and of the Wine which the King drank.

6. Vndiminishable. 6 Property
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. He
has Provision, of which one Guest has not the less, because another Guest
has more. This great Stock in the Gospel never wastes, 1 Kings 17.14.
no more than the Widdow's Barrel of Meal, or her Cruise of Oil, after Elijah
eat thereof. v. 13.
If we eat and drink never so long of God's Provision, he never needs to buy in
any new Store. Ordinary Food will diminish, but in Extraordinary, we leave as
full a Table as we find. Though Guests increase, the Diet still keeps the same.
When Christ feeds the Multitude of the Gospel, he works a greater Miracle
than when he fed the multitudes in it; because in the Gospel we read only of
Fragments taken up, Luke 9.17.
but of the Gospel it self, when Men have eaten sufficiently, Joh. 2.10.
or well drunk, the Feast remains: This Box of Ointment is broken, and yet it is
always whole.

7. Incorruptible. 7 Property
It is not like the Victuals of the Gibeonites, that had all the Bread of their
Provisions dry and moldy: Josh. 9.5.
It is unperishable, and this Mannah will not melt and consume away, Exodus
16.21.
as other Mannah did. The Bread that God gave the Israelites in the Wilderness
forty Years, v. 35.
would not preserve from Putrefaction, but when over-kept, like the rest of
common Provision, bred worms and stank, Exodus 16.20. And though some of it was
put into a Pot, Exodus 16.33.
as the Lord commanded Moses, v. 34. ibid.
and laid up before the Lord in the Ark of the Testimony, to be kept as a
Memorial throughout their Generations, v. 33.
that the Children which should be born might see wherewith God had Nourisht
their Fathers in the Wilderness, v. 32.
yet it was preserved thus from after-putrefaction, for so many Ages, by a
special Miracle attending it, and not from the inherent Qualification of the
Food it self, Psalm. 39.5. Joh. 6.27.
and therefore in its best Estate we may reckon it the Meat that perishes;
especially, considering that even this Pot of Mannah now cease, as well as
the whole Jewish State. But the Gospel is a Food in its own Nature
incorruptible, a Provision as well as an Inheritance that fades not away. 1
Pet. 1.4.
When other Victuals will utterly perish in their own Corruption, 2 Pet. 2.12
this is the Meat that endures to Life eternal, Joh. 6.27. latter part.

8. Lastly, 8 Property
Perpetual Nourishment, and the Partaker kept alive for ever. He that comes to
me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst, Joh.
6.35. latter part. And he that eats of this Bread shall live for ever: He
shall never pine or dye away for want of Meat or Drink: It shall implant such a
Nutrimental Habit, as shall secretly, in the greatest Difficulty, keep the Soul
alive. Hunger shall never kill, and Thirst shall never hurt Believers. To
conclude, other Feasts have supplied the Wants of the Body but for as many
Days as the Feast lasted, and the Guests have been quickly empty, and the
Virtue of their feeding lost, as well as their Entertainment over: But the
Nourishment received, the Seed of Grace obtained at this Rich Feast of Plenty,
is a perpetual and enduring Habit, or Principle of Grace, that will spring up
in Glory.

The Sixth thing is to evidence what suitableness there is in these Provisions
of the Gospel to the Condition of poor Gospel-Sinners, VI.
or to discover that the Case of any Soul may be suited among these All things
ready

First, The Gospel has Enlivening Provisions, suited to the Condition of dead
Souls. It has got wherewithal to infuse Life into them, either the Being of
Life, as they are found in a Dead State, or the Degree of Life, as they are
fallen under any Dead Frames of Spirit.

1. The Gospel has enlivening Provisions, suited to the Condition of dead
Souls, as they are found in a dead State.

Indeed it is necessary that the Gospel become first a vital Principle, before
it is made a Nutrimental: It must quicken the Dead, before it can feed the
Living, and raise Sinners out of a Grave, before it sets them down at Table.
Nourishment must presuppose Life. The Being of the New Creature is first in
Order, and afterward Food to maintain the Growth of it. A Man cannot feed,
though he has all Things before him, until he be quickened and made a Living Man:
So they that are spiritually Dead (that is, separated from all Spiritual
Converse and Communion with God, remaining still as they were cut off from him
in the first Adam) can do nothing at this Table, which requires us to touch,
taste and handle the Provisions of it. Spiritual Death is unfit for Spiritual
Dainties; you must be translated out of a Dead State, and changed from Dead
Works (that is, advanced beyond the Power of Nature in the most active refined
Morals) before you can serve the Living God, Acts 14.15
or receive the Gospel-Food. The Privilege of the Gospel lies in receiving
Grace first, to quicken and enable us to do in the strength of Grace after. It
is not the Dead, so long as they are dead, can meddle with these things. The
first thing the Gospel can do for us, is to beget us by the Word of Truth, ^am.
1.18.
and then with its Nourishment to bring us up. The Breath of Life must pass
upon us, before the Bread of Life can be eaten by us. Dead Sinners may be
brought to some outward means of Grace, and so a Carcass may be stirred, and
held up by an External Force, while Meat is set before it; but there must be an
inward Principle in both, to take Food and digest it, or live and grow by it.
You may as soon stand to purpose with a Dish of Provisions before a Carcass,
and put Meat forcibly into the Mouths of Dead Men, as expect the Plenty of the
Gospel should yield any Nourishment or Benefit to Dead Sinners, before they
have gotten true Life in them. In a word, they must be Created in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2, 10.
or the Provision is lost, though you Carve out Dainties to them.

Now the Gospel has its Enlivening Provisions, suited to a Dead State: And you
being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your Flesh, has he
quickened together with him, Col. 2.13. The Life of Jesus is prepared to be
made manifest to create Life, 2 Cor. 4.10
as it finds thee Dead in trespasses and sins. Our Blessed Lord takes an
occasion to reveal this in the Spirit, when he made use of his Divine Power in
the Letter, to teach us, that as he was able to infuse Life into the Dead Body
of Lazarus, so he could quicken any dead Soul he roucht, Joh. 11.25. I am the
Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live: Though thou art fallen down from an upper Chamber dead, yea, from
the House top in Adam, Acts 20.^^
yet Christ can raise thee upon thy Feet, and set thee up believing: He has
Life to move thee, and Faith to make thee see the Marvels he works out for
thee. Art thou dead, stark dead, that a little Life will not suffice to help
thee? why, yet Christ came on purpose to bring thee enough of those Vital
Spirits with him, Joh. 10.10. latter part. I am come that they might have Life,
and (as if he had said, If Life be too little) that they might have it more
abundantly.

If thou art a poor Dead Soul that do not yet know what to make of Bread and
Flesh, yet thou may hear a good Word suited in the Mouth of Christ to thee,
Joh. 6.51. latter part. And the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I
will give for the Life of the World. The Bread that I will give is my Flesh.]
Alas! if Christ had stopped there, it might not have suited to thy Case, or the
Condition of some of thine! peradventure, thou art weeping over some dead Soul
by thee, either some poor Relation in thy Bosom, or some poor Child as a
withered Branch sprung out of thy Roots, or a Brother, E^h. (...).
or a Sister, yet dead in Trespasses and sins; and thou mournest over their
Graves, alas! my Brother! alas! Sister! what is Bread, or wherein does Flesh
suit at all with thee? why, Zech. 1.13.
the Place answers thee with good words and comfortable, It is the Bread of
Life, and living Flesh; (the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world.) As if Christ had said, though they are dead, and
cannot take it yet as Food, I will put such a Morsel into the Mouths of dead
Men, as shall presently become Life, and afterward yield Nourishment. Oh! how
suitably does this Gospel provide to help thee in thy poor dead State! though you
are yet many of you Dead, Sinners, and cannot as you are Dead take in
Nourishment, or so much as come (by a spiritual Act of the Soul) where
Nourishment is provided, yet the Gospel is prepared to come to You in power, 1
These. 1.5
and with the Holy Ghost, that Life may enter into your Carcasses, Jer. 25.34.
and the days of your Slaughter be accomplished, that you shall be like the
slain that lie in the Grave, Psalm. 88.5.
no more. Christ has a Virtue to renew you, Exodus 8.19.
beyond all the Magicians of Egypt, and their Enchantments, that try to work
Grace by Nature. Moral Virtues, (as Flavel, Soul of Man, p. 44^.
one says) are but as so many sweet Flowers strow'd over a Dead Corpse, which
hide the loathsomness, but inspire not Life into it. Whereas there is a
Quickening Touch in the Son of God that does raise the Dead, and will enable you
to stand up from the Dead and live. Ephesians. 5.14.


2. The Gospel has Enlivening Provisions, suited to the Condition of Dead
Souls, as they are fallen under a Dead Frame. Thou may have Life at the Root,
and yet thy Branch may look as if 'twere dead in Winter; or there may be a
Concoctive Faculty, and an inward Power of Digestion through Grace, where thine
Appetite to Food seems at present gone: The Gospel therefore has Enlivening
Provisions that suit thy Dead Frame: It has Spirits to fetch thee, when thou
art fallen into a dead Swoon. There Is a Word to quicken thee, when thou art
dead to Duty, though thou art not through Grace, wholly dead in Sin: For Dead
Frames in the New Man are the Relics of the Old, or the Remainders of thy
Dead State before. Now the Gospel has a Portion to quicken thee, a Preparation
to whet thine Appetite, when thou seem to be dull, and thy Senses are not as
heretofore exercised; Heb. 5.14.
see Psalm. 119.50. This is my Comfort in mine Affliction, for thy Word has
quickened me: And v. 93. I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou
have quickened me: So that if thou art dropped asleep, or fallen into a dead
Swoon, as a living Man may do, thou see how he has provided quickening Means
to help thee, and excite thy Life again: Thou art not destitute of such a Help
Meet, Genesis 2.20.
but it is gotten thee among the All things ready.

If thy Sap be retired inwards, there is a Sun to cherish it, and call it forth
into outward Vital Acts again. If like Wax that has melted, thou art Congealed,
and have contracted thy wonted hardness, there is a Fire in the Sanctuary to
melt thee at the Presence of the Lord again: Yea, sometimes, tho thou art even
ready to question the work that God makes from the Beginning upon thy Soul,
Eccl. 3.11.
and thou have been certain days Dead in thy Stony Frame, Dan. 8.27.
or dry and withered, that thou think it almost impossible for these dry
Bones to live, Ezekiel. 37.3
yet there is a Quickening Virtue, an enlivening Power procured, and made ready
for thee, and thou sometimes feel'st it suddenly at an instant. Isa. 29.5.
The Spirit of Life from God that has seemed for a time to be drawn back from
thee (like Peter's sheet) up again into Heaven, Acts 10.16
yet is ready to come down and re-enter, as at the Resurrection of those slain
Witnesses, after the three Days and a half, Rev. 11.11. That Is the first Case
wherein Gospel-Provisions do suit, as well as are made ready. They are
enlivening, either to raise from a Dead State, or to quicken under any Dead
Frame.

Secondly, Enlightening Provisions, suited to the Condition of Blind Souls. A
Man may be a living, yet a blind Creature that cannot see his way. Nicodemus
was so blind in spirituals, when Christ discoursed the matters of Salvation
with him, that he could not discern the Mystery of the New Birth, but was fain
to put that Question in the Ignorant Man's Catechism, Joh. 3.9.
How can these things be? It is but a blind Approach to Christ, if we come to
him only by the Hearing of the Ear, and our Eyes have not seen him. Job 42.5.
Thou must therefore cry out as that Blind Man did, when Christ asked him what
he should do for him, Luke 18.41
Lord, that I may receive my sight. The Gospel is not suited to thee as Blind,
but as it has an Influence upon that Film, to remove it, which closes up thy
sight. There must be a gracious and invisible Touch to open Blind Eyes, as
certainly, though not so miraculously, as there was of Paul, when immediately
there fell from his Eyes, Acts 9.18.
as it had been Scales: God first struck him Blind, and afterward made him see
his Error.

Now the Gospel in its Enlightening Provisions will exactly suit such a Blind
Case. Though thou have lived in a State of gross Darkness, without any Glimpse of
the (...).
true Light, yet the Gospel is appointed and made ready to discover it: This is
plain in the Commission Paul received to Preach it, Acts 26.17, 18. Delivering
thee from the People, and from the Gentiles, to whom now I send thee, to open
their Eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light: As if God had said, Come,
Paul, I will send thee into a spiritual Egypt, where the People are groping in
worse than Egyptian Darkness, and I will send the Blessing of Goshen with thee,
Exodus
that there shall be Light in all their Dwellings. As in Natural Vision the
Organ must be opened and cleared, as well as the Object illuminated, and the
Medium transparent, through which the Visual Rays do pass: So in the Optics of
the Gospel, God has made a Provision for every one of these: His Spirit
opens the Eyes, enlightneth the Object, (by shining upon Gospel Truths) and
(for a Medium) does utter Knowledge clearly. Job


Art thou Ignorant of Salvation? yet the Gospel is suited to give Knowledge of
Salvation. Luke 1.67.
Art thou lying spiritually in the dark, that thou know not what to make
either of thy Condition, or of many needful Truths before thee? yet the Gospel
is provided to give light to them that sit in darkness. v. 79.
Art thou groping with that old Staff in thy Hand, of Nature, and trying by thy
self how to find the way, but after all thine Attempts do thou find thy self
uneasy? well, still the Gospel is ready suited to guide our Feet in the way of
peace: ibid. (...)
To guide strait, as the word imports, that in the Dark we may not run into
Crooked Paths, or turn any where aside. The Master of the House sets up a
Candle in his Entry, that we may see, though by Night, to come in to the Feast he
makes. Thou bast been already, perhaps, under the means, and yet do complain
still of much Obscurity; every new Trial casts a kind of a mist before thine
Eyes, and if thou see any thing for thy Soul, it may be it is but as he did,
that looked up, and said, Mark 8.24
I see men, as Trees, walking: But however, the Gospel provideth to work thine
Eyesight better, though Pharisees (who object in scorn, Are we blind also?) Joh.
8.40.
despise such Clay and Spittle. Though through Blindness thou have wandered far
about, yet the Gospel provideth to bring thee by a way, as Joshua says unto
the Israelites, Josh. 9.4.
which ye have not passed heretofore; yea, as says the Spirit by the Prophet,
Isa. 42.16. I will bring the Blind by a way that they knew not, I will lead
them in Paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light before them.
That Promise indeed (as Arthur Jackson, Vol. 4th. upon Isai.
a Judicious Interpreter observes) might literally and then more immediately
refer to the Jew's Return out of Babylon, who saw nothing of their approaching
Deliverance, any more than Blind Men, and knew not which way to turn
themselves: But nevertheless spiritually it was a Promise suited to these Times
of Refreshing, which are come thus far from the Presence of the Lord already,
Acts 3.19.
as to enlighten Blind Eyes, and bring Man into the only way of Salvation,
which he never saw before. Nah. 2.5.
Though thou stumblest in thy Walk, for want of Light to guide thee, yet God's
Word is prepared to be a Lamp unto thy Feet, and a Light unto thy Path, Psalm.
119.105. as also the Entrance of thy words gives light, Psalm. 119.130.
it gives understanding to the simple. And his Testimonies are so suited,
Psalm. 19.7.
that they are sure, making wise the simple. Though thou art a Child of a very
low Capacity, Jam. 1.17.
yet there be Beams of Knowledge from the Father of Lights will reach thee.

The Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ is made ready for thy need, to be a
Light shining forth in Darkness. The Night it may be puzzles thee to find the
way to thy Father's House, but God has made ready something for thee, to whom
the Night shines as the Day, Psalm. 139.12.
and he prepares to show thee both as to the Darkness and the Light what thou
never sawst before. Mal. 4.2.
The Sun of Righteousness is ready to pierce through all the black and dismal
Shades that cover thee, and though Darkness has hid thy self as well as God from
thee, Psa. 42.8.
yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime, and find out
what thou could not in the dark take Notice of thy self; Psa. 139.12.
for the darkness and the Light are both alike to Him.

Thirdly, The Gospel has Expiating Provisions, suited to the Condition of
guilty and condemned Souls. Expiating, that is Reconciling, making Peace for
thee. Reconciliare nihil aliud est quam amicitiam off^nsione aliqua gravi
diremptam resarcire, and sic inimicos in pristinam Concordiam reducere.
Davenant, Exposit. ad Coloss. in versic. 20. page 126.
To reconcile is to piece up a Friendship that has been broken off by some
grand Miscarriage, and so to bring Enemies to their old Amity and Accord again.
This is the state of the Case as it lies between God and Man, from hence it
comes to pass, that though thou art guilty through the Offense of one, Romans 5.15.
even the First Adam that involved thee, and guilty through thy own Personal
Offense besides, yet here is this Provision for thee in the Gospel, that thou
art to do with a God not imputing Trespasses. 2 Cor. 5.19
This account the Scripture gives of it, that when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, Romans 5.10. when we were Enemies, or,
as the words are read, (...).
being Enemies; the first Look of Kindness which Heaven cast upon us, beheld
Enmity in our Hearts, and the Weapons of Rebellion in our Hands. Yet then were
we reconciled by the Death of his Son, the Foundation of our actual
Reconcilement was then laid, that the saving Application of the Death of Christ
might be evidenced in our Effectual Calling. This the Apostle pursues further,
2 Cor. 5.19. To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. Reconciling the World.] The
World is to be understood (as Charnock. Vol. 2d. p. 1187.
a great Divine expounds it) (...), for all Ages, all Times of the World, as he
observes the same to be meant, 1 John 2.2. Reconciling the World.] Though the
World be a World at Variance with God, 1 John 5.19
and a World that lies in wickedness, yet God will be so far reconciled unto
this World, Genesis 6.12.
(where All Flesh have Corrupted his way upon the Earth, Romans 3.10.
as it is written, there is none Righteous, no not one,) that he will find
outhis chosen, and bring in them to Christ, that they in Christ shall be
reconciled also unto God. The Holy Ghost witnesses to the same purpose in
those words of Peter, Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
1 Pet. 1.2.
through sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience and sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus Christ, Grace unto you, (you Elect) and Peace be multiplied: So
that when God comes to manifest that thou art one of these, by calling thee out
from the World by a gracious and mighty Operation of his Spirit, he then
actually reconciles Thee by the Atonement, and shows thou art one to whom this
Blood of the Atonment belongs, Romans 5.11. -- by whom we have Now received the
Atonement.

Now though thou art never so sensible of indwelling Enmity, convinced that thou
art an Enemy by Nature, and have manifested the Carriage of an Enemy a thousand
times over, yet the Gospel provideth a Pacifying Reconcilement to make God and
Thee Friends, i. e. To make Reconciliation for Iniquity, Dan. 9.24. Thou have
an High Priest, in things pertaining to God, that remembered thy Name upon the
List among those Few Names in Sardis, Rev. 3.4.
when he made Reconciliation for the sins of the People, Heb. 2.19. This is
most excellently and fully described Col. 1.20. Having made Peace through the
Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself. God was fallen
out with the Creation for the Creature's sin, but he looks amicably again in
Christ upon an apostate, revolted Creature, nothing is reconciled but by the
Blood of his Cross only. Now though Guilt and Enmity, as considered absolutely in
the Creature, may both tend to drive thee from God, yet while both are pursuing
thee, Isa. 64.5.
they drive thee where thou meetest him that rejoices to procure thee a
gracious Friendship, and bring thee back through the Atonement reconciled to
God again.

The Law of God condemns, but by Virtue of this Reconcilement in Christ it is
God himself justifies, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? It is God.] God has a Prerogative of Grace upon the Mercy seat to
absolve a Trembling Criminal, as well as of Righteous Condemnation, when he
sits upon a Throne of Justice, and when God pronounces thine Absolution, the
Sentence of Condemnation will prove of no effect to hurt thee: There is none
shall call thee to any just Account for Life, because thou have one that now
has traverst Death. The Council of Heaven pleads to save thee, and a
Black-mouthed Crew in Hell, or foul-mouthed Crew on Earth shall never make thy
Cause, through Accusation, now to go against thee. What unrighteous Plea shall
ever overrule, Luke 18.6.
or unjust Judge stand up to overthrow the Highest Court of Justice. He that
justifyeth, will turn every Letter of the Law-Curse to make up the
Gospel-Blessing. Though thou art verily Guilty in thy self, Romans 3.19
for all the World is become Guilty before God: And though by offending in one
Point, we are truly Guilty of all, Jam. 2.10.
yet though we are the Sinners, the Gospel comes in ready with the Son of God, 2
Cor. 5.21
who was made sin for us. Though we owe our very Lives unto the second death,
Rev. 20.1. 21.4.
the Gospel has procured the Free Gift to save them, that our Statute of Death
unto Condemnation might be Repealed and Enacted unto Justification of Life.
Romans 5.18.
He that passes by and sees thee in thy Blood, delivers thee from Blood
guiltiness; he takes thee up, and imputes not thy Trespass, though a poor Felo de
se is the term which our Engl. Law gives a selfmurtherer.
Felo de se, that have sadly destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. O Israel! thou have
destroyed thy self, but in me is thy Help found.

Fourthly, Healing Provisions, suited to the Condition of back sliding, sick
and wounded Souls. The Gospel provides something Medicinal to purge out
Corruption, and Restoratives to fetch the Patient again, and gracious Lenitives
to mollify a Bleeding Wound, and a Skillful Hand to bind up and make all whole
again, as well as provides Aliment and Food to Nourish. Alas! our very
Corruptions, if we had not Grace provided to remove them, would spoil all our
Feast. We have such Foul Stomachs by Nature, that we need a Pill to cleanse
them, before our Morsel enters. Deuteronomy. 28.59.
We have all Naturally great Plagues and sore Sicknesses that turn our Stomach
upon a Feast of Fat things: And 'till we find something in the Gospel among its
All Things to Cure us, our Soul will be like that sick Man's in Job, Job 33.20
Psalm. 107.18.
whose Life abhors Bread, and his Soul dainty Meat: We shall otherwise be
too bad to touch Meat, or receive the daintiest that can be brought us. The
Corruption of the Heart before it is in any measure purged, makes a Sinner
disdain the Gospel, and hate the Diet of the Soul, Number. 21.5
like the Israelites that loathed Mannah, and called it light Bread, and said,
chap. 11.6.
there is nothing at all besides this Mannah before our Eyes. This is the true
Natural State of a Man, before the Gospel has been as Physic to work with
healing Grace upon him.

Now therefore the Gospel among its All Things ready has its Provisions of
Medicine, as well as Meat: The Grace of it will heal and nourish both, it can
furnish the Patient, and supply the Guest; create a soundness of Constitution
by Due Preparatives, and keep it up with Provisions and Supplies in other kinds
after. The Gospel is like those yielding and plentiful Trees in Ezekiel's
Vision, where the Fruit was for Meat, and the Leaf for Medicine, Ezekiel. 47.12.
lat. pt. The Balm of them was Healing, and would work a Recovery upon the
languishing, as well as the Fruit Nourishing to supply the Hungry, and the
Juice refreshing to allay a thirsty Appetite: Jer. 8.22.
So there is Balm in Gilead; a Physician and a Feast there both: Mat. 9.12.
Jer. 33.6.
A Physician that does bring it Health and Cure. The Gospel purges out
Corruption, as well as prepares our Table; it cleanses our Vessel, and then
pours the precious Mannah in. In a word, it is Physic first, and refreshing
Diet after.

Now this Gospel suits with thy Condition; though thou have been a Backslider in
thy ways, and art now sick and wounded. Psalm. 38.5.
Do thy Wounds stink? are they corrupt by reason of thy Foolishness? and do the
steams of Corruption make thine Heart sick? yet God has a Healing Medicine to
settle thee at thy Heart, and when broken, Job 5.18.
the Lord makes thee whole. This is most graciously illustrated Hos. 14.4. I
will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: This is a Remedy suits
thy sick Case. I will heal.] (...)
The word is Metaphorical, and shows the Efficacy of the Physician, that though
there has been a Iniquitates morbis, se medico, Christum medicinae comparat.
Rivet in Nesemn.
Complication of Distempers in thy Defection, insomuch that now the sense of it
has wounded thee in thy Spirit, and the Disease has bruised thee, yet thy
sickness shall not be unto death, but for the glory of God in healing thee; for
a Bruised Reed shall he not break, Matthew. 12.20. Not Break.] i. e. as the (...)
word imports, he will not do any thing against it, to hurt or handle with
violence such a Feeble Slip; his Hand is gentle, he will touch the Bruise with
Care, Isa. 57.16.
least the Spirit should fail before him, and the Soul that he has made. Though
you came as a Troop of Lazaruses, Luke 16.20
and were laid at his Gate full of Sores, Mat. 4.24.
though you are taken with diverse Diseases, some with one spiritual Infirmity,
some with another, whatsoever Sickness, 1 Kings 8.37.
whatsoever Plague it be, yet he has prepared to send his Word and heal you,
Psalm. 107.20. Be thou sick, rent or torn, whom He has put to Pain, Hos. 6.1.
yet run over the List of the All Things, and thou shall not complain, thou
have no healing Medicine. Jer. 30.13.
Thy Disease indeed has desperately broken out, and it may be now has fercht
out many a Groan, a Sigh, and a Tear, to see thy own Plague: But while your
Tears gush out, God has provided to stop an Issue of Blood. Mark 5.29
That Sore of thine which has ran in the Night, and ceased not, shall not
break out, 'till there be no Remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
because there is a Physician by whose Stripes ye are healed, 1 Pet. 2.24. Nay,
Rev. 13.3.12.
after thy deadly Wound is healed, thou may carry some Marks of an Old Sore
upon thee, but no Nisbet upon Peter.
Skar in thy Wound can hurt thee, Joh. 20.25
when thou have also the Print of his Nails.

Fifthly, Releasing Provisions to free thee, if a spiritual Captive, and break
thy Chains off. When the Gospel makes a Feast, it lets us out of Prison, Mat.
26.51
that we may follow the Banquet into our great High-Priest's Palace. The Grace
of the Gospel takes off our Restraints, as well as takes up a Holy Repast for
us: It eases us of a Yoke, as well as spreads our Table. Grace enables us to
walk at Liberty, Psa. 119.45
before we can leave work to earn the Wages of Death, and sit down to Meat. We
read of a Feast, Matthew. 27.15. at which the Governor was wont to release a
Prisoner: The Jews having Credebile est, a Romany hoc ess^, Polt Synop. Crit.
probably learnt it from the Roman Custom: However, this as Dickson upon
Matthew.
some account it, might be an unwarrantable Practice, yet it is a gracious
Privilege at this Feast of the Gospel to release a Prisoner, ay, and a Notable
Prisoner too, Mat. 27.16
Mankind, as notable in the Species, as ever Barabbas, the Individual, was. The
Gospel which Preaches up a Feast, proclaims a Free Liberty to Captives, Isa.
61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to Preach good Tidings unto the meek, he has sent me -- to proclaim Liberty to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound. Christ came
to free the Servant of Corruption, and a Slave of the Devil, that being loosned
out of Bondage, Gal. 5.1.
the poor Soul might afterward stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made him free: For a Plain Text asserts the Security of such a Freedom, Joh.
8.36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. It Is
called expressly a Redemption, Col. 1.14. it being the Release of Prisoners and
Captives by the Payment of a Price, at such a Rate as the Son of God paid for
the Redemption of them through his Blood. Now, suppose thou art yet in Bondage
to Sin, Heb. 12.1. Romans 7. v. 17, 20.
the sin that does so easily beset thee, the sin that dwells in thee, yet the
Gospel provideth against the intanglement, that thou may be made free from
sin; Romans 6.18.
i. e. Free from the Lordly Dominion of sin by the Spirit of Christ, and free
from the severe Condemnation of sin by the Blood of Christ, according to the
Atonement. Suppose a Slave, that thou art tied to Satan's Galleys, and one whom
Satan has bound, lo! these eighteen, or twenty, or perhaps forty Years, yet
the same Gospel that provideth to turn thee from Darkness to Light, is ready
also to turn thee from the Power of Satan unto God. Act. 26.18.
Art thou bound with a Chain that cuts thee, and imprints its ragged Indentures
on thee, whilst thou art sensibly feeling of thy self to be staked down, as if
something had fastened thee with Bands to Unbelief? yet the Gospel is made
ready to come in with Faith, and more Evidences of Might in the Day of Christ's
Power, when unto you it is given on the behalf of Christ to believe on him.
Phil. 1.29.
Though thou can not believe, except it be given thee from above, and thine
Impotence makes thy Bondage, yet the Gospel provides to release thee from the
Bondage of Corruption, Romans 8.21.
and translate thee into the Liberty of the Children of God.

Now therefore if Bound, what can suit thee more than the Loosning Power of the
Gospel? If thou lack'st to be called unto Liberty, Gal. 5.13.
nothing can be fitter for thy Case than the Gospel that proclaims it, and a
God that procures it for thee. No Power under Heaven can reach thy Case so
fitly, while of a truth thou art Bound, as the Son of God that can make thee
Free indeed. The Gospel is suited to thy Condition, though thou art shut up in
Prison; thou may be a Prisoner of Hope, Zech. 9.12
though thou feel the weight of thy Chain, Psalm. 107.10.
and art laid in Affliction and Iron. The Day of the Gospel is a Year of
Jubilee, a great Year of Release, Isa. 61.2.
and called the Acceptable Year of the Lord, in which he accepts of a Ransom
for thee. Though thou have been barbarously used in Egypt, he has set open a
Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15.
through which thou may see, and a Door of Entrance through which he will bring
thee in Free to Canaan. The Gospel has Grace ready to set thee at Liberty, and
then to keep thee for ever Free from the Tyranny and Dominion of thine old
Jailors, that thou may always dwell in safety. Psalm. 4.8.
This is provided suitably to thy Case among the All things ready.

Sixthly, Apparelling Provisions, suited to array the Naked, and adorn Nasty
Souls.

1. It has Provisions suited to our spiritual Nakedness, to cloth and cover
it. The Gospel has a Wardrobe of the richest Wear, as well as a Table of the
choicest Viands. Song 3.11.
Christ in the Day of his Espousals clothes the Naked, as well as feeds the
Hungry. We read of the Marriage Feast of Samson, that when he had put forth a
Riddle unto the Phlistines, he promised to give them thirty Sheets, and thirty
Change of Garments, Judge. 14.12.
if they could certainly declare it to him within the seven days of the Feast,
which Samson afterward upon their telling it, gave them in full Tale (as He
had agreed) punctually. Now the Gospel-Feast at the Marriage of the King's Son,
affords to us Changes of Raiment likewise, (tho not upon such hard Conditions
as Samson made with the Philistines, for when we have Food and Raiment in the
Gospel, 1 Timothy 6.8.
he frankly gives us Both.) Though we are stripped in the First Adam, yet we may be
clothed with the Second. Hence it is the Scripture speaks of putting on
Christ, Romans 13.14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ -- Though we want Clothes
in a Righteousness of our own, yet we may put on the Lord Jesus, Rev. 3.18.
that the shame of our Nakedness do not appear. God has provided Christ
therefore accordingly to suit us, as (...) Jer. 23.6.
Jehovah, or the Lord our Righteousness: if common Providence has provided a
Suit which the very Grass of the Field and the Flowers of it wear, Special
Grace would not come behind, but provide the Righteousness of God, in the
Garments of Salvation, to Cloth you. Mat. 6 30.
Oh ye of little Faith! Job 1.21.
though you come Naked into the World, yet He has provided that you may carry
this Clothing out.

2. It has Provisions suited to our spiritual Nastiness, to adorn us, and put
the Garments of Praise upon us. This Raiment indeed is for Sinners that come
Nasty, but not for such as are resolved to continue so. Alas! we come in to the
Feast of our selves, Jam. 2.2.
like the Poor Man in vile Ratment, but the Bounty of the Feast-maker provides
us with a better Suit to appear at his Table, and before his Presence in. Mat.
22.10 Luke 14.21, 23.
The Guests at this Feast are come off from the Hedges and the Highways, in a
mean, dirty, tattered Garb, and therefore had need of a clean Wedding Garment
to sit down in. The Dirt and defilements that clave unto us do make God abhor
our Persons, and loath our Performances, 'till he put of his Comeliness upon us.
Ezekiel. 16.14.


The High Priest Joshua was clothed Zech. 3.3. but yet with Filthy Garments,
when he stood before the Angel, or before the Lord Jesus Christ, Mal. 3.1.
the Angel of the Covenant, who appears unto this High Priest as the same
Person that was to come in the Flesh, Heb. 3.1.
the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession. Now this Glorious Angel, this
bright Seraphim beholding the Righteousness of Joshua as an Eyesore in the
Pure sight of God, commands it to be taken away: He answered and spoke unto
those that stood before him, v. 4. saying, take away the Filthy Garments from
him: These Filthy Garments could not be meant properly of his Iniquities,
because Sin is such an Abomination in the Abstract, that when Men begin to
entertain the true Sentiments of Religion, they dare not put on their Sins for
a Covering, but yet are very prone to wrap up themselves in warm Thoughts with
their own Services, even as Men, who though they do not use to array themselves
with Dirt, may put on Dirty Garments. I therefore understand by these Filthy
Garments, which the Angel commands to be taken away, all Workings whatsoever in
the great Business of our Justification, because of the immediate Impurity
conveyed by the Worker, Luke 16.15
that must make them (absolutely considered) to be an Abomination in the sight
of God: For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one, Job 14.4.
Man himself is polluted, and so are all his Duties: Now upon this Account in
that Type of Joshua the Angel proceeds, after the Removal of those Filthy
Garments: Zech. 3.4.
And unto him (unto Joshua) he said, behold I have caused thine Iniquity to
pass from thee, (I have provided thee a Remedy against thy impure Services, and
therefore much more against thine Impurities or sins) and I will cloth thee
with change of Raiment. I confess Pemble.
some Expositors do make this Change of Raiment to be the Robe of
Sanctification: But Hutcheson
others do Interpret it (I think in the most natural and genuine sense) of the
Robe of Christ's Righteousness, because his Righteousness being without us, is
more aptly compared to Raiment worn upon us; not but though it was principally
intended to signify our Pardon and Justification by Christ's Righteousness, it
suppofeth also our Sanctification to be ever accompanied herewith; 1 Cor. 1.30
for Christ is made of God unto us Sanctification and Redemption, wherever he
is made Righteousness: He answers our Pollution by a Work of his Spirit in us,
(of which afterward) as well as our Guilt by his Righteousness, for the sake
whereof God passes an Act of his Grace on us. We may therefore look upon this
Expression of the Change of Raiment, to shadow out Christ's Righteousness for
Pardon and Justification, and yet that Holiness of Heart and Life must
ascertain unto Us the Efficacious Interest we have in such a Righteousness to
change our State, and so evidence it to be no Dream and Delusion. Alas! when we
come to partake of the Privileges of the Gospel in our own Righteousness, we
do not only come like the Gibeonites with old Garments clouted, Josh. 4.5.
and rent upon us, but we are all as an unclean thing, with unclean and filthy
Rags about us, as our Righteousnesses are expressly termed by the Holy Ghost,
Isa. 64.6. Our Plague sores issue out and defile all our Service, that we have
not a Rag fit to put on.

Now the Gospel among its All things ready, Genesis 27.15
provides us the goodly Raiment of our Elder Brother, and takes Care that we be
found in Christ's Righteousness, when we are placed at God's Table: Hence it is
Psalm. 45.13. that the King's Daughter is all glorious within, her Clothing is
of wrought Gold. Christ in her, and Christ upon her, his Spirit inhabiting, his
Righteousness adorning, makes her truly Noble: Psalm. 149.9
And this Honor have all his Saints, that never a Pharisee in the World with
the Long Robes of a Self-Righteousness is arrayed like one of th^se. Luk 20.46
Christ has got^en thee Raiment that is Ornamental, Rev. 19.13
as well as Covering, for though it be a Vesture dipped in Blood, yet it does not
stain thy Ratment. Isa. 63.2, 3.
Though he was red in his Apparel when he trod the Wine press, because the
Sprinklings of his Blood dyed his own wear, Rev. 19.8.
yet it was made so White in the Blood of the Lamb, that ever since it has
been to the Saints a Suit of Fine Linen. Alas! v. 14.
it would not match your spiritual Vileness, if a Prince should Cloth you in
Scarlet, 2 Samuel 1.24.
as Saul did the Daughters of Israel, and put on Ornaments of Gold upon your
Apparel: But the Prince of the Kings of the Earth brings forth the Best Robe,
Luke 15.22. to Cloth you gorgeously, infinitely beyond the Attire of all such
as are clothed with strange Apparel. Zeph. 1.8.
That is the Sixth Case, in which the Provisions of the Gospel suit.

Seventhly, Sanctifying Provisions suited to the Universal Defilements of
Spirit, Soul and Body. The Gospel requires Holy Vessels, when it makes ready
Holy Victuals. As thou art Filthy, it opens a Fountain to wash in, Zech. 13.1.
In that day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness: It is true, The more
full Accomplishment (as Hutcheson upon the Minor Prophets.
one observes) of these things were reserved for the Converted Israelites, and
therefore are peculiarly promised in that Day when they shall repent and be
restored, yet are the common Privilege of the Gospel Church in every Age. Thus
far He. It is a clear Promise of Sanctification fulfilled in the Cleansing
Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Blood under the Gospel: That Fountain opened is
(as Mr. Hurst, Supplement to Pool's Eng. Annotations. Song 4.12.
one calls it) the true Siloam, which purifies and cleanses every Leper whom
God puts into it; and as the same Author observes, though the Spouse is to Christ
a Fountain Sealed, yet Christ is to Sinners a Fountain opened. For the House of
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.] i. e. for every one that is made to
look out to Christ, it is opened for every one that sees the Necessity of
Holiness or Purification from it: These shall be all Purifyed in that Bath
which is prepared to cleanse us from all Filthiness and Pollution both of Flesh
and Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1.
The Generation of God's Children are not left to be like that other Generation
which is not washed from their Filthiness: Prove. 30.12.
But God has provided that they may be Partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12.10.
last words. The Gospel will cleanse thee of thy Spot, which otherwise though thou
wash thee with Nitre, and take thee much Soap, would remain a Spot still, with
thine Iniquity marked before me, says the Lord God, Jer. 2.22. The Gospel
brings thee a Laver full of Christ's Blood, and this is the Blood that rinseth
all clean, 1 John 1.7 last words. And the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. Nitre and Soap, either apart or mingled, are
searching Ingredients (you would think) to cleanse a Dirty Spot! but alas! though
Man seeks out many Inventions, Eccl. 7.29.
to try to wash himself clean, yet it will not do for a Garment spotted with
the Flesh, Jude v. 23.
if God search this out; nothing will fetch out Sin 'till we dip in Jordan, 2
Kings 5.14. Psalm. 44.21 Isa. 9.5. 1 John 5.6.
nay, not only wash in Water, but with our Garments rolled in Blood, i. e. the
Blood of Christ, who came by Water and by Blood, for our Spot to fetch it out
clean, Rev. 1.5.
being said to have loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood. The
Gospel provideth suitably to our Pollution, Heb. 9.13.
for it sanctifies to the Purifying of the Flesh, 'till we are made meet for
Communion with the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 16.22.
even sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2.

Eighthly, Rich Provisions for the Poor Saints, though never so impoverisht,
lowly in Mind, or Poor in Spirit. The Gospel abounds with the Liberality of the
Grace of God, to supply the Poverty and Wants of all Men in Christ. Though thy
Transgressions have beset thee, and the Iniquity of thy Heels have compassed
thee about, that thou art now like the Man in his way to Jericho, that fell
among Thieves; yea, Luke 10.30
thou may cry out with Micah of the Danit^'s Plunder, Judge. 18.24.
They have taken away (though not my Gods, to Complain just like him, yet) the
Image of my God, mine Original Perfection, as I was made once like him, my
Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness, and what have I more? Well, be it
thus, here is enough left thee still to be a poor, broken Petitioner at the
Throne of Grace, crying out for a New Stock to set up with Christ, in whom are
hid all the Treasures that will make thee Rich again. Col. 2.3.
Art thou Poor? Luke 22.21
thou may be Rich toward God. When thou art got to the Gospel, thou art got
to God's Treasury, which he unlocks, to make known what is the Riches of the
Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, Col. 1.27.

Ninthly, Full Provisions, suited to the Condition of empty Sinners. There be
Lengths and Breadths in the Love of God, that will give thee full measure, Luke
6.38.
pressed down and running over. Thou art empty in thy self, and till He refresh
thee with his Loving Kindness, Prove. 7.18.
thou can not take thy Fill of Love. Have thou ever met with the Emptiers,
that have emptied thee out? Nah. 2.2. The Gospel has Provisions to come in and
fill up all that empty space again. Though at home thou art like her that is
empty, and void, and wast, Nah. 2.10. as Nineveh that was once full of Men,
Counsel, Treasures, yet afterward emptyed out of all, so thou had once the
sensible Manifestations of one that lodged in thy House to fill thee, but now
at home empty; and also though abroad, like Naomi, thou have gone out upon some
Oecasions full, if thou have gone to an Ordinance, thou have it may be
sometimes carried much of the Presence of Jesus Christ with thee, yet the Lord
(to try thee) has brought thee home again empty, Ruth. 1.21. yet still the
Gospel has Provisions suited to thee, that when most sensible of thine
Emptiness, thou may receive thy measure, and not like proud careless
Boasters, who presume on something when they have nothing, Luke 1.53 Joh. 1.14.
last words.
be sent empty away. Thou have to do with one that is full of Grace and Truth,
and with one besides, of whose Fullness thou may receive, Joh. 1.16. even one
that will never leave thee empty, because he fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. let
it be as low with thee in thy Beginning as a sense of Want can make it, yet
thou shall never take up the Complaint of Babylon in thy latter End, Jer. 51.34.
the Lord has made me an empty Vessel.

Tenthly, satisfying Provisions, suited to the Condition of Longing Souls,
Matthew. 5.6.
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Be thou as Dainty in thy Palate
Heaven-wards as possible, yet in the Gospel thou have a God who satisfyeth thy
Mouth with good things, Psalm. 103.5. He will not deny Dainties, or withhold
Mannah, or keep back the Fruits that thy Soul lusts after. Rev. 18.14
Thou shall not be estranged from thy Desire in the things of God, Psalm. 78.30
tho thou would eat his Lambs out of the Flock, Amos 6.4.
his Calves out of the midst of the Stall, v. 6.
and drink his Wine in Bowls. If six Days common Provision at home has made
thee long for Dainties, he has appointed a Festival upon the Holy Sabbath,
when thy Flesh longs for the Courts of the Lord. Psalm. 84.2.
This Longing of the Soul may be reduced unto Two Heads, Hungring and
Thirsting, and the Gospel has suitable Things for Both.

1. It has Satisfying Provisions, suited to Hungry Ones, Psalm. 107.9. For he
satisfyeth the Longing Soul, and fills the Hungry Soul with Goodness. There
is many a Hungry Appetite has been brought into his Presence, and be has
filled the Hungry with good things, Luke 1.53. Perhaps thou art one that have
lost a Meal, through a Providential Hand of God upon thee, and where God sets out
Food, thou come the more Hungering thither: Some Black Providence may have
put on Sackcloth upon thy Soul, Nehem. 1.4.
that thou have mourned and fasted certain Days, and lo! a Restraint of the
Bread of God whets thee further on: Thou can not forbear crying when thou art
Hunger-bitten, Prove. 30.15.
like those Daughters of the Horse-leech, Give, Give; I have been thus long
from an Ordinance detained, Psalm. 109.24.
and my Flesh fails of Fatness, I must break out to the Supper now, I can
stay no longer in. Well, if it be thus, the Feast is still meet for thee.
Christ that Invites thee to sit down, 1 Samuel 30.12.
will Feast thee with his Love 'till thy Spirit comes again.

2. It has satisfying Provisions suited to Thirsty Ones. If thou long'st for
some Pleasant Draught, yet the Lord does satisfy such a Animam sitientem.
Moller. Enarr. in Psalms.
Longing Soul, as some do Expound it of Thirst, Psalm. 107.9. form pt. before
mentioned. Thy Thirst it may be is vehement, but that Ocean in God will suit
it, where thou art bid to drink abundantly, Cantic. 5.1. last words. Seeing
thou may come and drink, it will fare but the better with thee, when thy
Soul thirsts for the Living God, Psalm. 42.2. If like Samson thou art ready to
dye for Thirst, Judge. 15.18
what can be more suitable to thy Case, than for God to break up the Fountains
of the great Deep, Genesis 7.11.
'till thou find an Enhakkore, the Well of him that cried, Judge. 15.19. In
short, if God cleave a Hollow in the Rock, and open Christ the true Rock that
follows us, 1 Cor. 10.4
thou shall then be suited, and then satisfied from the Clefts of it, much
better than Samson from the Hollow of the Jaw Bone.

Eleventhly, supporting Provisions, and Provisions light and easy, suited to
the Condition of Burdened and Oppressed Souls. 1. Supporting under Heavy
Burdens. 2. Substituting Light and Easy in the room of Heavy ones.

1. The Gospel has Provisions that are Supporting under Heavy Burdens. Are
Afflictions heavy? Do they gall our tender Necks, or fret sadly inwards? yet
where our own shoulders sink, the Gospel has provided to put the everlasting
Arms underneath, Deuteronomy. 33.27. -- underneath are the everlasting Arms. Thou
can not perish in Affliction, because in all thine Affliction he has made
Provision; indeed otherwise the Burden would be utterly insupportable, Psalm.
119.92. Unless thy Law had been my Delights, I should then have perished in my
Affliction: I could not have stood under my Burden, if he had not stood by to
lean on. The Redeunt dolores and redeundo erescunt, at tandem opprimunt. Rivet
in Psa. 119. v. 92. Vol. 2. page 461. Col. 2.
Renewal of mine Afflictions, together with their Increase must have otherwise
overcome me: But now as the Case stands, when his Hand presses thee sore,
Psalm. 38.2. Yet the Lord upholdeth thee with his Hand (too,) Psalm. 37.24. when
thou fallest into outward Calamities, he does mitigate the Affliction, that it
shall not overwhelm thee. A word of Power is prepared to bear thee up in his
Hands, Psalm. 91.12
while leaning Melancholy upon thine own, thou art bowed down heavily. Psalm.
35.14
Suppose thou touchest the Bier, Luke 7.14.
thou art next akin to one that is carried to his long home, Eccl. 12.5.
yet God has made something ready to support thee, while thou art chief with
the Mourners that go about the streets. ibid.
He that is better to thee than ten Sons, as Elkanah has it when he Comforts
Hannah, yea, the chiefest of ten thousand, 1 Samuel 1.8. Cant. 5.10.
is better to thee than so many Relations, were they possible, in any kind
whatever. The Gospel has such supporting Provisions, as will keep thee at the
very Grave's mouth from sinking, where others slide in.

2. The Gospel has Provisions that substitute a Light and an Easy Burden in
the Room of Heavy ones. If thou have a Burden upon thy Back, a Burden upon
thine Hands, yea, one upon thine Head, and a heavier Load at Heart, yet the
Gospel is ready to exchange them, and afford thee so light a Yoke, thou needst
not call a Burden: If thou do, yet still with Christ thou may say, it is a
Burden is not heavy, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden light, Matthew. 11.30.
Christ does not leave his People to do all in their own Natural Strength, it is
the Covenant of Works that serves the Worker so; Christ makes it easy to hold
his Yoke, because his Hand lightens it, while his Hand holds it on us. Isa.
30.20.
Though thou have eaten the Bread of Affliction that lies heavy at thy Heart, yet
he has prepared thee a Table of Bread to digest easier, while he appoints it
thy Meat and Drink to do the Will of God; Joh. 4.34.
her ways are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. For though it be hard in it self
to bear the very Gospel Yoke, yet it is not hard, when thou have strength to
bear of him. Psalm. 78.39
He remembers that we are Flesh, and therefore provides his Spirit to be
willing, when our Flesh is weak. Christ is a Master that will not deal like
others. Sin was imperious, Satan cruel, other Lords that have had Dominion
worse than Hagar's Mistress, Sarat, that dealt hardly with her, Genesis 16.6. but
Grace is ordered to deal with Thee gently, as David charged his Captains to
deal gently with the young Man Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.5.


Twelfthly, Establishing Provisions, suited to the Condition of wavering and
unsteddy minds. Art thou like a Wave of the Sea, Jam. 1.6.
that is driven up and down, and tossed, yet the Gospel has a Rock, not to break
or wrack, but settle thee, whereon thy Soul may rest. It provides the Author of
thine Establishment, God himself, 2 Cor. 1.21. Now he which establishes us is
God: It provides the means of thine Establishment, the Grace of God, the sure
Doctrine of Grace, that thou may know what to believe, and what to Practice,
instead of the Craft and Sleight of Cunning-men. Ephesians. 4.14.
Heb. 13.9. It is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace, not
with Meats; as if he had said, The substance of the Gospel will, but the
shadows of the Law will not afford an established Posture for you. The Gospel
suits unto the settling of the whole, or of any part that needs it. Do you want
Footing? it has laid the Pathway to Heaven, and cut it out upon the Rock the
tried way thither. Would you Catch, and meet with sure Hand-hold? it provides
you that which is fit to fasten on, that you may lay hold upon Eternal Life. 1 Timothy 6.12
It has Establishment for giday Heads, and enough for any gracious Hearts. It
will keep you steady in the Center, that you shall not, like others in the
Circle turn always round. Briefly, it has all that can be suited to perfect,
stablish, settle you, 1 Pet. 5.10. last words. The Elegant variety of the words
may denote the highest Degree of stedfastness, an establishment that can never
be overthrown. The last words, Fundare, est Radicem ipsam gratiae
magis-magisque infigere. Ames in Pet. Job 19.28
settle you, seems to have a reference to the security of the Root, and shows
that Grace is of a settling Nature unto all that have the Root of the matter in
them. Grace without will find out the smallest measure of it within, to secure
and fix the Subject, that it shall not be moved away from the Hope of the
Gospel. Colos. 1.23


Thirteenthly, strengthening Provisions, suited to the Condition of weak Souls.
Though thou have lost some of the Power which was given thee from above; i. e.
though the exercise and and actings of Grace be low, yet the Gospel has got
ready to increase Grace, and strengthen its Principle within thee, when thou
can not of thy self strengthen the things which remain that are ready to dye,
Rev. 3.2. though thou art, as to spirituals, sadly pined away, yet God has
provided such a Hearty Meal for thee, that yet again out of weakness thou
may be made strong. Heb. 11.34
Though thou art so weak of both Hands, thou can not keep thy hold, he has got
such a Feast to put thee into Heart, as will make thee thou shall not let it
go. Though thy New Creature be yet so weak, it will only lie in Arms, yet thy
nursing Father is ready to open its Mouth to speak; Psalm. 8.2.
for out of the mouths of Babes and Sacklings have thou ordained strength: He
opens the Lips, He loosens the Tongue of the spiritually sucking Infant, that
the New born Babe in Christ shall give the Glory due unto his Name, and say,
Psalm. 29.2.
Tho I a Little Child am weak, yet Oh my Father, Psalm. 89.8.
who is a strong Lord like unto thee!

Fourteenthly, succouring Provisions, suited to the Condition of Tempted Souls.
The Devil may suggest a Defect in Gospel Grace, as if there were nothing that
did suit among the All things with thee, but in this very Case of his Assaults,
it has succors, and brings the Anchor of the Soul to throw out, while Satan
makes the Storm. Heb. 6.19
Though he has deluded and bewitched with his Sorceries, Acts 8.11.
thou may bid him stand now with thine Enchantments, Isa. 47.12.
and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy
Youth, if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail: (to
allude to that Challenge of the Holy Ghost made to the Babylonian Confidence of
old.) Make ready thy Snares and Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11 Job 2.5.
of which we are not ignorant, put forth thy Hand, and now do thy worst; here
is that in the Gospel, Satan, which will put thee to everlasting Silence, Mark
5.9.
tho thy Name be Legion, and thou have many with thee, here be All Things
against thee. Deuteronomy. 32.4
The God of Truth has prepared to rebuke thy Lies, and the God of Peace to
tread thee under Foot; Romans 16.20
the God of Power will tie up thine Hands and stop thy Breath, and strike through
the Leviathan that has troubled the Holy Waters, even Leviathan that piercing
and crooked Serpent, Psalm. 27.1.
and will wound the Head of the Dragon (of this presumptuous and accursed
Dragon) in the Waters. Psalm. 74.13
The Provisions of the Gospel are succouring; it will relieve thee to meet with
a Gospel that makes a greater opposition to Satan, than Satan can to Thee; to
meet with a Gospel that lays open the Care in the Heart of Christ for thee, to
appear and withstand him while he winnows, Luke 22.31. And the Lord said,
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may fifth you as
Wheat (...), signifies to shakt, or stir violently up and down.
. To sift you.] The Devil would shake the Corruptions in the Heart together,
that Grace should be invisible, and all buried in them; but Christ's
Intercession is a security to these Graces, and keeps them he shall not sift or
jogg them out of their Place.

There is a Good Spirit in the Gospel provided against the Evil one, either to
drive him from, or to deal with him on us. Though through Satan's continual
Injections and Suggestions thou art grievously vexed with a Devil, Mat. 15 22
yet the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them, Psalm. 34.7. Art thou assaulted by the strong man armed? Luke
11.21, 22.
yet the Gospel brings a stronger than He into the Field, that looks always
well to thee, and will not suffer the Devil to be too long upon thee, Ephesians. 6.12.
or Principalities and Powers to wrestle too much against thee. Art thou
Conversant in some Plat he has beset about with Wiles? yet here is the Wisdom
of the Seed to supplant and counterwork the subtilty of the Serpent, that thou
may stand against the Wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11. In the Gospel, the Lord
takes Care that there has no Temptation taken you, but such as is common to
Man; and God is Faithful, who will not suffer You to be tempted above that ye
are able, but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. God shows you in the Gospel, that he intends
no Temptation but what he will through his succouring Help make you fit to bear;
be they what Trials (suppose) or incitements to Sin they will, either God
tries, or Satan tempts, or our own Lusts entice, they are but slight matters,
and never rise above the common measure: God does not suffer you to be
over-rated, he does not exact, nor will he allow to be exacted more on you than
others. Ephesians. 6.16.
If Satan winnow you, God will order it to blow away your Chaff: If he throws
his Fiery Darts upon you, God will have it consume no more than burn up your
Dross. Though ye fall into diverse Temptations, Jam. 1.2.
yet the Gospel provides a Savior that has suffered being tempted, who is
able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

Though the Devil haunts thee with Despair, or casts in Black and Blasphemous
Thoughts upon thee, yet the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under thy Feet
shortly, Romans 16.20. The God of Peace.] Though the Devil comes in with War, and
may suggest God an Enemy, yet there is Peace from God toward thee: 1 Pet. 5.8.
Though your Adversary the Devil be that Roaring Lion which goes up and down,
seeking whom he may devour, yet thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, (that
old crooked Serpent that has so often Poisoned, or tormented thee with his
Sting) the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under Feet, Psalm.
91.13. Though a Messenger of Satan buffet thee, 2 Cor. 12.7
the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9. Though
the Devil should cast some of you into Prison, yet the Gospel has Provisions
still to succor you, even where Satan's seat is. Rev. 2.13. Heb. 2.10. Mat.
9.34. chapter 12.34.
The Captain of our Salvation will protect you against the Prince of Devils.
Here is not only a Shield and a Ephesians. 6.17. Ephesians. 6.11.
Helmet of Salvation, but the whole Armor of God to secure you against all his
Fiery Darts, 2 Cor. 12.9
and His Grace sufficient when you are tempted of the Devil. Matthew. 4.1.
In a word, there is all; and when he goes about to cause thine Heart to
despair, Eccl. 2.20.
he shall never discover it of this Gospel, that it is not entire, wanting
nothing. Jam. 1.4.

Fifteenthly, Cordial Provisions, suited to the Condition of Fainting Spirits.
Judge. 19.5
Thou may comfort thine Heart with a Morsel, when thou have eaten other
sorrowful Meat, Job 6.7.
or with a Cordial to fetch thine Heart again, that will even fill thy Mouth
with Laughter, Psalm. 126.2
after thou have minglea thy Drink with weeping: Psalm. 102.9 Psalm. 13.2.
Though thou have sorrow in thine Heart daily, and art shook with continual
Feebleness of Mind, yet He that made thee, can speak a word that shall make
thee be of good cheer, thou shall eat thy meat with Gladness, when He has
joined and created singleness of Heart, Acts 2.41. In the Gospel he has it
ready for thee: Though thou a Poor Creature faintest, yet have thou not known?
have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the
Ends of the Earth, faints not? Isa. 40.28. He does not flag in his Power, tho
an Arm of Flesh hangs dangling from the Bone, by a little skin that holds it.
It may keep thine Heart up, to think that neither the Hand, or the Heart of God
is ever cast down. The Ministry of the Gospel is to be a Cordial, to keep thine
Heart, and cheer up thy Spirits: see 2 Cor. 4.1. Therefore seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we faint not: and v. 16. for which cause
we faint not. It is a Cordial that warms, when thou have sucked in other
Spirits, and gat no Heat by them. 1 King. 1.1 16.


Sixteenthly, Quieting Provisions, suited to the Condition of Troubled Minds.
Mal. 4.2.
It has a Sun of Righteousness to shine after God's Face has been long hid:
Job. 16.2.
If miserable Comforters disturb, here is a merciful Creator quiets thee. When
other Comforters are Physicians of no value, Job 13.4.
too weak and unskilful to remove or repel the Disease that troubles thee, the
Gospel is afforded, that we might have effectual Remedy; or, as the Holy Ghost
by the Apostle, that we might have a strong Consolation, Heb. 6.18. That is, as
Dr. Owen on the Hebrews, Vol. 3d. Fol.
a Learned Man glosseth it, prevalent against opposition. It is able to still
the Causes of our unquiet Tumult, and suppress the furious Agitations that roll
within our Breasts. Though thou have Great Troubles, Job 15.11
yet the Consolations of God are not small with us. Though thou also as well as
the Wicked do sometimes look like a Troubled Sea, Isa. 57.20.
yet with this Difference, he remembers God and is troubled, Psalm. 77.3.
whereas in the multitude of thy Troubled Thoughts his Comforts delight thy
Soul, Psalm. 94.19. The Gospel is so universally contrived in the whole Frame of
it, through all its Counsels, Promises, Experiences, that when He gives
Quietness, there is none can cause Trouble. Job 34.19.
He has sweet Morsels to roll under thy Tongue, after thou have taken bitter
Pills from him, This is my Comfort in mine Affliction. Psalm. 119.50.
God has so suitably provided Gospel Grace, and so ordered it in all the
Tribulations of his Children, Cant. 2.3.
that they might be encouraged to rest quietly under his shadow, who shakes
down some Fruit into their Laps, as a Testimony that he does know their state,
Col. 4.8.
and will comfort their Hearts: And therefore be of good cheer, 1 These. 4.18.
and comfort one another with these words.

Seventeenthly, The Gospel has Resolving Provisions, to answer thy Scruples,
and remove all thy Doubts and Fears. The Soul oftentimes puts such Questions
about its own State, that it needs a Messenger with it, and an Interpreter one
of a thousand, Job 33.23. Sick Souls as well as Sick Bodies do require an able
spiritual Doctor by 'em, to show unto Man his uprightness; i. e. Arth^^
Jackson, Vol. 3d. 4 to.
To show how he must come to be presented Righteous and upright in the sight of
God; Ad exponendum Homini, i. e. pro homine in usum hominis. Mercer in loc.
Isa. 19.18. Dan. 5.16.
and whether the Sick or Doubting Party may be yet in such a Case. Now for this
an Interpreter is requisite; not only a Man that can speak the Language of
Canaan, but also read the Handwriting which the Finger of God's Spirit has
written, though in so small a Character, that he who carries the Book may not
read the Hand: Such a Text-man is called an Interpreter, and an Interpreter one
of a Thousand, or as Multis e millibus unus. Mr. Mat. Pool, Morn. Ex. Giles's
in the Fields.
some read it, One of many Thousands. Dissolving of Doubts was one of the
things that made Belshazzar's Queen conclude of Daniel, Dan. 5.11, 12.
that the Spirit of the Holy gods was in him. Oh! what Spirit then is that in
the Gospel, that will resolve thy Soul Doubts, Acts 8.22.
and tell thee if perhaps the Thought of thy Heart may be forgiven thee? that
will untye the very Knot that lay upon thy mind, thou did not dare to utter?
This is an Interpreter indeed, one of a Thousand, one of ten Thousand Casuists;
He is one that speaks as never Man spoke. The Spirit of God is one that can
speak in us, when a Man, Gal. 1.8.
or a mere Angel frrom Heaven could only speak to us. It may be, with Naomi,
Ruth 1.20.
the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with thee; and perhaps, as Dr. Tho.
Fuller, Comment. on Ruth. page 122.
one Notes it, thou make sour Faces, whilst thou can not resolve the Doubt,
whether with Ephraim thou art God's pleasant Child, Jer. 31.20.
or no; yet the Gospel has a Spirit will search this out, Psalm. 44.21
because it searches the Deep Things of God. 1 Cor. 2.10
If there be never so many Dark circumstances in thy state that puzzle thee,
yet do not Interpretations belong to God? Genesis 40.8.
He is a Revealer of Secrets, Dan. 2.47. Act. 27.23.
and will tell thee whose thou art, and whom thou servest; Dent. 32.4.
yea, a God of Truth that will not belie thy Case. Ah! thou art often at a loss
to know what God would have thee do, but God has made Provision in the Gospel
to shine upon thy Path, and make thy way clear, that when the Spirit bids thee
go, thou shall go on with thy Duty, as Peter did with the Three Men from
Cesarea, doubting nothing, Acts 11.12. There Is not a Scruple you make, but the
Grace of God can make reply to it: Not a Knot, which either the Devil or your
own Fearful Hearts may tie, but the Sword of the Spirit waits to cut in sunder;
Ephesians. 6.17.
that in whatsoever you doubt, you might go into the Sanctuary and enquire,
Psalm. 73.17 Phil. 3.15.
and God shall reveal even this unto you.

Eighteenthly, The Gospel has saving Provisions, suited to the Condition of
the Lost Sheep of the House of Israel. Matt. 10.6.
Though you apprehend that you are in jeopardy every hour, 1 Cor. 15.30.
yet the Gospel is prepared to show forth his Salvation from Day to Day: Psa.
96.2.
Though you think the Pit is ready to receive you in, Psa. 69.15.
and shut her mouth upon you, even Hell, Job 17.1.
while the Graves are ready for you, yet the Gospel opens the Everlasting
Gates, Psa. 24.7, 9.
that you may look through a Door of Hope. Hos. 2.15.
Though you Mourn in your Complaints and make a Noise, Psalm. 55.2.
yet he can still the Voice of your crying, Psalm. 5.2.
when he stops the Voice of his Justice, and prepare you to sing of Mercy: Psa.
101.1.
Though you count it that for your Parts, Ezekiel. 37.11. Psalm. 1.3.
your Hope is gone, and your Branch is withered, yet he that planted it by the
Rivers of Water, Isa. 55.10.
will cause it to bud and spring forth again. In a word, though you cry out with
those Frighted Mariners in Paul's Ship, Act. 27.20.
that all Hopes of being saved is taken away, yet the Gospel still suits your
Case, for the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost, Matthew.
18.11. He finds you out, though you are got where you lose your selves, though you
are muffled up in shades, 1 Samuel 10.22.
or hid behind the Stuff, or covered over with Dust, or disguised with Tears,
or wrapped in a Mantle of Confusion, Psalm. 109.29.
you throw in a Fright about you.

Nineteenthly, The Gospel has Allsufficient Provisions, suited to the
Condition of wretched Creatures, sunk below the Recovery of any Men or Angels.
God can do for thee, what Men, Neighbors, thine Acquaintance, Companions,
Brethren, nay, thy own Flesh and Blood cannot. The very Called and Chosen of
God that are made nigh to Christ, Ephesians. 2.13.
can but stand round about thee weeping, but the Lord can break in with Tender
Mercies, Luke 1.78. Psalm. 136.23.
and in thy Low Estate recover thee: I was brought low and he helped me, Psalm.
116.6. last words. It is the work of God, and beyond the sufficiency of Men;
God's Friends may pity thee, but it is God himself must favor thee; thou may
lie in thy Pit while their Eye trickleth down with Tears, Lam. 3.49.
but the Arm of the Lord can quickly draw thee out. Isa. 53.1.
They may lament thee fallen, but he can lift thee up: I looked and there was
none to help, therefore my own Arm brought Salvation, Isa. 63.5. Arthur Jackson
upon Isai. 4th. Vol. somewhat changed from the Author's.
When God sought but a little Help of Man, to do his People Justice, he found
not one appeared; much more then does it note an Insufficiency for any Helper
besides Him that has the All Sufficiency of Free Grace and Power, to save Men,
though sunk in Misery, (through an Original Apostasy.) If God should look out for
Help through the whole Creation round, he would never find any but what himself
brings: And He can speak a word, which neither Heaven nor Earth, Angels or Men,
ever dare pronounce, My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Lastly, The Gospel has Eternal Provisions, suited to the continuance of Man's
Immortal Spirit. As the Soul must endure for ever, the Gospel has Provisions
to make it Happy through the same endless Parallel. Jam. 2.5.
Do you hope as Heirs of the Kingdom, for a Kingdom that cannot be shaken? why,
the Gospel has such a Kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 25.34. Heb. 12.28. Do
you hope for Glory, when you see a Full End of Grace? why, Heb. 6.18.
Heaven is the Hope that is set before you. Do you expect more than to be
ransomed for a little moment here? the Gospel suits with your Expectation, for
the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and
Everlasting Joy upon their Heads, Isa. 35.10. It is an Eternal Inheritance that
is prepared for the Heirs of the Grace of Life, Heb. 9.10. an Eternal
Salvation, Heb. 5.9. an eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. In one word, you
can never see a Full End of these All Things, though you look toward the utmost
Bounds of the Everlasting Hills. Genesis 49.26
And thus I have shown, that as the Feast of the Gospel is full and plenteous,
so it is a Banquet of suitable Provisions that do fit all the Guests of it. And
Oh! that now as Man has tried to suit them, and Apply them to your Case, so
God would by the Application of his Spirit press these Clusters for you into a
Cup of Saving Health.

VII. The Seventh thing is to give some Account, Why it is a Feast with all
Things in it.

1. It is so in regard of the Great Founder, that had All Things to give. It is
not the Provisions of a mortal Man, but the Supper of the great King; and no
wonder when a King Feasts his Subjects, if he hold a Feast in his House, like
the Feast of a King. 1 Samuel 25.36.
The Lord is a Great God, and a Great King above all gods, Psalm. 95.3. And
therefore the Entertainment he makes, must be a Feast that has Provisions
above all Feasts whatever, a Feast with All Things in it. Song 1.12.
The King sits at his Table, and the Feast of a King proclaims a Full Table,
and the Royal Founder of Divine Grace makes this Heavenly Fare the greater. If
this Great Provider were not God, Joh. 9.33.
he could do nothing; Nihil dat quod in se non habet: None can supply another
with what he has not himself antecedently; but now All Things are eminenter in
Deo, that is, they are dwelling by a Transcendent Fullness in him; he is the God
of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. first words; and therefore he gives us all this
Plenty. We may say of every Dish made ready for God's Table, as David spoke of
the Materials he had made ready for the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.16. All this Store
-- comes of thine Hand, and is all thy own. In himself is the Abundance of All
Things, and therefore the abundant Grace redounds. 2 Cor. 4.15.
There is a Full Treasure in God, and therefore a Full Table he has disht and
garnisht forth for us. This is the Lords Doing, Psalm. 118.23. and therefore
nothing Defective in it. The Lord had so many Things to give, that he made bare
his Holy Arm, Isa. 52.10. that nothing might hang in his way, to obstruct the
Communication of a Full Gift to us. In a word, he is All, and therefore he has
all ready.

2. The Gospel is a large Feast, wheresoever God bestows that one Gift, the
Lord Jesus Christ, he gives in all other Things with him. Every Child of God
has a Richer Portion than he thinks of, merely for his Elder Brother's sake:
For He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us Gave him up to
Death for the Salvation of all the Elect. Dickson upon the Epistles.
all, how shall he not with Him freely give us all Things, Romans 8.32. When God
provided his Son, he would to magnify this unspeakable Gift, 2 Cor. 9.15
bestow a House-full of all other good, that his Family should have Plenty, and
every Day variety. When he parted with his Jewel, he purchased All Things with
it. The Price of that dear Blood could not procure less than to buy in all
Provision. The Pouring out of Christ's Blood made the Cup of Salvation brim
full: Psalm. 116.13.
So that when we receive of Christ's Merits we receive a full Reward; 2 John 8.
we shall not be kept upon Gospel Grace with Part, when we have Christ that
fully paid for All.

3. There be all Things, they all spring from God's abundant Love and Goodness:
What he gives, he gives with all his Heart, 1 King. 4.29.
and he that has a Largeness of Heart infinitely more than the Sand upon the
Seashore, is large in Communicating, and in his Gifts does not bestow Little
Matters on us; Ephesians. 2.4. But God who is rich in Mercy, for the great Love
wherewith he loved us. He put forth his Heart, and then he put forth both Hands
for us. The Act of his Will to love us, awakened and called up the Mercy of his
Nature to appear for us; and from hence where he sets his Love, (as Psalm.
91.14. He has set his Love upon me;) there he provides All Things to show it.
It was such a manner of Love, (1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us) that when it appears, makes no less matters of
it. All Love overlookt our Defects, and did not think All Things too many.

The Largeness of the Divine Love in making such a Feast ready, may be
heightened by a Consideration of his Bounty in Common Mercies to us. It is a
Royal Act of Grace, that affords us any thing from Court. He is a Benefactor
that prepares our own Tables, but the Riches of his Grace proclaim him more
Bountiful to furnish the Table of the Lord, Mal. 1.12.
and make the Gospel of his Son ready for us. It was Love and Bounty that
filled our Cup to the Brim with common Mercies, Psa. 116.13.
but it was a larger Love than this that made the Cup of Salvation overflow. It
was Love and Bounty that gave us Corn, that we ever see or hear of the Shocks
of it to come in in their Season, Job 5.26.
in the Appointed Weeks of the Harvest., Jer. 5.24.
but it was a Larger Love that has given us of the Corn of Heaven. Psa. 78.24.
It was Love and Bounty that he has given for the Use of Man, to drink of the
pure Blood of the Grape, (as Wine is called among that Inventory of the Good
Things of Men, Deuteronomy. 32.14.) but it was infinitely more that he gave us Blood
to drink, Rev. 16.6.
even the Blood of Jesus Christ. Oh! what a Large Love was that, Isa. 63.3.
to give us one that should tread the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath! This
was infinitely beyond the common Bounty that made our Presses to burst out with
New Wine! Prove. 3.10.
Oh! Love Emphatical! God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life, Joh. 3.16. If God had not left it upon Record, with a so he loved us, we
had never had, no nor ever heard of such a Royal Entertainment, as the Riches
of his Grace in Christ. Herein is Love, 1 John 4.10. not that we loved God, but
that He loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins: Oh!
what a Present, what a Gift of Love, 2 Cor. 9.15
what an unspeakable Gift is here! we may call the Gospel with an Emphasis a
Love-Feast, a Feast filled infinitely more with Love than those (...), those
other Feasts of Charity, Jude v. 12. which were no more than Banquets of Love:
The Ground of these Ancient Love Feasts was Provision for the Poor Brethren,
and preserving mutual Love among themselves. Jenkyn upon Jude. Fol. page 111,
112.

* These were Suppers used in the Primitive Times, either to manifest their
Brotherly Union, or for the Comfort and refreshing of the Poor, in Obedience to
Christ's Injunction, Luke 14.12, 13. Dr. Manton on Jude. p. 407.


Entertainments used in the Apostle's Days, and the early Times of the Gospel
to express a Love in the Primitive Christians (and all this was but the Love of
Creatures) to one another: But the Gospel is a Feast of Charity that is filled
with the Love of a Merciful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19
and a Faithful Redeemer to us: His Bowels opened, and he shut up nothing from
us; His Affections rolled toward us, and so brought in all to make a full
Provision for us. It was a Large Love, and therefore a Little Flock feeds in
large Pastures. He was a God Psa. 86.5. v. 15. Psa. 103.8.
plenteous in Mercy, Hab. 1.16.
and therefore we have plenteous Meat.

4. It is the result of the whole Counsel of God, Wisdom, but the Multiformis,
vel, ut alij reddunt multi ^aria Sapientia. Bodius in loc. p. 368. col. 1.
Manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. The Infinite Wisdom of God did exert it
self in such a wonderful variety of wise and mysterious Operations, that he
has laid before us a Universal Entertainment. Manifold Wisdom contriving what
Dishes to provide, must needs find out Dainties, and prepare a great many. He
that was wonderful in Counsel is also excellent in working, Isa. 28.29. He who
does all Things according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. was a God
that could search this out, Psa. 44.21.
even a Spiritual Feast with All Things ready. The Apostle argues it, Ephesians. 1.8,
9. Wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; --
according to his Good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. Inculcat,
nihil hic temere, nihil inconsulto neque fortuito contigisse. Idem. page 369.
col. 2da.
The Lord did nothing rashly, or unadvisedly, or by chance, but carried on the
whole Platform of the Gospel by Wise and Prudent Counsels. The Wisdom of God
had the management and ordering of all that was ever made known by the
Foolishness of Preaching to us: 1 Cor. 1.21
And this was sufficient to find out All Things for us, that his understanding
was infinite. Psa. 147.5.
A Divine Contrivance could find out all the Dainties that any Poor Soul could
ever want or wish: I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out Knowledge of
witty Inventions, Prove. 8.12. Wisdom searches, and discovers to us how his
ways are past finding out. Romans 11.33.


5. It is a Provision against All Evils, (it may be) more abundant, in
difficulties above measure, 2 Cor. 11.23.
in Afflictions more frequent, in Deaths often, and though long brought up under
the means of Grace, yet (perhaps) that Soul is still ready to cry out, I was
almost in all evil, in the midst of the Congregation and Assembly, to allude to
Prove. 5.14. though I have lived under Means, yet still I need Mercy. Now what
would have prevailed to have done such a Soul good, if all Grace had not
abounded toward us. You have seen before what a multitude of Cases meet, some
in one, some in another, many or them uniting and centring in the same Person:
Now God has provided All Things, that in our very dividing of the Word, 2 Timothy 2.15
we might have enough to give to every one a proper Portion, and you might all
find some. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2.
and we had need of all, Romans 5.18.
that Judgment might not pass upon all unto Condemnation. We fell into all
sorts of Misery, and we had need of all sorts of Mercy.

6. It is to procure all Happiness in God's Favor here, and therefore he
provides all things accordingly. To invest us in the Possession of all Good, it
was necessary there should be the Provision of all Good Things. The Means must
be correspondent to the End. All Men indeed are not saved, but yet the Gospel
is (as the Apostle said he became) All Things, 1 Cor. 9.22
that it might by all means save some: As the Apostle tries to pull this way,
and that way, and the other, Zech. 3.2.
if he might pluck a Brand out of the Fire, and save it any ways from burning;
so the Gospel comes in with this and that and the other Provision, even All
Things ready, if it might but with any of them save us. Nothing must be
excepted in the means, if we attain the End of our Faith: 1 Pet. 1.9.
There must not be one Link of the Chain drop, if we are drawn to Heaven. There
must be Election to Grace, or there can be no Effectual Calling, no Adoption,
no Justification, no Sanctification, no Perseverance in Grace, (I mean the
State of it) and there must be all these, or no Glorification after. So that
All Things must be provided to begin our Happiness in God's Favor here, and to
perfect it in his full Presence hereafter. The Gospel is to advance us, and
therefore the All Things are the many steps to it. You can never ascend from
the Bottom to the Top of Jacob's Ladder, Genesis 28.12
if you do not pass through many Rounds between.

7. God has been always providing; before Time, providing in Time, providing
early, providing late, even to this moment, and therefore in the issue we must
needs have rich Pasture. Prove. 4.7.
It is impossible but with all his Gettings, he should have got in all Things
for us. The Gospel-Blessings he has brought to your Ears (though of yesterday in
the report) are the result of his Counsels that were of old. Job 8.9.
Isa. 25.1.
The Ancient of Days was not idle, Dan. 7.9. Job 38.4.
before the Foundations of the world were laid, but was employed in
accomplishing our Happiness, Heb. 3.4.
after he had built all Things in time. It was before the Sons of the Morning
shouted, Job 38.7.
that he was making Supper ready. Before the very Worlds were frramed by the
Word of God, Heb. 11.3.
his Grace was a laying in of all Things in order. The Apostle takes great
Notice of the Antiquity and Eldership of Divine Grace, Ephesians. 1.4. and carries up
the Date of it into an Eternity, a part ante, before the Foundations of the
World. Nature is young, but Grace is the Firstborn of Heaven. The great God was
cutting out this work in Eternity, which we see in Time made up into such a
Coat of diverse colors. Genesis 37.3.
It was an Eternal Purpose, and therefore such full and various Preparations;
according to the Eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Ephesians. 3.11. It is a Feast so large, because so long a getting.

They are all Things that God's People may have enough without meddling with
any Things forbidden: Luke 6.38.
It is measure running over without a Grain from the Devil's Heap. We have a
Full Table from God, that we might not Covet of any Dish he hates: Genesis
2.16.17. -- of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of it. Mr. Cooper. Morn.
Exer. at Giles's in the Fields. p. 84.
He grants him a vast Latitude to eat of all freely, that he need not be
straightened to eat of that one Tree excepted. So in the Gospel it is all lovely
Grace, that you might not cry after one Beloved Lust. All the Milk and Honey,
Number. 13.27.
the Spice and Balm, the Fruits and Clusters that grow in Canaan, v. 24.
that your Mouths may never water after the Leeks Number. 11.5
and Garlic, and stinking Onions, the Diet of the old Man in Egypt. He offers
the Fatness of the Olive, Romans 11.17.
that, having tasted it, we may never relish the Fruits of the wild Tree again.
You shall have Bread enough and to spare, Luke 15.17
that you may not whine for Husks, or cry out for the Trough to be fed among
Swine. You shall be provided with Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11
Things here and Things in Heaven, that you might not take up with, or be
delighted in things viler than the Earth.

9. It is that all Men's mouths may be stopped. Silencing Argument that makes
God's own People Dumb, without a reply, when he comes to reckon up his Mercies,
and their foul Miscarriages: See it in David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. (where God is
reproving David by his Servant Nathan the Prophet, for that scandalous
Trespass, after he had gone in to Bathsheba,) Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the Hand
of Saul, and I gave thee thy Master's House, and thy Master's Wives into thy
Bosom, and gave thee the House of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too
little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such Things, wherefore
have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight, etc.
Now here David's mouth was stopped, the Provision that God made in so many things
silenced him: He could not plead (after God had graciously conferred so much
upon him) for the killing of Vriah, the snatching away of Bathsheba, and when
God had given him the whole Flock of Israel, to usurp and dress of the Poor
Man's Ewe. 2 Samuel 12.3, 4.


So likewise it was a silencing Argument to his Church of old, when he comes to
reckon up the Mercies he had bestowed, in that Song of his Beloved, touching
his Vineyard, Isa. 5.1, 2. He had planted it in a Fruitful Hill, (but the Slip
proved naught, there was nothing to be reprehended in the Soil, or the
Situation) He had (also) fenced it, (his Providence watched over it, his
Protection was round about it, he kept out Thieves and Robbers by Night, Obad.
v. 5.
that would have stole 'till they had enough; he fenced out the Wild Beasts
from breaking in, and the subtle Foxes of the Desert from creeping through) he
gathered out the Stones thereof, Ezekiel. 13.4
(he took away such Hindrances as were most likely to mar the Soil) he planted
it with the choicest Vine, (no People under Heaven that he had chosen to do
these Things for but They, no Vine but that which he brought out of Egypt did
he ever plant in Canaan; Psalm. 80.8.
he chosen the Slip, and therefore the choicest, because the chosen Vine) he
built a Tower in the midst of it; (he had placed a Tower of Defense to save
them, in planting his own Presence there; as a Tower in the midst is a
necessary Fortification to Command all the Outworks, and cover them under its
Protection; yea, he built a Tower to discern all the Coasts round, and as a
Watchtower to observe all Enemies Postures, or Approaches toward it) he had
also made a Wine Press therein; (the very Afflictions he ordered were all
designed in mercy, to press out and save the Liquor of their ripe Grapes, if
they had brought forth any) insomuch that when God queries and expostulates
hereon with them, it stopped all their mouths. The whole House of Judah, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem are all silenced, when God challenges the Vineyard
for their Wild Grapes; every one hereby came to be Convicted in his own
Conscience, Joh. 8.9.
and could make no reply to God.

Now in the same manner these all things are provided in the Gospel to stop
Sinner's mouths, who dare provoke him to Displeasure, after all that God has
made ready. I have done thus and thus for thee, Sinner, and made a Large Feast
to encourage thee to become my Guest; and what? do thou kick at my Sacrifice,
1 Samuel 2.29.
and slight all my Kindness? I have sent in Provision, and served up one Course
after another, and will thou despise Mercy, and turn all my Grace to
wantonness? Oh! Jude v. 4.
it will shut the mouths of carnal, loose Professors, that God's Hand has been
so open toward them, Romans 3.19. lat. pt. That every Mouth may be stopped, and
all the World may become Guilty before God. Had thou trampled upon One Grace,
or Two Graces of the Spirit of God provided, thou had had of the Swine in
thee, Ephesians. 3.10.
but to trample upon the Manifold Grace, all the Grace of God at once, and
tread under the Pearl of Price, Oh! Mat. 13.46
what a cloven-footed Swine art thou! God provides all Things to stop all
Sinners Mouths: Indeed Sinners are naturally talkative, and think they have a
great deal to say for themselves; in the Parable they all began to make excuse,
Luke 14.18. but however when all things are so openly provided, they can have
no cloak for their sin. Joh. 15.22
God now writes it over the Door of their Lips, therefore thou art inexcusable
Oh Man, Romans 2.1. They who fancy they have enough to plead for themselves, will
find God has more, even all to put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men; 1
Pet. 2.15 Psalm. 39.2. Mat. 26.73
or, if they are not dumb with silence, their very speech will bewray them,
Luke 19.22. Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee. If all things should not
work upon thee, yet God will have them all Preached, that thou may be one of
them whose Mouths must be stopped. (...), ^re occlusus est. Angl. He was muzled,
as still in the mouth, as a Beast that has a Bit put into him, or a muzzle
laid upon him. Luke 10.42
And he was speechless, Matthew. 22.12. He was so, who thought it so slight a
matter to be found where All Things were ready, though he wanted the one thing
needful. In short, the more things there are in the Gospel, the fewer words
such will have to say for themselves, Isa. 53.6.
that turn each one to his way.

Lastly, All Things are provided, that God may be admired and adored by the
Saints to all Eternity. A rich and plentiful Gospel shall cause these to sing,
while it makes others silent. The Saints shall stand up for ever in Admiration
of this Supper of the Gospel, when they are got to that other Marriage-Supper
of the Lamb. Rev. 19.9.
And therefore the Second Coming of Christ (when he shall come in the Clouds of
Heaven) is set forth by this Blessed Description, Mat. 24.30
to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, 2
These. 1.10. As Christ's Personal Glory was a Ray that Shone from Everlasting,
Joh. 17.5. Prove. 8.23, etc. so Christ's Sclater on the Thessalonians.
Social Glory (or the Glory of the Head in Fellowship and Conjunction with the
Members) shall result to his Person from the Praises of the Elect. The Saints,
Rev. 15.2, 3.
having the Harps of God, will admire him in the Song of Moses, and in the Song
of the Lamb for ever: Yea, the Saints shall then admire and adore him for those
Things which the Angels already look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. last words.

The Eighth Thing is to lay open what Hindrances do make it unto many
ineffectual. VIII.
The Feast of the Gospel meets with very many. Now that we may not suffer any
of these Hindrances to slip away in the Crowd without Notice, it will be
convenient to seize as many as we find, by stopping them at these Two Doors,
and showing first what Hindrances do make the Gospel wholly ineffectual to
Sinners; and secondly what Hindrances peculiar do make it in part to be
ineffectual to Saints.

First, The Hindrances of Sinners that render this Feast of the Gospel
ineffectual to Them are numerous, no less than these Eighteen. 1.
Insensibleness of the Things of God. 2. Inward Captivity of the Mind. 3.
Ignorance. 4. Obstinacy. 5. Other Banquets. 6. The Cares of this Life. 7.
Slothfulness. 8. Prejudice. 9. The General Disesteem which the Gospel meets
with in the World. 10. Bad Company. 11. Carnal Relations. 12. False Teachers.
13. A Conceit of Self-Fulness. 14. Scandals. 15. Carnal Disappointment. 16.
Plain dealing. 17. Sometimes open Persecution. 18. God's Righteous Induration,
his hardening and giving them up judicially.

First, 1 Hinderance.
Insensibleness of the Things of God, or a Spiritual Death in sin. If we Preach
to a Company of Moral Stocks, that are no more affected with the Doctrines of
the true God, than if we had Preached up Stocks, and Dumb Idols, and the
Doctrine of Vanities, alas! Jer. 10.8.
what does it profit? The Gospel indeed has Enlivening Provisions, as has
been shown, but there be many nevertheless Dead in Sin, Jam. 2.16.
that have not yet received them. Oh! how do we Preach still, as if the
Assembly were a Golgotha, Mat. 27.33
a Place of Dead Men's Skulls! alas! how small is the inner in comparison of
the outer Court among us! how many come to Meetings, that never met with God!
how many Graves have the Trumpet sounded over, Rev. 20.13
that never yet have opened and given up their Dead! we wait to see that
Question graciously resolved in the Affirmative, Psa. 88.10.
shall the Dead arise and praise thee? Some, blessed be the Lord, are made
Living Men, because he lives, Joh. 14.19
they do, and shall live also. But how do we Preach Christ Jesus the
Resurrection to a great many others that never found Life! chap. 11.25
that were never yet awakened! never sensible, never stirred! never had the
Beginnings of any Good Work upon them! These are Dead, Romans 5.15. Through the
offense of one, many be Dead; Dead in Sins, Ephesians. 2.5. Now All Things to him
that is insensible, or not spiritually risen from the Dead, are nothing. So
long as a Man is Stupid, there comes not a Sigh, or ever one Groan, or Tear
from him. Acts 2.37.
You must be pricked at the Heart before the Liquor runs: 'Till then, no
Pantings, no Desires, no Enquiries, no melting Warmth, no Motions of the Soul
toward God. If thou art a mere Carcass in Divinity, or Profession with thy
Pulse gone, thine Affections lost, thy Breath stopped, and thou art found but
just where Adam (our first Father that sinned) left thee: Isa. 43.27.
This will be an insuperable Hinderance to thee, 2 These. 2.7
'till it be taken out of the way. And yet this is the Condition, this is the
State of every one by Nature.

Secondly, 2 Hindran.
An inward Captivity of the Soul. 1. Under Sin. And 2. By the God of this World.

1. Captivity under Sin is a Hinderance to the Gospel-Feast. If a Man be not in
such a stupid, blockish Cafe, as to remain grossly Dead, and altogether
insensible of the Things of God, but suppose him some ways Apprehensive, brisk
and lively in his Temper and Deportment; yet if sin commands him, he is but a
merry Slave still, and a stranger to Gospel Grace: For so long as a Man is
overcome of the evil that does so easily beset him, Heb. 12.1.
he is made a True Slave to it, 2 Pet. 2.19. latter part. Of whom a Man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in Bondage: His Iniquities seize him, and
carry him off as a Bond-slave, without his own Resistance: A Lust sets upon the
Soul and ravisheth her, and whether it finds her in the House, or in the Field,
she never like the Betrothed Damsel Nisbet upon Peter. Deuteronomy. 22.24.
Cried to Christ for Help. This is an easy Conquest, a voluntary Surrender, a
Running into the Enemy's Hand. Now it is no wonder, that Men are hindered from
the Things of God, when their Iniquities withhold Good Things from them; your
Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
Face from you -- Isa. 59.2. Sin like a mighty Cord draws the Wicked more and
more from God, and then winds so fast about them, they can make no return; Sin
at last will hold them in the snare, notwithstanding all their faint Wishings
and Wouldings, as some express it.
Velleityes to escape, Prove. 5.22.
whether they will or no. His own Iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and
he shall be holden with the Cords of his sins. Men first give way to sin, and
at last sin Peccata quae nexuisti, instar Retium and Tendicularum sunt, quae
vinctum te, and constrictum tenebunt, ut te expedire nequeas. Cartwright in loc.
twines so close about them, they can never get free, or, by all the Art and
Endeavors they use, make it loose its hold. Natural Conscience at first makes
them start, while it has beheld how the Snare has caught them, but afterward
Conscience wastes, and they sin under the Dominion of the Tyrant with more
Greedy Delight than ever. This is most notably represented in the Prophet, Isa.
5.18. Woe unto them that draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and sin as it were
with a Cart-rope. The Holy Ghost seems to speak there of the brisk, active
Servants of Sin, who scorn with Ahab to serve it a little, ^ Kings 10.18.
but with Jehu will serve it much, as Jehu counterfeits in the Case of Baal's
Priests. That draw Iniquity with Cords.] There is a Generation of Active
Sinners in the World, that will bring wickedness in by the Hand, if a
Temptation be slow-paced, and does not come fast enough alone, or present it
self quickly: If Sin without should be long a coming, the wickedness of their
Hearts is impatient, and will go out half way to meet it, Prove. 4.16
for they sleep not except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken
away unless they cause some to fall; they hate either to go to Bed, or to rise
without sin with them. And sin as it were with a Cart-rope.] Mr. Pool. Engl.
Annotations.
As Beasts commonly do that draw Carts with Ropes. Arth. Jackson.
Whilst others are drawn away to sin, they draw sin upon themselves. It denotes
the Great Pains they take, and their toilsom endeavors they use with all
possible Eagerness to accomplish what they have contrived. They will pull hard,
like a Man at a Cart-rope, when he is binding Sheaves in the Field, rather than
suffer sin to lie loose upon them, and hazard its dropping off. Now these in
this mighty struggling with the Cord, are caught fast in it, and lie bound worse
than Samson with the New Ropes, that if they would, they cannot get away. When
Sin has Dominion over them, they are made to do its Drudgery. The Will of the
Flesh is put in opposition to the Will of God. Joh. 1.13.
If sin therefore reign in your mortal Body, that you should obey it in the
Lusts thereof, Romans 6.12. His Servants ye are, to whom you obey, v. 16. And if
you are the Slaves of sin, you are no Subjects of the King that has made this
Gospel-Supper ready, nor will you be able 'till freed to meddle with it.

2. Captivity under the God of this World is also a Hinderance to the
Gospel-Feast. The Devil hates the Gospel, and he will allow none of his to love
it. He keeps them as much as possible under Blindness, least if they see the
light, they should break loose: It Is therefore ascribed to the Malignant
Influence of the god of this World to blind wicked Men, 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the
god of this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine
into them. If the Devil did not keep his Prison- windows, as well as his
Prison- Doors fast, his Prisoners would not lie contented, or be so quiet in
their Place, to see by Christ's Light this Black Jailer buckle on their Chain.
Now this Blinding Power which he has over them follows upon their Captivity
they are in under him; for when God leaves them in his Hand, Satan uses them at
his own Pleasure: He is a Tyrant wherever he is a Conqueror, and deals with
his Slaves as Nebuchadnezzar with Zedikiah, when he carries them Captive, he
binds them in Fetters, Jer. 39.7.
and puts out their Eyes: And though they cannot see, they shall be still made to
work, for he deals with them too as the Philistines did with Samson, they must
grind in his Prisonhouse, Judge. 16.21.
(to allude to those words literally, though in Samson we may understand them, as
See Dr. Smith's Pourtraicture of Old Age. p. 116.
some do, Metaphorically, to represent how he did perform the Offices of
Nature, as eating, drinking, and being nourished there, etc.) Oh! there is many
an old Slave of the Devil's kept so hard under a Spiritual Chain, that they
cannot stir a Foot to partake of this Feast. Poor Sinners that have been
Charnock's Discourses. The First Volume. p. 68.
as it were the Electors of him to the Government, and by their sin made him
the god of this World, have chosen a mighty Tyrant over them, that now it may
be they are so taken Captive by him at his Will, 2 Timothy 2.26.
that he will not let them go their Chain's length to any means of Grace. This
is another mighty Hinderance, which makes Gospel Grace oftentimes very
ineffectual to Men.

Thirdly, 3 Hindran.
Ignorance, and Carnal Apprehensions of the Things of God. Men do naturally
want Illumination, and mistake the very Notions of the Grace of God sometimes,
but, if they hit upon right Notions, they may still fall short of an
Experimental Acquaintance with those Things, having their Understanding
darkened, Ephesians. 4.18. or (...). Gr.
darkened in their Intellectuals, obscured and bemisted in their Reasoning
Faculty, they are brought into corrupt and deceitful Argumentations: The
Natural Man has little other Logic besides what those Two corrupt Tutors, the
Devil and his own Heart, read him, that is made all up of Fallacy, and makes
him conclude he is safe, because he sees no hurt. The Apostle has given a very
Faithful and clear account of it, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Natural Man receives not
the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. The Natural Man.] It is
not the Carnal Man, as some would strenuously try to render it, but the (...),
is one that has all that is or can be derived from the first Adam, one endowed
with a Rational Soul, and who has the use and exercise of all its Rational
Faculties. Dr. Owen of the Spirit. p. 217.
Animal, or Souly Man, as the word imports; i. e. it is rather the Man that
has a Principle of Fleshly Wisdom to guide him, than the Man that has only
Carnal Affections to over-ballast him; but though he be ((...)) a Man of never so
great a Soul, one of a piercing insight to reach and perceive other Things, a
clear-ey'd Observer in all humane Speculations, yet it is otherwise when he has
the Things of God before him; for without a Spiritual Apprehension superadded
to his most sublimated Reason, and exquisite Knowledge in Philosophy and
Politer Learning, he receives them not, (...), he does not take, or apprehend
them; you may reach them out to him, but he cannot take them with one of his
Fingers: For the words [ not receiveth] do imply (as a Charnock's Discourses.
2d. Vol. page 497.
Learned Man observes) an offer of those Things. Men's Intellectuals are blind;
Sinners naturally argue wrong, and from thence in their Actions run to Crooked
ways. Mr. Matthew. Mead, Good of Early Obedience. p. 319.
A Dark Mind is ever accompanied with a Disobedient Heart; where there is no
sharing in the Light of Christ, there can be no subjection to the Law of
Christ. Now this Hinderance may be opened under a Fourfold Division in
reference to the Gospel-Feast.

1. Ignorance of the Invitation that calls, is a Hinderance. Poor Sinners
discern not what Grace utters, when it tells them how Bowels of Mercy yearn
over them. They mistake God's Voice for a Poor mortal Man's, like Samuel while
a young Stripling, that took God's Voice for Eli's, 1 Samuel 3.6. Here am I, for
thou did call me. The Lord had called him in the 4th. Verse, Samuel; and
Samuel misunderstands; the Lord calls him again in the 6th. Verse, and still
Samuel mistakes the Voice, for Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was
the Word of the Lord yet revealed to him. Thus, under the Gospel, if Men have
an outward without an inward Call, they may hear a Sound, but know not the
meaning of the Voice; if there be not a Divine Light shining, 1 Cor. 14.11.
the Messenger may be as a Barbarian speaking. Sinners understand not an
Ambassador of God, 'till the Spirit interpret that Language in which he speaks
to them. Who then is the better for a Feast, that utterly misunderstands and
mistakes the Invitation? what signifies Spiritual Provision, when Men have
Carnal Thoughts about, and are mere Strangers to, a saving Call to take it? no
wonder, if it hinders the Banquet, when you are (any of you) held back for want
of knowing that sweet and inviting Call that bids you.

2. Ignorance of the Master of the Feast that provides, is a Hinderance
thereunto. Sinners do not know the great God that makes it. When the World have
thought themselves wisest, yet still the World by Wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor.
1.21. They are mere Strangers to the Action of God the Father in sending Christ
into the World with these Provisions. The King sends his Servant, or this
Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1.
to treat with Poor Sinners, and because his Deity was veiled with Flesh, Flesh
and Blood did not know him. Dr. Owen. Meditations and Discourses on the Glory
of Christ. page 79.
A very Learned and. Holy Man has thus remarkt it, The World was so far from
looking on him as the True God, that it believed him not to be a Good Man. Nay,
the Father and the Son were both unknown alike, Joh. 8.19. middle pt. Jesus
answered, ye neither know me, nor my Father. Alas! what was a Spiritual Feast
to a Poor, Ignorant and Carnal Generation, that neither knew God who provided
it, nor Jesus Christ that came from him with it. So Joh. 4.10. If thou knew
Who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink; speaking there to the
Samaritaness who was Ignorant of him that brought the Provision of the Gospel
with him: Christ had there to do with a Poor, Ignorant Woman, that took him for
no more than a common Jew, with whom such Samaritans as she had no Dealings, v.
9. How is it that thou being a Jew, ask Drink of me that am a Woman of
Samaria, for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans? Alas! so long as
she continued Ignorant of Christ, she was never the better for all that Living
Water in him! though it was Jesus, he would not save her, so long as she looked
upon him as a mere Jew, and wanted an Eye to look through the Vail of his Flesh,
Heb. 10.20
and by Faith see the Son of God in him. Thus, Sinners that have heard of the
Gospel will be hindered from partaking of it, so long as they discern not by
Faith who provides it. God's Ministers in the Pulpit may say to Sinners, Come;
God's People may be trying to deal with them too in private, and both to see,
if they can persuade them into a Love with the ways of Sion; but if Sinners are
still Ignorant of Jesus Christ who speaks by his Friends to them, this Feast is
an Entertainment that is likely to do no good upon them. Men are apt to
conclude we go about to Proselyte them to a Party, Act. 20.30.
and draw Disciples after us, and thus it will be 'till they come to believe on
Christ, through our words to them. And therefore Christ prays for all that should
see their Master's Mind in the Servant's Message, Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their Word.
Not believe on you, though through your words on Me. It Is your Message, but my
express Will.

3. Ignorance of the Provisions made ready is a Hinderance to them. Men are
Fools and Blind, Mat. 23.17
and don't see what is set before them, no more than who it is that has got it
served Up. Christ also reprehends this piece of Ignorance in the same Woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the Gift of God. An Ignorance of what
Christ has, as well as of what Christ is, is an ordinary and frequent Ground
of the Sinners Miscarriage to him. If thou knew the Gift.] Were thine Heart
sensible of the Grace that is now brought so nigh at Hand, it would make it
leap within thee, and thou would not rest 'till matters were at another pass
with thee. Alas! if you don't know the Gift in the Gospel, you will partake of
no Gospel Grace by it. If you are Ignorant of the Table he has prepared, you
will never sit at Meat. If Men have low, carnal Conceits of the Good Things of
God, and carry their Thoughts no further than the Letter, when the Spirit
speaks herein, it will beget ordinary Conceptions in the Mind, and prove an
Hinderance to the Gospel. There will be no Spiritual Application of the
Substance, so long as our Thoughts rest and terminate superficially upon some
Corporeal Image: This was the Grand Miscarriage of a great many Followers of
our Lord, who seemed to Covet to wait upon him in a Body, with a great deal of
Religious Zeal and Forwardness. Our Blessed Lord had Preached this Doctrine of a
spiritual Repast, and manifested himself to be the Provision which the Soul by
Faith must live upon; whereas it begat only in the Or, Capernaites.
Jews a gross Conceit of some Literal and Corporeal Banquet that Christ aimed
at, and raised in them a certain Question even to Indignation, as they strove
among themselves, saying, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Joh. 6.52.
insomuch that Christ taxes their Ignorance, by expounding to them his own
Doctrine, v. 63. latter pt. The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit;
as if he had said, I have been upon a spiritual Subject, but you have not
understood me: I have spoken of a Feast to nourish you inwardly, but it is your
own Ignorant Fancy that suggests the Corporeal Images of other Meats and
Drinks, as when ye did eat of the Loaves and were filled, v. 26. Now when the
Gospel in the Matters of it is ignorantly mis-interpreted, it becomes a like
Hinderance to it. If it be not apprehended and experienced a Feast of the Soul,
we shall rest in outward Conveyances, and lose the Kernel by holding fast the
Shell. It will be but as if we made Provision for the Flesh, Romans 13.14.
if we receive it not as a Feast of the Renewed Mind, Joh. 4.32.
which our Flesh knows not of. We must be spiritually enlightened to know the
Things that are given to us of God; 1 Cor. 2.12
for He that is spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. Besides, Ignorance
of Gospel-Provisions causes Men to turn the Truth of God into a Lie, and
embrace an Error instead of the Truth as it is in Jesus. Ephesians. 4.21.
This is a Hinderance therefore to the Holy Feast we speak of. You are like to
be fed with no other Mannah than that which will breed Worms and stink, Exodus
16.20.
if you are Ignorant of the True Bread.

4. Ignorance of the Way by which every one must come, is likewise a Hinderance
that keeps from these Provisions. If you take it as a sufficient Act to put
forth a little of your own Strength toward God, and rest in Dead Works, it
will hinder your Benefit by the Gospel-Entertainment. You must throw your
selves upon Christ as Sinners, this is your first Work, to come as you are, and
venture upon the Son of God, and afterward God's Spirit gradually works such
Qualifications that you may come then as Sons and Daughters. 2 Cor. 6.18.
The Substance of this is represented in that Directory for Conversion which
Christ taught the Jews, Joh. 6.28.29. Then said they unto him, What shall we
do, that we might work the works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them,
this is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. It is to
believe, and not properly to Men indeed by Nature retain such an Impression of
the first Covenant of Works, that they know no way of Acceptance before God,
but by the way of Works. Hutcheson upon John.
work. Such as sit down upon outward Performances, without going forth to Jesus
Christ to rely on him by Faith, do assuredly sit upon Thorns, though a little
slight Covering they have woven, or patcht together from Works that comes
betwixt, Job 36.32.
may at present bear off their Pricking, that now they feel no smart. Faith it
self indeed is a Work, but does not justify as a * In opposition to all Works,
Christ leads them to this one Work, that they believe. And his calling it a
Work, does not import that Faith as a Work does justify, for it is only the
Hand to receive Christ who is our Righteousness: But he gives it this Name,
speaking in their own Terms who doted on Works, and so the Doctrine of Faith is
called a Law, Romans 3 27. because the Jews boasted so much of the Law. Hutcheson
upon John. page 102.
Work: It justifies no otherwise than as it apprehends a justifying Object, and
it is a saving Work, no otherwise than as it fastens and relies upon a saving
Worker. Hence it comes to pass, that without Faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. Now Ignorance of this way to the Provisions in Christ, makes
them unto many so ineffectual.

If you think it an easy matter to thrust in to God any how, without Christ as
your Way, his Word as your Rule, and his Spirit as your Guide, you will profit
little by the Gospel, so long as such a corrupt persuasion leads you: Joh.
14.6. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life. The Way.] No access, or coming unto
the Father but by me. The Truth.] No Doctrine can be sound, that leads off from
me. The Life.] You will never enter into Life, Mat. 19.17
if you enter not in by me, as the Door, and unto me as the Provision. Again,
The Word must be your Rule, Psalm. 119.133. Order my Steps in thy Word. Si extra
Legem tuam incedo, non est Stabile solum sub Pedibus meis, coeno demergor.
Rivet. Via vitae, seu medit. in Psat. 119. operum vol. 2do. p. 472
If I step besides thy Law, (says the Learned Rivet) I tread where the Ground
will not bear my Feet, and where I am over Head and Ears in Dirt. Though Christ
is the Way, yet we should never know what Steps to take to or in him, 'till the
Word lays Christ forth, and discovers each of them to us. So for the Spirit,
it is Guidance is necessary: The Spirit of God has branded it as Foolishness in
those that follow their own Spirit. Ezekiel. 13.3
There is no Spirit fit to be our Guide but His. Thy Spirit is Good, lead me
into the Land of uprightness, Psalm. 143.10. Thy Spirit is good, lead me, or, as
Tuo spiritu bono deduc me. Junius.
some read it, By thy Good Spirit lead me. If we had Christ as the Way, and his
Word as the Rule too, yet if we had not the Spirit as our Guide, we should not
by reason of the Darkness in us and upon us, see the Straitness and Perfection
of the Rule before us, or know of our selves how at any Time to use it. There
is an absolute need of the Spirit's Guidance after Conversion, hence is that of
the Apostle inculcated, Walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16, 25. and walk after the
Spirit, Romans 8.1. and that Phrase, if ye be led by the Spirit, Gal. 5.18. all
which do import a submitting to the Conduct of the Spirit, as our Guide. And if
there be a need of the Spirit for Saints, after they have received Christ, be
sure there is a necessity of the Spirit's Guidance for Sinners to bring them in
to Christ. Well, Ignorance of and Unacquaintedness with the way of the Lord,
must needs be an Hinderance to the Feast of the Lord, that makes Sinners desire
none of his Dainties. That is the Third Hinderance.

Fourthly, Obstinacy, 4 Hindran.
or an obstinate Aversion to the Things of God. The Parable gives this account
of it, Matthew. 22.3. that when the King had sent to call them that were bidden
to the Supper, they would not come. Alas! if Men will become their own
Hinderers, no wonder that the Gospel proves ineffectual. If they will choose
rather to starve than eat, how can a Feast preserve or relieve such as these?
and yet this is the wretched and deplorable Case of Sinners, their Hearts do
naturally stand off from God, therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, for
we desire not the Knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. There is a mighty
Stubbornness and Rebellion in the minds of Men that God takes Notice of, this
was expressly laid open in the Jews, Isa. 48.4. I knew that thou art obstinate,
and thy Neck is an Iron Sinew, and thy Brow brass. Sinners will choose Poverty
and despise Riches, run into Misery and forsake their own Mercy. Jonah 2.8.
The Gospel would pity, relieve and save them, but they are a stiff necked
Generation that will not turn and live. Ezekiel. 18.23. v. 32.
It would feed them, but they will rather dye of spiritual Hunger; it would
cloth them, but they will rather to Hell naked, than go with Christ's Robe to
Heaven. They will rot in their Chains before they will stoop to choose a Free
Release, and will venture to fall Blindfold into the Ditch, Mat. 15 14 Rev.
3.18. Joh. 9.7.
rather than anoint with Eye Salve, or wash in the Pool of Siloam.

Fifthly, Other Feasts besides. 5 Hindran.
Though in the Gospel it is the Supper of the great God, yet in eating, Sinners
have taken every one his own Supper before it, 1 Cor. 11.21.
as the Apostle speaks of the Lord's Supper. They will have Banquets to
corrupt the Flesh, but none of that Holy Diet which might save their Spirits in
the Day of the Lord Jesus. Sinners will snatch especially at these Three, the
Lust of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5.
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2.16. The World that
reject a Feast provided by Father, Son and Spirit, yet will banquet with their
own Hec Tria pro trino numine mundus habet.
Trinity.

1. The Lust of the Flesh is a Banquet with Sinners that obstructs the
Gospel-Feast. Lusts of the Flesh are such Pleasures, says Coton upon the 1
Epist. of John.
one, as Men find in Meat and Drink, or Women; either Intemperance or
Incontinence. And then again, Pleasures, whether we consider them as gross or
vain, the Pleasures of the Body or the Mind, do hinder the Efficacy of Divine
Provisions.

1. Gross and Filthy Pleasures, or Fleshly Lusts (as the Apostle Peter calls
them) that War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. * (...). Greek T. (...). Pleasure
is a Net that entangles ungodly Men.
Fleshly Concupiscences the Original reads it, alluding to that inbred Appetite
of the old Man which goes forth after Morsels roasted at the Fire of Lust, and
took off the Devil's Spit. Abstain, says the Holy Ghost, from these. Romans 1.26
The Lust of the Flesh is a bad Appetite, a vile Affection, that covers to be a
Partaker with Devils, and rejects Angels Food. Psa. 78.25.
It will find out a Banquet that quite spoils the Feast. I may say here of the
whole Gospel, as the Apostle does of the Lord's Supper in a Part of it, 1 Cor.
10.21.
Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of Devils; ye cannot be
Partakers of the Lords Table and the Table of Devils. Carnal Concupiscence that
eats the Flesh as it were Fire, Jam. 5.3.
will breed no other Appetite than that which sups with Venus, Prove. 7 27.
and then lodges her Guests in That which wicked Men have in their Lusts is
but like Tickling of the Itchy Place, which leaves more smart afterward.
Anthon. Burgess. Sp. Refininings, part 2d, page 94. (mihi) Fol.
Hell.

So likewise the gross * Prove. 21.17. He that loves Pleasure shall be a Poor
Man. Gaudium scilicet cibi and potus, voluptates amat corporis. Mercer.
Pleasures of Intemperance in the Acts of Gluttony and Drunkenness, as sure as
those of Incontinency in the Acts of Whoredom and Fornication, or motions
toward Uncleanness, do hurt the Gospel-Feast. The Guests (who have Animus in
patinis, their mind running upon Dishes, or) whose God is their belly, Phil.
3.19. (such as pour down Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings to an Idol, Romans
16.18. Psa. 16.4. Heb. 11.40 Isa. 28.8.
and serve their own Belly) will not hasten after another God that has
provided some better Thing. Isa. 28.8.
The Tables that are full of Vomit have no Guests about them, Prove. 30.12.
that 'till they are washed from their Filthiness, do ever sup with Christ.
Sick Tables, Sick with Bottles of Wine, Hos. 7.5.
have none well enough for Him. The Guests at these Tables, says Mr. Cruso.
Tender Conscience. page 88.
a Writer (who has psctur'd such spotted Beasts in their own Native Colors)
are so many Filthy Bruits oftentimes in the shape of Reasonable Men. Alas!
these unclean Birds (to which they may be also compared) are rather for They
are such Beastly Creatures, it is a hard matter to speak of them in cleanly
Terms. Sir William Waller' s Meditations, p. 47.
Carrion upon a Dunghill than be with the Holy Doves to pick up the finest of
the Wheat. The Swine will not exchange their Acorns and their Trough for the
greatest Festival in the World. 1 Cor. 15.32.
Voluptuous Epicures had rather eat and drink of Meats and Drinks for the
Belly, though to morrow they dye, than partake of Gospel Grace, and live with God
for ever. All Inordinacy, as a Mr. Sam Lee. Joy of Faith. page 176, 177.
Learned Man expresses it in ventre and sub ventre, whether Intemperance or
Uncleanness, will make the Sensualist very sparing, and the more niggardly in
the Things of God.

2. Vain Pleasures that cannot profit do render the Gospel to many ineffectual.
They are sensual Delights and not spiritual (though men by an Art may sift them
finer) which do relish with the Carnal Gust of Man. Some Light Spirits had
rather feed upon Frothy Pleasures than the solid Food of Christians. A Feast
for Conversion will be of no account with them 'till they are delivered from
their vain Conversation. 1 Pet. 1.18.
They that spend their Years in Pleasures, will account one Day at a Banquet in
God's Courts a Burden. They who are given to Pleasures, Isa. 47.8.
like the Chaldeans, will not carry it to the Gospel-Feast as Christians.
Lovers of Pleasures, 2 Timothy 3.4. (...).
The Friends of it will be Enemies to God and his Provision for their vain
Pleasure's sake. If Sinners covet to enjoy the Pleasures of sin for a season,
Heb. 11.25
they will cast off the Thoughts of those Pleasures at God's Right Hand for
ever. Psa. 16.11.
So long as they walk in the Vanity of their Mind, Ephesians. 4.17.
they will never pitch upon Food that shall make them more solid. Such Trash
shook into their Laps will take off their Mind from the very Tree of Life. Rev.
22.2.
This as to the Lust of the Flesh.

2. The Lust of the Eyes is a Banquet with Sinners that obstructs the
Gospel-Feast. This Lust of the Eye, say There are Lusts in the Fancy, I take it
that is the meaning of John, 1 John 2.16. -- Lust of the Eyes. So Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice Oh young Man (because these are fullest of Fancy) -- and walk -- in the
sight of thine Eyes. Dr. Tho. Goodwyn. Vol. 2d. part 2d. page 92.
some, is Fancy. Others do understand by it more particularly that Piece of
Concupiscence seated in the Eye, which cannot be satisfied without the Object.
Lusts of the Eye, because Cotton upon John.
the Eye is only satisfied with them. Covetousness begins at the Eye. Eve had a
sight of the Tempting Object, and then sought to embrace it. When the Woman saw
that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, she took
of the Fruit thereof, Genesis 3.6. Satanas incepit (...) and successive (...) and
(...) invasit. Jun. Praelect. in Genesis Col. 74.
The Devil first set upon her Reasonable Faculty, suggests a mighty Prerogative
of Divine Empire to the Eye of her mind, ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil, Genesis 3.5.
and then sets upon her desiring Faculty, shows her an Apple with a Fair Skin,
but a Foul Core, to delude and captivate her other Eye of Sense. And so it
fared with Achan, Josh. 7.21. that when he saw among the spoils a goodly
Babylonish Garment, and two hundred shekels of Silver, and a wedge of Gold of
fifty shekels weight, then he coveted them and took them. The Entertainment
therefore which this Lust of the Eye finds out abroad, takes off Sinners from
the Provisions of Gospel Grace: When Men would fain fill their Belly with
increase, snatching on the Right Hand and on the Left, to gather with their
Hand what a covetous Eye beholds, and greedily to hoard up what they see, they
will lay up no Treasures in Heaven. Mat. 19.21
Carnal Profit is a Banquet that makes the wordly Eater thereof undervalue and
contemn Spiritual Good. A Poor Worldling that makes to himself a Feast of
Wealth, could live with content though there were a Famine of God's Word: He that
looks so much upon the smiles of Gain, can see no Gain in Godliness. 1 Timothy 6.6.
He that rolls the World so delightfully in his Fancy, will roll no other
Morsel under his Tongue, than from such a Banquet as his Fleshly Eyes have
seen. The Gospel will not fill the Heart, where it meets with an evil Eye that
is not filled with seeing. Eccles. 1.8.


3. The Pride of Life is a Banquet that obstructs the Gospel-Feast, and that
two ways; as it puffs up 1. With Applause. And, 2. With Worldly Pomp.

1. As it puffs men up with Applause. The Ambition of Simon Magus that would be
known to be (...).
some Body, or, as we read it in our Translation, giving out that himself was
some great one, Act. 8.9. is not a Little one, among the Hindrances that
obstruct the Gospel-Feast from some. When Men affect their own Carnal
Excellencies, they feed at home, and leave the Gospel-Feast to others. A Man's
Affectation of Carnal Praise sets so high an Esteem upon his own worth, that he
thinks the Gospel to be little worth to him. Applause blows Men up with
Conceits, and instead of eating at a Feast, turns them into spiritual Ephraim
pascit ventum and sequitur Eurum, Hos. 12.1. quo sensu homines vanos and
inanes, ambitionis mancipia and van^e Gloriae appetentes, frivolis ac inanibus
Studiis occupatos, vocamus Chameleontes, and dicimus aere anraqa; pasci. Rivet
in loc.
Chameleons, 'till they are made as Ephraim that feeds upon wind. He that
lives upon this Air, has a Bladder must be pricked, before he will take a
Plenteous Meal down. Indeeed he that lives in Religion upon Good words and fair
Speeches, Romans 16.18.
or is contented with the Commendation of a Professor that owns, or of a
Preacher that teaches Christ, without being in him, Rev. 3.20.
and supping with him, is but like Him that dines or sups upon the White of an
Egg, as Job speaks, in which he shall find no Taste, Job 6.6. and yet He that
can live upon such a Hungry Banquet, will despise the Gospel-Feast. There was
an ambitious and vainglorious Temper in the Pharisees, which has left their
Character upon record, Joh. 12.43. They loved the Praise of Men more than the
Praise of God. There is scarcely a greater Snare found to draw a Man from the
Things of God, than an inordinate Affection to his own Name. This Ambition in
Herod broke forth in Blasphemy, and made him receive such Praise of his
Flatterers for an Oration, as was due only to God himself in the Publishing
Glad Tidings; Luke 1.19. Act. 12.22.
it is the Voice of a god, and not of a Man. But he that could feast upon that
Blasphemous Piece of Praise, was turned into a vile Banquet himself, v. 23.
and served up for Worms.

2. As it puffs Men up with Worldly Pomp and Gallantry. The Pride of Life in
the Pomps of Men (of Carnal and Earthy Affections) is an Enemy to these
Provisions. Ambitious Men have a huge swallow for the World, but so narrow a
one for God, that a little Religion choaks them. The word (...), which we
render Pride of Life, signifies the Pride of Ambition to be raised up to
Preferments, Dignity, and external Grandeur; a Fastuous, aspiring Itch to climb
into Honor, the Honor that comes from Man, without any regard of God, or the
Honor which have all his Saints. Psa. 149.9.
Now when Men aim to post themselves high, and are Ambitious of Advancement
into Great Places, affecting Gallantry, which is but the finest Scene of
Pageantry, in the 1 Cor. 7.31.
Fashion of this world that passes away; they are got too high to stoop to an
Entertainment where God gives Grace unto the humble. Jam. 4.6.
If Men once get up to that which they call Church-Preferments (suppose) and
stand upon the Pinnacle of their Temple, Matthew. 4.5.
they often look down with Disdain upon the very Bottom from whence they rise,
but with a great deal more upon the Provisions of the Gospel, spread they think
so much below them upon that Mountain of the Lord's House near them. Isa. 25.6.
Isa. 2.2.
Worldly Pomp was ever such a pleasing Garnish upon this World's Dishes, that
makes the Table of the Lord, Mal. 1.12.
and his Meat contemptible. When Agrippa was come, Act. 25.23.
and Bernice with great Pomp, (though it was but with great Fantasy (or Fancy)
neither, the (...).
Original says, so little account does the Spirit of God make, when it speaks
of the Great Things of Man) the Gospel does not signify much to either of
these two. Festus shining in Pomp and Purple at the Bench, laughs the Gospel to
scorn, while Paul in relating his Conversion, gives them some account of it; he
could not forbear the laying open of his contemptible Thoughts toward the
Gospel in the midst of the open Court, but cries out, that all Men might hear,
Paul, thou art beside thy self, much Learning does make thee mad, Act. 26.24.
See now what a Hinderance to the Gospel this Worldly Grandeur was in the way of
the most Noble Festus: Act. 26.26.
He has too big a Name, and Titles too high and gallant to stoop and submit to
a Gospel that knocked Paul down: This as to Festus. And we shall see Agrippa
too, that seems to be carried away with the Pomp of the World least, yet but
almost persuaded, V. 28. Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. Oh! this
decking, this garnishing, this Glory of the outside, dazles the Eyes of Flesh,
they can see no Feast besides. The All Things look very despicable with Them in
the presence of these Bp. Hopkins's Sermon at the Funer, of Algernon Grevil.
page 75.
Nothings set astrut. Alas! if there be no more in it but such Bravery as is
used in decking the more uncomely part, the Body, it makes up such a gaudy
Banquet of the Pride of Life for Ambition to feed upon, 1 Cor. 12.23.
as hinders the Reception of a better Entertainment. Thus I have spoken of that
Hinderance to the Feast of the Gospel from other Banquets which are Spots in
Feasts, Jude v. 12.
and to Sinners will spoil the Feast where no Spot is. To conclude it, they
breed such Worms in the Mind, as first take away the Appetite to Food, and then
gnaw out the Entrails.

Sixthly, 6 Hindran.
A Conceit of Self-Fulness. This lies rather inwardly in a Proud Mind under
Concealment, than in the Pride of Life outwardly. It is when a Man will not be
emptyed of his own to receive of Christ's Fullness, Joh. 3.16.
nor throw out the Puddle-water to fill up the Vessel with New Wine.
Self-Fulness is a Hinderance to the Feast of Fat Things. There is in some, a
Tumor Cerebri, as Bishop Reynolds calls it Of the Passions, page 159. 4 to.
(mihi.)
a Learned Pride, when Men's Acquirements are risen to such a Pitch, that they
are too full to admit of any saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ or his Gospel. If
the Brain swells with the numerous Volumes of some Heathen Philosophers; nay,
if it be only with some lesser Systems and Maxims of Philosophy, it may grow
too big for the Gospel, and make a vain Philosopher imagine that the Truths of
both the Testaments may be crowded into as small a compass, as one did of
Homer's Iliad's, that thought they might be contained in a Nut-shell. But these
Men's Brains swell, and a Crown of Glory would be thought too little to suit
with their great Heads.

There is also in others a Tumor Cordis, a Religious Pride that swells them at
the Heart, and puffs them up with a Conceit of a Self-Righteousness, 'till they
grow too big to enter in at the Strait Gate, or get in at Christ's Table; Matt.
7.13.
see Romans 10.3. -- Going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God. Have not submitted.] The
Translation is in the Active Voice, but the Original is Passive, different from
the word by which We render it, (...).
they were not laid in order. Self-Fulness swells Men so big, that it puts them
out of their place, disorders them, that 'till they are laid in order, and in
their Right Mind again, Gospel-Provisions will be very ineffectual. Men that
have enough of their own, do not use to buy, they live upon their Stock, while
others go to Market. The full Soul loathes the Honey comb, Prove. 27.7. He mocks
at it, say the (...)
Septuagint, and scorns a Dainty Morsel offered. A Sinner's full Stomach turns
at any Feast provided. If he does not Vomit up the sweet Morsel he has eaten,
and be emptyed of all his Self-Excellency, Wisdom, Righteousness, Strength, and
seem so little that he is nothing in his own Eyes, the Provisions of the Gospel
will ('till then) be all nothing with him. In a word, so long as a Man can eat
and drink at his own Charges, he will scorn to depend upon any other Table: And
as long as the Soul thinks it self fed well enough already, it will hearken the
less to Christ to come in and sup with Him.

Seventhly, 7 Hindran.
The Cares of this Life. Worldlings plant such a Brake of Thorns in their way,
that do hedge them out of God's Pasture; they are afraid of the True Bread,
lest they should lose other Loaves for it. When Christ comes to be propounded
to them, they have a thousand carking, tormenting Thoughts that rend and tear
their minds from him, when they make any offers to sit down with him: Mat. 6.31.
What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? how shall the Family be maintained, and the Year brought about? these
Things therefore leave a Gap in their Soul, which 'till made up, but not with
their Thorns in the Flesh, will keep Christ and their distant Hearts from
uniting. Jesus answered, and said unto Martha, thou art careful and troubled
about many Things, Luke 10.4^. The (...).
word is, thou art Divided in thy Thoughts, and know not which of thy
Matters to unite and fix them on. (...) Pasor.
(...), Cares, are Divisions of the Mind, that make it anxious and Doubtful
where to settle, or what to take up withal. Thus is it in Religion, the Things
of God are Preached unto Carnal Men, the Thoughts of the World it may be for
the present are just laid asleep, and the Word knocks up Conscience, which
being awaked for the present in a calm alone without other interruptions,
listens to Gospel Truth, hears it, and in the Hearing a little outwardly
approves it, insomuch that the Mind is divided between God and the World, and
grows anxious which side to choose; but alas! the mischief is, that their
Hearts had been sown before with a Field-full of Worldly Cares, just ready to
spring up fresh after the Word falls, and immediately all Thoughts of Faith and
Fellowship with Christ are choakt, the Man reverts, his earthly Heart tumbles
to his Center, and instead of a new creature to live upon this Feast, becomes
the carking, Earthly, old Man again. He that received the seed among the Thorns
is he that hears the Word, and the Care of this World, and the Deceitfulness
of Riches choke the Word, and he becomes unfruitful, Matthew, 13.22. Worldlings
have their Hearts and their Hands both full of Dirt, and have no room for any
Dish of God's in either. Should they put off the World a little, yet it will
return, it will follow them into the very Assemblies of God's People, and in a
Crowd find 'em out. And alas! a Happy Meeting! they know not how to be so
unkind to the World, as to chide it home again: If such Men look a little out
toward God, their Dear Idols come weeping about them, and are presently enough
to break their Heart to leave them. O curvae in Terras animae, and inanes
coelestium! Persius.
Men's Carefulness in the Things of the World is their Hinderance in all the
Gospel brings.

Eighthly, 8 Hindran.
Slothfulness. This is also a Fault that will do the Feast hurt. Many would
like the Provisions of the Gospel better, if like Tamar's couple of Cakes which
she dressed for Amnon, they might be brought to them into their Chamber, 2 Samuel
13.5, 6.
while they are lying upon a Bed of Sluggishness, as he was upon a Bed of Lust.
Nature, says Rutherford's Letters, p. 244.
one, would have Heaven come sleeping to us in our Beds. A Sinner may seem
occasionally to run after the Gospel, like a Man that hunts for Venison, yet
what does it profit him, if he be like Solomon's slothful Man, Prove. 12.27.
that roasteth not that which he takes in hunting? I mean, if he be loath to
take Pains diligently to apply or practice the Word he went so hastily forth to
hear? if he grows too lazy to lay up some special Truth he hears, he lays out
all his mighty Pains in vain. What Good will the Dainties of the Gospel do him,
so long as he Videtur ad gestum desidiosorum alludere, quibus fere mos est
manum in sinum aut manicam infer, aut sub axilla tenere. Cartwright in loc.
folds up his Arms like the Sluggard, and will be at no spiritual Pains to pick
up the Morsel ready carved to him? A slothful Man hides his Hand in his Bosom,
and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again, Prove. 19.24. So Prove.
26.15. The slothful Man hides his Hand in his Bosom, it grieveth him to bring
it again to his mouth: i. e. He had rather to indulge his Laziness, sit and
look on than eat. So it is a Hinderance to the Gospel when Men choose rather
barely to profess it, than be at any Pains to profit by one Discourse of the
Grace of God they hear.

Ninthly, 9 Hindran.
Prejudice. That is, a Forejudging of Things or Persons, as if Men were
resolved to condemn the Cause, before they have heard or tried it. Men are
often angry with a Party, or with a Person, and will reject the Truth, though
they are convinced it is the Truth, merely because it comes by such
Instruments, or such means as they have got a Prejudice against. A wicked Ahab
did believe Micaiah a better Prophet than those at Ramoth-Gilead, and able to
inform him truly touching the Success of the War between Syria and Israel, but
he values neither Micaiah's Abilities in the Spirit of Prophecy, nor yet his
Honesty in prophesying Truth, because he hates him, 1 Kings 22.7, 8. And
Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord besides, that we
might enquire of him? And the King of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, there is
yet one man (Micaiah the Son of Imlah) by whom we may enquire of the Lord, but
I hate him, for he does not Prophecy good concerning me, but evil. God's
Elijah's would take their Food, 1 Kings 17.6.
though God should send a Raven to them with it, but the Prejudiced Ahab's of the
World will not meddle with Their's though Elijah himself brought it. The Gospel
is ineffectual to many by reason of Prejudice.

Tenthly, 10 Hinderance.
The General Disesteem which the Gospel meets with in the World. The World
represents God's Morsels, as they will one Day find their own Sauce, sour.
They account it a melancholy and uncomfortable Entertainment. Religion is a
Diet that will imbitter all their Portion in this Life. They think the Guests
that partake of this Supper, ( i. e. Separated, Holy Christians) are every one
of them like Him in the Book of Job, Job 21.15
that dies in the Bitterness of his Soul, and never eats with Pleasure. They
cry it up and down in the Streets of Ashkelon, 2 Samuel 1.20.
that the Ordinances and Appointments of Jesus Christ are Vessels in which is
no pleasure. Hos. 8.8.
The Fare of the Gospel is represented by them like John Baptist's in the
Wilderness, Mat. 3.4.
as Locusts and wild Honey. Thus, its Provisions have got an ill Name by some,
and they will not be drawn by the very savor of Christ's Ointments, Song 1.3.
so long as this low repute it has in the World, does cast in Dead Flies among
it, Eccles. 10.1. Dead Flies cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth
a stinking savor. The Grace of God is not courteously received, but treated
ill, though it comes with good will to Men. Luke 2.14.
The Dishes of the Gospel by an unthankful, unholy World, are much cried down,
and therefore when served up are generally much set by, Acts 28.22. As
concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. This
Sect.] (...).
This Heresy, says the Greek. The World concludes it Heresy, and therefore
will not regard it, though it be the Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven. 1 Pet. 1.12. middle pt.
Wicked Men will Nickname God's Truth, and then fly from the Truth for the
very Name's sake they gave it. They entertain Bad Conceptions of the Truths of
God, and are become Judges of Evil Thoughts, Jam. 2.4.
and therefore reproach and trample upon good Things under them. The World
imagine Fish to be Serpents, and then fly from them, as Moses did, when he cast
his Rod upon the Ground, Exodus 4.3.
and while it became a Serpent, fled from before it. A vile and a scornful
Generation do esteem of the Bread of Life as Stones. Oh! it is a mighty
Hinderance to their embracing the Gospel of Christ, that when his Oxen and his
Fatlings are killed, Mat. 22.4.
they take up these Spiritual Mysteries with no more regard, than if it were
but the slaying of Pharaoh's lean Kine: Genesis 41.3, 19.
But no matter to God's Children what such insinuate, 3 John 10.
that prate with malicious words, the Children must take their Bread, though Dogs
bark, and an Enemy calls it Poison. I confess this (says Paul) that after the
way which they call Heresy, Act. 24 14.
so worship I the God of my Fathers.

Eleventhly, Bad Company. 11 Hinderance.
If a Man had some Towardly Inclinations to embrace the Gospel, yet so long as
he goes in Company with the workers of Iniquity, Job 34.8.
he will not be able when these Sinners entice him, to consent not, Prove. 1.10.
Certain Lewd Fellows of the baser sort do often set upon a Man that is
otherwise soberly inclined, even as they assaulted the House of Jason, Acts
17.5. and never leave 'till they have worn out his Sober Impressions, that you
can read nothing at last but the Devil's Brand upon him. Exo. 23.2.
When Men follow a multitude to do evil, Psa. 42.4.
they care not to walk unto God's House in any other Company. The Gospel of the
only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17
signifies nothing to a Companion of Fools that shall be destroyed. Prove. 13.20
Psa. 119.61.
The Bands of the wicked will rob thee of the Feast, if thou art not one that
have no Fellowship with them. Ephesians. 5.11.


Twelfthly, 12 Hinderance.
Garnal Relations. If there were neither Adversary, nor evil occurrent abroad,
yet if a Man's Enemies be the Men of his own House, Mic. 7.6. and a Man's Foes
be those of his own Household, Matthew. 10.36. there is such a Radical Enmity in
the corrupt mind of Man against the Truth of God, as will make their Eye Evil,
and their Hand severe toward their own Flesh and Blood. They will violate the
Bonds of Nature to fight against Grace. Now this is enough without Special
Grace that opens the Heart, to keep the Gospel and its Provisions wholly out of
Doors. Men will often hearken to the Voice of their own Flesh and Blood, when a
Stranger they will not follow. Joh. 10.5.
Ahaziah hearkens to the pernicious Advice of his Mother Athaliah, for his
Mother Athaliah was his Counselor to do evil, 2 Chro. 22.3. Carnal Relations
will sometimes be very earnest to beat off young Beginners, that they may not
take up with the New Man, though perhaps assaulting them with that old Argument,
that none of their Kindred are called by it, Luke 1.61. There is none of thy
kindred that is called by this Name. You may be beaten off by such as are
related to you, if you be not related as Sons and Daughters to the Lord
Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.18


Thirteenthly, False Teachers. 13 Hinderance.
A corrupt Ministry sets the World against the Truth. Unsound Teachers are
against Salt, because they have lost its savor. Mar. 9.50.
Men's Lies to make the very Truths of God of no effect with some. When Sinners
are beguiled, and through the craft and sleight of cunning Men misled, Ephesians. 4.14.
their Minds will be corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel; 2 Cor. 11.3
if they hearken to such as are not Teachers of good things, Tit. 2.3.
they will not value the Gospel that has all good things ready. If they regard
vain Talkers and Deceivers (as the Apostle calls corrupt Doctors) Tit. 1.10.
Teaching things which they ought not, v. 11. it will hinder the Advantage of
Gospel Grace provided. If there be (...).
False Teachers among you, 2 Pet. 2.1. it will greatly damage your receiving
the Truth as it is in Jesus. Ephesians. 4.21
These have a beguiling Artifice to lay their varnish upon the worst
Complexion'd Face, and for a well-favour'd Rachel bring in a Leah that is
blear-eyed. Genesis 29.23, 25.
They wash over a little false Coin in Doctrine, and then put it off to such as
cannot try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1.

Fourteenthly, 14 Hinderance.
Scandals in Professors. When such as sit at Meat do profane the Table of the
Lord, Mal. 1.12.
it makes others even trample upon the Lord's Panis Propositionis will be
quickly oppositionis also.
Shewbread. Though you offer and propound Holy Things to them, they will oppose
themselves, if they can find but any Stain dropped upon our Garments at this Holy
Feast; I mean any thing in the World which they see by Us, to deride a
Love-Feast, and reproach the Gospel for. The World does not look so much upon
Religion, Jam. 1.27. v. 26.
pure and undefiled, as upon him that seems to be Religious. Neither is the
Holiness so much talked of as the Spot of God's Children: Deuteronomy. 32.5.
Their acerba Ingenia, as the Instit. Chr. Rel. fol. 284. Sect. 11. (mibi) 8o.
Learned Calvin calls them, their sharp or sour Wits will try at an Advantage
to render our Feast high-seasoned, and then in our Thirst their Mockery will
give us Vinegar to drink. Psa. 69.21.
We therefore who profess the Gospel had need be cautious, that we be without
offense unto the day of Christ, Phil. 1.10
and not keep others from the Provisions at God's Table, Genesis 4.7.
because of our Sin that lies at the Door.

Fifteenthly, Carnal Disappointment, 15 Hinderance.
Men come forth (it may be) expecting to meet with one thing, and lo! in the
Gospel they find quite another. They get out at the Rumor of a Feast, thinking
to meet with some Dainty Morsel ready, and alas! when they come they meet with
nothing which a Carnal Palate likes, but with a Dish their Corruption can in no
wise relish. It is a Feast where neither the Meat nor Drink does please them.
They bring so many Nice Corruptions to the Wellhead of Life, that the Living
Water is worse than brackish to them: It grows as bitter to their Taste, Rev.
8.11.
as if that Star in the Revelation, whose Name is Wormwood, had fallen into the
Waters, and made them the Waters of Marah, where such as they come. They find
the Gospel brings no such Tidings to their Ears, as they are harkening after.
-- No such Things as I supposed, says Festus in Paul's Accusation, Acts 25.18,
19. But certain Questions of their own Superstition, and of one Jesus which was
Dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. Alas! such a Disappointment spoils their
Approbation of the Gospel, and puts them out of Love with its Provisions (it
may be) ever after. They come perhaps for the Preacher to scratch an itching
Ear, Act. 7. 54.
but are cut to the Heart (like Stephen's Hearers that gnasht upon him with
their Teeth) and go away with their Consciences in the mean while accusing
them. Romans 2.15.


Sixteenthly, 16 Hinderance.
Plain Dealing. They think the Truths of the Gospel are too keen, and they
should better savor them, if the Morsels were not so often dipped in Vinegar; or
if it were a Passover made ready without any Bitter Herbs. Exo. 12.8.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and seemed to like the Feast well, 'till he
met with that Biting-grain of Mustard Seed, It is not lawful for thee to have
thy Brother's Wife, Mark 6.18, 20. compared: And we never read afterward that
Herod would endure to come and Dine or Sup with John again. He met with God's
Hook that pricked him, and being never in earnest, was resolved to play no more
with the Bait. When Men bring their Lusts unto Christ to feed, Sinners find
themselves mistaken in their Aim; and so long as they resolve to continue in
their sins, they shall find it to be a Banquet that affords not a Bone for any
sin to pick.

Seventeenthly, 17 Hinderance.
Sometimes open Persecution is a Hinderance to the Entertainment. They are
afraid of the Gospel, when God's Shewbread and Goliah's Sword are coupled. 1 Samuel 22.13.
When God's House is beset, Sinners for Refuge will flee far enough from his
Table. They care not to be found within, when there is a Judas without, Mat.
26.47
and with him a great multitude from the chief Priests with Swords and Staves
for to take them. A Persecuted and a Professed Subjection to Christ with them
will not stand together. 2 Cor. 9.13
If there be not Liberty from Men, they will renounce God's Liberality; for
when Affliction or Persecution arises for the Word's sake, immediately they
are offended, Mark 4.17. whereas it is a Character of the Saints of the most
High, that being persecuted they suffer it, 1 Cor. 4.12. last words.

Lastly, 18 Hinderance.
God's Righteous Induration, his hardening and giving Sinners up judicially.
They are first obstinate, and then God is just. On Their Parts it is a
contracted Obstinacy, on His a judicial Obduration. They are Haters of God,
Romans 1.30. and then (says He) my Soul loathed them; as Zech. 11.8. My Soul
loathed Them, and their Soul also abhorred Me. Sinners Discover an Aversation
to God, and God manifests an Induration toward Them: They will not be
sostened, and he will leave them hardened. When Men despise the Fatness of
God's House, he suffers such a gross Fatness to grow at last upon their Hearts,
that they cannot understand with their Heart, Isa. 6.10.
and be Converted. Now will not this be a Hinderance to purpose, when Men have
Eyes to see the Provision, and yet God is so wroth with them they shall not
see, or regard one Dish before them? and when they have Ears to hear, and yet
they shall not hear and understand one word of Grace and Good Will to Men
spoken? Luke 2.14.
Joh. 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said
again, he has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their Heart, that they should
not see with their Eyes, nor understand with their Heart, and be converted, and
I should heal them. This Hardness is Originally from themselves, it is their own
voluntary Work to contract the sin, and it is God's judicial Act to inflict the
Punishment, and give them up to augment it. Indeed God does not infuse a
Positive Hardness, by shedding abroad any malignant Influences of a hardening
Nature, but he hardens by a pure Privation, i. e. He does not infuse Evil, but
withholds the Good he is not bound to give, and a Man's Heart will then as
naturally grow hard, as Metals that are taken off the Fire. So much for the
First Branch of Hindrances, which obstruct Sinners, and render this
Gospel-Feast of no more use to them.

Secondly, The Hindrances of Saints, II.
which render this Feast of the Gospel so ineffectual to some of them (I mean
as to the Comsort and Quietude of their State) are chiefly these ^our.

1. Dissatisfaction about their Relation to God, and Right to this Feast. They
are not satisfied whether God is their Father, and that makes them thrive no
better by any Children's Bread. Mat. 15 26
They question their Right, and dare not make an Application of the Promises,
because they know not by what Authority they can do these things: chap. 11.23
They fear the Feast does not belong to them, but is appointed and decreed for
others, Mat. 20.23
for whom (alone, they think) it is prepared. A Saint may be ready to interpret
Christ's words absolutely, thou have no part with me, which yet he lays down no
more than Conditionally, [ If I wash thee not] thou have no part with me, Joh.
13.8. They query, what if they should be Dogs, to whom it does not appertain to
take the Children's Bread? Mat. 15.26
but alas! why should this hinder or discourage you? it did not the Woman of
Canaan, though Christ called her Dog expressly, Matthew. 15.26. It is not meet to
take the Children's Bread, and cast it to Dogs; as if he had said, the Bread of
the House is too good for such a Dog as thee: But this Woman still comes in
with a reply of Faith, and seeing good store of Provision in Christ, though she
were not a Jew by Birth, but a Syro-phenician by Nation, Mark 7.26. yet she
would not give over, or be content to lose all: If she were a Dog, she would
plead with Christ for Crumbs, and gather her Meat under his Table, v. 27th. and
she said, Judge. 7.1.
Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which fall from their Master's
Table; insomuch that Jesus now tells her she was no Dog, but a Daughter of the
true Faith of Abraham, v. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman!
great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will: As if he had said, thou
have been sueing for Crumbs, but now thou may take what Meat thou will.

2. Vnacquaintedness with the True Notion of the Gospel. They want Light, and
therefore walk in Darkness. They look more to Qualifications for Christ, than
to Christ for Qualifications. They would fain see more Works in themselves
before they dare venture to rely on Him. But my Brethren, though we apprehend
never so much unworthiness, guilt, pollution and misery in our selves, yet our
work is to come to Jesus Christ as we are, that in him and from him we may be
made better: For, if you try to place your own Obedience in the Front, and
Faith in Jesus Christ at the Foot of the account afterward, that is, you would
arrive to such a pitch of Holiness, to such a measure of Sincerity, to such a
Degree of Brokenness, to so much Fruitfulness in every good word and work, Col.
1.10.
and then you could safely rest on Christ; alas! this is to put a Naught in the
first place, and then a Figure in the next; for it is impossible to arrive unto
any Degree of acceptable Obedience, 'till Faith closes with him, who is the
ground of all acceptance, This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
Matthew. 3.17. -- He has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. There is by
Faith an antecedent Union ^to, and a Being in Christ as the Foundation of all
our acceptance with the Father, which I seriously profess was the sweet and
prevailing Allurement when the Spirit of God enlightened me in this part of the
Gospel, and wrought with a Divine Power, to bring me to give up my self as a
Sinner to believe in him, having been a long while deluded by this Fatal and
pernicious Mistake, that I must be first a Saint, and then might set up for a
Believer. But let none from hence misunderstand me, to plead for a vain Faith,
which never joins with Holiness: I speak only of the order, to show where
Holiness must be placed, not against the thing, as profane Libertines do, to
exclude it out of all place. If we look first to Christ, and then to Holiness,
we need not, as some weak Believers are apt under Temptation and the Hidings of
the Face of God, to question our State, while we bewail a Body of Death;
because our Justification, as soon as by Faith we first received Christ,
brought us into a Complete State, though it has not brought us, nor will in this
Life, to perfect Degrees of Holiness. But if we are preposterous, and look
first to such measures of Holiness, and then in the second place look to
Christ, we overturn all the order of the Gospel, which places Christ, or Faith
in Christ, at the beginning, and then Holiness immediately to be carrying on
gradually to our last end. It is as much Satan's Art on one Hand to trouble
Souls that have been awakened, by separating Christ from Holiness, as it is the
industrious Art of some Men to separate Holiness from Christ. The Devil
accuses us, because we are not perfect in our selves, and become our own
Saviors; others accuse us, because being perfect in a Savior, we will yet
talk of pressing toward the Mark, Phil. 3.14. 2 Pet. 3.18.
and growing in Grace and Holiness; as if Men in Christ were to make the Church
a Monster, that is, a Holy Head, and profane Filthy Members; therefore say
some, who I am sure have not learnt the Truth as it is in Christ, there is no
need of an Evangelical Righteousness, when we are found in Christ's
Righteousness, no need of our Obedience, poor, imperfect, rotten, because of
Christ's which is absolutely complete and spotless; Alas! this is no more than
to tell us, because we are not justified by Holiness, therefore we must not
labor after Holiness, nor pray for Holiness, nor look for Holiness, nor preach
up Holiness: I would fain know why our Holiness on Earth should impair Christ's
Righteousness more than our Holiness shall do in Heaven? for we shall there in
Person be Holy to Perfection, and yet have nothing, after we have been millions
of Years thus Holy, but all of it for and in Christ. Now, how can an incomplete
Holiness that be sure must be justified it self by Christ, injure Christ's
Righteousness on Earth, when our perfect and Angelical Obedience in Heaven
shall not diminish or eclipse one Ray of this Sun of Righteousness to all
Eternity? But to return, Mal. 4.2.
and in a few words close this Hinderance to the Feast, in reference to such as
err about Holiness and Obedience in the misplacing it, as I began the
particular. Let Christians take heed where they place Faith, for if they do not
begin with it, they will put that, and Christ's Merits, and their own Obedience
too all out of place. It is an excellent Passage to this purpose which I have
met with in a Divine that has also wrote very soundly an entire Piece upon the
Point of Justification; says he, in another Anth^. Burgess, Spiritual
Befinings, 1st. part. p. 249.
Treatise, As in the Holy of Holies every thing was Gold, or covered with Gold,
so all that is accepted with God, is either Christ, or Duties covered with
Christ. Again, that you may not entertain a wrong Notion of the Gospel, take
heed, that in your view of sin, you do not spy out more in your own Iniquities
than you do in the very Grace of God, to receive you graciously, Hos. 14.2, 4
and love you freely: And beware that you do not fancy a deeper Red (different
from other Death-colours) in your own Body of Death, than is seen in the Blood
of Jesus Christ. An Unacquaintedness with the true Notion of the Gospel is a
Hinderance to the Gospel-Feast.

3. Remaining Unbelief in the Actings of slavish Fear. Reigning Unbelief indeed
is the Property of Sinners, but Remaining Unbelief is a great Hinderance
hanging in the way of Saints. There are Remnants of this Sin to bring you under
spiritual Sickness and Infirmities, when there be no Ruling Signs-that it is
unto Death upon you. There is much Fluctuation in our Hearts, an unsteddy
rolling too and fro like the Waves of the Sea, sometimes carried out toward
the Shore in Hope, then driven back again to Sea in Fears, whereas our Rock is
the same for ever, though we roll aside. Oh! were our Faith (says Dr. Sibb^,
Bruised Reed, p. 23, 24.
one) as firm, as our State in Christ is secure, what manner of Men should We
be! A Saint may be brought many ways low, but he shall be brought no ways
under. Now by how much the less it is you live in the Exercise of Faith, (...).
2.20.
i. e. By the Faith of the Son of God, by so much the less in your spiritual
State will you thrive by Gospel Grace. As you want any measure of Faith to
digest the Food of God's Word, so much the less of Nourishment and Sweetness
you will find in any Morsel of it. Jesus said unto him, if thou can believe,
All Things are possible unto him that believes, Mark 9.23. If you have not, Oh
weak Christians, a stronger Degree, a higher Measure of Faith, your Fears will
make you jealous, and suspect the Love of God every time you try to eat and
drink in his Kingdom. It is observed of Peter, he never sank in the Waters,
'till he sank first in Fears; when he saw the Wind boisterous he was afraid,
and upon this follows his beginning to sink, Matthew. 14.30. Fears will suggest
nothing but such wrong and uncomfortable Thoughts as these; Well, this Feast of
the Gospel is too great for such poor Dust, and too good for so vile a Worm as
I, therefore it belongs not to me. But Oh! take heed of this, let not
Unbelief carry it without a check in thy Soul, when it calls the Bread of Life
Poison, or tells thee, thou art damned, if thou venturest so far as to meddle
with it.

4. Lastly, Refusing to be Comforted. God's People sometimes will not, though we
take his own words, be satisfied. The Consolations of God are so small with
them, Job 15.11
that they will not take this Cup of Consolation down, Jer. 16.11.
Psa. 77.2. last words. My Soul refused to be comforted, let me hear what I
would, it was all one with me. That was Good Asaph's case a while. Now what
will All Things avail, when no thing shall be allowed to comfort you, but you
will choose to go down into the Grave mourning? Genesis 37.35
What signifies Moses to tell the Children of Israel, that God had looked upon
their Affliction and Bondage, and to assure them of Deliverance, that it was
now even at the Door, Mat. 24.33
whenas they hearkened not unto Moses for Anguish of Spirit, and for cruel
Bondage? Exodus 6.9. It is observable indeed, that at the first News of their
Deliverance, which Moses brought them from God, they are hugely affected with
it, Chap. 4.31. The People believed, and when they heard that the Lord had
visited the Children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their Affliction,
then they bowed their Heads, and worshipped: Oh! how glad and comforted do they
seem that there comes any Relief to alter their Afflicted case at last! Well,
but God will yet try their Patience under their Burdens and Adversity a little
longer; in the next Chapter Pharaoh comes, and He multiplies their Burdens
still more and more, and lo! now the Double Labor of their Bricks and the
Stripes of their Task masters upon their Backs, beat them quite out of Heart;
insomuch that at last Moses with all his Arguments and Persuasion could no ways
still them; for they are resolved to hear, to wait, to trust no longer; they
hearkened not, etc.

Thus, some of God's Children will seem to be born up notably, when God comes
first into their Souls with Comfort; but alas! if God, to try them, lays them
again in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, Psa. 88.6.
in the Deeps, immediately their Mountain is overturned, their Sun is set, and
the Rainbow of the Covenant blotted out of Their Cloud. They refuse to be
comforted, and seem loath to look out toward the Everlasting Hills again. Psa.
121.1.
Now hence it is that the Gospel has been very often (in part) ineffectual
(for a Time) to some of God's own Children. To conclude therefore in a word,
your Meat will not strengthen you to flee as a Bird to your Mountain, Psa. 11.1.
so long as with Ephraim you remain a silly Dove without Heart, Hos. 7.11. And
so much for the Doctrinal Part.

The Ninth and last Thing propounded in the General method was the Application
of this Doctrine. IX.
The Uses I design to make (by God's further Assistance) are the Three
following, Information, to discover such Truths, Humiliation, to bewail such
Sins, and Exhortation, to beswade to such Duties as naturally flow from it.

First, I. Use.
by way of Information, in these Thirteen Particulars.

1. 1 Inf.
We may learn the Fitness of Earthly Comparisons to bring down Heavenly Truths
to our Capacities. I say, the Fitness of Earthly Comparisons, for in this Body
of Flesh we have more Earth than Spirit, and need to put on Spectacles to help
our weak Eyes. It is a piece indeed of condescending Workmanship in our Maker,
to blow up the very Earth and the Things of it into a Glass, and then show us
Heaven and the Things thereof through it; which made the Apostle use the same
Metaphor, when he was comparing the Knowledge of Believers here with that
perfect Sight they should have in Heaven, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see through a
Glass darkly, but then Face to Face. Thus the Holy Ghost declares, I have used
Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets, Hos. 12.10. Deus se quodammodo
transformat in verbo suo, in quo non loquitur pro su^ Majestate; sed prout
congruere videt modulo nostro, and infirmitati. Rivet. in loc. Vol. 2. p. 774.
col. 2. ultim. Obs.
When God speaks to instruct us in his Word, he does as it were transform
himself, not speaking according to his own Essential Majesty, but agreeably to
the measure of our Frailty. The Scripture often instructs us in Metaphors, and
sets forth our State, Privileges and Duty by them. It was Christ's frequent
way of Teaching, Luke 1.76.
who was the Prophet of the Highest, but used * Similitudes may be Preached out
of God's Word, according to the Scope wherein the Similitude holds. Vines,
God's drawing and Man's coming, page 25.
Similitudes as well as the Prophets of the Old Testament. The Master when he
taught his Disciples, did point to the Things that are not seen by a Fescue
from those that are. He did oftener open his mouth in Parables, Matthew. 13.35.
than express the Kingdom of God other ways; as particularly, we may see in the
Text and Context, where the Kingdom of God (that is the Church of God) is
likened to a certain King that made a marriage for his Son, Mat. 22.2.
or to a certain man that made a great Supper, Luke 14.16. Ver. 17.
and bade many, and then sent forth his Servant at Supper-Time to say to them
that are bidden, Come. There are many Similitudes, Parables and Figures in the
Book of God, taken from things below, that do all tend to set forth our
Privileges, and the Riches of the Grace of God to us. To conclude it
therefore, let our Adversaries tell us, we embrace Parker, Eccles. Polity, p.
75.
a few gaudy Metaphors, yet we judge it very allowable, being justified by the
General current of Scripture, to use such as R. Ferguson, Import and Use of
Scripture-Metaphors, page 296.
carry a due Proportion, Analogy and Similitude to the Things they are brought
to illustrate.

2. 2 Inf.
If, under these Metaphors, there be a Plentiful Store of all Provisions in the
Gospel-Feast, then there could not have been more than there is, ^eb. 11.3.
made ready. There might have been more Worlds framed by the Word of God, but
there could be but one plenteous Redemption. Psa. 130.7.
Nature might have been printed in a larger Volume, Luke 2.14.
but Grace and Good will to men could not be published Auctior and emendatior.
Heb. 10.7. Psa. 40.7.
more large or lovely, than God has made them in the Volume of his Book. He
has provided more to save one Soul, than was sufficient to make many Worlds.
Primogenitus ante quem nullus, unigenitus post quem nullus.
He had one only Son, and he gave a richer Portion with this one, and this only
Son of his Love, than could be increased by this whole World's Goods. It was
impossible we should have more than so great a Feast at the Marriage of the
King's Son. He that provided the Feast made the Match, and gave his own Son to
marry us. And lo! Matthew. 4.8.
All the Kingdoms of the World with the Glory of them, if they had the Golden
Mines of Ophir or Both the same place as some think; but others do make them
distinct, and seem to incline that Parvaim was no other than the Country of
Peru in the American Continent. Mr. Sam. Lee, Temple of Solomon, page 224.
Parvaim Others again believe that Parvaim might be a Country now altogether
unknown. Dr. Tho. Fuller. Pisgah-Sight, 1st Part. page 371.
, nay, the Riches of ten Thousand Times ten Thousand Indies, would be all Isa.
40.17.
less than nothing and vanity in comparison of this 2 Cor. 9.15.
unspeakable Gift of his Love. When God So loved the Taken (as before noted)
(...), for the Elect in all Ages of the world.
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16. He could not enrich it
with a greater Dowry, than this invaluable Treasure. One Christ brings in more
than Millions can reckon up to count it. We may find Words, says Rutherford,
Christ's Dying, p. 136.
one, to paint out Creatures, and the Garment may be wider than the Thing; but
should Angels come and help us to find out Expressions for this matter, Words
would be too low and on this side of it. The very Apostle was at a loss for a
higher Word to utter it than the unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. *
(...).
Riches beyond our Footsteps, Riches we can never trace out: Altitudinem
babent, bumance mentis Angustias modulum^, superantem. Bodius in Ephesians. page 358.
Col. 1.
They have a glorious Height that transcends our Low Stature. These All Things
in the Everlasting Gospel could not be made more glorious, if ten Thousand
Worlds heapt upon so many Millions were added new to them! The Apostle again
calls it the exceeding Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 2.7. which On the Ephesian^.
2d Vol. of his Works. Part 2d. page 237.
Dr. Goodwyn observes is an Epithete given no where else in the Scripture to
the Grace of God. Grace is Exceeding, and there can be no more added to it.

Alas! every Thing in this poor sorry World of our's is capable of a very high
Enlargement: Romans 8.22.
The World is a Prisoner, and the whole Creation groans to be set free, Eccl.
1.3.
and nothing under the Sun has a Divine Perfection in it; but the Love of God
to Sinners is so big with Treasure, it could not be bigger, or possibly any
other ways completed. The Reason is, because it is Infinite, a Feast without
any Bounds, or Dimensions of Love that made it! The Store of the Gospel is so
large, Psa. 24.1.
that Heaven and Earth with the Fullness thereof could not augment the Riches of
his Grace, or swell the Love of God higher. That God who has prepared this
magnificent Entertainment, may apply the same Interrogatory to the Feast, which
he put concerning the Vineyard, Isa. 5.4. -- What could have been done more
that I have not done in it? i. e. No Means had been in any Kind wanting; so in
the Gospel, there could be no further Preparation, no Dish or Dainty, nor
Morsel of the Grace of God made, to be added to what is Made ready. Does the
Salvation of a Precious Soul require a Greater Price than has been fully paid
to save it? Could God give us more than his Son, or could he give us any Son
besides. Could Christ have given more than richly give himself, Ephesians. 5.25.
when the Son of man came to give his Life a ransom for many? There are all
things, and what? Mat. 20.28
Could there have been more than all at once ready? there is nothing wanting to
be added unto Grace, or need either be put into the Scale to make up the
exceeding weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4.17
There are all things that appertain to Life, or belong to Godliness, Godliness
here in Christ, and Eternal Life hereafter with him. In a word, the Gospel
makes up so full an Entertainment, that we may put in what Christ at the Time
of his Crucifixion poured forth, when he was bowing of his Head, and giving up
the Ghost, Joh. 19.30. It is Finished, no more Ransom to be paid, no more store
for the Feast to be provided. He had purchased at once wherewith we might be
perfected for ever. Heb. 10.14
The Gospel needs no more of the work of God about it, to make the Grace of God
richer; he has brought it into a Blessed Perfection, and has put his Last
Hand to it.

3. As the Gospel could be made no larger, 3 Inf.
so the Provisions could be made no less for Love to make enough. Grace and
Love are Two sweet Springs that have not bubled or been broken up in vain. We
indeed through Corruption may turn the Grace of our God into Lasciviousness, Jude
v. 4.
but yet no Streams of it that make glad the City Psa. 46.4.
of our God shall ever run waste. Wisdom would not have contrived, or the Power
of Love accomplished, All, if Less had not been too little. Though the Psalmist
(when he is pursuing the String of Vanity that runs through the Pearls of all
Humane Excellency) seems to make a mere naught of this Life, yet we must not
make a Cipher of the next; and though he expostulates, Psalm. 79.47. latter part.
Wherefore have thou made (we cannot add, and say Wherefore have thou redeemed)
all Men in vain?

Love could not be tied in little Knots, when the Silver Cord was twisted,
Eccl. 12.6.
to draw us in Bonds of Love with it. Hos. 11.4.


The Ocean of Grace that overflowed could not be pent up or confined in any
narrow Seas. God would not be contented, but would give in all, when he gave
any Thing to us.

And indeed as Less than All had not suited with the Infinite and Boundless
Love of the Giver, so it had not been proportioned to a Fallen Creature's
Misery. If the Line of Love had been shorter, it had not reached to save us.
Man's Case was at the worst, and there had been no Relief found, if the Gospel
had not been in its best Estate provided. Psalm. 39.5.
If Christ had but dealt like Anantas, to have kept back part of the Price,
Acts 5.2.
the Gospel would have been no Purchase for us. And therefore if we were Happy,
we must have all, and could not have less than All the Gospel ours. As when
Israel went out of Egypt, the House of Jacob from a People of strange Language,
Psa. 104.1
they could not go out fewer than their whole Multitude, Number. 16.33.
and all that appertained to them, (insomuch that when Moses is debating with
Pharaoh about the Terms upon which they would leave Egypt, he tells him) there
shall not be so much as their Flocks and their Herds exempted, Ex 10.26.
our Cattle shall go with us, there shall not an Hoof be left behind: So to
allude in the Case before us) when Man was to be redeemed from everlasting
Destruction, and advanced into Fellowship and everlasting Communion with the
Great God, there was not one Essential (...), not so much as a little Greek
Letter, or one Hebrew Point.
Jot or Tittle of the Gospel must fail; if it had, our Salvation had failed
with it. As in the Law, to Jam 2.10
offend but in one point had been a Breach guilty of all; so in the Gospel, to
have left out but one Provision of 1 Pet. 4.10
the manifold Grace of God (necessary to our Salvation) had been enough to have
shut us everlastingly out of all Happiness, Gal. 3 22
and concluded us under all Misery.

Jesus Christ did not merit one Benefit in the Work of our Salvation, that
could have been left undone or spared: and therefore he tells his Disciples,
Luke 24.44. after they had seen such a concurrence of Wonders that seemed to be
drawn as so many black Lines from the Circumference, and met in him the Center;
that is, after he had lived obscurely, and died with Public Infamy, being made
a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
to procure our Entertainment; These are the words (says he) which I spoke unto
you, while I was yet with you, that all things might be fulfilled which were
written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning
me. If there had been but one thing omitted, there had been a Defective and not
a Full Accomplishment: There had been too Few, unless All things ready, we can
spare none of them. Every part of the Grace of God, and that which the Grace of
God tends to, is so rich a Treasure, that the Loss of it had been irreparable.
Nothing in the Pearl of Price but is Divine and Precious, there is not a Jewel
could be spared in the Crown either of Grace or Glory: The one is necessary to
bring us to the Full Assurance of Hope, Heb. 6.11. 2 Ep. Joh. 8.
and the other that we receive a Full Reward in Heaven.

4. Though the Gospel be a Feast with All Things ready, 4 Inf.
yet with nothing He prepared. The Father of Spirits will stand alone the
Provider, and will have no Flesh to glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1.29. We must
say of all as Meisnerus de Ecclesia. page 46.
one does judiciously pro nobis, sine nobis; it is Grace for us, but yet Grace
without us; it is a Feast sent to us, but nothing of its Provisions were got in
or served by us. He puts it in the Singular Number [I], when there was no
Plural with him; [I] (not You and I) have laid Help upon one that is mighty,
Psalm. 89.19. The King in the Parable makes his own Supper, his Servants have a
Commission to call you, but are no Caterers to buy up or prepare any of his
Rich Provisions for you. If thou art Hungry, Psa. 50.12.
thou can not say thou will not tell Him, for the Food in the Gospel is His,
and all the Fullness thereof, and thou did not by any kind of Work so much as
procure thine own Appetite; thy Stomach to this Food, as well as this Food to
thy Stomach, comes alone from him. Isa. 26.8.
The Desire of our Soul cannot be unto his Name, and to the remembrance of Him,
'till first he provides himself and All Things for us, and therefore the
Psalmist first mentions Him, and then his own Desire, he puts in the Object,
and then puts forth the Act, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and
there is none upon the Earth that I desire besides Thee. Now if we could not
desire a Crumb, or long to taste of one Drop from Heaven, Psalm. 2.4.
'till He that sits in the Heavens creates our Appetite, much less could we
have our Hand, or put in a little Finger to the Work in procuring this Blessed
Meat and Drink. Our Poverty must be supplied by, it could not contribute
toward God's Liberality. If we had sold our selves, we could not have made,
Mar. 12.42
or got up one Widow's Mite to throw into his Public Treasury. All our Money
will not buy a Sacrifice, much less could it mix with the Price of Blood to
sanctify. Mat. 27.6.
It would not avail to procure a Supplication to our Judge, Job. 9.15.
how could it join then in purchasing a Satisfaction, Mic. 6.6, 7. Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? Shall I come
before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a Year old? Will the Lord be
pleased with Thousands of Rams, or with Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I
give my Firstborn for my Transgression? The Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my
Soul? Our largest Offers had been infinitely too little for one of the least of
God's All things to have come at our Price. Mat. 25.40


5. All These Things must surely put a Dignity upon all True Gnests. 5 Inf.
What an Honor have all his Saints, while the Palace of the King sends to
treat the Cottage! Psalm. 45.15
What a Preferment is it that God should stoop down to maintain a Communion
with us! That our Lord should prepare so great a Feast, and then gird himself
to come forth and serve us! Luke 12.37
These mighty Things will make Believers great, tho otherwise they are little
both in their own and other men's Eyes. The Righteous is more excellent than
his Neighbor, Mat. 10.42
Prove. 12.16. If we state all Accounts truly, little ones, God's Little ones
are greatest. The All Things do put an Honor upon the Brother of Low Degree
whom others make the Footstool. Jam. 1.9.
Such as are highly favored of God shall not be found Ignoble. Luke 1.28
Though he sends out into the Highways, and takes up Beggars, Mat. 22.9.
yet here is a Feast that makes them Kings and Priests unto our God, Rev. 1.6.

6. It informs also of the Happiness as well as the Dignity of True Guests that
have got the Gospel-Feast Theirs. 6 Inf.
They are not only by an Advancement set up, but are a People saved by the
Lord. Oh! Deuteronomy. 33.29.
we may break out into Admiration, when we think deeply of the Blessedness of
the People of God, who may come freely and partake of all these Things as their
own? The Gospel is not to feed thy Fancy, and please a mere Imagination, as if
there were no richer, or more satisfying Good to the owners thereof, Eccl. 5.11.
saving the beholding of it with their Eyes, as Solomon speaks of the Increase
of the best Earthly Things: But it is a Feast made ready to be Thine, to fill
thee brim-full with thy own share of Christ. Oh! blessed are they that have
believed and obeyed God, who requires the Obedience of Faith as that Work of
God which will give them a Right unto the Tree of Life; Rev. 22.14. Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have a Right to the Tree of Life.
God does not require his People to look up as Strangers, Ephesians. 2.19.
but as Citizens belonging unto Sion, and as Servants that have (...).
Orders from their Lord to meddle with it; Authority to appropriate the Tree of
Life to 'em. A Right to the Tree of Life, (says Durham on the Revelation.
one) is a Right to Jesus Christ, and Glory in Heaven with him. Now, how rich
and happy are they that have an Interest by Faith in the Riches of the King's
Son! Oh! 1 Samuel 17.25.
he endows them with great Riches and Honor, they can never want Portion, and
he gives them this Entertainment that they may be Happy in all things, and
never want Provision. An Interest in the Son of God does not only make the
best, the most, but all things thy own. Matthew. 4.9. Luke 4.7.
If thou will fall down and worship him, all shall be thine. He has purchased
that thou may get Possession. Oh! blessed View of Faith, that can appropriate
Gospel Grace, though it be a Self-emptying Grace that will lie at Christ's Foot,
'till the Soul cry out, I am a vile Wretch, Isa. 6.5.
I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips! yet is a Grace that exalts a
Savior, and will not leave the Soul hanging off from Christ, but clinging fast
and crying out with Thomas, My Lord and My God! Joh. 20.28. God's Children that
have his Spirit witnessing, see the Gospel for themselves, and not another
exclusively. Job 19.27.
The Saints of the most High have a Privilege beyond all other Men. We have an
Altar whereof they have no Right (says the Apostle) to eat that serve the
Tabernacle, Heb. 13.10. The Apostle there means that the Faithful in Christ
Jesus had such Privileges by Christ as others had no Right to, who adhered to
Jewish Customs and Superstitions. So there is a Spiritual, Divine
Participation, which natural, unsanctified Men have nothing to do with. Oh!
blessed therefore are the Household, Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 2.12, 13.
the Household of Faith that be not aliens and strangers, afar off, and having
nothing to do with these Things! Blessed are the Family that come in to the
Feast, because God has given them Meat, and it is now their own Food! They have
Children's Bread, Mat. 15.26 Luke 6.20.
and Blessed be ye Children, for yours is this Bread.

7. An outward Liberty and a safe Protection of the Guests at God's Table is a
great Mercy. If all Things be ready, 7 Inf.
it is an Excellent Security that affords a Protection under the Roof of God's
House, to enjoy them. None indeed shall be able to keep God's Children out of
their Fathers House, that come nigh the Door with their Father's Name written
in their Foreheads. Rev. 14.1.
The Lord of the Feast does also plant a special Providence that guards the
Table, while his Guests are placed about it. Heb. 1.14.
He has Ministering Spirits that are set for the Defense of the Gospel; Phil.
1.17.
they stand as watchful Sentinels for the Good of his Chosen, Psa. 106.5.
because he makes a House of Defense to save them. Psa. 31.2.
He has given his Angels a charge over them, Psalm. 91.11. Heb. 1.14. that his
Guests may partake of the Feast in Quietness, and when He gives outward
Quietness in a Day of Liberty, Job 34.29.
as well as internal Peace and Calmness, who then can make Trouble and
Disturbance while he entertains us? The Lord has made a Hedge and a Wall so
high about his People, Job 1.10.
that none shall climb over, or break through to destroy the Gospel-Banquet, and
spoil that Holy Festival: Upon all the Glory shall be a Defense, Isa. 4.5. The
Holy Mountain is safely fenced round. The Guest may trust to a Protection,
where he tastes God's Provision. For He that has said Bread shall be given
him, his Waters shall be sure, has said also that his Place of Defense shall
be the Munitions of Rocks, Isa. 33.6. 2 Cor. 6.7.
There is the Armor of Righteousness on the Right Hand and on the Left to
guard both the Guests and Provision too: And it is with no less than the Mighty
Power of God that ye are kept through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. (...).
Kept.] Kept as a Thing or Person is when there be Soldiers set upon the Guard
to look well to them, kept as the Two Centurions with their two hundred
Soldiers, and Horsemen threescore and ten, and Spear-men two hundred at the
third Hour of the Night were to guard Paul to Cesarea, to bring him safe unto
Felix the Governor, Acts 23.23, 24. The Table of the Gospel is defended with a
Flaming Sword, Genesis 3.24.
a Divine Presence that Psa. 97.3.
burns up his Enemies round about him, and will no ways suffer them to rush
in and spoil the Banquet, or Spill the Blood of his Guests that sit in Peace
about it.

8. These All Things do inform us that they are worthy of all Acceptance. 8
Inf. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Oh! with how much cheerful Readiness does it become us to accept the Lord's
Kindness! nay, it becomes us to take it of the Lord with all sorts of
Acceptance: Our Hearts should be humble, our Hands active, our Feet nimble and
our whole Lives thankful. With Acceptance. Shall we dare reject the Grace of
God? if the Alms be so Bountiful, shall not the Beggar be so wise to take it?
if God stretch out his Hand, Prove. 1.24.
shall we pull our Hand back, and refuse what he offers?

9. All these things do argue it a Dishonor for the Guests, 9 Inf.
who are Partakers of them, to have any Fellowship with the Works of Darkness.
Their Company and Conversation ought to be suitable to their Table. If any of
the Professors that sit at Meat with them become loose and scandalous, it is
their Duty to abstain from Communion with such, and in order to Purity in the
Fellowship of the Gospel to cast them out. Joh. 9.34.
Nay, there must be a Forbearance of all unnecessary Communion or Fellowship
and Converse with them, not only at the Lord's Table, but at our own Common
Tables besides: 1 Cor. 5.11. But now I have written unto you, not to keep
Company, if any Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or
an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no
not to eat. It is a Dishonor for Christ's Servants to go and sit with the
wicked that wear the Devil's Livery. Psa. 26.5.
Our Master indeed when he came from Heaven, came to eat with Publicans and
Sinners, which the Pharisees did upbraid him with, not knowing the End of
Christ's coming into the World; and therefore When the Pharisees saw it, Mat.
9.11.
they said unto his Disciples, Why eats your Master with Publicans and
Sinners? And in another place the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, Luke 15.2.
saying, This Man receives Sinners, and eats with them: But Christ's
Presence with Sinners was like a Physician's Presence with the sick, Mat. 9.12.
that came to take away the Disease, but ours with them would be like those of
young Blood, to partake of the Infection. When Christ comes to Sinners, v. 13.
it is to call them out of their sins, I came to call sinners to Repentance;
but if we go to them needlessly, Prove. 1.14.
it must be to cast in our Lot among them. God comes to Us in our sins to make
us good, but if we go among others in their sins, it tends to make us bad, and
in the conclusion may leave us stark naught. Romans 4.5.
He that justifyeth the ungodly, that is, comes to change their State, covers
them with a Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61.10.
which makes it a Dishonor ever after to have any Fellowship with Iniquity.
The Honor that God bestows at this Marriage-Supper should be a Perpetual Bill
of Divorce to all our old Lovers. Deuteronomy. 24.1
Grace makes Men too high to return again to Nature. The New Diet with the King
makes it a Dishonor to Covet, or eat of the old Store again. A Saint cannot sin
without double Dishonor, because he is one that has received Double Honor,
the Honor that comes from God, and the Repute he has had with good Men. So a
Professor debaseth himself every time he walks not worthy of, or according to
the Honor and Credit of the Gospel. Alas! their Table raises them to so high
a Dignity, that it is a shame for the Lord's Guests to keep Company with them of
an ill Blood. What? shall the King's Favorites run out of his
Presence Chamber, or leave the Guest-Ceamber for his Stables and Kitchen, to go
mix with Grooms and Scullions? Wicked Men are no others but such as the Great
Lord employs in his Kitchen and Stables below in this World. Now is it not a
shame when we have been with Christ to sit again with Belial? The Jews held it,
(as one of our Dr. Lightfoot, Harmony of the New Testament Vol. 1. page 23.
^ol. See also ^ ^ (...). p. 2^1. Edit (^^bl) (...).
Learned Contrymen expresses it) That a Scholar of the Wise by their Canons
might not eat with one of the vulgar, much less with Publicans and Sinners, the
worst sort of all the vulgar that were. If the Jews held this when they ate
Bread among themselves, much more should Christians that hold a Feast unto the
Lord. Ex^. 10.9.


10. If there be such a Plenty in the Gospel made ready, 10 Inf.
then it is very sad where there is a Famine of the Word of God, and nothing of
these All things enjoyed. How sad is it to consider dark Places of the Earth
where the Light of this Gospel never shined, Psa. 74.20.
and the wast places of the Earth where they wander up and down for lack of
Meat! Job 38.41.
how sad is it to think upon those Children of our Heavenly Father, that through
the Fury of their Persecutors are deprived of all Ordinances, and ready to be
starved for want of Bread! how solitary and uncomfortable is their state, while
they are Hungry and Thirsty, Psa. 107.5.
and their Souls are fainting in them! It is a Terrible Dispensation to have
the Word of the Kingdom taken away, Mat. 13 19
and spiritual Feasts turned into Soul-Fasts! this is so represented in the
Prophet, as is enough to make the Ears of them that hear it tingle: 1 Samuel 3.11
Amos 8.11, 12. Behold the Days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a
Famine in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, or a Thirst for Water, (as much as
to say, I have a more grievous Judgment for you, I will not deal so gently, as
to inflict a Famine of Bread, or a Thirst for Water) but of hearing the Words
of the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to
the East; they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. Oh! dreadful is the Dispensation, when the multitude have been
assembled, Mat. 15.32
having nothing to eat! when God has suffered the Enemy to break up the solemn
Meeting, to disperse the Assembly, ibid.
and send them away Fasting, though diverse have come from far! Mark 8.3.
It Is sad, when the Things of our Peace are hid (though it be but under a Bushel)
and there is no open Vision! Luk 19.42.
1 Samuel 3.1.
when the Wilderness is dry, and the Rain from Heaven that should have filled
the Pools thereof, Psa. 84.6.
restrained! if the Gospel has All Things ready, Psa. 120.5.
Woe unto such as Sojourn in Meshech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar, in places
where there is nothing of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ found! it is very
sad with those poor starved Souls, if in Famine he does not redeem them from
Death, and in Hunger from the Power of Want.

Alas! who can express the Judgment, the Desolation of a Forsaken People! do we
know what it is to see the Table of the Gospel like those Tables of the
Money Changers in the Temple, Joh. 2.14, 15.
overthrown? it was the misery of the old World, and it will be the greatest
Judgment and Calamity can befall our selves, if God should say of us as he did
of them, My Spirit shall not always strive -- Genesis 6.3. It is Terrible to have
the Vials of Wrath unstopt, and the Cup of Salvation put, or took away from us!
to be in a Kingdom that is full of Darkness, Job 3.16.
among poor Pagans and Idolaters that never saw Light! to lose the Plentiful
Provision of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.48.
and be made to serve our Enemies in Hunger and Thirst, in Cold and Nakedness,
and in the Want of all things! this is Dreadful, and yet there are many
Desolate Places of the Earth that were once fed to the Full, Jer. 5.7.
yet now do not know where they can go to an Ordinance, 1 Samuel 2.36. Rev. 1.4.
to eat a Piece of Bread! The Seven Churches are in the Dark, and have their
Lights wholly put out. The Nation of the Jews that did once eat of the same
spiritual Meat, 1 Cor. 10.4
and drank the same spiritual Drink, are now turned out of their Inheritance,
Dan. 4.32, 33.
like Nebuchadnezzar, when he did eat Grass as Oxen. The Glory (of the Lord) is
departed from the Threshold of their House, 1 Samuel 4.22.
and now when God is gone, Jerusalem her self is without a Priest, and without
a Sacrifice, Hos. 3, 4. their Temple is destroyed, their Provision gone, and
they have none to keep House for them! And alas! how equally sad and dismal
would our own Case be, Gen 41.54
if the Meat were cut off before our Eyes! Joel 1.16. and the Famine begun in
the Land; q. d. if the Gospel that has been spread in so large a Table, were
taken quite from us! if he should cause to cease out of this Place, and out of
this Pleasant Land of ours, the Plentiful Field, Amos. 4.6.
and send a Cleanness of Teeth in the Want of Gospel-Bread among us, Oh! how
black might our Souls be by reason of the Terrible Famine! Lam. 5.10.
it is the Plenty of the Gospel through our Lord Jesus Christ that is able to
save much People alive, Genesis 50.20
as at this Day: This Bread shall do it, Matthew. 4.4.
by every word of Blessing that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Well, if
the Provisions of the Feast have all and abound, Eccl. 5.13.
it is a very fore Evil has been seen under the Sun, when there is a Famine of
the Word of God, and none of these All Things enjoyed!

11. They are in a miserable Condition likewise, 11 Inf.
who are in the Presence of this Plenty, and see it with their Fyes, but do not
eat thereof! what a Wretch was that Lord upon whose Hand the King leaned! 2
Kings 7.2. he sits crowded in the Gate, saw the Victuals come tumbling in out
of the Syrian Camp, he beheld the Windows of Heaven opened, and a shower of
Provision fell apace about him, but the Poor Wretch had no Vessel to put any of
it in! he must only see it with his Eyes, but not eat thereof! he had not the
Privilege of a Dog to take the Crumbs, but was trod to Death under the Table!
his Carcass was spread like Dung, after God had provided and spread before him
Dainties! v. 20. so it fell out unto him, for the People trod upon him in the
Gate, and he dyed.

So likewise as to Gospel Grace, is it not a very sore Judgment to sit under
Plenty of Means, and yet in a spiritual Sense not partake thereof! to have the
Table of the Gospel spread among us, and a large Feast prepared, when so many
of those that are bidden perhaps touch not a Morsel of it, Luke 14.24 Joh. 8.21.
but dye in their sins, and go to Hell at last. It Is one thing to hear of
Grace, and another thing to have it. Oh! how many natural, carnal ones, (mere
Unbelievers while they hear of the Means of Faith, and the Provisions of Grace
to work Faith in them) that have not one Dram of true Faith or Grace to lay
hold of the Gospel offer! they have heard many a Sermon about the Feast, and
yet go away Fasting; q. d. as natural and Carnal, as empty and unhumbled as
they came hither! miserable Wretches! what have these to live upon but the
Bread of Idleness, or the Bread that perishes, but no Portion of that which
endures to Life Eternal (as has been shown)? God is opening of his Hand, and
yet many of you are shutting your Mouths against him! God is raining down
Mannah, and you will not stoop to take Mannah up! he drops Fatness, but you
look on, and your Souls are lean still! he prepares Plenty, but you have such
other Plenty besides, in your diverse Lusts and Pleasures, that you care for
none of it! He gives Meat in abundance, but how ill a use do you make of it,
that come to see it a little upon the Lord's Days, but go away and do not
meddle with, or perhaps so much as think upon the Provisions all the Week
after! how miserable are You!

Again, what will become of others that are Profane, Filthy, Abominable,
Disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate? Are there not some who have been
instructed in the Particulars of this Feast, and yet can feed upon Oaths, if a
slight Provocation move them? do not Profane Dogs lick up the Devil's Scraps,
and though they look upon God's Table, yet return to their Vomit again? Now, is
not your Case miserable, Sinners! whose mouth (it may be) is full of Cursing,
Romans 3.10.
though out of the Mouth of the Lord you have heard so many Gospel Blessings! and
full of Biiterness, though that Mouth of yours should have been filled with the
sweetness of the Honey and the Honeycomb! are there not some of you have thrown
aside the Cup of Salvation, and taken up the Cup of the Drunkards? have you not
changed the Glory of all that Holy Bill of Fare, to shame? yea, into such a
shame through your own beastly Intemperance, as the Prophet expresses by a
shameful Spewing! Hab. 2.14.
Oh! how sad is it with you while you come and look upon the Provisions here,
and as soon as you have turned your Backs, and are gone Week after Week, should
be found in the Devil's Company, or about the Devil's Work again, eating and
drinking your own Damnation! dare any of you thus to profane the Table of the
Lord? And, you that are Scoffers ridicule the Provisions, make his Meat
contemptible? Again, How do you think after this Plenty, that God takes it at
your Hands, you that break the Third Command, and customarily take his Name in
vain, Exo. 20.7.
irreverently, wickedly and profanely in your mouths upon every slight
Occasion, blaspheming and dishonouring that worthy Name which should only have
been praised for his Bounty and Goodness to us? Would you thank that Guest who
should go away reproaching, and ungratefully vilify your own Names, after you
had either kindly entertained him, or offered courteously to treat him? I trow
not. And what? Luke 17.9.
shall the Great God of Heaven and Earth be dishonored in his Name, after he
has created, preserved and provided all, and spread so large a Table with
Blessings of Heaven above, Genesis 49.25
and Blessings of the Deep that lies under? Further, dare any of you be
Disobedient to Parents, and though you have heard of so much at God's Table, yet
continue as cursed Slips, instead of Olive-Plants round about Their Table? Psa.
128.3.
Surely miserable is the Congregation of the Wicked, and sad is your state that
have the Opportunities of Gospel Grace, and yet do but see it with your Eyes,
and never eat thereof! and that hear of Heaven, but must never, if you be not
changed, enter in there; Rev. 21.27
for there shall in no wise enter into it any Thing that desileth. Let those
words, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. dwell much upon you, Know ye not that the Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicaters, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Remember all these Things must
pass away, and there must be nothing of them remain, but only to testify of
the Grace of God that such were some of you. 1 Cor. 6.11 12 Inf.


12. Continuance in Unbelief, and a Refusal of these All Things, is Dreadful.
The State of Unbelievers must be miserable that has no Portion in these
Things, and the Sin of Unbelievers must needs become provoking that keeps them
from laying hold upon them. Did you believe, Romans 6.1.
you dare not trifle, or continue in sin, when Grace thus abounds. You dare not
grow loose, if you did believe, or join with this Grace that was made to knit
our Hearts to Christ. Oh! your Unbelief, which carries all your other sins in
the Belly of it, is a Monster big with Aggravation. Let me represent the
Dreadfulness of your Sin in two or three Instances.

1. You refuse the only Remedy. You sin against Grace, and Works cannot save
you. These all things are for the reconciling you unto God, Col. 1.21.
and yet you prefer to be Enemies in your Minds (and in your ways) by wicked
Works. They are for sanctifying and renewing your Abominable, polluted Natures,
and yet you choose to remain Filthy still! Rev. 22.11
They are for healing you, and yet you will die of your Wounds before! They are
for feeding and clothing you, and yet you will be starved, and then turned out
naked to the Judgment Seat of God! In one Word, they are for saving you, and
yet you will die, and be damned for ever, Prove. 8.36. He that sins against
me wrongeth his own Soul, all they that hate me love Death.

2. You rebel against the Light. You have heard, you have seen enough to cast
you, if you do not quickly cry for Mercy, and if Jesus the Son of God have not
mercy on you. Mark 10.47, 48.
Oh! where will you flee to hide, when Christ lays this Sin at your Door, that
you had been informed of the Provisions made for Sinners, and the more you
knew, the more you hated God's Offers made to you? See John 15.24. If I had not
done among them the Works which none other Man did, they had not had sin, ( i.
e. nothing in comparison of what they now have) but now have they both seen and
hated both me and my Father. You have heard of what Importance this Feast is,
and therefore it is a Rebelling against the Light to make light of it.

3. You trample upon Distinguishing Grace that comes with outward Peace to you.
God might have kept a Market with the Enemy, Psalm. 44.11
and given you as Sheep appointed for meat. Asaph enditeth a sad Complaint of
this nature, Psalm. 79.1, 2. O God, the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance,
thy Holy Temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps; the Dead
Bodies of thy Servants have they given to be meat unto the Fowls of the Heaven,
the Flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts of the Earth: And v. 3. Their Blood
have they shed like Water round about Jerusalem. Consider, others have been
fain to break through the Hosts of the Mighty to come at Bread, or fetch a supply
of Living Water; but you are offered Both in a Day of Gracious Liberty, when
you need not get your Bread with the Peril of your Lives! Lam. 5.9.
Oh! come and see the Works of the Lord abroad, Psa. 46.8.
what Desolations he makes in the Earth, while he provides a Sanctuary for You
that is not desolate for the Lord's sake. Dan. 9.17.
How do Wars ruin and eat up the Countries round you, while you have Peace in
your Borders, Ps. 147.14
and meat to eat which they know not of! Oh! the Distinguishing Grace of God,
that he should on you be raining Mannah, when on so many Thousands in the World
he has been seen raining Blood! Ah! Could you have looked into Neighboring
Countries, and seeen the Frights, the Perplexities, the Distress of Nations,
Luke 21.25
the Groans of Dying wounded Men, the Revenge of Armies boiling in their Blood,
the Thunder of the Captains and the shouting! Could you see that Supper which
God has been making beyond the Seas for the Fowls upon slain Carkases, as the
Holy Ghost signifies, when he speaks of an Eagle flying in the Sun, Rev.
19.17, 18. and crying with a loud voice, saying, to all the Fowls that fly in
the midst of Heaven, Come, and gather your selves together unto the Supper of
the Great God, that ye may eat the Flesh of Kings, and the Flesh of Captains,
and the Flesh of mighty men. Oh! how might you then admire, that he should send
forth any of the Angels of the Churches, any Servants of His at our Gospel
Supper-Time, to say to them that are bidden, Luke 14.17
come! that they should be Angels to invite you, and not Armies to devour you!
And will you sin against the Distinguishing Grace of God that calls you to this
Supper, when you might have been disht up among slain Carkases at the other?
The Lord could have bidden Guests which should have come upon the Wing, if he
had but said, Deuteronomy. 28.26.
Thy Carkase shall be Meat unto all the Fowls of Heaven.

13. If there be such Plenty now where God's People partake of the Gospel, 13
Inf.
Oh! what an infinite Stock of Plenty is That which is still reserved for
Heaven! If it be so much to look upon his Love, when thou art looking through the
Lattess, what will it be when the Windows fly open, and thy Soul shall mount up
like the Chariots of Amminadab, Song 6.12.
upon Angel's Wings to be for ever with the Lord in singing, and Mansions of
Everlasting Joy! What will it be then to see him as he is for ever! Thy All now
is nothing in comparison of what it tends to, 1 John 3.2.
when thou shall be all in the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2
all rapt up in Love, all Joy, all bathed in the Rivers of Pleasure to all
Eternity. Psa. 16.11.
So much for the first Use.

The Second Use is of Humiliation, II. Use.
upon these Three Accounts particularly, as, 1. That we have Despised it. 2.
Forsaken it. 3. Tasted so little, when we have taken something of it.

1. It should humble us, that we have despised the Gospel-Feast. God has been
making ready, Mat. 22.5.
and we have been making light of it. This Great Supper has been set before
us; I laid Meat unto thee, Hof. 11.14.
says God of Israel and Ephraim, but we have cast it behind our Backs. 1 King.
14.9
It is the Wedding-Supper, Mat. 22.2, 3.
and yet how loath are some of us he has bidden, to be courted to it! It should
bring us into the Dust, that we have preferred Dusty Things before it. Those
Three Despisers in the Parable all seek their own, Phil. 2.21.
and with one Consent shut out the King and his Gospel-Supper. One had rather
be abroad in his Field viewing a piece of Ground, Luke 14.18
than under the Roof of God's House at Supper. Another prefers his five Yoke of
Living Oxen he had bought before all those other Oxen and Fatlings in the
Parable that were killed, v. 19.
and made ready to be given. Mat. 22.4.
They each made light of it, v. 5.
((...)) not caring for the Provisions of the King, to taste of his Supper) and
went their ways, ibid.
one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise. And the other Third that was
married, cares for the Things of the World how he may please his Wife, 1 Cor.
7.33
Luke 14.20. It should humble us, that when God has took up this Supper of the
Gospel by a Hand of Grace, we have been taken up with our Hands in other
Things, which we have valued and preferred more. It should humble us, Psa.
94.19.
that in the multitude of our Thoughts we have run so low, when God throughout so
many High Mysteries plainly tells us, Isa. 55.8.
My Thoughts are not as your Thoughts! Again, that our Words have cast so many
Reflections upon these mighty Works of God! Mat. 14.2.
That our Actions have wrought much Provocation, when He has laid in so much
Provision to nourish and sustain us to all Eternity! That we should design his
Glory no more, who has accomplished so much to declare our Good! That we should
set up our selves (vile Worms) before this great Provider! That we should so
often prefer a Mess of our own Pottage, I mean the Things below, 2 Kings 4.40.
where there is Death in the Pot, and esteem this large Benjamin's Mess in the
All Things, no more! Sure, it should make us with shame to take the lowest
Room, and abase our selves, that have exalted our ways against God, ^uk. 14.9.
that has done so much at the Upper End for us!

2. It should humble us, that we have forsaken our First Love, we have once
shown to it. The Church of Ephesus, Rev. 3. seemed to have fed so long, that
she took a Spiritual Surfeit, and cared less for her Meat than she was wont to
do before: The Master of the House takes notice how well she kept to her Diet,
v. 3. and that though she had met with never so many Difficulties for this
Feast's sake, yet had a long while bore them: Thou have born, and have
Patience, and for my Name's sake have labored, and have not fainted: But when
she grew weary of her Bill of Fare, he brings in a Bill of Indictment in a sad
Charge against her, v. 4. Nevertheliss, I have somewhat against thee, because
thou have left thy first Love. And should we not bewail it, that our own Plenty
has brought forth the Ephesian-Surfeit in England, and that even as to the
very Profession of the Gospel there has been so great a forsaking in the midst
of the Land? Isa. 6.12.
Have we not in our Plenty forgotten the Bread of Adversity? Cha. 30.20
Oh! how precious was the Provision, when we thought we should eat no more of
it! When God was threatening to break up House, did not we promise to prize his
Table better? When some of the Synagogues of God in the Land had been shut up,
and others, through the Fury of the Enemy pulled down, had not we like Caleb
another Spirit given us? Number. 14.24.


At the opening of our Liberty, when God set open that Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15.
how did we see many entering in by the Door, that since have returned, and now
are climbing up some other new way? Joh. 10.1.
Nay, how many in the straitest Times of Difficulty, have seemed to run well,
Gal. 5.7.
and followed Christ for the Loaves, I mean have been so zealously affected
toward the Gospel, that rather than fast, 1 Samuel 21.6
would put Hot Bread into their Mouths, when Persecution has been greatest,
and yet now are hindered either from running or walking more with us? Joh. 6.66.
Again, as to others that come now and then to see what House God keeps among
us, did they not seem once to come with more Appetite? Were not Men's Spirits
once more akin to Job's, to love the Gospel of Christ, and esteem the Words of
his Mouth more than their own necessary and Appointid Food? Job 23.12
did not this Heavenly Repast from God determine their choice best, when it
came in competition with the Food that perishes? Joh. 6.27
Could not some have been contented to lose a Meal at home, to get out to an
Entertainment with our Beloved, where his Followers have gained more than Meat,
and yet now steal away from the Table, having loved this present World, 2 Timothy
4.10.
whither a Deceived Heart has turned them aside. Isa. 44.20.


Again, should it not abase us, that we seemed once to have more Valuation for
the Gospel upon a Sickbed, Mark 2.9
than we have had since God has made us take up our Beds and walk! Mat. 16.2^
Did we not better savor the Things of God, when we thought of the Graves
ready for us, Job 24.20
and the Worms that should feed sweetly on us? What strong Cries could many
pour out, when they lay howling upon their Beds, which have been long since
forgotten, and worn off by Laughter in the House of Fools! Eccl. 7.4.
How many have made a fair show in the Flesh, Gal. 6.12.
while their Face has been foul with weeping, that yet have worn off former
Troubles, after we had hoped by the sadness of their Countenance to have seen
their Hearts made better. Alas! Eccl. 7.3.
how deep in Shame should these Considerations lay us, that we are not (perhaps
any of us) as in Months past, Job 29.2.
and as in the Days when God began to send Plenty to us! The Gospel is the
same, but we are sadly changed.

3. It should humble us, that we have tasted so little of this Feast, Job 16.8.
when we have taken something of it. Who would not rather judge that some of
us, by our Leanness that testifies against us, had kept a Fast, and never been
at God's House a Feasting! How starved are our Souls, though such Plenty lies
before us! How withered are our Graces after the Dew has been all Night upon
our Branches. Job 29.9
He that has gathered much of this Holy Mannah (much comparatively, 1 Cor.
14.30.
more than another that sits by) yet has nothing over, Exo. 16.18
and he that has gathered little has the more lack. The Entertainment has
been full, but how many have risen out of their Seats and gone empty away? We
have but Tasted of the Heavenly Gift, Heb. 6.4.
when the Kindness of God has provided all, that we might have taken more of
it. We have Often fed, but we need still to be fed with the same Dish again.
Heb. 5.12. Ye have need that one teach you again which be the First Principles
of the Oracles of God. Some had need to lie at the Infant-Breasts and suck a
Catechism, being such Babes that many Sermons are too strong meat for them.
Well, it should humble us, that we have had a great Feast, a rich Gospel
provided, but little Stomach to, little Strength from it.

The Third and last Use is of Exhortation, III Use.
to persuade and counsel you in reference to this Large Feast in all the Things
before us. Take these Twelve Directions.

First, 1 Dir.
Labor to understand the Provisions of the Gospel more. Search into the
Mystery of Christ that you may not have any meat to eat, which you know not of.
Be acquainted more with your Table, that you may see what is set before you.
The Heart of him that has Understanding seeks Knowledge, Prove. 15.14. Let
not God therefore complain of you, when he has sent these Treasures of his
Gospel, as he did of Israel, when he had written to them the great Things of
his Law, Hos 8.12
that they are counted as a strange Thing. Eat of the Tree of Knowledge that
you may partake of the Tree of Life. The Supper will be lost in thy
Winter-Evening, if thou have not the Candle of the Lord to light thee, and
discover the Things that he has made ready. Cry therefore after Knowledge, and
lift up thy Voice for Understanding, be no Stranger to thy Diet, but know thou
it for thy Good, Job. 5.27.

Secondly, 2 Dir.
Meditate often upon the Furniture of this Table. It is no Spiritual
Intemperance though you have (Animus in Patinis) your Minds running much upon it.
I meditate (says that Holy Psalmist) on all thy works, I muse on the work of
thy Hands, Psalm. 143.5. When others only wonder a little at the Gospel they
know not why, as They at those Things which were told them by the Shepherds.
Luke 2.18.
Be you like Mary in the following Verse, that kept all these Things, v. 19.
and pondered them in her Heart. A good Christian (said an Mr. Jenkyn.
eminent Preacher) is much in Isaac's Walks. He meant in Meditation, because
Isaac went out to meditate in the Field at the Eventide, Genesis 24.63. Such
Spiritual Wanderers can turn Fields of carnal Pleasure into a Paradise of Holy
Meditation. Meditate then in the Gospel, which is a plentiful Field where thy
Thoughts may walk to and fro with Freedom. Muse upon the Extent, ponder the
Depth, contemplate the prodigious Stores of Grace, Psa. 50.11.
all the Fowls of the Mountains, and the Fish of the Sea, and the slain Beasts
on Earth are nothing to the House that God keeps for thee, therefore meditate
upon these Things. 1 Timothy 4.15


Thirdly, 3 Dir.
Be not satisfied till the Provisions are all made yours. Children have [ Ye]
any meat, John 21.5. What have you laid in of chose Things wherein God has
laid out. It is not Sight but Interest, no^ Speculation but Enjoyment will be
of use to you. If you gain not this Point, you lose your selves for ever. But
how comfortable will you find it, to read over this Bill of Fare in the Text,
when you can add Paul's Comment in the Margent, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22.
last words.

Fourthly, 4 Dir.
Partake Plentifully of this Entertainment. Deal not with a well-furnish'd
Table, as Men do with a Frugal Diet, to be sparing. Let not this Significat and
victus Rationem, quam quis sibi velut decernit and praescribit, ut eam non
transgrediatur. Mercer, in Job. 23.12.
Appointed Food be tied to any scanty Rules. It Is not indifferent to a Child of
God, whether he eat little or much. I would not therefore only, as Paul
exhorted in another case, press you to take some meat, Acts 27.34. but would
say as the Angel of the Lord did to Elijah when he touched him the second Time,
(still) Arise and eat, 1 Kings 19.7. The Prophet had once at the Motion of the
Angel eaten before, of a Cake baken on the Coals, and drank of a Cruse of Water
at his Head, v. 5, 6. But because the Journey was too great for him to perform
after ordinary, slender feeding, he is bid to eat again, and accordingly he
arose, v. 8. and did eat and drink ( i. e. plentifully, a double Meal,) and
went in the strength of that Meat forty Days and forty Nights, unto Horeb the
Mount of God. He took a large Meal, and then he held a very long Journey. So I
would persuade you to partake plentifully of the Gospel, believe with all thine
Heart, eat and drink with all thy might, and take of what Dish thou will. Here
is no need of putting the Knife to thy Throat, Prove. 23.2.
though thou be a man given to Appetite, as Solomon directs the Epicure. Summum
tibi Damnum and Ignominiam ac^erses, nisi Gulam cohibeas. Idem.
Other Dainty Meats may undo thee, if thou have not more Grace, than Appetite.
Take plentifully therefore of the Dainties wherein is no excess.

Fifthly, Return Thanks. 5 Dir.
As it comes in Love, return it to Love again. Jenkyn upon Jude, 2d pt. page
118. mihi Fol.
Wicked Men (as one observes of their common Mercies) drink of the Stream and
forget the Fountain, and as soon as ever they have filled their Bucket turn
their Backs upon the Well. But God's People are to show more holy Ingenuity;
and God's Mercies that draw out their Hearts, make them they dare not shut
their Lips. What shall I render (says David) unto the Lord for all his
Benefits? Psalm. 116.12. All God's Benefits do require all, and more than we can
ask or think to pay him. When David had been studying what Thanks to render, he
takes the Grace-Cup, v. 13. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the
Name of the Name of the Lord. Cum videat nihil habere se quod rependat confugit
ad. Gratiarum Actionem. Mollerus in locum.
Thanks is all God requires, and all that Man has to pay. The Sacrifice of
Thanskgiving is the greatest Offering we can bring to God's Altar. Praise is as
much of the Lord's Tribute as we can pay in the Glory due unto his Name; and we
must not pay less. We ought neither to eat of our own common, or of his
hallowed Bread without giving Thanks. The Dove, as Page 109.
Dr. Spurstow observes in his Treatise of the Promises, picks not up a Grain
without casting up its Eye to Heaven, and shall not the Soul of this Turtle
that has Dove's Eyes cast them upwards, Psa. 74.19.
Song 4.1.
while she is picking up his Mercies? As we must be Beggars for Mercy, we ought
to be Thank-offerers those Sweet Singers of Israel upon our receiving of it,
especially for the Gospel, in which we are prevented with his Blessings that
are granted before we ask them. Be ready to show forth the Praises of him that
has called you, 1 Pet. 2.9. Even the Praises of Providing Love that has
fetched out such wondrous Stores for you, and brought in all to treat you. Yea,
bless him for Sabbath-Festivals, that he treats you upon every such Solemn
Feast Day. Psalm. 81.3.
I had gone with the Multitude, I went with them to the House of God, with the
Voice of Joy and Praise, with a multitude that kept Holi-day, Psalm. 42.4.

Sixthly, 6 Dir.
Work the Works of God. Be not found a Spiritual Sluggard in God's Kingdom,
that sits to eat the Bread of Idleness. Take Pains, Christians, with your
own Hearts, and don't carry it at Sion, as those did at the Foot of Sinai, that
sat down to eat and to drink, Exo. 32.6
and then rose up to play. The more Grace, and the more we are justified
without Works, the more we should delight to work the Works of God. Ezekiel. 16.49.
This Fullness of Bread should not be joined with any, much less with Abundance
of Idleness in us. ibid.
Don't think you can do too much for God, that has provided and done so much
for you. Advance his Glory, as you may be most serviceable and useful in the
Places God has set you. In a Word, new Obedience unto Him, who has provided
all Things new and old for you.

Seventhly, 7 Dir.
Pray Affectionately for more Appetite, for Growth and the continuance of
Plenty to you. You may rise from this Feast, though the greatest Banquet in the
World, and as soon as you are up be fit to fall down and pray.

1. Pray for more Appetite to this Plenty. Be desirous of his Dainties, for
they are Not deceitful Meat, nor like those which the Wiseman cautions the Man
of Appetite to forbear, Prove. 23.3. Cry unto the King least Desire fail, Eccl.
12.5.
when thou should eat of his Son's Venison. Indeed in other Things, (as a Dr.
(...) Bates Final Happiness of Man, p. 59.
great Author observes) we may sigh through Desire, and when they are obtained we
often sigh for Grief: 2 Cor. 7.11
But our Vehement Desire, or the utmost Languishment of our Souls, that God
would 2 Cor. 9.10.
minister this Bread for our Food, is a Desire not to be repented of. Pray then
that the Holy Spirit would set an Edge upon your Appetite, that your Food when
carved for you, may not be found lying useless by you. One Meal at thy Table,
one Day in thy Courts, is beter than a Thousand elsewhere? Psalm. 84.10.

2. Pray for Growth by it. Beg that God may never deal with Thee, as he did
with the Israelites, when they tempted him by asking meat for their Lust, Psa.
78.18.
while he gave them their Request, Ps. 106.15.
but sent Leanness into their Soul: Cry therefore and make this Intercession,
Oh Lord, I beseech thee send now Prosperity, Psalm. 118.25. As it is given you
to sit at meat, pray that you may thrive by a Plenteous Feast. That you may not
live upon God's Ordinances, and yet it cannot be known either by your Health or
Growth what your Diet is, like those lean and illfavoured Kine in the Dream of
Pharaoh, that did eat up the first seven fat Kine, and when they had eaten them
up, it could not be known that they had eaten them, Genesis 41.20, 21. Ask
Improvements, many Cubits in your Spiritual Stature, that while you live upon
the Gift you may grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. Much growth should be desired from
much Plenty and Variety. This will be a means to adorn the Gospel, and
recommend the Provisions of it.

3. Pray for the continuance of Gospel-Plenty to you. You can never more aptly
apply that Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Give us this Day our Daily Bread,
Mat. 6.11.
Jam. 4.3.
than here. Ask not any Meat for your lust, but ask in Faith all other Things
and have. Entreat the Lord, that he would not deal with you, as your
Persecutors more than once have done, to make empty the Soul of the Hungry, or
cause the drink of the Thirsty to fail, Isa. 32.6. last words. Pray, that the
Good Shepherd would still provide, and the Sheep of Christ be yet suffered to
go in and out and find pasture, John 10.9. Pray, that God would Not cast thee
off, or throw thy Meat quite away from thee, Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from
thy Presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Beg that the Golden Pipes
of Ordinances (as they are Typed out in the Prophet's Vision of the Golden
Candlestick, and the two Golden Olive-Branches) may also empty the Golden Oil
out of themselves, Zech. 4.12. That Ordinances may neither be broken, as the
Pipes sometimes that convey the Water are, nor yet their Fatness or Moisture
fail, as a means of conveying all Things ready.

Eighthly, 8 Dir.
Look beyond the Instrument, any mere Servant of the King's sent to call you,
or bid to wait at Table on you. Look off from Instruments, and behold the First
Cause. Holy Mr. Rutherford has an excellent Passage to this purpose in his
Letters Pt. 3d. p. 37.
, Such as are Hungry look more to the Meat than the Carver. Oh! look off as
hungry Feeders from the Attendance of his Ministers to view the great Provider,
and taste the Virtue of all his great Provision. Why look ye so earnestly on
us, as though by our own Power or Holiness we had made this man to walk; the God
of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified
his Son Jesus, Acts 3.12, 13. It is the Glorifying of his Son Jesus, and not
the Abilities of Paul, or Apollos, or any Ministers by whom ye believed: We are
but poor Lacqueys, that run after our Lord, to be with him where he is, upon
any great Day of the Feast.

Ninthly, 9 Dir.
Learn to be weaned from Temporals, when you have such Provisions made in
Spirituals. Take what you have in Christ, and be Content, the meek shall eat
and be satisfied, Psalm. 22.26. though God blesses your other Basket and your
Store, Deuteronomy. 28.^.
yet live above the World, upon Him who has blessed us with all spiritual
Blessings ((...)) in Heavenly Things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3.
When he calls you to dwell in his House, regard not your Tents, nor lodge
among your own Stuff. Take off your Hearts from many Things, and lay them up
with your Treasure here in All, Col. 3.2. Set your Affections upon Things
above, not on Things on the Earth. Pant not after the Dust, Amos 2.7.
when God pours Waters out of his Buckets. Number. 24.7
Be more Crucified to the World, Gal. 6.14.
since he that hung upon the Cross has prepared enough (by getting all)
without it. If God has drawn some Earthly Breasts dry, yet let these Breasts
of Consolation in the Gospel wean you from the Paps that you have sucked. Let
that World to come provided put the World that now is under you. In one word,
be contented to wash off your Thick Clay which sticks upon your Fingers, 1 John
1.1.
and handle the Word of Life.

Tenthly, 10 Dir.
Pity others that want your Plenty. The less they have, let your Bowels grow
the larger to them. Be not of a Narrow Spirit that shuts out the sense of other
Men's Necessity, when you feed in large Pastures. Be grieved for the
Afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6.
and don't carry it like his unnatural Brethren, that when they had cast him
into a Pit, Genesis 37.24, 25.
sat down to eat their Bread. Think of God's Prisoners, though the chief Butler
may forget them, when he is pressing the Cup into Pharaoh's Hand. Though you have
got a Pleasant South-Land, and the Streams in the South to make it fruitful,
yet think of your Brethren in France, that are driven out of their South-Land,
and have their Springs of Water dry. Put on Bowels, when you behold your Table,
and are about to fill your Belly.

Eleventhly, 11 Dir.
Though you have Plenty, waste none. Make no Orts of Crumbs. When your Table is
full, turn it not into wantonness, least God overturn it. Though you have found
so much, do not lose any. Beware of every Morsel, let none fall under the Table
to be trod on. Genesis 32.10
Make much of the least of all God's mercies, thou may yet be low in thy
State, though thou art high-fed at present; and though such a Feast be now set
before thee, Luke 16.21
thou may desire again hereafter to be fed with the Crumbs that fall from the
Rich man's Table.

Twelfthly, Abound in Love, 12 Dir.
both to the Maker of this Feast, and to all our Fellow-Guests with us.
Professors of the Gospel should love, and such as eat together, cleave to one
another. Love is a special Duty we owe at such a Love-Feast.

1. Abound in Love to God. The Words of the Commandment that were written in
Stone should be transcribed upon the Fleshy Tables of our Heart; 2 Cor. 3.3.
see Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. Oh! how should we send Love streaming out
of our Souls, when Love pricks the Vein, though we bleed to Death with Love!

2. Abound in Love to all your Fellow-Guests. 1 John 4.21. And this Commandment
have we from Him, that he who loves God, love his Brother also. Shall there be
Contentions among Brethren at the same Gospel-Table, when Jenkyn upon Jude, 2d.
pt. page 118.
the eating at one Rack has bread Peace between the very savage Beasts. It is
the Note of an Egyptian, Genesis 43.32
to have an Hebrew in Abomination, and refuse to Bread with him. Let those
quarrel who sit at the Devil's Banquets, but let us agree, who have our Table
prepared of God. Let the Dogs fall out that fight for Bones, but let the
Children that eat of Children's Bread, unite: Behold, how good and how pleasant
it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity, Psalm. 133.1. It is comely to sit
together in our Profession at the Gospel-Table, Ephesians. 1.3.
as we hope to sit together in the Heavenly Places, and not like Foolish
Children wrangle and contend about our Meat, to provoke our Heavenly Father, to
take the Dishes off, or send Us to Bed, to our Graves, without a Supper.

II. Doct. That God makes an Invitation to Sinners in the Preaching of the
Gospel to come in to this Feast.
The Method in which I shall endeavor to prosecute and handle this Truth, will
lie in Four things. 1. To open the Properties of the Invitation, and show you
the persuasive Force, or Strength, and sweet import of this Blessed Word, Come.
2. To explain also the Nature of Man's coming, when God's Call prevails. 3. The
Reasons, or Necessity of this coming urged upon us, Why it must be. And, 4. The
Use.

The First Thing is to open the Properties of the Invitation, I.
and explain the Nature of God's Call to Sinners, when he Invites them by the
Preaching of the Gospel to partake of His Feast. Take them in these Ten
Particulars.

1. It is a Gracious Invitation, 1 Property
a Come that is full of Grace and Love, an Invitation that springs not from
common Tenderness, Luke 1.78.
but the tender Mercies of our God. He is styled the Father of Mercies, 2 Cor.
1.3. and therefore sends out to the Children of Wrath to show Mercy on them.
Ephesians. 2.3.
He is a Gracious and a compassionate Father even to Children that have wasted
the substance, and run out the Portion he gave once unto them: He is full of
Pity to such as have run away in the original Revolt from him, and therefore
sends out to such Prodigals as we, a Come, Return, to fetch us home again. Isa.
21.12.
He seeks, he sends, he calls, and it is nothing but Grace in every Act, in
every Voice, in every Line of Pity to you, as Paul was wont to Preface his
Epistles, admiring Gospel Grace. Oh! it is with a mighty Emphasis in the
Language of the Gospel, that by Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.5. And again, ( by
Grace are ye saved) v. 8. it is by a special, extraordinary Favor that is let
out of the Heart of God to you. Nempe Dilectio, Misericordia, Gratia atque
Benignitas. Bodius in Ephesians. page 259. col.1
Grace indeed is diversified in the Scriptures, and comprehends various Terms
of a Divine Affection to save, but they all agree in the Temple-Language
without any uncertain sound, 1 Cor. 14.8
that we may utter our Acknowledgments, and break out with Shoutings, Zech. 4.7.
crying Grace, Grace, unto it. When God looks down from Heaven, and beholds
from the Habitation of his Holiness, and of his Glory, it is with the Sounding
of his Bowels, Isa. 63.15.
and of his Mercies toward us. They are Compassions toward Us that afford us
a Call toward Him. The Church indeed seems there to complain of an Abatement
of the Divine Care to her, as appears by the manner of her expressing it, Where
is thy zeal, ibid.
and thy strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies toward me?
are they restrained? As if she had said, Why are thine Affections stopped from
flowing out unto me? but alas! if God had forgotten to be Gracious, Psa. 77.9.
as good Asaph too was ready to complain, there had never been an Invitation to
any such as Me; O taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8. This Come in
the Text had been blotted out of his Remembrance, Isa. 49.19.
if through Grace he had not engraven it upon the Tables of his Heart
continually. He is a God that has done every thing Graciously, Hos. 14.2.
he receives Graciously after, he invited graciously at first. Psa. 103.8.
The Lord is Merciful and Gracious in dispensing such a Call to us; Psa. 145.8.
Gracious and full of Compassion in the Gospel-Message; Lam. 3.22.
his Compassions fail not while he sends to fill us with good things. That is
the First Property of his Call to Sinners, it is a Gracious Invitation.

2. It is a Free Invitation. 2 Property
Nothing moved, nothing compelled the King, in ary possible Deserts or
Obligation, to send for such a one as Thee: He consdered thee as Poor, and
therefore would invite thee according to the Free Riches of his Grace: Ephesians. 1.7.
He comes freely in his Visit, and calls thee as thou art a Sinner, as a Great
Sinner, as the Chief of Sinners in thy own Apprehension. When he makes a
Dinner or a Supper, Luke 14.12
he calls not the Rich that can make a Recompense, not the Righteous, such as
are Self-Righteous, but he calls Sinners to Repentance, Matthew. 9.13. The Lord
does not look for some Great Thing in you, to make you worthy of a Look or a
Call of his after you, but when he comes to save you, he finds you as you are,
and yet knocks at your Door to take up his Abode with you. Though you have not a
Good Word in your Tongues, or a Good Work yet begun in your Hearts, yet the
Lord invites you to begin and carry both on.

3. It is a Sovereign Invitation. 3 Property
As nothing in us could move him to it, so nothing he saw in us, or by us,
should divert or put him off from such an Invitation. God will Call thee, though
Satan casts in many Things against thee. The Law of God condemns thee, but yet
however he will bring his Gospe, and have it offered to thee. Conscience may
accuse thee, but he will not always hear the Plea against thee; nay, Thou also
in Self-abhorrency may say even to the Almighty, Lord, bid me not! do not
look upon such a Dead Dog as I! 2 Samuel 9.8.
yet he will not be tied, he will not let thee stop him, Hos. 2.6.
thou shall not hedge up his way with Thorns, but he will invite thee to his
Son, take it how thou will of him, Exodus 33.19. And he said, I will make all my
Goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before
thee, and I will be Gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show Mercy on
whom I will show Mercy. He breaths in Sovereignty, when he opens his Lips, and
brings Grace, Grace forth. He will invite, he will entertain, he will exercise
a Prerogative while he offers to, while he bestows the Gift upon whomsoever it
seems meet unto him. His own shall be bestowed where the Owner pleases. He
invites not only where he foresees a Heart void of Towardly Dispositions and
moral Inclinations to receive his offer, but where there is a perfect
Aversation, a natural Hatred and Reluctance thereunto. Even so Father, because
it seems good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.26.

4. It is a clear Invitation. 4 Proper^
There is nothing in the Gospel but lays his Heart open, nothing in his Calls
but does make our way to Him clear. We may apply the Testimony of his Disciples
to confirm this, Joh. 16.29. His Disciples said unto him, Lo, now speak thou
plainly, and speak no Proverb. He had before declared to them, Joh. 16.28
he came forth from the Father, and was come into the World; as if he had told
them, I came down from God, to seek, to call, to treat with Sinners, and bring
them up to Him: Again, I leave the World and go to the Father: i. e. I must go
back to the Place from whence I came, and give an account how my Message sped.
The Invitation was therefore clear, his Disciples understood the Call, lo, now
speak thou plainly. What can be clearer than Prove. 9.5. Come, eat of my
Bread, and drink of the Wine which I have mingled. Though these Things are
Parables unto Men by Nature, yet when the Spirit of God has formed a seeing
Eye within us, to discern and perceive Spiritual Things, we may then answer as
the Disciples did to Christ, when he made an enquiry about their
Understandings, Matthew. 13.51. Have ye understood all these Things? and they say
unto him, Yea Lord.

5. It is a Commanding Invitation. 5 Propert.
Ministers have received a Command to Call you, and you have received a Command
to Come. When Orders are given from the Lord, Joh. 1.13.
you are not left to the Will of the Flesh to put off the Invitation which from
the Will of God you hear pressed upon you. The Servants indeed entreat you, and
beseech you to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20
but the Master of the Feast does require this of you. He is a Great King, and
where the Word of a King is, there is Power, Eccles. 8.4.
to employ his Agents, and Commission such as he makes the Officers of his
Trust to deal with you. It is affirmed of the King in the Parable, Matthew. 22.3.
that he sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden. 2 Cor. 8.23
The Messengers of the Churches must speak the mind of God and Christ to you.
Matthew. 8.9
Ministers are under one having Authority, and it is their Duty to declare unto
you, what they have received from the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.23
The Servants that call you can show their Lord's express Warrant to you, and a
Commandment both to Them and You, to tell you by what Authority they do these
things. Mat. 21.23
Christ has all Power in Heaven and in Earth to speak, Cha. 28.18
and his Messengers have an Authority by Delegation from him to speak also;
Isa. 48.16.
Come ye near unto me, hear ye this, I have not spoken in secret from the
Beginning, from the Time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord God and his
Spirit has sent me: So likewise that Commission for Christ's Messengers to
invite you, will stand, so long as the World stands it self, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo! I am with you always, even to
the end of the World, Amen. There is the Divine Commission at large, which
warrants the Messengers to Invite you with a Come and See, Rev. 6. sparsim.
Psalm. 34.8.
with a Come and Taste the things that God has prepared for you. Now if the
Commission lays an Obligation upon Them to call you, is it not a Command, or an
Authoritative Invitation from the God that sends them for you to come in. If
they must Preach the Gospel, must not you receive it, and embrace it? David
looked upon it as an Argument of weight, thou have given Commandment to save me,
Psalm. 71.3. and when God has Charged us to believe and obey the Gospel, may we
be at Liberty as we will, to accept or refuse the Invitation? Prove. 1.23.
either to turn at his Reproof, 2 Pet. 2.21.
or turn aside from the Holy Commandment delivered to us?

6. It is an Open Invitation. 6 Propert.
The Gospel is said to proclaim, Isa. 61.2.
and not to whisper the Grace of God to you. These Gracious Calls are Public,
Psa. 40.9, 10. 1 Kings 19.12.
you may hear Inviting Mercy in the Great Congregation, as well as the small,
still Voice, at home. When the Gospel is spoken of by Christ, Mark 13.10. he
tells us, it must be Published among all Nations, it was not enough that these
things were done in a Corner. Act. 26.26.
So when the Servants in the Parable are sent forth to call them that were
bidden, Luke 14.17
they are Commanded to go out quickly (but not any whither, here or there at
random, into by-corners of the City, where their Message would want a
Convenience to divulge and noise forth abroad, Go out quickly therefore) into
the Streets and Lanes of the City, Luke 14.21
(...), into wide Places, as the word may signify, where you shall meet with
Room enough for the Company, the many Sinners in Jerusalem, Luke 13.4.
to gather thick about you, and hear your Message which I have sent by you; and
v. 23. Go out into the Highways and Hedges: Go, proclaim your Errand, where
you are most likely to find Company, be it in City or Country, Jerusalem, or
in Judea, throughout all the Region round, or in the Kingdoms of the Gentiles,
beyond Judea.

For, it is thought by Interpreters that by Streets and Lanes of the City,
Christ meant the Jews that were then nigh at Hand, and to whom by reason of
that nearness the Servants or Preachers of the Gospel could go out quickly; for
These were to have the Gospel first Preached, beginning at Jerusalem; Luke 24 47
and it is thought that by the Highways and Hedges he intended the Gentiles a
great way off from Judea and Jerusalem, to whom also the Word should come, and
be Preached afar off in Places remote and distant from their Country and
Metropolis. Well now, the Servants and their Message are come forth as openly
into your Highways and Hedges, i. e, unto and among such Inhabitants as dwell
afar off from Jerusalem, whom the Parable seems to intend and set forth
metaphorically under these Terms; yet as openly Preached unto you now in these
Highways and Hedges as it was in Christ's time in the Streets and Lanes of the
City among the Jews themselves. The Invitation was Open then, Luke 12.3.
the Invitation is not in Private now. The Word that descended from the
House-Tops is not whispered and confined to Closets: Joh. 18.20. I spoke
openly, to the World, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple,
whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing: Why so

The Proclamation of Gospel Grace is now open, the Silver Trumpet comes
sounding close by you; there is no Restraint upon a Message from God to you;
nothing to arrest it before it reach your Ears. When Wisdom cries, she cries
without, she utters her Voice in the Streets, she cries in the Loco ubi
variae semitae concurrunt, and ubi sibi invicem, quam plurimi hominum
occurrunt. Mercer in loc.
chief Place of concourse, in the openings of the Gates, Prove. 1.20, 21. so
chap. 8.2, 3. She stands in the Top of High Places, by the way in the Places
of the Paths; she cries at the Gates, at the Entry of the City, at the coming
in at the Doors. These are Phrases that express the openness of a Thing done in
the Face or the Ears of much People, as if Wisdom's Message had been delivered,
not so much in the Street, whether of this side of the way or that, where the
Passengers half are lost in passing by on the other, but in the openings of the
Gates, and at the coming in at the Doors, where the way of all sides does meet,
and every one is pressing to crowd in or out through. The Word of the Lord that
invites you, is intimated to be in its own Nature an open Vision, 1 Samuel 3.1.
though it was then so precious and scarce in those days, that there was no open
Vision actually. It Is no less than a Ho! if any Man Thirst, let him come unto
me and drink, Isa. 55.1. compared with Joh. 7.37.

7. It is a large and comprehensive Invitation: 7 Propert.
A Come that shall reach Jew and Gentile both; the Arms of Love shall make a
wider Circle, Many are called, Matthew. 22.14. and all Israel shall be gathered.
People, Nations and Languages will be invited to come and hear the Gospel, Mark
16.15. Go into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature, i. e.
Cuivis hominum ordini. Poli Synops. omni Generi singulorum, non omnibus
singulis Generum.
to Men of every Rank and Order; to men indifferently of any Quality, Character
or Degree, to all the Kinds, be they Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, though
not to every Individual neither, appertaining to those Kinds. Again, to every
Creature, i. e. as the word Creature is restrained to Mankind: Thus Eve is
called the Mother of all Living, Genesis 3.26.
i. e. of all Mankind Living, be they Male or Female, but not to be understood
of Living Creatures produced of any other kind. Well, the Call of the Gospel
shall be a wider, a more extensive Call than now: The Hour is coming in the
which there shall be no Speech nor Language where their Voice, Psa. 19.3.
the Voice of them that will be Called to Preach Glad Tidings, shall not come.
But however, it is a large Come, an extended Call at present. God speaks it in
the Ears of many Nations, Come, fill your selves with Fatness; Kings are
exhorted to accept of it, to be wise and Kiss the Son, Psa. 2.12.
i.e. be subject to him, alluding to the Kiss of Homage which was used by the
Jews. Cities, Towns and Villages are spoken to, Families and single Persons
have a Message of Grace sent them, and the Voice still cries, Come. You
particularly of this Congregation in Cambridge, are invited to come near and
hearken, to incline your Ear to near, and your Souls shall live, Isa. 55.3. it
is large and comprehensive, the Voice Cries to many.

8. It is a Pressing, 8 Property
Earnest Invitation. It gives no rest, but solliciteth and through the
forbearance and long-suffering and goodness of God follows thee Day after Day.
Romans 2.4.
The Call refused has become a Call repeated: Isa. 62.11.
Once have thou heard it, yea twice that (Grace and Mercy, as well as) Power
belongs unto God. If thou art slow, that should be swift to hear, upon one
Week or Sabbath Day that is past thee, God^ has followed thee with another, and
tried thee by his Goodness once again, if Instruction may but enter, and thine
Ear be bored at last. Thou have now a Call, if thou will but come in and
embrace it with this Day's Mercies. The Apostle expresses this Earnestness,
with an as though God did beseech you by us, 2 Cor. 5.20. The Call is urgent with
Thee, as the Angel was with Lot to hasten him. While he lingered, Genesis 19.16
the Men laid hold upon his Hand, the Lord being merciful unto him; Mercy was
earnest, Mercy pressed him, it would not leave him to be consumed with a Sodom
burning round about him. Why thus Mercy pleads with thee, Why will thou dye?
Ezekiel. 18.31.
Mercy is urgent, it lays hold upon thee, Sinner, and would pluck thee as a
Brand out of Everlasting Fire; Zech. 3.2.
Mercy is loath to give thee up for ever: It comes with a sweet and gracious
Importunity, it cries continually in thine Ears, Judge. 16.16.
presses thee with words, and would draw thee with Bands of Love to Jesus.

9. It is a seasonable Invitation. 9 Propert.
It is Mercy that is not come too late. He calls thee while it is yet Day, Joh.
9.4.
that thou may see thy way before the Night comes: He sends out to invite
thee with a Summons of Love before the Sun be down, and therefore let not this
Day's Sun go down upon his Wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.
before thou art willing to come and Sup with him. If you lose him now, you may
lose him ever; if you dye in your sins, Joh. 8.24.
you drop without Recovery! when thy Mouth shall be stopped with Dirt, thou will
not eat of this Bread that strengthens Man's Heart. Psa. 104 15
Death like a Thief is stealing in upon thee, and may rob thee of thy Table,
before thou take thy Food! it may come with a rough Hand apace, to overthrow
thy Table, and snatch away Cloth and Thee, and All for ever! but of this more
under the next Doctrine.

10. Lastly, 10 Property.
It is an effectual, saving Call to all the Elect of God. If God's Power be
accompanied with his Voice, we may add that of Paul to the Invitation, who has
saved us and called us with an Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. when the opening of
God's Mouth is joined with the out-stretching of his Arm, then calling and
saving us do both go together. Now God does this to make the Call effectual; he
puts forth his Hand, and the Sinner comes to God's Foot immediately. Ephesians. 3.7.
The Gift of Grace and the Effectual Working of his Power do meet, and make the
Invitation saving. When God says Come, to those he intends to bring in, he
wakeneth their Ear to hear, Isa. 50.4.
and gives them Feet to walk. He removes all Obstructions, and will make the
very mountainous way to Zion become a Plain, Zech. 4.7.
when he intends to save unto the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.
Isa. 30.21.
and says, this is the way, walk ye in it. Every Lost Sheep shall be found and
brought home, before the Shepherd has done crying after it.

The Second Thing is to open the Nature of Man's Coming, II.
when God's Call prevails. Coming in the General implies a coming off from some
Things, and a coming on to others: For in all Motion (suppose it Natural) there
be two opposite and contrary Terms, Terminis a Quo, and Terminus ad Quem, one
from which we pass, the other to which we arrive. It Is the same Thing in
spirituals, in the Motion of the Soul toward God. We must come from many
Hindrances, before we come to Him: There is much within us to be forsaken, and
much to be left without us, before we break through all our way to Him.

First, I shall rank the Terms From which we must begin our motion in the Lord,
and place them under these four General Heads, Sin, Satan, our Selves, and this
present evil World. When we come, when we run after Him that calls us, we must
start from every one of These. We must come off from these four Terms like
those four Points in the Compass, if we begin a new, distinct motion; that is,
if we are Spiritual, and do not walk as Men; for it is not Northwards or
Southwards, toward the East, or toward the West, but a sursum corda, our
Hearts only upwards.

Sin is a Term we must be sure to come from. The Invitation of the Gospel is a
Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9.
and the Feast is a Feast of Holiness, and it will surely hinder our
Compliance, if we are resolved to touch the Unclean thing: 2 Cor. 6.17.
Shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound! Romans 6.1. Though Grace should
abound, that is, the offer of it to us, yet it will work out nothing, if it
does not work us off from sin. Romans 1.26
It must take of^ our vile Affections, as the Apostle calls them, that we do
not hate the good, and love the evil, it must eat off the Chain we bind our
selves in; for this continuance in Love to sin must be broken off, before we
yield to any New Compliance. We shall never stir toward a Savior, so long as
we stand in any Evil Thing. If Iniquities prevail, Psa. 65.3.
the Invitation works no Persuasion or Success upon us. All Things in this
Great Supper will be too weak to persuade, if there be but one Beloved Lust
prevails. You must not defile, you must not foul your Hands with sin, and your
Fingers with Iniquity, when you come to eat Bread in the Kingdom of God, but
wash ye, make ye clean, Isa. 1.16. and touch not the Unclean Thing, 2 Cor.
6.17. Wherefore come out from among them, (that is, from Unrighteousness, from
Darkness, v. 14.) and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the Unclean
Thing, and I will receive you. Egress^^ in Scriptura animo, non modo corpori
tribuitur. Camer. Myroth. p. 355
Be ye separate.] i. e. Remove, be gone, be not contented to lie still in sin,
change your Doings and Behavior, though you don't change your Dwelling; come off
in your Affections and Conversations from the Pollutions that have cleaved to
you; 2 Cor. 7.1.
Cleanse your selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, or you will
never accept of the Invitation that calls you to such a cleanly Feast. Though
Wisdom cries without, Prove. 1.20.
she will not help you, 'till she is suffered to break off the League which you
have made with Folly, You must come from Sin, for it is unto Death, Romans 6.23.
The Wages of Sin is Death; or you will not come to this Feast, to take of the
Bread of Life in it. You must get off the Broad wan, that leads to
destruction, Mat. 7.13.
before you can advance aright, or come on to the Gate that is strait, and the
narrow way to Heaven.

Satan is another (Terminus a Quo, or) Term we must likewise come from. Natural
Men are apt to imagine that the Devil and They are far enough asunder, his Name
perhaps affrights them, tho's they can bear his Nature on them. And therefore
if we comply with the Invitation of Gospel Grace, we must Return where we have
turned aside after Satan. This may be opened in three Things.

1. Sinners must come out of the Devil's Family. The Devil is expressly called
the (...).
Father of Wicked Men, Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
Lusts of your Father ye will do. Of your Father, and therefore of your Father's
House. His Lusts ye will do.] His Children obey him, though they can never obey
this Parent in the Lord. Ephesians. 6.1.
You must Dis-obey, 1 Pet. 1.14
fly from Him, if you would be found the True obedient Children. You can never
be the Children of God, if you remain the Children of the Evil one. Again, you
must change your Family, and get off from your old Lord, before you you can
serve a New Master; for you are but one, and can never serve Two, Mat. 6.24.
though Satan be a Prince, Ephesians. 2.2. yet you must not confent to let him lord it
over you: Though he be Lucifer, Son of the Morning, Isa. 14.12.
yet he is fallen from Heaven, and if you obey him, you fall down and worship
Hell. Though he be the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4.
yet it is Treason against the King of Kings, to consent as They unto the
Bramble, Judge. 9.14.
come Thou, and reign over us. He is called the Prince of the Power of the Air.
(...) not, (...).
The Word is the Authority, not the Intrinsic Power: And his very Authority
too is wholly Precarious and dependent, and what he exercises in the Air as
the Seat of his Empire and Dominion, is no otherwise than by Delegation; Ephesians.
2.2.
so that though he be the Power of the Air, you must resist the Powers of Hell,
or you resist the Ordinance of God. Jam. 4.7.
Resist the Devil, rebel against the Tyrant, though you have been born and
trained in his Court. In a word, you can never become the Friends of God, chapter
2.23.
so long as you are related to this Enemy of God that owns you: You must come
out of Satan's Family.

2. Sinners must come off from the Devil's Work. When they leave his House,
they must leave his Service, both within, and out of Doors too. Alas! Men are
nothing but Abominable, Strange Flesh, so long as they are acted by this
Spirit. It matters nothing how they are swept and garnished, though their Houses
be hung with a Profession, and they stick their Windows with the Boughs, so
long as the Unclean Spirit dwells within. Ephesians. 2.2. lat. pt.
He is the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience; that
works in, or (...).
the Inward Worker: He does not only stand by and look over the Children of
Disbbedience, but he works himself in them, i. e. says James Ferguson in loc.
one, by way of Inspiration and a kind of Breathing. The Devil blows up Men to
Wickedness, their minds swell, while that cruel Task-master enters in, and they
are filled with the Devil: He suffers none of his Slaves to rest idle, among
the many Millions he employs in his Service every Day. He works at the Trade
of Hell, and will make all his Servants help him. He cuts out work continually,
and all Natural Men, who remain under his Power, he keeps close, as a hard
Master to it. Now Sinners must be brought to leave these Works of the Devil,
Joh. 9.4.
before they can work the works of God. You must put nothing in Satan's Hands,
when you present your selves unto the Lord. You must throw off his Drudgery, if
you would be doing the Holy Will of God. You must not make your Bricks in
Egypt, if you go to be built up for an Habitation unto God in Canaan. You must
be willing to be freed from His Slavery, before you are Free for Christ's
Service, and shake off his Yoke of Iron, before you can take the Yoke of Christ
on, Prove. 1.9.
as an Ornament of Grace, or a Chain of Gold about your Neck.

3. Sinners must come off from all his Flattering Adurements, let him promise
what Reward he will. We shall be tied by the Heels, though we think to come to
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.26.
if in the Snare of the Devil we are taken Captive by him at his Will. You will
never come to the Banquet of the Gospel, so long as you relish His Baits. You
must not have Fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20.
if you partake of God's Dainties. You will never be drawn in the Bands of Love
to Christ, if you listen to the Subtilty of the Serpent, to be snared by his
Enticements. His Voice is as full of the old Poisonous Flattery now, as it was
unto Eve of old, 2 Cor. 11.3
when the Serpent beg uiled her, and she did eat, Genesis 3.13. lat. pt. You must
come off therefore from all his Allurements, though he points to a Tree of
Knowledge, Genesis 3.6.
and a Tree to be desired to make one wise, or a Tree thou would fain be at,
if it bears forbidden Fruit upon it.

3. Our Selves is a Term from which we must come likewise off. Self, that it
will be one of the last Things we leave for Jesus Christ; And yet if God's Call
prevails, we must come off from our selves in these Five Things following, viz.
Our own Bottom, Ease, Interest (where it contradicts the Interest of Christ,)
as also from our Unwillingness to come at Christ's Call, and all our Carnal
Fears that discourage us from Christ, and suggest Evil Things to us.

1. In coming off from Self, we must come off from our own Bottom. We must
depart from a Sandy Foundation, before we can come to dig one in the Rock that
is higher than we. Mat. 7.24.
Our own Hearts, our own Strength, our own Counsels, and our own Righteousness
are all such a Bottom of our own that we must remove our Tabernacle from,
before we can pitch in Christ to have our Foundation in the Holy Mountains.
Psa. 87.1.


1. In coming off from our own Bottom, we must come off from trusting our own
Deceitful Hearts. We are lying Children, if we say our Hearts are good, while
we think them not so bad as others. It is but next akin to that other Boast of
the Perfectionist, to say we have no sin in us. 1 John 1.8.
Thine Heart is the Dungeon where all thy Vermin breed, Matthew. 15.19. Out of
the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, (and that is enough to pronounce it bad, though
the rest of the Vipers be not reckoned in) Murders, Adulteries, Fornication,
Theft, False Witness, Blasphemies. Men are naturally prone to think it is
enough, that their meaning is good, and intend hurt to none. They have good
Hearts, though they have not such Heads and Tongues to speak as others: But you
must come off from this piece of Blind Self, for he that trusts in his own
Heart is a Fool, Prove. 28.26. Your Heart is desperately evil, and the worse
because you are not Good enough to know it. There be Depths of Wickedness in
this hidden man, which you that have Grace have too short a Line to fathom, and
can you then that have nothing but Nature search it out unto Perfection, that
have not one Thread of Grace to help you? The Heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.

2. In coming off from our own Bottom, we must come off from all our own
Strength. All our's, did I say? alas! our strength is dried up like a
Potsheard, Psa. 22.15.
since our Springs were cut off in Adam, and if we would come by a Right Hand
we must have Union with Jesus Christ our Head. We may talk and boast of
something, but Christ has told us, (...) bic non est simpliciter fine, sed
majus aliquid quasi dicat Christus, seorsum a me, nam to loco Christus agit de
unione nostri cum ipso, quam tam ait esse neceslarium quam sit unio Palmitum
cum vite. Camer. Myroth. page 163, 164.
Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. Vain Man thinks he has strength
enough to catch, but we can trust our Hands no more than trust our own Hearts.
The Flesh is weak, until his Spirit from on high be sent to work upon us. And
we must let go all confidence in this Flesh, Phil. 3.4.
before the Spirit can be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.5.


3. In coming off from our own Bottom, we must come off from all our own
Wisdom. Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart, and lean not to thy own
understanding: In all thy Ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths.
If we lean to our own understandings, we have found out a Poor Reed instead of
the Pillar of Truth to lean on. 1 Timothy 3.15
Acknowledge Him.] In Him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
Christ is a Full Treasury of every Thing we need. In humana Christi Natura
inest omnis plenitudo infusae and creatae scienti^e, seu omniscientia absoluta.
Davenant in Coloss. in loc.
There is a Created Fullness infused into his Humane Nature, and an Uncreated
Fullness absolutely Possessing his Divine. If we are not therefore Fools for
Christ's sake, we shall never be wise, 1 Cor. 4.10.
(as we ought to be truly wise) in Him. If Christ be not our Wisdom, the best
of our Wisdom will become our own Folly. Nay, were we Ahitophel's, and Men,
like Oracles, should consult us, yet if we took not Counsel from above, 2 Samuel
15.31.
all our Wisdom would be turned into Foolishness. Jesus Christ calls us, and if
we do not learn to choose our way of Him, we shall drop into Hell, though to a
Foolish mind that is darkened, Heaven may seem but just before us. We must become
as Little Children, Mat. 18.3.
i. e. as ready to take Direction in our way to Christ, as a Little Child might
be taught in the Way how to come to Us. If we think our own ways the wisest, in
the Matters of our Souls, we make the Wisdom of God a Cipher, and, I am sure,
our selves a great Figure for Destruction. You must pluck out your own Eyes
with those Galathians in another sense, Gal. 4.15.
I mean renounce all Fleshly Wisdom, that you may see none but Jesus Christ to
guide you on, and help you. If the Father bids us to a Feast, no man can come
unto the Father, to be welcome unto his House, but by the Son alone, Joh. 14.6.
lat. pt. No Man comes unto the Father but by me. You must despise your own
Wisdom in competition with Christ, and not carry it as if you knew of your
selves what, and how to do without him.

4. In coming off from our own Bottom, we must come off from our own
Righteousness. I do not mean to put off Morality, or the Works of Piety and
Charity, and become loose, Ungodly and Licentious; but I mean, that, when in
the Discharge of our Duty, we may seem to others, or to our selves to be
Righteous, then not to trust our own Works. It is an excellent The 14th. among
the Nine and Thirty.
Article to this Purpose in the Church of England, and I wish it were received
as an Article of Truth, as well as an Article of Peace among all the Sons that
she has brought forth. That Article words it plainly in the close with the
very express words of Scripture, When you have done all are commanded you, say
you are Unprofitable Servants. Though thou could not discern a Spot, yet to
justify thy Self in the sight of God is not the Spot of God's Children; Deuteronomy.
32.5
see 1 Cor. 4.4. For I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby justified.
Though thou can not discern a Mote in thy own Eye, yet the Eye of the Lord may
behold a B^am in it, for in his sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm.
143.2. Now, though it be the Garment of Christ's Righteousness, and not thy own
must cover thee, yet thou must be brought to pull off thy own, before thou put
on His. So much for that First Term in our selves, we must come off from, viz.
Our own Bottom.

2. In coming off from our selves, we must come off from our own Case. This is
another thing we must leave in Self, before we can come and accept of Christ's
Call. If we choose our Ease, and would wrap up this Lust warm, we shall be loath
to bring it with us Naked and barefoot to Christ to be turned out of Doors. If
Christ invites us to partake of Gospel Grace, we must leave off that slothful
Note, Soul take thine Ease, Luke 12.19. (...).
Rest Soul, said that Sluggard, I have enough, cease from taking further Care;
so the word signifies. We shall not care to gird up our Loins and walk after
our Master, if we had rather sit down in our Poverty and lost Estate, and be
contented in a Natural and Sinful state with such things as we have. Heb. 13.5.
We shall not be Christ's Sheep, if we leave not that Practice of Foolish
Shepherds off, who for this are compared to Dogs, Isa. 56.10.
in sleeping, lying down, and loving to slumber. If we come to Christ, he will
call us out to Watchfulness, and what shall we do, if we cannot endure to watch
with our Lord so much as one Hour! Mat. 26.40
we had need to have another Spirit, and other Language than that Tongue of the
Sluggard, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep, Prove. 6.10. A Call to put on Christ's Yoke, and sit at Christ's
Table, though in never so sweet and gracious an Invitation, Job 12.5.
yet will surely be despised in the Thought of him that is at Ease. A Man must
cease to be like that wicked and slothful Servant, Mat. 25.26
and not continue to be Slothful in Business, Romans 12.11
before he is one whose Soul shall truly dwell at Ease. Psa. 25.13.
We must come off from our own Ease and Sloth, and be willing to have Peace
with God any how, though we put our Sinful Flesh to Pain.

3. In coming off from our selves, we must come off from our own Interest,
where Christ's and our own are inconsistent. We must come cheerfully unto
Christ, whatever our Journey costs us, or we may go away sorrowful, like that
young Man who had great Possessions, Mat. 19.22. We must deny our selves, or we
are likely afterward to deal very ill with Christ. We must be ready to lose
what the Flesh might gain, before Christ and the Gospel can be sound the best
Gain to us. When we are building this Tower, we must sit down and consult the
Cost, or it may quickly end in Babel, i. e. Confusion, before we finish, or
have half done our Work: So long as all seek their own, i^e, are swallowed up
wholly with making Provision for the Flesh, Romans 13.14.
they will be such as the Apostle speaks of, that seek not the Things of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 2.21.

4. In coming off from our selves, we must come off from our Unwillingness to
come at Christ's Call. If we come against our Wills, though it be but hither to
our Solemn Meeting, to hear what God the Lord should say, we go up a Double
Hill, Pelion upon Ossa, Heaps upon Heaps, Hill upon Hill all the way to Zion. A
Man's Legs may bring his Body into the Assembly, while his Mind starts back
like a Deceitful Bow, never bent for God; a Friend at home or Neighbor near
you, may by accident persuade you out to hear, but so long as your Wills,
Sinners, are hanging off from Christ, your Consent is no ways Cordial; your
Iron Sinew yet was never touched, to come bending and melting all the way on.
Ah! here lies one of the Dying Symptoms, in this Plague of thine Evil Heart,
which the Physician speaks of, ye will not come unto me that ye might have
Life, Joh. 5.40. Salvation it self, as Dr. Sibbs, viz. Bruised Reed. page 182.
one observes, will not save those that spill the Potion, and cast away the
plaster. You must be Cured of Obstinacy, before you close with Jesus. Though you
are bidden to a Feast, yet your Wills must be taken down, before you can take
up your Beds, and walk to it. Willing and Obedient go by couples, when God
invites you to eat the Good of the Land, Isa. 1.19.

5. In coming off from our selves, we must come off from all our Carnal Fears,
that discourage us from Christ, and are ready to suggest an ill thing to us.
When Christ calls a Soul unto him, if that Soul has been much awakened, it
often happens, as when a Stranger calls a little Child, the Child is loath to
draw near, he looks like a Stranger, and he knows not how to trust him: But
will thou serve thy best Friend so? Man's corrupt Imaginations suggest Evil
Things to him: Our Eye is ready to be evil, Mat. 20.15
because Christ is good, and we are ready to think, as if this Joseph, though he
invites us to nourish us in a time of Famine, would yet find some occasion
against us; as Joseph's Brethren thought and spoke of him in Egypt. Now we must
lay aside our Fears that terrify us, before we can come to Jesus Christ to
treat us. Methinks Christ's Invitation should bring our Faith, and banish all
our Fears: Mat. 1049.
Be of good comfort, rise, he calls thee, were words enough to make the Heart
of the Poor Blind Man to leap within him. Oh! how did he shake off every
Impediment, throw his very Clothes by to take hold of the Hem of Christ's
Garment! and should not we shake off this Spirit of Heaviness, that clogs our
Approaches, and makes us sweat with Fear, when we might in Christ have Boldness
(or James Ferguson upon the Place.
Liberty to speak all the mind freely) and Access with Confidence by the Faith
of Him? Ephesians. 3.12. (...).
With Confidence,] in a gracious and well-grounded persuasion of kind
Acceptance with him. I speak this only to you that have been mourning like the
Doves of the Valley for the manifestation of the Love of Christ to you. And
thus you have had an account of the Third Term, our selves, we must come off
from, before we can come to the Gospel Invitation.

4. This present Evil World is a Term from which we must come, before we comply
with God's Invitation. The World it self, as well as sin and our selves, and
the god of this World, will try to draw us from Christ, though it be but with
Cords of Vanity. Indeed this Temptation from the World, be it twisted with
never so small a Thread, is enough to pull the Corruption of our Natures
down-Hill: But neither must the World be a Hinderance, if we fall in with the
In-Invitation of our God, and close with Gospel Grace. Let me open this of the
World briefly, as to the Things and the Persons of it.

1. In coming off from the World, we must come from the Things that keep us off
from Christ; the Profits, Pleasures, and Applause, or vain Esteem of Men.

1. You must come off from the sinful Profits of the World. These do either eat
you out with Cares, or press you down with the Carriage, or scatter and divide
your minds with Covetousness, and may put you upon unlawful means to gain it.
You must come off therefore in your Minds and Affections, and hang loose upon
all Earthly Profits. Tho the Gospel will allow you to buy and sell, and get
gain, yet if you embrace the Truth as it is in Jesus, you must come from such
Bargains where you have put Conscience to sale, and not strike your Hands in
Cases where God has smitten His. Behold therefore Percussi manum meam. Tigur.
verse. complosi manum meam. Jun.
I have smitten my Hand at thy Dishonest Gain which thou have made, Ezekiel.
22.13. When you are putting the World into your Scale, take heed lest the
over-weight press you down to Hell; for what is a Man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul?

2. You must come off from the sinful Pleasures of the World. You must leave
off your Stolen Waters, if you take of the Free Gift of God. You must not come
nigh these Foul Cisterns, or resolve to taste a Corrupt Spring, if you drink of
the true Fountain Water. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been
Wanton, ye have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter, Jam. 5.5. And
the Apostle Peter expresses it by their counting it a Pleasure to riot in the
Daytime, 2 Pet. 2.13. (...). Gr.
The Original reads it, counting Riot in the Day a Pleasure. The Word Riot in
Divinity, signifies an effeminate Softness of the Mind contracted by much
Wickedness in Pleasure, that even (...) luxus, deliciae; a (...) frango. Pasor.
breaks, and un-mans us; and if it destroys the Man, it will surely Mar the
Christian. There is much of this Riotous Living in the World, among them that
count it a Pleasure not only to be seven Years, but if it were possible seventy
times seven serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures. Now if you come to Christ, you
must first come away from These: You must depart out of their Track, who are
described 2 These. 2.12. to have had pleasure in Unrighteousness, before you can
tread in the Paths of Wisdom, and take in New Delights.

3. You must come off from the Applause and vain Esteem of Man: You must step
over this Threshold, before you come into God's House to Feast; for how can ye
believe, says Christ, which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor that comes from God only? Joh. 5.44. It has put by many that have
seemed to approach toward Christ's School, but never threw out any that were
truly entered, to upbraid them with This, we are Moses's Disciples, we know
that God spoke to Moses, as for this Fellow, we know not from whence he is,
Joh. 9.28, 29. it has likewise overthrown the Faith of some, but never shook
the Faith of God's Elect, to be told that Great Men have disowned God's way,
have any of the Pharisees (the Doctors of the Chair) or the Rulers believed on
him? Joh. 7.48. But if you will come under the Sun of Righteousness, you must
not be frighted with this Shadow that comes betwixt.

2. In coming off from the World, we must come from the Persons that keep us
off from Christ.

1. Sinful Companions. If we have Fellowship with these Works of Darkness, we
can have none with the Father of Lights; for what Fellowship has Righteousness
with Unrighteousness, and what Communion has Light with Darkness? and what
Concord has Christ with Belial, or what part has he that believes with an an
Infidel? and what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? wherefore come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16,
17. So Ephesians. 5.11. And have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness,
but rather (...)
reprove them, i. e. convince them both by Life and Argument, for a Companion
of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20.

2. Carnal Relations. You must first shake off their Objections, before you
will yield to Christ, tho we should produce our Causes for your Duty, and bring
forth our strong Reasons for it. It was a Carnal Relation, Luke 14.20. in him
that had Married the Wife, and could not come to Christ; for had she been a
Spiritual Yoke Fellow, she had put her Husband forward. We must be brought into
a Hatred of Evil Counsel, tho from our own Flesh and Blood, before We can be
brought into True Love to Christ; see Luke 14.26. If any Man come to me, and
hate not (Carnal Relations may be willing you should come to Christ a little,
but they are ready to put in Pharaoh's Condition, ye shall not go far away:
Therefore says Christ, it is not enough to come, if you do not come to
purpose, notwithstanding such Relations, if any Man come to me, and hate not)
his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, (all
that would keep him off from Christ) yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. You must hate their Advice, tho never hate or disrespect their
Persons, that hereby you may have the Person of Christ, as you ought, in
chiefest Admiration.

3. Other Evil Counselors: Tho there be not Relations as a Bar in your way to
Christ, yet there may be a conferring with other Flesh and Blood, which the
Apostle would not entertain, Gal. 1.16. Immediately I conferred not with Flesh
and Blood. The (...).
Greek word in its most genuine and immediate signification relates to the
putting a Thing to one, and so I conferred not, is as much as, I never put it
to them as a Case fit to be decided by them. We may have Carnal Acquaintants we
must overcome, before we acquaint our selves with God, and must be at some War
perhaps with Them, before we can fully be at Peace with God, Job 22.21.

Having now shown you that in coming at the call of God in the Invitation of
Gospel Grace there is a Terminus a Quo, a Term from which we must begin our
Steps, I shall next briefly open the Terminus ad Quem. Therefore

Secondly, The other Term we must come to, or the Point in our Spiritual
Compass we must arrive at, when the Gospel-call prevails and enables us to
come, may be opened in Two Things that clear it, particularly, A Believing
close with the Gospel-Invitation, and an obedient accepting the
Gospel-Entertainment.

1. A Believing Close with the Gospel-Invitation. When the Soul comes, it is
drawn with a Full consent to Christ; the Understanding is enlightened, the Will
persuaded, the Affections are drawn forth, and the Soul does not any longer
draw back. When the Snare is broken, and the Cords that held it back are cut,
the Soul comes pressing forwards, toward the High-calling of God: Phil. 3.14.
when it is loosned of its wonted Hold, it complies, and begins a close with
that Blessed Person of the Son of God that calls it. Heb. 10.39. For we are not
of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them which believe unto the
saving of the Soul. When our more than a Threefold Cord is broken, Eccles. 4.12.
then a call prevails, and we are drawn in Bands of Love to Christ. We can
(through Grace) take hold of Christ, when He has loosned our Knots that tied us
so close to other Things before. Oh! if we come once to be like that Band of
Men whose Hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10.26.
we shall be even pricked to the Heart, we did not come sooner, Acts 2.37.
and be earnest to dispatch our close with Jesus Christ the faster. We shall
then to purpose sincerely mind his Calls, and evince our Hearty closing with
them; not answering swering like that Second Son we read of, that was bid to go
work in the Vineyard, but played the Hypocrite and never came there, Matthew.
21.30.
Igo Sir, and went not; but like the First, though obstinate a while, yet at last
obedient, that afterward repented and went, v. 29. When the Soul closes, it is
glad of an Errand to come for any thing to Christ, as before it was glad of a
shift, and sought an excuse, to keep it off from him. Lo! now it will not be
satisfied with a Call, if the Soul but suspects it does not come away. Oh
Blessed, Sweet and Gracious, Universal Change! The Will consents unto the
Invitation, Romans 10.9
with the Heart the Man believes, and with the Mouth the Poor Soul confesses,
and lo! a change wrought upon the Invited Sinner you may discern all over! Oh!
how does the Soul press after the mark, when the Call of Jesus Christ prevails!
It is no sooner loosned from Prison and from Death, but it is joined unto the
Lord in Freehold.

I come Lord, I come with my Soul, I desire to bring my Body in also. I
renounce my Sins, and now I seek a Savior; I throw off Satan, and now I put on
the Lord Jesus Christ; I come out of my Self, Lord, whither shall I go? I come
to thee alone; I flee from the World, Psa. 55.6.
and with the Wings of a Dove, by the Help of thy Spirit am fleeing in to thee:
Psa. 119.30.
I have chosen the way of Truth, I have cast mine Eye, my Feet are bent to
thee: I am resolved by the mighty Power of thy Grace to be taken off, to be
called away, to be seized and stopped by none that calls, by none that comes but
Thee.

2. It is an obedient accepting the Gospel-entertainment: The Soul is willing
to take the Provisions of the Gospel as they are, Mat. 20.11
without any murmuring against the Good man of the House. When the Soul comes
to the Provisions of Christ, it is pleased in his House, delights in the
entertainment, and takes without a Reserve of any Dish he gives it. The Soul
comes, when it will be at the Feast to meet with a Christ, and to feed on a
Christ at every Opportunity! when Souls are brought to accept of Divine
Provisions, and cry out with an Holy Importunity, Lord, Joh. 6.34.
evermore give us this Bread! when the Soul takes up the very Fragments of the
Bread of Life, and would have nothing lost that is ready among the All Things.
To come, is to accept of him that calls, and accept of what he offers, and
comply with thy Lord who is ready to welcome and kindly accept of thee. Lord, I
come, here I am, 1 Samuel 3.6.
for thou calledst me, (as Samuel said to Eli) and I never read thou sendst me
back again; I think my self happy to be a Guest, where the Master of the Feast
that sent to call me, will be sitting by to serve me. Lord, I am come to seek
my Meat of thee; I remember thy Kindness to call a poor Worm forth, and lo!
here I am to eat of the Bread, Prove. 9.3.
and drink of the Wine which thou have mingled. This coming of the Soul at the
Gospel-call to Christ, is a Readiness (thus) to accept of the Glorious Things
that are spoken of this Table, where these All Things are spread: for Glorious
Things are spoken of the Supper as well as of the Psa. 87.3.
City of our God. The Provisions of Grace are wonderful, as well as the
Treasures that are laid up in Glory. And the coming of the Soul is to accept of
such as these; until it be filled with all the Varieties of the Word of the
Kingdom, Mat. 13.19
which God can bestow, or man receive of him.

The Third Thing is to enforce it by Arguments, III.
and urge the necessity of man's coming at the Call unto these Holy Commons of
the Gospel (for there is a Communion of Saints held at this Table.) And in
evincing why it must be so, I would lay open the Necessity of the Thing these
two ways in General: 1st. Necessitate Praecepti, as a Command. 2dly.
Necessitate Medii, as the Means appointed. It is no matter of Indifferency,
other Things are convenient, but this one Thing is needful, Luke 10.42.

1. It is necessary, necessitate Praecepti, as the Master of the Feast requires
it. It is his command, and that will render a compliance with it necessary. God
has bid you to a Feast, and it should not lie before you as a common, slight
indifferency, if ye be disposed to go. 1 Cor. 10.27.
The Commandment says, Seek ye the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness,
Matthew. 6.33. The Gospel Dispensation is called the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness by a Phrase that is equivalent to and comprehensive of its
Provisions made ready. Now this Provision in the Kingdom of God, God commands
us to seek, and seek it Potius quam Prius.
first; seek it rather; let the Priority be in your Affection, seek it more
than all Things else. This is seeking first, when you give God's Provisions the
Preference in your Hearts, though other Things have got the start, and were
sought by you first in Time. Christ is there taking off his Disciple's Hearts
and Thoughts from laying out their chief Care in maintenance about their
Bodies, and setting them upon a more necessary Duty than Provision for their
Body was. The Master of the Feast knows that the Soul is more than the Body,
Matthew. 6.25.
as the Body it self is more than Raiment, and therefore he commands his
Disciples and Followers to be careful rather in This, and come away unto the
Feast of the Gospel, seeking Soul-Food. It is the Will and Commandment of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 16.18.
that we serve not our own Belly, but in obedience to his Divine Injunction,
come and fill us with Hidden Gospel-Treasures. Labor not for the Meat which
perishes, John 6.27. But does not this Negative thwart a Positive command, 2
These. 3.10. This we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should
he eat? Does not Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ seem to contradict our Lord
Jesus Christ himself? I answer in the words of a clear Streat' s Dividing of
the Hoof. page 418, 419.
Reconciler of the Scriptures, No; for, To live without a Calling is one Thing,
and to swallow up all Care for Heaven in this Earthly Calling is another.
Labor not for the Meat which perishes.] i. e. Do not lay out your Thoughts,
nor spend your Time and Pains about that Provision alone which is not your
chief Portion, as if your Happiness consisted in the Abundance of the Things
that you possessed: but (it follows, labor) for that Meat which endures unto
Everlasting Life. Thus, he that has prepared his Dinner, has also bid his
Guests, and therefore necessity is laid upon us to go up unto this Feast. There
is a necessity we should partake of the Grace and plenty of the Gospel, because
God has required this at our Hands. It puts a must upon the Invited, and they
cannot in point of Duty refuse or put it off. We must in this be all Servants,
and Ministers of his to do his Pleasure.

2. It is necessary necessitate Medii, as a means of becoming Gospel Guests.
Finis prius intention, posterius executione.
The means are first in Execution, and the end after. There must be a
compliance with the Invitation before we can be called Guests. The Provisions
of the Gospel will be hid, until Men come and see by Faith what the Things are.
Coming, which signifies a Conversion of the whole Man to God, is performed in
the first place, and partaking of the Feast (or a feeding upon the Provisions
of Grace that are made ready for the nourishment of the Soul in it is converted
state) is brought about after. God first brings the Soul to himself, and then
he fills it with Good Things. The Prodigal could not partake of the Fatted
Calf, so long as he was absent from his Father's House; it was therefore
necessary (as a means of receiving it) that he should come away and be with his
Father where he was. I will arise and go to my Father, and say, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven and before Thee, Luke 15.18. But this necessity of coming
as a Means will appear Three ways.

1. It is necessary to come to the Gospel-Entertainment, because all our
Labors cannot purchase Bread. Isa. 55.2, 3. Wherefore do ye spend Money for
that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is Good, and let your Soul delight it
self in Fatness; incline your Ear and come unto me, hear and your Soul shall
live. Here are plainly Two Feasts spoken of in opposition; God's Entertainment
which he provides for Sinners, and Sinner's Entertainment which they provide
for themselves at their own charges; now the Poor Sinner so long as an awakened
Conscience sets him on Works and the Duties of Obedience, but never looks to
Christ, he sweats, he labors, lays down a Price, and pays dear for nothing, he
spends Money for that which is not Bread; all the poor Creature does, or can
possibly reach to, is infinitely short of Christ, he makes a Feast of his
Duties, but when he comes to sit at Table wants Bread to eat. Alas! he must
hearken to another Provider, before he will get supplies; he must come and
taste of God's Bounty, before he will ever fill his Belly; hearken diligently
unto me, incline your Ear, and come. If we come not to this Plenteous Feast of
the Gospel, we may strive and take much Pains, but all our Reward will be Husks
with the Swine, instead of Bread with God's Children. We may stir, we may
strive in a way of outward working, but if it be out of Jesus Christ, we are
Poor and cannot maintain our selves. We may look upon one another, as we read of
Jaoob's Sons, Genesis 42.1.
when there was Corn in Egypt; but if we will live by Bread, we must go for
Food to Joseph. All the Plenty in the Land of Egypt was deposited in Joseph's
Granaries, not a Sack could be filled though it came from his Fathers House in
Canaan, but it must come through Joseph's Hands; v. 25.
then Joseph commanded to fill their Sacks with Corn. So there is a necessity
we should come to the Son of God for Food, because all is lodged with Him, Col.
2.3.
Treasures, Joh. 1.16.
Fullness, while all our Labors will not purchase Bread. Again,

2. It is necessary to secure our Souls from Starving. We perish with Hunger,
if we do not come for Food. We must have Bread to preserve our Lives, and yet
we can have it no where else but here. As our Bodies would starve, if our
necessary Food were gone, so will our Souls, and the Souls of others under our
charge, if we do not take a little Food for the Famine of our Households, to
supply us and them. We must come forth to this Rich, Gospel-Feast, where there
is no want of any Thing (as the old Man that came out of the Field from his
Work at Even, Judge. 19.16. told the wayfaring Levite in the Street of Gibeah,
v. 19. latter part,) if we would not have our selves, and all that is within us
come to want. No other Table has Virtue enough to preserve our Souls, but that
which the Redeemer of our Souls has furnished. No Bread will sustain us, but
the Bread that came down from Heaven, and no Feast but the Gospel-Feast alone.

Why sit we here until we die was the Language of those four Leprous Men that
were ready to perish with Hunger at the entering of the Gate of Samaria, 2 Kings
7.3. last words. They could not live in so Black a Famine as we read
preavailed, Chap. 6.25. where an Asse's Head (in this extremity, perhaps not
common, yet Legally unclean) was sold for fourscore pieces of Silver, i. e. See
Mr. Pool's Engl. Annot. in loc.
If we compute those Pieces by the common Estimation, or the common Shekel,
which was half the value of the Shekel of the Sanctuary, and reckoned at
Fifteen pence, then being multiplied Eighty Times will amount to Five Pound, as
the Price of an Asse's Head in that extraordinary Famine. And (it follows) the
fourth Part of a (h) The Kab answers to our Quart. Dr. Fuller's Pisgah-sight.
p. 399. (mispag'd on the other fide 397).

(...) This contained 24 Eggs, and held proportion with our Quart. Goodwyn.
Moses and Aaron. lib. 6. Heb^. Measures, p. 262.

See also Weymse Hebr. Weights and Measures. Vol. I. p. 136, 137. But

Others think this meafure by Egg-shells must be very uncertain, because of the
Disproportion to be found in Eggs; and therefore are not so exact, to adjust
the measure to our Quart. Says one,

This way of dealing with Eggs in measures, I doubt will make nine measures of
ten prove addle. Lee's Temple of Solomon, page 110.


Kab (which was the least Hebrew-measure) of Dove's Dung; i.e. no more of this
Dung neither for Food, than they say could be contained in six Egg-shells, that
is, the fourth part of once 24. (24 being reckoned the entire measure of the
Kab); and these six Egg-shells of Dung too at no lower rate than five Pieces of
Silver, or, as is estimated according to the value of our English Coins at 6 s.
and 3 d. Well, (this Durum Telum, necessitas) this mighty strait makes these
four Leprous Men resolved to quit their Post in the Gate, and venture out into
the Camp of their very Enemies, to find better Quarters. They had starved, if
they had not sought supplies, or had looked that the Stones of their Gate should
be turned into Bread. Indeed these Distressed Hungry Lepers must be fain to put
it to the issue, as the History relates, v. 4.
whether they should get their Bread upon the Place where they agreed to go
forth. They are not Invited to any Entertainment, but must venture upon their
Enemies Swords to get their Bread with the Peril of their Lives. But lo! Lam.
5.9.
necessity spurred them on. Why sit we here until we die, was Argument enough
to venture any where to live!

Why, so there is the same necessity for our coming to the
Gospel-Entertainment. We die, if we have not this Feast, this Food to keep our
Souls alive! And lo! we are more abundantly encouraged to seek our Bread than
They! These Lepers sought it of Bloody Syrians, we may of a Savior that has
shed his own Blood for us. They of their Enemies, and we of the best Friend we
have. They ventured to the King of Syrta's Camp, we may approach to the King of
Sion's Court. They ventured without inviting, we are bid to come. And shall we
not go? shall we not gird up our Loins and run? 1 Samuel 17.29.
Is there not a Cause? And shall we starve our Souls to indulge our sitting
still? We have nothing left by Nature, no Bread under our Hand to feed us, 1 Samuel 21.4.
and though we are Prodigals that have wasted our first Allowance, we cannot find
our second Keeping in any far Country, or upon the Husks that any Swine do
eat. We must be nourisht in the King's Household, under the Roof of his Loving
Kindness, or we pine, and die in the open Field with Hunger! Oh! woe unto us, we
are undone, if we make not out to our Father! There Is a mighty Famine in the
Land, and we are Strangers in the Earth, Psa. 119.19.
and from below we have neither inward Grace, nor outward open Vision. And is
it not necessary we should come? Shall we slight a Feast of Plenty? Shall we
hear the Calls, shall we smell the Entertainment, shall we see the Provisions
served up before us? And yet shall we hear, shall we see? Shall we do any Thing
but come and taste that the Lord is good? Psa. 34.8.


3. Lastly. It is necessary to come, to maintain the Healthful and Vigorous
Constitution of the Soul, with the nourishment of Grace continually. Coming to
the Gospel Feast is necessary not only to preserve our Life, but to increase
our Strength, which is also one of the Proximate and Immediate Ends of Eating,
according to Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou O Land, when thy Inferior Rulers
and Officers of State. Pemble. Analytical Exposition of Ecclesiastes. p. 333.
Princes eat in Due Season, for Ad Corporis robur and animi vires, ut vivant
and valiant Cartwright. Homil. in Eccles.
Strength, and not for Ad reficiendum, non ad Luxuriam. Mercer.
Drunkenness. As the Tables of the Greatest Men should be spread to no other
end than the Refreshment and Supplies of Nature, so the Table of our Great God
must be furnished, and we partaking of it, as a means of Nourishment and
Increase of Grace. If we would have strength in our Souls, Judge. 16 5
we must come to the Provisions where our great strength lies. When Grace has
put a new, Healthful Constitution into the Soul, it procures a Diet to preserve
that same Blessed Temper. If we would be strong and lively, and wait upon the
Lord to renew our strength, Isa. 40.31.
if we would mount up with Wings as Eagles, if we would run and not be weary,
and walk and not faint in our Journey toward the New Jerusalem, as the Holy
Ghost has promised, and spoken by the Mouth of his Servant Isaiah, Isa. 40.31.
we must come to a Feast that has Healthy Diet in it. It Is by means we obtain
the End. Waiting, running, walking, as the Means, before strength and not
fainting as the End. Would you be strong in the Lord? Ephesians. 6.10.
you must first accept of his Invitation, and partake of strong (that is
Soul-strengthening) meat. This is the way by which you may come to be
strengthened with all might according to his Glorious Power, Col. 1.11. So much
for the Doctrinal Part.

The Last Thing is the Use, IV.
only in some Few Truths we may learn from it.

1. Inf. If we must Come, Oh! what need then of the Spirit of God to bring us!
we need a Real Aid, and a mighty, wise and holy Guide with us. We must have a
Principle of Internal, Spiritual Assistance wrought by the Holy Ghost, first to
enlighten our Ignorance, and then to strengthen our Impotence: we cannot stir,
if the Spirit do not strive with us. Psalm. 143.10. Thy Spirit is Good, lead me
into the Land of uprightness. I must come, Lord, to thy Table, I must see what
House thou keep for me; Da igitur sidum illum ducem, qui non prehendat
tantum manum, sed vires sufficiat, and motum. Rivet. in loc. vol. 2. Joh. 6.63.
Grant me therefore thy Spirit to be my Sure and Faithful Guide to thee, who
will not only take me by the Hand, but afford me sufficient Strength and
Motion, as the Pious and Learned Rivet glosseth it. The Spirit that Quickneth
must give Life and Motion, Legs to the lame, and Feet to walk with them. If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, He that raised
up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by his Spirit
that dwells in you. Romans 8.11. Charnock's Discourses. Vol. 2. p. 1321.
The Spirit must be our Auxiliary upon Earth, as well as Christ our Advocate in
Heaven. As we can never be obedient to the Truth till we come to the God of
Truth that calls us, so we can never come to be thus obedient, till there be an
obeying of the Truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. He may call, he may
command, This is the way, walk ye in it, but we can never run the way of his
Commandments, till He enlarge our Hearts, Psalm. 119.32. Acts 17.28
For it is in him that we live and move, and have our Being Spiritually, as well
as Naturally, both are from him, because all our Springs are in Him. We must
have our motion from him, before we can make any motion to him. A moving
Principle to cause our Pace, or we shall either stand still, or start back, or
turn aside, or tumble down, or stumble in our walk, when we try to come along.

2. Inf. God's Calling and Man's Coming are not the same, but Two Distinct
Things. It Is His Grace, but it is our Work and Duty; He draws, but it is we must
run, Cant. 1.4. Draw we, we will run after thee. The Call is often sent, when
there is no coming seen. Christ often invites, but Men too often refuse. He holds
out a Scepter of Grace, but They remove the Shoulder, and will not stretch out
one Hand to take it. Calling is the Act of God, Coming is the Duty or the Act
of Man in the received strength of God. God's Act in calling often goes alone,
but our's never does so, because it is impossible though God calls of himself,
that we should come alone. These Two then must be distinguished, God's Calling
and Man's Coming; neither must Man deceive himself to think he comes, because
God calls him. For he may be no Guest after God has given, and a Man has had
a Gracious Invitation. The Invitation may be made on God's Part, and yet no
compliance seen on Man's.

3. Inf. There may be also much coming to Ordinances, and little coming unto
God with any Spiritual motion in them. Alas! there be many Foolish Guests, that
follow their own Spirit, and rather come at their own call than God's. They bid
themselves, and so come in the Flesh, but never understand what to make of a
motion in Spirit and in Truth to God. They hear not with Spiritual Distinction
the Voice of the Son of God, but with a Confusion and Disorder the Flesh makes,
and therefore cannot come, but rather from some Forcible external Cause are
brought, without any Life in them. You may be going from the Feast in a
Spiritual Sense, when you are seen to come to it in the Literal. The Heart must
be upright, or you will come all awry in a crooked Line with the workers of
Iniquity, while you appear in these Duties. You know what was said of Ezekiel's
Hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31. They come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit
before me, as my People, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them,
for with their Mouth they show much Love, but their Heart goes after their
Covetousness. Judaei magna frequentia ad Prophetam concurrebant and coram illo
non secus consistebant, quam si animum plane induissent populo Dei dignum. Jun.
in loc.
They carried it well to the Prophet, but very ill to God. They would throng to
their Preacher, but be easily thrust away from God. They stood before the
Prophet as if they had put on the same Ornament of the Mind which the best of
God's Children wear; but yet God saw, their Hypocrisy stood before him naked.
So you may seem to come, when your Heart goes after your Covetousness. You may
come and make such a Dust with the Earth about you, while you put out the Eye
of Faith, that you see not where you are.

4. Inf. If God invites us by the Gospel-Call, other Invitations should be of
less account with us. When the Law of Mercy in the Gospel requires us to come
and eat, shall the Law of Cruelty in our Members be obeyed, that says, Abstain
from Meats? It casts a Disparagement upon the great God, that his Call must be
neglected, while other little calls are minded; that you have an Ear open to
let in the Persuasions (suppose) of a Mortal Man, while you stop it against
your Maker! will thou stay with the Swine, when thou art Invited to the
Sheep-folds to lie down in green Pastures? Can thou raise an Objection
against the Sequel, because the Antecedent is so clear, Arise, He calls thee?
It Is the Voice of a God and not of a Man, of the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh that calls thee, and shall the Voice of a Creature, the Voice of a Dying
Man, or the Voice of a Condemned Malefactor stop thee? Who has hardened
himself against him and has prospered? Job 9.4.

5. Inf. It is an Aggravation of our Trespass against Love and Kindness, to
turn our Backs upon the High-calling of God. This is a Prodigious Evil, though
Men have Presuming Thoughts upon it. This Rebellion (this Refusal to come to
Court when sent for) is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as
Iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.23.

6. Inf. It is such a Sin to stand it out against God's Calls, as God will
severely punish. A neglect of God's Calls will make our own Cries unpitied.
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out
mine Hand, and no Man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and
would none of my Reproof, I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when
your Fear comes. Such as refuse the Lodestone, and are not drawn with Mercy,
shall have a Millstone tied about their Necks that will make them sink for ever.
Such as would not be called shall be cast into Hell.

7. Inf. and last. The Invitation of the Gospel should find in us a suitable
compliance with it. I say a suitable or a meet compliance. As ye have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, (so walk ye to him) so walk ye in him. Col. 2.6. For
instance, the Grace of this Blessed Invitation should make us Gracious under
it. The Freeness of this call should make us ready of our own accord, and not
find, or rather not leave us, like those that are dragged by others to every
good word and work. The Sovereignty of the call should dissolve our Stone, and
bring it unto Christ in Dust and Ashes. The clearness of the Invitation should
leave no dispute about it. The Authority of the Call should meet with no
Denial. The openness of the Thing should make us less ashamed of Christ; we
should have more Boldness in our Profession, when we are bid with such a
Public Invitation. We need not be Timorous or Afraid of what we go about, to
come either by Night with a Nicodemus, or by Day that no Eye should see us. The
Largeness of the Invitation should take hold of us. The Earnestness of the
offer requires us we do not trifle with it. The Solemnity of the Call enjoins
us not to Jest with it. The Sincerity of it requires, that we do not hear a
little, and pray a little, and then go away, and sin much for it. In one word,
the Seasonableness of the Gospelcall requires us while it is yet Day to come.
If God calls us in the Day of Prosperity, we should not stay till the Day of
Adversity to consider it. If in the Day of Health, Peace, Strength or Liberty,
we must not delay till Sickness, Calamity, Weakness and Restraint. If in the
Days of our Youth he makes the Invitation, we must remember our Creator before
the Evil Days come. Eccl. 12.1.
If he calls us in the Day of Life we must not loiter 'till the Night of Death.
To conclude, whenever he calls us in the Day of Grace, while the Spirit breaths
and blows upon us, we must come, least we Quench the Spirit, and provoke him to
blow out our Light, that the Things of our Peace shall be ever hid from us.

That the Gospel is a Feast or a Supper in which all its Provisions are Now
ready.
In the handling of this Proposition there will be only these Three Things to
do. 1. To Open: 2. To Prove; and 3. To Apply it.

The First Thing will be to Open it, I.
and unfold this Present Readiness coucht under the word Now.

There is a Twofold Readiness in the Marriage Supper of the Gospel; the one is
Absolute in the Provider, as all its Provisions are now got, I have finished
the work which thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.4. lat. pt. This has been largely
discoursed already. The other is a Respective Readiness, being a reference unto
Men, as these Provisions are now ready to be had. It is the latter kind of
Gospel-Readiness which I must here speak of. This may be opened under a
Threefold Regard. 1. To Place. 2. To Time. And 3. Opportunity.

1. The Supper of the Gospel is now ready for the Place where the Gospel comes.
In every Nation, Town, Family, where an Evangelical Message arrives, God's
Heralds may proclaim the Supper now ready, Isa. 65.1. I said, behold me, to a
Nation that was not called my Name. It is now ready for this Quarter of the
World, for these Nations, for our own Native Country, for the Inbitants of
this Isle, Isa. 20.6.
for the Town in which we are, or the obscure Villages to which any of us may
belong, Act. 10.35. In every Nation he that fears him, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him; i. e. It does not suppose there can be any
Acceptable Fear of God, or Works of Righteousness in any Nation where the
Gospel was never Preached, for these must be the Fruits and Effects of the
Gospel it self; but the meaning is, in every Nation where the Gospel comes and
produces this Fear, and these works of Righteousness, not finds them
antecedently, there the Gospel is now ready to instate them with all true
Happiness in God's Acceptance. The Supper is now ready for any Place whither
the King sends forth a Message, tho it be in the Hedges and the Highways, Luke
14 23
where poor Sinners are cast out into the open Field. Ezekiel. 16.5


2. The Supper of the Gospel is now ready for the Age or Particular Time of the
World in which the Gospel comes: It is Preached unto the Generation that now
is, and therefore ready for them that are now upon the Stage, and do hear it
from the House tops, Luke 12.3.
or from the Pulpit-Top in our Gospel-Day. The Generation that is come up, and
stands over the Graves of their Ancestors, are acquainted with the Voice of
Preaching, and many Thousands in the World do now live, when God does this.
Behold, Number. 24.23.
the Mysteries of the Gospel are by Preaching now made known. Dark Ages of
Popery, and the Brightest Ages of Judaism saw not what we see. The Light shined
through a Vail to the Church of old, and as for our Pagan Ancestors their Lot was
cast in such a Midnight-Darkness, that neither Sun, Act. 27.20.
nor Moon, nor Stars, nor any Light appeared. But in our Age the People that
sat in darkness, have seen great Light. Math. 4.16
There were in the Apostle's Days, as he takes Notice, Ephesians. 2.7. The Ages to
come that God would look after, that he might show them the Exceeding Riches of
his Grace, in his Kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Ages to come.]
Chrysostomus, Anbrosius, Hieronymus, ea ad futurum seculum referunt. Bodius in
loc.
The Ancients do interpret these Ages of which the Apostle speaks, of that
Eternity of Ages in the Future State which is to follow after the Dissolution
of the World; but others reser the Scope of the Apostle's meaning unto the
after-ages of this World. Dr. Goodwyn thinks Dr. Goodwyn's Works, Vol. 2. pt.
2d. see him from p. 236. to p 248.
the Apostle had both Senses in his Eye, and therefore professes (the Reasons
for both being so cogent) that if one Stream of these Interpretations should be
exclusive of the other, he should hardly know which to prefer. However it be,
it does not exclude a showing forth the Riches of his Grace to us that live so
many Ages since the Apostle's Days; for We now, through Mercy, do find our own
(tho otherwise miserable enough) to be one of those happy, Golden Ages. Our
Gospel now (though Hid to them that are lost) is the Revelation of the Mystery, 2
Cor. 4.3
which was kept secret since the World began, but now is made manifest, -- Romans
16.25, 26. The Apostle also speaks of it to the same purpose elsewhere, Col.
1.26. Even the Mystery which bath been hid from Ages, and from Generations, but
now is made manifest to his Saints. Alas! how many Ages before Christ were
filled up with Generations of Men from whom the Mystery in Christ was hid! Dr.
Burthogg, Causa Dei, p. 195.
All the Light before Christ, was but Moon, or Starlight, designed only for
the Night preceding, (as that famous Apologer cited in the Margent observes in
a Learned Tract.) And it must needs be a Thick Darkness upon the Pagan World,
while the Divine Light did but faintly shine in Goshen. God's own People had
but some Prelibations and Fore-tasts so early, not a full Gospelmeal: Holy Diet
was more sparing, tho they were sed with never so many slain Beasts, both in
the Morning and at Noon; because the Chief Meal in the Day of Grace at the
Supper of our God was not then come. But we under the Gospel may say now ready,
even we of this Age to whom the Gospel is Now come. Job 8.9.
We are but indeed of yesterday upon the Earth, and our Span will reach but a
little way, though it extends most upwards; Luke 1.78.
yet no sooner did the Dayspring from on high visit our Quarters, but God sent
in Provision with it. 1 Samuel 25.8
We come in a Good Day that are born at the Hour of Supper. We are come forth
into this World a little before Night, and just as the Gospel has met us,
reeking in our Pollution, Ezck. 16.6
and lying in our Blood as it passes by, the Grace of it unto us may be dated
now ready. It is ready for poor Dark Families, that have been full of the
Habitations of Cruelty, Psa. 74.20.
and Dark Souls, even now when God springs in with Light, and reformeth the
Times of this Ignorance, which before he winked at, coming now in the Preaching
of the Gospel to command them every where to repent, Acts 17.30. And the Times
of this Ignorance God winked at.] There was a Time when the Nations were in the
Dark, and God took no Notice of them; he (...).
overlookt them, as the Word is, he had not an Eye of Mercy for them, but looked
over their Dark Times to instruct other Ages in the Knowledge of Saving Truth;
so we have a Parallel Testimony given us, Acts 14.16. Who in times past suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways. (...).
In times past he did so, that is, in the Ages and Generations of Men that are
gone, such whom Time has now carried us off a great way from: But God has now
altered the Case in Mercy, and though he did shut his Eyes on Them, and
righteously wink and overlook them, yet his Eyes are not contracted at this
Day, but he opens and graciously fixes them to look full on us. And now
commands all Men every where to repent.] That is, the Times in which the
Gospel comes, are the Times in which a People do receive the Grace of God in
Christ, and therefore God looks to such, Heb. 9.10.
and expects they should be I imes of Reformation. Well, the Gospel is now
ready for you of this Age, when God has taken that which lets out of the
way, be it any obstruction whatsoever, and it comes in the Preaching of it to
you: It Is now ready to give understanding unto the simple, when God perceives
of most of you, that you are ignorant and unlearned Men, and hereby will have
your poor Ignorant Neighbors, and your Carnal Kindred and Acquaintants, who it
may be will not be persuaded to come along with you, take Knowledge that you
have been with Jesus. He sends the Light of the Gospel among you, to acquaint
you with the Things of your Peace, which perhaps you had lived all your Days in
the World (some of you) and never knew till now. It Is now ready to regenerate
and save such of you as have been Dead and Lost until now; the Gospel has been
excellently made known by many a Saint that is now Dead, and now in the Grave,
and yet speaks, whose Testimony agrees with some that are alive and remain,
that now confirm the same Gospel also. You have Great Things that have been
made known in this Age, I speak particularly of this 17th Century since Christ;
whereas our Ancestors in some Ages and Generations past were nursed up
universally in the Darkness of Popery, and again before that in the blackest
Shades of See Verstegan's Antiquities. Chap. 3. from p. 73. to p. 89. (mibi) 8o
Edit. 1673.
Paganism, and never had a Glimpse of the True Light that now shines, or a
Taste of the Supper now ready.

3. The Supper of the Gospel is now ready in regard of the opportunity, or
special season now afforded us. Opportunity is that happy juncture which
Jenkyn, Supplement to the Morning Exercise. page 92. Sect. 7.
one expresses thus, The Spiritual Marketday for the procuring of saving
Provisions for our Souls, upon which we are to live for ever. The original
expresses the opportunity of Time by a Distinct word, 1 Cor. 7.29. We
translate it the Time is short, but the (...).
Greek reads it The opportunity is short; it is (...) not (...). I shall
consider this ((...), this Punctum Temporis, or) present Readiness of the
Gospel, according to the Season, under a Five fold Division.

1. Now ready, while Life now continues, Life is in a continual Lapse, it is a
Thread that slips, and has nothing but a succession of present Moments that
like Points hold it together in continuity; now we have no more properly for
our Season than these instant Points, or Moments: We can say only of Time past,
it was, Punctum est quod vivimus.
of Time to come, it is not; and therefore it remains only that we possess the
Time that now is. Life consequently is a going, and the work of it for our
Souls must be done, can be only done, while Time's a lasting. John 9.4. I must
work the works of him that has sent me, while it is Day, the Night comes,
when no Man can work. The Night of your Departure is at hand, and drawing on
apace in which you can neither eat, nor see to walk, or work! Now (you hear) is
but a Point, and it is always Passing. Life never stands still, the Time is
short if we measure it from one end to the other with our common Span. Alas!
what is Methuselah's Age to Eternity? Genesis 5.27.
And what is Threescore years and Ten to Methuselah's, Psa. 90.10.
and what is to Morrow, that we cannot boast of, Prove. 27.1
to Threescore years and Ten! And yet we have but such a short and uncertain
season of Life to come and receive Mercy in. Mercy (if we refuse it) can but
follow us all the days of our Life, Psa. 23.6.
though often Mercy steps back, and leaves a Sinner to himself sooner, and does
not follow him (I speak of the offers of Saving Mercy) to his Live's end.
However, after Death, if the Time of Life be slipped, Psa. 6.5.
in the Grave there will be no Remembrance of us, the Gospel can be only ready
for us now, before we are like the Slain that lie in the Grave, Psa. 88.5.
whom it remembers no more. Well, but now Life continues, and there is some
capacity of Improvement, some Help and a Possibility of Recovery by the means
of Grace. It is said of him that is joined to all the Living there is Hope,
Eccles. 9.4. We are now through the Merciful Providence and Good Hand of our God,
Living Men; Neh. 2.8.
God has not yet rooted us out of the Land of the Living, Isa. 52.5.
where our Place shall know us no more, Job 7.10.
but we may yet (through Mercy) walk before him in the Light of the Living. Psa.
56.13.
The Angel has not yet Sworn it in our Hearing, even the Messenger of Death by
a Sentence of Death within us, 2 Cor. 1.9. Rev. 10.6.
that Time shall be no longer; but God has spared us to recover strength,
after many a Humbling Visitation that had brought, and once kept us low. He
has raised us, when we were fallen upon a Sickbed, and did not know whether
ever we should come down from that Bed on which we were gone up, but might
surely die. This is therefore the Season unto us who are all here present
before the Lord, Act. 10.33
because Life continues with us, and to us whom he has granted Life and Favor
in a Recovery from Sickness, Job 10.12
and his Visitation that has preserved our Spirit.

2. Now ready, when Grace is now offered. This may be opened in Two Things. 1.
Now, when Crace is offered unto Saints to comfort them that mourn in Sion. 2.
Now, when Grace is offered unto Sinners to bring them in to Christ.

1. These Provisions are Now ready, when Grace is offered unto Saints, to
comfort them that Mourn in Zion. Isa. 61.3.
The Soul that thinks it has had a Repulse, yet shall not like Jordan, now be
driven back; though thou have cried out of a Denial in Months past, Psa. 114.5.
Job 29.2.
yet thou shall not be denied thy Supper, or kept without it Fasting, when
Grace is now offered. We do not only hear of the Kingdom, but if we believe,
Luke 12.32
it is our Father's good pleasure to give us the Kingdom, that we might eat and
drink in it, Luke 22.29, 30. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom.
There is now the offer of a Gift to Saints in whatsoever of Spirituals they may
be profitted withal; Mat. 15.5. Mark 5.43
Christ has commanded that something should be given them, as he did unto Her
that was healed, to eat. Though thou have been afraid, that Christ did frown upon
thy coming heretofore, yet lo! Song 3.9, 10.
now he comes unto the Table in a Chariot Paved with Love, to meet thee! Though
thou have cried under a sorrowful Spirit, he would turn thee out of Doors, yet
lo! now he puts forth his Hand upon the Handles of the Lock, Song. 5.5.
to let thee in presently. This Key of David shall be turned for, Rev. 3.7.
and not against thee to make thee lose thy Supper. Grace is offered, Grace is
now ready for thee; thy Redeemer is entered into the Chambers of his Love upon a
Blessed Feast Day to see thee. When thou have wept in secret, and in solitary
Retirements sighed out thy Case, Christ has heard the voice of thy mourning,
and is still taken with it; he loves the Music that is made by the Organs
which he himself has chosen: see Cantic. 2.14. Oh my Dove, that art in the
Clefts of the Rock, in the secret Places of the Stairs, let me see thy
Countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy Countenance
is comely. The Poor Soul may often be compared to the Sea Durham upon the Place.
Frighted Dove that runs into Holes, instead of flying in at the Windows to
hide it self. Some fierce Temptation perhaps like a Hawk pursues thee, and thou
like a Poor Dove for shelter art scared into a Hole to hide thee, and there
thou lie mourning in secret and durst not venture forth; well, however Grace
is now offered, and though thou can not come home of thy self, Christ has sent
to fetch thee! Thou shall now be guarded to come forth with others that are
made to fly as the Doves to their Windows. Isa. 60.8.
He will not abhor and reject, or cast thee off, but does remember that now is
a Time to embrace. Eccles. 3.5.
Christ listens to the complaint of the Frighted Soul, and is resolved to make
it welcome. Let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; as much as to
say, Come now into my Presence, venture to my Table's side, and see if I do not
make thee welcome! Ask what thou will and it shall be given thee, even double,
to the half of the Kingdom. Est. 5.3.
For Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. latter part.

2. These Provisions in the Gospel are now ready, when Grace is offered unto
Sinners, to bring them now in to Christ. There is a fit opportunity upon the
offer of Mercy for Sinners to be made now welcome to it. Feasts are ready, when
the Guests have an opportunity to go and be made welcome at them; so the Gospel
is then ready, when Sinners may have the Freedom to hear the Doctrines of
Salvation on published; it is Then for Sinners to listen after and lay hold of
some Good Thing tendered by the Lord God of Israel, when they hear the Name of
the Lord proclaimed, even the Name Immanuel, Mat. 1.23.
which is God with us; being proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and
Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, Exodus 34.6. while
he makes all his Goodness pass before us in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Exodus 33.19.
This is an opportunity to be made welcome! So it is in the Preaching and
Proclamations of it. A Sinner may be now accepted at this Blessed
Entertainment, for it is called an Accepted Time, 2 Cor. 6.2. A Time that God
has accepted for Sinners, and a Time in which he accepts also of them. The
Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven are set wide open to receive Sinners now in.
Jesus Christ now opens to let in every Sinner that comes to Him. The Gate of
Mercy shall be locked against none that have been knocking at it to come in.

Oh! how fit is the Present opportunity for Sinners to be made welcome! how
cheerfully, how abundantly might they come and be refresht at the Solemn
Feasts! Ezekiel. 46.9
Oh! how readily is Christ now opening of the Treasures of his Grace and Love,
to welcome Sinners to him! What multitudes might there now step in, while the
Banqueting House is open! Song. 2.4.
Oh! why is it that there is but one of a Family and Two of a Tribe, Jer. 3.14.
when you might with your Houses come in and be welcome to serve the Lord? Why
is it that so Few of you are setting your Faces toward Sion, Chap 50.5
even when Sion's Provisions are now ready? Oh why is the Season now, slighted?
Why is the opportunity, Heb. 3.15.
To Day, if ye will hear his Voice, neglected? Oh! why will you die, Sinners,
when you might close with the Redeemer now, according to the Time of Life? Genesis
18.14
Why will you be Sick, and yet shut the Door against the Physician's entrance
now, when he would come with Grace and Healing Love to save you? Why will you
now be Blind, Rev. 3.18.
when you might have Eye Salve to make you discern every Thing clearly? 2 Samuel
16.17.
Is this your Kindness to your Friend that would make you highly welcome? For
behold now is the Day of Salvation, behold now is the Accepted Time, 2 Cor.
6.2. Never such an opportunity appeared as the Day of Salvation is, and
therefore it is now that there is hope in Israel concerning this Thing, Ezra
10.2. last words. And this shows how the Provisions of the Gospel are ready in
their Season, as there is a fit opportunity for Sinners to be made now welcome
to them. So much for the second Branch of this Readiness now in opportunity,
being now when Grace is offered.

3. Now ready, when Ministers are now urgent. They are now like Phinehas, Numb.
25.11.
zealous for their God, not to slay as He, but to save and present you alive at
Supper. They are loath to see you starved, and so much Victuals ready, and
therefore are earnest in calling out to bring you in to Christ. Their Heart's
Desire and Prayer, Romans 10.1
their Tears and Travel, their Sermons, Study, Aim is, that you may be saved!
Their Language is to Sinners turn again now every one from his evil way, Jer.
25.4, 5. and 35.15. Their Language is to Saints, Oh taste and see! Psalm. 34.8.
They are serious and earnest toward all, Faithful Ministers dare jest with
none. Isa. 53.1.
We press you to believe our report and come, if by any means we may see you
but safe in at Supper. We blow the Trumpet, Ezekiel. 33.3
we ring the Warning Bell, to give you notice of Supper, that the Feast now is
ready.

4. Now ready, when God himself now waits to bestow Mercy on you. It is your
Duty to wait upon God, but such is God's Grace and Condescension that he is
pleased to wait on you. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be
Gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy on
you, Isa. 30.18. He stoops that you may be made the means by which he will
raise his own Name the higher. Rev. 2.21.
He waits, that he may be Gracious.] He gives space to repent, and does not
break up House before the set Time is come. The King waits at the Supper-Hour
to see his Guests in. He has limited a certain Day, Heb. 4.7. And he will stay
his own Time he sets. As he has constituted and set Bounds to a Sacred Day of
rest (as that Place must be understood) which Bounds can never be broken up
without a gross violation of the Morality of the Fourth Commandment; so he
likewise limiteth the Day of his Grace and Patience toward Sinners, and he
will not remove the Bounds he has placed by a Perpetual Decree to fence it.
Jer. 5.22.
He has secretly fixed a waiting-time within his own Breast, and as he now
waits accordingly, so he has fixed a Time, when he will never wait more. If
thou do not come in, Sinner, to this Supper, within the compass of God's
waiting-time, he will not stay a Minute, and beseech or use one word of
entreaty after! 2 Cor. 5.20.
There is now silence in Heaven for the space of half an Hour, Rev. 8.1.
now God seems to be making a Pause upon Mount Ebal, and will read no more
Curses yet, that thou might hear more comfortably and distinctly what is
said upon Mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11.29. Psalm. 24.3.
to encourage thee to ascend into this Hill of the Lord, where the Fat Things
wait upon the Mountain ready, till thou art brought thither. God now looks
through the Pillar of the Cloud to see who comes running by the way of the Plain,
Exodus 14.24. 2 Samuel 18.23. Numb. 35.13. Mat. 7.13. Matthew. 25.10, 11, 12.
to get in at the City of Refuge, and thrust in at the strait Gate to Table,
taking the Kingdom of Heaven by a Holy Violence, now, now, now before the Door
is shut.

5. Now ready, when the Spirit breathes and blows upon us. For the Spirit of
the Lord blows when, as well as the Spirit John 3.8. where it lists. As the
Spirit of God in the first Creation did move upon the Face of the Waters, Genesis
1.2.
or sit and hatch the Creature; so in the new Creation under the Preaching of
the Gospel, the Spirit moves upon the Face of the Waters, or People, who often
in Scripture are compared to Rev. 17.15. Jer. 47.2. Eccl. 11.1. Psalm. 124.4, 5,
etc.
Waters, and forms Gal. 4.19 Romans 6.19.
Christ in them. Now, when Men preach, and the Spirit helps the Infirmity of
our Flesh, the Gospel is then made ready: For it is the Spirit that quickneth,
the Flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6.63. It is a Time of Readiness when God
sends forth the Spirit of his Son, Gal. 4.6.
and proclaims it in your Hearts with a crying at the Table, Abba, Father! 1
Cor. 12.8.9, 10.
yea, when to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit, to another Faith by the same Spirit, to
another Prophecy, to another discerning of Spirits; when the Spirit lifts up
Ordinances and Means above their own Power, when the Spirit speaks expressly
in us, as well as the Language of the Messenger speaks to us, and when we see
by the Blessed Effects of it, Joh. 1.32.
the Spirit of God descending from Heaven, while the Word of the Kingdom comes
in the Demonstration of the Spirit and with Power, 1 Cor. 2.4.
then is the Blessed Season, the opportunity of the Gospel, the special Time of
Supper, the now, when All Things are ready.

It is now when the Spirit breathes and blows upon us. And lo! God now
stretches forth his Hand, the Spirit makes some work in thy Soul that perhaps
thou can now witness, yea, must acknowledge it, this is the Finger of God.
Exodus 8.19.
Why, now then the Provisions are ready for thee, 2 Cor. 2.15
it is now a Savor of Life unto Life to many, and it is now ready to get up Thee
that art Dead while thou live. 1 Timothy 5 6
The Spirit now opens some Eyes that never saw one Morsel of the Bread of Life
before. It reveals Mysteries unto Babes which they never heard till now. Mar.
11.25
God's Word now is Quick, Heb. 4.12.
Nah 2.4.
Rev. 3.4.
and runs like the Lightnings to find out the Few Names in Sardis: it is now
Powerful, though we are weak that use it. Heb. 4.12.
It Is now sharper than a Two-edged Sword, and cuts when we do not see what is
become of it out of our Hands! It was a Dead Letter, it may be, but now a
Quickening Spirit. 1 Cor. 15.45.
Ephesians. 6.17.
The Sword of the Spirit makes its way, when we that handle it cannot make it
enter. Oh! Now God goes forth with the Chariot of Israel, 2 Kings 2.12.
and the Horsemen thereof; he rides among some sturdy Sinners, unhorseth them,
makes them acknowledge that God is in his Ordinances of a Truth, 1 Cor. 14.25.
brings them to the Ground, calls them to his Foot, Isa. 41.2.
when they lie grovelling in the Dust, and goes forth Conquering and to Conquer.
Rev. 6.2.


The Second Thing is to Prove it, II.
that the Gospel is a Feast, or a Supper, with all its Provisions now ready.

1. The Guests of this Supper are now invited to it. calls you to come and Sup
with him. Now, it is a sure sign the Lord has a Supper, as it was once that he
had a Bloody Sacrifice of Destruction, Zeph. 1.7. when he has bid his Guests.
It is now assuredly a Call to a Wedding-Banquet, because the Spirit and the
Bride say Come, Rev. 22.17. There is a Feast, for the Children of the
Bridechamber do not fast so long as they have got the Bridegroom the Lord Jesus
Christ with them. It is ready, and now unquestionably, for the Elder Brother of
the Family and his Servants have invited all the King's Sons, 2 Samuel 13.23.
2 Cor. 6.18
every one of the Children, Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty; i. e. all
who are brought into such a Relation to him, are commanded to sit down as so
many Olive-Plants round about his Table. Psa. 128.3.
This is therefore a Proof that his Provision is now ready for them.

2. The Supper of the Gospel is now ready, it is now in the Evening of the
World Supper-Time. The whole Time of the Gospel Dispensation, if taken by it
self from Christ's first unto his second coming, may be termed as one Entire
Day; and so the Apostle seems to intimate, as To Day, signifies now in the Time
of his Appearance. Charnock. Vol. 2d. p. 1192.
some observe, in that Expression, To Day, if ye will hear his Voice, Heb. 4.9.
But yet if the Gospel-Time be taken in with the other Time that went on before
Christ, then it may be called the Evening of a Day; and in this
joint-consideration I now take it here, as the Apostle also does, 1 Cor. 10.11.
latter part. They are written for our Admonition upon whom the Ends of the
World are come. The Gospel is the last Season, or the utmost Difpensation that
Sinners will ever meet with to make Provisions of Mercy for them. Grace
therefore in this Dispensation is well expressed in the Parable by a Supper; A
Supper is the last Meal, and so is the Gospel the last Thing God has to give
you in the Evening of the World. The Food of these last Times indeed had been
promised early, when God spoke at Morning and at Noon what he would do for his
People before Night, for as the Passover in another sense, so this is a Feast
to be kept at Even; Lev. 23.5.
and now in the Evening of the World he does give us Flesh to eat. Exo. 16.8.


Besides, our Now is the latter part of the Day of God's Patience toward the
World, and of his Provision and Grace toward us; we live still later in the
Evening, Genesis 8.11.
and lo! in the Evening comes a Dove with an Olive Branch to us. We are
Borderers upon Eternity, and are as near that Ocean, Acts 10.6.
as Simon the Tanner that lodged by the Seaside. Now then is our Supper-time;
for as now it is Evening, so the Night comes next: God therefore provideth his
Supper now, because he will have it to be in Season ready for us. Hence is it
that he may say, Now have I brought it to pass, Isa. 37.26.
not as Sennacherib vaunted it in the laying waste defenced Cities into ruinous
Heaps, (no, that was a Now for mischief) but now has he brought it to pass,
Genesis 50.20
to save much People alive, as at this Day; and God has now done it, because
he would not, when we see a Full Congregation, kill this whole Assembly with
Hunger, Exo. 16.3.
as the People in their Murmurings against Moses and Aaron complained unjustly.
Well, God has made ready the Provisions of the Gospel now, because he would
fit them to our Entertainment now at Supper-Time; and therefore they are
Created Now, and not from the Beginning. Isa. 48.7.
God makes Supper ready, and we may say the Hour now is for entertaining us.
When the Age of the World is departed, Isa. 38.12.
Romans 13.12
1 Pet. 4.7.
its Day is far spent, and the End of all things is at hand.

3. Many Guests do now partake already. Feast, because so many eat and drink;
the Supper is ready, because so many sit down. I am the Door, by me if any Man
enter in he shall be saved, and shall go in and out and find pasture, Joh.
10.9. There be many through Grace which have been brought into God's House through
this Door, and set at God's Table. It is not only of our selves in these
Nations, and these Churches, but there are other Sheep also which Christ has,
Joh. 10.16
that are not of this Fold, and these also he has taken Care of, to lodge and
refresh in fat Pastures. The Gospel has not only been profitable to some of
you, but there has been the Fruits of it that appear, through the Blessing of
the Feast-maker, among other Gentiles also. Paul witnesses in his Day, that
the Romans were not the only Gentile-Hearers, who had profited under his
Ministry by the Entertainment, for he rather wishes that They might but reap
as much Benefit by the Gospel, as others had done besides, Romans 1.13: -- that I
might have some Fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles. Other
Gentiles.] Because others had been the Seal of his Apostleship elsewhere, he
tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.2. that ye are so in the Lord; i. e. Partakers
of the Benefits and the Graces of the Gospel as well as you. So that many
Guests do partake, and have partook, and therefore this Supper's ready.

Lastly, After-Delays will prove too late to sup; and therefore it appears now
ready. What will the Provision signify (suppose to us) if we have not it now!
what will a Supper avail, when our Candle is out, and we are gone to Bed! will
the offers of Christ neglected now, become an Advantage when we are gone
hereafter? if Death should clinch our Hands, could we open them in the Grave,
or the Belly of Hell, Jonah 2.2.
to close with Jesus Christ? it is Sup now, Close now with Christ and Welcome,
God now accepts thy Works; but there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
nor Wisdom in the Grave whither thou go, Eccles. 9.10. There will be no
feeding for Sinners upon Dainties, Psa. 49.14.
when Death shall feed on Them. In a word, no rising from their Beds, when they
lie down and sleep in the Dust of the Earth, Dan. 12.2.
to come in again to Supper!

The Third and last Thing will be to Apply it, III.
and the uses will be only Two. 1. Of Information to instruct, and 2. Of
Exhortation to persuade.

The First Use is of Information in these Thirteen following Points. I.
If the Gospel is a Feast in which all its Provisions are now ready. Then

1. We may learn of the Times and Seasons that the Father has put them in his
own Power. 1 Ins.
This is evidently cleared in those words of Christ wherewith he checked his
Disciple's Curiosity, Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the Times and the
Seasons which the Father has put in his own Power. The Present Readiness of
this Supper argues, that the fixing and ordering of Times and Seasons for the
Dispensing of Grace to Sinners, is solely in the Hands of God, and at his
Sovereign Disposal. It was an Act of Sovereignty to prepare the Gospel, and
make it ready in the Time that now is. As our Times are in Goa's Hand, Psalm.
31.15
so are all our Mercies. It was decreed in his Sovereign Purpose, and
foreordained according to the Good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5.
Prove. 16.33.
Eccles. 3.1
what Blessings of Grace should be the Lot to be cast into our Lap in the
latter Ages. As there is a Time to every Purpose, and to every Thing a Season,
so God is the Judge to dispose of it, and order every Thing in it. If the
Master of the Feast had ordered it, his Supper had been ready before such a
Time of Day, and he could have gotten courser Fare at Night. He that spreads
the Morning upon the Mountains could have gotten up the Provisions early, even
at the First break of Day, and at that Breakfast of the Promise made in the
Garden of Eden to our First Parents, before he drove out the Man. Genesis 3.15.24.
But he was Sovereign, and would stay to bring in this till Supper.

2. We may learn from this now, 2 Inf.
in the Text, that God finds out some special Season for the Things of our
Peace, when he deals in Mercy with us. There is a Peculiar Day of Grace, nay
sometimes a Particular Hour of that Day more than ordinary; being a season more
highly valuable than any time that we have besides in General. Our Gain or Loss
of the Season proves the Gain or Loss of all for ever. Thus it is hinted of
Jerusalem to the same purpose by our Blessed Lord, Luke 19.42. Saying, If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day the things which belong unto
thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes. Thou Jerusalem in time to come
may remember that thou had once a Day of Grace offered! Once thou mighst
have sound Mercy, but now thou have lost thy Season! There was a Particular
time, an express Day of Grace in which Christ Preached up the Provisions of a
Gospel Entertainment, a Day in which they were brought even to Jerusalem now
ready. Christ tells them the Happy Minute which the Men of Judah and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem might once have closed with. Isa. 5.3.
He had a special Season of showing Mercy, and offering the Terms of Salvation
among the Jews, a Season-day, a Day of a choicer opportunity than any of their
Time had been before, or was likely in that Generation to prove again. The Lord
was pleased also thus to pitch upon a Particular, special Season under the Old
Testament to bring Glad-tydings of Good Things to Judah and Jerusalem by the
Prophet, Romans 10.15.
Isa. 1.18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your Sins
be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool: As much as to say, I am now willing for your good, if
you can but hit the Season, and let us now argue the Thing together. And
likewise afterward in the same Prophecy, Isa. 40.2.
when God speaks comfortably to Jerusalem, he takes notice of it as a special
Season, and expresses it as an extraordinary, particular time of his Dealing
thus with her, Isa. 44.1. Yet now hear, O Jacob my Servant, and Ifrael whom I
have chosen: Although God had been otherwise dealing with them for their Sins, as
may be gathered from sundry passages in the former Chapter, yet he Records it
as a special time in which he would change his Dealings with them, Yet now
hear, O Jacob, my Servant. When God has shown Mercy either to Saints or
Sinners, to bring in one, or eminently build up the other, he has taken a
Peculiar Time that may be styled their Day of special opportunity.

And as we have heard of it in old Time, even so it is now, God is wont to come
in still with the Provisions of this Gospel. Supper, Peace, Pardon,
Reconciliation to himself in the Blood of Christ, and lay the Foundation of a
Saving Work of Grace upon the Heart of a Sinner in some special Season, not
indifferently upon any common Time. He does it when the Particulars of the
Feast in the Provisions of Gospel Grace may be said to be even now upon a
Feast Day ready. The Gospel must in some present Day affect, and work a change
in Men. The Provisions that have now of a long time been ready to relieve one,
and wrought also effectually according to the working of his mighty Power, even
to Salvation upon some of you, Ephesians. 1.19.
may not be accompanied with the Arm of the Lord till now upon others found
among you. Isa. 53.1.
One may have met with it as a special Season formerly, and have been provoked
by the Love of God to be ready (for a close with the Gospel) a year ago, 2 Cor.
9.2.
or, it may be, many years since, whereas another may not have found it to be a
Time of Love till lately, or a Time of Love till now. God meets with some of
his Elect under one subject of Grace, and brings them in sooner to Jesus
Christ; then he sends out under another subject, or another Sermon, or another
Preacher with the Invitations and Proposals of Grace again, and makes new ones
come in as Guests, that his House may be filled with them. He Will run over the
Olive, and turn up the Branches of his Vine again, to meet with new Clusters.
And therefore he comes again and calls them, though they have been without
Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no Hope and without God in
the World, it may be to the sixth, Matthew. 20.5, 6.
the ninth, the eleventh Hours, till it is almost Bed time with them. If you
have not heard of the Gospel in Power, Eccl. 12.5. Luke 1.18
until the Almond-Tree flourish, and till you have been well stricken in years,
and gray hairs are here and there upon you, Hos. 7.9.
yet if you have the Gospel at last, and it calls upon you to bring forth the
Fruits of it in Old Age, Psalm. 92.14
this is a Season in which God is dealing with you; and though of Ancient Times
you have not heard it, Isa. 37.26.
yet even now the Provisions are ready for you that are old and grey-headed.
Psalm. 71.18
Thus God finds out a special Season, and undertakes not the work at any common
time in General, to deal with Poor Sinners in.

3. God expects there should be a closing with his Calls upon special Seasons.
3 Inf.
When God provideth our Summer, and brings a Harvest, he expects we should be
as wise as the Ant, to lay up against Winter, which provideth her Meat in the
Summer, and gathers her Food in the Harvest, Prove. 6.8. Solomon as Arthur
Jackson. Vol. 3d. in loc.
one observes upon the sixth Verse, had put up, as it were into the Pulpit,
this little despicable Creature, to instruct Brutish Men; go to the Ant, thou
Sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. For the Ants are a People not strong,
yet they prepare their Meat in the Summer, Prove. 30.25. That Creature (the Ant)
is so Provident, she will not slip the time of preparing Food. The Famous
Cartwright that confuted the Jesuits of Rhemes in their Glosses upon the New
Testament, thus Comments upon her Industry. Formica quasi Hyemis praescia
aestate paret victum suum cum per a^ris serenitatem, and coeli clementiam,
perque viarum planitiem and munditiem justum onus comportare possit. Tho.
Cartwright in Pro^erbia Solom. cap. 6. v. 8 v. 97
The Ant, (says he) as if she foresaw an Approaching Winter gets her Provision
in the calm Summer, when the Air is mild and gentle, and the ways smooth and
clean to carry her Burden in. Sure the Lord takes it very ill at the Hands of
Men, when poor Insects on the Ground, and Fowls of the Air take more notice of
their Appointed Times than we. Jer. 8.7. Yea, the Stork in the Heaven knows
her Appointed Times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe
the Time of their coming, but my People know not the Judgment of the Lord.
Birds will rise up in judgment with the Men of this Generation and condemn it,
Mat. 12 42
because they are upon the Wing before their Season flees. God expects our
close. Alas! when he has been trying all things in kind, measure, order, and
makes Providence as well as Ordinances ready for our Good, he looks that we
should take notice of his Dealings, and comply with him in them. There is a
Particular now which makes God offended with us more than ordinary, when we
neglect and slight it; because there are special Tokens and Marks of his Grace
upon it, and these in a special manner do require us to improve and accept
thereof.

4. When God calls there is a Harmony, 4 Inf.
and a special Loveliness in our Seasonable complying with it. Our Duty like
every Work and Event of Providence is Beautiful in his Time. Eccl. 3.11
There is some Particular Time in which we may be called to obey the Will of
God, and when Obedience carries more than a common Loveliness in the Face of
it. We may see it exemplified in that great and extraordinary pattern of
Obedience, the Faith of Abraham, Genesis 22.2. Take now thy Son, thine only Son
Isaac whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moriah, and offer him
there for a Burnt-Offering upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee
off. Go Abraham, hearken to my Voice, and obey the Commandment now; Then God
tries him, and Then obedience and a compliance with the Call of God is
Beautiful.

In like manner as to us, when the Gospel-command says, Take now, Sinner, thy
Darling, thy Beloved Offspring, the Lust of thy Constitution, or some Peculiar
Bosom-sin, Mat. 5.29, 30.
the Dalilah whom thou love; Cut off a Right Hand, pluck out a Right Eye, and
now cast it from thee; accept of my Son Jesus, and let go thy Son that serves
thee; come to my Feast, and take what I offer thee, now I am come and have set
out all before thee. Lo! now God calls, and accordingly the Sinner's compliance
now would prove so Beautiful the very Angels of God would joy to see it, Luke
16.7. -- joy shall be in Heaven over one Sinner that repents. When there is
such a Time to be Born, Eccles. 3.2.
and of obedience here on Earth, v. 4.
it is a Time to laugh, and a cause of Mirth in Heaven.

Furthermore, There is a special Loveliness in complying seasonably with the
Call of God under Afflictions: Job 36.10
If God takes off thine Ear from the Word, and bores it with an Awl of
Discipline, now is a Time to hearken. David clings under the Rod, and complies
when chastened, he takes notice of the Whipping Post, Job 33.11
and God's Correction, while he puts his Feet in the Stocks, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy Word. As if he
had said, I once slighted and contemned my Father's Counsels, but since he has
made his Scourge ready, now I have complied more with him. Well, our compliance
with God is Beautiful, or our obedience to his Commands, whether he calls, or
chides us in to Supper.

5. If this Feast be now ready, it is sad, 5 Int.
that Sinners should be now unprovided. That Supper should be ready for them,
but they not ready for Supper, all things in a Posture fit for them, but they
in a careless, unprovided state just fit for nothing. A want of Readiness has
produced Fatal and sad Effects. The high Places were not taken away in the
Reign of Jehoshaphat over Judah, because the People had not prepared their
Hearts unto the God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 20.33. They were ready for any
but the Provisions that God had made for them, and were wholly unprovided to
meddle with any Reformation. The Scripture condemns an unready Servant, Luke
12.47. The Servant that prepared not himself -- shall be beaten with many
stripes: Prepared not] i. e. He who was unprovided for God's work when it lay
before him, and not ready to comply with his Master's Will, such a Servant
shall feel his Master's Blows. The Charge therefore, and the Counsel which
Jesus Christ gave unto his Disciples, was this, Therefore be ye also ready,
Matthew. 24.44. And be ye therefore ready also, Luke 12.40. But now it is sad,
when the Gospel is made ready, Gal. 2.15.
and Sinners of the Gentiles are yet unready for it. Behold (says Christ) I
stand at the Door, Rev. 3.20.
and knock; but how many obstinate, resolved Sinners that are going on still in
their Trespusses do keep a Hand upon the Latch, Psalm. 68.21
while he knocks, and they will not open to him! Psalm. 24.7, 9, 10.
They refuse to let in the King of Glory, though he knocks to come in and bring
them to a Banquet of Love prepared! God is ready with his Son, Christ is ready
with himself, yea, the Holy Spirit and the Gospel with the Faithful Preachers
of it (These) are all now ready, and yet how many wretched Hearers that are yet
in their Sins are not ready for them! Oh! it is sad, that when God calls away to
Supper, Men should choose rather to play than to come in! Matthew. 11.16, 17. 1
Cor. 13.11.
to be like Children playing in the Markets, rather than put away Childish
Things, and come in to the Provisions that have been purchased at a Dear Market
for them! It is sad, to be slothful in Business, when we should be fervent in
our Spirits, Romans 12.11.
serving the Lord! Ah! how unworthy is their Carriage, that when all is now
ready, Supper served in, Grace offered to pardon, cleanse, save them, yet they
will stand off, and have neither Hearts nor Stomachs to it! it is a high piece
of Ingratitude, when Sinners are not ready to embrace the Gospel, let the cause
of their unreadiness be as plausible and specious, as a negligent Hand, or an
unbelieving Heart can make it! it is sad, when Men will keep their Hands too
dirty to dip them in the Dish with Christ! Mat. 26.23 Luke 10.40. Chap. 22.27.
that they will be cumbred about much serving, and will rather run up and down
upon any thing among them that serve, than sit down among them that sit at Meat!

6. Again, it is still worse, 6 Ins.
when Men shall even now degenerate from what they have once been! That Men by
a slight and temporary Profession should once pretend to be Guests, and yet
quickly after (it may be) downright Apostates, at least wretched Backsliders,
and Strangers to Grace and Holiness! what a Horrible Revolt from an open
countenancing of the ways of God to a visible Enmity, or at least, a secret
Hatred of them! Once Zealous in Profession, now as hot, if it lay in their
Power, to stir up Persecution! Sometime outwardly reconciled, now again
alienated! A sad reverse of the state of the Colossians and all true Believers!
Col. 1.21.
Oh! how sad was the degenerate state of Jerusalem, when the Prophet describes
it, Isa. 1.21. How is the Faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of
Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but Now Murderers? And what? is it thus
with any of you that have read, heard, and professed the Doctrine of the Grace
of God? Are you now degenerate, now worse than ever? What Apprehensions have
you of this Gospel now ready? Could you once rise up in a Readiness for
Communion with them that dare not forsake the Assembling of themselves
together, Heb. 10.25.
to be joined with such as do understand and seek God? And can you now sit down
in a contented slothfulness at home, as if you were shut up in Plenty, and had
all things by you? Could you once set upon the Practice of an outward
Reformation, and yet when sanctifying Grace is now ready for you, are you
fallen into your old course again? Don't you need to be mourned over, that you
should return with the Dog to your Vomit, and with the Sow that was washed to
your wallowing in the Mire again? 2 Pet. 2.22. Did you once pretend to hate and
rebuke them that regard Lying? And what? Are you now upon every slight
occasion, accustomed to utter Lies? (though lying Lips are an Abomination to the
Lord of Truth.) Prove. 12.22.
Did you once pretend a Regard to the Commandment, Swear not? Jam. 5.12.
And yet even now you can ordinarily Swear by the Greater, Heb. 6.16.
and perhaps mock at the Tenderness of a Neighbor that fears an Oath,
Eccles. 9.2
and will tell you that even for Swearing the Land mourns! Jer. 23.10.
Were you once convinced that you took up a Reproach against the Lord, when you
profaned his Ordinances, despised his Sabbaths, trampled upon his Gospel,
Blasphemed his Reverend and Holy Name? Psalm. 111.9
And are you now as loose and extravagant, as openly wicked, it may be Debaucht
or Profane, and more than ever? Did you not once tell Men by your Profession,
that the Lord was the Portion of your Cup, Psalm. 16.5.
and yet can you drink off the Cup of your Abominations, Rev. 17.4. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
to add Drunkenness to Thirst? Oh! it is sad, that you should have professed
Righteousness and Purity, but return again to Uncleanness, and remain filthy
still! Rev. 22.11
It Is sad, that you should have sat under the Preaching of the Gospel which
has been made and brought in now ready, and yet be hardened any of you by the
Deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.13.
till you are now worse than ever!

7. It will now make your next Sins the Greater. 7 Inf.
Present Acts of Grace will aggravate future Acts of Sin. This Days Provision,
if refused, will increase your to Morrow's Provocation. You will presently heap
up wrath, if you neglect the Treasures of Mercy longer. If you are not led to
Repentance by a Savior now ready, Romans 2.4.
you will be more greedy to fill up your Sins always. 1 These. 2.16.
If the Gospel be a Supper now ready, if all the Blessings of the Kingdom of
Grace are now prepared, if Heaven it self be offered, and Everlasting Glory
promised and set before us, and yet Sinners will not regard the offers of
Salvation in the Day of Grace, Romans 8.31.
what shall we then say to these things, but as the Prophet does, Jer. 14.10.
latter part. That the Lord will now remember their Iniquity? and that now also
will he give Sentence against them? Jer. 4.12. latter part. The Sin is the
greater, because a rejection of Mercy and Grace in the very Season of it. It is
the sign of a more Rebellious and Revolting Heart, if we do not now fear the
Lord our God. If Men will not reform, nor now turn and live, why then assuredly
now shall they be found faulty, Hos. 10.2. middle clause. i. e. Now God will
look upon their Sin more than he has been wont to do in time past. You might
once perhaps have had a covering to have wrapped up and concealed your neglects
of God before, but now you are made naked to your shame, Exodus 32.25.
and have no cloak for your Sin, and therefore now is the Judgment of this
World, Joh. 15.22 8 Inf.
John 12.31.

8. It is a mistake of corrupt Flesh and Blood to look back upon the Days of
Ignorance, Vanity and Sin, and yet say the former Days were better than these.
Alas! What were those Days in which we all had our Conversations in Times past!
the Apostle makes our Births which we brought forth in such a Day Monsters!
Ephesians. 2.3. -- fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind. Was it better
in our Carnal Security to have Fellowship with Devils, than now at a Table to
sit in Communion with God? Was our Morality better, when we only made clean the
outside of the Cup and Platter, than since we have been at a Feast which must
have Vessels clean within? Shall there be any that dippeth his Hand in the
Dish, count it better to run back from Christ, and be such a Judas to betray
him? Are the Days of Darkness better than those when the Sun shines from
Heaven? and better than the shine of God's Face at Supper? Dare any Soul that
has sat in the King's Hall, look back into the Devil's Kitchen, and say then
it was better with me than now? Corruption would fain break loose, it loves not
to sit so long as Grace delights to be at Supper. It is a Torment to the Flesh,
so far as unmortify'd, to keep in God's Presence. Flesh and Blood savours not
the Dainties that came down from Heaven, and it would fain return back to be as
in Days of Vanity, and as in Months past again. But surely, if we should
hearken to these complainings in our Streets, Psalm. 144.14.
and say, Wherefore are the former Days better than these? we should (in the
worst sense) not wisely enquire concerning this, Eccles. 7.10. The Flesh will
be ready to object, we were not once put so hard, as now, to it; we need not
once have gone so far, or took so much Pains to hear, and then have had our
Faults, or every Miscarriage dealt so hardly with. We were once as Merry in our
Carriage, as Light at Heart, and free from the Burdens Religion lays upon us,
as our Neighbors that do but reproach us for being Righteous overmuch. Eccl.
7.16.
How is it that we are grown Melancholy and Heavy, and the Case now altered
with us? Come, let us return, Number. 14.4
let us make a Captain and go back, let us resolve to lay aside our Profession,
and it will go as well of our side yet again as ever.

This is exactly such a kind of Revolting Spirit as fell among the Jews, when
they cast off God, and embraced Idols, and when instead of worshipping the Sun
of Righteousness, they adored the Image of the Moon, Jer. 44.16, 17. As for the
Word that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee; but we will certainly do whatsoever Thing goes forth out of our own
Mouth, to Burn Incense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out
Drink Offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings and
our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of Jerusalem: For then
had we plenty of Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. They would rather
make Cakes to worship the Devil than eat of the Bread of Life! v. 19.
Sirs, if you meet with any thing that is grievous to be born, and think the
way to mend it, will be now to turn from the Holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21
yet know for a certainty, Numb. 32.23.
that your Sin will find you out. It will be a base increase of your Victuals,
if you either rob (by your own withdrawing) or pollute (by unhallowed
Approaches) the Table of the Lord, Mal. 1.12.
in Hopes it may fare the better with you. It will be a sad mending the Case,
to choose your own ways for the Inconveniences which you think you find in God's.

9. If this Feast be now ready, 9 Inf.
then now God makes amends for all the Discouragements and Inconveniences you
ever did, or do meet with, to enjoy the Means of Grace. Peradventure, thou have
sometimes found much ado with Men to break through all thy way to God. Thou have
met with Family-Discouragements, Reproaches at home, or Scoffs abroad; thou
have been in Journeyings often, in Fastings, Watchings, 2 Cor. 11.26.
Temptations to enjoy Christ at Supper; any thing, Psalm. 66.12
we went through Fire and through Water, if it might but conduce to come any ways
at Bread. Well, you shall now find the Gospel will become a Double Portion to
you. You that have come to the Provisions of the Feast in weakness, 1 Cor. 2.3
Neh. 8.10.
the Joy of the Lord shall be your strength. The Bread of God shall be now the
sweeter, as you have eaten the Bread of Affliction; Deuteronomy. 16.3 Cant. 7.9. Psalm.
102.9
and the taste of his Love like the best Wine, since you have mingled your
Drink with weeping. So that a Man shall say, Verily there is a Reward for the
Righteous, Psalm. 58.11. A Man] perhaps, a Carnal Man that sees how God does
bear thee out; or the Man, thine Enemy, shall be forced to acknowledge, that
surely, John 4.32.
if thou had not Meat to eat which others know not of, thou could never
break through such Discouragement, or get out to a Meal prepared so far from
home. And blessed be God which has not turned away my Prayer, nor his Mercy
from me, Psalm. 66.20. It is a great Encouragement to wait upon God, when he
will give it in to your own Experience, that in keeping his Commandments there
is great Reward, Psalm. 19.11. You come it may be diverse of you from far, Mark
8.3.
to come in and Sup with Him, but nevertheless you have your Reward, Matthew. 6.5
if you find that God who invited you, has been nigh and not afar off. You are
wet it may be sometimes, or cold, or chid, some of you, when you are got home.
Perhaps some in the Family will rebuke you for coming hither, Mark 10.13.
as the Disciples in another Case did the People when they brought in Children
to Jesus Christ; well, no matter, there is enough in the Entertainment to make
amends for all. If God Rains down Mannah upon your Souls, he makes amends, though
he does not command the Clouds in your return to rain no Rain upon you. Isa.
5.6. 1 Pet. 1.2. Job 14.8.
The sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus will recompense your being wet with the
showers of the Mountains; ay, the sprinkling it upon your Souls, will make
amends, though your Bodies may a little, like Nebuchadnezzar's, Dan. 4.15.
be wet with the Dews of Heaven. The Love of Christ when he has brought you
into his Banqueting House will warm you, Song. 2.4.
and make amends while you return cold home. Weather shall not chill your
Affections, if they are strongly bent for Him, as it is wont, when the Love of
many shall wax cold. Mat. 24.12
Again, Jer. 15.15.
if Christ whispers Peace into your Souls, you will not think the worse of him
at a Banquet, though for his sake you have suffered Rebuke, and the Reproaches of
Christ have fallen upon you. Heb. 11.26.
It will support you, though you hear Grievous Things spoken proudly and
contemptuously against the Righteous. Psalm. 31.18
In a word, if you have chosen the way of Peace, Psalm. 119.30.
you are provided with an Entertainment that shall recompense the strife of
Tongues. Psalm. 31.20


10. Your Hunger and Thirst, 10 Inf.
your Appetite to this Feast is now come in Season. You have more than Meats
for the Belly, 1 Cor. 6.13
and you could not hunger at a better Time than now. Blessed are ye that hunger
now, for ye shall be filled, Luke 6.21. God now will have you to be no more
consumed with Hunger; Ezekiel. 34.29. Lam. 2.19.
you shall not faint for Hunger in the Top of every Street. You shall not
Thirst, and yet now go without a Draught from the Water of the Well of
Bethlehem. 2 Samuel 23.15.
Jesus Christ is provided for your Entertainment, and you shall now have Meat
and Drink both. It shall not be unto you now, as was threatened, Isa. 20.8. Even
as when a Hungry Man Dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh, and behold
his Soul is empty; or as when a Thirsty Man Dreameth, and behold he drinks,
but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his Soul has Appetite. I say, it
shall not be so to any who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
because their Appetite is come when the Provisions of God are now ready.
Blessed is the condition of such as these, Job 22.7. Chap. 24.10.
for he has not withholden Bread, or taken away the Sheaf from the Hungry: He
has pitied us in Hunger and in Thirst, and now at once can supply our Fastings
often, 2 Cor. 11.27. John 19.24, 28.
and that the Scripture might be fulfilled, he has prepared his Dainties
against our Appetite, and made them now ready. What a Blessed Journey do we
make, when we come with an Appetite to Jesus Christ! and get to his House,
while his Doors are set open! and sit at his Table, Mat. 22.4.
when his Oxen and Fatlings are killed, and spread now in Plenty on it! Is it
not a Blessed Thing to come and find what we want of Him? Oh! Happy is the
People that is in such a Case! Psalm. 144.15.
Happy is the People whose Soul thirsts after the Benefits of Christ as a Dry
and Thirsty Land; Psalm. 143.6
because now Christ takes up the Cup of Salvation, and drinks to such as these
in it.

11. Now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed. 11 Ins.
This is the Testimony that is given Romans 13.11. our Salvation, that is, our
Eternal Salvation; we were saved Spiritually, when we were by Faith united to a
Savior; we shall be saved Eternally, when we are with him, where he is, to
behold his Glory. Joh. 17.24
Now that other Supper (in the Presence of Christ immediately) is approaching
nearer, than when we sat down first to this. We have our Table now spread with
Grace, what can we have next but the Provisions of Glory in the Highest? Luke
2.14 Isa. 25.6.
When the Sun Sets upon this Mountain, it will be Risen upon the Saints in the
Heights of Zion. Jer. 31.12.
It is but a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. The Saints do hear that now is their Suppertime, it is not
long after before they shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds,
(in the Bosom of Jesus Christ) each one walking in his uprightness. Isa. 57.2.


12. Time should now be of a more Precious Esteem with us. 12 Inf.
We had need be wise, and since we have lost so much, lay out our utmost to
redeem the Time. Ephesians. 5.16.
Now is a Golden space of opportunity, and it is pity to throw the Filings of
this Gold among the common Heap of Dust. We may almost grudge at the occasions
of this Life that come in of every side, like so many little Thieves, and steal
Handfuls of Time away. We have Robbers by Day, Eating, Drinking, Conversing,
Visiting, being Visited, and a Great Robber by Night that steals away our Time,
when we are insensible of his Approaches. Supper is ready, but we have almost
every Thing that lets us; we had need then improve the Remainder of an allotted
space to sit down at our Gospel-Meal, and Sup.

13. Lastly. 13 Inf.
You that have supt may now go to Bed with Comfort. You are now at Table, but
if God calls any of you to depart out of this World, John 13.1
you need not stay for your Fellows that shall tarry, and make an end after. If
you are ripe for Glory, you may leave them behind you yet to grow in Grace. 2
Pet. 3.18
When it is late, and thou art tired, perhaps thy Bones would gladly be at
rest, Psalm. 116.17. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee. So Luke 2.29, 30 Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in Peace, according to thy Word: For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.
Simeon had Supt, and therefore thought it a Blessed Season now to go to Bed. So
after thou have Supt, and done thy work, a Bed will do well. When thou have
made an end of Supper, thou art here fit to go to thy Heavenly Sabbath's rest.

The Second use of Exhortation, II.
to persuade and entreat Sinners not to forsake their own Mercies. Jonah 2.8.
The substance of the Exhortation Romans 10.6.
speaks on this wise, that seeing the Provisions of the Gospel are now ready,
we would all indeed labor after more Readiness in our selves to receive our
Portion of Meat in due Season. Luke 12.42
That it may become the more useful unto us, I shall manage it under these two
Parts. 1. Backing it with Motives. 2. Urging Counsel.

First, As to Motives I shall only use these Three Considerations.

1. The Day of our Entertainment is now sliding over. We may observe by what
Degrees our shadow goes down. Isa. 38.8.
Woe unto us for the Day goes away, for the shadows of the Evening are
stretched out, Jer. 6.4. latter part. Our Time spends, our Day wastes apace,
the shadows are long, and if we are not quick, we must be fain to cut our Work
the shorter: The shadows of the Evening are stretched out, as you know the
shadows are longest, when the Sun is lowest. The Supper-Hour is expiring, woe
unto us; the end of all Flesh is at hand! we are arrived almost in our Day to
the shuting in of the Evening, God seems, as to the state of the World, to be
just now lighting up his Dr. Lightfoot's Works. Harmony of the New Testament.
Fol. vol. 1. p. 18.
Sabbath-candle, that we may now see to end Supper by a little Light he lends
us, before he turns all into the shadow of Death, and make it gross Darknesi,
Jer. 13.16. We must by all means keep this Feast, as the Apostle said of his
keeping the Passover in Jerusalem, Acts 18.21
and we can never keep it but in this our Day, while the Offers and Provision
of the Gospel are now tendered to us. A Feast that is now ready may be quickly
disposed of out of our Reach. Mal. 4.2.
The Sun of Righteousness has not stood still throughout all our Day of Grace,
no more than that other Sun in the Firmament is used to stay and lengthen out
the common Days of Nature, though yet we read upon Two extraordinary occasions of
a miraculous prolonging the Day, between the rising of the Sun and the going
down of the same. One instance is, Psalm. 50.1.113.3. Josh. 10.13.
when the Sun stood still in the days of Joshua, and the other is, Isa. 38.8.
when the Sun returned ten Degrees backward, upon the Dial of Ahaz, by which
Degrees it had gone down, in the days of Hezekiah: But the day of Grace, like
our stated common days, is wearing off continually, that nothing can slacken
the motions of it, or bring it one Degree backwards, to keep it a moment longer
from the Period to which it hastens. The Day of Grace wastes, though the offers
of Grace abound. And as the day of Salvation spends, so it lays a greater
necessity and duty on us, to look after the work of Salvation, before the
offers of the Thing come to a perpetual End. Psalm. 9.6.
He that is now present to entertain us, is not afar off to judge us, if we
refuse to be fed before our Supper's over; for behold the Judge stands before
the door, Jam. 5.9. latter part. He is ready to step in and examine it, whether
we have Grace, and eaten of the Bread of God, or no.

Consider, the Table shall not be always furnished, or the Cloth continue after
Supper for any succeeding Entertainment, to treat one Sinner here. God has set
the Provisions of Grace forth, that to day we might come and take our Fill of
Love; Prove. 7.18.
but if we will not obey, while the Lord shall command his Loving Kindness,
Psalm. 42.8.
in the (Remnant of the) Daytime, (in the Evening-Time for us) he will not
offer us Kindness a Moment beyond the Limits of the day he sets us. If there be
not an Improvement of this present passing Season, there will be no prolonging
it to endure beyond our Supper-Time. Time must be observed, and will not wait
on us, and the Dews of Grace are like the Showers upon the Grass that tarry not
for Man, nor waits for the Sons of Men, Mic. 5.7. That is, it is their
inseparable Property to attend the Appointments of God, and not our own
Pleasure. And these Dews are sliding off in the very Moments while they are
distilling from Heaven on us, they are flying from us faster than (it may be)
they are now filling of us. We may say of the Good Day of our Entertainment, as
the Prophet does of the Great Day of the Lord, Zeph. 1.14. It is near, (even
the end of it is near) and hastes greatly. Much of your Day is spent already,
and under every Offer and Sermon of the Grace of God you have still less of
your day to come! Alas! it slides so fast, and has been sliding off so long,
that you have but a little while more to partake of Grace in; and though you may
yet see to eat while the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, yet, Jer.
6.4.
as to your own Being in this World, God will not after so long a Summer's Day
light up a Candle in the Grave, Nemo finitis nundinis exercet mercaturam.
to lengthen out your opportunity, when Day light's shut in.

2. What if it should be now the Last Day of the Feast, as it was when Jesus
stood and cried! The Feast of Tabernacles among the Jews did not expire sooner,
nor endure longer than the space of Seven Days, according to the Commandment,
Lev. 23.24. And on this last Day of the Feast Jesus stood and cried, saying, If
any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. John 7.37. i. e. If any Man
wants special, Rich Grace to supply all his need, if he desires to be
entertained with Righteousness, Counsel, Pardon, Strength, Comfort, or the
like, let him come in quickly now, and I will bestow it at the shuting up of
House, in the close of the Feast before the Guests are risen. It is the last
opportunity, This is a Day of Entertainment, but no Feast to Morrow. So under
the Gospel, we are yet within the Compass of a Spiritual Feasting-Time, but we
have no Assurance how long? Psalm. 74.9.
Our Festival may expire with this Sabbath, and this Sermon prove our last
Meal! God can say to a Graceless Sinner, that loyters away his Season, as he
did to the Rich Man that laid up Earthly Substance, Thou Fool, this Night thy
Soul shall be required of thee! Luke 12.20. Your Great Possessions would be a
very unprofitable heap of Lumber, Mat. 19.22
and all your Barns or Bags full of Increase a hoard of poor Stuff, if your
Souls be empty, and you are sent Supperless to Bed, at the close of the
Gospel-Entertainment. Lay it, Sinner, unto thine Heart, what if God should now
shut up his Tender Mercies, Psalm. 77.9.
and in wrath open his Mouth against thee! Prove. 27.1.
Boast not thy self of to Morrow, Dan. 5.30.
lest with Belshazzer thou be slain that night; or, with a King of Israel, in
the Morning be utterly cut off. Hos. 10.15


3. If it were now already with thee after Supper, in that Black Night in Hell,
the offers of this Grace would be never tendered more. Now you may drink, Song.
5.1.
and drink abundantly at the Feast, but not a drop of this Living Water will be
then obtained to cool your Tongue. See Luke 16.23, 24. In Hell he lift up his
Eyes being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom,
and he cried and said, Father Abraham, have Mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that
he may dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue, for I am
tormented in this Flame. Father Abraham have mercy on me;] but in Hell (if
Grace does not prevent our coming thither) Abraham will be ignorant of us, Isa.
63.16.
and Israel acknowledge us not. There is not one Drop or little Crumb of Mercy
to be had, when the Furniture of the Gospel-Table Table is over. There is
neither Provision, nor so much as a Candle to Sup by in outer Darkness. And
besides all this there is a Great Gulf fixed, Luke 16.26. A Gulf] i. e. (...).
a Great gaping or parting asunder of the Two Countries by such a wide Division
you can never step over. There is no passing from the Regions of the shadow of
Death, Mat. 4.16.
even of the second Death to the Better Country, Heb. 11.16 Luke 16.26
so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass
to us, that would come from thence. The state will be fixed, and the offers of
Grace ended. God will feed nothing in Hell, but the Worm that dies not, Mar.
9.44, 46, 48.
and the Fire that is not quenched. Conscience indeed will have a stinging
Remembrance to gnaw upon, but the Sinner will have no Refreshment with such a
Guest for ever. God will drink to you no more, Sinners, in a Lake of Fire, Rev.
19.20, etc.
unless it be in the Wine of his wrath, which will be poured out without
mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, Rev. 14.10. There can be no rising to
Supper, if he should cast you out to lodge in a Bed of Flames! These are the
Motives, and Oh! that God would fasten them upon your Minds by his Spirit, Isa.
22.23.
as a Nail in a sure place.

Secondly, As to Counsel, I would leave these following Directions with you,
and close up the whole Subject.

1. Now consider this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50.22. Consider it, that Grace
is now offered, and the Statute of Refusal will next be executed. God is now
calling, but remember, if you will not hearken, you will be then crying! Mercy
does now invite you, but Fury will then Fall upon you. Know therefore this Day
and consider it in thine Heart, as Moses, in that Solemn Advice to Israel,
Deuteronomy. 4.39. Let Sinners that are desperate and hard hearted, or careless and
unregardful of themselves, consider this. What will ye do in the Day of
Visitation, and in the Desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye
flee for Help, and where will ye leave your Glory? Isa. 10.3. What Provision
can thou have, if thou have none of this Supper? Can thou bear it to Sup
with Devils, and reject Angel's Food? What will become of all that airy Glory
thy Mind is now Feasting on? what will it avail thee, that thou have Supt on
Vanity, if thou must be fed with Torments, when thy Day of Grace is ended.
Remember, thou art going, as swift as Time can post thee, into the Land of
Forgetfulness, Oh! thou busy, distracted Worldling that have forgotten to eat
thy Bread. Psalm. 102.4
Men indeed will forget thee, Jam. 1.24. Psalm. 95.11
what manner of man thou wast, but God will swear in his wrath, if thou will
not meddle (...) the Grace he offers, Amos 8.7.
that surely he will never forget any of thy Works, but will remember thy
Faults that Day.

2. Acquaint now thy self with God, Job 22.21. Be not a Stranger now to the God
who will one Day take such knowledge of thee, as either infallibly to save, or
else in Hell destroy thee. Look to it, Oh thou young Man! and remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy Youth, Eccles. 12.1. Look to it, thou ignorant Man,
and lay up sound Knowledge, that thou may say with the Blind Man, when Christ
had opened his Eyes, John 9.25
One Thing I know, that whereas I was Blind, now I see. If the Provisions are
now ready, let them be no longer as a strange Thing unto thee. Be acquainted,
that this is Life Eternal under the Gospel for poor, condemned Malefactors,
already dead in Law, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, John 17.3. Thou will never taste and see, Psalm. 34.8.
till thou art acquainting thine Heart with Wisdom.

3. Get now into Friendship with a Lover of Hospitality. Tit. 1.8.
Be not an Enemy in thy Heart or in thy ways to this Feast-Maker under one call
more. Be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee. Throw down your Arms, and
beg for Qu^rter, if you would find mercy with the lord in that Day, for he
spares none with their Weapons of War about them. You spoil your Banquet, so
long as you run upon the thick B^sses of his Buckler. Be reconciled, and made
Friends to God presently; for he will have none but Friends to come in and Sup
with him. Enemies must fall, but shall not be Feasted, Luke 19.27. But those
mine Enemies which would not have me to reign over them bring hither and stay
them before me. Provoke not God by Delays, when his Supper is now ready; if his
wrath be kindled Spiritual Mannah will melt away from you, as Corporal Mannah
did from the Israelites, when the Sun waxed hot. Exodus 16.21.
See that the Master of this Feast and you are made one, or at least if Two,
yet you may either walk together, Amos 3 3.
or sit together at Meat, when by Grace ye are so agreed. Be reconciled and go
make your Friend sure. Do this now, my Son, and deliver thy Self, when thou art
come into the Hand of thy Friend, go humble thy self and make sure thy Friend,
Prove. 6.3. As thou art now once again invited into the Banqueting House of
Love, come prostrate in the Dust, and lie at Christ's Feet; the lower you choose
to sink, the higher you shall rise, when you sit at Christ's Hand. Friend, go
up higher, the^ shall thou have worship in the Presence of them that sit at
Meat, Luke 14.10.

4. Now accept of Grace. Put forth thy Hand now and lay hold upon Eternal Life.
1 Timothy 6.12.
Though you have staid out from this Feast long, yet make the more haste, and be
not afraid, or ashamed Now to come at last. Take Encouragement, and knock at
the Gate of Mercy, for though the Sun be low, yet if you are in earnest for
admission, it is not too late to be let in.

5. Be now more Holy, if you partake of what is now ready. Serve the Lord
better, and Act for the Interest of Christ, to keep up the Reputation and
Honor of this Feast more than ever. Omit nothing which may advance the Gospel,
and do nothing that may tend to make the Provisions of it sink. More
especially, Now yield your Members Servants of Righteousness unto Holiness,
Romans 6.19. Let your Eyes be more steadfastly fixed, where you have seen his
Salvation; let your Ears be more attentive, that even the Ear may now try
words, and the Mouth taste his Meat. Job 12.11
Let the string of your Tongue be loosed, and speak of these All Things (now
ready) in the Language of Canaan plainly. Stretch out your Hands unto God, that
he may not stretch out his to you in vain. Refrain your Feet from every evil
way. Let your Loins be girt about with Truth. Keep your Hearts with all
Diligence. Take Wisdom as an Ornament to bind about your Heads, and set your
Faces in reality toward Sion. This is to be Holy, Romans 6.19
and to yield your Members Servants of Righteonsness unto Holiness.

6. Now cry and make Intercession to the Lord of Hosts. Save now I beseech
thee, O Lord, Psalm. 118.25. In the Morning direct thy Prayer unto God and look
up, Psalm. 147.9
that He who gives unto the young Ravens when they cry, would refresh thee
with good Things: And at Evening do thou return, Psalm. 59.6.
and beg thou may not lie down upon thy Bed, until thou have Supt upon Jesus
Christ. Beseech the Lord, that he would impart to thee this Hidden Treasure,
and fill thee as a Vessel of Mercy with it. Pray, that he would change thy
Diet, and give thee Righteousness, Peace, and Holiness, not suffering thee
(however under some kinds of Spiritual Sickness thou may have evil Longings)
to eat that which is common or unclean.

7. Now take Pains, rather than lose such Provision now ready. It is a shame to
be so forward to increase in Goods, and so backward to lay in Grace. Take but
as much Pains on a Lord's Day to Occupy with your Talent, as you have done upon
the Week, to save or gain a Penny. Lay up for your Souls, as you are wont to do
for your selves. Get up and travel to a Meeting, as you could to Traffic in a
Market the Day before. Go through as many inconveniences, wet, wind and weather,
to obtain a sure reward, as you are wont to venture through, to partake of
uncertain Riches. Think not a Few Miles to be short enough for your Pleasure or
your Profit, and then too long, when you compute them for a Sabbath-Day's
Journey. Think how ill Christ takes it, who traveled farther to buy in
Provisions for you, than you can to fetch them now from Him; while he sees how
backward you are to walk a Mile to hear the Word of God, and yet are compelled
by other Motives to go Twain, yea many to accomplish other Work. If you think
you dwell from Jerusalem more than a Sabbath-Day's Journey, come then to a
Feast as you would to a Fair, get up and Ride, and be not like the Horse or the
Mule which have no understanding. Remember, Psalm. 32.9.
that perhaps you have borrowed or hired a Horse to Trade with, but never did
so in all your Days, to get to the Means of Grace, though you could not come on
Foot. Oh! think you that have been negligent under this pretense of Distance,
what Conscience will say unto it, if it were awakened in the Hour of Death; or
what God himself will, if he tries it without Mercy at the Day of Judgment!

8. Beg of God that this Holy Diet may now agree with you. It would be sad,
that when God has made ready, his Supper should be too strong for you, while
you discovered an Aversation to the Pure Worship, or the Pure Ways of God! It
is a sign of a most weak and sickly Stomach, when you cannot bear it, perhaps
sometimes, Amos 5.21.
so much as to smell in the Solemn Feasts! the very smell of Holiness offends
you, and you cannot endure the Religion of the Apostle, because it is pure and
undefiled. Jam. 1.27.


9. Don't think the Ordinances of God Tedious, or that you sit too long at
Meals-Consider, that Ordinances and the Opportunities of Grace are Eating
Hours, don't grudge your Time then in your way to Heaven, while you are Baiting
at any Inn that is needful. The People of God when they sit at Meat are often
troubled they rise so soon, and art thou complaining, thou art made to sit too
long? To say, Behold what a weariness is it, as Mal. 1.13. is not a sign that
you are qualified to be for ever with the Lord. 1 These. 4.17. Psalm. 118.4


10. Let them now that fear the Lord say, That his Mercy endures for ever.
Remember Him that is staying you with Flaggons, and say with the Church, Now
will I sing to my well-beloved, Isa. 5.1.

11. Keep up an Honorable Esteem of Jesus Christ. Oh! don't come to a Feast,
and now at last upon the close of all murmur against the Good Man of the House.
Blessed is he that is not offended in me, Mat. 11.6.

12. Lastly, Now bear Afflictions. If he breaks thy Bones, yet bless him for
Christ our Passover, Joh. 19.36
where not a Bone of him shall be broken. Do not refuse Correction, though God
sometimes Carves out thy Sorrowful Meat, Job 6.7.
as Job calls his Afflictions. Isa. 30.20.
If he gives thee the Bread of Affliction, and the Water of Adversity, do not
impatiently or frowardly spit it out again, Psalm. 111.5
seeing he will be ever mindful of his Covenant, and has given Meat unto them
that fear him. Psalm. 23.5.
And thy Cup of Mercy that now runs over may encourage thee to take a sip of
that other Bitter Cup he gives thee. Thy Cup is a little Cup to Christ's; A
Drop of Wormwood, His a Draught of Gall, and full of Dregs at Bottom; yet the
Cup which my Father has given me, Joh. 18.11
shall I not drink it? Well then, take Encouragement, O Believer, under thy
Trials, and now do not faint. Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor
faint, when thou art rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5. bear his Reproofs, seeing thou
art now in the Banqueting House of Love. He will not kick thee from the Table,
though now he chides thee at it. He will not be always wroth, Isa 57.16.
though now he seems to have hid his Face at the upper-end from thee. Wait for
the Cup of Consolation, though thou have mingled thy Drink with weeping. Psalm.
102.9
Bear it with Christian Patience, with a Holy Faith and Submission, 1 Pet. 1.6.
though now for a Season (if need be) ye are in Heaviness through manifold
Temptations. There is enough of Love prepared to ease thee of thy Burdens now,
and in Time to take them off from thee. Do not think the worse of the Lamb of
God, John 1.29.36.
though thou must eat it as the Jews did their Lamb in the Posseover, Exodus 12.8.
with Bitter Herbs. God may entertain thee with Grace in a Winter's Day, which
though short, yet is dark and stormy: But let it comfort thee in thy Tribulation,
Mat. 24.32
that Summer is now nigh at Hand. When all the Bread in thy Basket is spent,
and no more for thee in the City of our God here, Psalm. 48.8.
but Mannah it self fails, and Grace is ended, yet still God has provided thee
a Summer's Store in Glory! Come therefore, for all Things are now ready.

The END.

