The Great MYSTERY of GODLINESS, Laid forth by way of affectuous and feeling
MEDITATION:

Also the INVISIBLE WORLD, Discovered to Spiritual Eyes, and reduced to
useful Meditation.

IN THREE BOOKS.

By JOS HALL, D. D. B. Norwich.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, ^or John Place at Furnivals Inne-gate, 1659.

To all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Grace and Peace.
Dear Brethren,
IF I have, in a sort, taken my leave of the world already; yet, not of you,
whom God has chosen out of the world, and endeared to me by a closer interest:
so as ye may justly expect from me a more special valediction; which I do now
in all Christian affection tender unto you: And, as dear friends upon a long
parting are wont to leave behind them some takens of remembrance, where they
most affect; so have I thought good, before my setting forth on my last
journey, to recomend unto you these my two final Meditations; then which, I
suppose, nothing could be more proper for me to give; or more likely to merit
your acceptance: For, if we were half way in heaven already, what can be a
more seasonable employment of our thoughts, then the great Mystery of
Godliness, which the Angels desire to look into? And, now when our badily eyes
are glutted with the view of the things that are seen (a prospect, which can
offord us nothing but vanity and vexation) what can be more meet, then to feed
our spiritual eyes, with the light of Invisible glories? Make your use of
them, both, to the edisying of your selves in your most holy faith; and aspire
with me, toward that happiness which is laid up above for all those that love
the appearance of our Lord Jesus.

Withal, as the last words of friends are wont to bear the greatest weight,
and to make the deepest impression; so let these lines of holy advise,
wherewith after many well-meant discourses) I shall close up the mouth of the
Press, find the like respect from you.

Oh that I might in the first place, effectually recommend to you the full
recovery of that precious Legacy of our blessed Savior, Peace: peace with God,
Peace with men; next to Grace the best of all blessings: Yet, woe is me, too too
long banished from the Christian world, with such animosity, as if it were the
worst of enemies, and meet to be adjudged to a perpetual mitrnatit ion.

Oh for a fountain of tears to bewail the slain of Gods people in all the
coasts of the Earth: How is Christendom become an universal Aceldama? How is
the earth every where drenched with humane blood? ^oured out, not by the hands
of cruel Infidels, but of brethren: Men need not go so far as Euphrates for
the execution of Turks and Pagans, Christians can make up an Armageddon with
their own mutual slaughter. Enough, my dear brethren, enough; yea more then
too much has been the effusion of that blood, for which our Savior has shed
his: Let us now, at the last, dry up these deadly issues, which we have made;
and with sovereign balms bind up the wounds we have given: Let us now be, not
more sparing of our tears, to wash off the memory of these our unbrotherly
dimications, and to ppease the anger of that God, whose offended justice has
raised war out of our own bowels: As our enmity, so our peace begins at heaven:
Had we not provoked our long suffering God, we had not thus bled; and we cannot
but know and believe him that said. When Prove. 16. ^7.
a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him;
Oh that we could thoroughly reconcile our selves to that great and holy God,
whom we have irritated by our crying sins, how soon would he, who is the
commander of all hearts, make up our breaches, and calm and compose our
spirits to an happy peace and concord!

In the next place give me leave earnestly to exhort you, that, as we have been
heretofore palpably faulty in abusing the mercies of our God for which we have
soundly smarted) so that now, we should be so much the more careful to improve
the judgments of God, to our effectual reformation: we have felt the heavy
hand of the Almighty upon us to purpose; Oh that our amendment could be no
less sensible then our sufferings; But, alas, my brethren, are our ways any
whit holyer? our obedience, more exact, our sins less and fewer then before we
were thus heavily afflicted? (...) our God too justly (...) that complaint,
which he made once by his Prophet Jeremiah, Ye have transgressed against Jer. 2.
me, says the Lord, In vain have I smitten your children, they received no
correction: Far be it from us, that after so many sad and solemn mournings of
our Land, any accuser should be able to charge us, as the Prophet Hosea did his
Israel, Hos. 4. 2.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood: We be to us, if after so many veins
opened, the blood remaining should not be the purer.

Let me have leave, in the third place, to e^cite you to the practice of
C^^^stian charity, in the mutual constructions of each others persons, and
actions; which (I must tell you) we have heedlesly violated in the heat of our
holy intentions; whiles those which have varied from us in matter of opinion,
concerning some appendances of Religion, and outward forms of administration,
we have been apt to look upon with such disregard, as if they had herein
forfeited their Christian profession, and were utter aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel; though in the mean time, sound at the heart; and
endeavoring to walk close with God in all their ways: whereas the father of
all mercies allows a gracious latitude to his children, in all not-forbidden
paths: and in every nation and condition of Act^. 10. 35.
men, he that fears God, and works righteousness* is accepted with him:
Beware we (my dear brethren) lest whiles we follow the chase of Zeal, we
outrun charity, without which, piety it self would be but unwelcome: As for
matter of opinion in the differences of Religion, wherewith the whole known
world, not of Christians only, but of men, is woefully distracted, to the great
prejudice of millions of souls, let this be our sure rule. Jude. 3.
Whosoever he be that holds the faith which was once delivered to the Saints,
agreeing therefore with us in all fundamental Truths, let him be received as a
brother: For there is but one Lord, one Faith, one phes. 4. 5
Baptism: And, other foundation 1 Cor. 3. 11.
can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ: Let those
which will be a devising a new Creed, look for a new Savior, and hope for
another heaven; for us we know whom we have believed: If any man be faulty in
the doctrines of superstructure, let us pity and rectify his error, but not
abandon his person.

The Communion of Saints is not so slight that it should be violated by weak
mistakings: If any man through ignorance or simplicity, shall strike at the
foundation of faith, let us labor by all gentle means, and brotherly
conviction, in the spirit of meekness to reclaim him: If after all powerful
endeavors he will needs remain, obstinate in his evil way; let us disclaim
his fellowship, and not think him worthy of a God-speed. But if he shall not
only wilfully undermine the groundwork of Christian faith, by his own damnable
opinions, but diffuse his heretical blasphemies to the infection of others;
let him be cut off by spiritual censures; and so dealt with by public
authority that the mischief of his contagion may be seasonably prevented, and
himself be made sensible of his heinous crime.

In all which proceedings, just distinction must be made betwixt the seduced
soul, and the pestilent seducer, the one calls for compassion, the other, for
severity: So then my brethren let us pity and pray for all that have erred and
are deceived; let us instruct the ignorant, convince the gainsaying, avoid the
obstinate, restrain the infectious, and punissh the self-convicted heresiarch.

In the fourth place, let us, I beseech you, take heed of being swayed with
selfinterests in all our designs: These have ever been the bane of the best
undertakings, as being not more plausibly insinnuative, then pernicious: For
that partial self-love, that naturally lodges in every man's breast, is ready to
put us upon those projects, which, under fair pretenses, may be extremely
prejudicial to the public weal; suggesting not how lawful or expedient they
may be for the common, but how beneficial to our selves; drawing us by
insensible degrees to sacrifice the public welfare to our own advantage, and
to underwork, and cross the better counsails of more faithful patriots:
Whereupon, many flourishing Churches, Kingdoms, States, have been brought to
miserable ruin: Oh that we could remember, that as all things are ours, so we
are not our own; that we have the least interest in our selves, being
infinitely more considerable as parts of a community, then as single persons;
that the main end of our being, (next to the glory of our maker) is an
universal serviceablenesse to others: in the attaining whereof, we shall far
more eminently advance our own happiness, then by the best of our private
self-seeking endeavors.

But withal, it will be meet for us to consider, that, as we are made to serve
all, so only in our own station: There can be no hope of a continued well being
without order: There can be no order without a due subordination of degrees,
and diversity of vocations; and in vain shall diverse vocation^ be ordained, if
all professions shall enterfere with each other. It is the prudent and holy
charge of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 20
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called. We are all
members of the same body, every one whereof has his proper employment: The
head is to direct and govern, the feet to walk, the eyes to see, the ears to
hear: How mad would we think that man, that should affect to walk on his head,
to hear with his eye, to see with his ear? Neither surely is it less
incongurous for men in divine and civil administrations, to offer to
undertake, and manage each others function; in their nature and quality no
less disperate: So then, let us endeavor to advance the common good, as that
a pious Zeal may not draw in confusion; and that we may not mistakeingly rear
up the walls of Babel, whiles we intend Jerusalem: Not religion only, but
policy calls us to encouragement of all useful professions; and of the sacred
so much more, as the soul is more precious then all the world beside. Heed
therefore must be taken to avoid all means, whereby the study of learning and
knowledge may be any way disheartened; as without which the world would soon be
overrun with ignorance, and barbarism: All arts therefore, as being in their
kind excellent, may justly challenge their own rights, and if they shall want
those respects, which are due to them, will suddenly languish: But above all,
as Divinity is the Queen of Sciences, so should it be our just shame that
whiles her handmaids are mounted on horsback, she should wait on them on foot.

Fifthly, As it is our greatest honor that the name of Christ is called upon
us; so let it, I beseech you, be our care, that our profession be not formal,
empty, and barren like the Jewish fig tree, abounding with leaves, void of
fruit; but real, active, fruitful of all good works, and exemplary in an
universal obedience to the wholwill of God: For it is a scandal never to be
enough lamented, that any of those who are Saints by calling (such we all are,
or should be) should hug some dearling sin in their bosom, which at last
breaks forth to the shame of the Gospel, and to the insultation of Gath and
Ascalon: Woe be to us if we shall thus cause the name of our God to be evil
spoken of: There are two many of those, whom I am loath, and sorry to style
heathen-Christians; Christians in name, Heathens in conversation: these, as
they come not within the compass of my Dedication, (for, alas, how should they
love the Lord Jesus, when they know him not?) so I can heartily bewail their
condition, who, like Gideons fleece, continue altogether dry, under so many
sweet shewres of Grace; wishing unto their souls, even thus late, a sense of
the efficacy of that water which was once poured on their faces: These, if they
run into all excess of riot, what can be other expected from them? but for us,
that have learned to know the great Mystery of Godliness, and have given up
our name, to a strict covenant of obedience, if we shall suffer our selves to
be miscarried into any enormious wickedness, we shall cause heaven to blush,
and hell to triumph. Oh therefore, let us be so much the more watchful over
our ways, as our engagements to the name of our God, are greater, and the
danger of our miscariages more deadly.

Lastly, let me beseech, and adjure you, in the name of the Lord Jesu, to be
careful in matter of Religion, to keep within the due bounds of Gods revealed
will. A charge which I would to God were not too needful in these last days;
wherein, who sees not what Spirits of Error are gone forth into the world, for
the seducing of simple, and ungrounded souls? Woe is me, what throngs are
carried to hell by these devilish impostures? One pretends Visions, and
Revelations of new verities, which the world was not hitherto worthy to know;
another boasts of new lights of uncouth interpretations, hidden from all former
eyes* one despises the dead letter of the scriptures, another distorts it to
his own erroneous sense. O the prodiges of damnable, heretical, Atheous
fancies, which have hereupon infested the Christian Church; (for which, what
good soul does not mourn in secret?) the danger whereof ye shall happily avoid,
if ye shall keep close to the written word of our God which is only able to
make you wise to salvation: As our Savior repelled the Devil, so do ye the
fanatic spirits of these brainsick men, with, It is written; Let those who
would be wiser then God, justly perish in their presumption; My soul for yours,
if ye keep you to S. Paul's guard, not to be wise above that which is written. I
could easily out of the exuberance of my Christian love overcharg you with
multiplicity of holy counlses, but I would not take a tedious farewell. May the
God of heaven bless these, and all other wholesome admonitions to the
furtherance of your souls in grace; and may his good spirit, ever lead and
guide us in all such ways, as may be pleasing to him, till we happily meet in
the participation of that incomprehensible glory, which he has prepared for
ill his Saints; till when, Farewell from your fellow-pilgrim in this vale of
tears,

Jos. Hall.
HIGHAM near NORWICH, Nov. 3. 1651
THE Great Mystery OF GODLINESS, Laid forth by way of Affectuous and Feeling
MEDITATION.

By JOS. HALL, D. D. B. N.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Place at Furnivals Inne-gate, 1659.

THE GREAT MYSTERY OF GODLINESS.
SECT. I.
LET no man go about 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the Mystery of Godliness.
to entertain the thoughts of the Great Mystery of Godliness, but with a
ravished heart, an heart filled with a gracious composition of love, and joy,
and wonder: Such a one, O Savior, I desire, through thy grace, to bring with
me to the meditation of that thine infinitely glorious work of our Redemption:
It was as possible for thy chosen Vessel who was by a divine ecstasy caught up
into Paradise, and there heard unutterable words to express what he saw and
heard above, as to set forth what was acted by thee here below; as therefore
unable either to comprehend, or utter things so far above wonder, he contents
himself with a patheticall intimation of that, which he saw could never be
enough admired; Great is the Mystery of Godliness. There are great Mysteries
of Art, which the wit and experience of skillful men have discovered; there are
greater Mysteries of Nature, some part whereof have been described by Art and
Industry, but the greater part lies hidden from mortal eyes: but these are
less then nothing to the great mystery of Godliness: For, what are these but
the deep secrets of the Creature? mean therefore, and finite like it self; but
the other are the unfadomable depths of an infinite Deity: fitter for the
admiration of the highest Angels of heaven, then for the reach of humane
conception. Great were the mysteries of the Law; neither could the face of
Moses be seen without his veil: But what other were these, but the shadows of
this great Mystery of Godliness? what did that golden Ark overspread with
glorious Cherubims, that gorgeous Temple, those perfumers Altars, those
bleeding Sacrifices, that sumptuous* Priesthood, but prefigure thee, O blessed
Savior, which in the fullness of time should be revealed to the World, and
make up this great Mystery of Godliness? There is nothing, O dear Jesu that*
thou either did or sufferedst for mankind, which is other then mysterious,
and wonderful; but the great and astonishing mystery of Godliness is thy*
self; God manifested in the flesh: Lo, faith it self can never be capable to
apprehend a mystery like this; Thou who art a Spirit, and therefore
immateriall, invisible, to expose thy self to the view of earthen eyes; Thou,
who art an infinite Spirit to be enwrapped in flesh; Thou an al-glorious
eternal Spirit to put on the rags of humane mortality; Thou, the great Creator
of all things, to become a Creature; Thou, the omnipotent God, to subject thy
self to miserable frailty and infirmity: O mystery transcending the full
apprehension of even glorified souls! If but one of thy celestial Spirits have
upon thy gracious mission assumed a visible shape* and therein appeared to any
of thy servants of old, it has been held a spectacle of so dreadful
astonishment, that it could not be consistent with life; even so much honor
was thought no less then deadly; neither could the Patient make any other
account then to be killed with the kindness of that glory; What shall we say
then, that thou who art the God of those Spirits, and therefore infinitely more
glorious then all the Hierarchy of heaven, vouchsafedst, not in a vanishing
apparition, but in a settled state of many years continuance, to show thy self
in our flesh, and to converse with men in their own shape and condition? O
great mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh* 1 Pet. 1. 12.
so great that the holy ambition of the heavenly Angels could not reach higher
then the desire to look down into it.

SECT. II.
BUt O Savior, that which God manifested.
raised the amazement at the appearance of thine Angels* was their resplendent
glory; whereas that which heightens the wonder of thy manifestation to men, is
the depth of thine abasement: Although thou would not take the nature of
Angels, yet why would thou not appear in the luster and majesty of those thy
best creatures? Or, since thou would be a man, why would thou not come as
the chief of men, commanding Kings and Princes of the earth to attend thy
train? Thou, whose the earth is, and the fullness thereof, why would thou not
raise to thy self a palace compiled of all those precious stones, which lie hid
in the close cofers of that thine inferior Treasury? why did not thy Court
glitter with pearl, and gold, in the rich furnitures, and gay suits of thy
stately followers? why was not thy Table furnished with all the delicacies that
the world could afford? O Savior, it was the great glory of thy mercy, that
being upon earth, thou would abandon all earthly glory; there could not be
so great an exaltation of thy love to mankind, as that thou would be thus
low abased; Manifested then thou were, but manifested in a despicable
obscurity: whether shall I more wonder, that being God blessed for ever, thou
would become man; or, that condescending to be man, thou would take upon
thee the shape of a servant, a serva^t to those whose Lord, whose God thou were.

What proportion could In the flesh
there be, O blessed Jesus betwixt a God and a Man; betwixt finite, and
infinite; the only power of thy everlasting and unmeasurable love has so
reduced one of these to the other, that both are united in that glorious person
of thine to make up an absolute Savior of mankind: O the height, and depth of
this supercelestial mystery, that the infinite Deity, and finite flesh should
meet in one subject? yet so, as the humanity should not be absorpted of the
Godhead; nor the Godhead coarcted by the humanity, but both inseparably united;
that the Godhead is not humanized, the humanity is not deifred, both are
indivisibly conjoined: conjoined so, as without confusion; distinguished so, as
without division: So were thou, O God, manifested in the flesh, that thou the
word of thine eternal Father were made flesh; and dwelledst among us; and we
Job. 1. 14
men beheld thy glory, the glory, as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth; Yet so were thou made flesh as not by conversion into
flesh, but as by assumption of flesh to thine eternal Deity: assumption, not
into the nature of the Godhead, but into the person of thee, who art God
everlasting: O mystery of Godliness, incomprehensibly glorious! Cease, cease O
humane curiosity, and where thou can not comprehend, wonder and adore.

SECT. III.
BUt, O Savior, was it not enough for thee to be manifested in flesh? Did not
that elementarie composition carry in it abasement enough, without any further
addition? (since for God to become man was more then for all things to be
redacted to nothing) but that in the rank of miserable manhood, thou would
humble thy self to the lowest of humanity, and become a servant? Shall I say
more? I can hear Bildad the Shuhite say, Man is Job. 25 6.
a worm; and I hear him, who was a noble Type of thee, say, as in thy person, I
am a worm Psalm. 22. 6.
and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people: O Savior, in how
despicable a condition do I find thee exhibited to the world? lodged in a
stable; cradled in a manger; visited by poor shepherds; employed in an homely
trade; attended by mean fishermen; tempted by presumptuous Devils; persecuted
by the malice of envious men; exposed to hunger, thirst, nakedness,
weariness, contempt? How many sclaves under the vassalage of an enemy fare
better then thou did from ungrateful man, whom thou came to save? Yet all
these were but a mild and gentle preface to those thy last sufferings,
wherewith thou were pleased to shut up this scene of mortality: there I find
thee sweating blood in thine agony, crowned with thorns bleeding with
scourges, buffeted with cruel hands, spat upon by impure mouths, laden with
thy fatal burden, distended upon that torturing cross, nailed to that tree of
shame and curse, reviled and insulted upon by the vilest of men, and at last,
(that no part of thy precious blood might remain unshed) pierced to the heart
by the spear of a late and impertinent malice.

Thus, thus, O God and Savior, would thou be manifested in the flesh, that
the torments of thy flesh and spirit might be manifested to that world, which
thou came to redeem; thus wast thou wounded for our transgressions; thus wast
thou bruised for Esaias 53. 5.
our iniquities; thus were the chastisements of our peace upon thee; and thus
with thy stripes are we healed* O blessed, but still incomprehensible mystery
of Godliness; God thus manifested in the flesh, in weakness, contempt, shame,
pain, death.

Once only, O blessed Jesus whiles thou were wayfaring upon this globe of
earth, did thou put on glory; even upon Mount Tabor, in thy heavenly
transfiguration; then, and there Mat. 17. 2. Mark. 29. Luke 9. 28.
did thy face shine as the Sun; and thy raiment was white as thy light: How
easy had it been for thee to have continued this celestial splendour to thy
humanity all the whole time of the so journing upon earth; that so thou
might have been adored of all mankind? How would all the Nations under
heaven have flockd to thee, and fallen down at the feet of so glorious a
Majesty? What man in all the world would not have said with Peter, Lord it is
good for us to be here? Or if it had pleased thee to have commanded Moses and
Elias to wait upon thee in thy mediatorie perambulation, and, to attend thee at
Jerusalem, on the Mount of Sion, as they did in the Mount of Tabor, whom had
thou not in a zealous astonishment drawn after thee? But it was thy will and the
pleasure of thy heavenly Father, that this glorious appearance should soon be
over shadowed with a cloud: And as those celestial guests, now in the midst of
thy glory, spent their conference about thy bitter sufferings, and thine
approaching departure out of the world* So were thou, for the great work of our
Redemption, willing to be led from the Mount Tabor to Mount Calvarie; from the
height of that glory to the lowest depth of sorrow, pain, exinanition.

Thus vile were thou, O Savior, in the flesh; but in this vileness of flesh
mannifested to be God; how did all thy Creatures in this extremity of thine
abasement, agree to acknowledge and celebrate thine infinite Deity? The Angels
came down from heaven to visit and attend thee; the Sun pulled in his head as
abhorring to look upon the sufferings of his maker, the Earth was covered over
with darkness* and quaked for the horror of that indignity, which was offered
to thee in that bloody passion; the rocks rent, the graves opened themselves,
and sent up their long-since putrefied Tenants to wait upon thee, the Lord of
life, in thy glorious Resurrection; so as thou, in thy despised and crucified
flesh were abundantly manifested to be the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth.

SECT. 4.
O blessed Savior, thou the true God manifested in the flesh, be thou pleased
to manifest unto the soul of thy servant, the unspeakable riches of thy love
and mercy to mankind, in that great work of our Redemption: Vouchafe to
affect* my heart with a lively sense of that infinite goodness of thine
toward the wretcheddest of thy creatures; that for our sake thou came down,
and cloathedst thy self in our flesh and cloathedst that pure and holy flesh
with all the miseries that are incident to this sinful flesh of ours; and wast
content to undergo a bitter, painful, ignominous death from the hands of man,
that by dying thou might overcome death and ransom him from that hell, to
which he was (without thee) irrecoverably forfeited; and fetch him forth to
life, liberty, and glory: O let me not see only, but feel this thy great
mystery of Godliness effectually working me to all hearty thankfulness for
so inestimable a mercy; to all holy resolutions to glorify thee in all my
actions, in all my sufferings: Did thou, O Savior, being God eternal, take
flesh for me; and shall not I, when thou call, be willing to lay down this
sinful flesh for thee again? Were thou content to abridge thy self, for the
time, not only of thy heavenly magnificence, but of all earthly comforts, for
my sake, and shall not I, for thy dear sake, renounce all the wicked pleasures
of sin? Did thou wear out the days of thy flesh in poverty, toil, reproach,
and all earthly hardship; and shall I spend my time in pampering this flesh in
wanton dalliance, in the ambitious, and covetous pursuit of vain honors, and
deceivable riches? Blessed Lord thou were manifested in the flesh, not only to
be a Ransom for our souls, but to be a Precedent for our lives: Far, far be it
from me thus to imitate the great pattorn of holiness.

O Jesu, the author and finisher of my faith and salvation, teach me to tread
in thy gracious steps, to run with patience the race that is set before me* to
endure the cross, to despise the shame to be crucified to the world, to work
all righteousness.

SECT. V.
HOw easily could I be drawn to envy the privilege of those eyes, which saw
thee here walking upon Earth, O God and Savior, in the days of thy
manifesting thy self in flesh? Oh what an happy spectacle was this, to see the
face of him, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily? All the world is not worth such
a sight: whither could I not wish to go to see but a just portraiture of that
shape, wherein thou were pleased to converse with men? But thine holy Apostle
checks this 2 Cor. 5. 16.
useless curiosity in me, whiles he says; If we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet now henceforth know we him so no more; It is not the outside of
thine humane form, the view whereof can make us more holy or more happy: Judas
saw thee as well as he that lay in thy bosom; those saw thee that maligned and
persecuted thee, and shall once again see thee to their utmost horror, see him
whom they pierced: They saw that flesh in which God was manifested; they saw
not God manfested in the flesh: It is our great comfort and privilege, that it
was flesh wherein God was manifested* but it is not in the flesh, but in the
Deity to render us blessed: O Savior, I dare not beg of thee, so to manifest
thy self to me, as thou did to thy chosen Vessel in his way to Damascus, or
to thy first Martyr in the storm of his Lapidation; these miraculous
manifestations are not for my meanness to sue for: But let me never cease to
crave of thee a double manifestatio^ of thy self to me* Be pleased to manifest
thy self to me in the clear illuminations of thy Spirit; let me by the eyes of
my faith clearly see thee both sprawling in: the Manger, and walking upon
earth, and tempted in the Wilderness, and arraigned in the Judgment-hall, and
suffering upon Calvarie, and rising out of thy Tomb, and a soending from thy
Olivet* and reigning in Heaven, and there interceding for me: And after my
approaching dissolution, let my soul see thee in that glorified flesh, wherein
thou were manifested to the World, and in the Majesty of that allglorious
Deity* which assumed it to that ever blessed society of glory.

SECT. VI.
IT was thy mercy, O God, that thou would not keep up thy self close in thine
eternal, spiritual, and incomprehensible essence, unknown to thy creatures
upon earth, but that thou would be manifested to the world: It was yet thy
further mercy that thou were not only pleased to manifest thy self to man in
the wonderful works of thy Creation, Romans 1. 20.
(since those invifible things of thine are understood, and clearly seen by the
things that are made, even thine eternal power and Godhead) but to manifest
thy self yet more clearly to us in thy sacred Word, the blessed Oracles of
thine eternal truth: but it was the highest pitch of thy mercy, that thou
would manifest thy self yet more to us in the flesh. Thou might have sent
us thy gracious messages by the hands of thine Angels, those glorious
ministering spirits, that do continually attend thy throne; this would not
content thee, but such was thy love to us forlorn wretches, that thou would
come thy self, to finish the work of our Redemption. Neither did thou think
it enough to come to us in a spiritual way, imparting thy self to us by secret
suggestions, and inspirations, by dreams and visions, but would vouchsafe
openly to be manifested in our flesh: how then, O my God, how were thou
manifested in the flesh? was not the flesh thy vail? and wherefore serves a
vail, but to hide and cover? Did not thy Deity then lie hid, and obscured,
whiles thou were here on earth under the vail of of thy flesh? How then were
thou manifested in that flesh, wherein thou did lie obscured? Surely, thou
were certainly manifested in respect of thy presence, in that sacred flesh of
thine; though for the time thy power and Majesty lay hid under the vail:
Sometimes thou were pleased that this sun of thy Deity should break forth in
the glorious beams of divine operations, to the dazeling of the eyes of men and
Devils, to the full eviction of thine omnipotent power against thy envious
gainsayers; at other times, thou were content it should be clouded over with
the dim and dusky appearances of humane infirmity; The more thou were obscured,
the more did thou manifest thy most admirable humility, and unparallelable
love to mankind, whose weakness thou disdainedst not to take up; And the more
thou did exert thy power, in thy miraculous works, the more did thou
glorify thy self, and vindicate thine Almighty Deity thus manifested in the
flesh; Oh that thou would enable me to give thee the due praiss both of thine
infinite mercy in this thine humble obscurity, and of thy divine omnipotence,
who as thou were manifested in the flesh, so wast also justified in the spirit.

SECT. VII.
HE that should have seen Justified in the Spirit.
thee, O Savior, working in Joseph's shop, or walking in the fields or streets
of Nazareth, or journying toward Jerusalem, would have looked upon thee as a
mere man: neither did thy garb or countenance bewray any difference in thee
from the ordinary sort of men; so did ^hy Godhead please to conceal it for a
time in that flesh, where in thou would be manifested; it was thine
al-working and coessentiall spirit, by whose evident testimonies, and mighty
operations, thy Deity was irrefragably made good to the world: If the doubtful
sons of men shall in their peevish Infidelity, he apt to renew the question of
John's Disciples: Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another?
thine ever blessed and coeternal Spirit, has fully justified thee, for that
only true, absolute, perfect mediator, by whom the great work of man's
redemption is accomplished: Whiles the gates of hell want neither power, nor
malice, nor subtletie, it is not possible that thy divine person should want
store of enemies; These, in all successions of times, have dared to open their
blasphemous mouth against thy blessed Deity: But against all their hellish
oppositions, thou were still, and shall be ever justified by thy co-omni potent
spirit; In those convictive wonders which thou wroughtst upon earth; in those
miraculous gifts and graces, which thou powredst out upon men; in that glorious
resurrection and ascension of thine wherein thou did victoriously triumph
over all the powers of death and hell. Lo then, ye perverse Jews and scoffing
Gentiles, that are still ready to upbraid us with the impotency and sufferings
of a despised Redeemer; and to tell us of the rags of his Manger, of the
homeliness of his Education, of his temptation and transportation by the
Devil, of his contemptible train; of his hunger and thirst, of his weariness
and indigence, of his whips and thorns, of his agony in the garden of
Gethsemane, of his opprobrious crucifixion in Calvarie, of his parted garments
and his borrowed grave: Is not this he* to whose homely cradle a glorious and
supernatural star guided the sages of the East for their adoration? Is not
this he, whose birth declared by one Luke 2. 9, 10, 13, 1
glorious Angel, was celebrated by a multitude of the heavenly host with that
divine Anthem of [Glory to God in the highest, and on earth Peace, good will
toward men?] Is not this he that filled the world with his divine and
beneficial miracles? healing all diseases by his Word, restoring limbs to the
lame, giving eyes to the borne blind, casting out Devils, raising the dead,
commanding winds and seas, acknowledged by an audible voice from heaven? Is
not this he whom the very ejected Devils were forced to confess to be the son
of the everliving God? whom the heaven and all the elements owned for their
almighty Creator? whose sufferings darkened the Sun, and shook the Earth, and
rent the Rocks in pieces? and justly, whom the dead Saints and the heavenly
Angels attended in his powerful Resurrect on, and glorious Ascension? O
Savior, abundantly justified in the spirit against all the malignances of men
and Devils.

SETC. VIII.
If thy malicious persecutours, whose hand was in thy most cruel crucifixion,
shall for the covering of their own shame, blazon thee for a Deceiver of the
people; How convincingly were thou justified in the spirit, by the dreadful
and miraculous descent of the holy Ghost in the cloven and fiery tongues; and
that sudden variety of language for the spreading of the glory of thy name
over all the Nations of the earth? If the unbeleiving world, bewitched with
their former superstition, shall furiously oppose thy name and Gospel in the
times immediately succeeding: how notably art thou justified in the spirit, by
the sudden stopping of the mouths of their hellish Oracles, by the powerful
predications of thine holy Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Doctors, seconded by such undeniable miracles as shamed and astonished, if not
won, the gainsayers?

But, O Savior, being thus clearly instified in the spirit against the old
spite of hell, with what shame and horror do I see thine eternal Godhead
called into question by the misgoverned wits of certain late mis-named
Christians: who as if they would raise up cursed Arrius from his hateful
grave, have dared to renew those blasphemous cavils against thy sacred person,
which with so great authority, and full evidence of the spirit were long since
cried down to that hell, whence (to the great contumely of heaven) they were
most wickedly sent up into the world: Woe is me, their damned sounder did not
send down his soul into that fatal draught, in a more odious way, then these
his followers vent themselves upward in most unsavory and pestilent
contradictions to thee, the Lord of life and glory* But even against these art
thou justified in the spirit, speaking in thy divine Scriptures, whose evident
demonstrations do fully convince their calumnies and false suggestions; and
vindicate thy holy Name, and blessed Deity from all their devilish and
frivolous argutations.

Is there any weak soul that makes doubt of thy plenarie satisfaction for his
sin, of the perfect accomplishment of the great work of man's Redemption? how
absolutely art thou justified O blessed Jesu, in the spirit, in that thou
raisedst thy self from the dead; quitting that prison of the grave, whence
thou could not have come, till thou had paid the utmost farthing, wherein
we stood indebted to heaven: O Savior, not more concealed in the flesh, then
manifestly justified in the spirit for my all-sufficient Redeemer, not more
meekly yiedling Romans 4. 25.
to death for our offenses, then powerfully raised up again for our
justification: how should I bless and praise thee, both for thine humble
self-dejection in respect of thine assumed flesh, and for thy powerful
justification in thine infinite and eternal spirit; that holy Ghost whereby
thou were conceived in the womb of the Virgin, justified thee in thy life,
death, resuscitation; Now then, how confidently can I trust thee with my* soul,
who have approved thy self so complete and almighty a Reedemer? O blessed Jesu,
with what assurance do I cast my self upon thee for thy present protection for
my future salvation? how boldly can I defy all the powers of darkness, whiles
I am in the hand of so gracious and omnipotent a Mediator? Who shall Romans 8 33.
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Even
thou the God who wast manifested in the flesh, and justified in the spirit,
shall justify and save my spirit, soul and body in the day of our appearance
before thee.

SECT. IX.
O Savior, it is no mystery Seen of Angels.
that being manifested in he flesh, thou were seen of men; but it is no small
part of the great mystery of Godliness, that thou who art the God of Spirits,
were seen by those heavenly spirits, clothed in flesh: It could not be but
great news to the Angels to see their God born, and conversing as man, with
men. For a man to see an Angel is a matter of much wonder, but for an Angel
to see God become man, is a far greater wonder: since in this* the change
concerns an infinite subject, in the other, a finite, though incorporeall*
But, pause here awhile, O my soul, and inquire a little into these strange
spectators: Seen of Angels? who, or what might those be? Are three any such
real, incorporeall, permament substances; or are they only things of
imagination, and extemporary representations of the pleasure of the Almighty?
Woe is me, (that no error may be wanting to this prodigious age,) do we live to
see a reviction of the old Sadduci^^^, so long since dead and forgotten? Was
Dan. 8. 19, 17.
Gabriel that appeared and spoke to Daniel, nothing but a supernatural
ph^ntasme? And what then was a he Gabriel* that appeared with the happy news
of a Savior to the blessed Virgin? Mat. 18. 10.
What are the Angels of those little ones, whereof our Savior speaks, which
do always behold the face of his Father Luke 2. 9. 15.
in heaven? What were those Angels that appeared to the shepherds with the
tidings and gratulations of the Savior borne at Bethlem? What Act 12. 7, 8, 10.
was that beneficent spirit that visited Peter in the Prison, smote him on the
side to wake him from his sleep; shook off his chains, threw open the iron
gate, and rescued him from the bloody hands of Herod? What are those spirits,
who shall be Gods reapers at the end of the world, to cut down the tares, and
gather the wheat into his barn? Shortly, what were all those spirits (whereof
both Testaments are full,) which God was pleased to imply in his frequent
missions to the earth? were these phantasms too? Certainly, though there may be
many Orders, yet there is but one general condition of those Angelical
attendants on the throne of the Almighty: Even in the old Testament, was it a
supernatural apparition of fancy, that in one night smote all the first borne
in the land of Egypt? was it a supernatural apparition of fancy, that in one
night laid an hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians dead upon the
ground? Could these be any other then the acts of living, and powerful agents?
It is not for us to contend about words; those that are disposed to devise
paradoxes, may frame to themselves what senses they please of their own terms;
this we are sure of, that the Angels are truly existing, spiritual,
intelligent, powerful, eviternall Creatures, whose being is not exposed to our
sense, but evidenced both to our faith and reason; not circumscribed in any
gross locality, but truly being where they are, and acting according to their
spiritual nature.

Of these Angels, O blessed Savior, were thou seen manifested in the flesh, to
their wonder and gratulation: That, thou who had taken our flesh were
visible, was no whit strange; herein thou were a plain and happy object to all
eyes: but how the Angels, being merely spiritual substances, could see thee,
may be part of this great mystery: Doubtless, they saw thee both before and
ever since thou came into the world, with eyes like themselves, spiritual,
and, not seldom, saw thee being incarnate with the assumed eyes of those
bodies wherein they appeared; Thus they saw, and adored, and proclaimed thee in
thy first saluration of the world, when thou layest in that homely posture, in
the Manger at Bethlehem; singing that sweet and celestial caroll at thy
nativity, Glory be to God in the highest. They saw thee in the wild desert,
where no creatures appeared to thee, but either beasts or Devils, there they
saw thee pined with fasting, conflicted with the Prince of darkness: they saw
thee foiling that presum ptuous enemy, not without wonder, doubtless, at the
boldness of that daring spirit, and joyful applause at thy happy victory;
they saw thee, but (as knowing there was no use of seconds in this duel of
thine) unseen of thee, till the full end of that great combat; then they showed
themselves to thee, as willing to be known to have been the secret witnesses of
the fight, and glad congratulators of thy Triumph, then they came and ministered
unto thee; Never were they but ready to have visibly attended thee, had thou
been pleased to requite so sensible a service; but the state of a servant,
which thou choosedst to undergo, suited not with the perpetuity of so glorious
a retinue; whether therefore they were seen to thee, or not seen, it was their
great honor and happiness, and a main part of the great mystery of
Godliness, that thou, who art the true God manifested in the flesh, were seen
of Angels.

They saw thee in the garden, in thy sad agony; and if Angels could have been
capable of passion in that state of their glory, could have been no doubt,
content to suffer in, and with thee; with what eyes do we think they looked upon
thy bloody sweat; and the frowns of thine heavenly Father, which they saw bent
against thee, in our persons, for the sin of mankind, which thou came to
expiate? Now in this doleful condition, so were thou seen of Angels, that the
Angels were seen of thee: For lo, there appeared Luke 22. 41.
an Angel from heaven strengthening thee. O the deep humiliation of God,
manifested in the flesh, that thou, O Jesu, the God and Lord of all the Angels
of heaven, should in this bloody conflict with thy Fathers wrath for our sins
need and receive comfort from a created* Angel thy servant*

Whilst thou were grapling with the powers of darkness there was no need of
aid; only after the fight Angels came, and ministered to thee; but now, that
thou must struggle under the wrath of thy Father, for man's sin, there was use
of the consolation of one of those Angels, whereof thou command millions: O
blessed Savior, had not the face of thy heavenly Father been clouded to thee,
standing in the stead of our guiltiness, it had been no less then presumption
in any finite power to tender thee any suggestions of comfort; but now, alas,
those beatificall beams were so for the time hid from thine eyes, and the sweet
influences of light and joy arising therefrom, were for that sad instant,
suspended; so as nothing appeared to thee, that while, but the darkness of
displeasure and horror; now therefore the comforts of a creature, could not be
but seasonable and welcome; so that thou disdainedst not to be strengthened by
an Angel: Extreme distress looks not so much to the hand that brings supply,
as to the supply it brings: If but one of thy three drouzy clients could have
shaken off his sleep, and have let fall to thee some word of consolation, in
that heavy fit of thine* thou had not refused it; how much less, the
cordial intimations of an heavenly monitor? neither was it improper for thee,
who wast content to Heb. 1. 9.
be made a little inferior to the Angels, to receive some spiritual aid from
the hands of an Angel.

What then, O Savior, was the strengthening which thou receivedst from this
officious spirit in this pang of thine agony? Doubtless it was not any
communication of an additionall power to bear up, under that heavy pressure of
the sins of the whole world, which drew from thee those sweats of blood; No
Angel in heaven was able to contribute that to the Son of God; but it was a
sweet, and forcible representation to thy disconsolate humanity, of the near
approach of an happy eluctation out of those torments of thy sufferings, and of
the glorious crown of thy victory immediately succeeding.

SECT. X.
ANd now, soon after, those Angels that saw thee sweating in thine agony, and
bleeding on thy cross, saw thee also triumphing over Death, in thy
Resurrection; they attended thee joyfully in the vault of thy sepulture, and
saw thee trampling upon the last enemy; being then sutably habited to so
blessed an occasion, in white shining vestures; how gladly were they employed
about that most glorious solemnity, both as actors in the service, and as the
first heralds of thy victories over Death? I find one of them obsequiously
making ready for thy coming out of those chambers of death, upon thine Easter
morning; rolling away that massy stone, which the vain care of thine
adversaries had laid (curiously sealed) upon the mouth of that Cave, for the
prevention of Mat. 28. 2, 3, 4.
thy fore-threatned resurrection; and sitting upon it with a countenance like
lightning, and his garment white as snow, the terror of whose presence made
the guard to shake, and to become as dead men; I find Joh. 20. 12.
two of them no less glorious, sitting the one at the head, the other at the
feet of that bed of earth whereon thou had newly slept; By these Angels were
thou both seen and attended; and, no doubt, but as at thy first coming into the
world, when but one Angel published thy birth he was seconded by a multitude
of the heavenly host* praising God with hymns of rejoicing for thy nativity; so
when but one or two Angels were seen at thy second birth (which was thy
glorious resurrection) there were more of that heavenly company invisibly
celebrating the joyful triumph of that blessed day; wherein having conquered
Death and Hell, thou shewedst thy self in a glorified condition to the redeemed
world of men: After this, when for the securance of thy Resurrection, (upon
which all our faith justly depends) thou had spent forty days upon earth,
I find thee upon Mount Olivet, at thy most glorious ascension, not seen only,
but proclaimed, and fore-promised in thy certain, and at least equally-glorious
return, by the blessed Angels. And behold while they looked Act. 1. 10, 11.
steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, two men stood by them in white
apparel; which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven; This same Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so come
again, as ye have seen him go into heaven] But, O Savior, these views of thee
by thine Angels hitherto were but special, and visible even by bodily eyes;
How do I, by the eyes of my soul, see thee both attended up in that heavenly
progress, and welcomed into thine Empyreall heaven, by all the host of those
celestial spirits: no small part of whose perpetual happiness it is, to see
thee in thy glorified humanity; sitting at the right hand of Majesty; there
they enjoy thee, there they sing continual Hallelujahs to him that sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

SECT. XI.
If thine Angels, O blessed Jesu, desired to look into this great and deep
mystery of the Gospel; their longing is satisfied in the sight of thy blessed
incarnation, and the full accomplishment of the great Office 1 Pet. 1. 12.
of thy Mediatorship, since, now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly
places, is made known the manifold wisdom of God, in this wonderful Ephesians.
3. 9.
work of man's Redemption; which from the beginning of the World has been hid
in God, who created all things by thee; But, that the unsearcheable riches of
Christ should be preached to the Gentiles, how Ephesians. 3 8.
marvailous an accession is it to the greatness of this divine mystery of
godliness? of old, In Judah was God known, his name was great in Israel: In
Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion; but in the Psalm. 76.
1.
mean while, we miserable Gentiles sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, without God in the world, exposed to the displeasure of heaven,
tyrannized over by the powers of Ephesians. 2. 12.
hell, strangers from the covenants of promise, for lorn, without hope of
mercy: That therefore, O Savior, thou vouchsafedst in the tender bowels of
thine infinite compassion, to look down from heaven upon us, and at the last,
graciously to visit us, in the clear revelation of the saving truth of thy
Gospel, to break down the partition wall whereby we were excluded from any
participation with thee; to own us for thy people, and to admit us unto the
fellowship of thy Saints: O the wonderful mystery of Godliness, effectually
manifested to us outcast Gentiles, to our conversion, to our eternal
salvation! What a vail, O God, was spread over all Nations? Esaias 25. 7.
A dark vail of ignorance, of error, of impiety? How did our forefathers walk
in their own ways, following the sinful lusts of their own hearts worshipping
dumb Idols, sacrificing to all the host of heaven, offering not their substance
only, but their sons and daughters to Devils? It was thine own infinite
goodness, that moved thee to pity our woeful and despaired condition; and to
send thine eternal Son into the world, to be no less a light to lighten the
Gentiles, then to Luk 2. 32.
be the glory of thy people Israel!

How fully have thou made good thy gracious promises long since published by
thy holy Prophets: It shall come, Esaias 66. 18.
that I will gather all Nations, and tongues, and they shall come and see my
glory; And Esaias 2. 2, 3.
again, It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all Nations shall flow to it; And many people shall go, and
say* Come ye, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. And
again, Behold, thus says the Lord, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and
set up my Esaias 49. 2^.
standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders: And again, Behold thou shall
call a Nation that thou Esaias. 55. 5.
know not, and Nations that know not thee, shall run unto thee, because of
the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel, for he has glorified thee. O
blessed then, ever blessed be thy name, O God, that thou would vouchsafe to
be made known among us Gentiles; Psalm. 96. 7
Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord, glory and
strength; Give unto the Lord the glory due to his name: All the earth shall
worship thee, Ps. 66. 4.
and shall sing unto thee, they shall sing unto thy name; All Ps. 22. 27
the ends of the world shall remember, and run unto the Lord, and all the
kinreds of the Nations shall worship before thee.

How did we, O Savior, of old lie under the pity, and contempt of those thy
people, which challenged a peculiarity of thy favor: We have a little sister
(said thy Jewish Spouse) and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
sister, when she shall be spoken for? Take no thought for us, O thou
oncebeloved Cant. 8. 8.
Synagogue of the Jews, thy little sister is not only spoken for, but
contracted, but happily married to her Lord and Savior; having been Hos. 2. 19.
betrothed to him for ever, in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercies: so as we can now return our pity to thee, and say,
We had an elder sister which had breasts, but her breasts are long since
wrinkled, and dried up; what shall we do for our sister in these days of her
barrenness, and just neglect? We shall surely pray for our sister, that God
would be pleased to return to her in his compassion of old, and restore her to
the happy state of her former fruitfulness: We follow them with our prayers,
they us with malice and despite: with how envious eyes did they look upon
those first heralds of the Gospel, who carried the glad tidings of salvation
to the despised Gentiles? what cruel storms of persecution did they raise
against those blessed messengers, whose feet deserved to be beautiful? wherein
their obstinate unbelief turned to our advantage; for after they had made
themselves unworthy of that Gospel of peace, that blessing was instantly
derived upon us Gentiles; and we happily changed conditions with R^m. 11. 2^.
them: The natural branches of the good Olive tree being cut off, we, that
were of the wild Olive contrary to nature, are graffed in; O the goodness and
severity of God! on them Romans 22.
which fell, severity, on us, which succeeded, goodness; They were once the
children, and we the dogs under the table; the crumbs were our lot, the bread
was theirs; now is the case, through their wilful incredulity, altered; they
are the dogs, Romans 11. 1.
and we the children: we sit at a full table, whiles their hunger is not
satisfied with scraps; The casting away of them was the reconciling of the
world, their fall, our exaltation; It is not for us to be high-minded, but Romans
11. 20
to fear: The great sheet with four corners is let down from heaven, with all
manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and creeping things, and fowls of
Act. 10. 11. ^2.
the air; we may kill, and eat; without any difference of clean or unclean; but
even of clean meats we may surfeit. O Savior, it is thy great mercy, that thou
have been thus long preached amongst us Gentiles, that we in the remote ends of
the World have seen the salvation of our God: but if we shall abuse thy graces
to wantonness; and walk unanswerably to this freedom of thy Gospel, how both
just and easy is it for thee to withdraw these blessings from us, and to
return us to the woeful condition of our old forlornnesse: O let it not be
enough that thou art preached amongst us Gentiles; but do thou work us to an
holy obedience of thy blessed Gospel; reclaim us from our abominable
licentiousness of life, from our hellish heresies of opinion, and teach us to
walk worthy of that great salvation, which thou have held forth unto us: so
shall it be our happiness that thou were preached to us Gentiles; otherwise our
condemnation shall be so much the deeper, as our light has been more clear,
and our means more powerful.

SECT. XIII.
SO* poor and despicable, O Believed on in the world
Savior* would thou have thy coming in the flesh, that it is no marvail if
the vain world utterly disregarded thee: For what is the mis-judging world led
by but by outward pomp and magnificence? yea, thy very domestic, followers
after so long acquaintance with thy person and doctrine, even when thou were
risen from the dead, could think of the royalty of a temporal kingdom to be
restored to Israel: and still the perverse generations of Jewish Infidels after
the conviction of so many hundred years, gape for an earthly Monarchy of their
expected Massiah: that, therefore, appearing to the world in so contemptible
means, so born, so living, so dying, thou should be universally believed on
in the world, is the just wonder of the mystery of Godliness. It was the
largness of thy divine bounty to allow thy Gospel preached to every creature;
but alas, it is liberally preached, sparingly received; Who has believed our
report, Esaias, 53. 1.
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? It was the complaint 2 Cor. 1.
23.
of thy chosen vessel the Doctor of the Gentiles, We preach Christ crucified,
to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness: What a power
therefore is there in the mystery of Godliness, that thou art not preached
only, but believed on in the world?

Had thou exhibited thy self in the magnificence and majesty of the Son of
God, attended either with the glorious Angels of heaven, or the mighty Monarchs
of the earth, scattering honors and riches upon thy followers, in abundance:
how large a train would thou have had? how would all the Earth have rung with
Hosonnas to the highest? but now, that thou would come as the Mat. 21. 9.
Son of man, in the homeliest condition of birth, education life and death; not
having so much as an house wherein to put thy head, or a grave wherein to lay
thy dead body; now, that thou would suffer thy self to be spat upon,
scourged, crucifed, reviled; that the stub born hearts of men should be so
convinced by the truth, and power of thy Deity, that thou art believed on in
the world, is the great mystery of Godliness*

The powers of darkness could not but see their kingdom shaken by thy coming
down to the earth, upon this errand of thy Mediation; How busy and violent
therefore were those gates of hell in opposing so glorious a work? How did
they stir up cruel Tyrants, in the first dawning of thy Gospel, furiously to
persecute this way unto death? what exquisite torments of all kinds did they
devise for the innocent professors of thy name? How drunken was the earth with
the blood of thy Martyrs in all parts? And, when they saw how little force
could prevail, (since this Palm Tree grew the more by depression,) how did
they set their wits on work in attempting by fraud, to bring about their cut
fed designs. How cunningly did they go about to undermine that wall, which
they could not batter; now, whole troops of the skilfullest Engineers of hell,
are sent up by damned heresies to blow up, and overthrow that truth, which they
could not beat down* One while thine eternal Deity, another while thy sacred
humanity is impugned by those, who yet style themselves Christians: One while
either of thy natures, another while thy entire Person is laid at, by those
that profess themselves thy friends, and clients* One while thine Offices,
another while thy Scriptures are opposed by those who yet would seem thine; And
though their insinuations have been so eraftily carried, and their colors so
well laid, that no small part of the world has been for the time, beguiled by
them, and drawn into a plausible misbeleef* yet still, great has the truth
ever been, and ever prevailed, happily triumphing over those damnable heresies
that have dared to lift up their head against her, and chasing them into their
hell: So as, in spite of men and Devils, the great mystery of Godliness is
gloriously vindicated, and God manifested in weak flesh is believed on in the
world.

SECT. XIIII.
The world is not all of one 1 John 5. 19.
making, there is a world of creatures, not capable of belief; there is a world
of men that lies in wickedness, refusing to believe; there is a world of
faithful souls, that do believe, and in believing are saved: And, O blessed
Savior, that thou would graciously enlarge this world of believers! Woe is
me, what a world of this world of men lies still under the damnable estate of
unbelief? Alas, for those poor savage Indians, that know nothing of a God;
which out of their fear, and tyrannical superstition, worship Devils, that
they may not hurt them; for those ignorant, and woefully blindfolded Mahumetans,
that are not allowed to see any more, then one blinke of thee, as a great
Prophet, being taught to blaspheme* thy Deity, and to enslave their faith to a
wretched Impostor; for those obstinate Jews that are wilfully blind and will
not see the light of that truth concerning thee their Messiah, which shines
forth clearly to them, in the writings of the Prophets, in the undeniable
accomplishment of all former predictions, in the powerful conviction of
miraculous works; What Christian is there, whose bowels do not yearn, whose
heart does not bleed at the thought of so many millions of miserable
unbeleevers? O thou the God of infinite mercy and compassion, in whose hands
are all the hearts of the sons of men, look down graciously from heaven upon
the dark souls of these poor Infidels and enlighten them with the saving
knowledge of the great mystery of Godliness: Let the beams of thy Gospel
break forth unto them, and work them to a sound belief in thee their God,
manifested in the flesh: Fetch home into thy fold all those that belong to thy
merciful election; bring in the fullness of the Gentiles; gather together the
outcasts of Israel, and glorify thy self in completing a world of believers.
Romans 11. Psalm, 147. 2.
And for us, on whom the ends of the world are come; as we have been graciously
called to the comfortable notice of this mystery of godliness, and have
professed, and vowed a steadfast belief in thy name; so keep us by thy good
spirit in an holy and constant avowance of all those main truths, concerning
thy sacred Person, Natures, and Offices, unto our last end; For thou see, O
blessed Jesu that there is now such an hell of the spirits of error broken
loose into the world, as if they meant to evacuate this part of the mystery of
godliness, (Christ believed on in the world;) O do thou by thy mighty power
restrain and quell these pernicious heresies, and send down these wicked
spirits back to their chains; so as our most holy faith may ever remain
inviolable till the day of thy glorious return. Neither let us sit down
contented that we hold fast and believe the mere history of thy life, death,
and resurrection; (without which, as we can be saved, so with it alone we
cannot) but do thou by thy good spirit, work and settle in our souls, a sound,
lively, operative, justifying faith in thee; whereby we may not only believe on
thee, as a common Savior, but believe in thee, as ours: bringing thee home to
our hearts, and confidently relying upon thee, for the acquittance of all our
sins, and for our eternal salvation: O that thou might be thus believed on
in the world; and if not by them, in the notion of their universality, yet by
us who Received up into glory.
profess thy name, to thy great glory and our everlasting comfort.

SECT. XV.
IN these occurrences, on the earth; Great is the mystery of godliness, but
the highest pitch of this great mystery, O Savior, is, that thou thus
manifested in our flesh, were received up into glory: even that celestial
glory which thou enjoyest in the highest heavens, sitting on the right hand of
majesty, seen and adored by all that blessed company of the Heb. 12. 22. 23.
souls of just men made perfect, and the innumerable troops of glorious Angels:
If some erroneous fancies have placed their heaven here below upon earth, ours
is above; and so is thine O blessed Jesu, who were taken up in glory; thou
could not be taken up to any earthly ascent, since thou tookest thy farewell
on the top of Mount Olivet: but from this globe of earth thou ascendest through
the skies to that Empyreall heaven, where thou remainest in glory, infinite,
and incomprehensible. The many and intentive beholders of thy last parting, did
not cast their eyes down into the valley, neither did see cause with the fifty
sons 2 King 2. 16.
of the Prophets, to seek for thee (as they would needs do for Elijah) in
valleys, and mountains; they saw and worishpped thee, leasurely ascending up
through the region of this lower heaven, till a cloud intercepted thee from
their sight; neither then could easily be taken off, either by the
interposition of that dark body, or by the interpellation of Angels: And now, O
blessed Savior, how is my soul ravished with the mediation of thy glorious
reception into thine Heaven? Surely, if the inhabitants of those celestial
mansions may be capable of any increase of joy, they then both found and showed
it, when they saw and welcomed thee entering in thy gorlifi'd humanity, in to
that thy eternal palace of blessedness; and if there could be any higher, or
sweter ditty then Hallelujah, it was then sung by the Chore of Angels and
Saints. And may thy poor servants warfairing and wandering here upon earth, ever
second them in those heavenly songs of praises and gratulations: for wherein
stands all our safety, hope, comfort, happiness, but in this, that thou our
Jesus art received up into glory? and having conquered all adverse powers,
sit on the right hand of God the Farher, crowned with honor and majesty? O
Jesu, thou art our head, we are thy body: how can the body but participate of
the glory of the head? as for thy self therefore, so for us, art thou possessed
of that heavenly glory: as thou sufferedst for us, so for us thou also
raignest; Let Phil. 2. 11.
every knee therefore bow unto thee, of things in heaven, and things on earth,
and things under the earth; O blessed be thy name for ever and ever: Thine, 2
Chr. 2. 11.
O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory,
and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven, and in the earth is thine:
thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head over all: And now, O
Savior, what a superabundant amends is made to thy glorified humanity, for
all thy bitter sufferings upon earth? Thine Agony was extreme, but thy glory
is infinite, thy cross was heavy, but thy crown transcendently glorious: thy
pains were unconceivably grievous, but short, thy glory everlasting: If thou
were scorned by men, thou art now adored by Angels: Thou that stoodst before
the Judgment Seat of a Pilate, shall come in all heavenly magnificence to judge
both the quick and the dead; Shortly, thou which would stoop to be a servant
upon Earth, rulest and raignest for ever in Heaven as the King of eternal
glory.

O then, my soul, seeing thy Savior is received up into this infinite glory,
with what intention and fervor of spirit should thou fix thine eyes upon
that heaven where he lives, and raigns? How can thou be but wholly taken up
with the sight and thought of that place of blessedness? how can thou abide
to grovell any longer on this base Earth, where is nothing but vanity and
vexation; and refrain to mind the things above, where is all felicity and
glory? with what longings, and holy ambi^ion should thou desire to aspire to
that place of eternal rest, and beatitude, into which thy Savior is ascended?
and with him to partake of that glory and happiness which he has provided for
all that love him? O Savior, it is this clog of wretched infidelity and
earthlinesse that hangs heavy upon my soul, and keeps me from mounting up into
thy presence, and from a comfortable fruition of thee: O do thou take off this
sinful weight from me, and raise up my affections and conversation to thee;
enable me constantly to enjoy thee by a lively faith here: till by thy mercy I
shall be received into thy glory.

FINIS.

