LONDONS REMONSTRANCE TO THE PARLIAMENT, In subscribing to the Propositions of
both HOUSES, Concerning Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms to be lent for
the maintenance of an Army for the Kings Peace, and the safety of the
Parliament.

As it was concluded by the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and
Common-Councell-men of the City of LONDON, in Guild Hall; and by the Masters,
Wardens, etc. of all Companies in each several Hall.

With the just sum and proportion of Money and Plate collected, and to be
presented to the Parliament.

Received by Sir John Wollaston Knight and Alderman, Alderman Towse, Alderman
Warner, and Alderman Andrews.

Written by I. H. Gent.

London printed for John Harrison. June 23. 1642.

LONDONS REMONSTRANCE TO THE PARLIAMENT, In subscribing to the Propositions of
both HOUSES.
SInce by too-apparent demonstrations it appears, that the King (deluded, and
seduced by the evil Counsels of a malignant party, whose Spirits are
ill-affected to the public peace of this Kingdom) intends to make war
against the Parliament, and that in continuance of the same intention, he has
already collected and levied great forces both of Horse and Foot, to maintain
the former resolution throughout the County of York, and a multitude of
Papists, and other resolute and ill-disposed persons in other Counties
adjacent; all which do apparently intimate his resolution to make war
against the Parliament: They have therefore after a serious and deliberate
consideration thereof, propounded certain Propositions to the City of London,
desiring their assistance in a present aid for the security of both Houses;
for otherwise the pernicious malice of such desperate persons, employed in so
horrid, and unnatural an Act, will be ready to commit all outrage and
violence, which will consequently tend to the dissolution of this present
government, the violation of the Privileges of Parliament, the destruction of
our Religion, and all hopes in reforming the Church, to the perpetual ruin of
the Laws, the liberty and propriety of the Subjects. Wherefore the Lords and
Commons, considering how great an obligation does lie upon them in Honor,
Conscience, and Duty, according to the high trust reposed in them by the whole
Kingdom, to use all possible means in such cases for the timely prevention of
so great and irrecoverable evils, have thought it expedient to publish their
sense and apprehensions of these imminent dangers; thereby to excite and
extimulate all well-affected persons to contribute their respective assistance
to the preparations necessary for the opposing and suppressing the traiterous
attempts of those malignant spirits. The City of London seemed to sympathize
exceedingly with these Propositions: and the Parliament were not more ready to
propound them, then they as ready to perform, and obey the same.

Last Tuesday the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common-Councell-men, met
at Guild Hall in distribution of their affections, and in consultations what
should be dispensed out of the City Treasury. Every Company likewise did meet
at their Halls, and there distributed every man respectively; for men had
better dispense with their Money and Plate, conditionally to receive the same
with interest, and have the public faith of the whole Kingdom engaged for the
security thereof, then being parsimonious and refractory, perhaps have that
Money and Plate taken violently from them by intestine enemies: and let any man
judge, Whether the prevention of such impendent dangers be not more plausible
then the policy and diligence of a Remedy, when extremity shall drive a man to
the last hopes: It is more easy to keep out of dangers, then to get out of
them. Wherefore it were more prudent for men (that can spare money, without any
detriment or prejudice to themselves) to dispense with what money they can, for
the conservation of peace voluntarily, then when violent war shall come
rushing in upon us, to dispense then with compulsion; or else perhaps to be
reduced to an estate not less miserable then slavish. But not to hold the
Readers desiring eye in any longer suspense, I will delineate, and express the
particular proportion of moneys gathered in London. The Lord Mayor, Court of
Aldermen, and Common-Councell-men, sitting at Guild Hall, made a final
determination of their intents, and have disbursed fifty thousand pounds,
partly out of the City Treasury, and partly out of their own purses; and will
maintain fifty Horse. Most of the twelve Companies have dispensed twenty
thousand pounds a piece; and of the other Companies, ten thousand pounds is the
least that any have disbused: besides an infinite number of Plate that is lent,
of an unknown worth. Some Companies maintain threescore Horse, some forty,
some thirty, but twenty is the least that any Company maintains, with as many
Horse men: for the preservation of the public peace and tranquillity of the
Kingdom, for the personal defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament.
The affection of no man was measured by any limitation, but according to the
proportion of his offer, he expressed his good will to this service. But
according to the appointment and direction of both Houses of Parliament, the
Money, Plate, Horse, or Horsemen were delivered to Sir John Wollaston, Knight
and Alderman, Alderman Towse, Alderman Warner, and Alderman Andrews: for they
were Ordered to be Treasurers to receive all the Money and Plate, brought in
for the purposes aforesaid. And the Acquittances of them, or of any two of them
(as it was ordered by the Parliament) for the Receipt of the same is a
sufficient ground for the Party so lending Money, or Plate, to demand the same
again with interest; and likewise consideration for the fashion of the Plate.
The total sum of all the Moneys and Plate that the City has brought in to
the said Aldermen, is supposed to amount to above ten hundred thousand pounds:
the Horse and Horsemen to the number of about eight hundred and fifty; but
there are many more Horse in preparation to be sent.

FINIS.

