A SERMON PREACHED at Mercers-Chappel, On the 13 th of JANUARY, 1688/9.

BY TIMOTHY Lord Bishop of OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry,
over against Stocks-Market. MDCLXXXIX.

LEVITICUS XIX. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.


THAT we love the Brotherhood, and be kindly affectioned to one another, is the
joint and concurrent Language both of Law and Gospel; It is one of those common
Principles which are naturally engraven on the tables of the hearts of all men.
The ways and methods of discharging our duty, and expressing our good will to
Mankind, are various and different, they run in several channels; one is
mentioned in my Text, viz. by fraternal correption; a necessary, but a much
neglected Duty. We are very prone and forward to reproach our Brethren for
their infirmities, and to make a mock at their sins; instead of going back, and
throwing a Mantle over them, to hide and cover their nakedness; we rather draw
the Curtain open, and with a secret titillation and pleasure expose them to the
observation and contempt of the most scornful Michal: Instead of burying, and
Christianly interring in silence, some of their slips and failures, men rather
rake in the Grave, and tear up the Earth to give them an inglorious
resurrection.

When we should privately address to our Brother with all imaginable Meekness,
Pity, and Sobriety, to restore and recover him after some irregular step, or
unwary fall, men rather publicly proclaim and divulge on the Housetop their
Neigbours failing; and set it in such a light where it may most eminently be
seen.

With what bitter taunts and cruel mockings, with what slanderous aspersions
and defamations do men prosecute one another? Yea, to that height of wickedness
have some advanced in these low-running dregs of time, that instead of being
grieved that their Brother has done amiss, they could be glad if he had done
much worse. My Friends, is not this a great fault? have we thus learned either
of Moses, or Christ? This way of treating thy Brother will appear to be
collateral Blasphemy, and virtual Murder: Let me show you a more excellent
way, by learning your Duty to him in the words of my Text:

Which Duty is expressed,

1. Negatively, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart.

2. Affirmatively, Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor.

3. With an Argument and Motive persuading us to it; And not suffer sin upon
him.

I shall not wear out my little time in accurate and Logical Analyzing of the
words, but shall consider them as an entire Doctrinal Proposition.

1. Neg. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart.

A Meiosis: Thou shall heartily love him, and do all good Offices to him,
relating both to his Soul and Body.

This is to resemble God, who is always doing of good, and showring down his
Blessings and Mercies on our Heads; nay, in this work of Brotherly Reprehension
we resemble our Heavenly Father, who is said to rebuke and reprove whomsoever
he Loves, Rev. 3.19. And if thou make not Conscience thus to Love and affect
him, thou art guilty of his Blood, and wilt be esteemed, in God's account, his
Murderer; for he that hates his Brother is so, 1 John 3.15. And the Connection
of the Text to the former Verse, gives us full proof of it. Verse 16. Thou
shall not stand against the blood of thy neighbor; and this is one way of
doing of it, by omitting rebuke. Well then, love thy Brother, get admission
into his heart and bowels; not by the point of a Baionet, or the force of a
Bullet, that is a very strange demonstration of our affection to him (which by
some has been practiced); but get into him by mild and soft counsels, by
wholesome advice.

2 dly, Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor.

Fail not at your peril; here is a plain injunction, no Man exempted, no corner
to creep out at. It is not left to your will and pleasure; no Pleas and Excuses
will serve your turn to justify your omission. Necessity is laid on thee, Thou
shall in any wise do it: Thou shall do it, Thou thy self, not by thy Deputy or
Substitute. Reproof is like the Peace Offering made by Fire, thine own hand
must bring it, Lev. 1.17.

Rebuke thy Neighbor.

Who is this Neighbor? It was a Question propounded to Christ himself, Luke
10.29. The Solution may be gathered out of Christ's Answer.

1. In the General. Every Man to whom I may be helpful. Our Lord proves a
Stranger may be a Neighbor, Luke 10.36.

All people that have the face of Man are called our flesh, Isa. 58. And our
blood, Acts 17.26. One blood; Cousins at a remoter distance. Any Man is our
Neighbor, in regard of the nearness of our first Original; nay, not only a
Stranger, but an Enemy may thus be our Neighbor.

It Is true indeed, that the Precept of Moses, concerning the kind dealing of
the Jews with other men, extended not universally to all, Dr. Hammond.
but peculiarly to their Countrymen or Fellow- Jews; as for Aliens and Enemies
they were not bound to be kind to them; nay, against some, viz. the Seven
Nations, they were commanded to proceed in an hostile manner. Matt. 5.43. But
our Savior teaches us to extend our kindness as the Blessings of Heaven, even
to enemies and injurious provokers: In the same manner and measure as they do
ill to you, do ye good to them, blessing, obliging, admonishing, reproving,
praying for them, and making them no other returns for all their virulencies,
and malicious behavior toward you, but those of kindness and love, that so you
may approve your selves to be the Servants and Children of the Most high God,
and your Heavenly Father.

2 dly, There are more especially Neighbors, who dwell near us, with whom we
frequently converse, and have repeated opportunities of showing our love in
this kind to them. There are also,

3 dly, Spiritual Neighbors, begotten by the same spirit, to the same hopes;
these are to have a special preferment in our affections: They have the same
God to their Father, the same Church for their Mother, the same House for their
dwelling, and the same Inheritance for their portion.

3. And not suffer sin upon him.

There are various Readings of these words; some thus, Do not burden thy self
with sin for him, Non suscipies propter illum peccatum, i. e. Poenam peccati.
Take heed lest by thy silence thou bring the guilt of his sin upon thee.

Through the silence of one, we often suffer two to dye, our selves and our
erring brother. Sure I am, he that said, If thy brother repent, forgive him,
said also before that, If thy brother offend, admonish him: And it is as great
a sin, not to reprove our brother when he has transgressed, as not to forgive
him, when he has repented. If we suffer sin upon him, we our selves may suffer
for his sin. We neglect to do good, and so great evil comes of it.

But the most general and proper reading of the words is, as in our ordinary
Translation, Thou shall not connive at him, and thereon embolden him to
continue in his sin, augmenting the heap and number of his Transgressions, but
shall put a stop to him by seasonable and timely Reprehension. Let no man tell
me this is mere Morality, and prejudice himself against the benefit he should
reap. As God in his Law, so Christ in his Gospel does peremptorily exact and
call for our compliance with this Precept in several places: If thy brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault, Mat. 18.15. Warn them
that are unruly, 1 These. 5.14. They are said to be full of Goodness, who have
the ability to admonish one another, Romans 15.14. Ye count him as an enemy, whom
you will not admonish as a brother. 2 These. 3.15. Reprove the unfruitful works
of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. It was a Law in Israel, That a man should not see his
Brothers Ox or Ass fall down by the way, and hide himself from them. Does God
take care for Oxen? nay, for us are these things written. But alas! we are
fallen into those latter days spoken of by our Blessed Savior, wherein
iniquity should increase, and the love of many wax cold. What a sinful
bashfulness does attend us, sneaking shamefully from our work and duty of
Reproof, when an hellish impudence is in some profligate Wretches, that with
open face, and brazen brow daily make breaches on God's Royal Law! How quietly
and unconcernedly can we see some violent sinners upon a full career in the
broad way of Destruction, and never attempt to stop them, or throw in a bar or
block to abate the swiftness of their feet, tho it be to the shedding of their
own blood? Is this consistent with the Love of God? with the love of thy
brother's invaluable soul? or the happiness and security of thine own?

Having by this short Paraphrase taken off what of mist and darkness might
surround the Words, I should descend to an Enquiry into several Particulars,
each of which would require more time to discourse of, than usually is allotted
to Exercises of this nature; yet I shall not totally omit them.

As 1. I should state the nature of this Duty, and show you wherein it does
consist.

2. On whom this Duty is most principally incumbent.

3. I shall demonstrate the great Necessity and Reasonableness of it.

4. I shall lay down some Rules and Directions how to manage it successfully.

5. I shall, lastly, Apply it.

In short, for the First Particular, I shall only take notice of Three Words in
the Scripture, which sufficiently express the nature of Reprehension.

1. (...). A striking and beating of one. It denotes the vehemence and
earnestness of Reproof.

The Gravity of some men's Persons, and the Eminency of their Station, do exempt
them from blows of this nature; you may read the Supersedeas which some men
have, 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a father; have
respect to his Office, and deal not rigidly with him.

2. (...), a more mild and gentle kind of increpation, yet joined with some
Acrimony, and tartness of Speech, 2 Cor. 2.6. Thus Peter rebuked Christ, Mark
8.32.

3. (...), a bare minding and remembering, a putting of the Mind in order by
Advertisement and Admonition. This is the most fair and favorable course, the
most likely to prove successful, that which primarily is to be used, the other
only in extremities.

The Schoolmen give many definitions of it, and the Ancient Fathers abound with
variety of Illustrations, telling us, that great is the Affinity between Soul
and Body, both as to their Diseases and Remedies: That which Physic is to the
Body, Reprehension is to the Soul, and the same rule and method must be
observed in the application of the means of Cure. They reckon up three Parts of
Physic, (...), by Diet, Medicines, and Chyrurgery, all which by way of Analogy
and Proportion, are to be used in the Cure of Spiritual Distempers. Clemens
Alexandrinus compares them together.

1. Admonition (he says) is the Diet of the Soul, forbidding that which is
simply hurtful, or contrary to the disposition of the Patient, and affording
strong and wholesome nourishment.

2. Reproof is a Medicinal Potion, that has always attending of it a tang of
bitterness, which purges out the Morbifick Matter, and all peccant Humors and
Corruptions of the Soul, and is a great Restorative.

3. Rebuke, if sharp and keen, is the spiritual Chyrurgery, which sometimes is
to be used cuttingly, with a sharp Point and Edge. Intemperans aeger crudelem
facit Medicum. Salt upon some occasions must be rubbed and chafed into some
sores and wounds.

In short, Brotherly correption consists in giving our Brethren necessary
instructions in matters they are ignorant of; in letting them have timely
notice of their sinful Affections, and Inclinations; and in a total breaking
off our intimacy of conversation, and society with them, if they prove stubborn
and incorrigible, stopping their ears against all wise Charms.

I proceed now to the

II. Particular, To show who are the Persons mostly concerned in the discharge
of this Duty.

The better to understand this, you must know that Divines generally
distinguish Reproof into Ministerial, and by way of Authority; and Fraternal,
by way of Charity.

1. Ministers admonish by way of Office. The truth is, the work of Reproof
belongs in some sort to all men who have the use of Reason, because it is a
natural Precept, and a work of Mercy, a general Office due from one neighbor
to another. Hence Infidels may reprove Believers; so Abimelech reproved Sarah,
Genesis 20.15. Thus Inferiors may reprove their Superiors, provided it be done
with Modesty and Reverence. But principally this Duty is incumbent on three
sorts of Persons.

1. On such who in regard of Office are obliged to take the charge and care of
others, as Ministers and Dispensers of the Divine Oracles are.

2. On such who are engaged by bonds of Nature, and their Relative Stations and
Capacities; thus Patents and Masters stand more especially concerned.

3. On such who are qualified and fitted with Parts and Gifts to perform this
Office with success.

1. It is a principal part of our Ministry to rebuke. Among Christ's Disciples
one was styled a Son of Thunder; and what was said of St. Basil, ought to be
the Character of every faithful Steward in God's House, That he thundered in
his Doctrine, and lightened in his Life. If we look through all the Old
Testament, you will find that most of the Prophets Messages were severe Rebukes
and Threatenings. The Jews call the Book of Deuteronomy, the Book of
Objurgations; and that Section which begins Deuteronomy. 28.15. they call the
Section of Objurgations. The necessity of this Duty is such to us, that God
will require the blood of the People at the hands of their Pastor, if he
reprove not. The Shepherd was bound to make good that which was stolen, as
Jacob did to Laban, Cry aloud, spare not, Genesis 31.19. Isa. 58.1.
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their Transgression, and
the house of Jacob their sins. It Is the Spiritual Father's charge to his own
Son in the Faith, That he rebuke them that sin, before all, that others may
fear: 1 Timothy 5.20.
And this he must do without Partiality, not fearing the Eminency, nor being
deterred at the Greatness or any bold and open Transgressor.

As this is required of Ministers chiefly, so it is expected and demanded of
Parents and Masters; God has made them Guardians of their Children and
Servants. It is an idle conceit to think that we only are entrusted with the
Cure of Souls; you will find it no excuse for your negligence and omission in
the great day of giving up your Accounts at God's Tribunal; you are obliged to
be keepers of their Souls, as well as we; nay, every man, in this sense, ought
to be his Brother's Keeper. As God has set Conscience to watch over the inward
man, so for the conversation he has set Christians to watch over one another.
Suffer me before I proceed any further, to improve this.

1. It should teach all Ministers to be faithful in their places, and to take
care that no man muzzle up their mouths. Rev. 2.2.
See how the Holy Ghost commends the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; I know thy
works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them which
are evil. Wicked men are sometimes intolerable, not to be endured or bore with.
It is no breach of Patience to be impatient against sin and sinners.

It is said of Suetonius, that he took the same liberty in writing the Emperors
lives, that they took in leading them. Wicked men take liberty to
licentiousness in committing sin, let us take as great a liberty in reproving
it, and let nothing either affright or allure us to a sinful connivance at
their bold violations of God's Law. We must not be dumb, tho they should use us
as the thief does a dog, hold out a piece of bread to bribe us not to bark.

2. This should teach the Great ones of the world to bear with Patience, and to
receive with Meekness the word of Reproof. None are so high exalted as to be
out of the reach of that Word which God speaks.

None are more our friends than they are, who cannot stand by, and see us offer
violence to our selves without holding of our hands, Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil, which shall not break my head. Psalm. 141.5.
There may be smiting without violation of Friendship; and his wise Son Solomon
preferred the wounds of a friend, before the kisses of an enemy. These may be
pleasanter, Prove. 27.6.
but those will prove wholesomer; there is Treachery in these kisses, but in
those wounds faithfulness. The Mother of Cyrus charged him who was to speak to
the King, to express himself verbis byssinis, in soft and silken terms. It Is
true, sometimes we must come in the Spirit and Language of Love; but it is as
true, there is oftentimes as great need of coming with a Rod in our hands, as a
soft word in our mouths.

Bad men love not a Correcting Ministry; like them, Amos 7.10. The land is not
able to bear all his words; and ver. 13. prophecy not again any more at
Bethel, for it is the King's chapel, and it is the King's court. They hate him
that rebukes in the gate, (i. e. the Judge that punished sin) they abhor him
that speaks uprightly.

Men will endure to hear new Notions and controverted Points; any Satirical
Reflections, and bitter Invectives against their brethren; but cannot brook to
have their own Personal sins roughly handled. Be careful you do not Galatizare
(as Tertullian phrases it) hate him who tells you the truth; nor be like those
hearers mentioned Luke 4.19, 21, 22, 28. While our Savior preached the
acceptable and glad tidings of Salvation, the good news contained in the
Gospel, all the Congregation of Nazareth applauded his Doctrine, and admired at
the blessed words which proceeded out of his mouth; but when he came to apply
the word unto themselves, they were filled with wrath against him, thrust him
out of the City, and would have broke his neck, by attempting to cast him down
headlong from the brow of the Hill, v. 29.

Have a care you resist not such a Ministry, which awakens the Conscience, and
sets the worm on gnawing, although it should provoke thee to cry out with a loud
voice, as he did who was possessed with an unclean Spirit, Luke 4.33, 34.
Let us alone, art thou come to destroy us? God does manifest his Presence and
mighty Power in such a sifting Ministry; and the nature of Sin is to make men
afraid of God's Appearance, and foolishly with Adam to attempt the secreting of
themselves from his All-seeing Eye. Tit. 2.15.
We are commanded to exhort and rebuke with all authority; and you are enjoined
not to despise and fret against the Doctrine we deliver, and that on pain of
Everlasting Damnation, Prove. 15.10.
for he that hates reproof, shall dye.

I proceed to the 2 d Branch of Reproof, that which is Fraternal, and done in
Brotherly Charity. Every Private Christian may bear the Person, tho not the
Office of a Reprover; and this is founded upon undeniable Grounds, too large to
be insisted on at this time, in one single Sermon.

Whether we consult the Honor of God, or the necessity of a punctual
conformity to his Will, not distinguishing his Commands, but obeying all
equally; it nor disputing any of them, but obeying all readily; it will appear
to be our interest as well as our duty, presently to comply with God's Will and
Pleasure: Or if we respect the happiness and welfare of our Brother, exercising
in this work the highest acts of charity and benevolence; for if he hear us,
then we have gained our brother. When thou hear thy Neighbor swear, lie,
slander, deride holiness, persecute with his Tongue the Man who is more
righteous than himself, entreat him then to bethink himself what will be the
end of such Devilish practices; show him his danger, and snatch him, if it be
possible, out of the fire he is hastening into. Thou have a heart of Stone, if
thou art not concerned, and industrious to prevent his everlasting ruin; for
he is riding post to the Devil, if a stop be not put in his way. It is no
privilege to any Man to be out of the way of a Reprover; but a severe judgment
to be told they shall no more be smitten with this Rod. God, to punish Judah
for their Rebellion, threatens to impose silence on his Prophet. Ezekiel. 3.26
Let us make much of a blow and stroke of this nature, it carries healing with
it. Lib. 6. Conf. c. 9.
St. Austin gives two instances of the happy success of Admonition, the one
given by himself to his Friend Alipius, who was thereby reclaimed from the
Theater and Stage Plays; the other by a taunt and check given to his Mother
Monica, who was thereby reclaimed from her Tippling.

If we consult in the next place our own private weal and happiness, it will
appear to be highly reasonable. Hereby we prevent our being partakers of other
men's sins; so that if our Brother perish, he perishes to himself. This is the
way to keep our selves pure from the blood of all men, Acts 20.26.
by declaring to them the whole counsel of God. This is the way to entail,
God's Blessing on us: To them that rebuke, Prove. 24.25.
a good blessing shall come upon them. Nay, it is not only the way to procure
God's favor, but Man's too. A well-given reproof will ingratiate the Reprover
with the Reproved. He that rebukes a man, Prove. 28.23.
afterward shall find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue.
This is according to the former Observation, Rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee. Prove. 9.8.
If we hereby be so wise as to turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
we shall be so happy as to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as
the stars for ever and ever. And one advantage more we shall gain, we hereby
take a prudent course to provide for our selves a faithful Friend to perform
the same kind office as occasion serves. There is no member in the mystical
body of Christ, that may not need the assistance of another The eye has need
of the hand, the hand of the feet. We were sometimes foolish and disobedient;
And had not we Preachers and Friends to admonish us? Freely you have received,
freely give. Thy heart is not right, if thou who wast a Stranger, cannot pity
Strangers. Hereby also we should countermine the Devil in two grand methods of
his deceit, viz. The multitude of sinners, and the Impunity of sin. Reproof
will abate the number of offenders, and show the apparent hazard and danger men
run by continuing in their sins. That impediment to the discharge of this Duty,
viz. Singularity, would be taken off; weak Christians would be kept from being
scandalized, and strong ones from being grieved. If these Considerations are
not sufficient to show us the necessity of taking up vigorous and speedy
resolutions to live no longer in the neglect and sinful omission of fraternal
Reprehension, I know not what to add more that may prevail; But must leave such
to some other, and I fear, more dreadful way of conviction, when it will be too
late to retrieve the loss, either of their Brother or themselves. I am forced
to wave my Answer to the particular Cavils and Excuses which many allege for
their discharge from this work. I therefore must come to the last particular
propounded to be spoken to, which was,

The giving some Directions and Rules how to manage Reproof in such a manner,
as that we rationally may expect we shall see it turn to account.

It is a great Art to do it aright, like the Husband-man's skill which his God
does teach him. Every one can find fault and chide; but to reprove discreetly
and effectually, requires much wisdom: Eccles. 12.11.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies.

And here I shall not multiply Rules; but among the great throng of them, which
by many have been produced, shall select these few following:

Rule 1. Let the Rebuker look to it, that he be free from that Sin which he
condemns in another. Herod's Conscience was pricked to the quick, from the
consideration of the holiness and justness of the Baptist. Thus did Samuel deal
with the people; 1 Samuel 12.3.
first he clears his own Innocence, and then charges them with their Sin. God
Honors his Servants in the Consciences of their greatest Enemies. To accuse a
Man for Drunkenness, Covetousness, or any other sin, and yet to live in it thy
self, What is this, but with David in Nathan's Parable, to pronounce the
sentence of condemnation on thy self? With what a controuling, over-powering
force did our Savior tax the sins of the Jews, when he prefaced his Discourse
with that bold Challenge, Who is there amongst you that convinces me of sin? He
that lives in the commission of that sin he condemns in another, must expect
that his words will recoyl upon himself, as a foul Gun does in discharging. Let
us so walk that our feet cast not dirt into our mouths. Many a savoury truth is
hindered in its operation, by the stinking breath of him that delivers it. Every
one desires, if he must be stricken, that it be by the hand of the Righteous.
To see a Judas cast a Stone at a Covetous Man, a Pharisee at an Hypocrite, an
Herod at an Adulterer, is a sight that creates laughter and contempt. None
speak at so great an advantage, as they whose Hands are lifted up to God's
Commandments, whilst their Tongues are rebuking the transgressors. of them.

Rule 2. As the Reprover must look to it that he be faultless, so he must be
sure that his Brother be faulty; for otherwise thou do not reprove, but
reproach him; and instead of being a Wise Admonisher, thou art an Hellish
Accuser of the Brethren; thou do not perform the Duty of a Christian, but
do execute the Office of the Devil. Two things must here be regarded:

1. That it be a sin thou reprovest him for. 2. That it be His sin thou
reprovest him for.
1. That it be a sin; Be sure he be a transgressor of the Law, before thou
smite him with this rod. There must be a breach of some Command, Affirmative or
Negative; directly, or by consequence; either the doing what he ought not, or
the not doing of what he ought. To judge a Man for an Hatband or Cuffs, for a
Lace or piece of Ribbon, for a Knot or a Feather, (as uncouth sort of men have
of late done) smells rank of pride, censoriousness and uncharitableness. But
alas! In what an Age do we live, where men's quarrels against one another shall
take their rise from such minute and inconsiderable beginnings, that a wise Man
is ashamed to name them, being as insignificant and unedifying, as he who
studied Thirty years, whither Virgil's name should be written with an I, or an
E.

Reprove not therefore thy Brother for things lawful or indifferent, for
trivial and undecided matters. Be sure you have good ground to proceed on.
Beware of severe censures, and contentious debates. Many a matter that kindles
unnatural heart-burnings between Professors of Religion, when it comes to be
scanned, and fully understood, proves either nothing at all, or at most,
nothing to the purpose. It was the case of the Reubenites, Josh. 22.12.
The Army of Israel was raised against them, nothing but War, Fire and Sword
were threatened for their building an Altar of Testimony in their journey; when
they met together, and had discoursed the matter, and came to a right
understanding of their Brethrens end and intentions, V. 35.
they were presently reconciled. Thus our Brethren suffer often through our
ignorance; to such Reprovers we may say, what Job did to his mistaken friends,
who upbraided him with hypocrisy; How forcible are right words! Job 6.25.
but what does your arguing reprove? Some conceive that Jacob understood not
the mystery of his Son Soseph's Dream (concerning the Sun, Moon and Stars
making obeisance to him) whence it came, and how it should be accomplished,
when, he read his chiding Lecture about it.

2. Look to it carefully that the thing be not only a sin you reprove him
about, but that it be his sin. It was foretold of Christ, Isa. 11.3.
that he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the
hearing of his ears. Jealousies and conjectures, hear says, fancies and
reports, are not sufficient grounds for reproof. The Rule of Charity is,
Quisque presumitur quod bonus est, nisi constat de malo. Thus we read, neither
John's mourning, nor Christ's piping could pass their hard censures; but the
one has a Devil, and the other is a Glutton, and Wine-bibber.

Tho Christ came to fulfill the Law, yet there were that accused him as a
destroyer of it. Tho he decided the Question fairly on Caesar's side, in the
grand Case of Tribute and Custom, yet there wanted not those who charged him
with disloyalty. How were the Apostles slandered as Seducers and Sectaries,
Vain Bablers, and Heretics, Broachers of new, false, and pestilent Doctrines,
Presumptuous and Heady, Despisers of Dignities, and Promoters of Uproars, Riots
and Routs, and Unlawful Assemblies. In succeeding times, if we read the
Apologies of Athenagoras, Tertullian and others, it will amaze you to see with
what vilainous practices, and unnatural impieties they are charged; and no
wonder, for if they called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more
those of his household?

Because it was against Law to have Virgins strangled, Tiberius would have them
first deflour'd, and then according to Law, (alias humor, will and pleasure)
they must dye that death.

It is too much to abuse a good Man, as such; but first commit a rape on his
Name, and your way is open to his Life and Fortune.

The poor Protestants of Paris must first be accused of a Conspiracy against
the King, and then thousands together must be Butchered without mercy.

So Men, by misrepresenting, dress up their Brethren in the monstrous shapes of
Vultures and Harpies, with Claws and Talons, as being well armed for Prey and
Rapine; and then afterward fall foul on them. Thus was Hannah reproved for
Drunkenness, which she no ways could be guilty of, except large draughts of her
own Tears should intoxicate her: She was far enough from a merry heart; her
grief and sorrow did even break her heart, and she was overwhelmed with her
distress.

Mistake not therefore thy Man and Mark, and bear not false witness against thy
brother. Tho David will ever be registered in the Albo Justorum, and reckoned in
the number of good men, yet his act of censuring unheard Mephibosheth, will
ever be reckoned amongst his unjust Actions.

Potiphar was guilty of this injustice, by an overhasty crediting his Wifes
forged Tale against Joseph. A better course is prescribed. Inquire and make
search, Deuteronomy. 13.14.
and ask diligently, if it be Truth that is told.

Rule 3. Take care thy ends and intentions be sincere and upright in this work:
For if they are not right, it will vitiate all thou do in this or any other
Duty of Religion, either to thy God, or thy Neighbor. Let nothing be done out
of vainglory, and a secret ambitious desire of observation and raising up a
great name for thy self. Purge out that evil proud humor of contradicting and
controuling others; avoid every thing that may be interpreted to be a design to
disgrace and render thy Brother mean and contemptible in the eyes and
apprehensions of his Neighborhood and acquaintance. Look to it that all be
directed to those glorious ends of God's Glory, the recovery of thine erring
Brother, the satisfying thine own Conscience in the necessary discharge of thy
Duty, out of hatred to sin, and a desire to suppress that in this untoward and
evil Generation, and to promote universal Holiness throughout the World.

Rule 4. Let all Reproofs be managed with the greatest demonstrations and
expressions of Charity and Love to their persons that may be. When you express
your warmest zeal against their sins, be sure you usher in all your advice with
soft Prefaces of good will, pity, and real affections to them. The Text tells
us, Reproofs must not be given in hatred; they are bitter Pills, and should be
wrapped up in Honey, that they may slip down the better. Many therefore have well
advised it as a prudent course, to intermix their due Commendations with our
Admonitions, whereby the reception of our Advice would be much facilitated. The
dreadfullest and most solemn Censures of the Church of God, are not Mortal but
Medicinal, and are appointed not for Killing, but for Cure. Our reproofs being
thus tempered with Love, will be like a Sword dipped in Balsom, that wounds and
heals at the same time. It was said long since by an Ancient Father,
Admonitio misericordia carens tortura est. Do not put thy Brother on a Rack,
and torture him with violent and continual repetitions of his guilt.

5. Rule, Avoid all extravagancies of rage and passion, and let all be done
meekness and humility of mind. Reproof, tho it ought to be warm, yet it must
not be scalding hot. The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.
Michael the Archangel when controverting with the Devil, showed himself to be
a pure Spirit, by the calmness of the debate, which was not managed with any
excess of Passion. Hard Arguments and Soft Words should be yoked together.

Play not the part of an enemy under the mask of a friend, which is done by
pretending to heal a wound in the Conscience of our brother, or to wash him
clean from some blots and stains in his Conversation, but thou do set and
imprint some mark or brand of shame and ignominy on his name. This is the
direction of the Apostle, Restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; Gal.
6.1.
q. d. Deal as gently with a fallen brother, as thou would with a man whose
bones are dislocated; for so much, say Critics, the Metaphor in that place
imports. Elisha did more with a kiss, than his man with a staff.

Consider not so much what you are able to say, as what your brother is able to
bear. Use the Christian Art to suit and proportion your Wine to your Bottles;
let not children have strong meat, nor grown persons milk; be sure it be what
is most proper for their health and nourishment, what the stomach can well
digest, and will not throw up again. Yet withal, remember to reprove with all
seriousness, that they may know thou art in earnest. A trifling slight
reprehension, like old Eli's to his profligate Sons, (who only shaked his head
at them, when their heads rather should have been stricken off) What does it
signify or avail? Oftentimes it does more harm than good, and rather emboldens
than reforms the Offender.

It is a piece of great Wisdom and Skill to commensurate our rebukes to the
temper of the offender, and to the nature of his offense. Commonly we are
either too remiss if we endeavor Moderation, or too austere and rough if we
design faithfulness: But I think there is little need to caution any persons
against overdoing in this kind, it is an Extreme few fall into, there being
more danger in our oil, than in our salt, i, e. as one expresses it, in our
smooth words, than in our sharp rebukes. I fear the greatest work that is done
in this matter, is sowing of pillows under sinners elbows, when our duty should
be quilting of thorns to lay under their backs, that when the bold and
contumacious sinner retires to his Chamber, he may also retire within himself,
and be kept awake in his bed here, that so his sleeping an everlasting sleep of
death, and making his bed in unquenchable flames may be prevented. Command then
thy brother in the name of God to be think himself, to repent and reform, to
read what the God of Truth and Justice has threatened against him if he do not
amend and turn; fight him with this glittering Sword of God's Word, and it is
the likeliest way to make his sins fall before thee, and to give up the Ghost.

There are several other weighty Directions relating to the prudent management
of this important duty of Fraternal Rebuke, which I must pass by with a very
little reference to them; that so as we ought to pray read, sing, and perform
all Christian Offices with the Spirit, and with our Understandings also; so we
may perform this in that manner, that it may not be a sacrifice of fools. Let
us apply our selves to learn that Wisdom which is from above, so as to take the
Sinner by a holy craft and guile; as the Apostle expresses it.

And here distinction should be made between the Persons and Crimes of
Offenders, the proper Seasons, and the particular Ways and Methods of Reproof.

1. We must distinguish between the Persons. Of some we are to have compassion,
making a difference. Making a difference between men in public and private
capacities; Thou shall not revile the gods, Exodus 22.18.
nor curse the ruler of thy people. Rough and unhewn language is not to be used
to them. Shimei said nothing more in substance to David, than Nathan did, but
it was in a very scurrilous and railing manner. Tho we may rebuke, we must not
revile: Difference must be made between the tempers of sinners. There cannot be
an uniform proceeding with all, but we must vary according to their
dispositions. Some men are like Thorns, which if gently touched, hurt not; but
if you grasp them with an hard and unwary hand, they will fetch blood: Others
are like Nettles, which if they are nicely and delicately handled, sting and
prick, but if closely and roughly pressed and grasped, you may pull them up
without pain or harm.

Before therefore you reprove a sinner, know whether he be a Thorn or Nettle.

2. Difference is to be made betwixt their Crimes. As the Offense is great or
small, so should the reproof be sharp or mild. There are Beams and Motes,
Pimples and Plague-sores, Scratches and Ulcers. We must not hang a man for
filching a pin or a rattle, and whip him gently and tenderly for Murder and
Treason. As the Offense is more secretly, or more impudently committed, whether
drunk in the Night in his Chamber, or at noonday in the Exchange: Some sin
publicly, the greater is their sin, and so should their shame, because they
give the greater scandal; others sin more privately; our Reprehension in this
case ought to be auricular, and there is no better Sepulcher than that of
secrecy, wherein to bury his more hidden failings. There is no need of going
to the Housetop, when a Closet would be more proper. Thus we see, that tho all
sins want an equal Price and Merit for Atonement and Satisfaction, yet they
require not equal severity in our Rebukes and Admonitions. Some must have
Lenitives, others Corrosives. Superiors may be reformed by Exhortation, Equals
by Friendly Admonition; and Inferiors (if in the highest form and chair of
Scorners) by severe Reprehension. We must not indeed be fiery-hot in terrifying
the meaner sort, and look upon the rich as that Mount which must not be
touched. We must not talk one half in the language of Canaan, and the other in
that of Ashdod; but let us go to work impartially, not executing the command,
as Saul did against Amalek, when he spared the fat and chief, and destroyed
only the poor and refuse. This made that excellent Emperor Theodosius have so
great a value for St. Ambrose, because he was not affrighted with the huffing
of the Proudest, and had great compassion to the souls of the poorest.

3. We must make a difference in the seasons of Reproof; There is a time to
speak, and a time to be silent. It is difficult here to assign the mollia fandi
tempora, the soft Articles and Opportunities wherein we are to speak, because
variety of Circumstances may alter the case; only all must agree to do it as
soon as conveniently we may. Delays harden. As we must exhort, so we must
rebuke daily, Heb. 3.13. Suffer not sin to lie upon him, nor he in his sin one
day longer, if it be in your power to help it. But especially avoid thy
rebuking of him, when he is like the wild Ass, with whom there is no meddling
while she is in the heat and fervor of her lust, Jer. 2.24. but she has her
particular month to be taken in. Abigal deferred to reprove Nabal in his Wine;
she let him sleep it out, thinking the best time to give him this Physic,
would be when he was fasting in the Morning. Good Physicians evacuate not the
body in extremity either of heat or cold. Watch when thy Brother is himself,
nay, more than himself, humble, tender, and pliable, then he is indeed a
qualified recipient. Such are times of Affliction and Fear, Sickness and
impending Chastisements. But do not under pretense of a more convenient season,
totally neglect and shift off thy Duty.

4. We are to make difference in the ways and methods of reproving; sometimes
plainly and directly, as Nathan to David, Thou art the man; at other times more
covertly, by intimation and circumlocution. The Sun keeps the world in good
temper, by moving in an oblique Circle; and Ships (Mariners say) sail best, and
make the greatest way with side-winds.

I crave leave only to Apply what has been said in these following ways, when I
have laid down this single Caution, viz. That tho Reproof is then best taken,
when it is best given, (according to those Directions now given) yet no man
must reject it, because the Reprover wants those due Qualifications to render
him every way meet for his work. Good Counsel from a bad man must not be
slighted; Balaam was a bad man, yet he had a good wish, and uttered a most
excellent Prophecy. A diseased Physician may prescribe good Medicines; a lame
Steward may distribute his Masters Alms: Ungrounded is that Doctrine both of
the Romanists and several others, who tell us, That the Benefit of God's
Ordinances depends upon the goodness and right intentions of the Priest and
Minister. What, shall I not be saved by hearing, unless the Preacher be saved,
whom I hear? Is the Grace of God tied to the Ministry of man? Shall the Servant
share the Honor, and part stakes with his Master? Our Lord and Great Prophet
taught the people to observe their Doctrines that sat in Moses Chair; tho
without breach of Charity he called them Serpents and Hypocrites. Sampson did
not disdain the Sweets, because he found them uncleanly laid in the Lions
Carcass. His diet was strict enough, he might not eat that which savoured of
Legal Impurity, yet refused not a Honeycomb, because found in the belly of a
dead Beast. Honey is Honey, tho in a dead Lion.

Having inserted this necessary Caution, I shall in the Close, subjoin Two or
Three Things by way of Inference, Reproof, and Advice, by way of more particular

Application.
1. I hence infer, That if it be the Duty of Ministers, Parents and Governors
of Families to give Reproof, then it is the Duty of People, Children, and
Servants to take it. You are as much obliged to have a willing Ear, as we are
to use a faithful Tongue. But woe unto us! we have stopped our ears against the
loud and reiterated Rebukes of Heaven. God at sundry times, and diverse manners
has both in times past spoken, and still does speak in very Reprehensory
Language, and has let us know his mind in very broad and legible Characters; so
that if we were upon the wing, flying, or on our feet running, we may plainly
read it. There are four ways, in a more singular and eminent manner, by which
God has reprehended us.

1. By his Word. 2. By our Consciences. 3. By the Examples of Good Men. 4. By
his Judgments on Bad Men.
1. By his Word; That is profitable for reproof; 2 Timothy 3.16.
for reproof of Errors and false Doctrines; for correction of sin and evil
manners. Every one that does evil, hates this sacred Torch, neither comes to
this light, Joh. 3.20.
lest his deeds should be reproved. Moreover by them (i. e. by thy Statutes) is
thy servant warned. But men seal up this Book to themselves, and spend more
time in Romantic Discourses, than in these Sacred Oracles.

2. He reproves by our own Consciences. How often do they check and chide us?
It Is said of David, as soon as he had cut off the lap of Readiness Garment (his
heart smote him) that is, his Conscience recoiled upon him. Conscience is the
great Register and Recorder of the World; it has the Pen of a ready writer;
not a word or thought escapes its swift Pencil. It is God's Historiographer,
which writes not only Anuals, but Diaries; it has its Book and Table, wherein
it indelibly writes men's Transgressions and Swervings. It is man's private
Notary; his Bailiff to arrest him, and seize upon every miscarrying habit and
act. It is his Judge, sifts and scrutinizes the Offender, convicts and then
condemns the Malefactor; Their consciences also bearing witness, Romans 2.15.
and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. And
how many secret Lectures has this read to us? What Artifices have we used to
rock it to sleep? Play and Gaming, Music and Feasting, Company and many
diversions of the same nature, have been cast in to still this importunate and
offensive babbler, whose tongue will never lie still.

3. God reproves by the Examples of Good Men. Noah condemned the old world for
their security, by his preparing an Ark. Heb. 11.7.
A good man leads a convincing life, and there is an Elenctical Power in his
holy deportment. Those that stood with the Lamb, Rev. 14.1.
had the Father's name in their foreheads, as Holiness to the Lord was upon the
High Priest's. We must answer not only for sinning against the Light of God's
Word, and our own Consciences, but the light of good example also. The faithful
are called Witness; Heb. 12.1.
so Lot witnessed against the sinners of his age. A Good Man's life is the best
Scripture-Commentary, and has a Magnetical Virtue, a hidden Excellency to
allure to Goodness. Phil. 2.15.
The Godly shine like Lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation.

4. God reproves by his Judgments on bad men; he reproves both by his Word and
Rod, as by the testimony of his mouth, so by the works of his hands. Thou have
rebuked the heathen, Psalm. 9.3.
thou have destroyed the wicked. That act of destruction was a smart
Reprehensory Lecture to them; they were taught with Briars and Thorns. God will
get his lessons in at men's backs, if they will not kindly receive them at their
ears; he will whip them into better manners, and show them their faults by
their stripes. 1 Chronicles. 16.21. Psalm. 16.21. Psalm. 39.11.
Reproof is frequently in Scripture put for chastisement.

Lot's Wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt, looking back contrary to God's
command; and that this Pillar of Salt was for the seasoning of all that would
cast an eye behind to Sodom, appears by our Savior's general application of
it, Remember Lot's wife. Luke 17.32.


Remember, What? Not so much the Miracle, which every cursory Reader of the
Scripture has at his fingers ends; and poor Children, like Parrots, can recite
to you; but Remember the Moral, the Doctrine, and Instruction which lies more
covertly under it. Jer. 7.12.
But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the
first, an see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel.

The Ancient Philosophers (as Gellius notes) assigned Three Grounds for
punishment of offenders:

1. That which is called (...), when punishment was inflicted for amending of
the party punished, and to put him in mind of the committed offense.

2. The second they called (...), for preservation of the honor of him against
whom the offense was committed, lest indulgence should occasion contempt of his
figure and dignity.

3. They called (...), when an Offender was punished for Example sake, to deter
others from the like offense. Some notorious Malefactors are hanged up in
Chains to warn and affright others. This was the aggravation of Belshazzar's
Pride, Dan. 5 22.
that he humbled not his heart, tho he knew the judgment inflicted on his
Father for the same sin.

Zeph. 3.6, 7.
Mark God's own method of Arguing. I have cut off the nations: their towers are
desolate, I made their streets waste, that none passes by: their cities are
destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant. I said,
Surely thou will fear me: thou will receive instruction: so their dwelling
should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, and
corrupted all their doings.

The ordinary word the Greeks used for punishment was (...), which signifies
Example, because there is not a punishment on one, but it should be an example
to all; so the public putting away a Wife that was found faulty, is called,
(...), to make her a public example.

Matt. 1.19.
Cambyses fley'd off the skin of a corrupt and warping Judge, and spread it
over the Seat of Judgment for his Successors to tread on, that so it might be a
continual Monitor to them to avoid injustice.

God will not endure a succession in wickedness; and to prevent exemplarity,
reproves many in this way, to give a check to the boldness of others in sin.

How often his methods in all these ways of Reprehension have been used with
us, I leave it to your selves to judge; and how often we have defeated them,
God well knows, and will judge us for them: which leads me to a second branch
of my Application, I mean, from a Doctrine of Reproof, to descend to a Second
Use of Reproof.

2. When we compare God's Precept with our Practice, What bad Comments are they
on so blessed a Text? We may well cry out with our Countryman Linacre, Aut hoc
non est Evangelium, aut nos man sumus Evangelici: Either: this is not Gospel,
or we are not Gospellers. We ramble dreadfully from the Text; the meanest
Preacher may easily keep closer to the Sense of it, than the generality of
Professors do to the Practice of it.

Instead of taking this wise and honest course of fraternal correption, we have
used our selves to an accursed and odious way of fraternal defamation.

Two Beasts walk much up and down (which Diogenes advised the Emperor to avoid,
being malignant biters) the tame beast the Flatterer, and the wild beast the
Slanderer: As the Jews conspired against Jeremiah, so do many against their
Brethren and Neighbors, saying as they, Let us smite them with the tongue,
Jer. 18.18.
let us devise devices against them.

If to Rail and Lie, Censure and Revile, to Misreport and Misrepresent, were
fulfilling the Commands of God, and paying our Duty to our Brother; if they
were Rules of Behavior and Conversation, the generality of men might chime in
with that young Gentleman in the Gospel, and say after him, All these have I
kept from my youth upward.

They hate their brother in their heart, and show it in these following ways:

1. By industriously searching out what is culpable and blame worthy in them,
on purpose to disgrace and reproach them. Of this the Psalmist complains, Psalm.
64.6.
They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search. It is a sad
sign and indication, that malice is boiled up to a great height in men's hearts,
when they are so inquisitive and studious to find out articles of impeachment
against their Brother, and proud (as they who have obtained great spoil) when
they have made a fresh discovery of some crime in him.

2. Men discover their hatred of their brother, by tempting him to the
commission of that sin which they design to make matter of objection against
him. Thus the malicious Pharisees did their utmost to cause Christ to offend
(if it had been possible) urging him vehemently, Luke 11.53.
and provoking him with all their little artifices, to speak of many things,
that they might accuse him. They asked him many a captious question to make him
an offender for a word.

3. Their hatred is manifested by magnifying and aggrandizing their Brethrens
faults, swelling and improving every Mole hill to the size and bulk of a
Mountain. With their viperous and poisonous breath, they blow up every bubble
(which at first was but a drop of Water stuffed with a small vapor) to the
dimensions of a large Globe. Some think themselves excusable herein (if not
commendable) as thereby discovering their zeal against sin, which never can be
made to appear sufficiently sinful: But let such beware, lest upon scrutiny it
should be found a bitter zeal, having more of malice at the bottom, than any
true concern for God's Glory, or their Brethrens good.

4. And Lastly, Men discover their hatred of their Brother, by mentioning their
failures and infirmities with some secret kind of rejoicing and pleasure. What
self-satisfaction do many take, and without any uneasiness, can hear a
discourse of twice the length of any Sermon, if the subject affect the
reputation and good name of their nearest Neighbors? A sad sin, tho little
laid to heart. Deuteronomy. 27.24.
Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly.

This renders a Man like the Devil himself, and transforms him into an Angel of
darkness; this involves us in the guilt and breach of many a Commandment; Five
of the second Table are often at once violated: That Honor we should give to
our Fathers, our Governors, and Superiors, is withheld. We are also dipped in
Blood, and guilty of Murder; for he that hates his Brother, wishes he were
not; Hatred extends it self to the extirpation and nonexistence of the thing
hated, and therefore it is Heart-Murther; thou do kill him in thy thoughts,
tho for many external considerations thou art restrained from padling in his
Blood with thy hands; thou art loath to be hanged for thy Fact. A Rape also is
committed on his Name, and thou can not excuse thy self from a reductive
breach of the seventh Commandment. As for the eighth and ninth, they are
apparently broke. Thou art a notorious Thief and Robber. Your Brother's good
name is by Solomon preferred before precious Ointments. Eccl. 7.1.
Ointments in ancient times were a special part of the Royal Treasure of
Princes. When Hezekias, in ostentation of his Royal Wealth, and the
Magnificence of his Treasures, would show the Babylonish Ambassadors his
choicest Collections, among the chiefest things there are reckoned in the
Inventory, the precious Ointments. 2 Kings 20.13.
Some tell us out of Pliny, That there were Ointments in the Apothecaries Shops
of that value, (so great was the Riot and Luxury of those times!) that every
Pound amounted to more than Twelve Pounds of our Money, if they rightly compute
the value of the Roman Penny. A great rate surely, if we consider the time
wherein he lived, about 1500 years since. He had been a notorious Robber, who
should steal any considerable quantity of such costly Ware. And is not He a
worser Thief, (...) injuriously and feloniously takes his Neighbor's good Name
from him, which is by the Wise Man adjudged to be better than any Ointment,
consisting of the most costly Ingredients? Let us have no fellowship with these
Slanderers, Tale-bearers, and Whisperers, but rather reprove them; which we
then effectually shall do, when we will not allow our selves to be Receivers to
these Thieves, nor Abbettors of these Murderers, by setting our Ears open to
these Calumniators and Detractors. The Tale-hearer is the great Patron and
Encourager of the Talebearer. Receive not stoll'n Goods, and you will spoil the
Thiefs Trade. What great difference is there to be found betwixt him who has
the Devil in his Tongue, and the other who has the Devil in his Ear?

A venomous Tongue, if it be not matched with an easy, credulous, and itching
Ear, can never make any considerable earnings of it. Beware therefore of this
Snare of the Devil, of reporting with some kind of delight the worst thou can
find in thy Brother, overseeing wilfully the many commendable qualifications he
is endowed with. We are too like the old Critics, who had all Homer's
imperfect Verses in memory, but could not repeat any of those Excellent in
their kind. My Friends, are we not here highly concerned? With what a gusto and
relish do many report (if not raise) Stories and Fables that may any ways
derogate from the good Name and Reputation of those who dissent from them? What
(say they) do you not hear what such an one has said; or what the other has
done? We tell smiling, what St. Paul, or any other right-complexion'd
Christian, could tell no otherwise than weeping. They would mix tears with
their words. Is this to be rightly affected with other Men's breaches of God's
Statutes? Is this the right method of conquering your otherwise-minded
Brethren? Is this your rejoicing in good? It was a great fault among some of
the Corinthians, that when they heard of the scandalous sin of the Incestuous
person, they were puffed up, when they should rather have mourned. 1 Cor. 5.2.
There were great Divisions and Parties amongst them at that time when the
Incest was committed, and the contrary Faction thought they had an advantage
against the whole Party, and this puffed them up, and they started the
discourse of it in all Companies they came into. Verily this is a great fault
amongst us; to throw thy Brother into the Dirt, and then stand strutting upon
him, and crowing on his back while he is wallowing in the Mire; This is a
posture fitter for a Devil than a Christian: For, I beseech you, in what one
thing can a Man approach nearer to the similitude and likeness of that Evil
Spirit, than in the rejoicing at that Wickedness which is committed in the
World; especially for them to be guilty of it, who by their Holy Office and
Calling are more particularly obliged to the observation of the aforementioned
Rules of Reprehension? It is a Crime inexcusable. It is no wonder to see wicked
and profligate Wretches priding themselves in their proseliting others to their
own practice, when they make or find some in their own likeness; but yet in
them it is the height of Wickedness to glory either in their own, or other Men's
shame. Lamech indeed did thus. Genesis 4.
Thus did Alexander Pharoeus, who consecrated that Javelin wherewith he had
slain Polyphron; and Protagoras, who boasted he had spent forty years in
corrupting of Youth. Thus Mark Anthony disgorged a Book concerning his own
abilities in Gluttony and Drunkenness. Johannes a Casa wrote a Poem in
commendation of those Spanish Virtues (as one styles them) Whoredom, Sodomy,
and Incest. But for men making a more strict Profession of their subjection to
Divine Revelations, and all Moral Principles; for such whose Character loudly
calls on them, as the more immediate Servants of the Lord, not to strive, but
be gentle to all men, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.22, 23, etc.
avoiding all things that do gender strifes, to follow Righteousness, Faith,
Charity, Peace. 2 Timothy 5.
To reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering, thereby giving proof of
their Ministry. For these to be found deficient, is a doubled and multiplied
Iniquity.

Give me leave to be plain, and a little more particular. I am sorry to see men
of this Rank so to unhallow and profane their own venerable Office, that one
would think in their Orders they received an unholy Spirit, and Fire, in the
very literal sense of the words, without the relief of Figure or Metaphor. But
it spreads farther abroad. The Mouths of most stand half-cock'd, ready to
discharge at their Brethren in loud Vollies of Contumelies, and false Reports;
nay, some there are, who, if they were Basilisks, as they are Vipers, would
stab their Brother to death with their Eyes. Father, forgive them, though they
know what they say and do! What strange Accusations of late have been charged
on such whose Souls abhorred to enter into any such Secresies! viz. That they
are Popishly inclined, Promoters of Addresses of Abhorrence; that they have
covenanted to pull down all Bulwarks that have been erected for the Defense and
Safeguard of the Protestant Religion!

In Defense of several within the compass of mine own knowledge, I will
adventure to say thus much: These Evidences might with as much Reason and
Honesty have sworn them to have been nursed up with the Milk of a Tygress or
Bear; that they came into the World vested with the Skins of Porcupines, full
of Darts and Spikes, to squirt out at pleasure at Mankind; That for their
Religion they are Turks and Jews, Pagans and Idolaters, yea and that of the
worst sort also; that they are Canibals, and eat nothing but Man's Flesh, and
that their drink is a warm draught of Human Gore; That they were in a Plot to
cut the Throats of their nearest Relations, and had signed an Obligation to the
Devil, written with their own Blood, That after a small space of time, wherein
they were to accomplish the aforesaid Designs, they should tamely surrender
themselves to that Evil One's disposal and mercy. If this be thought to be
spoken with too keen an edge, I have only this to add in justification of it:
Those I speak of were never such Admirers of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience
and Non-Resistance, as to suffer all the Dirt and Offal that could be raked out
of Kennels and Common-shoars to be plaistered on their Faces, without lifting
up of a hand to wipe it off. Their rejoicing is this, the testimony of their
Consciences, that they have had their Conversation in the World with more
Integrity and Godly Sincerity than these men will allow them; and can say that
humbly and thankfully, which the Pharisee said falsely and haughtily, God we
thank thee, we are not the Men as such report us to be.

III. Use. Let us all suffer a word of Exhortation to be added to a word of
Reproof. And here I beg it heartily, that men would erect a Court of
Inquisition in their own breasts, and cite and try themselves before
themselves. Put these Questions home, and give Conscience leave to answer with
all imaginable freedom.

Are we Lambs, or Wolves; Doves, or Vultures, and Birds of Prey?

Don't our Language betray us?

Do we know what Spirit we are of?

We all do impropriate the Name of Evangelici, Christians and Professors of the
Gospel: but let us all take heed that we deal not with the Gospel as the Jews
did with the Law, who carried it along with them in their Clothes, but not in
their Hearts; so we have it in outward Profession, but express it poorly in
Heart and Life.

How ridiculous is it for men to have Names and Appellations which they do not
in the least answer! How absurd is it to be called Christians, and yet not to
have the spiritual Anointment of Heavenly Graces upon us!

There are some, as Salvian expresses it, are Christians fine Christo. Our
Names should be indicative of our Natures, otherwise thou art a Christian by an
Antiphrasis. It is noted of the Roman Bishops, that they have been very
ridiculous in their choice of Names at their Creation: A Coward would be called
Leo; a Cruel one, Clemens, or Vrbanus; an Impious one, Pins; a Carnal one,
Celestinus; a Loose one, Severus; a Deformed one, Formosus; and a Devil,
Eugenius. Let men either live as they are called, Christians; or be called as
they live, Pagans. Art thou called a Believer? show it by thy Faith. Art called
a Saint? show it by thy Holiness. A Disciple? show it by thy Knowledge. Are ye
called Brethren? show it by your Love, and show your Love by your regard to
this Precept of God's in my Text: Col. 4.6.
Let your Speech and Reproof be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, that ye
may know how ye ought to answer every man.

Christianity of all Religions is the meekest and most humble; it is founded
upon the Blood of Christ, who is a Lamb slain; it is consigned and sealed by the
Spirit of Christ, who descended like a gall-less Dove; Our God is a God of
Peace and Love, and will not be served with wrathful Affections.

Does the God of Heaven need a Tongue set on fire of Hell? Have I need of
Madmen, says Achish? Will our Savior always stand in need of Asses? I mean of
such who are destitute of that Wisdom which is from above, which is
characterized to be first pure, and then peaceable. There are some sorts of
Men, whom we may bray in Mortar, and yet they have their retentive faculty,
their folly will not depart from them. They still either slabber or foam at the
mouth; they shall either flatter or rage.

If I were addicted either to Invectives or Satyrs, I am sure I have here scope
enough: But I will withdraw my hand, lest I should seem to involve my self in
the guilt of that Sin which this Discourse was primarily designed against.

I shall conclude with die last Branch of my Application; which is,

Fourthly, Exhortatory, and by way of Admonition.

If thou must not refuse to afford thy helping hand to a fallen Beast, withdraw
it not from a fallen Brother: Put on Bowels which are Humane, and highly
improved by the Doctrine of Christ, who has furnished us with Arguments beyond
all contradiction, to enforce our Duty. If we love God or our selves, we must
not hate our Brother. Whose Eye does not weep, whose Heart does not ache, to see
the Misery of such a person, whom nothing cooler than unquenchable burnings,
and nothing lighter than the heavy strokes of an incensed and Almighty hand,
can make sensible of their sinful Omissions of this, nature?

We must all cry Guilty at our Arraignment and Indictment for our Copartnership
with others in their Offenses: we have not prevented that Sin we have had fair
Opportunities to crush in the very Egg. Jeroboam made Israel to sin: But how?
He neither forbid them by Word, nor prevented them by Example.

Gal. 2.14.
It is said, St. Peter compelled the Gentiles to Judaize. How did he so? Not by
what he preached, but by what he practiced: They sinned after the similitude of
their Spiritual Father's Transgression. How many Transgressors have we beheld,
Psalm. 119.158.
and never grieved because they kept not God's Word? Doubtless not to do Good,
is to do Evil. We have Sins enough of our own to answer for. Our Father, died
in his own sin, said Zelophehad's Daughters. Our own Sins are sufficient enough
to our Ruin, we need not the additional aid other Men's; yet we every day call
in for fresh Contributions to our own personal Transgressions, and no way more
than this, by connivence at the Miscarriages and Transgressions of others, to
whom we are sufficiently enough authorized to give check.

Be not therefore deterred from your Duty, because your habitual neglect of it
has been of so long standing. You must force your selves against all presenting
Difficulties; the Objections of your own Singularity, and the reproved Sinners
Obstinacy, must not be entertained, but repelled with all Christian Resolution.
I acknowledge it is no easy matter to bear a Reproof well, tho never so well
administered. No Sugar can bereave a Pill of its natural bitterness; and it
fares with Offenders, as with those who are awakened out of their sleep, they
are unquiet, and ready to brawl at their best Friends. Dogs in a chase will
sometimes bark at their own Masters. There are few like the Woman of Samaria,
who loved Christ the better for finding her out in her sin. But remember, thy
Lord will be ashamed of thee, if thou art of him; and whoever is ashame'd of
his Commandments, is ashamed of his Lord that enacted them. If They can boldly
sin, way should not We boldly reprove? Only Sin is truly shameful; and it is a
very commendable importunity to solicit men to be kind to themselves, and to
disturb them till they consult their own Everlasting Rest. For fear of
offending thy Brother, will thou resolve to offend God? Whose displeasure is
most to be dreaded, God's or Man's? Remember he is far from being impertinent,
who will not suffer his Brother undisturbedly to go to Hell: He is far from
being a busie-body, who engages himself to save his Brother who is on the brink
of Ruin. To be employed where God calls, is sufficient Commission for any man
to act upon. Do your Duty, leave the success to God, who is promised to bless
his own Institutions. Resolve upon a speedy complying with your Duty. Life is
uncertain; He may die who wants our Reproof, We may die who are to give it, and
so be out of the reach of our Charity: Our Mouths and Their Ears will in a
short compass of time be stopped with Ashes. Do not therefore persist in the
neglect of this Duty any longer. Omissions will damn as certainly as
Commissions; and it is all one whether we go to Hell for one Sin or many. Be
not therefore too thrifty of thy Tongue, when a word may do much good. We are
not born all to ourselves, but somewhat to our Brother, Neighbor, and Friend;
and we are guilty of the loss of that Soul we might save, and do not.

I am sure (with the Apostle) that He cannot love God whom he has not seen,
who loves not his Brother whom he has seen, and can endure to see miserable.

In being thus Friends to others, we chiefly befriend our selves; and never let
us think much of our pains, when we are rewarded with so great Blessings for
our Work.

Now God himself, and our Father, 1 These 3.11, etc.
and our Lord Jesus Christ, make you to increase and abound in love toward one
another, and toward all men; to the end he may establish your hearts
unblamable, in Holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with all his Saints. Amen.

FINIS.

