PARADISE Transplanted and Restored, IN A MOST Artfull and Lively
REPRESENTATION OF The several Creatures, Plants, Flowers, and other Vegetables,
in their full growth, shape, and color: Shown at Christopher Whiteheads at the
two wreathed Posts in Shooe-Lane, London.

Written by I. H. Gent.

London, Printed in the year, 1661.

Paradise Transplanted, and Restored in a most Artfull and Lively
Representation of all the Creatures, etc.
BEing Importuned by some Persons of Quality; whose curiosity invited them to
see the Paradise at the two wreathed Posts in Sho-Lane (where their
Satisfaction could not be limited by their own eyes) to publish something
concerning the excellency of it, that so the deserved honor of the
incomparable Artist, may be more generally known, not only to his bare Fame,
but also to his profit, toward the encouragement of his worthy Labors, I have
been induced to set forth this Paper, to recommend this Elegant and curious
piece of Art to all Noble and Ingenuous Persons.

The Design, is a Model, or Representation of that Beautiful Prospect Adam had
in Paradise, when the whole Creation of Animals, were togegether subjected to
his imperious eye, and from his mouth received their several names,
distinguished by them to those particular subservient Offices whereunto by
Nature they were Ordained.

The Artist has so far complied with the perfect and exact Original, as is
possible to humane skill and industry. His researches and enquiries after
Foraign, Outlandish Creatures, whose names are not so well known to these
Quarters of the World (and those small and inconsiderable ones too) was a
costly Labor; but to present them to view in their natural shapes and postures
to the Life, and beyond all former Figures and Descriptions of them, as that
every man may be as wise as Adam, and read their names and qualities in their
Aspects, is a most meritorious obliging Work.

To enumerate all the Creatures (so as they seem here enlivened) by name, were
a tedious and impertinent task, only thus much shall suffice: whatever the most
unbounded and comprehensive knowledge of any man since Adam did attain to in
the Science of the Number and Form of Creatures, is certainly outdone in this
Representation. For here they are placed from the greatest to the least, from
the Elephant to the Mouse, from the Eagle to the Wren, from the Crocodile to
the Glowworm; with all sorts or kinds of Insects, and Creeping things, to
please the wandering eyes of the Spectators.

One would wonder upon a long and continued view, that the Creatures of
different natures and antipathies to one another, as the Dog and the Bear, the
Lion and the wild Boar; and those smaller Animals, which exercise hostility,
and among whom, one with another there is such constant feuds, as Cocks, etc.
should stand so still and quiet, and not fly one upon another; certainly, the
least Mathematical motion, would breed such a War in this Commonwealth of
Beasts, that would utterly undo the better deserving Artist.

You must have a special care (whoever shall indulge himself his innocent
pleasure of seeing these Rarities) that as soon as you enter, you fix your eye
first on the Basilisk, placed conveniently for that advantage, lest her
venomous sight spy you out before, and so a strong conceit that she is there in
life, endanger yours.

You cannot without indignation of mind see the accursed Serpent putting the
deadly Apple into our Grand mother Eves hand: and were it not that this
malicious fraud is acted at the furthest end of the Room; and out of your
reach, you would put forth your hand to prevent that destruction (which ensued
thereby upon Posterity) A fraud, I say, twice so (ill and well) practiced,
first by the Serpent, and then by this our Artist, that the one can never be
remedied, nor the other mended.

There is also the divertisement of Hawking, in the several Flights of the
Tassel, the Lanner, the Marlyn, and that merry sport of the Hobby; but I know
not by what new or ill quality, they neither come down with their Quarry, nor
will they come to Lure at any hand; the Spaniels stand diligently at the
retrive, eagerly expecting a share of the Game, and would bark, but dare not
for their lives, but y^u would swear they meant it, and that they are abused.

Here is also sundry Rarities of Trees, Slips of those beauteous bulks, which
grew in the Garden of Eden, upon the fruit whereof ( Zeuxis Master ship being
here infinitely surmounted and excelled) stand Birds picking, to the envy of
the Lady Spectators, who thinks those Delicacies were ordained for them, while
their gallants are ready to hush them off the Trees with their Hat and Feathers.

While we are speaking of such Personages, give me leave to mention a piece of
excellent accomplished Art, relating to them: On the left side of the Room, are
five beautiful Ladies seated, beholding these curiosities, a person of quality
standing by them, attended with three Blackmore Lacquees in rich blew Liveries:
At the first entrance, the liveliness, beauty and gallantry of them has struck
such a kind of Reverence, that many have constantly and observantly bowed
toward them, and have wondered at the non-return of their Civility.

On the left side behind the opening of the door are placed a Consort of
Musicians of commonly known faces. among the rest the Artist, tuning of a Lute,
all so exact and to the Life, that people on a sudden glance, suppose they
shall have Music too, as in other Shows and Plays, for their money. But that
which excels therein, is the draught of the old man of the House, filling out
drink to the Musicians, so proportionably and rarely Copied, that it is very
hard to distinguish betwixt them, which is the livelier,

The Old man and's Picture, both to' life,
Together set to end the strife,
Or both will false and feigned seem,
Or both you will true and real deem.
Nay so completely has the Artist done this piece, that when first he placed
him in the Room, the Old man having conducted some Gentlemen thither, and while
they were beholding the aforesaid Rarities gone out again; when the Show was
done there; and the Artist was to shut the door, he espied, as he though, the
old man, and desired his Picture instead of him to come out, that he might lock
the said door, till recollecting himself, he found out his happy and almost
indiscoverable Error.

When you have glutted your eyes even to satiety here, there remains yet a
Collation below stairs which will amount to the just measure of a large
entertainment: It Is the Representation, What do I call it? It Is the very self
same Feast that luxurious Emperor Heliagabalus made for his Companions, who
disappointing his Invitation, it has been preserved in Art to this time; you
are desired nor to fall to, because that great Master of the Beast has nor as
yet touched one Dish of it, and (...) mannerly to begin before him: you may
design what Oath you please to feed upon out of all that choice variety, and
keep your stomach for it, whether it be Chine of Beef, Westphalia Gammon,
Venison, or Daintier Viands, Hollow Birds, Pies, Tarts, etc. But if you should
chance to fast over long (as I do not promise you any set Meal time) there is a
remedy at hand, you may kiss the Cook Maid; but let not her smug and black eyes
entice you any further.

After all this comes a Banquet (it is not for a masculine palate, and therefore
I shall not insist upon those sweet Kickshaws) there is nothing wanting here,
to serve a Ladies desire, and to keep it; for its twenty to one if her eye be
not bigger then her belly.

Upon a review of the whole, and second thoughts, it seems to me to be the
Model of the Ark, into which all the Creatures against the approach of the
Deluge entered for their preservation: The Provision in the Room below-s^e^^ing
like the Store Room in the Hold thereof (...) untain and feed them. And it is
most certain, that the (...) parable Art of this Gentlemen haht rescued many of
these Creatures from the ignorance of half-the world.

To conclude, he that has seen this delightful sight, can never see enough of
it (besides the daily ad^ons with which the rich Invention of the Artist is
still furnishing and replenishing this Work) and he that has not seen it, has
in effect as good as seen nothing. -- The whole is remitted to the belief of
your sight, which helped with the full Relation of the several Natures,
Qualities, Countries, and Contrarieties of the several Creatures, exactly
delivered by the Artist himself, will, without arrogance of saying so, improve
it to your highest satisfaction.

FINIS.

