A plain DECLARATION of the vulgar new HEAVENS FLATFORM. Serving not only fore
this Age, but also fore the future Age of 100 years.
HEre you are at first to know, that the motion of the Sun and the time do
always concur, and therefore is the one the measure of the other. Fore by the
Time is to be known the place of the Sun, and again by the Suns place you may
know the Time: therefore you must either know the Time or the place of the
Sun, both of them you may easily find in the Heavens-Flatform, do but lay the
dial A or B on the desired day of the year and see then what degree the dial
does touch upon the Sodiack, and you will find the thing desired.

I. EXEMPLE. How to know at anny time of the year in what Degree of the
Sodiack the Sun is.
^y Exemple on the first day of May, lay the dial A upon the suid day, and see
what degree the dial does cut upon the Sodiack, you will find it to be the 12th
of Taurus being the place of the Sun.

II. EXEMPLE. How at anny time to know the rising and going under of the Sun.
Suppose it be the 24th. of May, then you must lay the dial on the said day,
and see where it cuts the Sodiac, there you must make upon the dial a sign of
chalck or anny thing else that may easily be rubbed out, which sign
demonstrates the Sun, turn then the dial first so long to the East Side of
Heaven, til the said sign comes to touch the crombe Horizon, see then without
upon what hour and minute the dial does lie on the hour cirkle, you will find
the Suns rising at 4 a clock in the morning, and if you turn the said point to
the West Side of Heaven upon the Horizon, then you will see the dial to lie upon
8 a clock in the evening, being the going under of the Sun, then you will also
see that the Sun rises then 36 degr. 30 minut. from the East to the Northward,
and by consequence so manny Degrees and min. less from the West to the
Northward.

III. EXEMPLE. Hou you may see in the Night by the Stars what time it is,
Suppose you do but see anny acquainted Star to rise or stand in the S. N.
E. or Westward, let it be the three Kings arising the first day of October, in
the night, and that by it you would knove how late it is; then you must lay the
dial A on the said day, and the dial B over the 3 Kings, and give then a sign
upon the dial B over the 3 Kings, then you must firmly turn both dials alike to
the Eastward, til the said sign upon the dial B does cut or touch the Horizon,
and see then upon what hour and minute the dial A lies, you will find it to be
11 a clock in the evening, beingh the right time of the night.

I. PROBLEM. How you may upon every Poles higth find the riseing and going
under of the Heavens lights after you have taken the Poles higth, and the
declination or anny aquainted Stars.
You must place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of the
Heavens-Mirrour, upon the Dial A, and the other downwards, as far as the
Degree of the Declination of the Sun or Stars; with this opening of the
Compassis you must place the one foot upon the edge-side of the dial A upon the
complement of the Poles higth which you have taken; and slide the dial A
toward 6 a clock, (or to the dial B which may be laid along by 6 a clock (or
the edge-side of the dial B.) See then how in anny degrees the dial A lies
upon the houre-circkle from 6 a clock, which will be the true breadth of the
rising and going under of the Sun or Stars.

I. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the 21th. of June, where the Sun rises and goes under,
being beginning of Cancer, on the Poles height of 52 degrees. Then you must
place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of the dial A, and the other
downwards as far as on 23 degr. 30 min. being then the Declination of the Sun;
with this opening of the Compassis you must place one foot on the edge-side of
the dial A upon the Complement of the Poles height, being 38 degr. then you
must turn the dial A toward 6 a clock, til the other foot of the Compassis
comes triangularly to touch the lin. of 6 a clock. See then how manny degrees
the dial A lies off from 6 a clock. You Will find it to be very near 40 degr. 20
min. And so far does the Sun then rise from the E. to the N. upon each Northern
breadth of 52 degr. and goes likewise 40 degr. 20 min. under from the W. to
the Northward. And if the Sun be in the first degr. of Capricornus, then it is
just the same.

II. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Northern breadth of 50 degr. how manny degrees the
Southern Ey of the Bull called ^^debaran rises from the E. to the N. Fore the
doing of it, you must place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum, (...) the
dial A, and the other as far as the Declination of Aldebaran being 16 degrees,
with this opening of the Compassis you must place one foot upon the complement
of the Poles height of 40 degrees, on the dial A, then you mus^ turn the said
dial til the other foot of the Compassis comes triangularly to touch te line of
6 a clock. See then how manny degrees the dial A lies off from 6 a clock,
you will find verry near 25 degrees. 20. min. And so manny d^g. does Aldebaran then
rise from the E. to the N. it does also go under 25 degrees. 20 min. less from the
W. to the N.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Southern breadth of 20 degr. how many degrees the
Spica Virginis rises from the E. (...) the S. and that, because the
declination of Spica Virginis is Sourhly. You must place one foot of the
Compassis in the Center of the Dial A, and the other downwards as far as on 9
degr. being the declination of Spica Virginis, with this opening you must place
one foot of the Dial A upon the complement of the Poles higth of 70 degrees,
then you must turn the Dial A from the E. to the S. till the other foot of the
compassis comes triangularly to touch the East line or the line of 6 a clock.
See then how manny degr. the Dial A lies off from 6 a clock, you find verry
near 10 degr. and so far does S. Virginis from the E. to the S. and goes like
wise so far unter from the W. to the S.

II. PROBLEM. How to find the rising and going under of the Sun, or of anny
acquainted Stars, and that upon every Poles higth.
Place one foot of the Compassis in the center of the dial B, and the other
downward, along by the Edge-side as far as on the degree of the Declination of
the Sun or Stars, with this opening of the Compassis you must place one foot
on the edge-side of the dial B upon the Complement of the Poles height, add
slide the Dial B from the E. to the N. or S. til the other foot comes
triangularly to touch the line of 6 a clock. Then you must see o^ what hour
and min. the dial B lies, which is the true time of the Suns rising, which you
may also being to the going under.

I. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the rising of the Sun, on the N. breadth of 25 degr. being
the 21th. of June, when the Suns Declination is Northly 23 degr. 32 min. you
must place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of the dial B, and open the
other foot douwnewards as far as on 23 degr. 32 min. with this opening of the
Compassis you must place one foot on the edge-side of the dial B upon the
Complement of the Poles hitgh of 38 degrees, sliding the dial B from the E. to
the N. til the other foot of the Compassis comes triangulary to touch the line
of 6 a clock. See then upon what hour and min. the dial B lies on the hour
circkle, you will find it to be in the morning at 5 a clock 15 min. being the
right ti^^ of the Suns rising, the same is in the evening at 8 a clock 15 min.
the Suns going under.

II. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Southern breadth of 40 degr. being on the 21 of June,
at what time the Sun does there rise. Then you must place one foot of the
Compassis in the Centrum of the dial B, and the other foot downwards, as far
as on 23 degrees. 30 min. being at the said time the Declination of the Sun, with
this opening you must place one foot of the Compassis on the dial B upon the
complement of the Poles higth of 50 degr. and turn the dial B from the E. to
the N. til the other foot of the Compassis comes triangularly to touch the East
line of 6 a clock, see then upon what hour and min. the dial B lies, you will
find near enough in the morning 17 hours 30 min. being there the rising of
the Sun, the same is its going under in the evening at 4 a clock 35 min.

Nota. You must know that if you will, use the Heavens Flatform over the
South Side of the Equinoctial Line, then you must take the house contrary to
that as they are signed upon the Heavens Mirror, fore that which is over the
North-line 4 a clock in the morning, the same is Southly from the line 8 a
clock in the morning, and so is the rest accordingly.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know on the Northern breadth of 40 degrees, being the first of
August, what time the great Dog Syrius shall rise. Lay the Dial B over Syrius
and the Dial A upon the first of August, then you must place one foot of the
compassis upon the Center of the Dial B, and open the other as far as on 16
degr. 15 min. being the declination of Syrius, with this opening you must place
one foot the compassis on the Dial B, upon the complement of the Poles higth of
degrees. Then you must firmly turn both Dials alike from the E. to the S., till
the other foot of the compassis comes triangularly to touch the East line of 6
a clock. See then upon what hour and minutes the Dial lies, you will find near
enough 4 a clock 42 minutes. Fore to find its going under, you must firmly turn
both dials alike from the West to the Southward til the other foot of the
compassis comes triangularly to touch the West line of 6 a clock, see then upon
what hour and min. the Dial A lies, you will find 2 a clock 48 minutes.

III PROBLEM. How to find at al set times the Declination of the Sun upon the
Heavens mirrorr. Which is indeed verry proffitable for all Sea men, fore it
serves not only fore this present Age, but also fore the future Age of 100
years; when al Books that are made fore that purposse shall be of no worth.
Fore to find the Declination of the Sun upon the Heavens-Mirrour, you must
know that the Suns place is there set according to the two Jears, before and
after the Leape-yeare, and that especially upon the future Age, which does
almost differ a whole degree in the Sodiack with this present Age to the year
1700, and in the Suns Declination in March and September about 24 minutes. So
that al Tables of the Suns Declination which are reckened out with such a
difficult calculation, shall after the year of 1700 be of no use or worth to
a^ny Seaman; because the year of 1700 must be a common year. Desiring then to
know the Declination of the ^un upon some certain or set day in this present
Age, then you must always lay the dial A one day farther then the set day,
and in the second year after the Leap-yeare you must lay the dial upon the
midst of the day, but being the third year after the Leape-yeare, then you
must lay the dial A on the first fourth part, being in the Sodiack about 15
min. backward.

But being the first year after the Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial
upon the third fourth part of the day, being verry near 20 min. farther in the
Sodiack, then in the third year.

And when it is a Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial A upon the beginning
of the day, til to the 28 of February; but being after the 28 of February, then
you must all the year along lay the dial A upon the end of the day. And if you
do truly understand and perform this, then you will at al times know the
Declination of the Sun so perfect and exactly, as the Navigation requires. This
is the Head thing I have to say of my Heavens-Mirrour.

I. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination on the 30th. day of April 1691 or 95
being the third year after the Leap-yeare, then you must lay the dial A upon
the first of May, to wit upon the fourth part of the parck of that day. See
then where the Dial dath cut or touch the Sodiack, you find it to be verry
near the 10th. degr. 15 min. (being at the ^ame time the true place of the
Sun) that is 40 degr. 15 min. of. Farther you must lay the Dial A over the 40
degr. 15 min. off from., in the degrees of the Equinoctial or hour cirkle,
then you must place one foot of the Compassis on the dial A upon the greatest
Declination of the Sun, being 23 degrees 32 min. then you must open the other
foot of the Compassis toward the Line of 6 a clock, to come triangularly with
this opening of the compassis. Then you must place one foot of it in the Center
of the Dial A, and turn the other downwards, and see where it falls, you find
it to be verry near 14 degrees 55 minutes, being at the said time the Suns
Declination.

II. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination on the 30th. of April 1688 or 92. being
the first year after the Leap-yeare. Then you must lay the dial A on the first
of May, upon the utmost of the days parck, see then where the dial A does cut
the Sodiack, you find it to be verry near the eleventh degree of Taurus, being
the true place of the set time, that is 41 degrees of. Then you must further
lay the dial A on 41 degrees of. as before, and place one foot of the Compassis
on the dial A upon the greatest Declination of the Sun, being 23 degr. 32 min.
then you must open the other foot of the Compassis, til it comes rect-angularly
to touch the Line of 6 a clock, with this opening of the Compassis, you must
place one foot of it in the Center of the dial A, and the other you must turn
downwards, seeing upon what degree and minute it falls, you will find it to be
verry near 15 degr. and 10 min. being at the set time the true Declination of
the Sun, differing little or nothing with the wise and artificial calculation,
do so at al other times, til to the year of 1700, but after that time you must
lay the dial upon the set day, considering that this use is principally (as I
told you) practiced and formed upon the future Age, where upon we shall also
give some exemples, which also will serve fore the better understanding of the
former.

III. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns declination on the 30th day of April 1706. being
the second year after the Leape-yeare. Then you must at the same time lay the
Dial upon the middle of the parck of the said day, and see where the Dial A does
toutch the Sodiack, you will find it to be verry near the 9th degree and 30th
minute of Taurus, being at the said time the true-place of the Sun, differing
almost a whole degree with the Year of 1686, fore the Sun is 39 degr. 30
minut. of Then you must further place the Dial A on 39 degrees 30 minutes of.
upon the Dial, in the same manner as I told you before, and then you must place
one foot of the Compassis on the Dial A upon the greatest declination of the
Sun, being 23 degrees 32 min., then you must open the other foot of the
Compassis, till it comes triangularly to toutch the Line of 6 a clock: with
this opening you must place one foot of Compassis in the Centrum of the Dial A,
and the other downwards, see then on what degree and minute the foot stands,
you will find it to be verry near 14 degrees 42 minutes, which is on the said 30
day of April about noon, the declination of the Sun, differing also in the Suns
declination with the Year of 1686 almost 18 min. So that by this exemple you
may see that al Boocks and Tables ^^^^^ning this matter which are formerly
made, will altogether be in vain, and of no vallue, as soon as ever the Year of
1700 begins.

IV. EXEMPLE.
Desiring to know the Suns Declination in the year of 1710. when the Sun is in
the 18th. degr. of. Then you must lay the dial A upon the 18 degr. you will also
see that the dial does then lie on the eleventh day of August, about on the
third fourth part of the parck of that day, being in the evening about 6 a
clock. Then you must further lay the dial A upon the 42th. degree, from. to
Cancer upon the hour circkle, being on the 18th. degree of, then you must
place one foot of the Compassis on the dial A upon 23 degr. 32 min. as before,
en then you must open the other foot, rectangularly unto the Line of 6 a clock,
with this opening you must place one foot of the Compassis in the Centrum of
the dial A, and then you must turn the other foot downwards, and see on what
degree and minute it falls, you will find it to be verry near 15 degr. 30 min.
being at the said time the Declination of the Sun.

FINIS.

