A SURVAY OF THAT Foolish, Seditious, Scandalous, Profane LIBELL, THE
PROTESTATION PROTESTED.

Boeth. de Consolatione. (...).

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1641.

READER.
THis flash, the sudden thoughts of a day, had outfac't its adversary the
first week of his age, ni praesum sub frequenti puerpero gemiscens,
obste^^iceam negasset operam; nor without much pressure through a crowd of
opposition has it thronged out to thy hands; the birth how mean soever was
nigh strangled in the ^^adle: Take it as it is, an autoschediastick. The same
affection to my mother the Church skrewd it from me, that loosed his tongue in
defense of his father; She may say to her more concerned sons, as Jacob to
his, why stand you gazing one upon another? a fatal lethargy has so stiffned
their imaginations, that nothing is heard from them but the damps and groans of
a dying body, whether sydere tacti, or fallen in a spiritual praemunire, I know
not. It is true their scale may expect a more proportioned adversary, but they
do not mean time consider that Libels the more vulgar, because fitted to that
capacity, be the more dangerous; silence appears guilty or timorous to this
talkative age, either of these may edge an ignorant or base party. This Come^
points also at the State, for the loose rained popularity the Libeller aims at,
is no less dangerous to the liberty of the Subject, then a too high tuned
prerogative. Once acquaint that Briareus, the multitude with the secrets of
government, they will rush into the cloth of state; they like the smaller
stars have their course th^art that of the greater lights of the Kingdom,
nor give any motion (unless these be retrograde at biddings) to the higher
spheres, except that of trepidation, and when they come to be stellae
culminantes, and take the influence, the management upon them, they neither
know the disease, nor the remedy, but like empty (...) ^^acks work upon
themselves, while the spiders of the State weave nets of their humors to catch
adv (...). Sed manum de tabula, I find my affections (...) here for my
Judgment. I do ingenuously (...) no enemy to the agents or petitioners for a
Reforma^^on; The last times abound most in lees, and the evening Horizon has
the thickest vapors: but a medicine not a destructive must purge those, a
(...) not ^^hunderclap dispell these, only the sectaries who swell now beyond
the reach of names and numbers, I have here glanced at: these hotspurs run
themselves breathless, and leave others so far behind that they despair to
follow: nor can they (error and faction is so individ^ated with their
opinions) attend the leisure of authority, or keep the path chalked out to them
by a Parliament, but they must needs instantly from superstition to
profaneness, from disorder to Anarchy; so far have I justified my self,
give thy approbration if it please thee, I court it not, nor (...) I a
Chameli^^ to breath in that ^ire; only let thy charity extend to the errors of
the press, and be not moved with such grains and scruples, but impute them to
the Epidemick of the times.

Farewell.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 9. for a read or. p. 6. l. 4. f. ^ayles r. (...) p. 7. l. 16. to
(...).

A SURVAY OF THAT FOOLISH, SEDITIOUS, SCANDALOUS, PROFANE LIBELL, The
Protestation Protested.
Epist. 2. Timoth. Chap. 3. IN the last times perilous days shall come; for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, blasphemous,
disobedient to Parents, unthankefull, unholy; without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of these that
are good: Traiterous, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers
of God: having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such
turn away: for of this sort are they that creep unto houses, and lead
captive silly women, laden with sin, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; now as Iannes
and Iambres withstood Mooses, so do these also resist the truth. Epist. 2.
Pet. Chap. 2. But these speak evil of the things they understand not, and
shall perish utterly in their own corruption: They have eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls: An heart they have
exercised with covetous practices; cursed children, which have forsaken the
right way, and have gone astray, following the way of Baalam the son of
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: These are Wells without water,
Clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is
reserved for ever: for when they speak swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, and while they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the servants of corruption. Epist. Jude. Also these filthy
dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominions, and speak ill of dignities: These
speak ill of these things which they know not: W^e unto them, for they have
gone in the way of Coin, and run greedily after the error of Baalam for
reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core: clouds they are without water,
carried about with winds; trees, whose fruit withers; without fruit, twice
dead, plucked up by the root: raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own
shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever: These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and
their mouths speak great swelling words.
GOodman Cobbler, (it is you that has stitched together this Tubb-Sermon) or
whosoever else of the most holy inspired fraternity, I have taken you Sir for
my task: And that because of my abilities, Nil Su^or ultra crepidam, I dare
venture no farther than your old shoes; if I can find you there, and that
your trade mistake not the reformation of Soales, it is well: but you are
become a Preacher at the Last, and by that old piece of yours, (such stuff you
meddle with) taken from Barrow, or Marprelates Relics, has made the scissure
worse. Nor shall I trouble your conscience to thrust order upon you, whose
Religion it is to contemn all order; I must follow you, as you have followed
your Enthusiasmes, and that in the same manner; for as in preaching and prayer
you are extemporary, so am I in answering: I am not two days your debtor, lest
you, as your usurious brethren are wont, had expected Interest: It was too much
cost to bestow paper though not pains upon you. When I traced every step of
your lazy and superfluous discourse, to have joined with my adversary, I
found you as naked as an Adamite, not (one reason) the least piece of armor
with you; It had been a shame therefore to have drawn upon you, I have only
used the whip, that may perhaps teach you sense. It is true, four times you
cite Antiquity, but in your own way, that is, with greater respect to
Heathenisme, then Christianity, if that proceed from a Bishop, for you marshall
three Ethnic Emperors with one Eusebius. And why him, I pray you? does not
this derogate from your infallibility, if in a syllable you be obliged to a
Father? what? are not you and your Bible the only Judge of Controversies? can
any one find out the true meaning of Scripture, except your self, who has
monopolized (with all piety and reverence be it spoken) the Spirit of truth?
To say otherwise, were to prefer Rome to Amsterdam: but I do forgive you,
you have dealt very moderately in this point; one only you mention, and him in
matter of fact, the rest of the Book is your own invention, where you have as
faithfully abstained from Learning and Antiquity, as (and they are so to you)
from heresy and superstition. If the Reader complain of Vinegar in the Ink,
let him remember that the bite of the Viper (and such they are that rend the
bowels of their mother the Church) is best helped by the antidote of Vipers: a
frenzy is hardly cured but by the lance, the scourge, the whipping-post:
Dark rooms indeed, and a large dose of Ellebor, were the fittest attendants
for such roavings: But give me leave to convey him home to his Bedlam, there in
the paroxisme of his madness, to have his family exercise; and by the way
(though I wander after him that has long since wandered from himself) I hope
in charity so be-labour the man, that he may henceforth know that part of
Scripture practically; (if it be not against his justification to know any so)
A rod is for the back of the fool: nor wish I worse success to all his
braying associates, though their lugges be without the Bishops visitation, yet
I hope their necks is within that of the Parliament; that Honorable and
Judicious Assembly will in due time provide against these monstrously absurd
Libells, that heap of nonsense, from the which such a vapor of stupiditie and
ignorance is exhaled; that who are strangers to our better times, if they
behold this Island through the same, shall verily think it under an universal
Lunacie. But I have stayed you too long before the door.

You Usher in that discourse of yours by a preface, used belike many times
before your Dresser-Lectures, and tell us something of conscience, and its
scale; not unlike the Lap-wing, keeping the greatest stir when you are farthest
from your nest: conscience in the contemplation, in the pretense, is yours; but
what have you to do with it in the realitie, (so here you press it) in the
practice? beware this care of yours in agendis make you not suspect of merit,
if not of supererogation. The piece of sacred Scripture you make bold with, in
my poor judgment comes not home to the point: the words do rather concern a
voluntary then imposed vow, if any be such; and therefore had been more
congruous (if, as you do, by your infallibility, you had justified the
matter) to the holy Protestation is made in your Parlour meetings, for tearing
a Liturgy, rending a Surplice, burning the Railes, and pluming a Bishop: but
you cheat the world with a froath of words, and amuse the well-meaning; but the
ignorant multitude with an empty noise of conscience, purity, and reformation:
they say it is an evil sign to stumble at the threshold; and If God take no
pleasure in fools, you have prefixed a very slender approbation to your book.

Your next is, you tremble to see what small account most men do make of so
solemn a Vow. How do you (which is yours quarto modo) preach and practice
contradictions? Were ever the most superlative votaries of the Church of Rome,
Jesuits and Seminary Priests, more obstinately miszealous in refusing Oaths,
as Civil and Ecclesiastical tyranny and Antichristianisme then you, when
they suit not with your passions, and interests? Witness these of Supremacy
and Canonical obedience; the Gate House can tell us how much less you have
esteemed your bodily, then your Christian liberty in such cases: And if the
fear to be plundered of a fair Estate, or the love to a fatter Benefice, can
buy in this niceness of yours, and persuade you to lose a Button, you have no
more conscience in observing, than you had obedience in taking the Oath: For,
if Authority be in the waining, and some popular stars promise you liberty, how
soon do you break these cords asunder; and with a Jusjurandum illicitum
solummodo stringit ad poenitentiam, start you aside like a deceitful bow? Yea,
think your self obliged to redeem your slackned rigor by an after-increase
of heat and violence? Yet are you still the same man, love of gain prescribed
your oath, and the same absolves you from it, which doubtless your honesty by
a mental reservation, did ever lay as a ground; Happy you, whose conscience
can mould and fashion it self to the impresse of the times, and ebb and flow
with the aspect of different occasions! be ashamed therefore (tremble you
cannot) when you see What small account most of you make of your solemn vows:
God is not mocked; nor shall your bragges of casting out Devils of Idolatry
and Superstition in his name, save you in that day.

Having thus skirmished, you advance with the maine battle, subjoyning, That
the Ministers and People have taken the Protestation, and have solemnly vowed
to maintain the Doctrine of the Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery.
They have so, and so might they ever perform; but cannot one Devil be cast
out, unless seven enter? have they therefore vowed to erect Anabaptisme? is
there no midde betwixt the extremes? no salvation, but either in the communion
of the one, or conventicle of the other? must either a shaveling or a scavinger
be the star to point us out the way to Christ? lend us some of your light,
your tallow, to find out a consequence here, I pray: I must tell you, and ( Ni
frons periit) you may blush at it; you have defiled your fathers house, and
laid us open to the opprobrious insolence of the common enemy, who eying us in
((...)) our dross, wantonly upbraid us, to have rejected under the name of
Superstition all visibilitie of a Church, and by the title of purity, to have
brought in nothing else but profaneness and Atheism.

And it is not profaneness to think so slovenly as you do of God and his
Service, Atheism; to profess so much, and practice nothing at all? You are so
point-blanke against an innocent, harmless, decent worship; that either there
have been no Christians before your days, or you are none such: Ours perhaps
in abomination of so obstinate foolishness, may desperately make Apostasy to
Rome, but we can expect none from thence, if you be admitted to banish from us
the outward being of a Church, their very sails may think us refuted by
common sense, when they find nothing amongst us that relates to Christianity.
But what if under the name of Popery we find you (...) touched by the
Protestation, and so transport you in a second Colonie from New England to
Babylon? It is a received principle, that Proximius est extremum extremo, quam
extremum medio: and Lysimachus Nicanor does tell you, (not these to whom he
speaks) that whilst you refute the ^ittle, you nourish the worst of Papists in
your own bosoms. See your self in him, and take these gleanings further: you
plead the same independancie with Rome from the civil power, except it be
more easy for a State to tamper with one Bishop in Christendom, than with one
in each Parish: You maintain the excommunication of Princes, which is denied
by many of her followers; and that too, so much the more dangerous in you, as
you are ready to pretend a charter, a demise, of temporalities in ordine ad
spiritualia, not from the Pope, but by a revelation from heaven; with the
clause, Deus transfert imperia: you may, and it please you, remember of
Johannes Lerdensis Rex Israel, who was hurried by such a trick as this from the
Shuttle to the Scepter. Yea, in the matter of Episcopacie you join hands with
the Beast; you and his Holiness must have all Bishops, except him and your
selves, to be in the best sense, but of humane institution; see the hot
Bickerings about this plea, (if your reading goes beyond a six-penny ware) in
the third Convocation of the Council of Trent: Unhappy Bishops! grownd betwixt
two factions, as betwixt two milstones; there the Pope of Rome, here the Pope
of the Parish upbraiding them equally as usurpers. I could tell you further
your Ethusiasmes, and their traditions are from the same Minthouse, you from a
tumor of presumption, they of authority, alike ready to belie the holy Spirit,
and the blessed Fathers: But having brought you to Tyber, I leave you both as
twins (no difference but in age) to suck the Wolf your common nurse, and
proceed to your (for the Sections, if no more) schismatic discourse.

Here I must luctare cum larva, grapple with non-entities, doubts and
negatives; as if the old Sceptike Philosophers were revived in you, or as if
Sixins Empericus had founded your sect; Tell me in good earnest, why is there
nothing positive in you, but all your reformations consist of denialls: you are
perhaps, afraid, by having any thing common with others, to be thought of the
Church universal, which you have now thrust out of your Creed, and given her a
bill of divorce; or else it is that your Christian liberty can hear of no
restraint, even in the fundamentals. Your objections (though like Ixions cloud,
airy, and by your own fancy and supposition) I pass them by, as the only
orthodox part in you; and shall strictly tie my self to your answers, lest I
seem rather to have a cause, then found a party.)

In your first and second, you make your posture, and take your aim, in the
third you let in the thrust against the Church of England; but with no less
mistake, nor better success, than when Dou Quixot (one who for a headpiece,
might have been moderator to your diet) justed against the windmill, in stead
of the enchanted castle. At the first view, by the multiplying glass of your
purity, you can discry four of the beasts heads, and inform us, that the
Liturgy, discipline, government and ceremonies of the Church of England are
popish. Suppose now it were so, is not your curse, who discovers your mothers
nakedness, double to his, who did not cover his fathers? But I have mistaken
you, your anabaptization does privilege you to be none of her sons. What a
cursed Shimei is this to lay this heaviest imputation upon the most glorious
Church in the world? I should tell you, if you had either patience or judgment
for instruction, the Church of England, since the reformation has been only
she, who has seriously entered the lists with the enemy, kept them in hot
blood, and scarce granted a breathing time to her opposites, who, if not to
award her blows, had not daign'd to blunt a pen against your sect. Did not
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and numbers more of religious and learned martyrs,
seal their departure from the Church of Rome by their dearest blood, and must
your sacrilegious hands throw their sacred dust in the air, by persuading us,
that they dyed popish, not as members only, but (in some kind) authors of that
Church, that public service we now enjoy? How may this encourage the
Romanists, when by our pretended selves, not only our best champions, but our
very Church is made theirs? How shall they triumph over us, and our unnecessary
debates, (they fight closely within doors, when we bawle in the streets)
telling us, we cannot agree amongst our selves, until we return ad Petram
unde excisi sumus. What you say in defense of this your general position, we
shall see in each particular, only I cannot pass your Imposition of the
Liturgy; Hinc illae lachrymae: any thing that is by order and authority is
burdensome; you idolize only the calves of your own making, that is, of your
crazed imagination. But how shall this humor of yours suit with the unity of a
Church? can many shreads of cloth make a garment, and do not you remember that
Christ's coat was without a seame? Nay, for that you care not, you will be very
loath to plead right in Christ's Testament; My peace I leave you; for a needless
fear to be polluted with the antichristianisme of Ecclesiastical courts.
These who are in Civil or Ecclesiastical power, may from thence learn, what
a narrow circle you confine them within; nor should they take this ill, when
some of you, the Antinomians, do pretend immunity from the moral Law, the Law
of God himself (perhaps they dream of a Patentee by the Gospel) and tell us
with Pharabo, in the pride and hardness of their hearts, Who is the Lord that
we should obey him? But I hasten to your next.

Then you labor with tooth and nail to untie the obligement of the Chaos, and
tell us first, That the Law for reformation never intended to allow or set up
Popery in England, nor I hope to deface Christianity. What the intention of the
Law has been, and how understood hitherto, whether shall we believe the Law it
self, the articles, the canons, the rubrickes, the service of the Church, the
statutes of Parliament, the joint consent and practice of all good men, and
learned Writers (these without a seeming difference, give approbation to the
present Liturgy and government of the Church) or you, who is filius terrae, a
Mushrume, a son of yesterdayes? your self conceit deserves my pity, not my
refutation, and having by your pulse found out your fever, pardon me if I
refuse to take such a verdict upon your trust, until you be restored to your
wits, neither then must you expect to be balanced with so many contrary
pregnant testimonies. Your second is yet of a higher reach, All humane laws
contrary to Gods Word are invalid and void, ipso facto, and all must be such,
to the which your infallibility is not pleased to give approbation. Tell me, I
pray you, whether should the Judges, or your selves determine the integrity of
the Law? if they, why do not you attend their determination? how is it, that
the hand must reform the head, the people their Prince? and do you think
petitions, covenants, and insurrections the surest gradations to the Kingdom
of Heaven? But if your selves only, what need have you of Judges? Magistracy,
and Trienniall Parliaments are to you but ciphers, and visible nothings; your
consent is the figure which makes the number: for if old Laws be to be
repealed, it is sufficient, if you say, These are against the Word of God, no
more obedience from you; your Sic volo sic jubeo is more than powerful, the
wall of each City must to the ground at the voice of your ramshornes. And if
new Laws be to be made, it seems it is you that truch with the Scepter;
unless your wise heads find them agreeable to the Word of God, all is void
ipso facto: What language is this? Is it not the Dial^ct of rebellion? the very
(...), the Tactus physicus of all disorder, mutiny, and confusion? Now let the
world judge betwixt us, whether or not this your Doctrine strikes home to the
very life of government, and destroys it insensibly, as the worm that Gourd
of Jonas: every man, by this ipso facto of yours, is left with a supreme power
to be King and Priest to himself.

Your third ground is of the same bullion, and carries your Image, that is, of
Schism and Democracie: You have vowed against all Popery, and finding the
particulars mentioned to be so, you will have no more communion with them. What
if you should find the Decalogue, and the Lords Prayer (as you have already
the Creed) to be Popish, must not all the Principles of our Religion, for your
pleasure, be drawn within the verge of a thundering abjuration? nor is this
fear in vain: your precisest Gospellers already deny the Law, as only
suitable to the Climate of the Jews, and some of your best Rabbis make it a
case of conscience not to say the Lords Prayer, that Magicum canticum (as they
term it) Pontificorum; if therefore this wantonness of yours be not
restrained, I appeal to your selves (that is, to prejudice and faction it
self) if we shall have more certainty of Religion left us, then what may
subsist with the ebbing and flowing of your distempered and Moone-changing
brains.

It is your next care to draw the Parliament to your party; but there is no
communication betwixt light and darkness: nature has taught all Entities to
intend their own preservation; nor can that Honorable Court forget its
being, and join with you: plant you at such a distance, whether your
antipathy may reach, you shall no less exhaust the privileges and authority
of that most honorable meeting, then the Cabage does the sap and life, and
vigor of the noble Vine: can this be more evident than by the case in hand,
where you take the Supremacy upon you, and with intolerable pride and
foolishness presumes to give us the infallible sense and meaning of the
Parliament: I know you had no such Commission from their Honors, as to be
their trenchman, and to print a Declaration for them. But let us examine your
reasons. First, They intended the Protestation against all Papery. It is
granted: but are you not like the door that turns all day upon the hinges,
and never changes its place?

Have you yet proved these things to be Popish? nay, though you had, (which you
shall never do, -- rumpantur utilia codro.) were the probabilities of your
arguments, a warrant good enough for your reformation, without the approbation
of your Superiors? you indeed never desire a better, whilst you do what
seems good in your own eyes, acknowledging no King in Israel. But who gave
you authority to cleanse the Temple, unless you mantaine that all power is
from the people, (your hands) and that you may stop the wel-spring, the
fountain, when the fit takes you. Secondly, You remember us that the
Honorable House of Commons will not have the Protestation extended to the
maintenance of any form of worship, discipline, and government; nor of any
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and therefore they condemn them
as Popish? What a wild consequence is this? if that pious Judicatory did not
find it convenient (as it is not) to assert the grounds of Doctrine and
Discipline with the same oath; did they therefore condemn all as
Antichristianisme? that they did not is clear to any that will not shut his
eyes: first, from the maine distance they put betwixt Popery and Popish
Innovations, and the form of Worship, Discipline, Government, and Ceremonies
of the Church of England, interserted by such a period, as your ends shall
never be able to draw together: Secondly, from their laudable and religious
practice, in being at all occasions present at the service of the Church,
wherein none but Familists (who do conform themselves to any public worship)
can imagine their integrity and nobleness, for all the world would
prevaricate, if they had but thought (much less declared) the Liturgy, as you
would have it, to be the massebooke. And for the government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops (this is the heell you would most willingly bruise,
because it bruiseth your head) it is no less evident that the protestation
does not condemn that: First, from their actual sitting in the House, should
these members integrate that body, if they were already adjudged as ^ims of the
Antichrist? this were a too heterogenious fancy: Secondly, what needed the
late dispute concerning the present Discipline, if the sentence had been
already past? Thirdly, would so considerable men for honesty, wisdom and
power, of that number, whose reasons militates for Episcopacie have stood up in
defense of a maine branch of Popery, and not have been ashamed (if not
punished) for public maintaining the Antichrist, and contradicting their late
vow and order? These reasons, nill you will you, do convince you, that it was
not the intention of the Parliament (as you to arm them against
Ecclesiastical persons and orders in every corner of the kingdom would bear
the people in hand) to protest against (though it seemed not fitting to protest
for) the present Discipline, Government and Ceremonies of the Church; if you
had a forehead, you would be ashamed of this boldness, but your obduration
has no more sense, Quam si dura silex, aut stet Marpesia cautes.

These great patrons of Church and State, shall no doubt punish this malepert
sauciness of yours; for their love to peace and truth cannot permit such a
firebrand to belie their int^ntion, and abuse the credulous simplicity of the
multitude: I am confident this reply of mine shall first visit you in the
Gatehouse. Did you, I beseech you, ever think it possible, that the roarings
and outcries of such braying schismatikes as your self, could have induced
the honorable Court of Parliament to change upon a sudden the whole face of
the Church, as that of a scene, upon the daring and misgrounded information of
your ignorant and malicious libels: the dross, the off-scourings of the
multitude are yours; these, and these only, you are able to induce by promises,
or deceive by pretenses: Tell them, as you do, that they are the people of
God, set apart for the great work, and shall not this ambition blow up the
unconstant vulgar? Show them they may change their fortunes, and last share in
the public government, you may draw them along with you to the slaughter,
though there you leave them with your grandfather Munsers benediction, Si
quidem populus vult decipi, decipiatur. But do you expect that the grave
Statesmen of the kingdom shall be pleased to venture upon this Chaos, and let
you shuffle the cards again, in hopes of a better set? your parity brings
along with it an Anarchie, and that, all imaginable ruin and confusion; I Will
tell you in your ear, you had better keep your Pamphlets at home, and have
restrained the late zealous sturs at Southwarke and Saint Margarets, if you
would not have had your passions detected; these staring looks of yours so
soon after the change, do foretell what madness you may come to at the
height of the Moon, and will (no doubt) persuade that supreme Judicatory
either to draw blood of you in time, or to provide manacles for binding up your
furious attempts, lest you tear out your own bowels. Your third reasons
leanes to a thought, a supposition, and is a strain of your old lunacy; That
the honorable House of Commons did intend to exclude whatsoever should be
found to be a branch of popery. But who should find it so? themselves, or you?
Have they resigned that power which God, his Majesty, and their ancient
privileges have endued them with, into your hands? must they and we be tied to
what fancy your humor shall be pleased, to thrust upon their just commands,
and our due obedience? This were a dangerous implicit faith, and of as large
bounds and great variety, as there is judgments and opinions in a kingdom:
for shame (if you be reasonoable creatures) spare this nonsense; and rather
think that the protestation has an edge to cut out your tongue, than to cut
off what your unsettled imagination after a Fridayes supper from the back of an
Oister shall Dictator-like happen to belch up. You tell us in the fourth place:
That you are all in an erected hope of a reformation from this most noble
Parliament; and so are we too; yea, no less confident than your selves, that
all Popish trash shall be made packing; but may it please you to go along with
that baggage, and attend the safe transportation of these fopperies, we shall
be rid of two great evils; at your return from Rome, you may take your rest by
the way with your brethren at Amsterdame; no peace for Israel how long the
Jebusites are thorns in our sides; and if the Papists and you (I cannot tell
how to name you, unless it be Legions, you are so many) the Foxes, the
boutefeux joined by the tails were once removed, we should have good hopes no
more to see our cornfieldsd in a fire. The reformation you expect, is a
deformation; your active zeal extends to the purifying of Churches, yea, of
Churchyards; as lately one of your society was buried in the fields, lest his
sanctified body might be polluted by consecrated, that is, superstitious
ground: a strange separation that hold even amongst the dead: But when you have
banished from us all that can speak as Christians, what shall be the event?
the sad ruins of a torn Church and State, yea, of Religion it self is at the
stake: for the more weak and conscientious people, who expect salvation in
some Church, will rather join with Rome, then have no Church at all, like the
fish, changing the hot water with the hotter fire; others, who have made
Religion their hand-maide, shall be bold to laugh at piety, and think it
nothing but an invention of policy, to bridle the humors of the less daring,
and to encompasse the designs of the more active wits; so the fruits of your
reformation shall be like these of Gomorra, pleasing to the sight, but in
effect either Apostacy, or Athisme. In your fifth ground I acknowledge your
perfect idiome, the complete language of Amsteldame; their you tell me, that
suppose the House of Commons had, not intended the removal of these things,
but the protection rather of the same, yet private Christians must put to their
bands, and reform themselves, and live no longer schoole-boyes and punies
under the fernla of that discipline: Now you speak to the point, and have but
dallied hitherto. Bishops I see and Parliaments are in the same respect to you,
if once they cross your humor; if this be not a trumpet of sedition, there is
nothing so. Go on, and give not over till the Commonwealth be fitted to your
Church (as one of yours said, the hangings to the room) let us have that
prodigious monster, your parity, in both, without so much as distinction of
head and feet, and then you may reform when, and what, and how you please. Can
there be the least thought of loyalty and subjection beneath this, when such an
o yes is made for every man to take up arms, and to reform what first comes
unto his hand? nor is it a wonder to hear this from you; e're all be done you
will speak with a higher tone, even that the propriety of all goods is your
own: For it is your doctrine that we have fallen from all dominion and right
to the creature by the mortal sin of Adam; this, say you, was restored by
Christ, who reserved the dominion to himself (there your love to Magistracy)
but gave the right to his children, the sons of the Church, these whom the
conventicle has assured that they are marked with the white stone, you may
therefore possidere terram, and who besides you do so, are but usurpers. Yet
give me leave to wonder, if in a settled Church and state some care be not
taken to supresse this madness, whereby every man is invited to a freedom and
liberty of doing what his humor suggesteth; as if this Diana of yours inspired
nothing else but frenzy and rebellion: You will by this your exorbitancie,
make the Bishops enemies long after them, and while they are going out at
doors, pull them back by the gowns: in the time of their power, which of you
durst vent such dangerous whimsies; now you teach us, that by one blow we
cannot lop off the inconveniencie of Bishops, and the inconveniencie of no
Bishops, and that the greatest danger in a mutation is that all daugers cannot
be foreseen: if this popular reformation of yours take root for Religion,
Learning and civilitie, we must content our selves with profaneness,
ignorance and barbarity, nay, all the evils that anarchie and confusion can
produce must attend upon us. But the honorable House of Commons, against whom
by this reason you have taken up the bucklers, will provide for that fire, that
gangrene of yours, which has already inflamed the bed-straw, and ceased almost
upon the very heart of the Kingdom.

In your sixth answer yould dealt your strokes about you; your first blow is at
the Liturgy; this you observe to be popish in two respects.

First, in regard of the whole frame and matter of it, as being translated out
of the Romish Latin Liturgy: But is it not the Romish Liturgy translated?
That is, are there any thing in the Mass Book, which is not in the book of
service* if your answer be negative, I leave you to be hissed at; but if
affirmative, What advantage have you gotten by this envious calumny? Do you
think we may not use what is in the Mass book consonant to Scripture, and
purest antiquity? to say otherwise, were to deny the Lords prayer and the
Decalogue, because they are there: Indeed I think you intend no less then a
perfect reformation from Rome, that is, a flat denial of all that ever Rome
maintained, so much does your new Creed proport: God grant you do not deny
Christ to be the Son of God, because the Devils confessed him to be so. Tell
me in good earnest, are you so silly as to conceive that there have been
Heretics before your selves, who durst adventure to have nothing common with
preceding Christianity? And why may there not be some few pearls in that
dunghill, the masse-booke? If these be culled out, and according to Scripture,
and the best pattern of ancient Liturgies, most judiciously framed for the
service of our Church, what can malice or ignorance say against it? no greater
error in you, and our other enemies of Rome, than not to distinguish betwixt
the purging of an old Church, and the building of a new; they upbraid us,
because they say it is so, you because you think it is not so; all must be
admitted from them, errors with truths, all rejected by you, truths with
errors: they destroy the perfection of the Scripture, you the being of the
Church; you no less enemies to the authority of this, then they to the
belief of that. But let both of you roar like the Lioness bereaved of her
whelps, and mix heaven and earth together by your lowings, Naaman shall be the
same man to us before and after his washing, we will in despite of papists
cleanse the leprosy, in spite of you retain the substance; you mention the
late parallel, in a Mathematical sense, justly so called; for as Lines
parallel cannot be in one point coincident: so neither the Service book with
that of the Mass: he is an ungratious son of the Church, who has falsely
invented these whoredoms, and they the unworthy offspring of such a mother,
if they rest unrevenged. Mean time what a death it is to think of the sport
and advantage our watchful enemies will be sure to make of our
self-confession, that we have the same public worship which in them we do
condemn as heresy, as idolatry? what exporbrations, what triumph of theirs
will hence ensue? How shall we argue against them without bespattering our own
faces in time to come? all our help is that the Treatise it self (the
parallel) is so ridiculous a piece, that it will be thought the dreams of a
sleeping person, and (they say) Dormientes non tenentur de j^re, we are not
answerable for the fact. You tell us, you omit to say, what you cannot, you
dare not say, all your frivolous exceptions are so fully answered by the
learned Mason, judicious Hooker, and others, that it will be three ages yet ere
you attain to so much judgment as to understand their discourses: why do you
gull the world with these bravadoes, such general flashes, and when it comes
to the close, to the dispute, -- frustra comprensa manus affugit imag^,
Par levibus ventis volucrique fimillima som^^.


No word of you then: if we dare call the settled Laws of Church and State in
question, we shall by the meanest of five thousand in England stop your black
and ignorant mouths, and make you confess, there is nothing contained in that
Book which is not agreeable with Scripture, suitable to Antiquity, and
allowable by the confessions and writings of the best reformed Churches and
Divines in Europe. And you Sir, who has made all this dinne, how should a man
find your out, either to convert you, or to be converted by you? your name it
seems was affrighted of the title page; but it may be you had none, and that
this libell has been penned by you, in the interi^^ betwixt your renunciation
of that name you had from the Church of England, and your anabaptization. You
add there is vitions things (animus meminisse horret) that run through all
the veins of the Service Book; all the letters of the Alphabet cannot furnish
censures for this blasphemous Rabshakeh; God rebuke thee Satan. Sufficiently
discovered? by whom? in whose age? Did your Separatists ever produce any thing
upon this subject, but lazy indigested fables, as far from learning as their
authors from sense. King Arthurs story, a tale of Robin Hood, or the Books of
Chivalrie, were ever thought more profitable nonsense, more judicious stuff.

Your second general respect is, The imposition of the Liturgy upon all men's
consciences; let the matter be never so landable, yet the manner, the
imposition, is a wile of the Antichrist: Here I entreat Geneva to answer you,
whose Church has an imposed, a set form of Liturgy, and whose worthiest men,
Calvin and Beza, do stoutly maintain the Churches power in prescribing
Ceremonies and Orders for Unity and Peace sake: It were easy to have laden
the Margin with quotations, if I had not abhorred the ostentive foolishness
of your sect. Who runs may read here that in terminis terminantibus you
brand all superiority Ecclesiastical, whether of King, Church, or Parliament
(for all these are included in this imposition) with the minsing titles of
Popery and Antichristianisme; if this be the reformation you intend, that no
law can please you, much good may it do you, and those that desire it: I am
confident the Church and State of England are not so weary of themselves as to
become slaves to your fancy; this perhaps may fit America, where there is no
government at all, but how it may subsist with a being of a kingdom here, I
understand it not. Popery (you say) is Antichristianisme, hence every Papist
must be the Antichrist; nor stay you here, but bring the matter home from
Italy to England, and tell us by a necessary consequence; that not Bishops
only, but all Superiors do oppose and overthrow the Kingly office of Christ,
which is incommunicable to any creature and power in heaven or earth, bona
verba quaeso. The Scripture you bring 2 Ioh. 22. is as far from the point as
you from truth and judgment: Speak out, dare you say it in open terms,
though indeed you say as much, that the King and Parliament, because of the
Liturgy imposed have denied Jesus to be Christ? Tiburne for you if you do.
You indeed seem rather stained with this blasphemy, who has boldly and
prophancly averred, that bowing at that sacred name is idolatry, and (as you
jeere with the bad thief on the cross) Jesu-worship. But let me from your own
principles use one argument against you; whosoever prescribes to their people
a set form of prayer, do Lord it over the conscience, and are the very
Antichrist, but your extemporarie prayers in public are to your people a set
form of prayer, you therefore are the Antichrist. The major is your own, the
subsumption is proved by this inevitable dilemma; when you pray before your
hearers, either it is as their mouth to God, or for your selves only: if you
say the last, you contradict the action it self, your expressions, and the
cause of your meeting; and if the first, must not the people join with you in
word, or at least, in thought? and is not this to be stinced and tied to
aforme of prayer how raw and senseless so ever? By your sole Lawgiver, you
express your thoughts of authority; you can hear of no general commission
for ordering the House of God as place and time shall require; but pardon me to
believe the Apostle better then you, who has not in vain appointed this
qualification, Omnia fiant decenter and ordine; if the Kings and States of
Europe would be pleased from this your tenet to learn what a moath, a cancer-
worm you are to all Superiority and Jurisdiction, you would be sent novos
quaeritare orbs. And for this cause the Pope, say you, is proved to be the
Antichrist, in that he fitteth in and over the Temple of God, that is, as you
please to Paraphrase it, The consciences of men: it had been well you had
spoken with application; you are the only men I know, who must have all men's
consciences squared by the supposition of your own. The will worship you name
is truly that you practice, that is, an affected contradictorious way in the
service of God to Scripture, to Antiquity, to the Church you live in, to
Discretion, yea to Christianity it self. If by a Liturgy devised by men, you
understand man's devise, it is a gross calumny, a notorious untruth, not a
syllable in that Book, which is not either (as the greater part) the words of
Scripture it self, or clearly deducible in the very Phrase from thence; if
your sense be, that it is imposed by humane power, you are no less mistaken;
there is either a particular warrant from Scripture, or at the least a general
Commission granted for the ordering of the House of God, which extends to the
full latitude of the Book, if you had either impartialitie to conceive aright,
or conscience to obey; but it may be you mean that men have contrived the
Book of Liturgy, so they have the Apostles Creed, which perhaps you for the
same reason have rejected; nor was ever the Church of God since the first
Congregation of the Jews in a politic body, to your last and worst days,
without a public form of service and worship. We bid you therefore with Saint
Augustins, Erigere scal^^, and go up to heaven alone, but again, Dat^
venia^^, nos non credimus, that all the Churches of the Christian world have
been over-laid with Idolatry and Antichristianisme, till this late one of
yours.

Having choked (as you think) the Liturgy with this illpeec't discourse of
yours concerning the Antichrist, your second onset is upon the Ceremonies of
the Church; these you say because of man's devising and imposed upon the
Conscience are also Popery: you give no new reason, nor I any new answer, only
this, there is no greater error committed by you Sectaries, then that because
the Church of Rome has thrust upon us some unnecessary, many superfluous
Ceremonies, you would have the reformation to have none at all, not confidering
that Ceremonies as the hedge, do fence the substance of Religion from the
indignities that profaneness and irreligion oftentimes put upon it.
Ceremonies though in the particular, that is, This or that, be not necessary,
in the general they are; how long we are men, and do inhabit these our dull
bodies, we had much need of some visible helps to sti^re up our Devotion, and
to give a being, a continuitie to public decency and order: It is true, the
inward worship of the heart, is the great service of God, but the outward
worship of God, is the great witness to this, whereby our light shines to the
world, that men may glorify our Father which is in Heaven; now no outward
worship without Ceremonies, they, the ancienter (superfluity and Superstition
laid aside) the better, so they fit time and place: for you, your are so
spiritual, (though some think you no less carnal then your neighbors) I am
afraid your Religion, may evapour in words, turn in the smoke of a thin airy
profession, and as no substance of good works, so leave no visibility of
worship behind it; though now while the heat of a party keeps in the fire, you
seem to have some zeal in your breasts, if you were settled on your dregs, and
after this great motion returned to your cold blood, it is very possible you
shall have no Religion (...) all. It were not hard to tell you here what
happiness Christians do enjoy by the wholesome constitutions of a Church or
State; what peace, what unity, what concord, what increase of ^^ll p^ety and
virtue from thence. And unity, if it be not nature it self, it is the first
principle riveted by the hand of nature, no essence, no action without this
sickness and Rebellion, the two great confusions of the natural and politic
body do evidence this truth, no subsistence, no continuation of other, but by a
first cause, a prime agent, even your discipline must have unity and order in
it, if it have life and motion; and this the more general it is, the better:
Its true, the extension of good is not its touchstone, yet this does not hinder
it to be communicative, and that to the dimension of the body which is to be
governed. But now the matter imposed is left in its own nature indifferent
still, though not so in the practice, and why this very same restraint
enlarges then Christian liberty, for otherwise they would be in conscience
obliged to abstain from every thing that the nice and peevish humorist should
conceive to be offensive, now, being tied by a Law, they may use their
freedom, yea, must prefer a necessary duty to an imaginary scandal. But
this were to digress, nor are you for such peaceable thoughts, for you love
that order and not any besides it, that may be raked out of the ashes of
Monarchy, but your late injuries meeting with its discretion will teach a
necessity of foresight, not to adventure huge bodies as you are, quia su^
feruntur pondere, down steep hills, that is, to your own swinge. But you
could soon reply to me that not to abstain for every offense though in a case
commanded by lawful authority, were soul-murder, and against the sixth
Commandment, and that the authority so commanding were Antichristian: which
how it may agree with a Legislative power in King or in Parliament, and how
comply with the Presbyteriall or Parochial government more then with that of
Bishops, I profess I do not understand, all superiority, all imposition, all
public order and common decency is a popish and antichristian usurpation of
Christ's scepter.

Your third endeavor is against the discipline of the Church in exercising the
power of Excommunication; this you prove to be another branch of Popery,
because it is from the Church of Rome: you may with the same pains argue Christ
and his Apostles to have been popish, who are the undoubted authors of that
power, but you do well to deny all censures, having already denied all Laws,
Superiors, and Judges, least you might happen be punished for this contumacie.
You tell us of the Homilies, and what do you think are meant by the third
mark, the true discipline there? it must be either this of ours, or that of
yours: yours are not at all, that we have heard of, nor needs there discipline
where there is neither Law nor injunction; if this of ours, the homilies stand
up and witness against you: but your aim is to prove the Church of England by
the book of Homilies to be no Church at all; I pray you, how were they
Homilies, but by the Church? this is to prove by a Church that we have no
Church at all. a Logic indeed that beseems your conventicles, where
repugnantia in adiecto is attended by wilful malice and gross ignorance.
Now, this clear denial of a Church, how agrees it with your advise of
reformation? motus supponit non facit subiectum, nor can we reform that Church
which as yet is not gathered together; I know by your breath you are an actual
Separatist, who have some years ago condemned the whole body of this Church to
hell and perdition, though now to insinuate your self the better you appear (as
your master before you) sometime as an Angel of light. You add the not due
Administration of the Sacraments; Did you never think that rightly done, till
in Germany the holy Supper (with all reverence to that sacred mystery be it
spoken) was given by one of your number after some long winded orations from
the back of an oyster board to his fellow sitting Communicanter in brown bread
and small bear: It was say you, the pride and delicacie of the Antichrist,
that first used a wheat loaf and wine, nor will you have us in this (though in
other things to the very communicating in an upper room, as you do, and after
supper) follow the example of Christ, he, you tell us ( horr^sco refer^us) was
content with the ordinary and native elements of the Country, and so must we
be too. But the Church of England does no less hate the absurd Popish
Transubstantiation, then your foolish sacramentary bare representing signs:
both sacrificall and Sacramentary let them go packing for her, and so that
other Sacrament of Baptism, though you have vainly nibbled about the sign of
the cross, (no less hateful and Idolatmus to you, then ridiculous and
shameful to the Pagans of old) yet when it comes to the push of an argument,
you deserve nothing but Virgils description of his evanishing apparitions:
Ingenti trepidare metu: parstollere vocem
Exiguam: incoeptus clamor frustratur hiantes.


In spite of you and all wrangling opposites, the Church of England, as the
purity, so shall ever retein her decency as beseems so high actions in
dispensing these sacred mysteries. The restraint and edicts you complain of
were much indeed against your Catholic gift of preaching, but now I hope you
have repayed that loss, when not a Sow-gelder among you who makes not hold
with a tub for his pulpit, Dii, fi qua est Coelo pietas quae talia curet,
persolvant grates dignas.

The fourth plea is against the root of all bitterness, the very heart and
lungs of the Antichrist, the government of Bishops, each casual mishap in them
must be an error, so will your Rabbis have to be, who deeming themselves
less in employment then in merit, do heartily rail against that which they
heartily desire, the Rochet. This you say is not of divine, therefore it must
be of diabolical institution, can you give a reason of this consequence? yes,
I will help your to it, and from your own grounds, all Laws, impositions;
superiorities, ordinanc^s from men, are in your opinion, (and this is no weak
one) usurped, tyrannical, ^ntichristianty, and against the prerogative of
Christ, who is the sole (...) to the commonwealth of Israel in his spiritual
Kingdom; these are your wise religious thoughts, but what say you to your
parishes, these were not instituted by Christ, here perhaps you will slip me
and adhere to family, yea personal discipline, and withal bring your warrant
for it, that Paul did send greeting to the Church at the house of Priscilla and
Aquila: neither can I reach you here, I know not what customs you use in your
rebaptization; what say you of meeting together in private houses, and
expounding a piece of Scripture? for this you will allege Apostolical
practice, and the same necessity, because of the persecution, and the same
(otherwise the Argument were naught) infallibly too: what say you of the giving
of the holy Supper to women? this sure you dare not deny, least the Diaconists
punish you, if I should remember you here of the baptizing of infants, the
distinction of Apocryphical and canonical Scripture the Apostles creed, you
would presently stifle me with the noise of tradition, the first and last of
those you have taken an order with, and for the other, you desire no more
testimony from or of scripture, then your own, that is, of your own spirit,
you are so naked in your outward worship (as the wrestlers of old) it is
impossible to lay hold upon you, and so grumbling against all church custom
and laws (for what is not commanded in scripture is to you contramandat, and
shall so be to us too if you grant a general power, and rest not only upon
particulars) that I can find nothing material of public order and decency
to lay to your charge.

I must therefore go about to prove the government of Bishops to be of Divine
institution, or nothing, and here I will take the surest way, that is to show
the Divine institution of Episcopacy from Christ himself, not from the precept
and practices of the Apostles, else you would s^ip out of my fingers and tell
me, that if not by the blessed Apostles themselves (as one of yours said) yet
in their time this mystery of iniquity of Antichristianisme, did begin to
work. My assertion is therefore and with better ground then your denial of
all authority, that the apostolical office it self, in its proper and
reciprocal acts, was nothing else but the Episcopal (I see you startle and
chang your complexion) as it is now a days exercised in the church of England:
whether the ordination of that function was, Ioh. 21. 15. or 20. 22. or as
others more probable by these words, as my Father sent me so send I you in the
same place, and at the same time were Bishops ordained: These are the Apostles
successors in ass et ex solido in all things that ever was assentative to
their office; as to call the Disciples and elders of the Church (not theirs who
come with sword^ and pistols to maintain the truth) together, Act. 12. 2. 20.
17. v. or divine Prosbytors. Act. 14. 25. to give direction for Church censures
1 Corinthians. 5. 5. to make laws and canons Ecclesiastical. 1 Cor. 11. 2. to
require observation of the same 1 Cor. 16. 1. Now the gifts of immediate
calling universal commission, infallibility, long^^^, and miracles, were
(...), in the Apostles nor official, but personally only extraordinary, and
for the employments of the time* neither indeed can that be called
apostolical, which is not proper to, and convertible with the Apostles, but
all these extraordinary inducements were in others besides them, and in ^he
E^angelists, in Philip the Deacon, or in the Disciples, though not all of them
in every one of these (...) essential to that office in constituendo, but the
Acts of Ordination and Jurisdiction: these the Apostles as Apostles once had,
and these by the same right of Institution, transmitted by the succession of
many ages to the present Bishops. (...) you angry at this ( stant Lumina
flamma) and it may be it may do your good, if you shall happen to empty your
stomach of some loathsome humors at the view of this position, nor have you a
possible way, for all your windings to get about it, unless you either
maintain that the office of the Apostles, in its very (...) was extraordinary
(and then no office, (...) an inducement, a gift) and nothing useful for our
times, which your Schisms, as many of them, as you are of men, will not suffer
us to believe; or that each of you, and not the Bishops only are the (...) of
the Apostles, and then would we gladly see you give Imposition of hands (as
they did) and pronounce the sentence of Excommunication, without the consent or
assistance of your lay-brethren, and inspired-parishoners, but you divide the
coat, seemlesse before, betwixt you. You have better right, I think, to the
extraordinary gifts, as that of immediate calling, when you despise the Orders
of the Church, and tell us the Imposition of hands was the ceremony of a miracle
if you can presume upon your abilities, and obtain the hummings of a factious
congregation, you have your calling, and are sent by God: that of universal
commission, when the reformation of all Kingdom^s is alike to you; (...)
parishes must confine the single gifts of others, but a whole national Church,
not your double qualifications, that of infal^ibility, when you obtrude your
sense of Scripture; the Fathers are but dull tapers to your bright stars, they
more of kinn to the Antichrist than you; if you think you have found a text
for it they (good men) must be Heretics, no more disprite, you cannot err,
that of miracles was never more believed by the popish ridiculous Legends, than
by you, Johannes de Vordg. fained something that deserved the name of a wonder,
but your Rabbis, to the laughter of the hearers, content themselves with each
common accident,) this they will have to fall out by the strength of their
prayers, either for the confusion of the reprobate, as they call them, or the
furtherance of the good cause; nor are they satisfied to give (which every
Christian must and should) the determination of all successes to Almighty God.
but they in a presumptuous holiness will be upon his facred counsels, prey into
his secrets, and boldly design a particular end for his divine providence in
every thing. Only the gift of tongues, I cannot tell how to fix upon you, and
withal not polute you with (which God knows you are not guilty of the
language (...)) You see now I have not troubled (...) conscience with Timothy
and Titus (and the^e shall be still Bishops to me; while you prove the circular
and monthly changes) I have derived the original of Episcopacy from the
Apostles Office; not their authority; Doubt not therefore if Bishops be (...),
unless you doubt if the Apostles were so, or because of your love of parity
you think them of that same order with the seaventy Disciples, deny if you
dare that the institution of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ were divine, and
I give you the bucklers, as to neg antibus principia. Thus have I flourished
with you; it were a shame to bestow a blow in earnest upon such a poor
smatterer as your self, I have ever thought it the best refutation of you and
of your cause, to lay your foolish impertinences open to the eye of the world,
then I am assured only these who love to have their brains suspected, would
give you the least approbation.

You find in the administration of the Episcopacy office the perfect image of
the papal beast from horn to hoose; but stay and take it home to yourselfe,
who a^e the only beasts I know amongst men, if irrationality and passion, can
argue want of Judgment, and turbulency in affections, your plurality of
marriages (the old license o^ the Germane Anabaptists) your love Feasts, your
night me^tings can abundantly witness this; your absurd simplici^y and
ignorance in this and other your libels give testimony of that, it is not
altogether a mistake of religion but aliquod naturae vitium, a hypocondriacie a
fault in your brain, that causes your ravings (hence I incline to think this
humor of yours may be epedemicall because of some (...)) and this to be as
physio logists transformed (as the life quoad act^ secundum) a man in a beast.
But I have mistaken you, all this time you m^ane the papal beast the
Antichristianisme, I pray you if his definition can fit you, who sit in the
house of God and opposeth^l (Magistrates) that are called Gods; only in this
you differ, that Gods house is mistaken for your own: nor shall we want an
individuality, it is no less in the unity of your covenants and oaths of
secrecy, than in the successive race of the Bishops of Rome. You are pleased
to call the ministers a dumb preisthood, a mockery: what disgrace is this to
the Church, to these that have baptism from her, or do expect salvation in
her? You have indeed named them bald-pate^, with those ungracious children, but
take your seat for it in the first Psalm, and there stay for your punishment.
Doctors with us and Priests doc pronounce the sentence of excommunication, and
with no more indecency, we think, than if some reverend Cobbler, or inspired
Button maker did the same; give me leave to remember you here of the late
schism of your congregation at Rotterd (...); they upon debate were divided in
two bodies; each of them was the supreme Church of God upon earth, and each of
them gave commission to an honest Weaver to excommunicate the other; this
cannot but please you well (though your discipline cannot) because there is
neither reason, nor order in it.

I think it strange, that you who deny all outward calling except that from
the people, should think the Curates, None of the Ministers of Christ in that
they derive their ministry from the Antichristian Hierarchy, if no orders be
necessary, sure a mistake of orders cannot be much prejudicial. Hence let the
world judge how both these mal^cious factions spend their fury upon the Church
of England; the papists object that she has for feited her ordination, you
that she has one, but the papists they tell us we are noe Church because we
want a Priesthoood, you, because we have one: They will here of none but a
Monarchical subjection, you do establish a democracy in the Church or an
anarchy rather; they complain of perjury, because we refuse to maintain their
orders (as if who amongst them had sworn canonical obedience to a heriticall
Bishop, were obliged to be a heretic) you of the want of purity, because we
do not renounce all continuation and orders of the Church. In spite of you
both she shall still maintain a visible succession in the mi^istery from the
very Apostles times: may not the Church of Rome though in her old age more
faulty, give baptism, and may not this warrant the derivation of our orders
from her first and better times? but I crave you mercy Sir, this argument does
not concern you, who not after the Church of Rome only, but also in the Church
of England, do rebaptize. You frame here an objection to your self concerning
the antiquity of Archbishops, and Dio^esan Bishops (this you add to
distinguish them from these of the late edition for parishes) and how do you
answer it? First you tell us they were not known by the primitive Fathers; but
this is as gross as to say the primitive fathers did not know themselves, whom
we undoubtedly know by a moral belief to have been Bishops, as we do that
the Saxons did here succeed the Britains: scarce a leaf in the Councels,
Fathers, and Church histories that does not speak this for us. Secondly, you
tell us that government was corrupt even from the wellhead, but since I have
proved to you that this was Christ (the Apostles you will venture upon) I hope
you will mend your expression, and retire.

Thirdly, you will have this government a^ limb of papacy, and I dare
boldly-say it, there is nothing more destructive of it, for to maintain that
every Bishop is de jure divine (as you in the same place grant that the present
bishops of England do) is (...) only to deny all dependence from Rome but to
give her her deaths wound by lopping of the prerogative whereby she subsists;
for by virtue of this, (...) come to her, dispensations from her, exemptions of
(...) and religious houses (the maine pillars) which if the bishops of Europe
by man-seeming there office to be de jure divino, would challeng as an
usurpation, her borrowed fathers might; perhaps return home to the first own;
(...). You say the Pope and the Bishops of England hold their authority by the
(...) ^amely from Christ, so I hope duth the meanest (...) sweeper amongst you
his calling to preach, to expound scri^pture, to give the Sacraments, and yet
will be oftended, if you think him or his argument popish, though the Pope of
Rome do the very same here, like your self, that is, a very compound of
absurdity, and boldness, you mention Doctor Hall, and his learned pains: out
upon thee for a fool, and a babbler! The works of that reverend, p^infull, and
judicious bishop, shall be entertained by the posterity, with app^obation and
thankfulness, when the better times shall ^isse thee and thy associat^ out of
the Church; the quintessence of you al do come short to the meanest croatchet
of his learning, judgment, integrity, and eloquence; nor shall these your
calumnies be ought else to him but stig^ata Laudis, cicatrices to testify his
conscience and resolution, who had the courage to set his face against you the
Amalakites, when others turned the back. For (...); his very citation refutes
you; you say he fails in that he cannot prove Romes succession from Peter, and
yet you have said, his assertion is that he proved Saint Gregoryes succession
from Peter. But I forgive you, you knew not before now (...) it, that Gregori^
was bishop of Rome. Now, what if I should teach you, that we in the Church of
England, perhaps have neither Christianity nor sacred orders from Rome, s^re
the first we had not: for by the observation of Easter according to the
tradition of the Eastern Church (To let the tale of Simon Zelotes, and Joseph
of Aramathe^ pass) it is most probable this Kingdom had the blessing of the
Gospel from the Disciples of John: if after the Saxon devastation we were
restored by Rome, in some parts of the Island, the Northerns at the same time;
were converted to the faith, by bishop Aydanus from Scotland; as Beda mentions
Lib. 3. Cap. 3. But this discourse is not for you, who in the preceding page
has prophainly called the Ministry it self a pe^ce of Popery, whether from
Rome or not is all one to you, such is your superlative hatred against all
order. Give me leave here to slip out of the way, and meet with a friend of
yours, the Author of The petition for Bishops examined; this man tells us our
Archbishops, and Bishops were substituted to the places of the Ar^hflamins and
Flamins of the heathens, this is a now conceit, that bishops are not from the
new, but old Rome, not Antichristian but heathenish. Here for all the grace you
bragg of you may learn of nature, that not the least show of religion, except
this mad one of yours, can subsist without (...) cement, this harmony, the
subordination in its office-betrers. But will he have the Bishops heathenish
(...) joy the rooms designed for the residence of the Flamins, and are we not
all Papists, yea Pagans, because such did once inhabit this kingdom? Now I
smell out the reason why you persuade so vehemently the pulling down of
Churches, it is because of some inherent wickedness in the place. He says
further that the first four or five hundred years there was Bishops in
Scotland, but that (as he cites Ioannes Mayor) communi Monachoru^ regebantur
Concilio, but their histories are there for it, that Amphibalus was Bishop in
the Isle of Man An. 237. and for some 100 of years after the Monks were not
so much as reckoned among the clergy, much less had they dominion over them.

In the close of this answer you are assured that the Government is protested
against. If such a worm as my self might presume to speak of that Honorable
Iudicaturie and the p^otestation made by it, I might upon better grounds argue,
that you and your sectaries, are within the reach of the same: my instance
shall be in one point (when I might in a hundred) that of Magistracy, your
doctrine concerning it, is point-blanck against the doctrine of the Church of
England, the Kings honor and estate, the power and privilege of Parliaments,
and that for to use your terms, deserves to be cut off and cast out as a
fruitless withered branch, and to be plucked up by the roots as a tree twice
dead, and as a plant not of Gods Planting.

Hitherto I might have taken you up by some pains, but now you pass all
understanding: fall you once upon the business of reformation, you rave
perfectly, like these Lunaticks who will perhaps speak sense, do they
encounter with the purpose that first chased them out of their wits, then
straight they run out. Sir, by laughing at you, you have spared me the cost of
Physic for expelling malancholy. Your first assertion is that it will be
impossible to constitute a national Church agreeable in all points to the
visible Congregation of Christ: here you no less cross the Consisteries than
the Bishops; and therefore it shall be convenient to leave you to their
refutation.

It is your brag, that there is many thousand Saints, whose hearts are
perfect before God, that is pleasing to you: and shall these empty Pitchers,
these factious lights, these trumpets of intent, multiplied to make a noise,
afright the Kingdom? I dare say, that if from your party you deduce mad men
and fools (and none of these, are men envied) with such as love for their own
ends, to fish in your muddy waters, scar^e a number, yea scarce an unity shall
remain; though you try the Sword of the Lord and of Geddon, as a friend of
yours did in another Kingdom, the Church and state of England, will ever have
prudence to detect your Stratagems, and courage to award your blows. What you
mean by defiling of garments I know not, but I know you have lately provided
against that by your naked meetings. Now you speak plain Language in
persuading a separation, and, forcing us to believe, we are in no better
condition than those Heathens to whom the Apostles first peached the Gospel;
for you tell us the Sheep must be called forth, and gathered into Christ's
Folds, and that it is a strange speech be you separate. You therefore will
begin ab ovo, and call together the Holy ones, to make up your new household
congregations: but how shall these be descended? Only by the infallibility and
presumed omniscience of your spirit, that of Error, not that of truth; you
only know these few names, and here you tell us that sca^se a number shall be
found to make up these holy meetings, what? are all your thousands evanished,
you boasted of in the last page? oportuit mendacem esse memorem, but I take you
at your last word, if there be so few (as you profanely abuse that Scripture)
marked with the white stone in his Kingdom, pray you spare us the pains of
Separation, separate your selves for some new colonie in Virginia, and trouble
not your pates about unpossibiliti^s; would to God you would leave us, or your
madness you, and then both of us should be at rest. Now let the whole world
judge if you be a fit man to usher in a reformation, and thus boldly to thrust
your impious sense upon the protestation, (made by the most honorable
Parliament) whose head is fraughted with such whimses, and who can hear of
nothing but the gathering of a new Church in this Kingdom. And if we all had
made a total apostasy from the faith; we should descry you blasphemously as
the Apostles did when they came to plant Churches in a Country where the
Gospel had not been formerly preached; not your ears, but your neck is in
danger for this.

But what answer you to the question, if they have not received Baptism? Or
are they not Christians? Here something sticks in your throat: you answer
negatively, by an equipollent Metaphor, that the lame and blind are not to be
offered up in a Sacri^ice to the Lord. Do you thus tempt the patience of the
Prince and people? Is it nothing for you to object Paganism to them at every
word? To call them profane, ignorant, unbaptized, unchristian persons? This
were intolerable to any free soul, and must induce all those who have the
smallest affection to generosity and Religion, to provide a way how such
monsters as your self may be suppressed.

You go on, and tell us the godly may not communicate with the profane. Quo
Donate ruis? are not al profane to you, that are good Churchmen and obedient
Subjects? And must all these fall within the verge of your excommunication? May
we expect, dum viatores sumus, your contemplative perfection, or that the
wheat shall be here without the chafe? And know you what iniquity some of
your holy Sisters might have committed yesternight? if you communicate with
them, do you partake of their profanation? It may be you have so before, nor
is it a sin in you or her, but an oversight: I see there is a necessity laid
upon us to search the hearts of men, to have their breasts made of crystal, to
find out their very thoughts, else no fellowship, no communion. But if every
known sin be every man's, where is Christ's burden? What difference put you
betwixt the head and the branch? Others uncleanness can no more defile you,
then your holiness excuse them: if you be for this separation, you must either
fly out of the world, or your flight is in vain; the best metal here has its
dross, the best grain its oftall, there is need indeed of a Fan, and a
Furnace, but not that of yours, destructive, not purging.

Nor stay you here, all are Dogs and Swine to you that will not be of your
kennell, nor wallow in your Puddle: so your Founders the Pharisees upbraided
Christ, with the name of a Wine bibber, and said he had a Devil, because he
haunted with sinners and publicans, while they themselves cleansed only the
outside of the Platter, beware of their woe. A little Leaven leaven^th the
whole Lump, never better known then of late by you, what couzenage and
hypocrisy have these years bygone hid up in the Mass from the eye of
Discipline: none must come to the Passover except your selves, who have not
washen your hands in innocence, but your tongues in the gall of Asps. You seem
to speak of known evil doers; if you mean such as are under the Churches
censures, you fight against your own shadow, none such are admitted to partake
of our holy mysteries; but if you understand, as you do, those of a contrary
judgment to your self (for it is the first, and your fancy about that, not
the second Table, all this time you respect) we pray for your health, and do
protest against your madness.

Now I have found you out -- Qualem primo qui s^rgere mense
Aut videt aut vidisse putat per nubila iunam.


And know how to take a direct aim: the reformation you aim at is shorter
laced then either consistories or parishes, there is a necessity of setting up
other Congregations besides these; here your intent is to have all reduced to
families, old (...) must be your Doctor and pastor, his wife Tib your
diaconesse, his Son Die your ruling Elder, and the serving man Will your
Deacon: a pretty Church indeed, and where none are to be admitted but such as
are approved by the whole assembly; he And his household, the supreme and only
congregation upon earth; not any beyond it in purity, above it in jurisdiction;
no more contest now for consistories, or Parochial Churches, you for the
avoiding of profaneness have assigned us a lesser circle -- ipse ratem conto
subigit -- all will be well and you be at the Stearn. Is this your model, your
pattern of reformation? It is so, ridiculous children will point at you and it
in the streets; if not for Christianity, yet for shame ^ake abstain from such
motions for the which the enemies dreaming you and the Church of England to be
concentrike, nam^ us no more Heretics, but mad men: nor are you less
dangerous then they: the innocent Sheep are no less terrified by the barking
of the dogs within, then by the handling of the Wolves without; my very soul
bleedeth to think what discouragements you give us at home, what ignominy, and
scandal, and disgrace you are to us abroad.

But you proceed and tell us, If there must be a national Church, let not
this exclude and bar out the free use of congregations. Here you play the
Libertine: give you freedom and you care not what religion is at the next
doors: this is the Golden branch, let you once see this, though your mouths
were as maine and wide as these of Cerberuss tumida ex ira tune corda recedunt.
This is indeed the confusion your parity aims at, that every man may do what
seems him good in his own eyes: now let any Christian judge, whether it is
your love to purity, that persuaded your Separation from the Church, now your
reformation of the Church, or your desire of license, when, if that be granted
to you, you are willing to be daily spectatours of the Antichristianisme and
their patron (such is all to you beside your sanctified Conventicle) of a
national Church, Order as they call it: and how do you? You have no use, no
name for order at all: all be^de your humor, though prescribed by the state,
must be order as they call it: this is your respect to Parliaments, you are the
only mouths, I know, of all power and Jurisdiction. Nor must the consciences
of Gods people in things indifferent for order and unities sake, be regulated
by wholesome Laws; when every man's conscience must be tied to yours in the
very principles of religion; how far they decline from this, so far from
purity, from salvation: without this no admission to your society, to your
communion, nor (as you will have it) to the Kingdom of Heaven. It is said of
Aristotle, he disputed against monarchy, least any beside his master should
affect that, just so you against government, when you are the hardest
Tax-masters, the most curious searchers of opinions in the world, nothing can
pass your censures (and that is either to be saved or damned) which is not
borrowed from your selves.

You will have us to believ, that though you are in, yet you are not of the
world, you, good men, are separated from the world in the corruptions thereof;
whether is this that you cannot sin, or that you do not sin, whether boast you
here of your opinion, or your practice? If the first, take it with you, and
that of the Apostles, when you say you have not sin you are liars, and the
truth is not in you: but if the last, I will tell you, you are now too gross
not to be discerned, all your fig tree leaves, of Purity and reformation,
will not cover your nakedness, violence, rebellion, deceit, cruelty,
dissimulation, wrath, incharity, in a word all the titles that attend you in
the first page, are your individual Lackeys, and do your best, will
acknowledge no other Master; I have known men of honest civil dispositions,
ere they joined to your sect, but then, as if Satan had entered with the Sop,
immediately became proud, testie, hollow-hearted, and whose charity dared nor
so much as extend it self to the respects of nature or acquaintance: these in
the Children of disobedience might be accounted sins, what they are in you I
know not; it may be, as by the access of truth and light, your natures are
essentialy changed, so the qualities and viciousness of your actions. But I
have mistaken you all this time, it is a Separation from the world in Doctrine,
not in practice; you intend you are as far from this, as you are from Rome.

Mean time you bear us in hand you are not Separate (and woes me for it) from
the civil state, but are peac^able members thereof, subject and obedient to
all good, and just Laws, how long they may happen to fit your i^ching humors;
go beyond this train, the Laws will be neither good nor just; you must have
the power to interpret them, as you have the Protestation, and thereafter obey
not them, but your fancy concerning them. Here you bring in your fulminatrix
leg^o, as if all we were Pagans about you, what your prayers have procured to
us, let these last thundering days witness; the almost ruins of a poor
Church by your Schisms, will testify it to the succeeding ages.

The Apostle indeed exhorts us to pray for Kings, your hearers know how you
obey this exhortation, when by your prayers you teach them how to suspect their
Princes of Luke-warmenesse and oppression; in your wavering petitions to God
for their reformation, their amendment, as Ioab did to Amasa, you stab their
authority, their reputation, beneath the fifth Rib. But if it were not proprium
convertibile with your Sect, to make bold with Scripture, I could fit you
better with texts, and tell you of a Miriam, who said, has the Lord spoken
only by Moses, and not by us also? and of a Core of whom you learned your
Dialect, you take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation of the Lord
are holy, wherefore lift you your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?
But you are worse then both these; no speech by Moses, as by your selves; not
all the Congregation of the Lord, but only you are holy. I will therefore
assign you a third, that comes more home to the point, To your Tents O Israel,
what Inheritance have we in the Son of Iesse? validior est oris quam operis
vox. Let the condition of the times, your defections, your stirs, speak for
me the truth of the matter: if the Parliament should give ear to your desires,
Royalty might seek a Patron amongst the Nominalists; you would soon find
that burdensome that is not profitable, and at the last answer the charges of
the crown with a Quorsum proditio haec? You make too bold with Domitian's
example; blessed be God for it, we have none such; no edicts come out for
persecution; but it is customary with you to compare King and people to Tyrants
and Heathens. You tell us here of protection and tolleration from civil
states, what if you shall imagine, as now you do, that this reciprocal duty
is not sufficiently afforded you? why then have you not only jus
determinationis, but Vindictae, you may judge betwixt you and your Prince, and
thereafter your rebellion is but a holy War; for the maintenance of religion
you may do any thing. This is a summary excommunication of yours; and the
Martyrs of the Primitive times were but Dunces, that could not fall upon it:
Kings have no more certainty of your obedience, then of your humors, your
mutations, at the first change of the Wether-cocke (and you are no less
moving) or information sent you from Amsterdam of a design against the
religion, omnia susque deque miscentur, all is turned topsie turvie. Do not
therefore offer us Sugar for your Pill: we are not so purblinde, but we do
perceive the nail in the one hand, while you carry Milk in the other hand.

Now when you have drained us of all discipline and unity, how proceed you
against the fomentation of envy, and faction in the state? you give a bil of
divorce to all Ecclesiastical, and a seeming power to civil Laws: these say
you, may take order with transgressors, but with the proviso of
incorrigibility: and can there be any such in your exempted Congregations? This
is either against your doctrine of admission or perseverance. But let no man
blame you before they try you: do you deal so with others? no, that were a
suspicion of charity, or a remission of zeal in you: Quod tibi non vis fieri
etc. is a precept too practical for your contemplative faith, what accusations
from you of Apostasy, of Treason, of heresy, upon suspicions, probabilities,
and consequents? Hear you of preparation for War? It is to bring in Popery.
Of the a ornation of a Chapel? it is superstition. Ask you how you know
this, you reply, the thoughts and intentions of the men are not upright, and is
not this without trial to judge the mind? Whether is this a trick of the
Antichrist or not, an usurpation of Gods prerogative? but you have made too
bold with infallibility to forge this privilege, without this fuel your
calumnies (the very life of your Sect) might be soon starved in cold blood.
Nay how blame you a whole Church and nation? is there a corner in all this
(...) of yours which is not stuffed with accusations of a total apostasy and
profanation against her? Her doctrine is Idolatry, her discipline
Antichristianisme, her religion at every turn, compared with heathenisme: b^t
the eye that mocketh his father and despises the government of his Mother, the
Ravens of the River shall pull it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

That old stratagem of Satan, you have executed handsomely this year against
the Bishops, and with as great moderation as he whom you name did, Nero: they
poor men, are by you made the gate to disburthen the people of their sins;
and will that slaughter on too if you can accomplish your ends, but it is
their, and our comfort, that he who has let you loose can cast a hook in your
nose, and chain you again, the Devil cannot so much as enter a heard of
swine without permission from Almighty God, you tell us the Gospel, that novum
Evangelium of yours, will kindle Coals and stir up debate, and for all this
the Civil power may not cast you out, nor can without much fasting and prayer,
you then (it seems) and religion are convertible terms, but see how you deal
with us here; shall we seem profane to you, you must separate from us, shall
you be troublesome and contentious to us, we not from you? This is your
Legerdemaine, your Hocus Pocus whereby you delude the people by this you intend
to blindfold the state, and toss the whole Kingdom (with reverence be it
spoken) like to an old Bear tied to a stake. Kings you will have none, unless
they be made by your selves, as he at Leyden: a one may give you, the Sons
of the Church, that which is yours, the fat of the earth for others, they are
children of Belial, all both Prince and People have forfeited their right,
their dominion in the Creature, and never as yet restored, because not of the
Reformation, only you whom the ^onventicle has assured to be of the
faithful, have the liberty of the Gospel. you may therefore freely, and with
a safe conscience reject your King, and deceive your neighbor, and think it no
more sin, then when the Israelites revolted from Pharaoh, and borrowed the
eate-rings of the Egyptians; your bondage has been the same, and your warrant
as particular, if we may believe you; nor do the coals you talk of burn no
heigher; you are as peremptory in granting rooms in heaven, as you are in
giving peace on earth, to them you are pleased to call heretics; and yet not
the less for all this, the state must nourish you in her bosom, though your
^rrand be then to suck out her heart blood.

For your next doubt, that your perfection will be envyed, it is of your own
making; there is none who knows your conversations, can Justly charge you with
popery, that you intend for heaven by good works: but if you had not added
purity (which with you is only Speculative) to your perfection, I might have
suspected you of the three vows, which falsely march under that name; though
your many wives, and large usury may serve to purge you from that of chastity
and poverty; and for that of obedience you may very well take it in the
negative. You call your way of devotion Christ's sweetness; spare, I entreat
you such appropriations; your works must not ever pass as the works of God:
lest as you else where make him the author of sin, so you may thrust (with all
reverence be it spoken) violence or dissimulation upon him; and is not this to
lay a ground work for Atheism, when you preach and practice contradictions?
and yet will have your credulous hearers (who have pulled out their eyes for
you) conceive, that all you speak is from above?

Now fall you down again upon the parishes, and maintain a necessity to
Separate your exempted congregations from them; no minister, you say, will be
so unchristian as to envye this: pereunt civili vulnere fratres; each of you
has his sword in his brothers side. When will you agree among your selves? it
seems you are erecting the Babel; you so much talk of; if the confusion of
tongues, hearts, and opinions be suitable to the work; one calls for an elder,
another brings a widow; one will have a parish, another a family; one for the
separation another against it; This man that the Doctor is an office-bearer,
this that he is not, he for a diaconisse, he against her: one says the Doctors
may excommunicate, another contradicts that; he gives the right of prophesying
to the inspired-lay-elder, he denies it; another denies all Church superiority
and jurisdiction; he maintains it in a Presbytery, this man in a parish; --
non si linguae centum, oraeque centum -- ferrea vox, and yet all of these (
mirum dictu!) leaning to the like immediate, the like infallible revelation;
neither learning, Church, nor fathers, must assist to find out the genuine
sense of Scripture concerning any of these. The Poets tell us that the mistaken
History of Babylon, was (...), this in a twofold meaning, may be so. Settle the
business among your selves, and say (you who maintain the discipline and
government of the church to be so clearly and perticularly set down in Gods
word) hitherto shall our proud wits (that casts up dirt and mire continually)
come. Then it is possible we may join with you, and that safely too, because
you are no more your selves, if you once but listen to unity and concord; but
this were dangerous; agreement amongst your selves might at the last end in the
Monarchical government of the Church of Rome; your purity, and peace are
compositio incompossibilium; and that is even what you are in your most formal
essence, a very notion of the brain, Christ told us in his apology for
himself, that the old serpent would not have regnum in se divisum, his poison
is yours, not his policy, you are not so far learned yet. In the close of this
answer you tell us, that your independent congregations will not plead for
tithes: Now you take the title of independence upon you, from church and state;
such is the liberty of your family meetings; Nor will you meddle with tithes,
this were (God save us) to Iudaise. It is your custom to ingratiate the people
to you by preaching sacrilege, rebellion, and usury; King, Priest and people
are too cheap sold for your 5. s. freewill-offering. Nor shall you thus avoid
the reward of Balaam; your purchase it may be is as good as the set rent of
others; to live by the chimney corner is sometimes as profitable as to live by
the Altar: Twenty or thirty pounds of collection is a mean reward for some of
your household lectures, even for one exhortation, if some godly families about
midnight be pleased to join themselves together. That piece of Scripture is
practically yours indeed, Godliness is great gain; nor must the good women
(the conceit of whose devotion is measured by their reward) want their
oblation, though they should borrow it from the Pockets of their sleeping
husbands, or send their clothes to Long-lane to fetch it: not many wise, you
can tell us, these are likely to detect your Knaveryes, but as rich as may be,
they will drop the more oil for your zeal, and you out of your Christian
pity will adventure to disburthen them of part of their goods that they may
have the more easy passage through the needles eye. your small tithes you
gather them ipsa Corpora at your chamber Conferences and long feasts, which you
repay with as long graces, praying to the extent of your belly, where not a
morsel may pass your censure if your hand be not in the dish; fastings,
unless it be with the Manichaes upon the Lords day, fall not out in your
Callendar till the 32 day of the month.

The Parliament you tell us is about a reformation; a glorious work indeed! God
prosper them, and send it us, to the rooting out of you and all who have
wrought our unquiet and troubled the peace of Israel: these Convulsions and
renting pains, which in a part, you to the horror of every Christian soul do
stir up, admonish us what humors, what obstructions are yet to be purged: but
under favor you must not prescribe the Medicine, such a measure of acrimony
should then be administered, that not the diseases only but the vital spirits
might readily be exhausted: you are a part of our consumption, and in such a
case strength not weakness is to be studied, whereby the kingdom may work
out the malignity of the sickness. But what reformation do you conceive? when
shall you make a stand? must every year produce you a new religion? every
month a new faith? nor shall the Rabbyes of the next moon, be content with
what you do, a new inspired-eldership upon a new pretended revelation will
perhapps demolish this Platform: you have indeed reached home to the first,
the Patriarchall, each of them were Priests to themselves, so you; thus is was
before the law, before ceremonies were in custom and therefore is the only
means for you, who are without all law, to reclaim the Church your household
from Ceremonies.

You persuade your self, the Parliament will remove that government you name
Hierarchicall, and we hope it will not; you indeed labor what you can to throw
sparks in the flax to put the kingdom in a flame, that you may see to find out
Popery, or rather the treasure and revennues of the Church, hid up in the time
of darkness; hence your zeal is active, yea so hot, that it is strange that
it melt not the plate, the bells, the very lead of the Church into coin. But
those of that honorable that religious Judicature are lately taught by your
madness, that essentially to change the present state of things, were no less
present death to the state, then to open a vein and disable nature in the
highth the rage of a fever, If in the time of your seeming interdict, you have
been so excessive, how should we find superlatives to express your carriage,
if the Church Government were totally removed? sure no more difference,
propriety, nor distinction of person, things, and conditions, should be left
amongst us Then if that dream, that Idea of Platoes were made real, did you
imagine these noble and conscientious Pilots of this great body would resign
their present tranquillity, for the fancies of you, distempered Humorists? nay
though they should (animpossible supposition) God himself would preserve some
order amongst us, lest the Harmony of Nature should be dissolved by you, and
all reduced to the Mother, Chaos. Go therefore with this your conceit to
New England, there convert the Americans from Popery (every thing beside your
own opinion is so to you) we hope never to see this confusion of Government,
this parity of beings, this annihilation of laws and Magistracy, you bring
along with you, received with any thing but laughter and derision in this
kingdom. It is true you have some reason and no more to brag of your
connivance hitherto; not is it wonderful (that is without a known cause)
though you would bear the world in hand, that as your knowledge, so your helps
are immediately from heaven: it will be possible to tell you, what angeli
^otores, what great agents have turned the sphere, and racked their heads, if
not their consciences (these I know they have, I doubt if those) to advance
your ends, for their own; I speak no mysteries now, blindness it self has
gotten eyes to see it. But the never sufficiently admired Parliament by the
hand of wisdom and providence will a midst all these distractions pull off
your Mask, and having made you visible to the world, either reduce you to a
nonentity, or restrain you within the limits of your proper vocations, no
more to intermeddle your selves with Church and state. Do not you too much
rejoice over the (perhaps deserved) afflictions of others: If Judgment begin
at the house of God, what do you expect? the brim of the Cup may purge, may
refine them; the dregs, plague and confound you; and such fierce scourges as
your selves, after their just chastisment, may be (if your proper element can
punish you) thrown into the fire.

That a national Church has no pattern, no direction in scripture, is false
and scandalous; and because no less repugnant to the position of Consistories,
then of Bishopps, I leave you to their just censures: If you loved peace half
so well, as you pretend to love truth, this expression had never dropped from
your pen: that olive branch, I am afraid, shall not be brought home to us,
while it please God by a mighty wind to abate and dry up your waters.

You would gladly purge the universities and schools; non amonimium
diligentes: this vomitive of yours may be the evacuation of their Learning and
livelihoods; I pray God the houses themselves may obtain favor at your
religious hands, whose piety extends to the very extirpation of your own enemy
knowledge, and a single life; that argues your simplicity, this your
wantonness: nor shall you want pretext; this is Monastical, that vain
Philosophy; either Paganism, or that which is worse, Popery. But since
already, the name of a scholar is no less odious to you, Then that of an
Academick to Paul the second, and that to know but the titles of schoolmen,
and in what language the fathers have written, is for that to be suspected of
heresy, for this of superstition. -- ^ro miserere laborum
Tantorum, miserere auimi non digna ferentis.


For generosities sake, envade not your enemy under the cloud, but leave us
the title page of two universities, that the after ages may know, we had once
religion and civility amongst us.

You come at the last to a strange position, it is indifferent to you what ever
liturgy or Ceremonies or discipline are left to accompany this national
government: is this you that told us all these are popish? it is true you did,
but it is the imposition you only complain of, let you enjoy your Christian
liberty at home in your parlours, and let Mahomatisme reign in our Cathedralls
for you; now let your blinded followers themselves judge whether it be
prejudice or reason, your malice or its misdeserving has so inflamed you
against the present Church government; give freedom to you, you crave no more;
it is therefore not the Crimes of the Episcopal office, but because it curbes
your passions, your vagaries, that has stirred your humors against it. if the
Juditious reader shall take the measure of your whole body by this your foot,
he shall find that it is nor your purity but your pevishnesse is in the issue
betwixt us: our Camells shall be but gnats to you, if a way may be found to
dispense with your obedience, and make you something betwixt a King and a
subject; by this outward pulse a man may find the inward motions of your heart,
how unequal these are and how this aguish and preternatural heat of yours
forespeaks a sweat from my heart; I wish not that of blood.

You add, that a dangerous error stiffly maintained, is liable to
excommunication: I am glad you grant a possibility of error; now there is some
hopes you may be instructed since your presumed infallibility permitts you to
think, you can think amiss, the acknowledgement of a sickness is the first
step to health, but how your excommunication from other Churches and your
exempted independent congregations can be soadered together, I profess I
understand it not; to me they seem as contradictorious, as independent, and not
independent: your herisie divides it self in so many cross ways that it must
sometimes thwart, and the more, that your extemporary conclusion, know neither
Premises nor deliberation.

In your last words you seem to cast a smile upon the Civil power, and give a
hail to your Master, by granting that in a reflexive way it may punish the
oversights of the s^aternity; but if hypotheca impossibilis aequipollet
simpliciter neganti, this is no grant at all, so you speak of such crimes as
cannot possible fall upon any of that sanctification, such as the root of
Apostasy, and the errors derived from hence; nay if they did, such falterers
were no more of your society, because you are obliged in conscience to separate
from them: so it is then that the Magistrate has not only no power in
Ecclesias^icis (this is to you directly Antichristianisme) but in Civilibus,
neither to censure any member of your exempted and independent Congregation:
this is the Gideons fleece that must never be of the Common dependence and
condition of the rest of the kingdom. See now what necessity his sacred Majesty
has (unless he would sell all his possession) to buy your pearls to curb
this feaster of yours; do not flatter your selves, his authority and yours
cannot breathe under one climate your pretended freedom is wholely
incompatible with his due obedience, (witness these sad eclipses, these late
storms, these clouds that yet threaten a tempest) either that, or this,
withal loyalty I speak, it is not of God; nor deal you more favorably with
Parliaments; how much you regard the power, the integrity of that most
honorable Court this your discourse can best give evidence; if you once carried
the business, you have professed it, that no Law no statute shall oblige you
further then you find convenient to your exempted Congregation. And how have
you suited your respects to the better times? that light of redress has only
served to make your Iett the blacker: what horrid Monsters, quot Africa non
caperet, has a too favorable beam of toleration, raised out of the mud and
clay of your ignorant presumption and drossie wits? how is the pleasant land
become a wilderness. Infelix lolium and steriles Dominantur avenae;
Pro molli viola, pro purpureo Narcisso
Carduus, and spinis surgit paliurus acutis.


And why do such Batts and Owls as you screech about our Churches? enter, you
may not for pollution) as if the ruins and desolations of Babel had already
seized upon us? the spirits of all good men do already groan under your
spiritual Democracy, and do suffer a forehand, when their tenderness
represents to them the rubbish (unless your violence be prevented) of a
demolished Church and state; it is true you are of flint, and the Polititions
of the times who do use you as their stalking-horse from whence to shoot their
prey, abundantly furnish tinder, but our prudent King and most careful
Parliament shall quench your ignis fatu^s and not suffer you to consume us all
to Ashes: you have bin spared hitherto either to try the length of your Arm
how far these your designs would reach, or that the Kingdom had not yet
collected it self out of that amazement, which by your sudden irruption as
that of many rivers, you had caused: but it is now high time to throw full
buckets of water upon your fiery heads, to take the matches from you, and
either to send you hence, or prescribe you bounds; lest that the combustible
body about you (all are now of Gunpowder) take hold of your sparks, and burn up
all to the extirmination first of order, then of religion, and last of humanity
it self. These are the prayers, and these the fears of all them that with more
real sighs and groans, than you, to the hazard of your buttons employ in
charming of your hearers, love the prosperity, and long after the peace of
Jerusalem.

FINIS.

