Comarum (...) The Loathsomeness OF LONG HAIR: OR, A TREATISE Wherein you have
the Question stated, many Arguments against it produced, and the most material
Arguguments for it refell'd and answered, with the concurrent judgment of
Divines both old and new against it. With an Appendix against Painting, Spots,
Naked Breasts, etc. By THOMAS HALL B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton.

ROMANS 12. 2. Fashion not your selves like unto the World. 1 THESE. 5. 22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil. Nihil leve aestimetur, quo Deus
laeditur. Salvian. Capillus a Deo in natura non est ordinatus, ut tegat
frontem, genas, collum and humeros, sed solummodo locum illum cui innascitur;
ergo capillus ulterius procurrere non debet. Poiemenand. Christians should not
wear Beauty Spots (seeing Beauty-Spots are the Spots of Beauty) for their
Beauty is to be without Spots. Venning. Mart. 2. 1653 Imprimatur Tho: Gataker.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham at the sign
of the Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1654.

Viro ornatissimo Domino THOMAe HALLO.
HUmano capiti caudam qui jungit equinam.
Jure hunc ridiculum dixeris esse caput.
Si non cauda, juba est saltem, qua^ plurima gestat
Nunc pars Angligenum, credit and esse jubar.
At jubar hoc pulchrum nubes est turpis: ut aures
Sic humeros, oculos, oraque saepe regit.
Quid? quod and ingenio tenebras offundit opacas,
Et nimis est Matri dura noverca Piae?
Credo dari Vacuum quoties hos specto cometas,
Hos ita crinitos femineosque viros.
Quis risu^ teneat monstra haec informia cernens?
At quis sustineat cernere mente valens?
Halle potes (vel nemo potest) sibi reddere motos
Mente, potes nimias, spero, fugare comas.
Saepe Cerebrosos te sternere novimus Ore:
Nunc peto Crinitos aggrediare stylo.
D. U.
Viris has tempestate plus nimio capillatis, calamistratis, effeminatis.
QUis furor, O cives, quae vos dementia caepit?
Queis melior natura Vitis dedit esse, virilis
Sic vosjam Capitis taedet? Vestrumne capillos
Sic promittere, sic crispare, and pulvere odoro
Spargere, and omnino muliebri incedere ritu?
Mollior iste placet vestro mage sexus? an unqua^
Optat equus timidam fieri se fortis afellam?
Se Phoebus Phoeben? and se conclave culinam?
Has resecate comas, haec vellera ponite longa,
Has sylvas tondete, aut Barbas tollite vestras,
Et tractate colos, and lintea nostra lavate,
Et mundate domos, and quicquid femina praestat
Credit vos alacres debere capessere munus.
Sin minus hoc libet, ac junctim me^tumque virile
Femineumque caput, vobis servare statutum est,
Ne grave sit vobis vocitarier Hermaphroditos.
G. A.
O Crines homin^! o quantum est in rebus inanel
Non feminaru^ modo, quarum admodum
Dedecet infirmas pauxilla superbia mentes:
Sed and virorum, quibus est rationis vigor.
Hos ita promissis calamistratisque capillis
Vestire sese, o quam viris est absonum!
Nonne leves animos and inania pectora prodit,
Minusque inepta virilibus provinciis?
Fallor? An in crines migrat pars magna cerebri?
Minusque cordis est sub tanto tegmins?
O si queis volupe est nemus hoc nutrire pilorum
Luberet Ungues sic alere simul suos,
Sic foret ut miseros se degenerasse puderet
In feminas primum, ac deinde in bestias.
R. D.
GOod Ramus pardon me, for I
Have always loved Trichotomy.
But now Idoe affect it more
By far, than ever I did before.
How many do I daily see
Given up to Muliebritie!
A female head to a male face
Is married now in every place.
And some do make, so vain they are,
A Galaxias in their hair.
Now sure Trichotomy it is
Can banish these sad vanities.
A. M.
To the Long-hair'd Gallants of these Times.
GO Gallants to the Barbers, go,
Bid them your hairy Bushes mow.
God in a Bush did once appear,
But there is nothing of him here.
Here Is that he deeply hates: beside,
That execrable sin of Pride;
Here also is that Felony:
Nay, Is not here Idolatry?
Such Bushes daily intervert
The time that is due to th'better part:
And more observance have by far
Than He in whom you live and are.
Great cause you have much to admire,
That He that is a consuming fire
So cool, and patient is; but know
You will not find him always so.
Expect a change in him, unless
There be in you his holiness;
Stir up his Justice will, and make
Your Idoll-heads to th'purpose ache:
At length, if this your triple sin
Be always thus continued in.
Tell me I pray, did you nere hear
Of Herod's Executioner?
Or the strange halter, which did free
The burdned Mule, and charged a Tree?
Or the third Plague of Pharaoh's Land?
Have you not been inform' of the hand
Of God on Poland lately laid;
Enough to make all Lands afraid,
And your long dangles, stand an end?
Fear him that did that Plica A most loathsome and horrible disease in the
hair, unheard of in former times; bred by modern luxury and excess. It
seizes speci ally upon women; and by reason of a viscous venomous humor,
glues together (as it were) the hair of the head with a prodigious ugly
implication and intanglement; sometimes taking the form of a great snake,
sometimes of many little serpents: full of nastiness, vermin, and noisome
smell: And that which is most to be admired, and never eye saw before, pricked
with a needle, they yield bloody drops. And at the first spreading of this
dreadful disease in Poland, all that cut off this horrible and snaky hair,
lost their eyes, or the humor falling down upon other parts of the body;
turned them extremely Mr. Bolton in his four last things, p. 40. out of
Hercules Sanonia, a famous Professor of Physique in Padua.
send,
And those sad Crawlers: and has more
Unheard of Judgments still in store,
Than the vast Heaven has glorious stars,
Or those your delicate Heads have hairs.
Those your sweet powders rather strew
Upon the ground on which you go,
Than let them be so vainly spent
Upon an haughty Excrement.
Forget not that your selves are dust,
And the Times tell your Heads they must
Their powders into Ashes turn,
And teach their Wantonness to Mourn.
Shall you my counsel practice then
I Will say you have the Heads of men.
Then being from that Cumb'rance freed
You may attend the parts that need
Your utmost care, the Heart and Brain;
Then also will that numerous Train
Of your Inferiors suddenly
Be cured of their deformity.
For whatsoever you Gallants do,
They gallant think, and follow you.
Then lastly, such your heads will be,
As may admit consistencie
With circumcised hearts, which you
Must get, or you your selves undo.
Who have such hearts, they only may
Hold up their heads at the Great day.
R. B.
Courteous READER,
I living at a distance from the Press, there have passed some Errata's which
do mar the sense; these I pray thee to correct before thou read, the rest
are literal and venial.

PAge 1. line 16. for profession read professors. p. 5. l. 6. able for abler.
p. 11. l. 19. surely for freely. p. 17. l. 16. put for but. p. 19 l. 3. term
must be put in. p. 23. l. 3. Romans 7. for 1., p. 37. l. 2. a natura. p. 44. fas
est and. Margin. p. 68. l. 5. Tuva for Tucca. p. 75. l. 7. tho for then. p. 78.
l. 16. or for as. Marg. ochlos for oculos.

To the Candid Reader.
AS it is the duty of every Christian in his place and calling, to seek the
good of that Nation in which he lives; So especially it concerns Ministers, who
are by office the Lords Seers and Watchmen, to observe the sins of the times
they live in, and to warn their people that they shun those National sins,
which (without amendment) will bring National plagues. Amongst other Vices, I
observe that Pride is very predominant in this licentious age; Pride in Heart,
Pride in Habit, Pride in Long-haire; Pride in the Clergy, Pride in Profession,
etc. Had it reigned only in the under-sort, I had been silent; but when I saw
Gods own people by profession; yea, and many Ministers (who should be patterns
of Gravity Oportet Concionatorem esse reliquis exemplar temperantia and
modestiae. Syno. Holland. Ministros prae caeteris Apostolus voluit ab hoc
levitatis exemplo alienos esse, q eos oporteat reliquis fidelibus enemplar esse
pudicitiae and gravitatis. Hieron ad Nepotian.
and Modesty to their Inferiors) to be tainted, appearing like Ruffians in the
Pulpit, I could no longer forbear; especially considering how few have
appeared against this sin, either in the Pulpit or the Press. Master Pryn is
the only man that I know who has appeared (in our language) in a set Treatise
against it: and yet his bent is principally against Lovelocks: I shall give one
clip nearer and will see what may be said against the Longlocks especially of
Ministers and Professors, who have of late exceeded in this kind: they draw
nearer unto God, and so their sins are more displeasing unto him, and should be
more grievous unto us: Besides, their example is more infectious; Ubi sublimior
est praerogativa, ibi major est culpa. Salv. de Gub. Dei, l. 4. ubi pluta.
wicked men rejoice when they have such a Plea, such a Minister wears his
hair as long as we do, and such a great Professor would not go in such a
guise if it were sinful etc. Hence the Lord Plutarch says it was the
Schoolmaster that he beat. in llib virt. doceri posse. Quintilian relates the
like of Crates. Inst. l. 1. c. 15.
complains, Jer. 23. 15. that from the Prophets of Jerusalem, profaneness was
gone forth into all the land; their looseness had leavened others. Diogenes
seeing a child do amiss, ran and beat the father. We Ministers are to be
blamed for many of the exorbitances of our people; either we reprove them not,
or else by our evil example we harden them in their sin.

Neither is this my observation only, for I find Reverend Master Gipps
lamenting Gipps Fast Ser. on Psalm. 46. 1. p. 9.
and complaining of it in a Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons: When
I came to London (says he) and was showed such and such Divines of note,
Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Nam quis iniquae Tam patiens urbis, tam
ferreus ut teneat se? Juvan. Sat. 1.
I had much ado to believe it, and still it lies as lead upon my heart to
consider what Ruffianly hair, what Cavalerian garb of clothes, with
answerable diet we are fallen upon, even in these sad times: as easy and loose
herein, as rigid and strict in what is both of smaller evidence and
consequence, etc. Certainly (says he) it was not so within these few years,
when the poor fugitives posted to New England, in another cut of hair and
clothing. Thus he. I know The Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, etc. have
said much for this way; yet the Truth (with all sound unprejudiced men)
prevails still.
this age is subtle to find out distinctions to patronize any error, and
when the Word has convinced them, yet that old Serpent joining with our
corruption, has taught men many sleights and devices to shun the dint of
truth; but all in vain, for it is not frivilous distinctions that will help us
at Gods Bar, all this painting will off when it is brought to the fire of that
great day. God expects that we should practice, and not question his commands:
a good soul says with the Martyr, Though I cannot dispute, The good man may
want a disputative knowledge, yet he has sapidam scientiam, a savory
knowledge, and can die for the truth, when he cannot dispute for it: persuade a
man that which he tusts is bitter, perhaps he cannot answer all you say, but
yet by his taste he knows the thing is sweet: so though a good man cannot
answer all the Devils sophistry, yet still hoe holds the conclusion firm, it is
good for me to walk with God.
yet I can die for the truth so say thou, though I cannot answer all the
cavills of the flesh and the Devil, yet I can do what Gods Word commands me,
and his faithful servants have practiced.

The Lord he knows that I have no by-ends, or aims in this Work, I do it
not out of any Pharisaicall, selfe-conceited humor, nor in opposition to the
persons of any whatsoever; but solely and singly out of love to the Land of my
Nativity, that the Lord, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the
Sun, may see nothing to displease him. And lest any should think me singular,
I have produced Scripture, Nature, Reason, with the concurring practice of Gods
Church and people, and the judgment of such as have been famous in their
Generations both for Prudence and Piety. And that it might win (if possibly)
upon all, and exasperate none, I have made it as inoffensively pleasant as I
could. Only I wish that some able Pen, and some one that could spare more time
then I can well for such employment, had undertaken the Work, the path being
somewhat obscure and unbeaten, they are numero paucissimi, but two, that have
directly treated on this subject, and Diatriba Theologica de capillis constans
dicputatione Textuali ad 1 Cor. 11. 14. cui suffragantur D. Voetius and D.
Hornebeck. Theolog. Professores.
one of these I could never attain for love nor money, till of late I borrowed
it of that learned, laborious Gentleman Col. Leigh. At first I intended it
only as a little Appendix to a Treatise already extant, but having since
obtained more light and help, I shall proceed more fully and methodically. To
this end I shall, I state the Question, 2. confirm it with Arguments, 3.
Answer all Objections. I expect not to please all, Jupiter himself could not
do it, I know that one ship cannot carry all passengers, Ne Jupiter quidem
omnibus placet. Prove.
and the French man tells me, Who builds in the way where all pass by, Pro captu
lectoris habent sua fata libelli.

Shall build his house too low or high.


But I shall submit all to the judgment of the Grave and godly wise, desiring
a candid construction of all, without carping at any Punctillo's or failings in
expression, where the matter for substance shall be found right, being ready to
do the like for thee. Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.


Now for the clearer and better discussing of the point, I shall lay it down in
this Thesis, viz.

That it is unlawful for any man ordinarily to wear Long Hair.

I shall observe the usual method.

1. I will briefly explain the Terms as they lie in order: I shall have
occasion to enlarge upon them in the Answers to the Objections.

2. I will confirm the Thesis with Arguments drawn from the Word of God, etc.

3. I shall answer all the cavills (of any weight) which are made against it.

1. I say, it is unlawful, and that not only by man's Law (for some Nations
have made Decrees against it) but by the Law of God, it is his word that
condemns the wearing of Long-haire, as I shall prove in the Arguments. 2. Its
contrary to that order which God has set in nature, hence the Apostle blaming
the Corinthians for this sin, appeal^ to their own consciences, and to the
voice of God in nature; 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not even nature it self teach you,
that if a man have long Hair it is a shame unto him? The Apostles
Interrogation is a strong affirmation, q. d. this sin of wearing Long Hair is
so evident that even nature it self, much more Grace, does condemn it. But of
this, more in its proper place.

2. For any man. Be he high or low, rich or poor, King or Kesar, be he a
Northern or Southern man, etc. he may not transgress the commands of God in
wearing Long Hair, especially since God himself by the voice of nature has
told us that it is a shame for [a man] whoever he be, for the indefinite is
equivalent to an universal, as appears by the Context. 1 Cor. 11. 4. Omnis
vir, every Man, etc. we must not distinguish where God himself does not
distinguish: for as he is Lord of us all, expects obedience to all he
commands from us all: and if Northern men be colder, God has ordained clothes
(not Ruffianly Hair) to cover their backs and shoulders: and though in colder
climates they may be allowed to wear somewhat longer Hair then we in these
Southern Regions, yet that excessive, Heathenish profane guise of having their
Hair to lie on their backs, and shoulders, out of a proud fashion and sinful
custom is utterly disapporved of by the Word of God.

Yet here this caution would be remembered; That the Hair in it self has not
any Nostri tenent, sub prolixis capillis intrinsecam latere malitiam. Salmas.
Dialog. de coma: p. 12.
intrinsecall sin or malice in it (as some maliciously suggest) no more then
our Nails, Meat, Drink, Clothes, and all which are good in themselves, but
accidentally they become sinful when abused by us.

3. Ordinarily, for in extraordinary cases that may be lawful, which in an
ordinary way is unlawful; Thus the Nazarites might wear Long Hair, because
they had Gods special command for it, which we have not, of which more
hereafter. Thus if a man be cast into some close Prison, where he can have no
man to poll him, in such an extraordinary case that may be tolerable, which in
us, who walk at liberty is intolerable. So in some constitutions, in some
cases of Weakness, in some extrardinary cold climats that may be lawful,
which in another case not so circumstantiated may be utterly unlawful: And
here let every man beware of making excuses and pretenses (as is usual in this
and many other things) when it is not weakness, but willfulness; not they
cannot, but they will not reform what is amiss: for observe those men that
pretend weakness and infirmity, and you shall see that for their own ends
they can wear their hair far shorter without any hurt, etc.

4. To wear long Hair, Whether it be their own, or the hair of other
persons, and here lies the knot of the controversy; How long that hair is
which the Scripture condemns? For the clearing of this we must know that the
Scripture mentions.

1. Shaving of the Head. 2. Polling. 3. Long-Haire.
The first is expressly forbidden. Levit. 21. 5. They shall not shave their
Heads.

The second is expressly commanded, Ezekiel. 44. 20. They shall Poll their Heads.

The third is expressly condemned, Ezekiel 44. 20. They shall not suffer their lock
to grow long, for nature it self condemns it. So that here is some light
already. 1. Gods people must not shave their Heads, as the Heathens did, unless
it were in some extraordinarycase, where God gives an express command, as
Numb, 6. 6. 9. 18. Deuteronomy. 21. 12. or where there is some real, urgent,
unavoydable necessity, There God will have mercy, and not sacrifice; Thus to
cut off a Hand or Leg for the preservation of life in a case of (...)
necessity, is lawful; So where the Head is infested with some dist^ that there
is an absolute necessity Quia major totius quam partis is it habenda ratio.
of shaving off the Hair, in such an extraordinary case it may be lawful,
else ordin^ its utterly unlawful, and therefore Salmsius might well have
spared his jeeres, of shaving our Heads, and getting a Razor for our heads,
cutting to the very skin, and pulling up the Hair by the roots, etc. he sets
up a Man, or rather a Monster of his own Pugn^ cum monstro a s^ipso g^to.
making, and then fights with it. He utterly mistakes the state of the
question, for the Question is not, whether shaving the Head be lawful, for
that is denied by all our Divines, as being contrary to Scripture. Levit. 21. 5.
Ezekiel. 44. 20. and depriving a man of that which God has given Cum capilli dati
^nt a Deo tum ad tutelam, tum ad ornatum capitis, ipsa ratio docet ab ^lsione
capillorum and rasur^ (nisi gravis aliqua necessitas eam postulet) abstinendum
esse. Dematius. Licet breviores caput tegant adversus a^ris injurias, minime
tamen velaminis muliebris usum praestant. Idem.
him both for defense of the head, and modest ornament, both which polling
preserves, and therefore. Secondly, the Lord commands Polling of our heads, for
we surely confess (though Salmasius make a jeere of it) nullam habemus Sylvam
nisi caeduami all our woods are cropped, and all our heads are Polled; nor is it
every slight polling that will serve, but it must be strictior tonsura, a more
strict and close polling, even a rounding of the head, they shall round their
heads, Ezekiel. 44. 20. hence (...)
the word is doubled in the Original, tondendo tondebunt. But of this more in
its due places. Salmasius then is out, who is so bold as to affirm nusquam in
Scriptura Salmas. Dialog. de coma. p. 92.
sacra improbari aut damnari caesariem (i) capillum virilem promissum modo non
more modoque muliebri comp^us and Ornatus habea^ur. No wonder that he plays
Anonimus in the business; pity it is such parts and abilities had not found
out a better subject; or at least that he had not pleaded so bad a cause after
so bad a manner, and with such grossly false mediums, as that Christ himself
wore long Hair, and his Apostles also, etc.

Q. But when may we say that a man's Hair is too long?

A. I Answer.

1. The Hair of a Man's Head is too long when it is an impediment to him, and
hinders him in the works of his calling; Therefore such men as are feign to
get Strings or F^llets to tie up their Hair that it fall not in their eyes
when they work, offend in excessive Long-Haire. Tum esse tondendum capillum
cu^ capiti gravi^ est, aut functiones aliquas impedit (...) ass^nt. ^icl.
Even the Stoics could say, that it is time to cut our Hair when it is a burden
to us, or hinders us in our Callings.

2. It Is excessive, when it is so long, that it covers the eyes, the cheeks,
the countenance, etc. God has ordained those parts to be visible, for the face
is a special glass wherein the glory and Image of God (in respect of the body)
does shine forth and appear, and therefore may not be hidden with long hair,
since the hair of Alienum est a fine propter que^ comae hominibus datae sunt.
D. Voetius. Qui nutrit capillos notabiliter infra cra^ium descendentes, and
capiti nullum adjumentum adferentes, peccat. Demat.
the head is ordained by God for the covering of the head, and not the face.

3. When it is so long, that it lies on the back and shoulders; the hair of
man's head is given to man for a cover to his head, and not to his back and
body, which apparel must cover. Cappillus aures tantum obtegat, atque ad imas
earum parts descendat.

4. When it is scandalous and offensive, when it is so long, that the godly are
thereby grieved, the weak offended, and the wicked hardened.

5. When it is contrary to the civil and laudable custom of those civilized
Nations which we live in; for when the customs of a Nation are good, and
agreeable to the rule of Gods Word, we are bound to observe them. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Now the known commendable custom of our Land (all the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and the beginning of the late Kings reign) was short
hair: It Is true indeed, de facto, that of late in these licentious times
(where so many amongst us change both their Practice and their Principles) some
have brought up the fashion of long hair; but quo jure, What Law of God or Man
command them so to do, I know not; and that you may see I am not singular, you
shall have the judgment of Mr. Perkins, a man famous in his generation for his
piety and experience Perkins on Mat. 5. 36. in (...) p. 82.
in the ways of God. The wearing of long hair in the younger sort (says he)
is an abuse of it; it began (indeed) amongst the aged, but now it is become a
trick of youth, and is the badge of a proud heart; for how can they say they
glorify God thereby, when the Apostle says, It is a shame for a man to have
long hair. Well, since God has set his name therein, we must beware how we make
it an instrument of sin. If it be said, to wear long hair is our English
fashion: I answer, it is not our ancient English fashion, but indeed it is a
foreign trick, and therefore as unlawful as foreign attire, which God
condemns. Zeph. 1. 8. Our ancient English fashion (except it were amongst the
aged) was to wear short hair: and in every country the most ancient and grave
fashions ought to be followed, etc. Thus he.

Lastly, as no man may wear his own hair excessively long, so he may not
wear the long hair of another, be it of a man, a woman, or it may be of some
harlot, who is now in Hell, lamenting there the abuse of that excrement. These
Periwigs of false-coloured hair (which begin to be rise, even amongst
Scholars in the Universities) are utterly unlawful, and are condemned by
Christ himself, Mat. 5. 36. No man can make one hair, white or A false, a
counterfeit, and artificial head or face, and an honest, upright, gracious
heart, do seldom, (and if I am not much mista^en) never meet in one and the
self. same person. Pryn. ag. Love. looks, ubi plura. p. 16. 17. etc.
black; but we have those in our days that can do both; by powdering their
hair, they can make that white which was black, (the powder forgets the dust;)
other by Periwigs Personal defects in nature or occasional wants, as a man
wants a leg, he may supply it with a wooden one; but natural defects, as
wrinckling of the face, etc. may not be supplied by Art. Weems. on the 7th.
Commandment.
and false hair, can make themselves black or white, even what please
themselves; what is this but to correct Gods handywork, and in the pride of
their heart to think they can make themselves better than God has made them,
and can correct his creation? 2. It Is the usual practice of the riotous and
profane of the world, and therefore may in no wise be practiced by the people
of God, unless they mean to perish with them. 3. We must be more careful to
please God, and approve our selves to him, than to please the wanton eye of the
wicked of the world; better wear an hundred caps than one Periwig: for as
reverend Perkins well observes, it is an Non metuis quae talis es, ne cum
resurrectionis dies venerit, Artifex tuus te non ne cognoscat? Cyprian de
discept. and habitu virginum, ubi plura.
odious thing for any man or woman to be ashamed of Gods workmanship in their
own hair, and therefore to beautify their heads with bought hair, and
sometimes of dead persons, with what face will such persons be able to stand at
the last day before Gods Tribunal?

Thus have I stated the Question as briefly, yet clearly, as I could. I shall
now proceed to the Arguments.

Arguments proving the sinfulness of that proud fashion of wearing long hair,
which is lately sprung up amongst us.
The first ARGUMENT is this:
That which is condemned and forbidden by the Word of God, may in no wise be
practiced by the People of God,

But the wearing of long hair is condemned and forbidden by the Word of God:
Ergo,

It may in no wise be practiced by the people of God.

The Major is undeniable.

The Minor I prove both from the old and new Testament. 1. From See Ainsw. on
Levit. 10. 6.
Ezekiel 44. 20. They shall not shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to
grow long, they shall only poll their heads. Both the extremes are here
forbidden, Shaving on the one hand, and Long hair on the other, put polling,
as a mean between both, is commanded; and that not a light kind of polling,
or a polling at large of some part of the head; but it must be a strict polling
or rounding of Jubetur tonsura non qualiseung; sed strictior. Demat. Jussit
decenter tonderi capita, and criues ad modum capitis, aequari. Po^ in loc
Accurate tondebunt. Tigur: Translat. Non ^runt rafis capitibus ut Sacerdotes
Isidis atque Serapis; nec comam demittant, quod proprie est luxuriosorum,
barbarorum and militantium. Paraeus in loc.
the whole head, as Tindalls, and the former Translation render it according to
the Original; They shall round their heads: the word is doubled in the
O^iginall for greater emphesis [Tondendo tondebunt (i. e.) tondendo aeque aeque
tondebunt. Montanus.] They shall poll their heads equally all of a length; they
must not be like the Heathenish Idolatrous Priests, for some of them did shave
their heads, others wore long hair; but you that are my Ministers (says God)
shall not appear before me in such heathenish guises. but you shall round your
heads, or, in plain terms you shall be Roundheads. The Text is clear for
that term in the very Letter; the greater is their sin who jeere at Gods
Ministers and People for their short hair, and for rounding their heads, since
we have Gods command for it; and the very Forma rotunda est omnium figurarum
perfectissima, capacissima, simplicissima, pu^ herrima. Aristot.
Philosopher can tell them, that the roundest form is best and beautifullest.
And Horace describing a freeman, says he is, -- Totus teres atque Rotund^.
Hor. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 7.



Aristotle's Square man, Horace's Round man, are the same man. I press this
the rather, that the wicked may see that this rep^oachfull (which was first
invented by some profane Stage Players, for from that shop of the Devil, so
far as I remember, that Nickname first came) is more honorable than
(peradventure) they imagine. The Devil forgot this Text (as Mr. Buroughs well
observes) when Bur. on Hos. 2. 16, 17. p. 558.
he raised up such a name to reproach men by, which we have the express word
of Neque radunto prorsus, neque studiose alunto caesariem, seu modestiam
colunto, and mediocritatem prae se ferunto. Trem. Vide plura apud S. Hieron. in
locum.
Scripture for the enjoining of. Thus he. There must be then no affectation on
either side, but gravity and modesty is required against the long hair of
Ministers. So the learned Annotators in their large and elaborate Annotations
on this place. Diverse exceptions are made against this Text.

1. Obj. The Precept (say some) belonged only to the Priests, and not to the
People, because they are not mentioned in this place.

A. True: In the Letter, and primarily Prohibuit De^ Sacerdotes caesariem
studiose alere, and jussie decenter tonderi capita, and crines in modum capitis
aequari. Polan. in lo^.
the Text concerns all Priests, because they were Superiors, and so ought to
be examplesto their Inferiors. But

Secondly, It concerns the People to be civil and modest in the wearing of
their hair, though they be not mentioned here by name; else it would follow,
that the People might shave their heads, because the Priests only in the text
are forbidden so to do: But as the prohibition of shaving the head includes
the People, and belongs to them as well as to the Priests, as appears by other
Texts of Scripture; so the prohibition of long hair belongs unto the People as
well as to the Priests, as appears by other texts of Scripture. e. g. The
Apostle requires many virtues in a Minister (Titus 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.) as that he
be sober, blameless, just, holy, etc. yet does it not follow, because the
People are not named here, therefore these virtues concern them not; but, as
the Apostle requires these virtues in a Minister, that he might be a good
example to his flock for their imitation, and so vindicate his Ministry from
contempt: So Ezekiel requires the Priests to poll their heads, that they might
preserve their Ministry from scandal, not walking in the guise of heathenish
Priests, who sometimes shaved their heads, and sometimes nourished their hair:
but that they should be a pattern of modesty to their people. And if any of
the Jewish people did swerve from the practice of the Priests, and did wear
long hair, yet this does not prove the lawfulness of it, unless we could
prove that the A facto ad ju^ non valet consequentia.
Jews never transgressed any of Gods commands.

2. Obj. This Commandment was ceremonial and peculiar to the Jews.

A. 1. This is gratis dictum, said, but not proved.

2. Then shaving the head, which is a part of this Text, is Ceremonial also,
but as that binds us as well as the Jews, so does this of polling the head:
but the Apostle takes off this Cavil, for what Ezekiel forbids the Priests to
do, that the Apostle applies to all mankind, and forbids it in us all, so
that unless men will Lex naturae obligat omnes. Brochmand. CC. Tom. 2. C. 4.
q. 6.
unman themselves, the Text will reach them. 1 Cor. 11. 14. it is a shame for a
man, i. e. for any man to wear long hair.

3. S. Jerome commenting on this Text, applies it to these Gospel Times: and our
solidest Divines, when they argue against Popish shaving, make use of this Text
against them, which they would not do if it were Ceremonial.

3. Obj. This is an Old Testament proof, and concerns not us who live under
Gospeldispensations.

A. What is commanded in the Old Testament, and is no way forbidden in Ratio
illius mandati permanet. Jun.
the New, is binding still; but the wearing of short hair is commanded in the
Old Testament, and is so far from being forbidden, that it is confirmed by
the New, as appears fully. 1 Cor. 11. 14. 15, 16. Does not even Nature it
self teach ^ou, that if a man has long hair, it is a shame unto him? But if
a woman have long hair, it is a praise unto her; for her hair is given her
for a covering. But if any man list to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.

This is a Pregnant Text, full of convincing Arguments to all those that are
willing to be ruled by the word, and prefer not their lusts before Gods Law.
The Apostle in this Text uses four Arguments against l^ng hair.

1. The first is drawn from Nature, and Ratio ipsa dictaevit mollitiem spirare
comam alere, non virtutem. Aretius.
right Reason. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair it is a shame to him? The Interrogat^on is a ^hement Affirmation, q. d.
it is both a sin and a shame to nourish our hair, and that by the dictate of
nature. Now it is a dangerous thing to sin against the light of nature. Romans 7.
But the voice of nature condemns long hair, as V Eliot's conversion of the
Indians, p. 3. and Thorowgood the Jews in America. p. 112.
effeminate, lascivious, and vile; how much more does Grace condemn it? Mere
civilized men have made laws against it; The Indians in New England have made
a law, that all these men which wear long hair, shall pay 5. s. and every
woman that shall cut her hair, or let it hang loose, shall pay 5. s, Now what a
shameful Ut non praestet fides quod praestitit infidelitas. Hieron. See more
Pryn against Lovelocks. p. 10, 11, 12.
thing is it, that faith should not enable us to do that which Infidels have
done? In vain had God eng^affed those sparkles of common honesty and dishonesty
in the consciences of natural men (Romans 1. and 2. 14) if there were no binding
power in them.

2. It Is a shame, a blot, and dishonor A ded^core, (...) ignominia est. Natura
and ratio docent ignominiosum esse and contra decorum virum nutrire comam, non
loquitur de co rupta natura, sed de vi and ordine
to wear long hair; many think it an ornament, and an honor, when every
civil, grave and gracious man esteems it an ignominy and dishonor, Sin and
shame came into the world together; Genesis 3. till sin came into the world, there
was no shame in the world. Genesis 2. ult. Innocence knew no shame, and glory
shall know none. Shame is the fruit of sin, and arises usually from doing
somewhat Dei quo agit in rebus a seconditis Marlorat. Ut mulier decus negligit,
quando comas suas praescinait, and tanto quidem magis, quanto magis cas
praescindit, etc. decori suo consulit quando eas nutrit, etc. sic vir dedecus
sibi accersit ^um promissos gestat capillos, and tanto quidem magis, quanto
promissiores, etc.
against common light, though every evil act has matter of shame in it, yet a
man is not naturally ashamed of it, unless it be done against the light of
nature. Not to be ashamed of s^ sins, is to put out the light of nature: Such
Men are worse than Beasts, for they observe those instincts and orders which
God has planted and engraffed in their natures. A good man is ashamed of any
thing he has done against the light of Scripture: Every man is ashamed of what
he does against the light of Nature; yet how many in our days are proud of
their long locks, and even glory in that which is their shame? What their end
is, the Apostle will tell you, Phil 3. 19 Their end is destruction, who glory
in their shame.

3. Verse 15. From the Antithesis and Opposition which is between the hair Ab
Antithesi.
of men and women: As long hair is a Coma mulieri gloriae, vi^o dedecori.
Muscul.
glory and ornament to a woman, because it was given her by God and Nature for
a covering; and it is a shame for her to be polled or shorn, but she must be
covered, and that because of the Angels, ver. 20. So on the contrary, short
hair is a glory and ornament to man (as the Antithesis implies, and the
practice of our grave and reverend Judges, which many godly Ministers confirm)
and he may not come with unshorne, long hair, into the public Assemblies of
Gods people.

1. Because of the good Angels, who behold this pride, and are grieved at it.

2. Because of the Adco sibi Demon in cincinnis placet, ut cincinnaculus nomen
Daemon^ fuerit. A Lap. in Lev. 19. 26. The Devils are called Shegnarim,
hirsuti. Levit. 17. 7. Hairy ones, because they appeared in the form of
Satyrs, or wild Goats. Weemse on the 7th. Commandment.
evil Angels, who behold it, and rejoice in it: Pride is, Pabulum Diaboli, the
Devils darling and delight.

3. Because of the Ministers, who are Gods Angels, and Messengers, and must
reprove such sins. The Lord expressly forbids the confounding of S^xes, ( Under
this, all manliness is forbidden in women, and all effeminatenesse in men,
either in their attire, or ordering of their hair. v. Jacks. ad locum.
Deuteronomy. 22. 5) by wearing of that which is not proper to each S^x: as the woman
must not wear what pertaines to the man, so the man must not wear what
pertaines to the woman; for all that do such things are an abomination to the
Lord.

Now, long hair is proper to women and not to men, Nature having given it In
genere pudicitiam commendat, ubi periculo Deus occurrit, ne mulier audaciam
colligat excutiendae modestiae, aut vir in molliciem sua natura indignam
degeneret. Calvin.
to her for a covering: and though that Text speak Literally of apparel, yet
Analogically, and by way of allusion, it may fitly, be applied to long hair.
(Analogice legem quam de vestitu sancit, etiam ad capillos extendendam, quia
utrobique eadem est ratio, finis enim legis est ut debita sit distinctio inter
virum and foeminam, and honest as naturalis observetur. Demat.)

4. A fourth Argument the Apostle draws from the Custom and Practice A
salutari ecclesiaru^ omnium and gener atim recepta consuciudine.
of ^he Churches of God. v. 16.

But if any seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God. q. d.

1. These Arguments are sufficient to convince any moderate, ingenious man; yet
if any will be so litigious as to contend Sive contendendi, sive talia
faciendi. Hier.
for such unseemely guises, let him know he shall be singular in his opinion,
for we have no such customs of undecency and immodesty, nor any other Churches
of God.

2. It is against the modest, civil, and In comis ut in vestibu^ decorum 3. 1.
Voc^tionis. 2. Sexus. 3. Nationis. Alsted.
commendable custom of our own Nation, till lately that we began to follow the
French, and Spaniards, who yet are known Papists and Idolaters: And will not
the Lord visit for such things as these? Zeph. 1. 1.

I come now to answer all those shifts, and vain distinctions, which the false
heart of man has invented. To avoid the dint of this Text, there is scarce a
word in it but is wrested; How loath are men to see what they care not to
practice!

1. Some have found out eleven acceptions of the word Nature; by this word de
V. Revium. usu capil. p. 222. 228.
(say some) is not meant that order and natural Instinct which God has
implanted in the Creature; but by Nature is meant an arbitrary custom; and for
this they allege Calvin on the place, (who says) Quod omnium consensu and
consuetudine receptum tunc erat, and quidam apud Graecos vocat natural, etc.
quoniam in Graecia parum virile erat alere comam, ut tales quasi effaeminati
notarentur, morem jam confirmatum pro natura habet.

A. 1. By Nature here cannot be meant a Custom, for we never find through the
whole Book of God, that ever that word is used for a Custom, and therefore
the learned Assertors of long hair do utterly reject this opinion, Salmasius
Dialog. De coma p. 71 cui astipulatur Revius. p. 219. Natura est rectae
rationis judi^ium ex instinctu naturae fluens. Pet. Mar.
Frustra de his disputatur, cum certum sit, apud Paulum (...) non posse accipi
pro consuetudine.

But by Nature here is meant, the light and dictate of right reason in the
understanding, informing men by its common notions and instinct, what is good,
and to be done, or what is evil, and to be avoided: It Is that order and
natural inclination which God has put in the Creature: And thus Nature it
self is Natura significat honestatem and decentiam naturalem, q. decentia illa
and honestas a naturali rectae rationis judicio dictatur, aut ab inclinatione
naturali, aut ab ordine a Deo in natura constituto common stratur. Alapide in
loc. Juris naturalis esse colligitur id quod apud omnes gentes, aut moratiores
omnes tale esse vide^. ^otius de Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 1. S. 12. ubiplura.
said to condemn long hair, as being contrary to that order, and natural
principles of decency and honesty, which God has implanted in man: And though
many Heathens have worn, and do wear, long hair, yet that is their abuse
and sin against Nature, as Romans 1. The sinful customs of some barbarous
ones, cannot be called the Law of Nature; But Customs, when they flow from the
principles of right Reason, and are agreeable to its Dictates, then they bind.

2. Whereas Calvin calls it a custom, Virile est tondere caput, idque, test
Paulo, dictat sensus naturae. Call. in Numer. 6. 5.
Calvin shall answer and explain Calvin.

1. In his Comment (on Numb. 6. 5.) which he writ many years after his
Commentary on the Corinths; he there tells us, that it is a manly part to poll
our heads: and this (as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 14.) the light of Nature
dictates to us. See here what Calvin means by his received custom; he means
not a bare, arbitrary custom, but a custom grounded on the light of Nature,
as appears further in his Comments on 1 Cor. 11. 5. Nature abhorres a shaven
woman, and Nature has given her hair for a covering, and it is a natural
veil, etc. where by Nature (as appears by the Text) he means not a naked
custom, but that order which is set in Nature by the God of Nature: So (v.
14.) he sends them to Nature to learn Naturam illis decori magist^ (...)
propourt. Ca^. in 1 Cor. 11. 14.
what is decent, where by Nature he has reference to what he spoke on v. 5.
which was no bare custom, for human customs are often teachers of uncomelinesse,
rather than comeliness, of vice than virtue.

3. Should we take Nature here for an arbitrary custom, this would render the
Apostles argument invalid, especially if drawn from a custom used by the
promiscuous multitude, which often times is naught, as appears by the Idolatrous
and Superstitious customs throughout the world. But the Apostle argues not
from a mere arbitrary custom, but from a custom founded in principles of
Nature, and from the custom of his Colleagues, the Apostles, and the Churches
of God; we have no such custom, nor the Chuches of God. Now take it thus, and
the Argument is cogent and convincing. As for Calvin, however some would wrest
his words, yet his Practice is well known, and his Effigies in Oxford Library
(which I believe is drawn to the life) will tell you, that he never intended
to be the Ruffians Patron.

2. The next word they cavil at, is (...) This word (say they) does not
signify sin, but only shame, or indecency, or incommodiousness. [Per
inhonestum non intellexi peccatum sed indecorum, exquo existimatio detrimentum
potest capere, ideoque ad incommoda semper recte refertur, peccatum autem non
semper, nec necessario conjunctum habet. Revius de usu capil. (p. 138.)

A. Shame usually arises from doing Loquitur de indecoro quod legi and naturae
est contrarium. (...) faeditatem poti^ quam ignominiam significat. Beza.
something, against common light and Principles of nature, such is the sin and
the shame here meant; it is not a little indecency, but a sin, a crying sin to
transgress the Law, and dictates of nature. Romans 1. 26. God gave them up
(...), to foul affections: We shall the better understand the word here used
if we consider the signification of its opposite, which is (...), and in
Scripture is put for honesty and care, to preserve our selves from sinful
uncleanness, 1 These. 4. 4. that every one possess his vessel in Sanctification
and Honor: So here (...) signifies that which is is dishonest and
reproachful, as being committed Hoc sub ratione peccati, illiciti and
inhonesti vetat. Demat.
against the very light of Nature, else the Apostles Argument were not cogent,
to say it is no sin, but only incommodious, and undecent; to wear long hair
Est quaedam indecentia quae peccat contra legem Dei and ipsam naturam, viz.
illa quae sexus confundit, iquos natura ipsa discriminavit. Sal* Dialog. p. 102.
is to encourage men to sin, but when we shall see that Nature condemns it,
as shameful and sinful, this awakens us.

2. I answer by way of Concession; suppose from this sole word, (...) we could
not conclude it sinful, yet considering the scope and Arguments in the whole
Text, he must needs be grossly blind that cannot, or will not see long hair,
condemned as sinful in this Text.

Obj. The Apostle condemns not all long hair, but only such which is as long
as women's, as the word (...) imports, Significat comam more mulierum semper
intonsam servare. Salmasius, that singularly learned man (as Mr. Tombs styles
him) Tombs Antipaedobap. p. 118.
After a large and exact examination of the word (...), makes it a womanish
dress of hair, distinguishing the Sex though he find only something in
Hesichius, Artemidorus, and some other conjectures not just in that sense in
any place else, because it best suites with the matter. Thus he (poore-man,
being at a loss for one word in all the bible to prove that Holy* signifies
legitimate, brings in this lame proof to comfort himself withal, Dignum
patella operculum.

A. 1. How many instead of clipping their hair, clip the text, whilst they
restrain the word [ Communiter and per se significat nutrire comam, comatum
esse, vel promissos alere capillos. Scapula. Calep. Steph. Budaeus, etc. See
Mr. Leigh^ Critics on the word: Ubi plura.
(...)] which signifies, to nourish the hair, or to wear long hair, to such
a kind of nourishing the hair as women use, to let it grow to its utmost
length; whereas Homer using the Apostles word, calls the Greeks,
hair-nourishing men, though they (...). Capite comatos Achivos. Pise.
wore it not so long as women do. The Apostle calls wicked men, absurd men. 2
These. 3. 2. and see what an absurd comment they make on this Text: they make
(...), qui faciunt quae minime convenient.
the Apostle upon the point to reprove no man, for if he reprove only such as
wear their hair so long as women, who let it grow down to their feet.

1. I would feign know what Ruffian there is that wears his hair down to his
hammes, or heels, so long as women's hair usually is.

2. Should men suffer their hair to grow to its utmost length, and never poll
it, yet I question whether ever it would Natura viro breviores capillos quam
foeminae, ^iamsi si quis finat excr^seere. Beza.
be so long as most women's hair is; my Reason is, because Nature has allotted
shorter hair to men, than to women, as Beza well observes.

I therefore conclude:

1. That our Translation is true, which (...) accipitur pro qualicunque
promisso capillitio communiter sive nunqua^, sive aliquando tondeatur. Non est
restringendum ubi le^ non restringis.
renders the word Long-haire in general, and agrees with all the Translations
that ever I have seen.

2. There is no circumstance in the Text to constrain us to such a restriction
of the word, as some would have.

The Antithesis in the Text opposes it, which runs thus, As a woman
dishonors her self when she cuts her hair, and the more she cuts it, the
more she disgraceth her self, because comatam esse, long hair is an ornament
to her, and given her for a covering: So on the contrary, a man disgraceth
himself by wearing long hair, and the longer the worse, because comatum esse,
to wear long hair is a dishonor to him, Nature having not given it him for a
vail, as it has done to women.

4. The Apostles Argument would be invalid, if the word be restrained to such a
nourishing of the hair as is never cut; then Ruffians, if they cut their hair
but a fingers breadth, should be free from this reproof. Then some men would
have longer hair than some women (and so that order which God has set in
Nature, would be confounded) for though Nature has allotted shorter hair (in
the generality) to men than unto women; yet some men, by reason of their
constitution, if they suffered their hair to grow to its utmost length, would
exceed some women's. But now take the word simply in its usual acceptance (as
words ought to be taken) for to nourish the hair, or to wear long hair, and
then the Apostles Argument is cogent. q. d. It Is both a sin and a shame, and
that by the dictate of Nature, for a man to wear long hair: But if a woman
have long hair, it is a glory and ornament to her, for her hair was given her
for a covering; it is a shame therefore for her to be shorn or polled, but she
must be covered, because of the Angels, who observe their immodest and indecent
carriage: yet, if any man list to be contentious, and will rather stand to
justify these unseemly fashions, let it suffice him, that we have no such
customs of immodesty and indecency, nor any of the other Churches of Christ,
so as he shall be singular in this his opinion. This I conceive to be the
genuine and proper sense of this Text: But now you shall see what an absurd
Paraphrase the Expositions of some will make. q. d. Does not a bare arbitrary
custom teach you Corinthians only, that it is no sin, but only an
incommodious and indecent thing for you to wear hair as long as women's? How
invalid and absurd this renders the Apostles reasoning, and what little
conviction of the conscience could arise from such arguing, let the Reader
judge. The bare rehearsal of it is confutation Corripimus illos qui hoc uno
vitio capillorum contra praeceptum Apostolicum demissorum offendum and
perturbant ecclesia^, etc. coguntur manifesta verba Apostoli in perversam
detorquere sententia^. August de opere M^nachorum tribus ult. Capit.
sufficient, only we may hence observe how loath men are to be convinced of
their sins, what shifts they invent, how unwilling to see any thing which might
separate between them and their lusts; they shut their eyes, they are wilfully
ignorant, and will not see; but God one day will make them see and be ashamed.

If any desire fuller satisfaction, let him Diatriba Theologica de capillis
constans Disput. Text ad 1 Cor. 11. 14:
peruse that elaborate Treatise of the learned Dematius, where all the cavills
raised against this Text by Salmasius, Revius, and others, are learnedly and
satisfactorily answered. I shall now shut up all with the gloss of a learned,
pious, modest Divine of our time. Upon this Text, dim Nature (says he)
condemns D. Reynolds, sin full of sin. p. 125.
many vices, as Idleness, Beastiality, Lying, Luxury, the Cretian Poet could
condemn. Those drinking of Healths, ad plenos calices, was condemned by the
Law of a Heathen Prince. Long hair is condemned by the Dictate of Nature, and
right Reason; and the reason why so many Men, and whole Nations use it, is
given by S. Jerome, Quia natura decia derunt, sicut multis aliis rebus
comprobatur; and, as Tert. says of women's long hair, that it is Humilitatis
earum sarcina, the burden, as it were of their Humility, so by the warrant of
that proportion, which S. Paul allows, 1 Cor. 11. 14. 15. we may call men's
long hair Superbiae sarcinam, nothing but a clogge of Pride, etc.

The sixth ARGUMENT
From Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves like unto this world: From whence I
argue thus,

The sinful Customs, Fashions, Properties and practices of the wicked men of
the world, may in no wise be followed by the people of God (unless they mean
to perish with the world.)

But the wearing of long hair is one of the sinful Customs, Fashions and
Practices of the wicked men of the world. Ergo,

It may in no wise be followed by the people of God.

For the Major, it is clear, that Gods people must not fashion themselves like
(...). Ne co^figuremini (i. e.) no figuram mundi induatis, ut tales sitis
qualis est mundus and mund^ni (i. e.) vani, superbi, ambition, terrena tantum
quaerentes, non ^lestia. a Lap.
to the world, they must not walk in the way of the wicked, Psalm. 1. 1. nor
run with them into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. nor once enter into
that broad way, Mat. 7. 13. be they never so many for Number, or mighty for
Power, Wealth, Wisdom, Authority and Success, that walk therein: And why so?
Because Christ has redeemed us from the corruptions of the world, Galat. 1. 4.
and therefore we must keep our selves free, not only from the gross Blots,
but even from the Spots of the World; Iam. 1. 27. there should be as great a
distance and contrariety between the lives and walking of true Christians, and
the men of the World, as there is between Light and Darkness, Day and Night.
1. These. 5. 5, 6, 7. we must show forth the Virtues of Christ, and not the
Vices and Vanities of the World in our Conversations, 1 Pet. 29. we must
lament, not follow the pride, and sinful courses of the age we live in, as Lot
did: 2 Pet. 2. 7. God will not have his people to walk like Heathens and
Pagans, that know him not; they must not be like them so much as in the cutting
of their hair, Levit. 19. 27, 28: Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2, 3. as they are his peculiar
people, and he loves them with a peculiar love, so he expects a peculiar
carriage from them, differing from the sinful courses of the world. Hence it
is made a note of an unregenerate man, to walk according to the course of the
world. Ephesians. 2. 2. and to walk as Gentiles, in the vanity of their mind; Ephesians.
4. 17. yet this is the great Plea, it is the fashion now adays, to wear long
hair, and as good be out of the World, as out of the Fashion, cum lupis
ululandum est; they will do as the most do, forgetting that broad is the way
that leads to Hell, and many there be that go that way. Math: 7. 13.

2. For the Minor, It is clear that long hair is one of the sinful customs
and fashion of the wicked men of the world. This will appear, if we look
abroad into the remote parts of the world, we shall there see, that long hair
was, and still is, the guise and fashion of the most V. Purch. Pilg. l. 8. c.
12. etc.
barbarous, idolatrous, heathenish Nations, that know not God, but worship
the Devil, as the Virginians in America, to whom the Devil appears in the
shape V. Purch. Pilgr. l. 8. c. 6. s. 3. P. 954.
of a Virginian, with a long black lock on the left side hanging down near to
the feet, whom the Virginians imitate in this Divellish Guise.

But let us come home, and amongst our selves we shall see, that usually the
vilest, proudest, profanest, deboyshest persons are the greatest Ruffians. And
is it not made a badge of those proud effeminate Locusts, Rev. 9. 8. that they
have hair like women? I wish we had not too many that res^mble them; for if we
look on men's out-sid^s, their Hair, Habit, Attire, etc. what difference can
you find between the most graceless* vain, fantastic Ruffians, and many
professors of Religion? Surely all is not right within, Vanum cor vinitatis
notam ing^rit corpori, and exterior super fluitas iuterio is vanitatis est
ma^um. Bern.
when there appears so much vanity without: when Christ is once entertained in
the soul, it will soon appear in the hair, habit, attire, in an humble,
modest, mortified, selfe-denying walking; the soul that loves Christ can
easi^y part with any thing which it conceives to be displeasing to him. I shall
conclude this point with the Testimony of a reverend Divine, a man famous for
Stoughtons Sacrifice on Romans 12. 2. p. 168.
his Piety and Pains in the Ministry: It Is the duty of Christians (says he)
not only to sacrifice their eyes and ears, but also their heads to God, in a
sober and modest wearing of their hair, which the Apostle (by the testimony of
Nature it self) commends to us* viz. that men wear short hair, because
it is a shame for them to have long hair, etc. of such long haired men the
Scripture records one, and but one example, viz. Absalom, the rebellious and
In quo quis peccat, in ^o punitur, efferebat se pulchritudine comae, ergo fit
laqueus. Pet. Mart. Absoloms hair was Absoloms pride: therefore Absoloms hair
(as it is conceived) was his halter; and whilst he will needs spare the Barber
a labor, he also spares the Hangman a labor. Dyke.
traitorous Son of David, whose fearful end. and direful judgment all men
know, viz. that by his long hair he was hanged in an Oak. Oh that our
long-haired Gentlemen would make use thereof and tremble! Would any of them
have the like end? Though they would not, yet let them fear a worse, etc.
Besides, how strangely do men cut their hairs, some all before, some all
behind, some long round about, their crowns being cut short like Cootes, or
Popish Priests, and Friars; some have long locks at their ears, as if they had
four ears, or were prick eare'd; some have a little long look only before,
hanging down to their noses, like to the tail of a weasell; every man being
made a Fool at the Barbers pleasure, or making a Fool of the Barber for money
to make him such a fool; for, as it is said of the makers of Idols and Images,
they that make them are like unto them; so it may said of such Fools, and such
Barbers, etc.

Most lamentable especially is it, that great foretops and long hair has
seized on some in the Ministry, that come up to the Chair of Moses more like
some Gentlemen's Butlers, than Ministers of the Word. This is a great scandal,
and no small disgrace to that honorable calling. The young years of Note.
some may not be pleaded for excuse, for though they are young in years, yet
by calling they are Elders, and ought to be of grave carriage, beseeming
Elders. All these things have I spoken not with any delight, but with grief of
heart, from love to God and men, and not without fear of Gods judgments
against such things. Thus this holy man of God.

The seventh ARGUMENT,
From the Rise and Original of Long hair, viz. Pride, I argue thus: Ab
origin.


Where the Root is naught, the Fruit cannot be good. Qualis causa, talis
effectus.


But the Root of long hair is naught, (it springs from Pride) therefore the
Fruit cannot be good.

The Major is clear: The Minor Experience proves: We daily see the pride
Deformitas vestium and capillorum, deformitatis mentis est indicium.
of men's hearts appearing, as in their habits and attire, so in their hair:
modest persons are modest in their apparel and hair, but proud effeminate
persons discover themselves by both.

Obj. Pride lies in the heart and not in Principaliter and radicaliter in
cord, operative and declarative in capite.
the hair.

Answ. Pride is principally in the heart, yet declares it self in the head, as
in apparel: the pride of the heart appears by the vanity without.

Obj. But many are proud of their shore hair.

Answ. 1. Suppose this were true, yet this will not help you; for Recrimination
is no Purgation, another man's pride will not excuse mine.

2. Good men have little cause to be Super bus fio quod nomen pessimum mihi
crescere audio. Luth.
proud in this kind, unless it be of the jeeres and scorns of wicked men, as
Luther said sometime, I am even proud of the reproaches of mine enemies.

3. It is not Pride, but Obedience to Gods commands, who has said, we shall
not suffer our locks to grow long etc.

Obj. We see some wicked men wear short hair, who have no regard to Gods
commands.

Ans. 1. Two men may do one and the Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem.
same thing yet upon different accounts, and so it is not the same. The wicked
man prays, and the good man prays, the one does it out of form and custom,
the other out of conscience to Gods command. So two men wear short hair, the
wicked man wears it either because the Pox or the Fever has fet off his
hair, or because his Grandsire wore short hair before him, or out of some
other carnal principle; but the good man wears it singly and solely out of
obedience to Gods most sacred Command, with an eye to his glory, in the
adorning of his profession with a modest, meek, and humble conversation,
answerable to the simplicity of the Gospel.

2. Where one wicked man wears short hair, there is a thousand wears long.

3. We must not forsake our grave and modest guise, because some wicked men are
got into it; thou will not refuse thy meat because wicked men do eat, nor Fas
est ab host doceri.
go naked because they are clothed; for then you would be like the women of
Ulma, who colored their teeth black, because dogs teeth were white.

The eighth ARGUMENT.
That which is a badge of cruelty and effeminacy must be shunned by the people
of God, (who are commanded to shun all appearance of evil, 1 These. 3. 22.)

But long hair is a badge of cruelty and effeminacy:

Therefore it must be shunned by the people of God.

The Major is manifest; The Minor I prove from Job 5. 5. and 18. 9. where
robbers and cruel thieves, that devour men's substance, are called From a root
which signifies the hair of the head, or extraordinary Ruffian-like-locks. V.
Caryl on Job 55, etc. Comam demittere proprie est luxuriosorum, barbarorum and
militantium. Hieron. V. D. Reynolds Censur. lib. Apochryph. Lect. 25.
Tzammim, the hairy ones, because cruel theives, and rude soldiers, do delight
in long hair: Thus the Devils are called, Shegnarin^, Hirsuti, hairy ones,
Levit. 17. 7. they shall no more offer their Sacrifices, Teshegnirim, to the
hairy ones, (i. e.) to Devils, who are called rough, rugged hairy ones, because
they appeared in the form of Isa. 13. 21. and 34. 14. Purch. Pilgrim. l. 9. c.
13. s. 2. Verticem pili i e. Pilosum, pro truculentis bominibus, ut qui
prolixum capillitium gestare solebant. Junius.
Satyrs, or wild Goats.

Thus the crul Caniballs, who eat men and worship the devil, are said to wear
the hair of their heads a yard long: Thus the Psalmist describing the wicked
and the violent man, he gives him this character, He has a hairy Pate, Psalm.
68. 22. God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy pat^ of him that
walks in his sins.

2. It also notes effeminacy and wantonness, Mollities locustarum denotatur.
Nullus comatus, qui non sit cynaedus. Syn. Prolixi capilli signum mollis and
effeminati enimi; ideoque viros dedecent.
hence the effeminate light, lascivious locusts are said to have hair like
women, Rev. 9. 8. and amongst our selves; Who more light and loose than
Ruffians? It Is a dishonor to a man to be found in such a guise; gravity and
modesty becomes him best, in the very judgment of one of the wiser sort of He
athens. Sint procul a vobis juvenes, ut foemina, compti:
Forma viros neglecta decet.
Ovid.

The ninth ARGUMENT.
It is neither beneficial to soul nor body: From whence I argue thus,

That which brings no benefit to soul nor Ab inutili.
body, may be practiced:

But the guise of excessive long hair brings no benefit to soul or body.
Ergo,

The Major no rational man will deny.

The Minor I prove by its Parts. 1. It brings no benefit to the Soul, it
brings only a stain and blot of Pride and profaneness, as Solomon says of
reproving the wicked, he that does it shall get nothing for his pains but a
blot of reproach, Prove. 9. 7. So by walking in this vain guise, we get nothing
but the title of Proud Fantasticks; besides it makes way for other sins, it is a
temptation to Curling, Poudring, etc. and gives occasion to the better sort to
conceive that we are as yet but profane Worldlings, because we go in the
worlds fashion.

2. For the Body, it does but hinder men in their Callings many times: and
Lendium and pediculorum silvae.
without diligent care and much combing it becomes a fit harbor for Lice and
vermin. Besides, some conceive that Long hair does rather weaken than
strengthen Crinium copiae vires minuit, and quasi e corpore^ exugit. Loricer.
Turc. Hist. l. 2. c. 3.
the body, and is rather a hindrance than a furtherance to our health. At best
it is but a vain and idle practice, of which men can give no good account, and
yet for it one day they must account; for if men must give an account for every
idle word that they shall speak, Mat. 12. 36. how much more for every vain and
idle action? and if in our eating, drinking, sleeping, Recreations, etc. we
must Habitualiter and virtualiter* Zec. 14, 20, 21.
have respect to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. then also in the wearing of our
hair.

Obj. If it be unlawful to wear long Hair, then it is unlawful to wear long
Beards.

Ans. There is not eadem ratio, the Beard is one thing, and long hair upon
men's heads is another. 1. Long hair is contra decus virile, its a shame and
dishonor to a man, but so is not a long Beard. 2. The Scripture no where
condemns a long Beard, but it often condemns long hair. 3. A decent growth of
the Beard is a sign of Manhood, and given by God to distinguish the Male from
the Female sex, this is a badge of Virility, the other of Vanity. God would
have his Voluit Deus in populo suo barbam quasi virilitatis insigne apparere,
barba enim virum indicat. a Lapide in locum ubi plura. Council. Carth. 4. Can.
44. referente Caran^a.
people to preserve their Beards, and enjoynes them not to shave the corners of
their Beards, as the Heathen did, Levit. 19. 27. they must not deforme and
disfigure their faces by shaving off the hair of their beards. The Council of
Carthage at which S. Austin himself was present, made this Canon, Comam nec
nutriant sacerdotes, nec barbam radant. Let not Ministers wear long hair, nor
shave their beards. But now the practice is quite contrary, for many let their
locks grow long, but shave their Beards still, that they may look more like
beardlesse boys, than grave Ministers of the Gospel.

4. Nor do we plead for extraordinary long beards, but only for beards,
whereby God will have the sex distinguished; the beard may not grow so long as
to be a burden or an impediment to us in our callings; nor yet must it be so
shaven, that a man should want that manly comeliness and dignity, which God
has given him.

The tenth ARGUMENT:
From the scandal that it brings. Thus, That which is scandalous and offensive
to Ascandalo.
the people of God, must be avoided; But the wearing of long hair is
scandalous and offensive to the people of God. Ergo.

The Major is manifest; we should be very tender of doing any thing that might
justly grieve the people of God: 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give no offense to Jew nor
Gentile, nor to the Church of God: Mat. 17. 27. And we should walk in such
holy gravity, modesty, singleness and sincerity, that we might give no just
cause of offense to any, hence we are commanded to follow things (...), i. e.
gravia, severa, honesta, verecunda i. e. quae talia sunt ut sanct a quadam
gravitate vos exornent. a Lap.
honest, and of good report; Phil. 4. 8. whatsoever is grave, modest, and may
procure us and our profession a good report amongst men, that follow.

For the minor it is apparent that long hair is scandalous, it grieves the
godly to see Christians in profession turn Ruffians in their conversation, it
offends the weak, hardens the wicked, and opens their mouths to blaspheme, and
say these are people of the Lord, Ezekiel. 26. 20. and Ecce quales sunt qui
Christum colunt. Salv.
these are the Professors, see how proud, vain, fantastic they be; this
provokes the Lord to vindicate his honor, he will not suffer such to escape
unpunished, Ezekiel. 39. 23. 24. and the Heathen shall know that the house of
Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they trespassed against
me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their
enemies; so they all fell by the sword, etc. so that if this guise were but
indifferent, yet it is not convenient, because it gives advantage to the enemy
to blaspheme, when they shall see vain, profane fashions creep into the
Church, and christian modesty, with godly gravity to be gone: The Apostle
advises to be very wary in this case, 1 Cor. 8. 13. Romans 14. 13. That pious
and ingenious speech of an acute and reverend Mr. Nath: Ward
man, speaking to this point, is worth observing. I shall speak a word (says
he) to our long-hair'd men; it is but this, If God prove not such a Barber to
them as he threatens, unless it be amended Isaiah 7. 20. before the peace of
the Church and State be well settled, then let my Prophecy be scorned, as a
sound mind scorns the riot of that sin: and more, it needs not, if those
who are termed Rattle-heads, and Impuritans, would take up a resolution to
begin in moderation of hair, to the just reproach of those that are called
Puritans and Roundheads; I would honor their manliness, as much as the others
godliness, so long as I knew what man or honor meant; if neither can find a
Barbours shop, let them turn into Psalm. 8. 21. Jer. 7. 29. 1 Cor. 11. 14. if
it be thought no wisdom in men to distinguish themselves in the field by the
Scissers, let it be thought no injustice in God not to distinguish them by the
sword. I had rather God should know me by my sobriety, than mine enemy not know
me by my vanity. He is ill kept that is kept by his own sin; a short Promise
is a safer guard than a long Lock: it is an ill distinction which God is loath
to look at, and his Angels cannot know his Saints by; though it be not the
mark of the Beast yet it may be a mark of a beast prepared to slaughter; I am
sure men use not to wear such manes; I am also sure Soldiers use to wear
other Marklets or Notadoes in time of battle. Thus He^.

The eleventh ARGUMENT.
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin:

But this proud guise of exc^ssive long hair is not of faith; Ergo it is sin.

The Major is clear from Romans 14. ult. He that doubts whether he sin in
eating* Fluctuans, and tamen edens, conscientiam suam violat. and fi^ Deum
offend^t. quod est damnabile. Par.
is condemned if he eat, because his conscience is unsettled, and he eats
sinfu^ly, because he eats doubtfully; for whatsoever we do, if we be not
certainly persuaded in our consciences by the word of God, that it may be done,
it is not of faith, but is done with a doubtful conscience, and so is sin.

For the Minor, That excessive long Dum damnatur q^ quid non est ^x si^e.
rejicitur q^ quid non est verb. Dei suffu^ and approbatum. Calv.
have is not of faith, is clear, because it has no word of faith commanding
it, or c^mmending it to us; yea, the most that wear it, are condemned in
themselves and their own consciences accuse them and ch^ck them: Therefore I
conclude to them it is a sin.

The twelfth ARGUMENT.
The twelfth Argument is drawn from the practice of Gods p^p They have A
Testimonio.
no such Custom, nor any of the Churches of God.

To omit the practice of our own Church, all the days of that famous Queen
Elizabeth King James, and the beginni^g of the late Kings reign; all which
time, 'ti^ well known, short hair was the guise of this Nation, (...) o^ late
years we have changed both our Principles and our Practices together. Yet I
find no less than eight Synods in Holland, that have made Acts against it.

1. Both Pastors and Elders there, have condemned long hair in men.

2. They judge it u^lawfull, especially in Pastors Elders, Deacons, and
Students in Divinity.

3. That all such as profess the Gospel, and yet come to hear the Word in
such a guise ought to be reproved and a monished, both publicly and privately,
yea, yea, all circumstances considered, to be Ad exam^ Theologicum in
classibus, and ad ministerium non admittendos esse studiosos qui capillos
promittunt. Vide Demat. Part 1 a. These. 8. in fine.
suspended from the Sacrament.

4. That no Expectants, that are entering into the Ministry, coming with long
hair, ought to be admitted.

5. That all Professors and Governors do dissuade the Students from such
vanities, etc.

Diluuntur Sophismata. An Answer to the most material Objections and Arguments
which are brought in defense of Long Hair.
The first OBJECTION.
The great plea for Long hair is this, That it is an Ornament, that makes men
decent and comely, that they have accustomed themselves to it, and now they
cannot leave it; that they wear it not for pride, but for warmth and health,
etc.

An. 1. Sin never wants excuses. The Devil cannot endure that sin, which is
Improbitas prae^extu nunquam caret. A^ist. See Brook 's Remedy against Satan's
devices. p. 19. etc.
his darling, should go naked, and therefore he usually clothes Vice with
Virtues Robes; no man must call a Spade a Spade; but you must call
Drunkenness, Good fellowship; Covetousness, Goodhusbandry; Cruelty, F^ugality;
Painting, Beauty; and Pride, D^cency, etc. But let all such know, that God will
not be mocked, but cu^seth those that call evil good, and put darkness for
light, and bitter for sweet. Isaiah 5 20.

2. For Decency; that is decent and Ornamentum est quod ornat, ornat autem quod
honestiorem facit; id autem non aurum, non smaragdus, non coccus, sed
quaecunque gravitatis, pudoris and moderationis sp^ciem praebent. Cicer. Hoc
cum decor quide^ videatur, multum habet deformitatis. Stobaeus. Gincinni non
orname^ta sed crimina, lenociniae formae no^ praecepra viriutis. Am. l. 3. de
virginit. Fen. on the Affect. p. 214.
comely which is answerable to the rule of Gods Word, how meanly soever the
world esteem of ^t; and Gods poor people, with their shore hair, are more
comely in the eye of one that is truly wise, than all the proud Ruffians and
Ranters of the world with their long locks. Long hair is so far from decen
cy, that it is a great deformity: the A postle tells us it is so far from being
an honor, that it is a shame, a blot, and a dishonor to wear long hair: it
makes men look like one come out of a Jayle, like some cheating Rook, or rude
Runnagedo. Hear what that Boanerges of his time says of such persons, A proud
fanta stique fool (says he) affects his long locks, and his love-locks;
every one that is sober minded, and sees him; is ready to say, What a humourous
fool is yonder man? What a Ruffian is he? How like a Mastiff or a Bedlam does
he look? Yet the Fool is not ashamed, because he affects it. Thus he. As the
adorning of women, so consequently the adorning of men, consi^s not in the
outward adorning of the hair. 1 Pet. 3. 3. but in the inward adorning of the
mind with humility, faith, obedience. Nor is that presently to be accounted
Non est decorum quicquid placet carni, ita tamen corrupti sumus ut oculis magis
quam mentis nostrae recto judicio serivamus Muscul.
an Ornament, which the profane of the World esteem so; for then painting of
the Face, curling and powdering of the Hair, black Spots, naked B easts, etc.
would be lawful, because some wicked ones esteem them Ornaments. Then women
might poll their foreheads (as the fashion was lately) because they conceive it
to be an ornament, though it was indeed a mere abuse of the Excrement: for the
Apostle tells them it is a sin Ponderi vel radi turpe est mul^eri; qu^a contra
naturam. Raven^
and shame (and therefore can be no Real lawful ornament) to be polled and
shorn. 1 Cor. ^1 5. 6. 15. B side its scandalous, and against Christian
modesty: for as in apparel, so in the wearing of our hair, God will have the
S^xes to be distingu shed. Deuteronomy. 22. 5 Polling indeed is an ornament to a man,
but long hair is an ornament unto a woman, besides Homo est inversus Dec^logus.
Job. 11. 12. Trapp.
its given her for a covering. Now see the perverseness of our natures, and
their contrariety to Gods law; women, who should not yet will Poll their heads;
and men, who should poll their heads, will not: Then women might also lay out
their locks, for some account that an ornament, though indeed it is a badge (to
say no more) of the levity and folly. For.

1. Their hair was given them for a covering to their heads, not cheeks and
faces, which should be visible; it is an abuse of the hair, when the locks are
hung out to Crine tuo (i) crine tuo modeste and pudice composito, and reducto
procul ab occulis; non autem projecto, et lascive ex^uberante, quod impudicarum
est, Junius in Cant. 4. 1. Quae nimium sese ornat, esto fit castissima, non
caret tamen impudicitiae suspitione. A Lapide.
be seen of others; a modest matron hides th m: Cant. 4. 1. Oculi tui columbini
prae cri ne tuo (as Junius renders it) i. e. Thy hair is bound up like the
modest matrons, and not lasciviously hung out as the hair of the harlot. 2. It
is scandalous and of evil report amongst the godly. 3. It is the modest custom
of the virtuous matrons of the land we live in, and against that simplicity
which the Apostl^ requires in women, fearing God. 1 Timoth. 2. 9. and 3. 11. 1
Pet. 3. 3, 4. 4. It sp^ings from pride, which ever b^ings judgment along with
it. Isa. 3 16. 17, etc. If that pride brought judgment then; sure this
analogically cannot escape: It Is well observed by a late reverend Divine of
ours, That the natural Byfield on 2 ^t 3. 3. Si tu te speciosiu^ co^as, and
p^r publ^u^ notabilite^ ^ncedas, oculo^ in (...) juven tutis ill^cias, ut etsi
ipsa non percas, alto^ tamen perdas and velut gladium te atque venenum
videntibus praeferas, excusari non potes quasi mente casta sis and pudica;
redarguit te cultu^ improbus, and habitus impudicus. Cypr. lib. de descript.
and hab. virgin.
use of the hair is to be covering: Now when the hair is with curiosity, and
by vain inventions turned into vain forms, by pla^tng, curling, or other
ways, which we cannot name; or falls into dangling locks, like to the hair of
Ruffians; the dressing is then vicious; for Basil says in general of all
apparel and dressing, that whatseover in these things is not for profit or
necessity, is vain and superfluous. And S. Jerome expressly condemns the
hanging of the hair below the forehead. etc. Thus he-

3. But thou wearest thy long hair for health and warmth? How many are there
that never wear their hair half so long as thine is, and yet are as
healthful and warm as thou can be? How many that with their short hair can
follow the plough in a winters day without a Bonnet? Custom will make it easy
and comely; and if you plead custom for your long hair, you have accustomed
your self so long to it, that now you cannot leave it: This is so far from
lessening, that it aggravates and doubles your sin; it is a sin to steal,
be drunk, etc, but to be a customary thief, drunkard, etc. increases the
sin; especially when it is acted presumptuously against Knowledge, and
against Correction: How many proud, stately Ruffians have lost both Head and
Hair in the Wars? God has stained the pride of all our glory: Isa. 23. 9.
If then it be your custom to wear long hair, you must know it is Gods
custom to punish such as follow such proud strange fashions: Zeph. 1. 8. An
evil custom is better broken than kept; you must therefore (by degrees)
accustom your self to short hair, and then I can experimentally assure thee,
it will be no impediment to thy health or warmth; for God and Nature allow thee
such a length, or may cover thy head and keep it warm; but what warmth has thy
head by the hair that lies on thy back? And for health, the learned have
observed, that long hair does diminish the strength, and is rather an
hinderance than a furtherance to it.

2. Suppose thou have accustomed thy self so long to wear excessive long
hair, that now thou find it preserves thy health and warmth; yet if long
hair be sinful, and against the dict^tes of Nature (as all sober men
acknowledge excessive long hair to be) then may we not do evil that good may
come thereby, Rom 3. 8. especially since the Lord has provided so many lawful
means to preserve our health and warmth: And if a man may not sin to save his
life, much less may he sin to preserve his health; the greatest evil o^
affl^ction must be chosen rather than the least evil of sin, it being better to
dye than to sin.

The second OB^ECTION.
It is an indifferent thing how long we will we are our hair, and a part of
our Christian Ego non censco per se malum esse (...) cap^llos habere, qua^ rem
ergo plane indiffer^ntem statuo. Salmasius Dialog. de coma. p. 16.
liberty to do as please our selves herein, etc.

Ans. For the clearer answering of this great (...) which some very learned men
lay so much stresse upon, we must first define what an adiaphorous or
indifferent thing is. That is a thing V. Bucan loc 33. S. 13, 14. Polan.
Syntag. l. 6. 6. 39.
indifferent (say the Learned) which is neither commanded nor forbidden, either
literally or consequentially, explicitly or implicitly; and then their
Argument will be this:

That is indifferent which is neither commanded nor forbidden either literally
or consequentially explicitly or implicitly: But long hair is neither
commanded nor forbidden literally nor consequentially explicitly nor
implicitly. (...) it is a thing indifferent.

Here the Minor is expressly false, for Long hair is forbidden in Scripture both
ways: 1. It is forbidden literally and explicitly, terminis terminantibus, in
express Quae vel express Dei verbo praecipiuntur, vel cum Dei verbo manifest
pugnant, etc. no^ sunt res mediae and indifferentes Bucan.
terms. Ezekiel. 44. 20. we must not suffer our locks to grow long, but must
round or poll our heads: and 1 Cor. 11. 14. the dictates of nature condemn long
hair in men.

2. Its forbidden implicitly and consequentially. Romans 12. 2. F^shion not your
selves like to the wicked of the world, now Ruffianly hair is the known guse
of wicked men. So 1 These. 5 22. Abstain Fuge qui^quid male fuerit coloratum
Bern.
from all appearance of evil, fly from the very shows and shadows of sin: But
all civil men confess that long hair has (at Nego res indifferentes esse,
ubi ratio decori moralis, sive honesti ipsis accedit. Dematius. Ratione
scandali dati, quae in se erat actio indifferens, fit mala per accidens.
Paraeus in Romans 14. Dub. 1.
least) a show of sin and pride in it, and therefore I conclude it can be no
thing indifferent.

3. Suppose it were an indifferent and doubtful thing, yet in doubtful cases
its best taking the safest and most inoffensive way: Now Short hair has ever
been judged by the Gravest and Godliest Divines the best and safest way; yea,
most that wear long hair yet are convinced in their consciences that short
hair is better; though they have accustomed themselves so long to wear long
hair, that as themselves confess, they cannot leave it. Thus it was in the
case of the Sabbath, in Episcopal times, some said 'twas lawful to play on
the Sabbath day, others said 'twas indifferent; but the most moderate of that
party have confessed that they did best, who spent the whole day most
religiously: to say truth, men could profane the Sabbath fast enough without
bidding, or setting forth books to encourage them in that kind: So some say,
Long hair is lawful, others say it is indifferent; but since Short hair is no
where condemned as a sin, and Long hair is, I conclude its safest wearing short
hair; especially since Salmasius (no great friend Ego non censeo per se malum
esse capillos breves habere. Salmas. Di^log. p 16. Ambitio, superbia, luxus
affect^tio, and alia (...), non sunt res medioe. Calvin.
to it) yet freely confesses, the wearing of Short hair to be no sin.

4. Admit it were indifferent, yet it is not expedient, because it grieves the
Godly, offends the Weak, and opens the mouths of the Adversary to cry, Pro
fessors are as proud and apt to follow fashions as others, 1 Cor. 6. 12.

5. This is Ranters License, not Christian Liberty, to go like Ruffi^s and the
Videndum est ^o libe^tas illae Christian^ la^us (...) quam Deus ex ensam
volu^t, ne fa^sa libertatis specie; jugum, quod Deus nobis imposuit,
excutiamus. Demat.
wicked of the world. It is dangerous ex tending our Christian liberty beyond
its true bounds; from this Root spring many of our present Errors. True
Christian Liberty gives us no license to act the least sin, but binds us to a
due observance of all, even the least of Gods commands; it is a liberty from
sin, not a liberty to sin. 2 Cor. 3. 17. Romans 6. 6. Nor do we go about to
infringe true Christian Liberty, but are ready to defend it to the utmost,
against Papists on the one hand, and Libertines on the other: And if to oppose
inordinate long hair be a breach of Christian liberty, then Paul offended in
this kind, and many Synods, ancient Fathers, and Modern Divines, who have with
one consent declared their dislike of this proud guife.

The third OBJECTION.
The wicked will take offense at our short hair, therefore it is best to
forbear it.

Answ. Then you must forbear all that is good, for they will take offense at
your Dimittendum est propter scandalu^ omne quod potest praetermitti salva^
iplic^ veritate i e. vitae, justitiae and doctrinae. A quinas 2a. 2ae. q. 43.
art. 7.
praying in your family, at your exact walking, etc. It is one sign that short
hair is the best guise, beause the wicked of the world are so apt to jeere at
it and abhor it, as they do all things else which are good: and therefore
Bonae res neminem scandaliza^t uisi malam mentem. Tertul.
Tertull. well observes, that none but evil men will take offense at that
which is good; if wicked men will be offended at us for doing our duty, and
will take offense when none is given them: this is scandalum passivum, non
datum sed acceptum, a scandal not given by us, but taken by themselves, and is
lightly to be regarded. Christ himself was a rock of offense to the Pharisees,
not actively, but passively; Pharisaeis i. e. praefeactis vel malitiose
insidiantibus nibil largiendum, ut Christiana liberta incolumis servetur. Bucan.
they took offense at his poverty and mean condition, and see how he slights
them. Math. 15. 14. Let them alone, since they are desperate, they are blind
leaders of the blind. It Is true, we may seek to please our neighbor in that
which is Nihil boni aus liciti est omittcudum propter scandalum acceptum
hominum Pharisaico ingenio pr^ditorum. Ames. CC. l. 5. c. 11. s. 12.
good, but not in that which is evil, Romans 15. 2. What God forbids, may never
be done, though we should displease all the world by shunning it. No man may
sin to avoid scandal. Their damnation is just, who say, Let us do evil that
good may come, Romans 3. 8. Quodvis vitato peccatum, etiam leviusoulum, quo
proximus tuus offendi potest. Brochm.


The fourth OBJECTION.
I am not alone in this guise, for I find that when this Land was over spread
with Heathenisme and Barbarism, long hair was their custom; and now of late
that we are (in some things) worse than Heathens, we are fallen to it again.
Yea, in these times of Liberty its become a National sin, many Great men,
Lords, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, go in this guise, etc.

Ans. Christ is Truth, not Custom; that custom which has no ground nor
foundation in the Word of God, may not be followed by the people of God, who
must to the Law and to the Testimony, and not to Customs. Esaias 8. 20. A
sinful custom is better broken than kept; else if any sinful custom were
sufficient ground for our Practice, then Polygamy, and the worshipping of
Devils would be lawful, because that was an ancient custom: But you must
know, that long hair is contrary to the civil, laudable custom of our land
since the Reformation; for though formerly, when the nation worshipped Devils,
had community of Wives, and was overspread with Heathenisme, etc. then the
ancient Britains wore excessive long hair: yet The Britains paint
themselves, wear long hair; ten or twelve of them together use their Wives in
common, Brethren with Brethren, and Parents with Children. Came. Brit. p. 29.
since the Reformation came amongst us, this abuse was reformed, and all the
days of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, a modest Tonsure has
been used, which still continues amongst some, and the notion abides in most,
for if the people see a man come up to preach with excessive long hair, it is
an offense unto them.

2. If it be a national sin, it is so much the worse; for when sin grows
general, it brings general judgments; when all the Old World, and all Sodom
had corrupted their ways, then the judgment of the Lord came on them, Genes.
6. 5. 7. and 19. 4. 24, 25. when all Jerusalem, from the least to the greatest,
from the Prophet to the Priest, is given to lewdness; then it is time for God
to resist, Jer. 6. 12, 13. be the multitude never so great; if they walk in an
evil way, we Argumentum turpissimum est turba. Sen.
must not follow it (Exodus 23. 2.) but oppose it; it is a sign of sincerity to
be good in bad times, with Lot to be good in Sodom, with Job in an heathenish
Uz, and with Noah to be righteous in unrighteous Vixit, non aetate unaj sed
multis, non cu^ bonis, sed cum hominibus corruptissimis. Junius.
generations, Genes. 6. 9. and with the Church of Pergamus to be constant in
professing Gods truth, in a place where Satan reigns, and in time when
Heresy, Supestition, and all wickedness does abound. Rev. 2. 12, 13. This is
high commendation indeed: The vilest will Asiam nunquam vidisse nulla laus,
verum summa laud dignum siquis pudice and pie in Asia vixerit.
seem good amongst good company: Let a Saul come amongst the Prophets, and he
will prophecy: but to be good in a bad place, and not to be ashamed in the
midst of an adulterous generation: There Is the trial. Mark 8. ult.

3. It is too true, that in these times of liberty, we are turned ^centious, a
great cause of our unhappiness, is our too much happiness; that which makes
many so luxuriant in habit, hair, etc. is the want of the golden reins of
government: It is a hard thing to be good in Magna faelicitad it is est a
faelicitate non vinci.
loose times, and to use prosperity well: How many have we seen that in times
of persecution and adversity, which being raised to a greater estate, or to
some higher condition, are become other men; like Tuva in the Poet.

Vis dicam male sit cur tibi Tuva? been est. Martial l. 10. 13.

4. Whereas you say you have many Improbitas aliena nequaquam dabet nos facere
improbos. Salv.
great men on your side; I answer, We must live by Rule, not by Example; or if
we will follow examples, follow the best and not the worst: another man's pride
(though he be never so great) is no rule for me to walk by: because such a
great man is a drunkard, an oppressor, etc. it does not follow, that therefore
we must imitate him: we may not partake with great men in their sins, unless
we mean to partake with them in their plagues. The more they be, and the
greater they be that walk in a wicked path, Ubi major est pecca^tium turba,
major est divinitati injuria. Salv. de Gub. Dei l 3. Parum refert quam multi
sint, sed quam boni, quam graves.
the more God is provoked, the nearer to judgment, and the more suspicious is
the way; for the most are usually the worst, the greatest number go the way to
hell. Math. 7. 13, 14. The whole world lies in wickedness. John 5. 19. nil
mundum in mundo 'Twas the complaint of Seneca against the men of his time;
amongst the Inter causas ma^um nostrorum est, etc. Sen ep. 123.
causes of our evils (says he) this is one, that we live by Example; neither
are we governed by reason, but led away by custom. That which we would not
imitate, if few men did it, when many men have begun to do it, we follow as if
it were more honest, because it is more frequent, and error with us supplyeth
the place of that which is right, when it is made public.

Consider there are many base and beggarly b^ats, that wear long locks, as
well as some great ones. Are not the dross and dregs of men companions with
thee in this sin? Look abroad into the world, and see whether the vilest man
do not usually wear the longest locks. Tell me whether ragged Rascals, nasty
Varlets, Raggamuffi^n Soldiers, Tinkers, Crate-carriers, Jayle-birds, etc. are
not partakes with thee in this Ruffianly guise? And if so, I should think one
need not bid thee change thy fashion.

The fifth OBJECTION.
I have not only many Great men, but also many Good men on my side, I see many
Ministers, and many Professors of Religion in my guise, and therefore I hope I
may use it still without offense.

Answ. Ministers and Professors are men, and so subject to infirmities, yea, to
enormities (when left to themselves) as well as others: We must therefore
follow no Man or Minister further than Imitemur bonos, sed in bonis.
they follow Christ: So S. Paul directs us, 1 Cor. 11. 7. Be ye followers of
me, as I am of Christ: So far, and not an inch farther: We must imitate the
Virtues, and not the Vices of the Saints, and be like David in his zeal for
God, not in Mu^der and Adultery; and if you will follow the example of any, let
it not be those who are seemingly, but really religious; the most of these (if
not all) are the most modest in their guises. As for those Ministers which are
dissolute, and go like Ruffians; it is both their sin (...) i^ populo, ^rimen
in (...) (...).
and their shame; it is odious in any Man, but abominable in a Minister, who is
Gods mouth unto a People; it becomes not the Messengers of Christ to go in the
guise of his professed enemy. Rev^l. 9. 8. Vide, utrum hae sint comae Ministri
Dei?

Obj. There are good men on both sides, some wear their hair shorter, others
longer; which of these must I follow?

A. In doubtful cases it is best taking the safest way. For instance, two good
men have money, the one lends freely, the other lends upon usury: Which of
these two must I follow? I answer, We must follow him that walks most close to
the rule; and that is he who lends freely, according to Christ's command. Luke
6. 35. So here, one good man wears long hair, another wears short hair,
Which of these two must I follow? It is safest following him which follows the
rule most exactly: Now the Word commands, that we suffer not our locks to grow
long, Ezekiel. 44. 20. and tells us, that it is a sh^me for a man to wear long
hair: 1 Cor. 11. 14. Therefore, since those good men which wear the shortest
hair, walk closest to the rule: we must follow them.

2. Observe which way is most pleasing to flesh and blood, which course takes
most with the world, and has most carnal inducements to draw the heart after
it, and then know, that this way lies most under suspicion, to be the worst
way. Now, whether the wearing of short Hair, or of long Hair be more
pleasing to Flesh and Blood, takes more with the World, and has more carnal
inducements to draw the heart after it; I think there is no experimental
Christian but can easily determine.

3. Observe which way is of best report amongst the godly, and that follow,
Phil. 4. 8. whatsoever is pure and of a good report meditate and think on that
till you be in love with it. Now whether is of better report amongst the Grave
and Godly-wise, Long hair or short Hair, is well known to all. Show me but
one man that is truly godly that ever pleaded for Long hair as now it is
commonly worn? Be sure then in all your ways and walking Sint capilli ad
exemplu^ piorum et gravium bominum, non vero luxuriosorum et leviu^ compo^ti.
not to swarve from the way and communion of the Saints, but let your
apparel, Hair, Habit, etc. be conformable to the most Grave. Modest, and
Religious of your rank and quality.

The sixth OBJECTION.
Yet you tell us not just how long we should wear our Hair, could we but
see one place of Scripture that plainly says, so long thou shall wear thy
Hair and no longer, we would soon obey etc.

A. This is just the Anabaptists plea, could we show them in so many syllables
a command, saying, Thou shall Baptize Infants, then they would believe it; when
it has been proved to them over and over, that in Scripture there is that
which is equivalent to such a syllabicall command. So though in Scripture there
be no syllabicall command saying, Thou shall wear thy hair just so long, and
no longer; yet there is that which is equivalent to such a literal precept,
for we are commanded not to suffer our locks to grow long, nor to fashion our
selves like to the men of the World in the cuting off our Hair: now long Hair
is the known guise of wicked men, I have observed that when men change their
Opinions Eplumis dignoscitur avis: form haec crinium deformitatis mentis et
morum est indicium. Coma promissa mulieres magis decet, vel effaeminatos in
venere^quaepronos et delicatulos mollesque prodit.
and grow worse, they also grow more dissolute in their Hair and Habit,
changing their Gravity and Modesty, into lightness and vanity: and it is
observed by others, that the greatest Sectaries in London, are the greatest
Ruffians, and as they grow degenerate in their Principles, so they grow
effeminate in their practice.

2. For the length of your Hair you must have recourse (as in the matter of
apparel) to the most grave, gracious sober and civil men of your rank and
quality, there is no express Rule what apparel for color, shape or fashion
a man should wear; but we must observe the judgment and practice of the grave
and godly-wise, and follow them, rather keeping too much will in the bounds of
measure, than any way to exceed it, we should take heed of rejecting the
testimony of such as are truly godly. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. we must not vex or
grieve their spirits by our wilfulness, yea, though a Minister could not make
so clear a demonstration, yet when he reproves such things as have an
appearance of evil, out of a holy jealousy and fear, least you should be
infected with it, you must hearken to him. Heb. 13. 17. Good men have their way
and practice, now we should observe the way of good men, and keep the path of
the Righteous. Prove. 2. 20. eye their walking, and follow their ways, rather
than the profane ways of such as stand in nearest relations to them: children
should rather follow the example of godly men, though they be strangers, than
of Father, Mother, Friend, etc. though they be never so great, rich, many, or
carnally wise; their Examples may be inter Motiva, non fundamenta: motives to
duty, though not the ground of doing it: for the word is our Rule, and no
example binds us further, though it agrees with the Rule. Now the Scripture,
which is our Rule, condemns long Hair, and the practice of Gods dearest
servants walking up to the Rule, may confirm, comfort and encourage us against
it. Most men err in taking the vain, light, selfe-conceited, fantastic
fools of the World for their pattern; when they should have respect to the
practice of the most experienced, holy, grave men, who express the inward
virtues of their minds, by the outward modesty, humility and gravity of their
Hair, Habit, Gestures, Actions, etc. Now the gravest and godliest Divines and
Christians in our Nation (whose examples the younger sort should imitate) do
still wear, and formerly did wear the shortest Hair: witness Cartwright,
Perkins. Reynolds, Rogers, Abbot, Dad, Briasly, Hilder sham, Herring, Fen,
Whately, Predeaux, etc. In their works they pleau for it, in their lives they
practiced it (as many now living can testify) and the Effigies of many of them
which are to be seen at this day in Oxford Library (which we may conceive were
the liveliest and exactest that could be had) do plainly show it. Besides about
twenty years ago, I well remember that generality of the Reverend and godly
conformists and Non-conformists were for tonsure, like Perkins in the
Frontispiece, even Mr. Tombs was one, I remember still, that when he was
Lecturer at Worcester, went vel attonso capite, patentibus auribus. But as many
are ashamed of Perkins his good old Principles, so many (I fear) are now
ashamed of his Practice, though formerly they approved of both. Let this
suffice that we have the Word of God, and the example of his dearest servants
to encourage us against the discouragements we shall meet with in this
particular; And which is somewhat, our short Hair is our own, when many of
our Ruffians borrow their Periwiggs (it may be) of some Harlot, or of some
poor creature which now may be lamenting the abuse of that excrement in Hell.
What the Epigramatist said in Martial Epig. l. 2. 58.
defense of plain apparel, may fitly be applied. Pexatus pulchre rides mea,
Zoile, Trita.
curta,
Sunt haec Trita.
curta quide^ Zoile, sed mea sunt.


The seventh OBJECTION.
But that which sticks most with me is this, If I should once be seen in this
precise Plus laborandum est ut placeamus Deo por honestatem, quam hominibus per
impuritatem. Salv.
cut; I shall be counted singular, and look like no body, I shall be made the
drunkards song, and be in derision daily; Besides, my Friends dissuade me my
Wife is against it, my Parents like it not, etc.

A. 1. Thus the flesh wants not excuses! But thou must know, that he which will
go to Heaven, must be content sometimes to go alone, as Elijah did: beside,
there is an holy singularity, and so Gods people must be singular from the
wicked of the world. Mat. 3. 47. (...) quid eximium facitis? Vata^
What singular thing do ye, do not even Publicans and Sinners the like?
Implying that Gods people must do more than Heathens and Moral men. Thus Job
was as a singular man, not with a proud fantastic singularity, but in a holy
sense. Job 2. 3, He was a Nonesuch, none like him for singular holiness. It is
better going to heaven alone, than to hell with company.

2. It is true, the proud and profane of the world will, peradventure,
contemn and scorn thee, because thou do not run with them into all excess
of riot: But if thou will be Christ's Disciple, thou must get an heroic spirit,
and out of an holy pride contemn contemners, resolving if this be to be vile,
thou will yet be more vile; and by an holy Antiperistasis thou must flame the
more by opposition: The Lacedaemonians used not to ask how many their enemies
were, but in what place they were; and had thou true valor, thou would not
so much recount the number of thy adversaries, or enquire where their strength
lay, that thou might subdue them. In the matters of God we must not consult
with stesh and blood, nor go to ask counsel of carnal friends, but observe
what that Great Counselor (Isa. 9 97.) commands, and presently set to the
practice of it in Faith will make us to contemn worldly men's scosts; and
notwithstanding them, do any thing that God shall enjoyne, Gatek. Ser. on Heb.
11. 7. p. 26.
despite of all oppositions whatsoever; for he that for fear of men dares not
do what God commands him, must bid adieu to all Religion: There is no way of
God but the Devil and his agents will oppose it more or less. All that will
be Christ's Disciples must be ready to part with their dearest lives for Christ;
But how will he part with his life for Christ that will not part with a lock
for him? How will he part with his Heart, that will not part with a little hair
at his command? or how will he deny himself on Christ; Who will not part with
in Excrement? Assure your selves, that he who will not freely part with head
and hair, with life and locks when Christ calls for them, shall at last loose
them all with reproach and dishonor. Such Pride is often punished with a fall:
Isaiah 2. 12. The proud and lofty shall be brought low. How many thousands in
Germany, Ireland, Scotland, England, etc. that have had as brave heads of hair
as thou can have, and yet have fallen by the Sword, Axe, Canon, etc. Foelix
quem faciunt, etc.

3. Suppose thou should be little and low in the worlds esteem, for walking
in an humble, selfe-denying path; yet so long as thou art beautiful in the
eyes of God and his people, and the daughters of Jerusalem do esteem thee the
fairest amongst women. Cant. 6. 1. Thou may well give those losers leave to
talk; when Michol mocked David, he comforts himself with this, that the
religious Maidens would honor him: 2 Samuel 6. 22. The testimony of one godly,
wise man, should with us weigh down the reproach of a thousand vile ones: For,
though we may not take up any fashion of apparel, or guise of hair, simply
to make our selves deformed (for that were Pharisaicall Pride, and base
Hypocrisy, which our God would soon discover to our shame) yet if our plain
and close walking to the rule should accidentally make us seem fools, and
deformed in the worlds eye, we must not cast it off, lest we cast off all that
is good with it: We know that excessive long hair is displeasing to the Godly,
and makes the wicked deformed in his eye; yet what wciked man forsakes his
fantastic guise for fear of displeasing the godly? And shall we forsake our
civil, modest guise for fear of their vain censures? Let them return to
thee, but go not thou to them. Gods people are called light, and they must be
like fire, which turns all things into it self, but it is turned into none of
them; they must persist in gracious ways, and draw others to them, but in no
wise must they turn to the wicked, or conform themselves to their sins and
corruptions. In this case we must comfort our selves with this, that it is the
inward, and not the outward beauty which God respects: Christ himself, in
respect of outward beauty, was not desirable (Isaiah 53. 2.) to a carnal eye,
There was no form nor comeliness in him Christus vivens in hoc mundo, nibil
nobile, opulentum, tantum splendidum coram mundo ostendit sed vitam egit
ignobilem, tenuem et labortosum in o^ere fabrili. a Lap.
why we should desire him: His brave, and comeliness was spiritual in respect
of his Goodness, Love M^nesse, Wisdom, Humility, Gentleness, Patience, and
all the Graces of the Spirit: He that has inward beauty, and yet wants the
outward, is likened to the Vine, which being a poor, crooked, deformed Tree to
the eye, yet brings forth Grapes and Wine fit for Kings.

The eighth OBJECTION.
The Narazites wore long hair Numb. 6. 7. 19. Now had it been sinful,
unnatural, or no ornament to them, God would never have commanded it etc.

A. This is a chief argument with some men, but being weighed in the balance,
it Comam Hebraeos alere non consuevisse liquet ex Nazareatus lege, ac proinde
extraordinarium fuisse quod dicitur de
will be found too light. For, Absolomo. Beza.

1. It appears by this, that the Jews did not nourish their hair, else what
need this special command to the Nazarits to do it, if it had been ordinary
with them to wear long hair?

2. God is agens liberrimum, and by his Royal Sovereignty, and absolute power
over our bodies, souls, goods and lives; he may command an Abraham to
sacrifice his Isaac, and the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, and Solomon to
make Cherubins: God, that made the Law, can dispense with his own Law, and may
command Nazarites to nourish their hair, which others that have no such
command, may in no wise do, and therefore it is a manifest non-sequitur,
because God commanded the Nazarites to nourish their hair; therefore that we
may do so still, it does not follow. For,

1. They had Gods special command Privilegium non tolli^ logem. Naza ^ut comam
nutrirent (...) Dei praecepto devotissime faciebant. Hieron.
to nourish their hair, Numb. 6. 5. which none amongst us have, but rather
prohibitions: Now an extraordinary case will not maks an ordinary rule.

2. This was typical, as we see in Sampson, who was a Nazarite, and a Type of
Christ, both in his See Ward on Mat. 2. 23.
birth, life and death: Now Christ the Substance being come, the Shadows and
Ceremonies are gone.

3. If we will follow the Nazarites, we must never poll our heads, for though
the Nazarite by vow was to cut off his locks when his vow was at an end, yet
the Nazarite by birth, as Sampson, might never be shorn.

4. Non sequitur, because God commanded the Nazarites to nourish their hair,
therefore it was an Ornament to them, for God commanded many external Rites
under the Law, which yet were no Ornaments to the body: What beauty did
Circumcision bring to the body? or the shaving of the Levites? Numb. 8. It
signified rather a neglect of outward ornament, or bodily adorning.

5. Suppose it had been an ornament to the Nazarites, who had Gods special
command for what they did; yet does it not follow, that therefore it is an
ornament to us who have no such command?

I shall conclude this point with the words of that See M. Rich: Rogers on
Judge. 13. 4. 5. p. 617.
man of God; a man famous in his generation for his industry and piety. This
disguised wearing of long hair (says he) is a foul abuse. I think there are
few of them that will defend themselves by the practice of the Nazarites; if
they did, yet the world would convince them, as being (for the most part)
farthest off from the strict worship of God, and sincere walking after his
will, as the Nazarites did: if they do not also mock and scorn those that
embrace it. Methinks it is strange, and argues somewhat more than common for
the badnesse of it, that among many changes of corrupt English fashions, worn
out and expired; yet this unnatural fashion (as S. Paul calls it; for a man to
wear long hair, has survived them all: I know some nourish it for amorus
lightness of mind, others as a supposed ornament to their person, or mark of
gentry, or (at least) imitation of Gentlemen. These (as I think) might more
wisely forbear it now (seeing it is become the fashion and habit of the basest
Swaggerers and Ruffians, and the Devils mark which he has set upon many that
will not be reformed) than at the first, when they used it either as an Ensign
or an ornament. It was the speech of a worthy and reverend Judge of the Land,
that the use of the long lock was first taken up by branded fellows for a
cover of their shame: And that honorable person in his Circuit, sitting in the
place of Justice, against Malefactors, practiced according to the former
observation, Not much unlike did the religious Cromwell deal with a Ruffianly
Servingman. V. Clerks lives. p. 47. in the life of Tho; L. Cromwell.
commanding all whom he saw beset with deformed hair, to be immediately cut or
shorn, whether to discover their ear-mark, or to shame their unseemly guise, I
know not; and yet many of them (far enough from Nazarites, all may think) set
as much by their hair as if they had put Religion therein etc. Thus he.

The ninth OBJECTION.
Christ was a Nazarite, and wore long Christus fuit (...) Nazaraeis. Sal.
Dialog. p. 100.
hair: This appears by ancient popish Painters, who pictured Christ very
beautifully, with fine hair, very long, lying on his shoulders; and from Mat.
2. ult. he shall be called a Nazarene.

Answ. 1. For Christ's external beauty, it is contray to two plain texts of
Scripture, Isaiah 52. 14 and 53. 2. His outward appearance was so exceeding
mean and contem pible (more than the ordinary fashion of the Sons of men) as
that those who beheld it, were astonished to see such a Majesty shrouded in so
plain and homely an outside.

2. It is very probable (if not certain) that Christ wore short hair for
these reasons:

1. Christ could not sin against Nature, for there was no sin found in him.

2. The Apostle durst not have said it had been a shame, and uncomely to have
long hair, if Christ himself had worn it long.

3. Christ was no Nazarite (though he was of Nazareth, or a Nazarene in respect
of habitation, and of his education in the City of Nazareth, hence he is called
a Nazarene, (Math. 2. ult.) but not a Nazarite. And this appears,

1. Because he drunk wine and strong drink (Mat. 11. 19. Luke 22. 18.) which no
Nazarite might do. Numb. 6. 2. 3.

2. He touched the dead, which was unlawful for the Nazarite to do.

3. Though he was no Nazarite in the Letter and Ceremony, yet in the morality
and truth of the thing, he was the only perfect Nazarite; never any so
temperate, V. Piura apud Doctis. Spanheim. Dub. 91, 92, 93.
so active in preaching, praying, doing, and suffering for us:

Obj. We read of Christ's locks, Cantic. 5. 11. and 6. 5. thy locks are bushy
(or curled) and black as a Raven.

A. The whole book of the Canticles Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa.
Similia ad pompam, non ad pugnam: illustram, at nih^ probant.
is an high Allegory, of which this is one strain. Now similitudes and
allegorical speeches, make no grounded Arguments: Christ is called a Vine, yet
does it not follow that therefore he is a natural Vine, so (Cant. 6. 8.) he is
said to have threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, yet does it not
follow that therefore Polygamy, or the keeping of Concubines is lawful.

2. We may not so expound one place of Scripture, as to make it contradict
another: Now if you take this Text in the Letter, you will make Christ to wear
bushy, curled, beautiful locks, and so it would contradict many other places
of Scripture, which condemn long hair and curling of the locks: 1 Pet. 3. 3,
4. and 2. 9. Besides, it is said of Christ, that for outward beauty he had
none. Isaiah 53. 2.

3. It Is an allusion of the Nazarites, who (according to the Law) did wear
long hair: Now Christ being a Nazarite in the truth of the thing, though not
in the letter, is said to have locks in a spiritual sense, viz. to express
that spiritual beauty, might and strength which was in him, and not to
countenance curling or crisping of the hair, which the Scripture generally
condemns.

The tenth OBJ.
There are none but a few precise fools which condemn long hair they are a
pack S. Paul was one that condemned long hair, yet I hope he was no precise
fool.
of Grossum caputs, scrupulous Ingnoramusses, and selfe-conceited
Melancolico's, who stumble at straws and leap over blocks, who love to contend
de lana caprina, and make much ado about a matter of nothing: they have no
Scripture, no ancient Fathers, no modern Divines that ever condemned long
hair, it is a mere figment of their own inventing.

Ans. This is their last refuge, I see, and Morsus morientiu^ bestia u^n (...)
(...) esse mortiferi. Aristot.
that makes you so fierce.

1 They were not a few nor were they fools that have t^stified against long
hair; but they were men famous in their generations, for Wisdom and for
Piety, as Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Paul, Austin Jerome many Synods, besides those
renowned Lights of our own age, Calvin, Polanus Junius Perkins, Reynolds,
Rogers, etc. We have a cloud of witnesses against you.

2. The nourishing of long hair is not so small a matter as you imagine. Is it
a small matter to sin against the light of Nature, against the Word of God,
and the Example of his choicest Servants? We may esteem nothing little that is
Nihil est parvum in lege Dei, sed omnia magna quia magnus legislater. Pisc.
offensive to God, or a breach of his commands: Christ tells us (Matthew 5. 19.)
that of what rank or degree soever he be, that shall by Doctrine or Practice
transgress the least of Gods commands, he shall be of no account in Gods
Church here, nor have any part in Heaven: And (to speak properly) there is n^
sin in its own nature considered that is See Brook's devices of Satan. p. 27.
etc.
small, because there is no small God to sin against, no small price paid for
sin, and no little punishment due to sin, for the wages of sin, be it great or
small, is death, Romans 6. 23. the least missing of the mark is an error as well
as the greatest, and both alike for kind, though not for degree. Hence God
has severely punished disobedience in small matters, as eating a forbidden
Apple, looking into the Arc, gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath day, Lots
Wife for looking back, etc. Qui minim^ spernit paulatim decidit. Aug.
Besides, the slighting of little sins makes way for greater; the Devil
desires but little at first, he would have you but taste of his broth (Isaiah
65. 4.) for then he knows ere long you will eat of his Beef: If then the
wearing of long hair be a sin, as the Arguments make it clear to any
unprejudiced man; beware of venturing on it, left by your wilful breach of one
of Gods commands, at last you come to make conscience of none at all, James 2.
10. He that seems to keep the whole Law, and yet willingly allows himself
in the breach of one, he performs true obedience to none, as Herod: The bond
of all is broken, the authority of all is slighted, and that evil disposition
that causes a man to venture on the breach of one, will (when offered) venture
on the breach of any. I shall conclude with the words of a learned and
laborious Gentleman: That which is most M. Pryn against Love-locks. p. 34.
suitable to nature, to the condition of our sex, and the custom of our
country, and and does most adorn, commend, and beautify us in the eyes of
God, and of the best, the wisest, and greatest part of men, that is most
beautiful and commendable; But short hair, or hair of a moderate, ordinary,
grave and decent length, is most suitable and proportionable to nature, to the
condition of our sex, and custom of our country, (to all which long hair is
contrary) therefore short hair is most beautiful and commendable, both in the
sight of God, and of the best, wisest, gravest and greatest part of men, who
approve it as the best and comeliest wear, both in their judgment and
practice, etc.

I have now but one word of exhortation and admonition, suffer that to prevail
with you, and I have done.

1. Let me in the bowels of love and tenderness, beseech those that are young,
especially such as intend to Ministry, to take heed of getting (now in their
tender years) a habit of Pride Levity and Vanity, lest Sin and Satan, at last
plead prescription; Oh that they would consider how hard it is to break an
evil custom, Jer. 13. 23. a Blackmore may as soon change his skin, and a
Leopard his spots, as those who are accustomed to do evil, can learn to do
well: Besides, these are times of lamentation and sore affliction; and
therefore as Gods people, in times of great grief, were wont to poll their
heads, and cut off their hair. Job 1. 20. Ezekiel. 7. 18. Micha 1. 26. So should
we in this day of Jacobs trouble, cut off our proud effeminate locks, and give
up our selves to mourning before the Lord for all the abominations of these
licentious times. Consider that long hair is now become a national sin, and
therefore the more like to bring national plagues. Remember what befell
long-hair'd Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 20. who was hanged in his own hair, that
wherein he chiefly Alterius perditio fit tuae cautio.
gloried, being made by God the instrument of his ruin. Consider, how God
threatens to wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy Pates of such as go
on still in their sin. Psalm 68. 21. Lastly, consider how long hair debaseth a
man, Prolixitas capillorum arguit animi levitatem, and cum mascula gravitate
pugnat Sphinx. Basilicon doron. p. 112.
and argue, either levity and lasciviousness, or cruelty and rudeness, comam
nutrire apud antiquos in viris mollitiei aut ferocia argumentum habebatur. D.
Reynolds in Apochu: King James counselling his Son, advises him not to make a
fool of himself, in disguising, or wearing long hair, or nails which are
but excrements of nature, and bewray such mis-users of them to be their
vindictive, or vain, light naturalls.

2. You that are more ancientand Superiors as Magistrates, Ministers, Tutors,
Schoolmasters Fathers, Governors, etc. you are called forth to public
employment, and have the eye of the world upon you: and therefore it concerns
you in a special manner to observe the rules and bounds of Modesty. Gravity,
Humility and Piety, in your Habit, Hair, and whole conversation, that your
good example may become presidentiall to your Inferiors, and you may teach
them not only by your words and directions, but also by your works and
actions, which is Realis magis movet, quam verbalis concio.
the most prevailing Rhetoric.

3. In all humility I beseech those Illos non corripimus, sed rogamus and
obsecramus per divinitatem and humanitatem Christi, and per charitate^ SS. ne
ultra jam ponant hoc offendiculum infirmis pro quibus Christus est mortuus,
etc. quod si post hanc admonitionem vel potius obsecrationem nostram in eo sibi
perseverandum esse putaverint, nihil aliud faciemus, quam dolebimus and
gememus. Aug. de opere Monach. c. 33.
grave and godly Divines (which in Episcopal times were noted by the profane
for their exact walking in this kind) that they would retain their former
Gravity, Humility, and Gospel-simplicity in this particular that the eyes of
Gods jealousy (who walks in the midst of his Church) may see nothing in us or
ours to displease him; but that we may all answer our Gospel Light, with
Gospel-lives; and our Gospel-principles with Gospel-conversations, that he may
delight to dwell in the midst of us, and be our God and Guide for ever; that
the wicked may be no longer hardened, the weak offended the godly grieved, nor
Gods glorious Name dishonored by us or (...).

CORONIS.
VEreor in hoc vitio plura dicere propter quosdam crinitos fratres, quornm
praeter hoc multa and pene omnia veneramur; sed quo magis eos in Christo
diligimus, eo solicitius admonemus, neque metuimus ne humilitas eoru^ respuat
admonitionem, nostra^ quando quidem and nos a talibus ubi forte titubamus aut
aberramus, cupimus admoneri, etc. Hoc ergo admonemus tam sanctos viros, ne
stultis vanorum hominum argumentationibus moveantur, and eos in hac
perversitate imitentur, quibus in caeteris long sunt dissimiles. Aug. de opere
Mon. c. 31.

Adeo sibi Demon in cincinnis placet, ut cincinnatuli nomen aliquando
usurparit, etc. Ite nunc adolescentes, ite nobiles, capillos religate,
inungite, crispate. Ite nova gloria Daemonum, inferorum deliciae; vos ille
amat, ad vestrum nomen exultat ac gestit: prostituite pudorem ac formam.
Decalvabit Dominus verticem filiarum Sion, and erit pro crispanti crine
calvitium. Isa. 3. Facessant ergo ista virorum opprobria, mascula virtutis
dedecora, nobilissimi sexus maculae, libidimis testis, infamiae nota, ab equis
and armis ad colum and pensa trudantur. Cornel. a Lapide in Levit. 19, 27:

Ut vestium nulla certa forma Christianis est praescripta, ita not capillorum;
in utrisque tamen lex humilitatis, modestiae, prudentiae spiritualis, and
aedificationis proximi observanda est, quam qui transgreditur, non leviter Deo
displicere, conscientiam laedere, fratrem infirmuns, pro quo Christus mortuus
est, offendere judioandus. Revius de usu capillitii. p. 254.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX CONTAINING Diverse REASONS AND ARGUMENTS Against Painting, Spots,
naked Backs, Breasts, Arms, etc. Together with a discovery of the Nakedness,
Madness, and Folly of the Adamits of our time, a Refutation of all their
Cavills, and removing of all those Figleaves, under which they would hide
themselves.

JEREM. 4. (...) Though thou Paintest thy face with Colors, yet shall thou
trim thy self in vain; fer thy lovers will abhor thee and seek thy life. DEUTERONOMY.
32. 5. Their Spot is not the Spot of my people. HOSEA 2. 2, 3. Let her put away
her Whoredoms out of her sight, and her Adulteries from between her Breasts,
lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day when she was borne. Veritas
per se placet, honesta per se decent,
Falsa fucis, turpia phaleris indigent.
LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham at the sign
of the Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1654.

To the courteous Readers, especially to those of the Female Sex.
Gentlewomen,

LEst you should think your selves wholly forgotten, having done with the long
Locks of Men, I shall now add a word, and but a word, concerning the Vanities
and Exorbitancies of many Women, in painting, patching, spotting and blotting
themselves. I shall do nothing out of any sour or discontented humor, but
solely and singly out of love to your souls, wishing you eternal welfare, etc.

1. It Is observed, that some women are not content with their native Beauty,
but they add painting and coloring of their faces, breasts, etc. to inamour
and ensnare others, and to kindle a fire and flame of lust in the hearts of
those who cast their eyes upon them; and so not only labor to Iubemur non
modo nostram, sed altorum etiam salutem providere, quomodo igitur fucis tuto
licebit uti, qui sunt gladii, venena, and ignes juvenum aspectantium. Pet Mart.
undo themselves, but their spectators also, contrary to Gods commands, who
wills us to seek the salvation, and not the destruction of our neighbor. This
practice of artificial painting and coloring the body, that people may seem
that which indeed they are not, is sinful and abominable, and that for these
reasons.

1. In respect of the Author Aposta^ Angeli oculos circumducto nigro (...),
and genas mendacio uboris i^ficere, and mutare adulterinis coloribus orinem
do^uerunt. Cyprian de habitu virginum. Quod (...) opus Dei est, quod fing^tur
Diaboli negotium est. Tertul. de foeminarum.
of it; Who was that? It was the Devil (say the ancient Fathers who did at
first teach lewd women this art of painting and coloring their hair and
faces; without all doubt the Devil was a great assistant to the first inventors
of it. Hieron in epist and Lae^am and in (...) ad Furiam.
Jerome says, that the painted face is not a member of Gods making, but of the
Devils marring. Haec non sunt membra quae Deus fecit, sea quae diabolus infecit.

2. As it is evil in respect of the Author, so also in respect of its Root,
it springs from the root of pride; that they might excel others, and be
admired for their beauty, they invent artificial Si pictor egregius pinxisset
imaginem, and alius plebeius ei alios colores injiceret; pictor sane
excandesceret.
forms and favors, to set upon their bodies and faces by painting: what is
this but implicitly, and interpretatively to reprehend Gods workmanship, and to
go about to correct the same which must needs be highly displeasing to him?

3. It is the badge of an harlot, rotten posts are painted, and gilded Nutmegs
Fucis tollitur pictura Dei, and meretricis assumitur.
are usually the worst. We read but of one in all the Word of God that ever
painted her self, and that was wicked Iesabell, 2 Kings 9. 30. No wonder then,
that they are ranged among harlots, who follow their guise, Ezekiel 23. 40.
when Caldaeis ut placeres, te lavisti, linisti^tibio, ornacti, ut meretrices se
ornant iturae ad amasios a Lap. in Ezekiel.
people intend to set or let their houses, they use to paint them; though I
dare not say they are all harlots that paint; yet this I may safely say, they
have the harlots badge, and their chastity is questionable; and therefore let
all who would be accounted modest matrons, abhor it; it becomes not the
spouse of Christ to go in the harlots guise.

4. It Is contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel, which forbids all gayish
attire, and sinful gu^ses. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 3. and if they may not
adorn themselves with gold silver, and (which yet in some cases are lawful)
much less with Painting, which is utterly unlawful. The beauty of Gods people
is an inward beauty (Ps. 45. 13.) consisting in holiness, humility, meeknss,
modesty, mercy, etc. no matter what the skin, or outside be, so it be well
within. The people of God must not contend with the people of the World about
fashions, indulgence in such cases cannot stand with sincerity.

5. Lying is unlawful; but this painting and disguising of faces, is no better
than dissimulation and lying; they teach their faces to lie, and to show what
it is not; and so by deceiving others, at last they deceive themselves, getting
deformity Fucus faciei est deformatio Dei ipsius operis in nobis, and
damnabilis. Danaeus.
instead of beauty, losing that true beauty which they have by Nature, by their
Medicines and Mineralls, often making their faces to wrinkle, their color pale,
often poison their skin, and dim their ey-sight, etc. Thus they that follow
lying vanities, forsake their own mercies; we are often commanded to walk
before the Lord in sincerity and truth; but in painting is neither sincerity
nor truth, nothing but cousening and deceit: Christ says, Math. 5. 36. No man
can make one hair white or black, but those by their Diabolical art, can make
black hair white, and white hair black.

6. It is scandalous, and of evil report amongst Gods people, it grieves the
godly, and hardens the wicked: We never read in all the book of God, of any
Saint that did ever thus paint and spot themselves; and therefore let every one
be content with those favors and features which the most wise God has given
them, esteeming that complexion to be best for them, be it what it will be,
either better or worse; for if we may not blend Cum ipsas merces fucare non
licet, qua^ minus vultum?
our wares, much less may we go about to change our countenances; and if a
curious workman cannot endure to have his work controuled, think we that God
will bear it at our hands?

7. Such painting will not be able to endure the fire of Gods wrath. Jer. 4.
30. especially it will off at the fire of the great day.

Obj. The great Objection is, They paint, and spot themselves, to adorn
themselves, and make themselves lovely in the eyes of men: if they want
Husbands, this (say they will be a means to allure them: if they have
Husbands, this will help to please them, according to that 1 Cor. 7. 34. the
married woman cares how she may please her Husband.

A. 1. They are but sorrily adorned who adorn themselves with sin, as if one
should go tumble in some filthy kennell, thinking thereby to make himself more
comely: now sin is called mire, filth, folly, a blot, pollution, dung, death,
etc.

2. We should rather study how to please God, by walking in ways of modesty
and piety, than sinful man by walking in ways of pride and vanity. Such as
make it their work to please men are not the Servants of Christ Gal. 1. 10. the
ground of this painting, is man-pleasing; and if the Apostle would not study
man-pleasing in antiquated Ceremonies, which yet had their rise from God, why
Iuunge ochlos tuos non stibio Dialobico, sed collyrio Christi. Cyprian.
then should any be solicitous to please men in such things as have their rise
from the Devil?

3. The Apostle would have women to please their Husbands in all lawful,
honest, modest ways, but not by sinful, immodest, lustful guises; let them
be as careful as they please, to please their Husbands in all that good is,
and without guile: for as Servants must observe their Masters commands only in
the Lord, so Wives must observe their Husbands commands no further than may
stand with Gods glory, remembering they have an Husband in Heaven. And if they
themselves would not be cheated so as to take an old, painted, deformed man,
instead of a fair, lovely man, why should they go about to put such fallacies
on men, that themselves cannot endure? True, a man or woman may cover a
natural defect by lawful means; but by no means may they set a new face, or
form on the body, for this were dissembling, which is condemned in deeds, as
well as in words.

4. Whereas they do these things to get them Husbands; if their natural
comeliness will not set them out, then are they mere cheaters and deceivers,
that so make themselves to be that by dressing, which they are not by nature;
and they are foolish men that judge of the fitness of women to make them wives
by their outward painting and attire, and not by the persons gifts and graces.

5. Painting is so far from making honest Husbands love their Wives, that it
makes them loath them: and if men cannot love their Wives, because God commands
them so to do, much less will they love them for their painting and patching;
and therefore women that are deformed in body, should labor by their Studeant
naturaliter deformes virtutibus and moribus quam honestissimis se commendare
atque approbare, non fucis.
piety, humility and modesty, to win their Husbands, and not by pride and
vanity, which will be bitrernesse in the end.

Arguments against naked Backs and Breasts, etc.
FOr naked Backs, Breasts, Arms etc. the very naming of this is confutation
sufficient to modest persons: yet since we are rational creatures, and must
have our judgments convinced before the affections will yield: I shall
therefore produce some reasons against this immodest fashion, too common in all
places.

1. This laying out of naked Breasts, etc. is a temptation to sin, both in
the Sunt ignes juvenum, fomenta libidinum, impud^ae men^ iudicia. Hieron.
Actor, and the vain Spectator, and so is the breach of the seventh
Commandment; where (under that great sin) all lesser sins, and all
provocations to lust, are forbidden: now naked breasts are temptations and
known provocations to uncleanness: Hence the Lord complains of Adulteries
between the Breasts. Hosea 2. 2. Let her put away her whoredoms Propheta ad
cultum meretricium alludit, quia meretrices ut alliciant homines sumptuosius se
colunt, and majore cur a fucant faciem suam, deinde ornant mammillas suas.
Calvin. How many profess openly their inward uncleanness by laying open to
the common view, their naked Breasts, as though it were a bill affixed to the
dooreposts, to signify to the passers by, that within that place dwells an
unclean heart, and that whosoever will, may there buy Honesty and Chastity at
an easy rate. Downam on Hos. 2. 2.
out of her sight, and her Adulteries from btweene her Breasts. Alluding in
this phrase (say the late learned Annotators) to unchaste Women and
Adultere^les, who set out their Breasts to allure Lovers. Whores use to
discover their filthiness much in their Breasts, eith^r in the nakedness of
their Breasts, or in those Ornaments that they hung about their Breasts, as
they were wont to do in those Countries, for the enticing of their Lovers: nor
has this Adultery of the Breasts, in the nakedness of them, been condemned
only by the people of God, but even by V. Tertul. de Veland. Virgin c. 17.
Adulteria uberum vocari potest, vel ipsa uberum in verccundae nuditas, vel alia
ornamenta quae suspensa ad ubera, ille ebrae sunt libidinis. Sanchius.
Heathens, who did not only cover their heads, but their faces also, that
their nakedness might not appear; and shall Christians fall short of Heathens?
That which is the Bedlams madness, and the Beggars misery, viz. nakedness,
that is the Whores pride, and the Strumpets glory: It is an ill sign, when
people are more curious Magna corporis cura, magna animae incuria. Sen. Sic
Ca^o Cens. ap Ammian. (...) hist lib. 16.
and careful to adorn their bodies, than their souls. To be excessively
careful about the hair and the skin, and those parts that draw the eyes;
this is crimen prostitutionis, the sin of a prostitured whore (if we may
believe De habitu mul^ebri Hones^ae matronae ubera gerunt occulta, vel amata
pretiosa inter ubera recondunt. Paraeus.
Tertullian) Pious Matrons are modest: it is only light ones, and such as are
for sale, that thus invite customers, by setting open their shop windows. God
has given us clothes wherewith to cover our bodies in a decent, modest,
frugall manner, Hos. 2. 19. I gave them Wool and Flax to cover their
nakedness: Sin has made nakedness shameful, so that now it needs a cover.
Hence nakenesse is reckoned as a curse, Deuteronomy. 28. 48. but affected nakedness
is a curse with a witness, even monstrous pride; and therefore great is the
folly of those, who have their garments made on such a fashion, that their
necks and breasts are in great part left naked; a sinful and abominable
practice! For sin has so horribly stained and d^siled our whole bodies, and
covered them with shame, that if it were possible, and necessity would permit
it, the whole body, both face and hands, should all be covered: hence God has
made garments to cover our naked bodies (Genesis 3. 10. 27.) which must be wholly
covered, leaving only our hands and faces open and bare for necessity sake. It
is true, nakedness, before the Fall, was an ornament and glory to our first
Parents, they were free from sin, and so from shame; Genes. 2. 25. they were
both naked and were not ashamed; such purity, simplicity, and perfection was in
body and soul, that they found no unwholsomenesse or uncomelinesse in this
condition. But now, since the Fall, nakedness is become a curse, and a
reproach: Hence Adam (after the Fall) seeing himself naked fled from the
presence of God, and hid himself for very shame (Genesis 3. 78. getting
fig leaves to cover his nakedness. Great then is the immodesty and impudency
of those who glory in their Ranters say they have attained to that perfection
in Christ, which they lost in Adam; and therefore they may go naked as he did,
living above sin and shame.
shame, and lay open many parts of their bodies more than need requires. But
above all, fie on those filthy Adamites, and impudent fly blown kind of
Anabaptists, who think cloths are a curse, and are given to man for a
punishment of sin, and are badges of his sin: But now by Christ they are
restored to that original purity and perfection, Adamitae cujus imitantur in
Paraediso nuditate^, ante peccatum. Nudi mares foeminaeque convenient, nudi
audiunt, orant, celebrant Sacramenta. August. de Haeresib. cap. 31.
which Adam had in the state of Innocence, and therefore they will go naked as
he then did: Hence it is, that the men and women pray naked together, hear the
Word and celebrate the Sacrament naked. This is an old Heresy, broached before
S. Austins time, in the year 132. above 1500 years ago, yet now it begins to
spring up amongst us under the name of New-light, and some, both men and women
(given up to a reprobate sense) in many parts of the land, are come to that
height of Atheistical impudency, and desperate Rantisme, that they are are
not ashamed to appear in the Public (naked.) But if some speedy and special
course be not taken, to punish such abominations; God (who will by no means
acquit the wicked) will certainly punish us, and strip us naked, as in the day
when we were born (Hos. 2. 3.) and will make us as notorious for his
judgments, as ever we have been for blessed for covering their Fathers
nakedness, (Genesis 9. 23. 26.) then they must expect a curse, who uncover their
own.

But to discover the folly of these men, or rather * beasts, I will put what
they Belluini bomines, Americani, Cannibales, qui honestum and curpe nihilo
magis curant quam bestiae, nuditate non erubescunt. Paraeus.
say into a Syllogism, thus:

Those who are as pure as Adam in the The heathenish Britains went naked, and
painted their bodies blew.
state of Innocence, need no cloathin^g This is granted.

But the Adamits of our time are as pure as Adam in the state of Innocence:
That is denied; for it can never be made good: yea, the Foedis hoimnibus
perplacent foedi mores. Vide Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 14. c 17. c. 20.
swearing, lying, whoring, and open profaneness of this sect, declares their
Impiety, and not their Innocence to the world. It is true indeed, that in one
sense they are like Adam, and may fitly be called Adamits, viz. for their sin,
rebellion, and Apostatizing from God as Adam did, like sons of Adam they
transgress the covenant, and hide their sins as he did etc. but for any
goodness, it is far from them.

2. For fuller satisfaction, we must consider man in a threefold estate. Quia
tune induti erant^magine Dei, seu vest innoeenti^ and sanctitatis. Ravenel.


I. In the state of Integrity before the Fall, and so he was without sin or
shame, and had no need of clothing.

II. Consider him in his lapsed and fallen condition, and so he is full of
sin and shame, and has great need of clothing.

1. For necessity, to preserve our bodies in life and health, to save from the
pinching cold and parching heat.

2. For Honesty, to hide and cover the deformity of our naked bodies; therefore
so soon as ever Adam and Eve had fallen, God gave them clothing: Genesis 3. 21.
and in this respect, Christ himself, though he were truly righteous, and had
no sin, yet went he not naked, but showed his respect to modesty and common
honesty. And if the Apostle would not suffer a woman to come with a naked
uncovered head into the Assembly 1 (Corinth. 11. 15.) much less would he
suffer her to come stark naked among them: Yea, though we be regenerate, and
have our inward man clothed with Christ's righteousness, yet since our
regeneration (as all our other graces) is but in part; and we still carry about
us a body of sin and so are obnoxious unto shame; therefore we have, and still
shall have, need of clothing in this world, both for necessity and common
honesty.

III. Consider man in the state of Glorification, Ubi nullus est pudor, nulla
concupiscentia, nullum frigus, null a opus est vest aut luce. a Lap.
as free from sin and misery, and so they shall have no need of clothing,
but shall be like the Angels, and shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father.

Yet since these men are not mad without some show of Scripture and Reason, I
shall briefly answer their Cavils.

Obj. 1. Isaiah (say they) prophesied three years naked, Isa. 20. 2, 3, 4. 2.
Saul coming amongst the Prophets, prophesied naked. 3. So Micah 1. 8. 4. Peter.
John 21. 7.

Answ. Diverse Answers are given.

1. Some conceive that this was not Triennium hoc in visione, uno momento
comprehendit, sicut in somno solet breve tempus multum apparere. Occolam.
really done by the Prophet, 'twas only a prophetical Vision, as Hosea 1. 2,
3. which might be represented in a moment, like Ezekiel his lying on each side
so many days, and eating dung: Ezekiel. 44. 6. 15. for it is not probable (say
they) that the Lord would command the The litterall sense is to be left, when
it is contrary to Modesty, Piety, or good Manners. Weems. 1 Vol. p. 232.
Prophet to do such an immodest thing, as to go up and down and preach
publicly three years stark naked: Besides, how could he endure the
Extremities of heat and cold? etc.

2. Others conceive, and that upon better grounds, that this was really done,
How else could he be a sign and wonder to them? ver. 3. Not that the Prophet
went stark naked, the Text does not say so; it only says (ver. 2.) Go loose
the sackoloath from off thy loins, and thy shoe from thy foot, and he did
Nudus i. e. exutus tog a non indusio, hoc enim pugnasset cum honestate. Pisc.
so. God bids him only put off his prophetical Robe, or Mantle; he must put
off his upper garment, which was Sackcloth, or some other rough garment which
the Prophets used to wear in those days. 2 Kings 1. 8. Zech. 13. 4. Matthew 3.
4. But it cannot be proved, that he put off that garment which was next his
skin. He was indeed to go stripped as a Prisoner, or Captive, who were not
wont to be led stark naked, but Nudus catacbresti^s fig. male vestitum ut Deuteronomy
28. 45. 1 Cor. 4. 1 Job 22. 6. V. Ravanel. in Vorbo Nudus. Saul dicitur nudus
i. e. deposito amiotu regio ^ecinisse. a Lap
ill clothed, in single and sorry suits: And thus the word naked is commonly
used in Scripture, viz. when a man goes in his inner raiment only, without
his upper garment. Thus Saul prophesying, is said to put off his clothes, that
is, his upper garments: 1 Samuel 19. 24. for it cannot be imagined, that he
prophesied stark naked, it being so unseemly a thing, and against the law and
light of Nature, since the Fall.

2. A more genuine answer is given, viz. that Saul, before the spirit of
prophecy came upon him, had on him his warlike attire, where with he went out
to pursue David; but when the spirit came upon him, then he put off his
military habit, and went in the attire of a Prophet, and so prophesied. Thus
(Mic. 1. 8.) the Prophet, to express his deep Exutus vest exteriore. Pisc.
humiliation, went stripped and naked, that is, he was stripped of his Prophets
weed, and upper garments, as they used to go in times of great sorrow, Isa.
32. 11. the women must strip themselves, i. e. they must put off their bravery
and best apparel, and gird on sackcloth. So Peter (John 21. 7.) girt his
fishers (...), amiculum, (...) (i. e.) a superinduendo. V Leigh. Crit.
coat to him, for he was naked; he was not wholly naked before, but he put upon
him an upper coat (for he was clad after the manner of Fishers, with some close
inner garment only) and having girt it to him, out of an earnest desire to
come to Christ, he cast himself into the Sea.

3. I answer, by way of Concession; Should we grant that Isaiah prophesied
three years stark naked; yet will it not follow, that therefore our Libertines
may take the like liberty (unless they mean to starve themselves) for what
the Prophet did here, he did by special command from God, and for a special
end, as appears ver. 2, 3. God Ne^ considerandum est quid quispiam interdum
faciat, sed quid (...) (i. e.) saepe ac majori ex part fieri consueverit. Ut
loq. Causidici.
bids him go loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, etc. He has a command
and commission for what he did: when any can show the like special command
they may do the like. 2. He did it but once; now one swallow does not make a
spring, nor does one action denominate.

Seven Arguments against Spots, and Black-patches (worn for pride) on the Face,
etc.
AS for Spots and Black-patches on the Face, Back, Breast, etc. which some call
Beauty-spots (the Devil loves to put fine names on foul things) we may call
them base and Beastly-spots, the spots of the proud, wanton, idle Droans of the
world. Let such consider,

1. That these spots are not the spots of Gods Children: Deuteronomy. 32. 5. These are
not spots of Infirmity, but spots of Malignity and Rebellion; they are proud,
and they will be so; they are spotted, and spotted they will be, in despite of
all the Ministers in the world. These are Leprosie-spots, not Beauty-spots,
spots that defile and debase, but no whit adorn the wearers of them. Such
spots, many times, are the husbands blots. Christ's Spouse knows no such spots,
Cant. 4. 7. she is wholly fair, and there is no spot (of wilful pride or
vanity) in her: her modest, grave, and plain attire we must follow, and not
the fashion of every vain fantastic person.

2. Consider, if the Plague-spots appear Sin-Spotts are the worst spots; we
must be spotless as if Sons of God, Phil. 2. 15. (i. e.) without such spots we
are unsuitable to our Sonship, some are so be spotted that they are called
Spots. Jude 12. He that has many spots is not forward to hold up his face,
then how shall he who is a spot? Garyll on Job 22. 15.
on a person, or a garment be infected with it, we will not come nigh them; but
these spots are worse, for those are but spots of Punishment, by which God is
glorified; but these are spots of Pride and Vanity, by which God is
dishonored, his Name blasphemed, and Religion scandalized, especially if they
be Professors, such as pen Sermons, and sit before the Lord as his people; it
were well if such would lay down their Pens, and pull off their Patches,
either Profess less, or Practice more; for as Jacob complained of his Sons,
that by their cruelty and treachery, they had made him odious, and to stink in
the nostrills of the nations amongst which he lived; so these make Religion to
be abhorred; they are spots in our Fasts, and blots in our Feasts, (Jude 12. 2
Pet. 2. 13.) the botches of Christian Society.

3. This is a conforming our selves to the sinful fashions of the age we live
in, contrary to Rom, 12. 2. Fashion not your selves like to this world; and at
our Baptism we openly renounced all the Pomps and Vanities of the world, of
which this spotting is one.

4. Christians must not only shun evil, Viti^ ad^sus utra^que ^gis (...) (...)
^unda gra^antia fug^s. Pa^aeus.
but they must also shun the appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. they must
hate, not only the garments, but the faces also that are spotted, with the
flesh; Jude 23. they must keep themselves, not only unblotted, but also
unsported of the world; many will shun the gross blots, but we must shun the
lesser spots of the world. James 1. 27.

5. Such cannot worship God, or pray to him with comfort: With what a face
(...) such a one come into the presence of the most h^ly God, whose Eyes are
(...) (...) of fi^ to c^sume them, and his Feet as brass (Rev. 1. 14, 15.) to
break in pieces those that carry such ensigns of pride and vanity in their
faces, backs, and breasts? And though they should pray, yea, and make many
prayers, yet God will not hear, so long as they walk in ways of rebellion
against him. Isa. 1. 15.

6. By thy evil example thou infectest others, thy pride makes others proud,
thy painting and patching makes young ones do so, to the endangering of their
chastity; for though some young ones, for the present, may be chaste (being led
to this folly by the example of their superiors, by fond education, or the
iniquity of the times) yet few, or none that practice this nakedness,
painting, etc. being of years of discretion, but give just cause of jealousy
and suspicion: we should rather study to be patterns of piety ^o others; and as
our Predecessors were careful of their walking, that they might be exemplary
to us, so we should be careful of our ways, that we might be exemplary to
others; for when we are in our graves, yet our examples live, and may be
presidentiall to others for good, as the example of the wicked is for evil. It
was the glory Magna vis est in exemplis in utramque partem. ^olloe in Johan.
13. 17. mihi p. 736. Quam Sanctus est Deus qui tam pure and sancte (...)
Christianis colitur, imo qui eos facit tam puros^ and sanctos:
of the Primitive Christians, that by their innocence, patience, unity, and
purity of life, they made the very Heathen to adore and admire their God,
saying, [O how holy is that God which has such holy followers!]

7. This monstrous pride is ever a forerunner of destruction, as we see in the
woman of Judah a little before the Captivity. Isa. 3. 16. to 26. God is the
same still, and hates pride as much in England as ever he did in Israel. He
that punished painted Iesabel, who was cast out at a window in the midst of her
pride, and eaten up with dogs, will not suffer the proud Dames of our time to
go unpunished, unless by speedy humiliation and amendment, they prevent it,
Isaiah 3. 16, 17, etc. The Prophet numbering up their several trinkets, and
parts of their pride, descends to show how the Lord would reward them in a meet
proportion: Instead of their costly perfumes and sweet smells, they should have
stink; to wit, most noisome and loathsome savours in their siege, and in the
cabins and holes, whither they that escaped should be thrust in their
Captivity, or where they should be glad to hide themselves. Instead of their
brave and costly girdles, they should have rends; that is, they should go in
tatters and rags, as poor beggars having never a whole coat to their backs.
Instead of dressing of hair, to wit, of all their frizling, crisping, curling,
laying out their hair, their perukes, the hanging down of their locks, or
tufts, or whatsoever they had, they should have baldness, when they had torn
off their hair through the extremity of misery. And instead of their rich and
costly stomachers and attires, to set them forth, they should be glad of
sackcloath, sackcloath in token of humiliation, sackcloath to cover their
shame, and burning instead of beauty. That beauty of theirs, which they had so
abused, it should now be painted with another die; it should be tanned and
burnt with the Sun, like the hu^ of the Black-moores. Brinsly on Ezekiel. 9. p.
278, 279.

CORONIS.
SI pictor egregius pinxisset imagine^, and alius plebeius ei alios colores
injiceret, pictor sane excandesceret: ita Deus naturae opifex and pictor jure
irascitur, quod ejus naturam and sapientiam accusetis inscitiae, ipsumque
creatorem damnetis imbecilitatis. Nolite ergo Dei corrumpere imaginem, neque
tentatis ea addere, quae sapienter non dedit, neque hanc adulterinam excogitare
pulchritudinem, quae vel pudicis affert excidium, vel videntibus insidias.
Theodor. in vitis Patrum.

Indignum est Christiano faciem fictam gestare, cui simplicitas indicitur;
effigiem mentiri, cui linguam non licet; appetere quod datum non sit, cui
studium pudicitiae est: quomodo praecepta Dei custodientis, lineamento Dei non
custodientes? Tertul. de habitu mulier.

Non metuis quae talis es, ne cu^ resurrectionis Dies venerit, artifex tuus te
non recognoscat and adsua praemia and promissa venientem removeat and excludat?
Increpans vigore censoris and judicis dicat: hoc opus meum non est, nec imago
haec nostra est, cutem falso medicamine polluisti, crinem adultero color
mutasti, expugnata est mendacio facies, figura corrupta est, vultus alienus
est, Deum videre non poteris, quando oculi tui non sunt, quos fecit Deus, sed
quos Diabolus infecit. Cyprian de habitu virginum. Consule locum, ibi
quamplurimas invenies sacras margaritas.

FINIS.

