A Burning and a Shining Light: A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF The late
Reverend Mr. James Wrexham, Minister at Haversham in the County of Bucks.

By John Hammat, M. A. and Vicar of Stanton-berry.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder, in the Poultrey, and Thomas Watson,
Bookseller in Newport-Pagnell. 1685.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THIS plain Sermon had not seen the Light, had it not been for the Sake, and
Desire of that dear People, to whom my Reverend Brother, and my self had a
joint Relation; and to preserve his Memory amongst those, who had the Happiness
to know him, and the Grace to love him. The Death of good Ministers (who are
our Chariots and Horsemen) is a sad Omen, and it is a sadder, they dye no more
lamented. It is reported of Philo the Jew, that he wept when he heard of the
Death of any good Man: but there are but few Philo's now: Good Men live
unbeloved by the generality, and dye unbewailed. I speak not this with respect
to my Brother, it pleased the Lord to place him more happily than most are; his
Auditors rejoiced in his Light while he lived, and when dead, with great
Lamentation carried him to his Grave. May God bless these few Lines to do that
good that is intended, and I shall be satisfied, and none will have Reason to
be dissatisfied.

Upon the Death of that Pious and Profound Divine, Mr. James Wrexham.
(I.)
BLESSED with the Sight of Artificial Men
Ranked in a Gallery, thus did I deem,
Are these their own Survivors in this room?
Or are th'Graves Prisoners loose, and hither come?
I mused upon the matter once again,
And second Thoughts corrected my Esteem.
Then I confessed,
These man are sprung from Brains and Heart,
The Progeny of Love and Art.
Then a new thought my mind possessed,
This is a teeming and improving Age,
I Will Paint a Soul. A Soul as dear as fair,
O, 'twill be rare!
When it is invested in its lively hue
Our Conversation we'll renew.
I hasted to my work, rapt with a pleasant rage.
(II.)
I got such Colors as I judged most fit,
The Flame color, I thought would do,
Together with the heavenly Blue,
My Knowledge was the enlight'ned Air;
My Heart, the Chair
In which the Darling of my Thoughts did sit.
I took my Pensil and began to draw,
I scarce had drawn a Line,
But, lo! I saw
An Heaven-born Muse, the gravest of the Nine.
Said she, What mean those Colors there?
I answered readily,
A Soul is in my Eye,
A splendid Soul. I Will paint it on this Table here.
The Flame will show its quick Ascent,
The Blue will show its Element.
O how I pleased my self, that my account was fair!
(III.)
But pleasant Errors are but Childrens Plays,
She with a gentle smile replied,
The blue and the bright-flowered Curtains hide
What shines un-envy'd on the other side.
But these
To Mortals do forbid the glorious Rays.
Moreover,
Thou Wilt draw a Shine, but can thou paint the heat,
The Vitals of his Soul, and how his Heart did beat?
Can thou discover
His quick and mighty Zeal?
Pure Zeal that issued from above,
Composed of Prudence and of Love.
Can paint the Pleasures which into his Soul did steal?
Towering Eagles, winged Boys,
Are but faint Emblems of Devotional Joys.
A golden Mouth does fall within thy bounds,
But can thou paint his heavenly sounds?
She further said,
His depths of Learning cannot be portrayed
By your poor Pensil -- He has done it with his Quill.
(IV.)
He was the Jonah of the Age;
Buried alive: In horrors Gulf involved,
Yet undissolv'd.
The Artist was too wise to engage
To draw sad Agamemnon's Face,
When he his Iphigenia did bewail,
But overcast it with a Vail,
And left it to Spectators to spell out the Case.
Tremble, weak Hand, none of thy strokes can show
How he did conflict with the Fiends below.
He went into the deeps to learn;
And O, the pious Myst'ries he did there discern!
(V.)
But, lo! our Jonah comes a shore,
And the Leviathan never touched him more.
Then cheerfully he went,
Whither he was most wonderfully sent,
He preached unto his Ninevites, Repent.
His Words were lightning, of an heavenly rise,
Which spared the Person, but consumed the Vice.
O how his Hearers were to him enchain'd,
Whilst he the Sacred Text explained!
He sick'ned there,
In Moses Chair.
And he with Moses on the Mount did dye,
With Canaan in his Eye.
But can your Colors tell
The Glories of an heavenly Throne?
O whither, whither is he gone!
This said; she left me all alone.
I stood amazed -- And down my Pensil fell.
Upon the Death of that Faithful Servant of Christ, Mr. James Wrexham.
COME Tears, ye pearly dewes; your Forces join,
To wash the Body of a great Divine.
Lament, O England, at a Prophets Tomb,
One Pillar's fall does sorely shake the Room.
Late monstrous Stars did look us into fear,
What think we, when our kind Stars disappear?
Needs must a dreadful Darkness us surround,
When Lamps are Tapers watching under Ground.
Ha'rsham, Lament. Thy pleasant Sermon Bell
Is turned into a doleful Funeral-Knell.
You were the Field, where he bestowed his Pains,
In hopes to reap your Graces for his Gains.
Your Chancels Northern part bedew with Tears,
In memory of your former golden Years.
Ah, Loss on Loss! What Heart can this abide?
The young one sleeping by the old Prophet's side.
Children, Lament. Your Catechist is gone,
Your Morning's over-cast, which lately shone.
Both Young and Old, Lament your mighty Loss,
Ye wore the Crown, but now you bear the Cross.
But he, whose Heart does not Lament his fall,
Deserves to be lamented most of all.
A BURNING AND A Shining Light, etc.
JOHN 5.35. He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light.


OUR Savior in the Context speaks of four Witnesses, who attested that he was
the Christ, the Son of God; his Father, his Works, the Scriptures, and John the
Baptist. The Testimony of John Baptist (which was argumentum ad hominem) he
produced ex abundanti, q.d. The Testimony of a wise and good man, weighs with
men; and such a one John Baptist was esteemed to be by you, (the Jews we know
had a great Veneration for him, and many of them have at this day) ye consulted
him concerning the Messiah, he denied that he was the Person, and bore witness
of me, and ye rejoiced in his Light, the light of his Life, and the light of
his Ministry. This I might insist on, and expect that ye should believe,
because of his witness, who was a burning and a shining Light, a Prophet that
might be credited; but I receive not Testimony from man; I have greater
Witnesses; neither do I speak it out of Ambition, but for your Edification and
Salvation.

The Text contains first, an Encomium which our Savior gave of John Baptist,
either after his Imprisonment or Death, (Divines determine not which) his
evident 't was when he was taken off from his public Ministry.

He was a burning and a shining Light.

Secondly, A Reprehension of the Jews for being so soon weary of his Ministry.
Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his Light. Or, if you will, an
Account of the great Minister and Prophet John Baptist: He was etc.

Thirdly, an Account how the Jews (to whom he was sent) behaved themselves
under his Ministry: Ye were willing etc.

You have in the Text these four Observables.

Doct. 1. First, Faithful Ministers are burning and shining Lights, or Candles,
or Lamps, (...), Candela, Lueerna: He was a burning and shining Light.

Doct. 2. Secondly, These burning and shining lights will be extinguished. He
was, etc. He was, but now is extinct, burns and shines no more to you; Alas,
that we must say so now of our Reverend Brother, he was a burning and shining
Light: how soon is this great Lamp put out? How splendidly did he shine, and
cast his Rays farther than this Parish; but now he is gone; why so soon, it
behooves us seriously to enquire.

Doct. 3. Thirdly, The generality are pleased with a faithful Minister only for
a little time. And ye were willing to rejoice, (...), for an hour; it signifies
a short season, an hour being a small part of time. When a Minister is newly
come to them, they are pleased with his blameless Life, and affecting Sermons,
they flock to hear him, and admire at the gracious Words that proceed out of
his Mouth, as the Jews did at Christ, Luke 4.22. Yea, are ready to adore him,
as the Lycaonians, Paul and Barnabas. Acts 14.11, 12. etc. But alas, the Scene
is quickly changed, his serious Exhortations, and Reproofs, and holy Life prick
their Consciences, and disturb them in their pursuit of sinful Gains and
Pleasures: or some malicious Tongues bring up evil Reports of him: and then
they hate and despise him, as much as before they loved and honored him.
Blessed be God, I cannot say this of you: you were constantly forward to attend
on the Ministry of the word (which is the Glory of this Parish; Oh that you
might never lose it.) Your Pastor dyed lamented by you, (as well he might)
it is your Grief that you had but a short season to rejoice in his Light: Ah,
short indeed! but three or four years did he burn and shine amongst us, and he
is extinguished; he did not go out of himself, as some Hypocrites, who blaze
for a little time, but wanting a stock of Oil, having not the root of the
Matter in them, go out in a snuff, and leave a stink behind them: no, God
extinguished him, who burnt strong and bright, until God did it; yea brighter
and brighter, the longer he continued. But it may be said thus of many; ye see
it is of John Baptists Auditors in my Text, and of the Lycaonians in Acts 14.

Doct. 4. Fourthly, Some Hypocrites will rejoice for a time in a faithful
Minister; yea; glory that they have such a Minister: So the Word (...)
signifies, ye were willing to glory in his Light, the Expression is full, ye
were willing, ye were forward to do it, ye pleased your selves in doing it.
These are called by Divines, temporary Believers, who have a Faith (as one
elegantly describes it) that buds, and blossoms with some tastes, and joys in
the things of God, but never comes to Fruit. They are likened by our Savior to
stony ground, Mark 4.16, 17. which has not Earth enough for the feed to root
in, and therefore it is scorched and withered as soon almost as it springs up.

Doct. 5. Fifthly, and lastly, God observes how Ministers discharge their
Function, and how their People are under their Ministry. He observes what
Ministers burn and shine, and who do not; and who hate and scoff at the Word,
and who rejoice in it, yea, and what effect it has on our Lives. Oh, how
careful then should both Ministers and People be, since God's Eye is upon them?
You see God took notice that John Baptist was a burning and a shining light,
and that the Jews were willing to rejoice but for a season in his light; and
the same All-seeing Eye observes you, and me, and every Minister and his
Auditors.

We shall insist on the first Doctrine, taken from the Character Christ gives
of John Baptist.

Doct. Faithful Ministers are burning and shining Lamps, or Candles.

It was usual with the Jews, to call a Person, that was eminent for knowledge
and a good Life, Lucerna, a Lamp: hence those Titles of the Rabbis, lucerna
legis, the candle of the Law, for one versed in the Law: and lucerna looi sui,
for one famous in the Place where he lives. And the Scripture (you see) makes
use of the same Metaphor. There are other Metaphors in Scripture by which
Ministers are described, as Salt, Stars, etc. But we will keep to the Metaphor
in the Text, and enquire briefly, first, why they are compared to a Lamp or
Candle. Secondly, why they are said to be burning Candles. Thirdly, why
shining. And lastly, apply it.

First, Why are they called Lamps or Candles. The Reasons are, first, because
it is a dark Place in which they shine, Earth, which is sadly overspread with
Ignorance, and Infidelity. Over the Minds of most, there is such a thick
darkness that they know nothing of the things of God; and the best see but
through a Glass darkly. The brightest part of the Earth, is but a Dungeon
compared with Heaven, where the Lord God and the Lamb is the Light. We are sent
to give Light to the Children of the Night, and therefore are fitly compared to
Candles.

Secondly, Because our light is but small, and reaches but a little way; so
that there is need of many Ministers to enlighten the World.

The Sun gives Light to the whole Earth, and other Luminaries borrow their
Light from it, and therefore Jesus Christ is compared to the Sun, he is Fons
Lucis, the Fountain of Light, from whom Ministers have theirs. Some Ministers
are bigger Candles than others, and Stars of a greater Magnitude, but yet they
are but Candles, and Stars, they are not the Sun. Every faithful Minister has
boundless desires of doing good, he would have (if possible) what St.
Chrysostom desired, all the World for his Auditory, and a Voice like Thunder,
that might reach them, he would instruct, and save all; but alas, he can
instruct but few; he is but a Candle, whose rays reach not far.

Thirdly, They are called Candles, because they endure but a short time. A
Church indeed God will ever have; the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it:
it lives in the Flames, as the Bush, its emblem. Exo. 3.2. But particular
Members, and Pastors, as well as others dye. Some burn longer than others, but
they that burn longest, burn but a time; and usually, they that burn clearest,
are soonest out, as our Reverend Brother, and diverse other famous Divines. And
hence also, because of their Frailty, and Mortality, they are called earthen
Vessels; We have (says the Apostle) this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the
excellency of the Power might be of God, and not of Man. 2. Cor. 4.7. On
therefore you that have good Ministers, walk in their Light while they shine
amongst you; for you cannot enjoy them long, they will be extinguished. Zach.
1.5. Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets? do they live for ever? No,
they dye as other Men.

Fourthly, As they are called Candles, because they will burn out; so because
they waste in giving Light, their Spirits, and Strength, are exhausted in
studying, and preaching, etc. It was a great Comfort to our Bishop Jewel (of
blessed Memory) when he was on his Deathbed, that his Body was wasted away in
the Labors of his holy Calling: the same we may say of our Brother, He spent
himself in the Work of the Ministry: and, as St. Austin desired, that Death
might arrest him, aut precantem, aut praedicantem, either praying, or
preaching; the Sickness that was the Death of our Brother, seized him
Praedicantem, while he was preaching. Jer. 6.29, 30. The Bellows are burnt,
(that is the Lungs of the Prophets) The Lead is consumed of the Fire, (the
Exhortations, Affections, etc. of the Prophets) by which they endeavored to
draw the People from their Sins, as the Founder, by Lead melts the Silver in
order to the purifying it from Dross. Woe to those, for whom they have been
spent in vain, Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, for the Lord has rejected
them.

Fifthly, and lastly, Because there will be no need of Ministers in the Morning
of the Resurrection, as there is not of Candles, when we have the Light of the
Sun. We expect a brighter time than this before the Resurrection; when the
Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea; which will be at the reingraffing of the Jews; but it will not be day
until the Sun of Righteousness comes in the Clouds: and therefore, even then,
there will be need of Ministers; otherwise God had not appointed (as he has)
that there should be Pastors and Teachers, until all the Elect are called,
and the Body of Christ perfected, which will not be e're the end of the World.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some
Evangelists: and some Pastors and Teachers: for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ: till we
all come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
To boast that we are above Ordinances (as some do) e're the Body of Christ is
perfected, shows Ignorance and Pride, and imputes imprudence to the All-wise
God, in ordering that there should be a Ministry till that time: but then (when
the Body of Christ is edified) the Ministry will cease, all darkness will be
dispelled, we shall see Face to Face, and know as we are known.

The second thing to be enquired into, is, why they are called burning Candles.

Ans. It is because of the Zeal, the fervor of their Affections, by which they
warm the cold, benumbed Affections of their People, and kindle in them good
Desires, and Resolutions, (or rather the Spirit of God by them.) O, that there
are no more such Ministers! How lifeless are the Souls of our People under our
Ministry, because we do not burn? How can we expect that they should be
affected with our Sermons, when the Word of Life seems to dye in our cold, and
heartless preaching it? Oh, that God would fire our Affections, that we might
be instrumental to kindle good Affections in others. I have read of a Man that
gave this reason for his forsaking Paris, that he perceived their Sermons were
every day colder than other, so that he feared if he tarried there longer, he
should be spiritually frozen to death. I relate not this to justify
Separatists, but to give a hint of the Mischief of careless preaching. We want
burning Ministers in this frozen Age. Plain Sermons, preached with Affection,
will do more good than the most learned, coldly delivered. Eusebius tells us of
a Heathen, that came to an assembly of Bishops, to discourse the Articles of
Faith; and when the learned of them looked one upon another, fearing to
encounter with him, because of his acute Parts; one esteemed the meanest for
Learning, with great Ardour of Affection, told him, that unless he believed in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, he should be damned; and therefore it was in vain
to cavil, he must subject his carnal Reason to Faith: which so wrought upon
him, that he embraced the Christian Religion, and was baptized; saying, he
could answer Reason with Reason, but he could not resist the Authority with
which that Bishop spoke. Lucerna, ut luceat, ardere debet; we must burn that we
might shine. They who have not good Affections, do not, cannot give light to
others into the most spiritual Mysteries of Christianity; their Sermons are dry
and jejune, more like the Discourses of the Heathens, than Gospel Sermons: It
is seldom that they touch upon the Vitals of Religion, and when they do it is
superficial and insipid to a sanctified Sense: neither do they shine in their
Conversations; for it is Zeal that makes a Person active for God.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, why they are called shining Lamps, or
Candles. Ans. It is because they give light by their Doctrine and Example. The
Learning of some is lost for want of Zeal; and the good Affections of others
for want of Knowledge: and there are some Hypocrites that shine, and seem to
burn, to have a concern for the Glory of God, and Happiness of Souls, in the
Pulpit; but darken the light of their Doctrine by their wicked, scandalous
Conversations. Zeal without Knowledge, is fitly compared to the Fire of Hell,
which has Heat, but no Light: and they that have Learning and not Grace, to
the Toad, who (as Naturalists say) has a Jewel in his Head, but Poison in his
Belly. Theresore we must both burn and shine, have Knowledge, Zeal, and a holy
Conversation.

Appl. But alas, alas! are there not some that want a Head, and more that want
a Heart for God? and (O that I had not cause to say it) too many that want
both, and are scandalous in their Conversations? I know this Age has afforded
as many holy and learned Ministers as any, but yet there are too few; and
therefore they have cause to lament, from whom God has taken a faithful
Minister. Oh, what a Mercy is it to benighted Souls, (whose way is covered with
Snares, and who have a seducing Devil whom they are prone to follow) to have a
faithful Minister, to call them when out of the way, and show them the Way of
Life, and light them along in it? What a mercy is it to have a zealous Minister
to warm our frozen Hearts, and quicken us in the way of God? How indifferent
should we be, what became of the Interest of God, and of our Souls; how should
we settle on our Lees, if not stirred by his lively Exhortations? Alas, that
blind Sinners should be so insensible of it. Some are glad when their Lights
are gone, because they reprove their beloved deeds of darkness; but oh, how
will they repent it, when they are plunged into everlasting darkness? Oh,
Haversham, Haversham! thou had this mercy, but thou have lost it; thou art a
Candlestick, but thy Candle is gone; you had a burning and a shining Light, his
Knowledge and Example shined to you, his fervent Affections warmed you; how
gloriously did this Parish shine with his Light? it drew the Eyes of the
Inhabitants round about, and made them admire at God's goodness to you. But now
your Candle is out, and how great is your Darkness! I need not insist on this
to move you to lament your loss; I see you are sensible of it: neither will I
endeavor to stop your Sorrow. Weep on, your loss requires your Tears; and I
must bear a part with you. You have lost a faithful Pastor; I, a dear and
faithful Brother. How often have we taken sweet Counsel, and walked to the House
of God? How often have I been refreshed by his Heavenly Discourse, and Prayers?
Ah, my Brother Wrexham! distressed for thee; very pleasant have thou been unto
me.

But what have we done to provoke the Lord to inflict this heavy Judgment upon
us? Are there any that did not prize him? (would to God there were not) if
there be, they have been instrumental of pulling down this Judgment: For God
will not long vouchsafe his Mercies to those that despise them. Are there some
who love Darkness, and wished that their Light might be removed, that so they
might undisturbed enjoy their Lusts? Lo! he is extinguished. He will show you
your Sins, and trouble your Consciences no more by his Reproofs, Exhortations,
etc. But know ye, that the Light, which through him has already shined into
your Souls, will leave you inexcusable, and aggravate your Condemnation without
Repentance. John. 3.19. This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the
World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil.
They who have had, and abused most Light, will sink lowest in the dark and
bottomless Pit.

Again, Are there not some who grew more cold, while he burned amongst us? who
by an Antiperistasis were cooled by his heat? God threatened the Ephesians with
the removal of their Candlestick, for losing their first Love. Rev. 2.4, 5.
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy
first works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. And behold! your Candle is removed.

Again, Are there not some Hypocrites, who have but a name to live, to whom God
may say, as he did to Sardis, I have not found thy Works perfect before God?
some Works thou have done; thou have given me bodily Worship; but there wants a
Heart, and good Intentions, and therefore they are not perfect. God threatened
that he would come suddenly, as a Thief, upon this Church, and they should not
know at what Hour. And lo! God is come suddenly upon us, and with a surprise
snatched away our Candle. Hypocrites hide their Wickedness, and by their Cheats
impose upon the World, and Gods Judgments steal upon them. Oh! will there be
yet a Hypocrite in Haversham?

Again, Are there any proud Professors in this Place, who think they have
Knowledge enough, and Grace enough, and have no need of Ministers? (God knows
your secret Thoughts) For this Pride God threatened to spue the Laodiceans out
of his Mouth. Rev. 3.16, 17. So then because thou art lukewarm, neither hot,
nor cold, I will spue thee out of my Mouth: because thou say, I am rich, and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Oh that God might not
spue out you!

Again, Not to insist any longer on particulars; We have not improved this
Light, we were idle while the Candle Burned; and therefore God has taken him
away; we were unfruitful, while God by him dressed us, and therefore the
Labourer is called out of the Vineyard. Unfruitfulness is the desolating Sin of
Churches. Luke 13.7. Behold, these three years have I come seeking Fruit, and
found none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? It is thought, the three
years of our Saviors Ministry is intended, he now being entered upon the last
half year of it. And it is but three or four years, that your faithful Minister
labored among you, and he is taken away. O, does not this Judgment sound
through your Ears, Repent, Repent, and bring forth Fruit? for the Axe is not
only laid, but strikes at the root of the Tree.

Use. Secondly, Are faithful Ministers burning and shining Lights? then they
are to be reproved who despise and hate Ministers. Light is pleasant, one of
the most comfortable of Gods Creatures, and Ministers are Lights, why then are
not Ministers loved? So great a love and value of God's Messengers had the
Church of Old, so much were they affected with the blessed News of Peace which
they brought, that they cried out with Admiration, as if they could not express
it, How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings good
Tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings of Good, that
publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, thy God reigns, Isa. 52.7. Yea,
they esteemed the removal of their Teachers more grievous than the sorest of
temporal Calamities. Isa. 32.20. And though the Lord give you the Bread of
Adversity, and the Water of Affliction, yet shall not your Teachers be removed
into a Corner any more, but thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers. And it is
reported of St. Chrysostom's Auditors, that they said, they could better want
the Sun, than Chrysostom. But such is the Blindness, and Atheism of this Age,
that the everlasting Gospel is despised, and God's Ambassadors who publsh it:
their Auditors set at naught all their Counsels, and will have none of their
Reproofs: Instead of working for God and their Souls, they play, and sin, while
the Candles burn and shine to them, in the Hand of God, and do wish that they
were extinguished. Oh, what will be the end of this, but the loss of the
Gospel, unless God gives timely Repentance! Ye judge your selves unworthy of
it, and of Eternal Life; and the Dust of the Feet of Gods despised Ministers,
will be a Witness against you, and make your Condemnation more dreadful, than
Sodoms, or Gomorrahs: as you may see in Math. 10.14, 15. And whosoever shall
not receive you, nor hear your Words: when you depart out of that House, or
City, shake off the Dust of your Feet: Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom, and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, than for
that City.

Use. 3. Thirdly, Are Ministers Lights? then let Ministers improve the Talents
that God has given them for the Instruction, Conversion, and Salvation of
Souls. Mat. 5.15, 16. Neither do Men light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel;
but on a Candlestick; and it gives light to all that are in the House. Let
your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, You that have a faithful Minister, prize and love him, and walk in
his Light while ye have him. We also had one lately, but now he is
extinguished: take warning by our loss, and provoke not God to take away yours
likewise.

I know it is expected that I should speak something of our Reverend Brother. I
shall not give you a full draught of him. Omitting his Justice, Temperance,
etc. I shall draw some parts, which were extraordinary; And this I can do but
imperfectly; for, as Pliny says, Pictores absolutain Faciem, raro, nisi in
pejus depingunt, Painters seldom paint a very beautiful Face, but with
disadvantage. He was wholly devoted to his Ministerial work, not being careful
about the Affairs of this World: He did (as the Apostle Paul exhorted Timothy)
give himself to reading, and studying the Word; avoiding Society, but with such
as might improve him, either in his Knowledge, or Grace. He was Lucerna Legis
and Evangelii: An Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures: It was his great Delight
to study, and preach them. Before he came to this Parish he constantly preached
twice a day, and had many Auditors. He was both a Boanerges, and a Barnabas:
And God blessed his Ministry, for the awaking of Sinners, and edifying, and
comforting of Saints. He knew how to divide the Word of God aright, and to give
to every one his Portion in due season. He shined in the Doctrinal part of his
Sermon, and burned in the Applicatory. He preached with such Life and Power, as
you might perceive he had servent desires to do good to his Auditors: both in
prayer, and preaching, he excelled most of his Brethren. He was a great admirer
of free Grace, and delighted to preach and meditate on it; and while meditating
on it, was once (as he told a Bosom-Friend, he was shy of speaking of such
things) so ravished in a Journey, that for twelve Miles he rode weeping, and
crying, Lord, how good art thou, how bad am I! how good art thou, how bad am I!
and was troubled, that his Thoughts were so soon diverted by his arrival to the
end of his Journey. But he did not always live in Raptures. He had his Night,
and a long and dismal Night it was, for it lasted three quarters of a year
together. It pleased the Lord to exercise him with strange, and dreadful
Temptations, which forced him to retire to his Wives Friends; never I believe
was Heman, or any Saint, for the time, in greater depths, than our blessed
Brother was; the Arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in him, and his Terrors
drank up his Spirits; None can express the horror that was in his Soul. I have
been with him, when (though he could not do it fully) he has expressed it in
such dreadful manner, that it was enough to make ones Heart tremble to hear
him. Oh! said he, if I were to lie in Hell, but a hundred, or a thousand years,
I should not be so much troubled; but Eternity breaks my Heart into ten
thousand pieces. O, I have eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, and neglected the
Tree of Life, and now the flaming Sword turns every way, to keep me out of
Paradise. O, said he, I am a Pillar of Salt, enough to season a Nation; the
wretchedest, the most unfortunate Creature, that ever Gods Earth bare: I shall
be lower in Hell, than Cain, or Judas, or Nero: Oh, why did the Knees prevent
me? Why came I out of my Mothers Womb? Many such Sentences fell from him. Ah
Sinners, do not your Hearts tremble to hear it? If this was done to the green
Tree, what will be done to the dry? If a Saint, a Holy, Faithful Minister
suffered so much, what will you suffer unless you repent? Oh, how apt are
Sinners to bless themselves, and condemn those, who in their lowest estate are
a thousand times better than they in their best; as the Pharisee censured the
Mourner at Christ's Feet, who was in better Condition than himself. But know,
that a wounded Conscience, is better than a stupid Conscience, and wholesome
trouble, than false, and rotten Peace.

But that Gath and Askelon might not rejoice, that the uncircumcised might not
triumph, God did not leave his Soul in Hell; he remembered him in his low
estate, for his Mercy endures for ever. God restored comfort to his Mourner;
but by degrees, lest he should be overwhelmed, a glimmering light breaks into
his Soul, by which he read the name of God, which is, the Lord God, gracious,
and merciful etc. As he styles himself in Exodus 34.6, 7. He had high Thoughts
of the mercy of God, which so affected him, (though he knew not of his Interest
in it) that he was forced (like Joseph) to seek a Place to weep in. After this,
his Lips were opened, that he might show forth God's Praise: and he preached on
Jonah 2.4. Then said I, I am cast out of thy sight; yet will I look again
toward thy holy Temple. Soon after (while his hope of Mercy was but small) God
visited him with a very sore sickness, in which he was nigh unto Death; but the
Lord restored him, and this dumb Ezekiel prophesied again, and was a burning
and a shining Light to you, amongst whom God settled him, according to his
desire. You, among the many thousands of England, were the People of his Love
and choice. For when a Reverend Brother told him in his sickness, he came to
offer him Preferment: Heaven, Heaven, cried this holy Man of God: No, replied
his Friend, it is Earthly Preferment, and where would you have it? he readily
answered, at Haversham. Oh Haversham! how unworthy art thou of the Love and
Labors of such a Minister? And what sought he here, but the Gain of your
Souls? How did he spend himself for your Salvation? How earnestly did he
exhort, how compassionately warn you; how forward was he to instruct, and
comfort you? How ready was he, when you were sick, to pray for you, and relieve
you? He was a burning and a shining Light. I need not say much: ye are
Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and unblameably he behaved himself among
you. That little he continued with you, he had much Peace in his Soul, and
comforted others, with the Comfort wherewith he himself was comforted of God.

In his last Sickness, he was no less, than in his Health, concerned for the
Happiness of your Souls. Frequently did he lift up his Hands, and pronounced
the Blessing, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father,
and the comfortable Fellowship of God the Holy Ghost be with you all Amen.
Adding always, What would you have more? One thing troubled him in his
Sickness, that Professors should have no more love one for another, seeing
they are Members of the same Body, and are so earnestly pressed by our dear
Savior, and by his Apostles to this Duty. Is it not enough that the World
hates you, but you must hate one another? such was his concern for you. As for
himself, he was full of Peace and Comfort, and freely resigned himself to God,
saying to his Wife, mourning by his Bed, this is God's World, and we are his
Creatures; and should not God do in his own World, what pleases him. I asked
him, whether Jesus was not now sweet to him: Oh, yes, replied he, unexpressibly
sweet. A little before his departure, I said to him, your Body is weak, but I
hope your Faith is vigorous; Yea, replied he, blessed be God, it is very
vigorous. Then I asked, whether he had no Cloud, nothing of Fear upon him? he
replied, no, I bless the Lord, not any: and not long before, he told a Friend,
he did not know one Promise in the Bible, that he could not apply to himself.

Thus we see that Scripture verified; Mark the perfect Man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is Peace. Though God hid his Face from him,
for a time, yet in his last years he had Peace, and dyed triumphing over Sin
and Satan. And now this great Light shines amongst the glorious Lights above,
while we in this dark Vale bewail our irreparable Loss. Help, Lord, for the
godly man cease, for the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

THE EPITAPH.
HEre lie interred a Learned Saint's Remains.
O the rich Mineral which this Ground contains!
He had a vast Ambition to be Good,
That that would make him Great, he understood.
He knew the way to rise was low to fall;
Who seemed to aim at nothing, aimed at all.
Witty he was, and Wise. His ready Wit
To his commanding Judgment did submit.
God's Book he trusted, but Men's Books did try;
God's Book the Touchstone was, he tried 'em by.
God's Book and He, how well were they agreed!
He licked the Leaves, and they his Soul did feed.
And, that he might be perfect in his Rules,
He forty weeks learned in Temptations Schools.
He was a Bright Divine, Who clearly saw,
The Precincts of the Gospel and the Law.
He was an earnest Preacher of the Word,
As one that knew the Terrors of the Lord.
He watched his Flock, with so concerned an eye,
As if he feared starved Souls revengeful cry.
Sleep Sacred Dust. When Christ shall rend the Skies,
Then thy concealed Worth with Thee shall rise.
FINIS.

