Seven Irrefragable Propositions concerning OATHS.
Dedicated to King CHARLES I. By the Right Reverend Dr. Jos. Hall, then Lord
Bishop of Exon. And Printed in the Year 1639.
I. NO Man may swear, or induce another Man to swear unlawfully.

II. It is no lawful Oath that is not attended with Truth, Justice, and
Judgment, Jer. 4. 2. the first whereof requires, that the thing sworn be true*
The second, that it be just: The third, that it be not undue, and unmeet to be
sworn and undertaken.

III. A Promissory Oath, which is to the certain Prejudice of another Man's
Right, cannot be attended with Justice.

IV. No Prejudice of another Man's Right can be so dangerous and sinful, as
that Prejudice which is done to the right of public and Sovereign Authority.

V. The right of Sovereign Authority is highly prejudiced, when private
Subjects incroach upon it; and shall, upon suspicion of the disavowed
intentions, or actions of their Princes, combine, and bind themselves to Enact,
Establish, or altar any Matters concerning Religion, without (and therefore
much more if against) the Authority of their Lawful Sovereign.

VI. A Man is bound in Conscience to reverse and disclaim that which he was
induced unlawfully to engage himself by Oath to perform.

VII. No Oath is, or can be of Force, that is made against a Lawful Oath
formerly taken; so as he that has sworn Allegiance to his Sovereign, and
thereby bound himself to maintain the Right, Power, and Authority of his said
Sovereign, cannot by any second Oath, be tied to do ought that may tend to the
Infringement thereof: and if he have so tied himself, the Obligation is, ipso
facto, void and frustrate.

Questions concerning the Validity of the late Act for the Oath of Abjuration.
1. WHether an Act of Parliament may not be void, and of none Effect in whole
or in part?

2. Whither there be not two Originally distinct Authorities in this Kingdom or
Nation; a Civil Authority for ordering of Civil Matters, and a Sacred for
Matters of Religion, and merely Spiritual?

3. Whither by the Fundamental Principles of the true English Government,
whatever Acts are made contrary to, inconsistent with, or derogatory from the
Laws of God, or the Authority of Christ committed to the Ministers of his
Kingdom be not so far void?

4. Whither an Act of Parliament requiring the Subjects under great Penalties
to Swear such M^tters, as they are not competent Judges of, be not to involve
them in a Sin, and contrary to, or inconsistent with the Principles of
Christianity?

5. Whither this be not such Matter of Religion, as ought to have been
considered in a free National Synod, before it was past in an Act of Parliament?

6. Whither, for these Reasons, the Injury to the Subject, the Inconsistence
with the Principles of Christianity, and the Irregular and Illegal Proceedings
in it, the late Act concerning the Oath of Abjuration be not a void Act of
Parliament, and the Oath not to be taken by any Members of Parliament or other
Subjects?

7. Whether there be not a heavy Load of Guilt, of Perjury, and diverse other
Sins upon the Nation already, and this likely to fill up the Measure, and bring
down the Judgments of God upon it?

8. Whether to prevent the Judgments of God there ought not to be a Solemn Fast
appointed, and a Public Confession be made by some Act of the State of the
Public National Sins, which have been committed, within 20 or 30 Years last
past, and all things done, which are requisite to a Sincere National Penitence,
and giving Glory to the Majesty of the Great God of Heaven?

FINIS.

