An Epistle to the READER.
AMongst all the Tractates in Divinity written by English men in English (which
are very many, and many of them very excellent, and highly esteemed even by
learned men of other Nations) there are none more useful (in some respects) or
more serviceable to the Church of Christ, then such of them which are
Commentaries and Expositions upon the holy Scriptures. Witness Ainsworth upon
the Pentateuch. Willet upon Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Daniel, Romans and
Jude. Perkins upon the Galatians. Bifield upon the Colossians. Tailor upon
Titus, and many others. Insomuch that if we had such like English Commentaries
upon every Book in the Bible, I doubt not but it would very much tend to the
right understanding of the Scripture, and thereby to the further propagation of
Truth and Godliness throughout the whole Nation.

The Reverend, Learned and Religious Author of this ensuing Treatise has
undertaken to give us a Practical and Polemical Exposition upon the third and
fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy; of which it may
truly be said, That it is both elaborate and judicious. And that he does not
serve the Lord with that which cost him nothing. There is in this excellent
Commentary the sum of nigh 30 years studies, and the Epitome of all those
choice things which this worthy Minister of Christ has ever either heard or
read. And therefore I doubt not but it will fully answer expectation, and be
gladly entertained by the godly learned Readers.

Especially if they consider, That the Author of this Book is the same Person
who has by former Books guarded the Pulpit from unordained Preachers, The Font
from Antipaedobaptists, The Schools by the defense of human learning; And the
Ministry and their maintenance in a Latin Treatise called Sal Terrae. His
abilities are already sufficiently known to the world by these, and many other
of his works, and therefore there is no need to add any thing more in way of
commendation, Vinum vendibile non opus habet hedera suspensa.

My prayer to God is, That this large and yet pithy and learned Exposition may
obtain the end for which it was written, That it may do good to future
Generations and speak to the world, when the Author is gone out of it to enjoy
the Kingdom provided for him from all Eternity*

Thy servant in the work of the Ministry, EDM. CALAMY.

A Practical and Polemical COMMENTARY Or, EXPOSITION UPON The Third and Fourth
Chapters of the latter Epistle of Saint Paul to TIMOTHY.

WHEREIN The Text is explained, Some Controversies discussed, Sundry Cases of
Conscience are cleared, Many Common Places are Succinctly handled, and Diverse
Useful, and Seasonable Observations raised,

By THOMAS HALL, B. D. and Minister of Kings-Norton in Worcestershire.

Versatur ob oculos nostros profanus ille Christianismus Aevi extremi, quem
praesaga Pauli men's ante tot Secula penicillo Spiritus Sancti depinxit, Scult.
in 2 Timothy 3.1.

Psalm. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and
silver.

Rev. 12.12. Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil
is come down unto you having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a
short time.

Imprimatur EDMUND CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler, for John Starkey, at the Miter at the North door
of the middle Exchange in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Richard Hemming Mayor, Richard Vernon Sheriff, with
the Aldermen, the Reverend Ministers, the Common Council, and the rest of the
Inhabitants of the City of WORCESTER; T. H. Dedicateth this Practical and
Polemical COMMENTARY, as a Testimony of his unfeigned Love and best Respects to
that his Native CITY.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
MY hearts desire and Prayer for you is that you may be saved, And since God
saves none ordinarily but by means, I here present you with a Practical Book,
which by the blessing of God may be a means to lead you safely through this
Wilderness to the heavenly Canaan. Here you will find Directions for all
sorts, for Magistrates and Ministers, for Superiors and Inferiors. Here you
have Antidotes against those nineteen sins (of these last and worst times)
which are so rife both in City and Country; for, where can a man go but he
shall find such as are Self-Lovers, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers,
False-accusers, Covenant-breakers, Unholy, etc. So that the Treatise is very
seasonable, the good Lord make it profitable.

To this end, First, You that are Magistrates may see their duty in the
Treatise it self, on 2 Timothy 3.2. p. 26.27.
Rulers must Rule for God, you must not bear the sword in vain; but you must be
a Terror to Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath-profaners, Whore-masters, Seducers,
Blasphemers and all the rabble of Hell. It Is an old complaint that England has
golden Laws, but Leaden Executioners* Be The excellency of a zealous
Magistrate: you may see on 2 Timothy 2.4.
Zealous therefore for God, we never lose by venturing for him. Remember that
at the last day you must give an account of your Steward ships, of those
Offices, Talents and Opportunities which you have received, and what good ye
have done in your year, what Vices have been punished, what Goodness has
been promoted, and what disorders rectified.

A Zealous Magistrate is the best Common-wealths-man, such a Nehemiah is a
means to keep off wrath from the City and Place of his abode. When Men punish,
God spares; but when men spare then God arises to execute judgment on the
wicked. Mistake me not, I plead not for Cruelty, or rigor, but for Justice; as
Magistrates must be Clement and Merciful (as occasion requires)
distinguishing of sinners, observing who offend through weakness, and who of
wilfulness; So he must be just and sharp against incorrigible and incureable
Offenders, least they infect others. Be Men of public Spirits, cast off all
self-seeking and private-spiritednesse; I could wish that every Magistrate had
Master Iacombs Sermon, on Acts 13.36. it is an excellent piece, and will teach
you how to serve God in your Generations.

2. You that are Underofficers must (in your spheere) be also active for God,
little Birds we see sometimes set the greater on singing: your zeal may
quicken others. Do, but do not over-doe your duties, least you bring an Odium
upon Religion by your Pharisaical rigor and austerity, but do all in a Spirit
of Wisdom, Love and Meekness, else you may sin in over-doing, as well as
in Under-doing.

3. You whom the Lord has set as Spiritual Watchmen in the City, it concerns
you to promote his work with one shoulder and one consent. Unanimity is the
glory of Societies, and makes them Si eritis inseparabiles, eritis
insuperabiles.
invincible. The Primitive Christians were of one heart and one soul, they had
a holy conspiracy in the ways of God, Erat fidelium cor unum, and anima una,
non Physice, sed Moraliter, q. d. Ita animis and sensibus erant concordes, ac
si omnes unum idemque hab^issent cor. a Lapide, in locum, Ubi plura.
Acts 4.32. When the shepherds are divided, the flock must needs be scattered,
and Gods work hindered: If there be four Oxen in a Team, and these four draw
four several ways, the work must needs go backward; See Motives to Unity,
Buroughs Irenicum, Chapter 31. etc. Gournall on Ephesians. 6.15. c. 13. p. 422.
but when all draw jointly together, how comely, pleasant and easy is the
work? The Application is easy. Take heed of that Rock of offense, and Root of
division, Fenner on Rev. 3.1. p. 10. to 21. folio.
The gathering of Churches out of Churches, which is indeed the destruction of
Churches. It Is an uncharitable, and an unscriptural Practice, V. Mr. Blake on
the Covenant, Chap. 31. p. 240.
There is no Precept nor President for it in all the Book of God. V. The Answer
of the Assembly to the dissenting Brethren. In fine, p. 60.61.
The Dissenting Brethren were not able to produce one example out of Gods Word
for the gathering of Churches out of Churches, though they were pressed to it
by the Reverend Assembly of Divines.

We read in Scripture of Gathering Churches from amongst Heathens, but never of
gathering Churches out of constituted Churches. Were England a land of
Heathens, and no Church planted amongst us, it might be proper enough to gather
Churches here, but to put a planted, constituted, settled Church into the
condition of Heathens, See Master Gage his Defense of Parish Churches. See
Master Cawdry, Independency a great Schism,
savours strongly of Pride and Censoriousness. Parochial Assemblies (if the
Parishes were but regulated and made more uniform and compact) are the best
both for Pastor and People; when this gathering of Churches breeds as many
Divisions in Families, almost as there are persons; e* g. The husband is a
Presbyterian, and goes to his Church, the Wife an Independent, and goes to
her meetings; the Son an Anabaptist, and goes to his meetings, the Daughter
a Quaker, and she has her meetings, etc. What Rents this kind of gathering
makes, let the Reader judge: Besides the great inconvenience of having
Church Members at such a distance; one at London, another at Dover, a third at
West-Chester, a fourth at York. I know some that dwell nigh an hundred miles
off him whom they call their Pastor, To cull out ten or twenty and make them
the Church, excluding two hundred or two thousand (in some places) as dogs and
swine, does exceedingly puff up the one (so that Ministers can scarce tell how
to please them, but in a short time they pick quarrels and fall all to pieces)
and discourageth the other, and so prejudiceth them against their Ministry
that it loses the operation it should have upon their hearts.
such sheep are like to be well fed and looked to that are at such a distance
from the Shepherd. Moreover, it is a kind of Sacrilege to rob godly
Ministeres of the firstborn of their Prayers and pains, of the cream of their
flocks, and the Crown of their Ministry. If they will gather Churches out of
the world (as they call it) let them first plow the world, and sow it, and then
let them reap with Gods blessing, else he is but a hard man that reaps where he
has not sown. There is superstition on the right hand as well as on the left,
and the Devil cares not on which hand we miscarry so he can but get us out of
the right way.

Be not over-righteous in making the Gate of the Church narrower then God has
made it, shut not out those whom God admits. Better be too Charitable, then
too censorious. Pity the many hundreds of poor, ignorant, profane,
uncatechized souls that are in your City, the great (I had almost said the
greatest) part of a Ministers work lies out of the Pulpit.

I have experimentally found more good by week-dayes Catechizing, then by many
years Preaching, condescend to the Capacities of the weakest, by works of
mercy, and by all good means labor to win them to Christ: Be not high nor
supercilious, be not harsh and censorious in casting off the greatest part of
your flock as dogs and swine; if they be ignorant, you should instruct them;
if scandalous, by all wise means you should labor to reclaim them. This
rigorous casting off them and their Infants does but harden them, and make them
out of love with Religion; when a tender and compassionate carriage toward
them, might have brought them into better order.

4. You that are Tradesmen be just in all your dealings* Plain honesty is the
best Policy, though it gain but little, yet it keeps the credit and the
custom, when he that overreacheth and cozens me once, shall never cozen me a
second time.

Much of religion is seen in our dealings with men ( Psalm 15.2, 3, 4) Let a
man profess like an Angel, yet if he be faulty here, all his religion is vain.
Piety toward God, and Righteousness toward man are the best Walls and
Bulwarks of a City.

It is true, your walls are razed, but it is not the want of walls; but the Sea
20. considerations to quicken you in 2 Timothy 3.15.
wickedness of the Citizens that ruins a City. If Piety be within, God
himself will be a wall of fire round about you to defend you, Civitatis
eversio, morum non murorum casus. Aug.
and offend your Enemies, and your glory in the midst of you* Zachary 2.5.
Isay, Boni cives civitatis maenia. Spartanis multis seculis Civium virtus Vrbis
murus fuit. Pezel. Mellif. Histor. P. 1. p. 234. edit ult.
26.1. Good Citizens are the best fortifications. God has blessed you with the
Nether-springs and given you a South-land, you have a rich and fruitful Soil,
a River that brings you Treasure from far, do you as Achsah the Daughter
of Caleb did, beg for a better blessing, even the Upper-springs also, for
Grace and Glory, which will refresh you to Eternity, Joshua 15.19.

The Riches of your City lies much in clothing, Oh get your Souls clothed
with the robes of Christ his Righteousness for your justification, and the
White Robes of Innocence, Integrity and Sanctification; these are the only
true riches of a Christian, which can never be taken from him.

5. You that are young lay your foundations low if ever you would build high;
with See 20. considerations to quicken you in 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothy, give up your selves to God betimes, fly the lusts of youth, mortify
the flesh with its affection and lusts, Redeem the seasons of Grace, know the
day of your Visitation and improve it, remember your Creator betimes, the
sooner the better, since the seasoning of our youth has a great influence upon
the remaining part of our days God has blessed you with many able and laborious
Ministers, who are ready on all occasions, in season and out of season to
dispense the Mysteries of salvation to you, (so that you cannot sin at so cheap
a rate as formerly) happy are you, if you have hearts to improve the mercy,
storing up in these days of Spiritual plenty, Truths against times of Error,
Light against times of darkness, and comforts against times of discomfort. If
Philip King of Macedon rejoiced that his son Alexander was born in that time
when Aristotle lived, that so he might be instructed by him* how should we then
rejoice who are born in such a time when the Gospel is so fully and freely
published to the world, which is able to make us wise unto salvation.

Lastly, you that are Governors of Families, set up Religion in the Power of
it there, let them be Bethels, Houses of God; and not Beth-avens houses of
Vanity and iniquity, lest God make them Beth-anys houses of sorrow and
affliction. Lay injunctions on your Children and Servants, that they keep the
way of the Lord, So did Abraham ( Genesis 18.19.) as you would partake with him
in blessedness, To encourage you to the Duty; See an excellent little Tract
of Master Cawdry, called Family-Reformation, and of Mr. Philip Goodwins
Treatise on the same subject.
so follow him in Obedience. Let not the greatness of your Families make you
neglect the Duty, Abraham had a great Family, above three hundred that could
bear Arms, yet he Catechized them, and instructed them in the ways of God,
Genesis 13.14. The houses of the Primtive Christians were as so many little
Churches, Romans 16.5. 1 Corinthian, 16.19. C^los. 4.15. Philem. 2. Solomon (in
all probability) had thousands in his Court, for he had seven hundred Wives
which were Princesses and their retinue must needs be great, he had forty
thousand stalls of Horses, and these required many servants, besides the daily
provision for his house, shows the greatness of his household, 1 Kings 4.22,
23. yet it was so well ordered, that the Queen of Sheba was amazed to see it, 1
Kings 10 5, 8, 9. yea his servants were so seasoned with Religion, that about
five hundred years after their Children are recorded by the Spirit of God to
be the most eminent of their times for Religion, Ezra 2.58. Nehemiah 7 60. How
will this shame us that have so few to look to, and yet neglect them!

I am now come to my last Stage, I have no better Legacy to bequeath to you,
Gold I have none, and silver I have but little, but such as I have I give unto
you. Now the good Lord bless you and keep you, he purge out of your City every
thing that offends, that the name of your City from henceforth may be,
Iehovah-Shammah (Ezekiel ult ^lt.) The Lord (in his special love and presence)
is there. This is and shall be the Prayer of

Your Servant in the Lord THO. HALL*
Kings-Norton in Worcestershire, Jan. 1. 1657./58.
To the Reader.
THou may wonder to see me once more in Print, and no wonder, for I wonder,
(all things considered) at it my self. I was fully resolved to rest, and never
to trouble the world any more in this kind; yet having finished my other works
for the Press, and finding experimentally that I had best health when I was
most strongly employed, and that my work was to me instead of Physic, I chose
rather to spend my self with labor, then consume with rust and sickness. I saw
that Master Barlow had finished the two first Chapters of the second Epistle to
Timothy, and perusing the two last Chapters of that Epistle I perceived the
handling of them would be very useful and seasonable (both in respect of
Practicals and Polemicals) for these present times. Hereupon I would have had
some abler Pen to have undertaken the work, and that failing, I would have got
some assistance, but that would not be, I was constrained if I would have any
thing done to do it my self. Upon this I buckled to the work, and in less then
two years space (notwithstanding my double employment) by the strength of God
completely finished both Chapters for the Press. I confess it has cost me much
pains, and more then at first I imagined, but if it may be profitable to Gods
Church, I have my desire.

It is observed that many Posthumous work have had Supplements excelling their
Predecessors; this cannot be expected from me: All that I can prom^se thee is
this; That there is not a Text, nor a word (of any consequence in the Text) but
I have as plainly, faithfully and fully explained it as possibly I could; I
have broken every clod that I might find out the gold^n Oar, In tenui labor est
Vocum and Phrasium enodatio, tenuis gloria, at non tenuis Vtilitas. Scultetus.
though such labor may seem small, yet the profit is great; a good foundation
is the strength of the building.

2. Many common-places are succinctly, yet fully handled. I have couched as
much matter in as little room as possibly I could, being Naturally averse to
tediousness.

3. Where any Controversies occur, they are handled Pro and Con, the Truth is
confirmed, and falsehood confuted; so that if thou art ignorant, this will help
to instruct thee; if erroneous, to reclaim thee; if wavering, to settle thee;
if poor, to enrich thee; if rich, to humble thee.

4. Where I am too short in the close of a Point, I give you references to such
Authors as will satisfy those who will be satisfied with Scripture and Reason.
The Quotations are entire, I have scarcely so much as touched any of those
which I refer to, because I study brevitie; besides many of them are S^rmons
and such Books as have no Indexes.

I Quote the more Authors, that if any miss of one, yet happily he may have
another to consult with, store is no sore. They may serve also as a Directory
to young Divines in the choice of their Books, it has cost me a considerable
sum, before I could know them. For the perfecting of the work: I have perused
the choicest Authors that could be gained for love or money.

If any ask what means the Citation of so much Humane Learning?

I Answer, that I have been larger (in this Particular) with my Pen, then I was
in the Pulpit, and have added many things here, which I omitted there.

2. Being versed in Humane Learning (by reason of my employment amongst my
Nursery) I have made some use of it, if any dislike it he may pass it over, it
may please some, sparingly, and as I use it, it can justly displease none.

I remember it is the wish ^f a Learned man, That every one of S. Paul's
Epistles, Yea, every Book of Holy Writ might have a Davenant to draw forth its
Lineaments, nor do I know any work that would be of more general and singular
use then a Practical Commentary upon the whole Bible. Many have done worthily
on a great part already*

As, Willet and Babington on the [P^ntateuch,] Attersol on [Numbers,] M.
Richard Rogers on [Iudges,] Topsel and Fuller on [Ruth,] Caryll on [Iob,]
Dickson and VVilcox on [Psalms] VVilcox, Dod and Tailor on [Proverbs,] Cotton,
Robotham and D. Guild on [Canticles,] Vdal on [Lamentations] Greenhil on
[Ezekiel,] Willet on [Daniel,] Hutchinson and Trap on [ All the 12 lesser
Prophets] Buroughs on [Hosea,] Topsel on [Ioel,] Marburie on [Obadiah,] Abbot
and King on [Ionah] Pemble on [Zacchariah,] Stock and Doctor Slatyr on
[Malachie,] Ward and Trap] on [Matthew,] Hutchinson on [Iohn] Perkins on
[Galatians,] Bain on [Ephesians,] Doctor Airy, on [Philippians,] Davenant,
Bysield and Elton on [Colossians,] Doctor Slatyr on 1* and 2. to
[Thessalonians,] Barlow on [ the 2 Epistle to Timothy,] Dr. Tailor on [Titus,]
Attersol and Dyke on [Philemon,] Dr. Gouge and David Dickson on [Hebrewes,]
Manton on [James,] Byfield and Rogers of Dedham on [ 1 Epistle of Peter] Adams
and Sympson on [ 2 Epistle of Peter,] Cotton and Hardy on [ 1 Epistle of
John,] Perkins, Willet, Jenkin and Manton on [Iude] Dent and Bernard on
[Revelations.]

It were a work well becoming some learned Godly Divines to set upon the
remaining Books which yet want a Practical commentary on them.

To conclude, thou have here mine All, even the Cream and Quintessence of many
years studies; which I the rather send abroad to the Eye, partly to recompense
my natural swiftness in delivery.

2. As judgeing this way more beneficial in Though the lively voice more pierce
the heart, and be apter to move affection, yet men seldom take the pains or
time to lay down things in speech, as they do for public writings. Robinsons
Essays, Observat. 23. Vbi plura. And Master Philip Goodwin in his Epistle
Dedicatory to his Family-Religion.
some respects then speaking.

^. What is written will last longer; what is spoken is Transient and passes
away, but what is written is permanent. Litera Scripta manet.

2. It is a more general good, and spreads it self further by far for
Persons, Time and Place, then the voice can reach, our Books may come to be
seen where our Voice shall never be heard, Speech is only for presence, but
what we write may be useful in our absence, yea, when we are Non omnis moriar,
multaque pars mei Vitabit Libitinam. Horat. Ode 30. Lib. 3.
dead, yet by our writings we may still speak for the good of others.

If thou reap any benefit give God the Praise, and let him have thy Prayers,
who desires to live no longer then he man be some way serviceable to the
Church of God in his Generation.

THO. HALL.

To the Reader.
IT is not long since the Learned Author of the Elaborate Commentary on the
two last Chapters of the second Epistle of Paul to Timothy, presented the
World with a Latin Book, called Sal Terrae, The Salt of the Earth, which to
this larger Volume so quickly following, methinkes represents the setting of
Salt on the Table, as the first Service before a Feast.

Of the former he desired me to be his Taster, and to attest how savourly it
relished with me when I read it, which I have done in the same Language. Now
he and his Stationer having requested my Perusal and Testimony of the latter, I
was the willinger; first to read it, because the Author has bestowed much
pains, and given his Reader the sum and substance of nigh thirty years
Studies, Emanuel Sa was nigh forty years in composing his Aphorisms. In hoc
opus per Annos fere quadraginta diligentissime incubui. Em. Sa Praefat. in
Aphorism. p. 2.
which bespake an expectation in me of so much satisfaction in the Book, as
made me think it worthy both to be bought and read. On the contrary, I have
ever had a contemptuous conceit of such Extemporary stuff, as like Jonas his
Gourd, grows up in a night, and think it worthy to last no longer then it
did, which perished in a night, Iona. 4.10. I deny not but sometimes there may
be found a man of such a ready faculty as to be able to do as much, and it may
be more as well upon a sudden, as others upon long deliberation; such a one was
Lucilius saepe Ducentos versus dictabat stans pede in uno. Horat. Sermon. Lib. 1.
Sat. 4.
Lucilius the first Latin Satyrist, who (as Horace says) would dictate two
hundred Verses in an hour, standing upon one foot; but this is very rare, and
out of Rule, nor are there any Examples upon Record to match it. Saepe caput
scaberet, and vivos roderet ungues. l. 1. Sat. 10.
He likes that Verse better which is made with often scratching of the Head,
and biteing of the nails to the quick; and Carmen reprehendito quod non multa
dies and multa litura coercuit, atque perfectum decies non castigavit ad
unguem. Horat. de Art Poet.
discommendeth such as have not taken up many days, and come under many blots,
even to a Tenfold correction, and ordinarily it is with ingenious works, as it
is with Mechannicke Fabrickes, those are the fairest which are longest in
building, Ducentis and viginti Annis a tota Asia factum fuit. Munsteri
Geograph. Lib. 5. Page 983.
as the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, one of the seven Wonders of the World, was
the work of all Asia for two hundred and twenty years together.

Secondly, I may be the more willing to deliver my Censure of this Work,
because when I had acted the part of a severe Critic upon it, the Author
testified his ingenuity, by returning me so much the more Thanks, as I found
the more faults in it; which I liked the better, when it gave me occasion to
renew the remembrance of a contrary acceptance of the like Office done to the
Bishop of Coventrie and Litchfield, a Prelate of as great Reputation for
Learning and Religion as any of his rank in this Nation: who above thirty
years ago, I presenting my service to him at Ecclesell Castle in my return
from London, to Great Budworth in Cheshire, he staid me certain days to read
over (as a Censor) his Book which he entitled, It was Reprinted, 1628.
The Grand-Imposture: I took it for a great Trust and confidence in me, and
thought it my Duty to be answerable to it by free Animadversions of any thing
which I apprehended for an error, and accordingly did so; When I showed him
mine exceptions, at the first he seemed somewhat angry and wrangled with me to
excuse the Passage, (which I conceived did need Correction) we parted
unperswaded, and I returned to my Task with this Opinion, that he was
therefore offended with the fault I found, because on the sudden he knew not
how to mend it; after that, to the Errata, I added the correction of the first
as well as of the rest, and then bringing my Paper of the whole unto him, he
showed himself so well pleased, that he would needs fasten twenty shillings in
Gold upon me for my pains, besides other courtesies.

Thirdly, I am content that my judgment of this Book should be Printed, not so
much to gratify the Author or the Stationer, as for other reasons.

1. Because the whole frame of the work does not only fully answer the
Frontispiece, (though it promise much) and so is not liable to the Sandersons
History of King Charles, page, 1116.
Exception taken up against a great Writer, which is, That there is more matter
in the Title Page, then in the Book it self.

Secondly, Because though I were well satisfied with the matter of it while I
read it in his Manuscript Original, yet I desire better satisfaction by a
review of it when in a fairer Character from the Press, I may read it with
less difficulty and more delight.

Thirdly, Because it is not only the I mean the better half not in Quantity
only as bigger, but in Quality as better done then the former part by Mr. B.
who though he were a good man, a good (...), and a good Preacher, was yet in
Scholastical faculties and furniture; ability of body, and studiousness of
mind to make use of both, inferior to his follower. I say thus much not by
conjecture, but by my certain knowledge, and good acquaintance with them both,
for I was M. B. successor for Preaching the Friday Lecture in the City of
Chester, as Mr. H. my near neighbor is his Successor in writing this
Commentary now Printed.
better half of the best Expository Treatise that I have seen upon the Second
Epistle to Timothy, but I believe (for Congruity with the Truth of the Holy
Text; pertinency and fullness of profitable matter deduced from it or consonant
to it) is the best that hitherto has been extant in the Church of Christ. The
Lord give the Pious and Painful Penman of it the Return of his Holy labors
herein, in the Prayers and Proficiency of his People, for whose edification
chiefly it was undertaken, continued, and by Gods gracious assistance is now
thus completed.

John Ley.

Books formerly published by the AUTHOR.
1. THe Pulpit Guarded in quarto. 2. The Font Guarded in quarto. 3. The Schools
guarded or a defense of Humane Learning. 4. The Beauty of Holiness; Octavo. 5.
A Treatise against long Hair, Painting, Powdering, and Periwigs, spots, Octavo.
6. Wisdoms Conquest, A Translation of the thirteenth Book of Ovids
Metamorphosis, Octavo. 7. Phaetons folly, A Translation of the second Book of
Ovids Metamorphosis, Octavo. 8. Homesius Enervatus, or a Treatise against the
Millenaries, Octavo. 9. Sal Terrae, or a Guard to the Ministers and their
maintenance, Octavo.
Errata.
In such a Volume as this we cannot but expect some Errata, those of greatest
consequence* are here corrected; such as are obious I leave to thy own
correction.] Page 9. line 1. read Laylanders. p. 21. l. 37. r. stay. p. 33. in
Marg. r. Glutinant. p. 37. l. 40. r. Cap. p. 48. l. 20. r. All. p. 49. Marg. r.
Ignavissimus. p. 49. Marg. r. Stor. p. 52. l. 7. r. John p. 52. marg. r.
Infamia p. 53. marg. non aliis. p. 53. l. 18. r. Show. p. 56. l. 1. Prudence.
p. 28. l. 40. Observe. p. 29. l. 25. Universal. p. 60. l. 10. r. irresistible.
p. 71. l. 25. r. promises. p. 76. l. 20. r. Apostasy. p. 86. l. 5. r. (...).
p. 87. marg. r. quum. p. 88. l. 14. r. Psalm. 10. l. 16. r. there is. p. 91. l.
46. r. Amos. p. 98. l. 22. forget. p. 105. marg. Aegyptus. p. 106. marg. r.
Proxineta. p. 10.103. l. 22. r. 13. p. 147. Gravatas. marg. p. 168. l. 37. r.
Dorchester. p. 171. l. 21. r. Apostles and 15. p. 174. l. 27. r. Practical. l.
28. r. Oeconomical. p. 197. marg. r. (...). p. 217. l. 35. r. mirror. p. 219.
r. delectatione. p. 222 l. 14. r. Pillar. p. 231. r. Polyptoton. p. 234. l. 5
dele All. p. 259. l. 17. r. Question. p. 267. l. 12. r. (...). p. 28.4. r.
ultro. in. marg. p. 311. l. 40. declaration. p. 133. l. 20 acrei. p. 339. l. 6.
Beophman. p. 366. l. 26. add David had 3 enemies, Saul, Goliath, and Absalom. p.
375. l. 38. r. reproaching. p. 380. in marg. liberam for liberalitatem ex part
dantis.

AN EXPOSITION Of the third Chapter OF THE Second Epistle of PAUL TO TIMOTHY.
2 TIMOTHY 3.1. etc. This also know, That in the last days perilous times shall
come.
THE Apostle, having in the two foregoing Chapters forewarned, Praemonitus,
praemunitus.
and so fore-armed, his dear son Timothy against those Schismatics, Heretics,
Hypocrites, and false Teachers which were then arising and creeping into the
Church; he comes now, by a Prophetical instinct, to foretell of greater
evils, and of more false Teachers and Seducers, which should yet arise,
especially toward the end of the world.

In this Chapter we have 1. A Prediction, Est Prophetia qua praevidet and
denotat Apostolus quanta mala imminerent ab mimicis fidei, viz. Haereticis and
Pseudo-christianis. Espencaeus.
or prophetical narration, of the men and manners of the last times, from verse
2. to verse 9.

2. The better to avoid them, we have here the marks whereby the Seducers and
Impostors of the last times, may be known.

1. They are glozing Hypocrites, verse 5. they have a form, and but a form, of
godliness.

2. They are of an insinuating disposition: they slily and secretly creep into
houses, verse 6.

3. They are subtle: they set first on the weaker vessel, like the devil their
father, that first set on Eve, that he might by her the better deceive Adam, v.
6, 7.

4. You may know them by their opposing the Truth, and the faithful Ministers
thereof, verse 8.

5. By their corrupt principles and practices, verse 8.

6. By their Apostasy: they fall away more and more, and grow worse and worse,
verse 13.

3. Lest Timothy should be discouraged, here is first a consolatory promise for
the bounding and breaking of the follies, and fopperies, of the malice and
madness, of these Impostors, verse 9.

2. The better to encourage him, Paul sets before him his own Example, and
shows him what troubles and persecutions he under-went, and how the Lord
delivered him out of all, verse 10, 11. and withal tells him that persecution
was not peculiar to him, but that it was the common lot of all the godly,
whilst they live in this world.

4. He exhorts Timothy to constancy and perseverance in the doctrine which he
had received, verse 14, 15, 16, 17. and withal to a diligent study of the holy
Scriptures, which he adorns with a most elegant Encomium, drawn 1. From their
divine Authority. 2. From their singular Utility. 3. From their complete
Perfection.


This also know.] q. d. O Timothy, my dearly beloved Son whom I have begotten
in the faith, I have armed thee before against present dangers, and against
those enemies to the truth, which are already risen up in my life time; V. Mr.
Vines on the Sacrament, cap. 2.. 6. p. 29. Epiphanius in Haeres 26. Thinks the
Apostle aims at the Gnostics in this place, who were a most vile sect wholly
given up to the lusts of the flesh.
such as Alexander, Hermogenes, Hymenaeus, Phyletus, etc. I come now by a
spirit of Prophecy to foretell thee of future troubles, which shall befall the
Church of God, not only immediately after my death (for even then from amongst
your selves, shall ravenous Wolves arise, Act. 20.29, 30. such as Menander,
Carpocrates, Cerinthus, etc. who shall have a form of godnness, but will deny
the power of it) but especially toward the end of the world: those last days
will be the worst, iniquity will then abound, and the love of many shall wax
cold. Be not therefore, my son, discouraged, neither let any of Gods faithful
Ministers, thy Successors, be dismayed, or take offense at the Sects and
Schisms, at the Heresies and Blasphemies, which shall in those last and loose
days arise; do not wonder at them, as if some strange and new thing were come
into the World; for this also you must know; That in the last days perilous
times shall come.

(...), in extremis diebus. Beza.
In the last days.] That is, all the time from Christ's first coming in the
flesh, till his second coming to Judgment. In scripture the latter or last
times, are taken two ways: 1. More generally for all Gospel Times, from that
time since Christ came in the flesh and published the Gospel; this is called the
Gospel-time in opposition to the Legal administrations: and this is frequently
in scripture phrase called, The last time, and, The last days. This appears
by those parallel Texts. Joel 2.28. compared with Acts 2.17. Heb. 1.2. See
Doctor Gouge on Heb. 1.2. and Weems. Vol. 1. p. 1.
1 Pet. 2.20. and 2.3.3. Isai 22. Hos. 3.5. Mich. 4.2 and 33. Thus we may
understand that saying of Jacob to his sons. Genesis 49.1. Gather your selves
together; that I may tell you what shall befall you in the last days. (i.) at
the coming of the Messiah, or when Shiloh comes, v. 20. Hence Gospel Times are
called, The end of the world, 1 Cor. 20.11. Heb. 9.26. and the last hour. 1
John 2.18.

Now these are called The last days.

1. Because all was then consummated which was prophesied concerning the work
of man's Redemption, and so is the perfection of all times, or, as the Apostle
calls it, The fullness of time. Gal. 4.4. Nothing now remains but a looking for
the day of judgment, which how soon it may come, we know not.

2. Because the whole time of the worlds continuance being distinguished into
three great Periods, the Gospel-time is the last of The three. The first was
from the creation to the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai. The second from
the giving of the Law, till the Appearance of Christ in our nature. The third
from that Appearance in Humility, till his Appearance in Glory; and this is
that which in scripture is often called the Last time, because after it there
shall be no more.

Tanto pejora sunt tempora futura, quanto fini hujus mundi and extremo udicto
fuerint proximiora.
3. Comparatively, in respect of the precedent times which have past since the
beginning of the world, those times were longer than these Gospel Times are
like to be.

4. By the last times more especially is sometimes meant the times that are
somewhat near the end of the World, which are the latter times of these last
days; when people shall give themselves to luxury, and security, and all
manner of vices. Mat. 24.24, 37, 38. and thus it has relation to the times we
live in, wherein iniq^ity abounds, and love to God, his people, his Ministers,
and Ordinances abates. Apostolical times were bad, but these dregs of days,
(...), Tempora molesta, Beza, Periculosa Vulg. Dura. Tremel. Difficilia.
Castalia, saeva, gravia, infesta, acerba, aspera. atrocia, noxia. Erasmus, et
alii. Omnia sunt generaliter intelligenda, nisi ubi aliquid specialiter urgent
circumstantiae. Mercer.

See more in my Schools Guard. Rule 24. Periculosa and perniciosa. Periculosa
sunt tempora, quia sub specie pietatis falsi doctores occultant omnia, ad
perdendas animas.


and this dorage of the world will be far worse. This also know, That in the
last days perilous times shall come.

Perilous times shall come.] That is, hard, hurtful, hateful, heavy,
pernicious, perilous; troublous times shall come.

On this clause there are almost as many Opinions, as there are Writers; and as
many Interpretations, as there be Interpreters. Yet in all this Variety there
is no contrariety, they may easily be reconciled, tending all to one and the
same end. I shall therefore take them in all; for it is a Rule in expounding
Scripture, That when a Text admits of many (but not contrary) senses, it is a
safe way to take in all, lest we miss the meaning: where no reason does
constrain, we are not to restrain the words, but may take them in the largest
sense; especially when neither matter, phrase, context or scope do hinder us.

1. The last days are called perilous, because of those perilous, pestilent,
wicked men, and wicked manners that shall then abound. This sense is genuine,
if we consider the context; The last days shall be perilous: and why so? not
so much because of the sword, plague, famine, persecution, or any corporal
distress that shall molest men, but bccause of those perilous sins which shall
then overspread the face of the Church. This Reason is clear, verse 2. For men
shall be lovers of themselves, covetons, boasters, proud, blasphemers, etc.
These, even these are the things which make the times truly perilous, and
really pernicious: And therefore Grotius and his followers are much mistaken,
who place the peril of the times only in affliction and sharp persecutions,
citing Genesis 47.9. Psalm. 49.5. whereas the Context clearly evinceth the contrary.

2. They shall be troublesome times, Molesta and infesta Meton. Effecti.

Hinc (...), a (...) laedo, infesto, laxo, labefacto, everto. Scapula.


because of the predominancy of sin, which will create much trouble to the
godly: for there is nothing more grievous to a gracious soul than sin; as
nothing is dearer to such a man than the glory of God, so nothing affects him
more, than Gods dishonor; and as the last days will be troublous to all the
godly in general, so especially to Gods Timothies, to his faithful Ministers,
who are bound, by their place and calling, to witness against them. 2 Cor.
12.26.

3. The last times will be sharp and sad times to the godly, Acerba and aspera.
who are the light of the world, and so hateful to these Owls, as the light
is to the thief, which discovers him.

4. Cruel and outrageous times, Saeva and atrocia.
because of those outrageous sins and sinners, which shall then be rife. Thus
the Devils are called [(...), Saevi valde] Mat. 8.28. exceeding fierce, The men
of the last times shall resemble this their Father; for, as the godly are holy
because God their Father is so: so these shall be fierce and furious, because
the devil their father is so. Hence the way of transgressors is said to be
harsh and hard, Prove. 13.15. they are men of fierce and furious spirits, full
of malice, hatred, envy, and all manner of cruelty. 2 Timothy 3.3.

5. Difficult and dangerous times, Difficilia and dura, quia homines illis
temporibus futuri erunt difficiles and molesti, imo pessimi. Chrysostom.
wherein it will be very difficult to discern what counsel or course to take,
and how to behave our selves amongst such monsters rather than men, as shall
arise in the very bosom of the visible Church.

2. They may be called hard times, in respect of the men that shall live in
those days: they will be hard-hearted, impudent, impenitent sinners, these are
called [ duri facie, and duri cord. Ezekiel. 3.7.] brazen-faced men; hence
Tyrannical government is called hard and cruel government: Dan. 2.40. because
Tyrants use to rule with rigor and cruelty. Hard things cannot be bowed or
bended: So Terence uses the word, Ad^one ingenio es duro atque inexorabili, ut
neque misericordia neque precibus molliri queas? Terent. in Phorm.
you may break them sooner than bend them; a hard Adamant no fire can melt it,
no hammer break it: So the last days shall be perilous, because men will be so
hardened in sin, that all that mount Sinai, or mount Sion, can afford, neither
the curses of the Law, nor promises of the Gospel, can work upon them.

3. They shall be hard times, in respect of the proud, boasting, blasphemous
speeches, which men shall utter; these are called hard words in Scripture, as 1 Samuel 2.3. talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance [or hard words]
come out of your mouth: thus blasphemous Atheists are said to utter hard
things. Psalm. 94.4. Thus in the last days men shall be proud, boasters,
blasphemers, exalting themselves, and their own By-ways as the only way,
blaspheming God and his Ordinances, and slandering his faithful messengers.
For these hard speeches they must one day answer, Jude 15. it is these sins that
make these last times so hard, 2 Timothy 3.2.

4. They will be hard times, because it will be hard for a man to keep himself
free from the infection of the sins of those times: all that live in them will
be in danger of being partakers of the sins of those about them, either by
complying with them, or conniving at them, or not mourning and witnessing
against them, It will be very hard to keep our selves pure in the midst of such
an impure generation.

Tempora tristia. Cujus spiritus sive animus dure affligitur. Piscat.
5. They will be sad times, and therefore hard times: for sad things in
Scripture are called hard things. Thus those that are sad and troubled in
spirit, are said to be of an hard spirit, 1 Samuel 1.15. thus Hannah is said to
be a woman [ Kesath ruach (i. e.) Mulier duri sive amari Spiritus.
duri spiritus] of a sorrowful spir^t. So a sad messenger is called an hard
messenger, 1 Kings 14.6. I am sent to thee with hard tidings (i. e.) with sad
news. In this sense also the last times will be hard times, by reason of those
sad tentations and oppositions, which the godly will meet withal from that
degenerate generation; and because of those abounding sins and errors, which
will much sadden the hearts of Gods people.

Tempora gravia.
6. They will be grievous times: grievous things in Scripture are called hard
things. Thus the grievous servitude of Israel in Egypt, is called a Hard
bondage. Exodus 1.14. and 6.9. and the yoke of Tyrants is called a hard and
grievous yoke. 1 Kings 12.4. So the last times will be hard and grievous times;
not only in respect of the opposition of Tyrants on the one hand, who like
wild boars will endeavor to root up the Lords Vineyard, Psalm. 80.14. but
also in respect of subtle seducers, and pernicious Heretics, who like Foxes
will endeavor to destroy Christ's Vine. Cant. 2.15.

(...), Instabunt, at instare dicitur quod jam praesens est. V. Plura apud
Grotium in 2 These. 2.2.
Thus those perilous times which then were instant, are now extant; no sooner do
the last times come, but perilous times are presently come. This also know,
That in the last days perilous times shall come.

There are yet two Questions to be answered, and then I come to the
Observations.

1. Quest. How can the times be said to be perilous, hard, hurtful, etc. since
Time in it self is good, being given us by the God of goodness, for good Ends
and Uses?

Metonim. Subjecti.

Non dies nec tempora, sed homines qui tunc futuri sunt, carpit. Chrysostom.


Answ. It Is a Metonymicall speech, the times being put for the men that live in
those times; a Trope very frequent in scripture. Psalm. 49.5. Ephesians. 5.16. the
days are evil (i. e.) the men living in those days. So in our common speech
we cry; O tempora! O wicked times! when we mean the wicked men that live in the
times. [See more in my Schools Guard. p. 172.] So Amos 5.12, 13. the Prophet
calls the time wherein many crying sins reigned, an evil time, by reason of an
evil and ungodly generation which made it so.

2. Quest. How can the last days be called perilous, when the Scripture so
frequently proclaims them glorious? Isay 2.2, 3. and 11.9. and 60.6, 7.10.18.
and 62.5. etc. Hosea 1.11. and 3.5.

Answ. The last days may be said to be both glorious and perilous in different
respects. 1. They may be said to be glorious, in respect of the great light,
liberty, knowledge, company, commentators, encouragements, clearer
manifestation of the Gospel, and many other gloriou^ privileges, which former
ages never enjoyed.

2. Yet they will be perilous times in respect of the sad abuse of those
glorious privileges, and sinning against such great light and love. John 3.19.
the higher we are lifted up with privileges, the greater will our fall be if
we abuse them, Mat. 12.23. we cannot sin at so cheap a rate in these last
times, as formerly men did. The sinners of the last times will have the lowest
place in hell.

Besides, they will be perilous times, in respect of the swarms of sinners and
seducers, which will then overspread the face of the earth, going up and down
(like the Devil their Master, that grand Peripatetick) seeking whom they may
devour; Vermin of this kind will then abound every where: weeds grow no where
so rank, as in a fat soil.

So that if we take the words in the largest construction, yet the Text is
ours; as our Savior said sometimes of a Text in Isay, so may I say of this
Text in Timothy; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears: our times
are a Comment on this Text. I appeal to all that know them, whether they be
not perilous, pernicious, troublous, hurtful, hateful, hard times.

I come now to some practical Observations.

1. Observe from these words, [ This also know] That it is our duty to take
notice of the Prophecies delivered to us in the word of God. As they are not
sealed by him, but left open for our use; so they must not by our negligence be
as a sealed Book to us. Deuteronomy. 29.29. we must not barely read, but search out
the meaning of the word. John 5.39. So did Daniel [9.2.] though he were a great
and excellent Prophet, yet he does not disdain to read: and when by reading the
Prophet Jeremy he understood that the time was come for the accomplishment of
Gods prophetical promises, then Daniel begins to pray for the fulfilling of
the promises. The Book of the Revelations is an excellent prophecy of the
downfall of the Churches enemies, and of the great things which in the latter
days God will do for his people, even to the end of the world; and therefore
the Lord would have us attentively to consider, and humbly and accurately to
weigh what is written there; that so our faith may be strengthened, and we may
be quickened (by remembering his promises) to serve his providence, acting and
praying for the downfall of Babylon, which God has so clearly promised shall
come to pass. And to encourage us to read, the Lord has pronounced them
blessed that read the words of that prophecy, viz. with attention, affection,
application and practice, Revel. 1.3. God takes it ill when he shall write to
us the great and glorious things of his Law, and we shall count them as strange
things, that concern us not, Hos. 8.12. this makes people (especially in the
Churches distresses) so faithless, prayerlesse, comfortless, and careless.
The Evangelist gives this as a Reason why the Jews committed that great sin in
crucifying Christ, it was because they knew him not to be the Messiah, nor did
they understand the prophesi^s of him, [ Acts 13.27.] though they were read to
them every Sabbath day.

This should startle us, and make us not only to enquire into the precepts and
promises of God, but also into the prophesies which he has published for our
good: for this is one great reason why so many stumble and take offense at Gods
ways, because of the Heresies and Apostasies of many: they forget this
prophecy of the Apostle, viz That the last days should be perilous times; and
therefore This also know.

2. Observe. The people of God, and specially his Ministers, his Timothies,
should be so prudent as to know and observe when perilous times are
approaching: as the prudent man foresees the evil of punishment before it
comes, [ Prove. 22.35.] so he more especially improves his spiritual prudence
in foreseeing the evil of sin and error; and having by certain sins and signs
discerned a tempest in the clouds, he hides himself in the chambers of Gods
special protection and providence. Isay 26.20.

This spiritual prudence can hurt neither Pastor nor People, but will advantage
us much. Hora novissima, tempora pessima sunt, vigilemus.
This pre-vision is the best means of prevention; in vain is the snare laid in
the sight of a bird. It will make us pray more fervently, watch more
diligently, gird on our armor, and walk more hum^ly: and this singular
privilege we shall have, that we shall more quietly and calmely undergo these
trials by false Prophets, Quicquid expectatum est diu, levius accedit. Sen.
which God shall be pleased to exercise us withal; we shall not fret and fume
as the wicked do, but in an holy silence we shall submit to the hand of God,
considering this, that which we have long since foreseen, Praevisa tela minus
laedunt.
and prepared for. Foreseen evils come no whit sooner, but far the easier to
us when prepared for, Acts 21.13. Darts foreseen are dintless: that which
suddenly falls on a man, may trouble a constant mind, but that which is long
expected, is more easily borne; and therefore This also know, that you be not
offended at it. It was a good resolution of Peter (had he not taken it up in
his own strength) Though all men should be offended at Christ, yet would he
never be offended. Matthew. 26.33. Let us take up the like in the strength of
divine assisting grace, Though many be offended, though all should be offended
at Religion, yet so will we not be: though never so many scandals be given by
others, yet shall they not be taken by us, so as in the least to distaste the
ways and truth of God. To this end God would have us acquainted with these
things before hand, that we may not be offended when they come, nor think it
strange when we hear of Errors, Schifmes, Heresies, false Teachers: Ordo
seculi, tanquam pulcherimum carmen, constat ex quibusdam quasi antithetis;
antitheta vero sunt elocutionis ornamenta. August. de civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap.
18.

Vbi ovile, ibi lupus.

(...), cert^ scito.

Consule Danaeum in Augustine. de Haeresibus.


thus it has been, thus it is, and thus, we see it foretold in the Text, it
shall be. There was of old a Iannes and a Iambres to resist Moses; an Hananiah
against the Prophet Jeremy; 400. false Prophets against a good Micajah; an
Alexander, chief Priests, and Pharisees against Paul. Where ever God has his
Church, the Devil will have his Chapel; where God has his true Prophets,
the Devil has his false ones to oppose them. From hence we may yet gather
this encouragement, That we have the true Church of Christ amongst us, because
the Wolves are so busy: where there are no Sheep, the Wolf seldom appears;
but where the folds are full, there the Wolves are busy. John 10.12. and
therefore think it not strange, but this know, and know for certain, That the
last days will be perilous: we think it strange to hear of Arrians, Arminians,
Socinians, Anabaptists, etc. but they are not new nor strange to Germany, no,
nor to the primitive Church; for in S. Augustins time we read of many old
Heresies which now go under the name of new light, when it is neither light nor
new, but only old error new vamped, an old Hag put in a new dress.

3. Observe Gods singular love unto his people, in that he warnes them of
perilous times long before they come. He will do nothing against his Church and
people, but he will first reveal it to his Prophets, that they may reveal it
to his people. Amos 3.7. Not that the Lord is bound to observe this Method: for
he may execute corporal and spiritual judgments when and how he pleases,
without revealing it to men or Angels: only it pleases him out of his tender
love and gracious condescension to his people, ordinarily to observe this
Method: First to shoot off his warning pieces, before he shoot off his
murdering-pieces, Hence he tells Abraham, Joseph, Noah, Lot, Daniel, etc. of
dangers before hand; he makes them of his privy Counsel: and as Gods Love
appears in fore-warning us of corporal judgments; so his tender care over us
especially appears in fore-warning and fore-arming us against spiritual
judgments, and spiritual enemies, which hunt for the precious soul. Now,
that we might prepare for the battle, and fear no dangers nor difficulties;
that we might not be despondent, Christ foretells us thrice in one Chapter of
false Prophets, and admonishes us to beware of them, Matthew. 24.4.11.24.25. So
Matthew. 7.15. Mark 13.23. John 16.1. And that we might not be seduced by such
Impostors, the Apostle also is frequent in admonishing us against them. Acts
20.30. 1 Cor. 11.13. 2 Timothy 2.17.18. and 1.4. 1. Phil. 3.2. Romans 16.17, Gal.
1.7, 8, 9. and John frequently in his Epistles admonishes us to beware of
deceivers that should arise in the last times, 1 John 4.1.3.5, 6. Peter does
excellently characterize them; that we might the better know them and avoid
them. 2 Pet. 2.1.10.13, 14, 15, 18, 19. so does Jude 4. to verse 20. he spends
almost his whole Epistle (it being an Epitome and summary of the second of
Peter) in describing false Teachers, and counselling us against them. This must
enlarge our Love and Thankfulness to our God, who is thus careful, over and
over to caution and counsel us, and to foretell us of perils long before they
come; with a This also know.

In the last Days.
Whence observe, That the days we live in, are the last days. Our times are
the last times, they are often so called in scripture. This is the last hour, 1
John 2.18. and upon us the ends of the world are come. 1 Cor. 10.11. the Coming
of the Lord is said to draw nigh. James 5.8. and the Day of the Lord
approaches, Heb. 10.25. it is but a little while ere Christ come to judge the
World; hence he is said to come quickly, Rev, 6.11. and 22.12. and the time is
at hand: Rev. 1.3. and our full Redemption draws nigh. Luke 21.28. and the
end of all things is at hand, 1 Pe^. 4.7. If the Apostle thought the day of the
Lord was at hand 1600. years ago, we may well conclude that it is near now.
The Apostle, seeing Christ come, all the Prophesies of him fulfilled, the
Gentiles called, and the Mystery of iniquity beginning already to work, he
concludes the day of the Lord was near, and so it was.

1. Comparatively, in respect of the times before Christ: it was nearer than to
those under the Law.

2. In respect of the certainty of it: the day of the Lord will as surely come
as if it were come this day. 2 Pet. 3.9, 10.

3. In respect of God; to whom a thousand years are but as one day. Psalm. 90.4.
2 Pet. 3.8.

4. In respect of Eternity: a thousand years, or two thousand years, are as
nothing, being compared with the time to come; it is but as a little drop of
water to the whole Ocean. So that this great day of the Lord which was near in
the Apostles time, is much nearer now: then began the last time, but now is the
end thereof. It cannot then be long to the day of judgment; for all the Signs
and Forerunners of it are accomplished, excepting the ruin of Rome, which
falls apace; for, as Rome was not buil't in a day, so she shall not down in a
day: but as she rose gradually, so shall she fall gradually; in England,
Scotland, Ireland, Poland, Holland, and France.

2. There wants but the destruction of the Turk, and the calling of the Jews,
and then comes the End.

Now, since the time is short, and we live in the last days, this should wean
us from the world, and take off our hearts from these fading, perishing things,
and make us labor for grace, which is durable riches. 'Twas an aggravation of
their sin, James 5.3. That they heaped up treasure for the last days. When
they were going out of the World, then they were drowning themselves in the
World. We should labor to do much good in a little time: and as at all times
we ought to be careful and conscionable in fitting our selves for our Masters
coming; so then especially when we see the day of the Lord draw nigh: then we
must double our diligence, as a servant will when he knows his Master is at
hand. They that lived a thousand years ago were bound to lead holy lives but
we that live in the clearest times, and the nearest to judgment, ought to lead
more holy and heavenly lives; that our Lord when he comes, may find us prepared.

2. It may teach us patience under all tentations and afflictions: it is but yet
a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and he will not tarry. Heb.
10.36, 37. Let therefore your moderation and equanimity be not only in your
breast, but let it be visible and known, not to one or two, but to all men,
both friends and foes; why so? for the Lord is at hand, ready to help you, and
to judge your enemies. Phil. 4.5. James 5.7, 8. [See in Sangar. his morning
Lect. p. 225.226.]

Perilous times shall come.
Hence note, That the last times will be the worst times.

Though in respect of the clear light of the Gospel, (which shall then abound)
they will be glorious times: yet, in respect of the contempt and abuse of the
Gospel to Libertinisme and profanesse, they will be inglorious and perilous
times; so bad that it will be Omne tempus Clodios, non omne Catones feret.
Seneca ep. 98.

In his ultimis and pessimis temporibus. Bern.

Sicut in sentinam profundi maris colluviones omnium sordium; sic in mores
nost^orum* quasi ex omni mundo, vitia fluxerunt Salvian.


dangerous saying how bad they be; hence Bernard long since called them, The
last and worst times. These last days will be the common sink and sewer, the
very receptacle of all the vile abominations and heresies of former ages. As
all the creatures met in Noah's Ark, and all the waters meet in the sea; so all
those prodigious enormities, and floods of error, (In this third age of the
World.

Aetatem parentum pejorem esse seculo avorum, and subsequentem Aetatem
progeniem daturam vitiosiorem. Horat.

Adhuc in processu sunt vitia; invenit luxuria aliquid novi inquod insaniat.
Invenit impudicitia novam contumeliam sibi. Invenit delitiarum dissolutio
aliquid tenerius, molliusque quo pereat. Seneca l. 7. Not. 2. cap 32. etc.


which have appeared in former ages, will meet in this Ocean. They will come
forth in a Third Edition, Auctiores, non Emendatiores: enlarged, but nothing
bettered. The Sinners of former times were but children in wickedness, the
Sinners of the last times shall be men. As that old Serpent the Devil, the
older he grows, the more subtle and experienced he is; so it is with the
wicked who are the Seed of the Serpent, the elder they grow, the more skillfull
Practitioners they be in sin; they are wittily wicked, and understand more how
to contrive Sin, and defend Errors by the improved experiences of their own,
and former times. As it is in every Art, by length of time, custom, and
experience, it is improved to a greater degree of finenesse and exactness: so
it is in this of sinning; time and experience make men more cunning in ways of
sin, and more subtle to defend them. Those Sins and Errors which formerly were
dammed up, shall, in these last and loose times, break forth with greater
violence. Now Heresy, Blasphemy, Envy, Pride, Atheism, Hypocrisy, Apostasy,
contempt of the Gospel, profanation of holy things, etc. will exceedingly
abound. The Devil is broke loose, and now there appear amongst us with open
face; Arrians, Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Familists, Separatists,
Mortalists, Perfectists, and (a compendium of all these in one) Quakers. The
common crying Sins of other nations, are ri^e amongst us: here you may find the
Drunkenness of the Dutch, the Lust of the French, the Italians Ambition, the
Spaniards Treachery, the Laylanders Witchcraft, the Covetousness of the Jew,
the Cruelty of the Turk, and the Monsters of Munster.

The Reasons are obvious. 1. In respect of Satan's rage, the last times will be
the worst. The Devils time now grows short, and therefore his wrath grows
great. Revel. 12.12. Satan's malevolence is a Spur to his diligence, and he
labors to supply the shortness of his time with the sharpness of his assaults:
insomuch that the Devils themselves seem to be possessed of far more violent
Devils; Morsus morientium bestiarum maxim solent esse mortiferi. Ar^stot.
they rage above their ordinary rate, since their Kingdom is so near an end:
Dying creatures bite most fiercely. Besiegers make their last onset upon a Town
or Castle, the most resolute and terrible of all others. Satan now sets upon
Souls by seduction most furiously, because when these Times are at an end, his
Work is also at an end, in this kind. He Is like a malicious Tenant; who,
perceiving that his Term is almost expired, does what he can to ruin the
house. Or like a bloody Tyrant; who suspecting the loss of his usurped
Sovereignty, makes havoc amongst his Subjects.

2. This is the Worlds Old age, it is its last and worst time; for Old age is
the Winter of a man's days, Senectus mill morbis, taediis and aerumnis est
obnoxia.
the dregs of his life, full of weakness, coldness, diziness, and
virtiginous; all our days are few and full of misery: but Old age (in respect
of those diseases and infirmities, which oppress both Soul and Body) is most
miserable, and therefore Solomon calls it, an Evil day, Eccles. 12.2. This
evil day (in a spiritual sense) is come upon the World, it is come to its Old
age, I had almost said, to its Dotage; it draws upon the Lees, and its dregs
are apparent. It Is now Winter with the World, it grows old and cold, according
to the Prophesy of our Savior, Matthew. 24.12. speaking of the Forerunners of
the end of the World, he sets down this as one special Sign, That iniquity
shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold. That Sin abounds and
superabounds, none can deny; that Love waxes cold, there are many complaints.
Where Is our fervent love to God, his Ordinances, his Ways, and People. The
World (says one) has been once destroyed with Water, for the heat of Lust,
and shall be again with Fire, for the coldness of Love. Latimer saw so much
lack of Love to God and goodness in his time, that he thought verily Doomes-day
was then just at hand; what would he have thought, had he lived in our age,
wherein it were far easier to write a Book of Apostates, then a Book of
Martyrs* yea so grossly degenerate shall the last days be, that Christ makes a
question whether he shall find Faith in the Earth, when he comes. Luke 18.8.
false Prophets will so abound, (in those last and loose days) that if 'twere
possible, they would deceive the very Elect, Matthew. 24.24. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. 1
Pet. 4.1. 1 John 2.18, 19.

2. Old men's Heads, by reason of weakness, are full of Fantasies, so the World
in this its decrepit Old age, and declining time, abounds with fantastic
fopperies, Mundus senescens patitur phantasias. Gerson.
and follies. The world is crazed in its Intellectualls, and Crazed in Moralls;
crazed in its Doctrines, and crazed in its Discipline. It has many gray hayres
(Signs of old age, and death approaching) yet such is its Security, that it is
insensible of them; She knows it not. Hos. 7.9. but as it was in the days of
Noah, so it is, and will be in these last days, Men give themselves to eating,
drinking, marrying, etc. and other sensual delights, till judgment arrest
them. Matthew. 24.37, 38, 39.

Yea so prolificall and fruitful are the vain Fancies of these last doting
times, that they may not unfitly be compared to a Mathematical line, which is
semper divisiblis, in semper divisibilia, and has no end.

We are so divided, and subdivided, that Love and Unity are fled the land. Non
enim parts solum sunt inter nos, sed partium novae parts. This should be
matter of Lamentation to us, and cause sad thoughts of heart.

3. Old age is testy and troubled with morosity: old persons usually are
froward, and hard to please. So in this dotage of the World, men are very
froward and perverse; they cannot endure sound doctrine, but are ready to fly
in the face of a Reprover. 2 Timothy 4.3.

4. In Old age the Senses decay. Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, are impaired. 2 Samuel
19.35. So in this decrepit age of the World, it is Spiritual senses are lost,
it is so blind, that it cannot discern between Light and Darkness, Truth and
Error; so deaf, that it cannot hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never
so wisely: so senseless, that it cannot savor the things of God.

Use. Whilst we complain of the badnesse of the times, let us not make them the
worse for us; Quo ad fieri potest numerum malo^um pietate nostra minuamus.
Baldwin.
but let us so walk, that we may make these last times, the best times; and
these Perilous times, Glorious times. Get convincing lives, be burning and
shining lights. Walk up unto your Privileges, answer your Gospel Light, with
Gospel-lives; how often is this duty pressed upon us? Ephesians. 4.1. Phil. 1.^7. Col.
1.10. 1 Th. 2.12. We should all make the times and places we live in the
better, and not the worse, for u^. Magistrates should be so zealous against
evill-doers, and Ministers so active against Sin and Error, and Governors of
Families so careful to Rule for God, that they may live desired, and dye
lamented; Qu^ periculosiora sunt tempora, eo cautiores simus ne commune malorum
diluvium nos una cum impiis abripiat. Baldwin.
that so when you are dead, it may be said, We miss such a man, he was zealous
against Sabbath-Prophaners, Drunkards, Swearers, Sectaries, etc. He was forward
to works of Piety, and Mercy, and ready to every good work. 'Twas David's
commendation, Acts 13.36. that he served God in his Generation; he did not seek
himself, nor serve God for a day or two, but he served him his whole
Generation, as Noah did. Genesis 6.9.

God has abundance of dishonor done him by profane persons, and Religion
suffers much by them; now we should labor to repair the dishonours done to his
name, by being blameless and harmless, shining like lights before a perverse
nation. The worse the times we live in are, the greater will our honor be, if
we be faithful. 'Twas Lots commendation that he was good in Sodom, and Job in
an Heathenish Vz. The more Sin abounds, the more our Grace should abound; and
the more Sin appears in the World, the more should we appear against it.

The Lord has done more for us of this last age of the World, then ever he did
for our forefathers, and therefore he expects more from us, then he did from
them; where he bestows much, he looks for much again: where we bestow double
cost, we look for a double crop. Christ is now more clearly preached to us, and
we enjoy the helps and advantages of former times. When Caesar was wounded to
death in the Senate House, Brutus coming for his blow, Caesar looks him in the
face saying, What, and thou my Son? (...).
A Pigmy set upon a Giants shoulders, may see further then the Giant himself.
It Is a shame for us if we do not our work better by Sun-light, then others that
have had but Twy-light. God takes it very ill to be wounded in the house of his
children and friends; for when he has done so much, Isai 1.2, 3. Zach. 13.6.
Will ye also forsake me, said Christ to his disciples? will you, whom I have
redeemed and loved above all the people of the World, you whom I have brought
forth in days of greatest Light and Love, when 'twas free with me to have
brought you forth in Midnight of Popery and Superstition; will you also rebel
against me? There is nothing renews the Gospel so soon as this contempt; it
makes the Lord repent of all the kindness he has showed us.

2. Note. Observation.
We must not look for a Church in this World without its imperfections and
corruptions, if ever the Church on Earth shall be pure and glorious, it shall
be in the last days; yet we see the spirit of God tells us here expressly, that
these last days shall be perilous times, by reason of the swarms of wicked
men, Non de iis qui plane foris sunt loquitur* sed de iis qui saltem externa
professione in ipsa Ecclesia sint futu^i. Aestius.
which shall be in the very bosom of the Church; who shall indeed pretend to
much Piety, yet shall be full of Impiety, and Hypocrisy; they shall have a form
of godliness, but they will deny its power. v. 5. There will be to the end of
the World a mixture in the Church of God, there will be Tares and Wheat, good
and bad in the Church always. Mat. 13.25. One told the Emperor Frederick,
that he would go to a place where no Hypocrites were, then (said he) you must
go beyond the frozen Ocean, where there are no Inhabitants; and yet thou will
find an Hyprocrite there, if thou find thy self there. He that looks for a
perfect Church in this World, or for such a Church wherein there shall be none
but Real Saints, A tempore Abel usque ad Christum semper fuerunt mali permixti
bonis, and erunt ad finem seculi. Sasbout. in 1 Timothy 3.1.
may look till his eyes rot in his head, before he see that day. Christ had but
twelve, and one of them was a Devil; and the rest that were sincere, yet had
their failings. The Apostle tells us that in the bosom of the Church, there
shall be seducers. Acts 20.29, 30. from amongst your selves shall men arise
speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them. All the Churches we
read of in the Scripture, have had their failings and blots, as the Church of
Jerusalem, Corinth, Galatia, and the seven Churches of Asia: yet Christ owned
them, and communicated with them still, and sent his disciples to them; and
therefore be not offended, when you see defects, corruptions, and disorders in
the Church; perfection indeed is to be wished for, but it is reserved for
Heaven. No Church ever was, is, or shall be perfectly free from sin on Earth.

Let us not then forsake the Lords Floor, because there is some Chafe in it;
nor run from Sion instead of Babylon, as many in our days do, that cry out
against the Church of England as a false Church (though all the Churches of God
in the World own her for a true one) and run from her as from Babylon, and so
run into Babylon: from a supposed, into a Real, Babylon. Babylon signifies
Confusion; now amongst those that separate what sad confusion is there?
Division upon division; separation upon separation, etc. till they have broken
themselves all to pieces, and at last are feign to sit, like Owls, alone.
These are they that abhor a mixed company, yet fly from Real Saints. This
they call new Light, when it is nothing but an old Error of the Catharists, V.
Danaeum in Augustinum de Haeresibus. cap. 38. and cap 69.
and Donatists, who, out of a conceit of their own exceeding holiness, did
separate themselves. [ Perfectionem justitiae and Angelicam sanctitatem hic ab
hominibus requirunt Donatistae; quam etiam se, suosque illos impuros coetus
habere jactant, and profitentur; tam sunt arrogantes, coeci, and a vero suae
infirmitatis and rebellionis sensu alieni. Danaeus loco citato, ubi plura.]
Causeless Separation (says a learned Doctor Owen's Rules for walking in
fellowship. p. 53.
Divine) from established Churches walking according to the Order of the Gospel
(though perhaps failing in some small things) is yet no small sin. Let such
consider.

1. That the Root of this separation is bad, Pharisaei a Parash, separare,
dividere V. Godwin's Jewish Antitiquitie. cap. 10.
and therefore the fruit cannot be good. It springs from Pride and
Censoriousnesse, as we see in the Pharisees, who were great Separatists, and
have their name from thence.

2. Such are Schismatics, and in a short time they will he Heretics; for,
Schism is the way to Heresy: they make a Rent in the Church, whose Peace
should be very dear to us; for, though Peace be not the Esse and being of a
Church, yet it tends very much to its been esse, and well-being: for as a
Kingdom, so a Church, divided, cannot long endure.

3. The Pretenses made for Separation are now removed, there is no Bishop,
Surplesse, Cross, Common Prayer, etc. for them to stumble at; and yet
separation was unlawful then, but now its far more vile, and therefore the
Lord punishes the Separatists of this age more severely, by giving them up to
viler opinions than formerly.

4. It Is a scandal and wrong to a Church: it is ill to forsake the society of
one good man without a cause; but to un-church a whole Church causelessly, now
great is that sin?

God punishes the Separati^^s of our times worse than formerly. V. Edwards's
Gangreen. 2 Part. Corol. 3. p. 195.
5. They cannot escape the revenging hand of God. Though men may suffer them,
yet God will not; one of the saddest judgments that we read of in the
Scripture, befell schismatic Corah, and his company: Numb. 6.16. they
thought to have levelled all, but God levelled them; they would destroy both
Magistracy and Ministry, but God destroys them; they made a rent in the
Congregation, and the Earth rent and devoured them: all this is done for a
memorial to succeeding Ages, that they take heed how they make rents in the
Church of God. verse 40. So Cain, the first Separatist that we read of, Genesis
4.16. he went from Gods presence ( i. e.) from Gods Church and Ordinances, and
then he becomes a Vagabond.

Suave est ex magno tollere ac^^vo. Horat. See more on verse 5.
He that would see more against this Sin, let him peruse Mr. Perk^ns on Jude 19.
Mr. Robert Bolton's Saints Guide* p. 126. Mr. Pagits Arrow against Separation.
Mr. Rutherfords Plea for Presbytery, p. 120. Mr. Bernard against Smith, D.
Hill's Fast Sermon, 1644. on 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Mr. Blake on the Covenant, chap.
31. p. 228. etc. and on the Sacrament; chap. 8. Sect. 3. p. 314. Camero
Praelect. de Ecclesia mihi. p. 322. and above all, Mr. Brinsly of Yarmouth, His
Arraignment of Separation.

A fourth Observation.
That the doctrine of the Millenaries is a mere fancy. The Text is clear
against it; for it says expressly, The last days shall be perilous times.
Many dream of peace and joy, and, I know not what, golden, glorious,
flourishing times, wherein they shall be free from Sin and Sinners, and live in
this World without tentations and troubles. But do not you deceive your selves
with such vain conceits, for I tell you (says the Apostle) the last days
shall be very perilous, wherein all manner of Sins, and Sinners shall abound;
men shall be Covetous, Proud, Blaspemers, etc. verse 23. Now whether shall we
believe Paul, or these Dreamers; that say, Christ shall come from heaven, and
shall reign visibly and personally in Jerusalem a thousand years, as an
earthly Monarch, in outward glory and and Pomp, putting down all Monarchy and
Empires. Then shall the Church of the Jews and Gentiles live without any
Trouble or Enemy, without Sin or Sorrow, without Word, Sacraments, or any
Ordinances. They shall pass this thousand years in great worldly delights,
eating, drinking, building houses, planting vineyards, and eating the Mill
annos post Resurrectionem in terreno regno Christi secundum carnales ventris,
and libidinis voluptates futuros fabulantur Cerinthiani. V August de
Haeresibus. cap 8. These wild grapes they would gather from Mat. 26.29.
fruit of it, Marrying wives, getting children, and enjoying all the lawful
pleasures which all the creatures, then Redeemed from their ancient slavery,
can afford? In this earthly happiness shall the Church continue till the end of
thousand years, and then comes the day of Judgment. Upon this point I find so
many men, so many opinions, it is a harder thing to find out certainly what they
hold, then it is to conquer them. Piscator says, The Martyrs shall rise a
thousand years before others, and shall reign with Christ in heaven. Alsteed
comes, and he says it shall be on Earth, yet after the day of judgment. Mr.
Mede with his new light differs from all the rest, affirming, That this reign
shall be in and during the day of Judgment, which shall continue a thousand
years. Delirium hoc est, non D^gma Theologicum. Spectrum cerebri Anabaptistici.
[ Chimaera Chimaer^ssima] a very fiction without foundation in the Word of
God. Thus these builders of Babel, are divided and confounded amongst
themselves.

The first opinion I find to be most generally received hy the Millenaries.
Indeed such carnal Doctrine, suits well with such carnal Saints, This is some
of the new light of our times; being nothing but an old error broached by
Cerinthus the Heretic in the first Century, Nullo modo ista p^ssunt nisi a
carnalibus credi. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 20. c. 7 This piece of rich coin
(as Mr. Sterry calls it) has been butied in the earth a long time, but of late
days has been dug up again.
1500. years ago. He was a loose Libertine, and therefore he invented this
loose Opinion, to uphold his riotous practices. S. Augustine opposed it. It has
layen dead for a long time, till some some Libertines and carnal Anabaptists
of late have revived it, and put a new gloss upon it.

The vanity of this opinion will appear by the arguments in my Chiliasto-Mastyx
against Doctor Homes.

VERSE 2. For men shall be lovers of themselves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud,
Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents. unthankful, unholy, etc.
THe Apostle, having told us, verse 1. in General, that the last days should
be perilous; His verbis (...), seu per congeriem 19 enormia recenset vitia
Apostolus. Weinrich.
he comes now to particulars; verse 2, 3, 4, 5. and sets forth in their proper
colors the Sins and Sinners, the Men and Manners of the last times. I wish
they were not a true Map of our times. I may truly call these 19. sins,
Englands Locking-glasse, wherein we may plainly see the true cause of all our
miseries, and what it is that hinders the work of Reformation, and turns away
good things from us. These are the 19. Weeds which deface Gods Garden, the
Church; the good Lord root them out of all our hearts, that our names may never
be found in this black Bill, and cursed Catalogue, to be such as make evil
times, bad; and bad times worse.

It Is worth our noting, that the Apostle does not place the Peril and
Hardness of the last times, in any external calamity, or penal evils; as
Sword, Plague, Famine, Persecution: but in the prodigions sins and enormities,
of such as profess Religion. Let the times be never so successful and
prosperous, in other respects; yet if Sin abound, they are truly perilous and
pernicious times: for it is Sin that sets God against us, and the Creatures
against us, and conscience against us; Sin is the Fundamental and Meritorious
cause of all our miseries and perils, as appears, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc. Sin is
the evil of evils, and brings all other evils with it. Let the times be
never so miserable, and the Church lie under sad persecutions; yet if they be
not sinful times, they are not truly perilous times, but rather purging and
purifying times.

From the Connection of this verse with the former, Observe.

That nothing is so perilous and pernicious, so hard and heavy to a gracious
soul, as the Sins of the times he lives in. [ This I have cleared in the
opening of the last clause of the first verse.] As nothing is dearer to Gods
people, than Gods glory; so nothing goes nearer their hearts, than Gods
dishonor; As Gods soul is said to be afflicted, and his heart to be broken
with the Idolatries and Apostasies of a backsliding people. Ezekiel. 6.9. so it is
a great grief and heartbreaking to the people of God, to see their God
dishonored; Hence Lots righteous soul is said to be vexed [ or tormented, as
the word signifieth] with the abominations of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. The
Mourners sigh and cry for all the abominations of the times they lived in,
Ezekiel. 9.4. Jeremy [13.17.] weeps in secret for the sins of the people. David's
eyes run down with rivers of tears, bec^^se men forget Gods Law, and his soul
was grieved because of the Transgressors, Psalm. 11.9.53.136.158. Christ wept
over Jerusalem because she knew not the day of her Visitation, Luke 19.41, 42.
Paul is troubled at the Idolatry of the Athenians, Acts 17.16. and weeps to
consider the sad condition both of the Seducers, and the Seduced; Phil. 3.18.
the two Witnesses mourn to see so many bewitched with Antichrists delusions.
Revel. 11.3. It Is true, we ought to be sensible of the judgments of God, and
to be humbled under them; so was David. Psalm. 119.120. I am afraid of thy
judgments. So Job [31.3.14.] was awed by seeing Gods judgments on the Wicked,
and it is made a note of a wicked man, that he cries not [ in Prayer to God]
when the Lord binds him with the cords of affliction, Job 36.13. These
corrections are harsh and hard to flesh and blood; but that which should most
affect us, is Sin: for God is honored by his judgments on men, In omni peccato
voluntario est contemptus quidam implicitus Aquinas.

Omne peccatum est divinitatis injuria. Salvian.


but Sin is a despising and despiting of him. 2 Samuel 12.9.14. and therefore
Gods people had rather live in times of judgment and common calamity, when
Sword, Plague, and Fam^ne are abroad; than in times of general and common
sinning: for those are but Penal evils, and may drive us to God; but sin is
the evil of evils, and makes us run from him, as Adam did Genesis 3.8. and Cain.
Genesis 4, 16.

Before I can proceed, two Questions must be answered.

1. Quest. Of whom does the Apostle here speak, when he says, In the last
days men shall be Lovers of themselves, Covetous, Boasters, etc.

Answ. 1. Negatively, he speaks not here of Turks and Tartars, that are without
the Pale of the Church, and do openly oppose the Gospel of Christ. But
affirmatively, he speaks of such as shall live in the bosom of the Church, and
shall partake of the external Privileges of it, verse 5. they be such as will
have a form of godliness: they will be great pretenders to Piety, though their
lives abound with all manner of Iniquity.

1. The Text may have relation to the Pharisaical Papists, and Popish Seducers,
who creep into houses, and lead captive silly women. How do all the Vices,
which the Apostle does instance in, reign especially in the Popish Clergy? In
all their doctrine and service, how do they seek themselves? Papists are
natural men, and so must needs be full of self-love. In their preaching, they
cry up the Popes Supremacy, and exalt him above Kings: for the Pope can give
them Deaneries, and Bishoprics, which Kings cannot do, without him.

2. They are exceeding Covetous, they cry up Purgatory, Indulgencies, Masses
for quick and dead; all is for money. Rich men have store of Masses and
Trentalls said for them, for which they pay dear; but the Poor have none said
for them, they may dye good cheap.

Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra Ecclesiam dimicatis.
3. They Boast of their Holy Mother the Church [ yet fight against the true
Church] they boast of their holy Relics, holy Rags, holy Bones, holy Stones,
holy Wood, holy Blood, holy Blocks, holy Stocks, etc.

4. The Consule D. Downam de Antichristo. l. 4. c. 23.
Pride of the Pope and his Clergy is known to all the World; how do they insult
over Kings, and Emperors, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

5. Their V. Willets Tetr. Con. Pill. 2. Synop p. 1264. Edit. ult.
Blasphemies are known to all; they take upon them to forgive Sins, and for a
reward can dispense with the manifest breach of all Gods Commands.

6. How disobedient to Parents are their Nuns and Friars? amongst whom many,
contrary to their Parents liking, even in their Minority, are seduced, and so
become unthankefull to those that bred them. So the Jesuits, how disobedient
and unthankful have they been to their Superiors of those Nations that
entertain them, by plotting their ruin. As for the unholinesse of Rome, all
the World that knows her cries shame on her. Hodie cum tanta sit spurcities
in Clero Papali, quae vel suo foetore totum mundum inficit: non desinunt tamen
cum sua nequitia titulos juraque omnia sanctorum fastuose sibi arrogare. Calv.
in locum.

Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse; rever^or, cum Le^o, Meretrix, Scurra,
Cynaedus ero. Mantuan.


What is the Pope their head but that man of sin? 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. merum scelus, a
man compounded of Sin, and made up of Wickedness, one that is Sin it self in
the Abstract. Hence Platina (one of their own) tells us of 13. Popes that were
Adulterers, 3. common Brothellers. 4. Incestuous ones, 11. Sodomites, 7.
Whore-masters, and erecters of Stews, where every Whore pays weekly a Julian
penny to the Pope, which many years amounts to 40000. Ducats. Thus by the
Rottenness of the Heads of their Church, we may guess at the unholiness of
their Members. This made Mantuan long since bid adieu to Rome, telling her He
would never return to her again, till he went to be a Baud or Brotheller. 9.
They are void of natural affection, witness their bloody Inquisition, and
cruel persecuting of their nearest Relations, if they be (as they call them)
Heretics, (i. e.) faithful Servants of Christ. A Turk, a Jew, a Pagan shall
find more favor with them then a zealous Christian. 10. Covenant-breakers,
they are notoriously guilty of this, witness their late dealing with the
Protestants in Savoy. No Bonds can bind them, no Oaths can hold them, they deal
with them all as Apes do with their Collars, which they can put off and on at
pleasure. The Popes Holiness can easily absolve them from the faith which they
have promised to Heretics.

11. False accusers, V. Willets Tetrastylon Papismi Pill. 1. Synopsis. page
12.33.
their lying and slandering of Protestants, is one of the four main Pillars of
Popery.

12. Their Incontinency is notoriously known to the World: what has been the
practice of their Friars and Nuns, the sculls of children that have been found
there, does evidence. Corporal whoredom, and Spiritual, often go together. Hos.
4.13.

13. Their Fierceness appears by their cruel Massacres in England, Ireland
France, Savoy, and amongst the poor Indians.

Their Heady desperate Treasons are known to the Nations. How often did they
attempt the life of Queen Elizabeth, and by Gunpowder would have blown up King
James.

Their hatred to those that are good, is so implacable, that they cannot once
name them without some opprobrious Title, as Hereticus Lutherus, Impins
Calvinus. Hence Azorius the Jesuit [ Moral. l. 8. c. 16.] affirms, That the
names of Reformed Writers must not at all be mentioned, unless it be to their
disgrace. They are voluptuous persons: they love their Sensual delights more
then God; and with that profane Cardinal, they prefer their part in Paris
before their part in Paradise.

Lastly, they, have a form of godliness, and that is all. All their Religion is
mere formality, lip-labor, and gross Hypocrisy. Under the name of Christ's
Spouse they play the filthy Harlot. Under the Title of the Church, they fight
against the Church. Under a Show of godliness they cloak a World of wickedness.
Under pretense of vowed Chastity, they lived in Adultery; under the cloak of
professed Poverty, they got the goods of the Temporalty, and under the vizor of
being dead to the World, they not only reigned in the World, but also ruled
it: creeping not only into men's Purses, but also into their Consciences; they
heard their confessions, they knew their secrets, and ruled men as they
pleased. Thus we see the whole Catalogue is theirs without any straining; and
though we cannot excuse our selves, yet they are the unfittest persons to
accuse us in the World.

2. Yet the Text has an eye (in my judgment, and in the judgment of betters)
more especially and properly to these last times wherein we live; and to those
that shall live in the bosom of the true Church; who shall have a Form of
godliness, and shall make an extraordinary profession of Piety, engrossing the
Name of Sanctity to themselves and their party, as if they only were the holy
Ones: yet will they deny the Power of it in their lives; being full of
Self-love, Covetousness, Pride, etc. creeping into houses, and seducing silly
women, as our Anabaptists and Quakers do. To these does every piece and parcel
of this Character of these last times, most properly belong, as will appear in
the handling of them.

Quest. 2. The second question is this. Have not men in all ages been Covetous,
Self-seekers, Proud, etc. what wonder then is it, if they be so in the last
days?

Ans. It Is true, in all ages men ever have been, and will be, Self-lovers,
Covetous, Proud, etc. I, but in the last days these Sins will super-abound,
they will then appear in a more eminent manner, they will be acted more visibly
and violently then in any Age before. The Sinners of the last times will be the
vilest Sinners: because they will sin against the greatest Light, and the
greatest Love, etc.

The Observation.
1. Note, That Self-love is one special Sin, and Sign, of the last times. In
all Ages men will be full of Self, but never so much as in the last Age. This
sinful Self-love is set in the Front, as the Leader of the File, and the cause
of all those 18. Enormities which follow: it is the Root from whence these
Branches spring, and the very Fountain from whence those bitter Streams do
issue. This is that pregnant, prolificall Mother of those Monsters which
follow. First men shall be Lovers of themselves, and then they will be
Covetous, Proud, Blasphemers of God, and disobedient to man. Instead of
Christian love which takes care for the good of others, men will only consider,
(...) sunt nimii sui amatores, qui ^imis sibi placent, suisque commodis impense
student. Espencaeus. Sui amantes dicuntur sua quaerentes (i. e.) qui privatis
student commodis posthabita salute and utilitate aliorum.

Aestius. (...). Aristot.


and intend themselves; they will seek their own Profit, Pleasure, Ease; they
will admire themselves, and all their own Opinions; they Deify themselves, and
Vilify others. Thus all men [ comparatively] seek their own, Phil. 2.20.
contrary to that Apostolical precept, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own,
but every man another Wealth. Most men enquire after nothing else, but Who
will show us any good? ( i. e.) Goods and Riches. Psalm 4.6. referring all to
themselves with the King of Babylon. Dan. 4.30, blessing and approving of
others in that way. Psalm. 49.18. This is made one special Mark of a wicked
man. Psalm. 36.2. he flatters himself in his own Eyes ( i. e.) he has a good
Opinion of himself, though he be never so naught; the Pharisees were so stuffed
with Self-love, that they thought themselves righteous, Luke 5.32. when they
were most unrighteous. Thus Simon Magus was a great man in his own conceit,
when indeed he was a Sorcerer, a very limb of the devil. Acts 8.9, 10. So Paul
before his Conversion was alive. Romans 7.9. he thought himself in a good
Condition, being full of Presumption, and Self-confidence. So the Church of
Laodicea had too good a conceit of her self; in her own conceit she was
spiri^ually rich in Knowledge, Faith, Obedience; but Christ tells her she was
indeed blind and naked, wretched and miserable, Rev. 3.17. and this is the Sin;
not of one or two, V. M. White on Genesis 3.12. Observat. 3.
but of every man by Nature, he is apt to think himself something, when indeed
he is nothing, and so deceives himself. Gal. 6.3. as a good man in a desertion
may think he has no Grace, when indeed he has it: so a natural man in his
presumption may think he is full of Grace, when he has none at all. James 1.22.
So Prove, 13.7. some make themselves rich when they have nothing; of the two
extremes, its far better and safer to under-value, than to overvalue, our
selves. So did Agur, Prove. 30.2. I am not a man. Paul in his own apprehension
was the chief of Sinners, and least of Saints. This is not so dangerous, nor so
common, for where one thinks too ill of himself, there is ten thousand thinks
too well of themselves; like those Levites, that really thought themselves true
Priests, till the Records were searched, and they not being found there, were
discarded, and put from the Priesthood. Ezra 2.62. This is the Root of much
sin, and misery.

Iste mali fons est, tam sum Miser, ut miser ipse
Cum sim, me miserum non tamen Esse sciam.
Quest. But some may demand, is all Self-love unlawful? are not we commanded
to love our Neighbor as our selves; and is not the Proverb, Quisque sibi
proximus, The love of a man's self is (at best) a good pattern, but an ill
boundary; to love another as one self, may be a good Level, but to make it ones
mark too, and love another, but for ones self, it is to make a man's self not
only the Epitomy of the World, ^ut the whole Volume. Herb.
Charity begins at home, and every man is next Neighbor to himself?

Answ. We must distinguish of Self

Love, it is threefold, 1. Ordinate. 2. Religious. 3. Inordinate.


1, There is an Ordinate, Qui sibi malignus, cui bonus erit? Aug. Ordinata
charitas incipit a se, non de^init in se. Aquinas. Homo post Deum debet seipcum
prim^ and maxim amare in rebus quae spectant ad aeternam salutem. Alsted.
honest, and natural Self, springing from an instinct in nature, whereby a man
loves himself, and seeks the preservation of his life; this is commanded. Ephesians.
5.28, 29. Men must love their own bodies, for no man [in his right wits] ever
yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. Thus a man may love
himself as Gods creature, for God has planted in all men the Love of
themselves, which in subordination to God and the common good, is warrantable:
so that Love of a man's ^elf is one thing, and Self-love is another: in the one
love guides the man to make him love whom he ought, and as he ought; in the
other, the man swayeth his love to make it serviceable to himself, and to love
as he pleases: so that the Scripture does not simply condemn Self-love, which
is planted so deeply in our natures by the God of Nature; but sinful and
inordinate Self-love.

2. There is a Pious and Religious Self-love, considered in relation to God and
the common good; thus a man may love himself as an Instrument of Gods glory,
and as a servant for the good of others: else our Savior would never set our
love to our selves before us, as a Pattern of our love to our Neighbors. Now
upon these grounds, and in relation to these ends, we may not only love our
selves, but seek our selves too. This love spreads, and dilates it self, for
God and the good of others. The more noble and excellent things, the more
communicative and diffusive they are of themselves; Bonum quo communius eo
melius.
the Sun is herein a more noble thing then a Torch, and a Fountain then a
ditch. Christ emptied himself of his Glory, not for his own, but for our,
benefit, Phil. 23.6. it will make us part with our own right for Peace. Genesis
13.8, 9. 1 Cor. 6.7. it will make us condescend to those of the lower sort.
Romans 12.16. not seeking our own profit, but the profit of many. 1 Cor. 10.33.
yea, and though they be Free, yet Love will make them Servants to all, Sicut ex
charita^e omne bonum, sic e Philautia omne malum; nam charitas est lat^ and
undique essunditur: Philautia ver^ latitudinem ejus in a^ctum constringit, and
in unum tantummodo contra^it. Soto.
1 Cor. 9.19. On the contrary, Self-love contracts the soul, and has an eye
still at Self in all its undertakings. It Is the very Hedg-hog of conversation;
that rolls and lap^ it self within its own soft down, and turns out brisles to
all the World besides: much like the fat Monk, who when the Abbeys were going
down, and he had gotten his pension for life, stroaked his belly, and cried,
Modo hic sit been, if all went well there, 'twas well enough. This is, with the
^illy bird, to mind nothing but the building of our own nests, when the tree is
cutting down; and to take more care of our private Cabin, then of the ship it
self, when it is a sinking.

(...) sunt, qui plus de seipsis sentitiunt, quam recta ratio ipsaque veritas
admittit, q^ique omnia ad s^a referunt commoda. Baldwin.
3. There is a carnal, corrupt, inordinate Self-love; when a man admires
himself, his Ways, his Works, his Opinions, Contemning and Vilifying others:
When a man so loves himself, that he loves neither God nor man truly, and as he
ought, but prefers himself and his own private interest, before Gods glory, and
his brothers good. Now this vicious and inordinate Self-love, is the great and
Master-sin of these last and worst times. It Is an evil disposition that is
natural to us all, and so moves us strongly, delightfully, constantly, as
natural things use to do, and this makes it so hard, even where there is Grace
to subdue it, and keep it within its bounds. Hereditary diseases are hardly
cured, Morbi haereditarii graviores habentur adscititiis. Ke^^arm.
Self-love is hereditary to us, we are apt to have high conceits of our selves
from the very birth; till Grace humble and abase us, all our Crows are Swans,
our Ignorance Knowledge, our Folly Wisdom, our Darkness Light, and all our
own Ways best, though never so bad. Even the Regenerate themselves are in
part tainted with it, and have fallen by it. David to save himself, acts a
weak part, and counterfets before Achish. Peter to save his life, denies his
Savior. Let us therefore set our selves with full purpose of heart against
this Epidemical, Soul-destroying, Land-ruining sin. To this end take these few
considerations.

1. Consider, this Inordinate, Vicious Self-love, is the Root of many great
evils, Covetousness, Contention, Unthankfulness, etc. are all Virtually,
Seminally, Originally, Fundamentally in this cursed Self-love. This is morbus,
Morbi complicati difficillime curantur. ut loq. Medici.
complicatissimus, a disease that has many other diseases included in it, and
so is more hard to cure. Hence spring all those Errors and Heresies, which are
so rife in these last days, men have too high a conceit of themselves, and
their own opinions, they imagine they can see more then all the Churches of God
in the World. Multi sap^enses esse potuissent, nisi se jam tales esse f^lso
fuissent opinati.

This makes many take Morality for Grace, when Morality is but Nature refined,
Old Adam put into a better dress. A Moralized man is but a Tame Devil. Mr.
Watsons Sermon. on Phil. 2.12. p. 20. Vbi plura.


There Is more hope of a poor silly fool, then of such Self-conceited persons.
Prove. 26.12. This made the Donatists think themselves spotless; and the
Pelagians to cry up Nature, and cry down Grace. As a man that is in love, does
think the very blemishes in his love to be beautiful; so those that with
Narcissus are in love with themselves, and dote on their own opinions, think
their Heresy to be Verity; and their Vices Virtues. This will bring Vexation at
last, it troubles us to be cheated by others in petty matters, but for a man to
cheat himself wilfully, and that in a matter of the highest concernment, is the
trouble of troubles to an awakened conscience.

Hoc ad crimina nostra addimus, ut cum in omnibus rei simus etiam bonos nos and
sanctos esse credamus, ac sic in nobis cumulentur iniquitatis effensae,
praesumptione justitiae. Salvian. de Gub. Dei. l. 2.

Philautus qui se amat cum seipsum magis quam veritatem honorandum putet, quid
justum, bonum, pulchrum sit male judicat. Plat. de Legibus. l. 5.


2. It Is a Sin that blinds men so that they cannot see the Truth. Let a Minister
never so clearly convince them, yet they will not be convinced; their
deceitful hearts have a thousand evasions, no Jugler in the World has so many
tricks to deceive, as they have; many are blinded and deluded by Satan, he
persuades men that they are in a good condition, and highly in Gods favor.
Where he dwells, he labors to keep all in Peace, by himself, by false
friends, and by false Prophets who are his agents. Thus deluded Ahab by false
Prophets who bid him go up and prosper. when they might more truly have said,
Go up and perish, but usually men deceive themselves wittingly, and wilfully.
2 Pet. 3.5.

No wise man will trust a known Cheater, yet such fools are men that they
trust too much to their own deceitful hearts, which is the Grand Impostor of
the World. See Doctor Hall, and Mr. Daniel Dyke on that Text, and Mr. Daniel
Rogers on the History of Naaman. Mr. Ant. Burgess spiritual Refining; the 7.
first Sermons.

Bis miseri qui se non sentiunt esse miseros. Igno^ antia a quae a Philantia
and a cupiditate mala proficiscitur, omni excusatione vacat. Fayus.


Ier. 17.9, 10. the heart of man ( i. e.) the whole Soul, the Understanding,
Will, Affections, etc. is Gnacob, crooked, crafty, deceitful, and desperately
wicked. It tells men of gold, but gives them counters; it makes them dream they
are Kings, when they are beggars; like a hungry man that dreams he eats, but
when he awakes he is hungry. Isay 29.8. This makes men so indulgent to
themselves, their sins and errors must not be touched; these, Absolon-like, must
be dealt gently withal, and which is the height of misery, it makes men
insensible of their m^sery; they think themselves at the gates of heaven, when
they are in the Subburbs of hell. This Self-indulgence spreads a veil over the
eyes, and blindes the judgment that it cannot see what is amiss in it self.
Isai 44.20. a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? A Self-conceited heart, is a
self-deceiving-heart; it cannot endure any Self-Examination, Self-reflection,
Self-judging; it cannot endure to put the question to it self concerning it
self; he cannot, he dares not, say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? What
have I done? Ier. 8.6. a gracious soul reflects upon himself, and cries, Lord,
is it I? Mat. 26.22. and it is I that have sinned and brought this judgment,
says David, 2 Samuel 24.10. but let a wicked man's sins be never so visible, yet
he pleads innocence, and Not-guilty still Ier. 2 34, 35. The Priests and People
in Malachies time were very corrupt, yet when the Lord by the Prophet tells
them of it, see how impudently they cry three times together, Wherein have we
done am^sse? Mal. 1.6. and 2.6. and 2.17. and 3.8.13. See to what a height of
shamelessness Self-excusation of the heart of man may transport him, even then
and in those things when and wherein he is most guilty! and though we think
this prodigious in them, yet it is but an instance of the overweening
partiality that is in us all by nature toward our selves. This makes so many
to pervert the Scriptures, and to apply the promises to themselves instead of
threatenings,

3. This sinful Self overthrows Christian Society and Community, if one member
be sick, Aegrotante una, lamentantur omnes. Sicut te, non quantum te. Every man
ought to have a greater care of his own soul, then of his brothers. V. Doctor
Andrews, on Con. 5. cap. 7. ubi plura. Sibi placentes, multum tibi displicent.
August. Confess. l. 10. c. 39.
the rest of the members will sympathize with it; we are members one of
another, Romans 12.4. and should be sensible of the afflictions of Joseph. Like
Bees, when one is sick, the rest are sad. But Self-love hardens the heart, and
makes it cruel to Father, Mother, Wife, Children, and Neighbors; whereas true
love seeks not her own, but the good of others. 1 Cor. 13.5. it makes us love
our neighbors as our selves, now every man wishes (or at least ought to wish)
his own eternal good heartily and sincerely. It Is therefore an ungodly Proverb
which is used by too many. Every one for himself, and God for us all. But where
every one is for himself only, there the Devil is for all. We must therefore
change the Proverb, every one for his own, and for his Brothers eternal good,
and then God will be for us all. Psalm. 133. ult. There God commands the
blessing, where Brethren dwell in sacred amity and unity together.

4. Such are odious to God. The more lovely we are in our own eyes, the more
loathsome in Gods; but the more we loath our selves, the more God loves us.
Ier. 31.18* 20.

2. They are odious to men. Multi oderint, si te diligas nimis. Suldas.
As a public spirited good man (as much as in him lies) does good to all, and
so is beloved of all, insomuch that some would even venture their lives for
him, Homines supra modum se amantes, a multitudine male audiunt, quipp^ qui
foedo infamique cognomine, vov^cantur (...) A^istot. Eth. ^9 c 4.8. Pe^^e (...)
pereas Salvian.
Romans 5.7. though for a rigid righteous man; scarce any will dye, yet for a
good man who has been useful and serviceable in his generation, whose life
and labors have benefitted many; for such a one (says the Apostle) some would
even dare to dye. So on the contrary, a private spirited man, that is all for
himself, and for his own interests, is slighted and abhorred of all.

3. This inordinate Self-love is in effect Self-hatred. We never loose our
selves more, then when we seek our selves most. He that loves any thing better
then Christ, shall loose it. Luke 9.14.17. John 12.25. Henry the Third, King of
France, forsaking God and turning to Idols, he became a Catholic, and l^st
all: for thinking to get the Monks on his side, by affecting their devotion; a
Monk killed him, and he became contemptible to his People, Paris and all his
great Towns revolting from him. That we may not ruin our s^^ves, let us deny
our selves, and all that is dear to us for Christ; this is the only way to save
all. As we must deny our Regenerate Self, viz. all our Grace, Services, and
Sufferings, in point of Justification: so we must deny our Corrupt self in
point of Mortification. We must deny our own carnal Reason, Qui diligit se
stultum non proficiet ad sapientiam, nec fiet quisquam qualis esse cupit, nisi
se oderit qualis est. August* Est genus quoddam pietatis in hac re crudelem
esse. Hieron.
and submit our selves to Gods counsel: in all our Ways we must acknowledge
him. Prove. 2.5. 2 Cor. 10.5. being ready to deny our selves in any thing, and
to do what ever he commands us. Act. 9.6. We must be content to be ordered by
Christ, as well as to be saved by him. Christ's Mind now must be our Mind, and
his Will our Will; now we desire to be men according to Christ's heart: now we
are Friends to all his Friends, and Enemies to his Enemies, for ever. Now we
hate our selves for hating him, and take a godly revenge on our selves for our
former rebellions.

[If any would see more of Self-denial, which is directly contrary to that
cursed Sin of Self-seeking; let him peruse D. Preston, His Treatise on
Self-denial. D. Reynolds Sermon. on Matthew. 16.24. Pinks three Sermon. on
Self-denial Mr. Ier. Buroughs, His Treatise of Self-denial. Mr. Ambrose his
Media, Edit ult. Fenner on Luke 9.23. Fol. p. 151. D. Tailor in Folio, in fine
p. 1. Mocket on Mat. 13.45.

6. Consider, that it is a great blemish to Religion, when the Professors of it
are Self-seeking men; the Lord lays this as a blot on Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel.
33.31. they gave him the hearing, but their hearts were set upon Covetousness.
That But spoiled all; so we may say of many, They are eminent Professors, but
they are Self-seekers, they are Knowing men, but Hard, Worldly, and love their
own private interests too much. Away with these Buts, they are great blemishes,
and cause Religion to stink in the no^trills of the men of the World. Iribera
me Domine a malo homine meipso, a me, me salva. Bern.
Labor therefore for Self-denial, whereby we may advance Gods glory, and our
Brethrens good, before our own private ends, and interests; and let that good
man's Prayer be thy daily Prayer. Deliver me O Lord from that Evil Man my Self.

[Against Self-seeking, see two excellent Semons. Viz. Mr. Ienkyn on Phil.
2.22. Preached April 9. 1645. and Mr. Calamy on the same Text, at Paul's, 1654.
Mr. Daniel Rogers, Naamans History. p. 98. etc. Mr. Iacombs Public Spirit, A
Sermon on Acts 13.36.

Covetous, Boasters, Proud, etc.
See here what a Concatenation of Sins there is, and how they are linked
together, Self-Lovers, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, etc.

Hence observe, That Sins (especially great Sins) seldom go alone. As great
men have great attendance, so great Sins have many followers; and as he that
admits of a great man into the house, must look to have all his ragged
Regiment, and black Guard, to follow him; so he that admits but one great Sir
into his heart, Res immoderata Cupido. Ovid.
must look for Gad, a Troop of ugly lusts to throng in after. Sin i^ like a
Tyrant, the more you yield to it, the worse it Tyrannizeth over you. It Is
insatiable, and knows no bounds. E. G. David's great Sin of Idleness, brings
forth Adultery, Murder, Lying, Drukennesse, Inhumanity, Cruelty. So Lots
Drunkenness brought forth Incest; Peter's Self-confidence brought him to a
denial of his Master, and every denial was worse then other. Mat. 26.72, 74.
Adams eating of the Forbidden fruit, brought with it a breach of all the
Commandments (as Divines observe) and if it be thus with Gods children, who
Sin with Reluctance, oh how violently will Satan drive on his slaves, who give
themselves up to Sin! Thus Iezabell cove^s Naboths Vineyard, but does she stay
there? no, but she subornes false witness against him: and takes away hi^ life.
Judas at first was a Hypocrite, then a Covetous Caitiffe, and at last sells his
Master; so that what we say of Errors in Opinion, V. Capel on Tentat. l. 4. c.
1. p. 4.5. and Weems. Vol. 1. c. 3. p. 126. in fine Vol. Fides est una
copulativa.
is most true in matters of Practice; Concesso uno absurdo consequentur mill;
Grant but one, and many will follow. As there is a Concatenation of Virtues, so
that he who has one in Truth, has all. As 2 Pet. 1.5.6.7, 8. add to your
Faith Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, etc. there is a golden chain consisting of
eight Virtues, as so many Links; for the complete adorning of a Christian. Here
Faith has the Precedence, it being the Root and Mother of all Grace, then see
how many Maids of Honor attend her.

7. Virtue, Virtutes morales sunt ad invicem connexae. Aquinas, 1.2^. q. 65.
art. 1. Vna virtus sine aliis aut omnino nulla est, aut imperfecta. Greg. Omnes
virtutes ita sibi connexae concatenataeque sunt, ut qui unica caruerit omnibus
careat, and qui unam habuerit, omnes habeat, Hieron. in Isai. 5 6.
no true Faith without Virtue, no true Virtue without Knowledge, no true
Knowledge without Temperance, no true Temperance without Patience, no true
Patience without Godliness, no true Godliness without Brotherly kindness, no
true Brotherly kindness without Love, This is that golden chain which God
bestows on those whom he does more especially honor. As Christ was adorned
with variety of Graces. Isai 11.2. so is every Christian in his measure, he
receives Grace for Grace. John 1.16. So Mal. 4.2. Romans 8.30. there is Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification, and growth in Grace, all linked together. So
Luke 1.74, 75. Titus 2.12. Phil, 4.8. So there is a Concatenation of Vices,
they are so linkt one in another, that as in a chain, the drawing of one link
causes the following of the rest; so the admittance of one notorious Sin,
brings with it another, and that a worse, unless God stay (...) and restrain
it: e. g. admit of Covetousness, then follow Usury, Bribery, Boasting, Lying,
Forswearing, Murder, etc. So true is that, James 2.20. He that breaks one
Commandment, is guilty of all. He that makes no conscience of breaking one,
will, when a temptation comes, make no conscience of breaking any one; so that
albeit he do not Actually b^eak them all, yet Habitually and Dispositively, he
does.

Oh then stop Sin betimes, resist the very beginnings of it, kill these
Cockatrices in the shell, dash these brats of Satan against the stones, fly the
very appearance of evil, else you will grow worse and worse, and fall away
more and more, till you be ruined; for Sin is like to Water, give it a little
passage, and it will eat a way for it self, till it become irresistible. Prove.
17.14. as little Thieves, let in at a Window, unbolt the doors for greater; so
small Sins allowed in the Soul, will soon bring greater with them.

Covetous.
This is the second Character of the men of the last times; they shall not only
be Self-lovers, (...), argenti amantes.

Rem, rem, quocunque modo Rem. Hor.


but Silver-lovers, and Money-lovers, such as account gain to be godliness. 1 Timothy 6.5. In all their actings be they never so Pious, they have an eye at
gain. One being asked what was the sinews of War? he answered Money; being
asked the same question a second time, he answered Money; and being asked the
third time, he answered still, Money. So if you ask me what is the moving and
primary cause that makes so many leap out of a profane course of life, into a
great profession of Religion, without any proportionable measure of
humiliation? The answer is ready, Money, Money, Money. It Is to get an office,
or that they may be rising men; just like the Shechemites, they would be
circumcised, why so? For their cattle and their substance will be ours. Genesis
34.22.23. Propter oves and hoves and pecora campi.

Primus and maximus Philautiae foetus, avaritia. Espencaeus.


This sin of Covetousness, is Self-loves Firstborn. As all good comes from
Love, which diffuseth it self for the benefit of all; so all evil, and
especially this of Covetousness, comes from Self and Private spiritednesse,
which contracts the Spirit, and sordidly makes it all for it self. This Sin is
become general, and so the more dangerous; like a Leprosy it has overspread
the land: as the Lord complained of Israel, so he may of England. Jer. 6.13.
From the least of them to the greatest, every one is given to Covetousness.
See what follows. ver. 19.

2. This sin is now committed against very great Light, which aggravates it
much. The Ministers of Christ have testified against this sin by Preaching,
Printing, Light, and Life, (however we are bespattered by the Libertines of
these degenerate times) and yet men desperately break forth into it. The men of
Nineveh shall rise in judgment against the men of this generation, for they
had but one Jonah to preach unto them, and they repented: but we have had many
Ionahs, Ieremies, Daniels, Ezekiels, and yet we abide impenitent.

2. They had but one Sermon, and that a short one, yet they repented of their
Covetousness and cruelty; but we have had many large ones, and yet we continue
the same men still. Let such know that if Preaching will not mend them,
Judgments will end them. If the old World will not return at the Preaching of
Noah, the flood shall drown them: if Pharaoh will not hearken to Moses voice,
the sea shall swallow him: if Elies sons will not hearken to the voice of their
Fathers, it is a Sign God has a purpose to destroy him.

This Sin of Covetousness is a sin that the Scripture testifies against very
much; there is scarce any sin that is branded with fouler Titles, and all to
make us out of love with it.

1. It Is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Colos. 3.5. which is one of the greatest
sins, and breaks the marriage knot. God bears with other sins, but this is a
God-provoking, Amor tuus, Deus tuus.
and a Land-destroying Sin. When people once choose new Gods, war and judgment
will soon be in the gates, Judges 5.8. when Idolatry comes in, God goes out.
Now the Covetous man is a gross Idolater, for he loves his money above God, he
trusts in it, and says to the wedge of Gold; Thou art my hope. Job 31.24. He
thinks himself more safe with his money in his bags, Quod elegeris,
praetulisti. Salvian.
then all the Saints who have Gods promises for their Portion, and the loss of
his money grieves him more then the loss of Gods favor. Hence Bernard compares
Covetousness to a Lady riding in in a Chariot, whose wheels are four Vices.

1. Contempt of God. 2. Inhumanity toward men. 3. Forgetfulness of death, when
they must part with all. 4. Diffidence and distrust in Gods providence and
promises.
2. It Is called the Root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6.10. nor money, but the
inordinate love of money is the Root of Pride, the Root of Theft, Murder,
Bribery, Perjury, Usury, Heresy; Apostasy, Oppression, false weights, false
wares, etc. in a word, it is the Root not only of one or two, but of all evil.
Then have at the Root (says Father Latimer) and have at all; down with that,
and down goes all; Preachers should not stand ticking at the branches, but they
must strike at Covetousness, which is the Root. The Covetous man, -- Quid non
mortalia pectora cogit Auri sacra fames? Hor.
whose aff^^ctions are inordinately set on money, will not stick at the breach
of any one Commandment, for gain. Hence Solomon setting forth the vile
practis^ of lewd m^n, Prove. 1.10. to 18. in the nineteenth verse he sets down
the Root of all that; Murder, Theft, Villainy, etc. So are the ways of every
one that is greedy of gain Hence Habbakuk [2.9.] calls it an evil
Covetousness. It Is easy to lead it through all the Commandments, for although
the Covetous man do not actually break the mall, yet he breaks them habitually
and dispositively; there is an inclination and a disposition in him (when a
temptation comes) to break them all. Hence David prays. Psalm. 1 19.36. incline
my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness. Implying, that
Covetousness draws a way the heart, not from one or two, but from all Gods
Commandments.

1, The Covetous man is an Unbeliever, he trusts in his riches, and loves them
more then God; if they increase, he sets his heart upon them. Psalm. 62.10. 2.
He Is a gross Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. He must worship Caesar's Image, and makes a
clod of earth his God. Job 31.24. His Bills are his Bible, his Goods his God,
and his Pictures, his Scriptures. 3. For gain, he will swear and forswear, he will
abuse the word and works of God. 4. He thinks all time lost which is spent in
the Service of God. Hence usually they keep their Feasts, go to Faires, sell
their Wares, visit their Friends, and send their servants on needless errands
on the Lords day, they can spare no time for the Sabbath before it comes, to
prepare themselves for it; Hence it is, that they come weary, drowsy, heavy to
those sacred solemnities, and cry out as those cruel, covetou^ Jews. Amos
8.5. When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn. 5. For Money he will
go to Law with his own Father, abuse his Mother, wrong Magistrate, Minister,
any one for Money. This makes men cruel and unnatural to their Relations. 6.
How many Murders are committed, Avaritia Christum vendidit.
and all for Money; To get Money, Judas will sell Christ himself; and many Popes
give themselves, body and soul, to the Devil. How many Covetous, cruel
Landlords, by oppression, eat and drink the blood of their Tenants, and their
Families. Ier. 22.17. Exek. 22.13. and many by their excessive sorrow for the
loss of their money, often become guilty of their own deaths. 7. For Money the
Popes Holiness will erect a stew, and tolerate whores, and others cast off all
modesty and chastity. 8. For Money men will rob, He that would see these more
enlarged, let him peruse Mr. Dykes Ser. against Covetous^ess. p. 17. etc.
cozen, use false weights, false wares, etc. 9. What Lying, Slandering,
Backbiting, etc. and all for Money? Iezabell will suborne false witness, to
get Naboths Vineyard. 10. He Is always coveting his neighbors goods, and this
Commandment he breaks above all the rest: for though he cannot get a Kingdom,
yet his Covetous heart may desire a Kingdom.
3. Consider it is a sin which the very Heathen, by the dim light of Nature
have contemned and condemned. Bion calls it the Metropolis of all evil. Animi
parvi and angusti est amare divitias. Cicero.

Toll tu, ego sum Themistocles.

Magni est animi magna contemnere, and mediocria malle. Granatensis e Seneca.

That little Book has the flo^ers of Seneca, Plutarch, and other choice
Moralists, and may be very useful for young Students.


Cicero could say, it is a sign of a sordid spirit to love money. Themistocles
could say, take up that gold, for I regard it not; Seneca could say, it is the
property of a Noble mind to contemn those earthly things.

Hence (...), magnus; quasi (...). non terrae filius, non terrenus. Now shall
not Faith do that which infidelity has done? shall Nature excel Grace? and
shall we come short of those that come short of heaven? There is no sin so
unbeseeming a Saint, as this. Hence the Apostle would not have them once name
it, with approbation, but only with detestation. Epes. 5.3. It Is observed, that
he never read in all the Scripture, of any Saint that was ever branded for
Covetousness. We read of their falls into other sins, as Aarons Idolatry, Lots
Incest, Noah's Drunkenness, David's Adultery, etc. but I never remember any
Saint in Scripture that fell by this sin. That they have the Root of this sin
as well as of other sins, is clear by that Prayer of David, Psalm. 119.36. but
that any Saint was ever overcome by it, we do not read. Luther said of himself,
V. ^urroughs Sermon. on John 18.36. ^erm. 3. p. 270.
that of all sins he was most free from this, and in this respect I could wish
we were all Lutherans. We should answ^r Temptations to this sin, as Nehemiah
answered his Adversaries, when they would have had him fly, Neh. 9.11. Should
such a one as I fly? so, shall such a one as I be covetous, that have God for
my Father, the Promises for my Heritage, that have interest in Christ, and so
by him have interest in all, I that am under such special protection, and have
such plentiful provision, should I be covetous? Let the Dogs of the World
fight for these bones, and scramble for these scraps; let Esau, Laban, Ahab,
Achan, Balaam, Iezabel, Judas, Demas, Simon-Magus, feed upon these husks: but
let the Saints who are clothed with the Sun, tread the Moon under their feet,
Rev. 12.1. they must contemn these Sublunary, Transitory things; counting them
all but dung, and dogs-meat, in comparison of Christ, Phil. 3.8, How often do we
read of the Saints bounty and liberality, but never of their rapine, usury,
etc. Job was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, he never did eat his
morsels alone. Job 31. David gave his goods to the Saints, and Millions toward
the building of the Temple. The Disciples forsook all for Christ, and the
Primitive Christians sold their houses and lands for pious uses, and how
careful was Paul to shun this sin! 1 These. 2.5. 1 Cor. 9.12.

4. It besots men, it makes them unteacheable, and untractable; none so dull
and incapable of the things of God, as those that are besotted with the World.
These thorny cares choke the good seed of the Word, Luke 8.14. and blind the
understanding. Isai 56.11, 12. greedy dogs cannot understand, because their
minds run all upon gain. This sin so besotted the Pharisees, that they derided
even Christ himself, (...), Subsannabant eum quasi contracto naso, non poterat
avaris, non ingrata aut etiam non ridicula esse tam severa liberalitatis
praescriptio. Grotius.

They say, the Mountains are barren, where the golden Mines are.


and blew their noses at him in contempt. Luke 16.14. we do not read of any
other sinners, that they derided Christ, as these covetous Pharisees did. Thus
Ezekiels covetous he arers derided him. Ezekiel. 33.30, 31. So that we may as soon
expect a crop of corn on the tops of barren Mountains, as a crop of Grace in
the hearts of Covetous Cormorants.

5. It eats out that love and tenderness, it destroys that Society and sweet
communion which should be amongst the Sons of men. It turns men into Hogs, and
Christians into Cannibals. It makes men churlish Nabals, and renders them cruel
and unnatural to the wives of their bosoms, to their own children, to Friends,
Neighbors, and dearest relations.

6. It creates trouble to men and their houses. Prove. 15.27. He that is greedy
of gain, troubles his own house. He fires his own nest, when he thinks to
feather it, and troubles all his own household with have and hurry to get gain,
he overworks both servants and cattle, he brings Lawsuits upon himself, and
at last a curse upon his posterity; Nulla avaritia sine poena, quamvis sit ipso
satis poenarum. Sen.
and so Passively, as well as actively, he is said to trouble his own house:
what did Achan and Ahab get by their covetousness, but ruin to themselves and
their posterity? So Gehazi by his covetousness brought a Leprosy upon himself,
and upon his posterity. 2 Kings 5.26, 27. and King Iehojakim ruined himself by
this. Ier. 22.17, 18. by this they provoke God to sell them into the hands of
Tyrants and Robbers. Hab. 2.6, 7. and at last it robs them of inward peace, and
brings trouble of conscience, which is the trouble of troubles. Isay 57.17.
such pierce themselves through with many sorrows. (...), circumcirca perforant.
1 Timothy 6.10. they wound themselves on every side, as if one were stabbed all
over from top to toe: insomuch that they are seldom free from vexing cares,
tormenting fear^, and toyling labors.

7. It makes a man odious to God; however the world may admire such, yet Gods
soul abhorres them. Psalm. 10.3. he dislikes all sinners, but he abhorres these.
Hence God is said to pun his fists at such, as we do at those with whom we are
angry, Ezekiel. 22.13, 14. compared with Numb. 24.10. and cries Woe to them that
load themselves with thick clay. [ Hab. 2.5, 6.] ( i. e.) with these earthly
things which burden and oppress the soul; therefore when God is angry with a
man, and would punish him for his other sins, he gives him up to this sin
amongst the rest. Romans 1.29. This made the Apostle so careful to warn all the
Churches of God against it: as the Church of Rome. Romans 12.8.13. the Church of
Corinth. 1.6.9, 10. Gal. 6.6.20. So Ephesians. 5.3.5. Phil. 3.18, 19. Col. 3.5. and
generally all the Churches. 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.17. This made our Savior
not simply forbid this sin; but to use more Arguments against it, then against
any one sin whatsoever. Mat. 6.24* to the end of the chap.

8. It hardens the heart, so that such men seldom Repent. So long as men have
any thing to trust in, they will not care for God: when people are grown to be
Lords, they will not come near God, nor be ruled by him. Ier. 2.31. therefore
the Lord outs his of their creature-confidences, and makes them sensible of
their lost and fatherless condition, before he shows them mercy. Hos. 14.3.
other sins which are carnal and sensual, are more easily discovered, and
conquered; but covetousness is a more close, cloaked [1 These. 2.5.] spiritual
sin; and so is more hardly discerned, and more hardly cured. And this amongst
others is one Reason why, An avarus sit deterior prodigo? Aff.
for one covetous person which returns there are twenty prodigals: which
brings me to that Question, Whether a Covetous man be worse then a prodigal?

Answ. We must distinguish of prodigals.

1. Some are compounded ones, and have many other foul enormities mixed with
them, as Idleness, Whoredom, Drunkenness, etc. and these aggravated by long
continuance in them; now there is more hope of a Temperate young Worldling, then
of such a compounded Prodigal.

2. There is a single and simple prodigal, one that only spends beyond his
estate, and wastes his means excessively, now (caeteris^paribus) there is more
hope of such a one, then of a covetous man; and that for these Reason^.

1. The prodigal man does good to many; but the covetous man, is not good to
himself. 2. He gives (though he gives too much) and so comes nearer to
liberality, whose act is giving; and is nearer to blessedness, according to that
of our Savior. Acts 20.35. it is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive.
But the Covetous man will part with nothing willingly. 3. The prodigal hurts
himself, yet benefits others; but the Covetous mis^r defrauds both himself, and
others. 4. The prodigal is more tractable, and sooner reclaimed by reason of
his poverty, misery, and affliction, his ear is opened, to discipline, and he
more ready to hearken to good counsel. Luke 15. But a covetous man, the more
he has, Omnia vitia cum senectute senescunt, sola avaritia juvenescit.
the worse he is; and the older he grows, the harder it is to reclaim him:
other sins, age may bereave a man off the acting them; but covetousness
increases by age. How long may we preach to such before we can stir them; we
speak to stones, and call to dead men. Hence our Savior tells us that a Camel
may sooner go through the eye of a needle, then a rich man (because so apt to
trust in his riches) can enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mark 10.24, 25.
9. It unfits a man for any employment, whether it be Magistraticall,
Ministerial, Martial, or Domestical.


1. He Is an unfit man to be a Magistrate, such a one will transgress for a
morsel of bread, any base reward will byas him, and therefore Iethro
describing a right Governor, tells us [ See this Text excellently opened in
Mr. Sam. Wards Sermon. p. 395. Tantum valent leges, quantum volunt (imo valent)
Reges. Beda.
Exodus 18.21.] that he must be, 1. A man of Courage, a magnanimous man, one
that fears not the faces or frowns of any, be they never so many or mighty;
else he will soon be daunted and discouraged. The want of this made fearful and
faint-hearted Rehoboam to be branded for a child viz. in heart and courage [2 Chronicles. 13.7.] though he were then above 40. years old, as appears 1 Kings
14.21. therefore God commands Joshua [1.7.] to be strong and of good courage,
and the like counsel David gives to Solomon, 2 Kings 2.2. 2. He must fear God,
or else he will fear the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1.17. the great fear of God will
devour all base inferior fears. Micajah feared not two great Kings sitting on
their Thrones in Pomp, because he saw a greater then they, 1 Kings 22,
10.14.19. no man can be truly valourous, but he that is truly Religious; as we
see in Joseph, Nehemiah, Daniel. The fear of God is the Foundation of all
Virtue; without it [ non sunt verae virtutes, sed Vmbrae] they are mere
shadows. 3. He must deal justly and truly, sifting out the truth, that the
poor be not oppressed. Even the most precious things are vile and cheap in his
eyes, to whom money is dear. He will not stick with Ahab to sell himself, to
work wickedness for the compassing of what his soul loves. Ward.
4. He must ^ate covetousness. Public persons must have public spirits, not
seeking themselves, but the common good, else he will take bribes, which blind the
eyes of the wise, so that they cannot discern between a good cause and a bad: it
makes them partial, and perverts judgment; making men pass sentence on his
side, from whom he received the bribe. Hence the Lord so often condemns it.
Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. and 27.25. 1 Samuel 8.3. Isai 5.23. and it is made a note
of a wicked man, Psalm. 26.9. his right hand is full of bribes. These stop the
ears, Olim Graeci pecuniam bovis simulacro signabant, hinc Proverb. Bos in
lingua; nullum vitium tetrius quam avaritia, praesertim in Principibus and
Remp. gubernantibus. Cicero.
tie the Tongue, and manacle the hands. No Vice so foul as this in a
Magistrate; the bottle and the basket will make him to do any thing. So that if
a Judge should ask me the way to Hell ( says B. Latimer) I would show him
this way. First, Let his heart be poisoned with Covetousness. Secondly, Let
him then take bribes, and at last pervert judgment: there lacks a fourth thing
to make up the Mess, which, so God help me (says he) if I were Judge, should
be Hangum tuum, a Tyburne Typpet to take with him; if it were my Lord chief
Justice of England, or my Lord Chancellor himself, to Tyburne with him. As
birds are caught with bird-lime, so are men with gifts: Munera non capiant ne
iis capiantur, and jus violent.
and therefore men deal with such as we do by dogs, throw them a crust, that
they may not bark or bite. This was one of those sins that helped to ruin
Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 22.12. Micah 3.11, 12. Isai 1.23, 24. many build them brave
houses with their bribe, but God threatens to bring a fire on those houses. Job
15.34. though bribes may build them, yet bribe-takers cannot protect them, for
God has said it; who is able to perform it, See Beards Theater of Gods
Judgment. lib. 2. cap. 38, 39, 40
that the Tabernacles of Bribery shall be consumed. This has made Gods
servants careful to keep themselves pure from this sin. 1 Samuel 12.3. Acts
20.33. and the Lord has promised Life and Happiness to such. Psalm 15.5.
Prove. 15.27. Isai 33.15.


Quest. Are all gifts unlawful, and may a man never take a gift?

Answ. We must distinguish of Gifts.

There are six sorts of gifts. See Mr. Clerk Mirror. cap, 12


1. Gifts of Piety, to promote Gods worship. 2. Gifts of Charity to the Poor.
3. Gifts of friendship to preserve amity. 4. Gifts of duty and gratitude from
inferiors to superiors, to testify their Obedience, and Thankfulness. 5.
Gifts of bounty and favor from superiors to inferiors, to testify their love
to them. Now there is no danger in such gifts, because they increase love, and
help to preserve humane society. 6. There are Gifts of iniquity, See Mr. Clerks
Mirror. cap. 15. Edit. 3.
that tend to the destruction of our Brethren, and the perverting of Justice;
and this is that Bribery; and those Gifts which Gods word condemns. It does not
simply condemn the taking of a Reward, but the taking of a Reward against the
Innocent, Psalm. 15.5. So that it is not sinful by way of Gratitude, either to
send a gift, or to receive a gift: but to send a gift, to the end that Justice
may be perverted, the eye blinded, and the Innocent condemned; so to send a
gift, and so to receive a gift, is both a sin in the one, and the other.
He that would see more against Bribery, let him peruse Mr. John Downam's 4.
Treatises against Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Bribery. Willet on
Exodus 23.8. Doctor Downam on Psalm. 15.5.

2. It unfits men for the Ministry. Covetousness is odious in any man, more
odious in a Magistrate; but most odiou^ in a Minister: who by his life and
doctrine ought to witness against it. It troubles us to be abused by
strangers, but to have our menial servants, and such as are near to us, to
prefer the trash and dross of the earth before us, that is the highest and
horridst ingratitude: insomuch that a dull Ass reproves Balaam for it, 2 Pet.
2.15, 16. With what face can a man reprove that in another, of which himself is
guilty? therefore it is made one special Qualification of a Gospell-Minister,
he must not be greedy of filthy lucre. 1 Timothy 3.3. Titus 1.7.11. 1 Pet. 5.2.
(...), non amans pecuniam; non dicit, non habens, sed non amans.

Negotiatorem Clericum, and ex inop^ divitem, ex ignobili gloriosum, quasi
quendam Pestem fuge. Hieron.


The man of God must not only go, or run, but Fly from this Vice, 1 Timothy 6.10,
11. for a Minister to be a Mercenary man, or a Market-man; or by flattery and
dawbing, to curry favor, and get riches, this is that filthy lucre, so often
cendemned in Scripture. Such are called greedy insatiable dogs, Isay 56.11.
who for a slight reward profane the Name of God, Ezekiel. 13.19. Paul knew what a
blemish this would be to his calling, and therefore he was always careful to
shun the very appearance of it. He often parted with his right for Peace, and
demanded not what was his due, Look what Liberality loses a man in his Purse,
it gets him in a better place; not only in Heaven, but in earth also, and the
best place there* the hearts of men, and their loving affection. Robinson's
Essays. Observe. 31.
but labored with his hands (in the Churches infancy and low condition) that
he might not be burdensome to any. 1 Cor. 9.6, 7. 1 Thessalonians. ^.5, 6.9. We are
soldiers, and therefore we must not entangle our selves in these low things. 2 Timothy 2.4. Caution, yet let no man accuse us of Covetousness, for demanding
those dues, which by the Law of God, and the Laws of the Land, are due unto
us. The labourer is worthy of his hire, says Christ, Matthew. 10.10. this Paul
proves by many Arguments 1 Cor. 9.7, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Many would have us
Preach for nothing; when soldiers will fight for nothing, and Tradesmen work
for nothing, we will Preach for nothing. In the mean time let them know, that
it is one thing to preach for money, and another thing to take money for
preaching. Though we receive pay for our pains, and may justly demand it for
our great labor, yet we do not make that our end. The conversion of souls,
and not money, is the ultimate end of all our labors. but I have spoken fully
to this point in another Treatise which is now Printed. Sal terrae, cap. 9.


3. He cannot be a good soldier, that minds money more then the cause of God;
such a one will betray his trust, or plunder, and use violence: This S. John
foresaw, and therefore commands soldiers to do violence to no man, but to be
content with their allowance. Luke 3.14. It Is an ill Trade to go up and down
killing men for eight pence a day; such fight with an ill conscience, Finis
denominat opus.
and so will fly in a time of trial. As the man must be good, and the cause
good, so his end must be good, else he marres all.

4. He Is unfit to govern a family, he will make slaves and drudges of his children
and servants. Parlow on 2 Timothy 2.18. as the earth has been the place where all
wickedness has been committed, so it is most meet, that there the acto^s of
sin should be tormented.
Better be some men's beasts, then their servants, for those rest on the
Sabbath, while these are drudging for their covetous Masters. These men either
cannot pray with their Families, or else the cares of the World will not suffer
them; they savor nothing but Earth: they are mere Earth, Earth, Earth. Ier.
22.29. They are Earth by Creation, Earth in their Conversation, and return to
Earth in their dissolution. They have earthen bodies, and earthen minds too,
and so are mere Earth, and have their names written in the Earth, which shall
be their Hell, as some conceive. Ier. 17.13.

[He that would see more Disswasives from this sin, let him peruse Mr. Boltons
Directions for walking with God* p. 289.288. etc. where you shall find 12.
excellent considerations against it, and Mr. Palmers Memorials. p. 10.3. etc.]

Observe. We are free from this sin (say most men) though most men are guilty of
it, yet few will acknowledge it. It Is a secret, subtle sin, that hides it self
under the Cloak of good husbandry, frugality and thrift. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. I shall
therefore give you some signs and characters of a covetous man. This sin may
be discerned.

See more signs in Mr. Capell of Tentation. Part. 3, cap. 3. Sect. 9, 10. Mr.
Burrows on Psalm. 17.14. p. 341. etc.
By our Thoughts, Words, and Works.


1. Try your selves by your Thoughts, this is the best way to know what you
are, for as a man thinks, so is he, Prove. 23.7. By these the Lord tries us,
Psalm. 139.23. 2 Samuel 16.7. Job 42.2. and therefore by them we should try our
selves; they are the peculiar acts of Gods eye, and greatest in his esteem;
it is not so much our words and works, as the bent of our hearts and spirits
which he ponders. Prove. 16.2. and if he find them irregular, it displeases
him, Genesis 6.6. Prove. 6.18. Isai 65.2, 3, 5. Zach. 8.17. Ier. 4.14. Romans 2.2.21.
not only the works, but also the Thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to
the Lord. Prove, 15.26. and though Thoughts are free in respect of the Courts of
men, yet they are not free from the All-seeing eye of God, Isai 66.18. I know
their thoughts.

2. They are not free from Gods word, it takes hold of them, Heb. 4.12. Exodus
20.17.

3. They are not free from his revenging hand. Ier. 6.19. Romans 2.21. Revel.
2.23.

2. We should try our selves by the thoughts and devices of our hearts, because
they are the more immediate issues of our hearts, and cannot so easily deceive
us as words and works may. A man cannot so well judge of the goodness of a
spring by the water which runs 7. miles off, as he may by going to the Fountain
head: so we cannot judge so well of our selves, by our actions, which are as
streams, as we can by our Thoughts, for there are many Occurrences between the
Act and the thought. These are the Master-wheeles, and first movers in the
soul, and from them issue either life or death. Prove. 4.23. Isai 59, 7. Mat.
15.19. if a man be Malicious, Murderous, Covetous, etc. first, his thoughts are
so, and thence come evil acts. These are the Root, and those the Fruit, these
the Mother, and those her Daughters. In the time of the Law, the Lord required
the first fruits, and the firstborn. Exodus 22.39. he calls not now for the
firstborn of our flocks, or bodies, but of our souls: these must be kept more
especially for him.

3. They are the Universal Acts of the heart, which discovers it self most
clearly by them.

4. They are the swiftest acts of the heart, nothing swifter then thoughts, we
can think of a thousand things in a little space.

5. They are the conscientious things of the heart, Romans 2.5. their thoughts
accusing, or excusing them.

6. They are the freest acts of the heart, we do not always as we think, or
speak; but thoughts are free, we think as we please. When Peter denied his
Master, if we look to his words, you would judge him an Apostate; but if a man
could have seen into his heart, there he should have found. Rabboni, My Lord,
at least,

7. They are the continual issues of the soul, and so we may the better judge
of our selves by them. There is no judging of a Niggard by one great Feast
which he keeps, but by his constant fare: So observe, what thy heart does
constantly and habitually run upon, what do plod most upon? as the liberal
man devises liberal things, and by them is established; so the covetous man
devises covetous things, and by them is ruined. Isay 32.7, 8. their end is
destruction who mind, viz. inordinately, habitually, and excessively earthly
things. When men can forget God, days without number, and he is seldom in
their thoughts, but their minds run altogether on their Oxen, Farms, Wives,
Money; when their desires be greedy after those things, and their joy excessive
in the enjoyment of them, and their sorrow excessive in parting with them;
these are palpable evidences of a heart that Trades, and is exercised in
Covetousness. 2 Pet. 2.14.

[Concerning Thoughts, see Doctor Goodwin, Vanity of Thoughts, Doctor Burges
his Sermon. on Ier. 4.14. Fenner on Philip. 3.19. Fol. p. 43. P. 1. and on Isay
55.7. Fol. p. 139. Mr. Angiers's Treatise. Doctor Preston on Romans 2.18. Sermon.
3. p. 69., 70. Hooker, Souls Preparation. p. 64, Church his Treasure, p. 353.
Mr. William Burton, Anal. of Belial. Sermon. 7.]

By thy Words. Out of the abundance of the heart does the mouth speak. Matthew.
12.34. What is in the Warehouse will appear in the shop, what is in the heart,
the Tongue tells you. As is the man, such is his language; as we know what
Countryman a man is by his language, Index est animi Sermo. Qualis vir, talis
oration.
a Frenchman speaks French, etc. So we may guess at men by their language; a
good man has good language, he speaks the language of Canaan; an evil man
speaks the language of the World, Isai 32.6. discourse with him of that, and he
is in his Element; he can talk all day of it, and not be weary: but talk to him
of spiritual things, and he is tanquam piscis in arido, out of his Element, he
has nothing to say. It Is a sure sign men are of the World, when they speak
only of the World, 1 John 4.5. when the sum of their talk is, Who will show
us any good. Psalm. 4.6. ( i. e.) who will show us how we may get goods and
riches, as they said to Peter, thou art a Galilean, thy speech bewrays thee;
so these are Worldlings, their very speech betrays them.

3. By thy Works, and walking toward Thy Self, Thy Family, Thy Neighbors.


1. When a man lives besides his Estate, and can scarce allow himself Meat,
Drink, Apparel, Rest, or things convenient: this argues a covetous spirit, for
he that is cruel to himself, to whom will he be good? Solomon esteemed it a
great evil for a man to have riches, Avarus nemini bonus, sibi vero pessimus.
Seneca.
and no heart to use them. Eccles. 6.1, 2. like an Ass which carries gold for
others, when it self feeds on thistles. This man is always poor, and wants as
well that which he has, as that which he has not. Like Tantalus, who sat up
to the chin in water, Desunt inopiae multa avaritiae omnia, Sen. See Mr. Manton
on James 5.2, 3. p. 522.
yet died for thirst. Poor men want many things, but the covetous all things.
These are men sometimes of good Wills, but bad Deeds; they are so far from
being like Dorcas, who made coats for the poor whilst she lived, [ Acts 9.36,
37.] that they can scarce endure to make any for themselves.

2. By his walking toward his Family. He Is base to his wife, and base to his
children, they are bred like so many ignorant wild colts. They are like to be
golden calves, and that is all. He Is base to his servants, he ove-worketh and
over-watcheth them. He never catechiseth, or instructs them, he never prays
with them, or for them. He Is cumbred about many things, and can spare no time
for the service of God, either in his Closet, or Family.

3. Toward his Tenants and such as are under him, how cruel is he? he wracks
them, he squeezes them, he sucks them, till he has got all the blood out of
their bodies, and money out of their purses. They grind the faces of the poor,
as the Milner does his corn, so long as there is any meal to be had out of
them. Isai 3.15. yea so exceeding cruel are they, that they do not only
fleece, but flay them; Micah 3.2, 3. They pluck off their skin from off them,
and their flesh from off their bones, and break their bones, and chop them for
the pot, and sees them again in the Caldron. Observe the Method of these
cruel Canibals, barbarous butchers, and cursed Cooks.

1. They flay off the skin. Pellis, caro and ossa, hic facultates significant.
Grotius.

Tunc ossa frangunt, cum imponunt onera graviora quam quae ab illorum viribus
sustineri possint. Sanctius.


2. They eat the flesh. 3. Like dogs they fall to gnawing the bones. They break
the bones, they will get somewhat out of the bare bones; they suck them, they beat
them, they heat them again; to fetch out marrow; and at last boil them again,
to get out the utmost drop of fatness. How do the Prophets thunder out Woes
against unmercifull oppressors. Isai 5: 8. Amos 1.3. and 2.6, 7. Habbak. 2.11,
12. Mal. 3.5.
Yea, Olitorem odi qui radicitus herbas excidat.

Quid? number and pellem vis? lana contentum esse oportet. Boni Pastoris est,
tondere pecus, non deglubere.


the wiser sort of Heathens have abhorred such cruelty. Philip, King of
Macedon, being counseled to increase his Revenew, wisely answered. I like not
that Gardener which pulls up his herbs by the roots. The like answer gave
Tiberius Caesar to one that advised him to augment his Treasure. The Wool (said
he) is sufficient, I will not have the Pelt too: For if the Wool be shorn, it
will grow again, but if the skin be pulled off, then farewell all.

2. When men are hard-harted to the poor. They have money for Pride, and money
for their Lusts; but for the poor servants of Christ, they have nothing: like
Churlish Nabal that has abundance for himself, but nothing for a pious David,
1 Samuel 25.10, 11, 36.

3. It argues Covetousness, when men are overreaching and unrighteous in
their dealing; when they have false Weights, and false Wares; when they work
upon the ignorance and necessities of people.

4. When men murmur at just Taxes, justly assest; every penny of pay goes to
their hearts, and comes like drops of blood from them. How many excuses do they
invent? they be poor, in debt, have great Families, etc. for Pleasure, Pride,
Purchases, they have Pounds: but to preserve Peace, and the Gospel of Peace,
they have not Pence.

1. Let such know that there are Dues belonging to Caesar which must be freely
and cheerfully paid: Non date, sed (...), reddite, ut just debitum.
Matthew. 22.21. Luke 20.25. Give unto Caesar (says Christ) what is Caesar's due,
give it as willingly, as if it were a free gift; so says Paul, Romans 13.7.
render to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due. Hence Christ, though
he might have pleaded Freedom (as being of the blood) yet for Peace-sake, V.
Perkins 2. Vol. on Phil. 4.5. p. 445.
and to avoid Scandal, he paid Tribute. Mat. 17.29. They have right to their
Tributes both by the Law of God, by the Law of the Land, and by the Law of
Nature. We enjoy great blessings under them, both Temporal and Spiritual; we
sit queitly under our own Vines: no Plundering, Fireing, Crying, nor Killing
in our streets. Now to preserve all these, there is a Necessity of Taxes, which
are the sinews of a State, and without which no State can be long, kept in
Peace. Nor can the Church, Commonwealth, Armies, Navies, Counselors,
Schools, Universities, Hospitalls, etc. be maintained without Taxes, and
therefore there is a great deal of Equity, and Necessity in their payment.

2. You that groan before you are sick, V. Buroughs. Hos. 8.10. Observe. 2.
cap. 2.
and murmur without a cause, must know, that your Blessings are far greater
then your Burdens. We enjoy Houses, Lands, Wives, Lives, Children, Peace; and
above all, the Gospel of Peace; the Token of Gods special presence amongst us,
for this mercy alone: many of our forefathers would have given twenty times
our Taxes, and have thought it nothing: if one should give us a 1000 l. per
annum, provided we would pay a Pepper-corn every year, to testify our
Thankfulness, we would count him unworthy of so great a gift, who should deny
so small a favor,

3. Suppose superiors should lay unjust Taxes on us, yet must we patiently
undergo them; remembering that it is the sins of a people which give strength to
Tyrants. Things that cannot be remedied, must patiently be borne. When the Lord
told Israel what their King would do to them, all that they must do, was to cry
unto the Lord, and acknowledge their sin, 1 Samuel 8.11, etc, not that God
approved of such doing, but showing them what the might of a King would draw
him to do.

4. Especially when Taxes are imposed on the Subject by Authority of
Parliament, the best and highest Court in the Land; they should cheerfully be
paid. This is the fundamental and most proper Government in the Land. It Is
indeed the glorious privilege of our Nation, Si antiquitatem spectes, est
curia vetustissima; si degnitatem, est honoratissima; si surisdictionem, est
capacissima; Huic ego nec me^^s rerum, nec tempora pon^. S. Edw. Cook.
above all other Nations. It Is that Government which the Lord has wonderfully
owned in all their set battles, and miraculously preserved in despite of all
opposition. It Is observed by a great Master of the Law (Sir Edw. Cook) that no
Prince ever prospered, Nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis
utilius, quam quod in commune non consulunt, rarus ad propulsandum commune
periculum conventus; ita dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. Tacit. in
vita Ag^icol.
that did oppose Parliaments, and those that have been ruled by Parliaments,
have flourished wonderfully; as King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth,
and Queen Elizabeth. Tacitus observes that the Romans vanquished the ancient
Britains for want of Parliaments.

Object. Parliaments have done very little good, Errors and Disorders, still
abound, etc.

Answ. Omne invalidum natura querulum. Weak men are full of complaints; when
men faint in time of trial, it argues their strength is but small.

1. Know, Parliaments have done much, very much, considering the Mountains of
opposition which they have met with,

2. Had not my sins, and thy sins hindered them, they had done more. We often
murmur at Moses and Aaron, when it is our own Rebellion that keeps us in the
wilderness.

3. The Parliament never approved of those Errors and Disorders, which are now
so rise amongst us. For 1. They did expressly Covenant against them. 2. They
have published Ordinances and Acts in Print against them. 3. We hope this
present Parliament will take further Order for the suppressing of them.


I have been the larger on this point that I may take off that scandal which
the wicked (in all ages) have cast on the people of God. Solenne est
Christianis ut crimina seditionis, and laesae Majestatis a persecutoribus
affingantur; quibus tamen non sint obnoxii. Gentum Magdel. 2. Col. 420.
viz. That they are enemies to Caesar, Factious, Seditious, Turbulent, etc.
Thus Haman accused the Jews for Breakers of the Kings Laws. Hest. 3.8. Paul
is counted a pestilent fellow, and a troubler of the State, Acts 17.18. and
12.26. and 24.5. and Christ himself was counted no friend to Caesar. But this I
dare boldly affirm, That Superiors have no better Subjects in the Land, then
such as fear the God of heaven. These obey for conscience sake, when others
obey only for Self, and out of Fear. These will sacrifice their Lives and
Estates, in just and Honorable ways, for their Governors; when those that
serve them for their own Ends, will leave them, and forsake them. These pray,
Pay, and Preach for Caesar, carefully obeying his just commands: whilst the
wicked are Cursing, Swearing, Drinking, Murmuring at Taxes, and Transgressing
their Laws. The honor of Religion should be dear to us, and we should walk so
wisely, that we should give no just cause of offense to any. Colos. 4.5. 1 Pet.
2.12. much less to our Superiors but by our wise, inoffensive walking, we
should labor to win their hearts to a love of the truth. As a wise and
virtuous wife may be a means to win her husband, 1 Cor. 7.16. So holy, humble,
wise-walking Christians, may be a means to convert, or at least to convince
such as are a verse to the Truth. So did the Constancy, Courage, Patience, and
Piety of the Primitive Christians.

2. We shall encourage the Lord to continue the Blessing of Government amongst
us. It Is a great Government amongst us. Take it away, and you open the
Floud-gates to all Licentiousness and Villainy; men would be like Ishmael, wild
men, every man's hand would be against his Brother. Genesis 26.12. when there was
no King in Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own eyes, Judge. ult.
ult. Without Government, one man would be but bread for another, as in the Sea,
the greater fi^h devour the lesser. Hab. 1.14, 15. Pisces majores glutinant
minores. Prove.
Take away Government, and what Rapes, Rapines, Tumults, and Disorders, would
there be? every man's lust would be a Law. Better have Tyranny then Anarchy, a
Tyrant then no Government. Better live in a State where nothing is lawful,
then where all things are lawfvll to be done. It Is a very bad Government
indeed, that is worse then none at all, where there is Magistracy, some may be
oppressed and wronged; but none can be righted, where there is none. Better poor
people should sit under a scratching bramble, then have no hedge at all to
shelter them from the storms of popular fury. Seeing then that the Magistrate
is the Minister of God for our good, both Temporal and Spiritual. See the
benefit of Magistracy in an elaborate Sermon. of Mr. Gournall on Isai 1.26.
Romans 13.4. Seeing he is a means under God to preserve our blessings to us,
and to increase them in our hands by a Peaceable enjoyment of them: there is
all the reason in the world that we should freely and fully contribute to his
necessities in the promoting of such just and pious designs. And they deserve
to be branded for sordid Earthwormes (unworthy to enjoy any Privileges in a
Nation) that shall murmur or repine at such just Assessements as tend to the
preservation of the land both in its Being, and Well-being. I have insisted the
longer on this Point, that the world may see, Religion is no enemy is to Caesar.

I come now to remove those more especial Pretenses, Vitia nostra quia amamus,
defendimus; and malumus excusave ista quam excutere. Seneca epist. 117.
and Fig Leaves, under which the Covetous would hide themselves.

1. Obj. It Is but a small sin (say some) it is Frugality, Thrift,
Good-husbandry, etc.

Answ. Is Idolatry, and spiritual Adultery a small sin? Is the root of all
evil, and the breach of all the Commandments, a small matter? is it a matter
of nothing that brought the Leprosy on Gehazi, and his posterity, stoned Achan,
and brought Judas to the haltar?

2. Know that the Devil puts the finest names upon the fowlest Vices. Heresy is
New-light, V. Brook^. Remedies, Device 2. p. 18, 19.
Sottishness is Sanctity, Pride decency, Drunkenness good-fellowship, and
Covetousness good-husbandry; though it brings men to beggary. Prove. 11.24.
there is that withholds more then is meet, and it tends to poverty.

2. Object. I do but make the best of mine own, and that is no sin.

Answ. It Is true, in just and honest ways, we may make the best of our own,
but if you go about by Usury, Oppression, etc. to raise your self and yours,
then you make the worst of your own. Hereby you get care to your selves, envy
from your neighbors, become a prey to thieves, bring peril to your persons,
curses on your children, Law for your Heirs, and damnation to your Souls.

3. Object. We have a great charge of children, and many to provide for, now
Parents are commanded to lay up for their children, and he that provides not
for his own, is worse then an Infidel. 2 These. 4.12.

Answ. Some have no charge, V, B. Halls C. C. chapt. 2. p. 13.
but themselves, yet they drudge, and are never satisfied. Solomon tells us
there is one alone, and not a second, yet there is no end of his labors.
Eccles. 4.8.

2. Suppose thou have children, yet how do thou know what thine heir may be?
he may be a spend-thrift, and wast that in a short time, which thou have toyled
for all thy days. Eccles. 2.18.19.

3. Though Parents may and must provide for their own, yet it must be in a
moderate, prudential manner, not with a carking, vexing, distrustful care;
pious education, is the best Portion; that can never be lost. Piety has the
promise, and the promise virtually is every thing, this is the riches which God
commands Parents to provide for their children, Psalm. 75.5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
to teach them Gods Statutes, En quales divitias Deus diligit, en quas
pignoribus recondi exigit opes? fidem scil. ac timorem Dei, modestiam,
sanctimoniam, non terrena, non pereuntia, non caduca. Salvian. Ad Eccles.
Catholic. lib. 1. p. 345. Edit. Oxon. Vbi plura.
and bring them up in his fear. Ephesians. 6.4. We may love our children, but it
must be In, and For the Lord; we may not to raise them, ruin our selves, nor
to make them rich, make our selves poor; nor to get Temporalls for them loose
Eternalls for our selves.

4. Suppose you do get riches for your children, yet how know thou whether
ever thy children shall enjoy them? for as riches are uncertain in getting, and
uncertain in keeping, so when we dye, it is uncertain to whom we shall leave
them. Thine enemies may be thine heirs, for ought thou know; many rich men
of late have found it so, in many parts of the Land. Many times the riches of
the wicked i^ laid up for the just, whom they most hated Prove. 13.22. as Nabals
was for David, Hamans for Mordecai, and the Canaanites for the Israelites.
Hence Christ makes it the note of a ^oole, so to mind Temporalls, Cum peste
avaritiae jungitur pestis desidiae. Gr. g.

Qui sibi longa tempora promittebat, diem sequentem non vidat. Greg.

Quaeris horrea? habes horrea, scil, ventres pauperum. Basil.


as to lose Eternalls. Luke 12.16, etc. That rich fool, like a secure Ep^cure,
sings a requiem to his soul, and promises himself many years, when he was not
sure of one day. But what says God to this covetous Caitiff with his new
Barns, when he might have laid up his corn more safely in the poors bellies? v.
20.

First he is called a fool for his pains. The World accounts such wise men, but
in Gods Dictionary their name is Fool, and their folly appears, in that they
never think on the shortness of their lives, Insipientis est dicere, non
pu^aram. Cicero. Nihil aeque pro dest ad temperantiam omnium rerum quam
frequens meditatio brevis and incerti aevi. Seneca. (...) animam tuam repe^ent.
the uncertainty of riches, and the great account which they must give for them.

2. God comes sudenly and unnexpectedly upon him. This night shall thy soul be
taken from thee. Thou dreamest of many years, behold in this night of thy
ignorance, and darkness, in this night of thy security and negligence, whilst
thou art glorying in thy riches, Bags, and Barnes, comes a Fever, Plague,
Sword, etc. and sweepes thee and thine away.

3. The devil fetches his soul against his will; a rich worldling is loath to
dye; a good man patiently and quietly commits his soul to God, 1 Pet. 4.19. but
a wicked man's soul is required of him. This night they, viz. the Devils, whom
thou have served, and obeyed, shall require thy soul: for as the good Angels
do carry the souls of the godly into Abraham's bosom, so the evil Angels carry
the souls of wicked men into hell. Lastly, his folly appears in heaping up
riches when he knew not who should gather them. Then whose shall these things
be, which thou have provided? q. d. thou labourest and toylest for thou know
not who, Infelicissime omnium, cogitas quam been alii post te vivant, non
cogitas quam male ipse moriaris. Salvian, ad Eccles. Cath. l. 3.

O miseranda conditio? bonis suis aliis praeparat beatitudinem, sibi
afflictionem; aliis gaudia, sibi lacrymas, aliis voluptatem brevem, sibi ignem
perennem. Idem ibidem.


whether for a Friend, or Foe, a Kinsman or a Sranger, a Wise man, or a Fool, a
temperate man or a waster; if thy Friends have them, they may do them good, and
they may do them hurt; they may help, and they may hinder them; they may be
blessings, and they be curses to them. How many have been undone by the estates
that have been left them, and had been happy, if they had not been so happy;
they might have been rich in Grace, See more in B. Usher's Method for
Meditation. Duty 6. p. 149, etc.
if they had not been so rich in goods.

4. Obj. We are Religious, and therefore not Covetous.

Answ. It does not follow, for a man may practice all the duties of Religion,
and yet be a covetous wretch, as we see in Judas, and the Scribes and
Pharisees, who fasted, made long prayers, gave alms, and yet Christ taxes them
for covetousness. Mat. 23.14 So Ezekiels Hearers. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. covetousness
is a secret sin, and cleaves close to the natures of the best. Hence Christ
warnes his own Disciples to beware of it, Luke 12.15. and 21.34. Yea the more
pious any man is, the more the Devil will tempt him to this sin. This made St.
John write to those that were strong in grace, and fathers in Christ's School,
to take heed of loving the world. 1 Ioh 2.15.

5. Obj. Men praise me, and therefore I am not so bad as you would make me.

Answ. Yet God abhorres them, Psalm. 10.3. and though all thy fellow prisoners
praise thee, yet if the Judge condemn thee, thou art undone: for it is not he
whom men commend, that is commendable, but he whom the Lord commends. Romans 2.29.

[He that would see any more, Sublata ca^sa tollitur eff^ctus* Christians
should live above the world* it is much below them to stoop to these beggarly
enjoyments etc. Iacomb, Enochs walk. p. 20, 21. Vbi plura.
let him peruse M. Capel on Tentat. Part. 3. Sect. 8. p. 329. Edit. ult.]

Quest. But what Means must I use to overcome this sin?

Answ. You must first remove the Causes (as Physicians use to do) and then the
effect w^ll cease. Now the the first cause of covetousness is Diffidence and
Distrust of Gods providence, and promises. This unbelief is the very Root of
all those Vexing, Inordinate, Tormenting cares, which possess men's hearts.
They question whether God will provide for them, and therefore they are so
excessively careful to provide for themselves. The weakness of the Disciples
faith strengthened their fear about food and raiment, Matthew. 6.30. The Lord
foreseeing this, has for our support promised, that he will never leave us,
(...), nequaquam neque unquam te deseram. Beza.

Quintuplex negatio apud Graecos vehementer negat.


nor forsake us. Heb. 13.5. there are five Negatives in the Text, to assure us
of the truth of it. q. d. I will not, no, I will not; I will in no wise leave
thee, nor forsake thee. He that provides for Sparrowes, and feeds the Ravens,
will not fail his people; man is a poor weak creature, and cannot live without
some prop; and if he trust not in God, he will trust in uncertain riches. Prove.
18.11. For this the Lord who is a jealous God, and cannot endure a Corrivall;
crosses and curses him, and sets an Ecce of detestation upon him. Psalm. 52.7.
Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in his riches.
Let us therefore act and strengthen our faith, Fides famem non formidat.
Tertul. Fide armatus difficilia quaeque potest.
for it fears no Famine, Dangers, or Difficulties. Get assurance of heavenly
things, that will enoble your minds, and make you to contemn earthly things.
If you be risen with Christ, and have set your affections on things above, they
will dye to things below. Colos. 3.1, 2. He that is filled with sweet meats,
cannot away with courser fare.

2. Discontent with men's present condition, man is a poor froward, wayward,
perverse, d^scontented piece. God has much ado with u^. The proud man has no
God, the unquiet man has no nei^hbour, the distrustful man has no friend:
but the discontented man has not himself Herle's Poliop. p. 1. c. 4.
I^ Israel be in Egypt, he then longs to be in Canaan; let God bring them into
Canaan, and then they long to be in Egypt again. Our present Callings,
dwellings, Wives, please us not. The Servant would be a Master, the Maid a
Mistress, the old man young, the single man married, and the married man would
feign be single again.

1. Consider that this discontent with thy present condition is a dangerous
Temptation, It makes men unthankful to God for present enjoyments, and to
undervalue the blessings they have.

2. Discontent makes men like to the Devil himself, who is a proud
discontented spirit, Jude 6. as contentation make us like to God, and partakers
of the divine nature; so Discontent makes men like to Satan. A gracious man is
a Self-sufficient man; he rests contented with his little. Suppose all the
creatures in the world should be destroyed, yet God would be El-shaddai,
all-sufficient still, laying all happiness in himself: So if God should take
away all creature comforts from a gracious soul, yet so long as he has God for
his portion, he has all; and is as joyful, as if he abounded with all
creature comforts. Hab. 3.17. Psalm. 16.5, 6, 7.

See more Judgments on covetous persons.

Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. Part 2. cap. 5. p. 58. in Folio.


3. Discontent brings ruin, Ahab was not content with a Kingdom, but he must
have Naboths Vineyard too, and that ruined him. 1 Kings 21. This cast the
Angels from Heaven, Adam out of Paradise; he would be like God, and made
himself lower then man. Psalm 49. ult. Let the scratching bramble, and tearing
(...), aspire after Ru^e, and to be a King: but let the Vines of Gods planting
content themselves with the wine, and sweetness which God has given them.
Judge. 9.14, 15. when Israel was not content with Manna, but they must have
flesh, they had it with a curse to boot. Numb. 11.31.33. Impatience may wrest a
deliverance from God, but we had better be without it. Such Preservations
oft-tim^s are but Reservations to some greater judgment. This ruins men in
Temporals: as a rolling stone gathers no moss, so a running, discontented head
gathers no riches. It Is not those which are rich in an orderly way, but those
that will be rich before their time, and that by unjust practices; such bring
themselves into a snare, and do so drown themselves in perdition, (...) in
profundum exitium demergunt.

This is finis operis, though not finis operantis. The end of the action,
though not the intent of the agent.


that they seldom or never rise again. 1 Timothy 6.9. So did Balaam, Jude 11.
and Achan, Ahab, Judas. This ruins men in Spirituals. It robs the soul of that
Peace and Joy, which it should find in God, it distempers the spirit, and makes
it unfit for holy duties. It lays men open to many sad Temptations. What makes
so many Witches? Discontent. What makes so many run to Withes? Discontent. What
makes so many murder themselves? Discontent. This lets the Devil into men's
hearts. Ephesians. 4.27. He loves to fish in troubled waters, and carefully
observes all excesses in us, whether of sorrow, or joy; and acts accordingly.

Here some object. If I had but such Gifts and Graces, as others have. I could
be content, but it troubles me, that I come so short of many others.

Answ. You must know that God has ordained some men for more eminent places,
and these he adornes with more eminent Gifts and Graces. Others are for lower
service, and these he gifts accordingly. Some are to be Eyes, some Hands, some
Feet, some little Toes in the body, yet all useful and beautiful in their
places. It Is a great dignity to be the least member of Christ's mystical body.

2. Though thou be inferior in some things, yet thou may excel in others.
Another, it may be, may have more knowledge; yet thou may practice more.
Another may have more Learning; but thou more Humility. Aaron excelled in
eloquence, and freedom of speech; but Moses excelled in Wisdom, Solidity, and
Meekness. God in his Wisdom has so ordered it; that no man has all things;
but some excel in one thing, and some in another, that we might all be useful
in our way, and helpful each to other.

Quest. But suppose the Lord should call me to a higher place, must I still
content my self with my low condition?

Answ. As when the Lord calls us to a lower condition, to forsake all, as he
did Abraham, to leave a certainty, for an uncertainty. Genesis 12.1. Acts 7.5. We
must cheerfully obey. So when he calls us to Riches and Honor, as he did
Joseph, David, Hester, Daniel; We may and must with Thankfulness accept it: or
if the Lord by our industry, or by the death of Parents and Friends, shall
enrich us, we may accept of them, and must improve them to the honor of that
God, that gave them. As we have better wages, so we must do do more work. Quae
a De^ dono accepimus, ad Dei cultum refer debemus, and in ejus opere
consumere, quae ejusdem sum^simns largitate. Salvian ad Ecclesiam Catholicam.
l. 1. p. 352. ubi plura.

Ille habet aucum, qui novit uti auro; qui autem auro uti non novil, habetur,
non habet, possidetur, non possidet: est^te Domini auri, non servi. Aug. in
Psalm. 123.


As he has exalted us, so we must exalt him. Like Iehosaphat, when God gave
him riches in abundance, his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6. Such are not slaves to their Riches; they do possess it, but it
possesses not them.

Quest. But how shall I know when I am called to an higher place?

Answ. When the Lord gives Gifts and Qualifications suitable to the work which
he calls us to; for God calls none to any employment, but he gives them gifts,
in some competent measure, answerable thereunto.

2. When we come not to our Places by Bribery, Simony, or any indirect means.
When we make not money our end, but the glory of God; for many pretend a Call
from God, when it is 100 l. or 200 l. per annum that calls them. This is Mammons
call and not Gods, and such prosper accordingly; they have no comfort nor
success in what they do. But when a man shall see (upon the improvement of his
gift) a clear hand of providence, leading him from a lower to a higher place,
wherein he may bring more glory to God; and he can make it appear to others,
that this is his primary end: then go and prosper, and the Lord be with thee.

3. Carnal security, with hopes of long life, and thoughts that they shall live
here for ever, Luke 12.17, 18. this made that rich churl so eager after the
World. Such may do well to remember, that we are but strangers and pilgrims
here. That our life is short and uncertain, like a Tale that is soon told.
Psalm. 90.9. a span that is soon measured, Psalm. 39.5. like a shadow that soon
passes away, See Mr. Ley's Sermon on that Text.

See Mr. Cases Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Lucy. p. 17. etc.


Job 8.9. like a vapor that soon vanishes. James 4.14. Like a flower that
soon fades. Isai 40.7. James 1.10, 11. Like the grass that soon withers. 1
Pet. 1.24. Like a Post that hasts away. Job 9.25. Like a Weavers shuttle, that
flies swiftly. Job 7.6. Like a race that is soon run, Like a thought which
quickly comes, and quickly goes. Psalm. 9.9. Like a dream which quickly
vanishes. Psalm. 90.5. Like a blast of wind which returns no more, Job 7.7.
Psalm. 78.39. though a man should live a thousand years; yet in Gods sight, and
compared with eternity, it is but as a watch of the night, which lasts but
three hours

Besides, Physicians observe that, within us, we are obnoxious to three hundred
diseases; besides many new ones which have not been heard of till of late; yea,
how many have been killed by immoderate passions? as excessive Joy, Sorrow,
Fear, Envy, etc.

2. Without us, there is the Sword, Plague, Famine, Fire, Water, Beasts, and
wicked Men, who are worse then Beasts. Death is in our Cap, in our Pot, in our
Meat, Drink, Gloves, Apparel: a Hair, a Fly, a Raisin stone, a Tile from an
House, may soon end us; So vain a thing is man. Psalm 39.11.

This, seriously considered, is a notable means to mortify our affections to
the World. Remember that all these creature comforts, have aut finem suum, aut
finem tuum, either thou must from them, or they from thee; how soon thou
know not. 1 Timothy 6.7. 'twill be our wisdom therefore to wean our hearts
betimes from these low enjoyments; that so when our last weaning by death shall
come, it may not be better to us.

4. False Notions, and delusive conceits about riches. This indeed is the prime
Cause of Covetousness. Most men are blinded, they judge Riches to be that
which makes a man and his Posterity happy. Hence it is, that they place their
Comfort, Joy, Contentment, in these Perishing, low things.

They call them Goods, as if they were the only good Wealth, Bona appellantur
ac per hoc fallunt homines nomine praesentium bonorum, cum sint causae malorum
aeternorum. Salvian.
as if it were well for all such. Profit, Gain, Treasure, Substance; as if
there were an All Sufficiency in them. Men look on Riches as great things. Ier.
45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self? they are not so in subsistence,
but only in Appearance.
They look upon a man as undone without them, but he that has them, they look
upon him as made, such a man has a house and land given him, he is made; when
the man oft-times is marred: and by them is made more Idle, Proud, Luxurious,
Covetous, and cruel, etc.

As a remedy against this Soul-destroying Malady, Be sure to get your
judgments rightly informed, that you may conceive aright of these Temporal
things. Regard not what the World calls them, for those things which are highly
esteemed in the sight of men, often times are an abomination in the sight of God,
they call Darkness Light, and Evil Good.

But observe what the word of God (which is truth it self. Dan. 10.21.) calls
them, and accordingly judge of them. Now the Scripture calls these earthly
things, which the World idolizeth, and so dotes upon.

1. Vanity; not only Vain, but Vanity it self in the Abstract. Habel habalim,
haccol Habel. Vanitas vanitatum, omnia vana. Vanitas significat. 1.
Mutabilitatem. 2. Inanitatem. 3. B^evitatem. 4. Interitum. 5. Mendacium. 6.
Fraudem and fallaciam. a Lapide in locum. V. Clerks Mirror. cap. 131,
Not only Vanity, but Vanity of Vanites, (i. e.) Vanissima Vanitas, exceeding
Vain. And not only so, but they are Vexation of Spirit too; there is Vexation in
getting them, Vexation and Care in keeping them, and Vexation in parting with
them. But who tells you all this? Why Solomon, the wisest of men, who had
experience of all creature comforts, after much trial of them all, concludes.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. Eccles. 1.2.

Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest. p. 1. c. 8. Sect. 3. p. 167.
[See Mr. Cottons Commentary on Ecclesiastes. Downams Warfar. lib. 2. cap. 8, 9,
10. p. 466, 467, etc. Doctor Reynolds, Vanity of the Creature. Mr. Henry Smiths
Sermon on Ecclesiast. 1, 2. Sibbs Cordialls. Sermon. 18. on 1 Samuel 19.3, 4. Edit.
1. Papillon on the Passions. cap. 3.]

2. Riches are called Snares. 1 Timothy 6.9. though in themselves they are good,
and the blessings of God, yet accidentally, by reason of man's corruption, they
become dangerous Snares to many, and the occasion of their ruin; as we see in
Pharaoh, Jeroboam, Rehoboam, Nebuchanezzar, Darius, Nabal, Iesurum, Deuteronomy.
32.15. Herod, Dives, Abstrahunt divitiae a recto; quae opinione nostra chara
sunt, pre^io suo vilia. Seneca Ep. 8 2.
how Proud, Luxurious, Unmercifull. Luke 16. The poor men were bad in Ieremies
time, but the rich were far worse. Ier. 5.4, 5. and usually when we have most
of the Creature, God has least of us. Job 21.7. to 17. Ier. 2.31. Hos. 4.7.
and 13.6. Psalm. 73.6, 7, 8. as they were increased, viz. in number, riches, and
all manner of blessings, so they sinned against God: Pius. V. Pontifex factus,
dicere solebat: Cum religiosus essem, sperabam been de salute mea; Cardinalis
factus, extimui, nunc Pontifex factus, pene despero. a Lapide in Number. 11.11.

Galba omnium consensu capax fuit imperii, nisi imperasset. Tacitus. When there
were Golden Chalices, there were wooden Priests, and when wooden Chalices, the
Church had Golden Priests. Difficile est esse in Honor sine Tumore. Bern.


and according to their Pastures they were filled, and their heart was exalted;
not in duty and thankfulness, but in Pride and forgetfulness, How many,
whilst poor and low, were active, and zealous men; but the higher they have
been promoted (like a Pope which I have read of) the worse they have been, when
the Church was most persecuted, it flourisht most. Plures efficimur, quoties
metimur, said Tertullian. And when Constantine bestowed great preferments on
the Church, a Voice was heard in the Air saying. Hodie venenum fun ditur in
Ecclesiam. Now is the Church poisoned. Riot and Pride usually attend Riches.
Hence that Caveat. 2 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich, that they be not
high-minded; implying, that rich men are apt to be so. Riches to a wicked man
are like a sword in a mad man's hand, with which he does much mischief. He Is
the more able to oppress, and Tyrannize over his brethren, Psalm. 52.2.7. Bulls
and Bears, when they are fat and full, grow fierce and man-kin. Since
therefore riches are such dangerous snares, we should rather fear them, then
desire them; considering how many great men, yea and good men have fallen by
them.

3. Riches are called Thorns.

1. As those choke the seed that is sown, they overtop it, and drop upon it. So
the inordinate cares of the World choke the good seed of the Word, that it
cannot prosper in our souls. Mat. 13.22. Luke. 8.14. 2. Thorns are noisome,
unprofitable things; so are riches, if they be not rightly used. 3. Thorns, if
they be carelessly handled, scratch and wound us, a man had need to be fenced
with iron, and well harnassed, that goes amongst them. 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. So
riches, if they be not wisely managed, pierce us with many sorrows. 1 Timothy
6.9, 10. 4. Thorns are perplexed and folded one within another: so are the
cares of this World so linkt together, that one draws on another. 5. They are
catching any thing that comes near them, Abraham's Ram was caught in a thicket,
Genesis 22, 13. let a sheep come to them for shelter, and he is soon entangled, and
leaves some of his fleece behind him: So they that will be rich, are quickly
caught and entangled by them; they rob us of our Humility, Industry, Courage,
Zeal: How many in times of trial to save their goods, have denied their God.
6. They soon vanish, and are quickly extinct. Psalm. 58.9. and 118.12. So riches
fly suddenly from us, and are therefore called uncertain riches. 7. Thorns
spring from the earth, and their heads run into the earth again: So Rich men
have their Hearts and Heads in the earth. 8. Thickets of Thorns are
Receptacles and Dens of many noisome hurtful creatures: so the hearts of
worldly men, are Dens of Devils, and Lodges for noisome lusts.
4. Riches are called Unrighteous Mammon, Non ipsae divitiae per se noxiae, sed
mentes male utentium criminosae: nec ipsae opes homini poenae causae sunt, sed
de opibus sibi poenas divites faciunt; quia dum uti divitiis been nolunt, ipsas
sibi divitias in tormenta convertunt. Salvian See Dyke on the Hear. c. 4. p.
52, 53
Luke 16.9. and Treasures of wickedness. Prove. 10.2. Because oft-times they
are ill got, ill kept, ill spent. How many use unrighteous practices to gain
them, and in the possessing of them, they become the baits and instruments of
many sins, especially of oppression and unrighteousness. Not that Riches are
unrighteous in themselves, but accidentally by the abuse of wicked men, they
become the occasions of great unrighteousness.

5. They are called Deceitful riches, Matthew. 13.22. Jude 11. Because they
deceive such as trust in them. They are like a painted harlot, that promises
pleasure, but brings pain; they deal by men, as the devil does by his witches;
he promises them delights, but gives them torments; promises them liberty,
and brings them to prison: promises them life, and brings them to death.
Riches frustrate the expectation of such as rest upon them. They are like the
gross Idolater, which feeds on ashes, and rests on a lie. Isay 44.20. yet are
they so bewitched with them, that they cannot say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand? they cannot so much as question with themselves, Are these the
things I was born for? are these my chiefest good? if they could once but thus
reason with their hearts, they would soon loath them.

6. Riches are called Nothing, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not? or which is nothing? (as the former translation reads it) most
men idolize riches, Veenennu, and ille non supple sunt, existunt, vel non
manent in tuo jure and potestate.

Per modica and minima Christus intelligit bona temporalia; per magna,
spiritualia, a Lapide.

Turcium imperium quantum quantum est, mica tantum est, quam pater-familias
projicit canibus. Luther.


and look upon them as great matters, but in Christ's Inventory they are set
amongst the least of goods. Luke 16.10, 11. Solomon goes further, and reckons
them amongst the things that are not. The whole Turkish Empire (says Luther)
is nothing else but a crust, cast by heavens great Housekeeper to the dogs of
the world.

1. Observe how sharply Solomon reproves men for looking after Riches. Will thou set thine eye on that which is not? q. d. Thou may not do it, they are
not worth the looking after, and therefore do not so much as cast an eye upon
them.

1. Because man is a rational creature, he uses convincing Argum^nts to
dissuade him.

1. Consider they are Nothing. Nothing in Gods eye, and esteem; Nothing in
comparison of Grace and Gods favor; Nothing in respect of any Real comfort;
they profit not in a day of wrath, when trouble is upon our selves, or upon the
Nation; they cannot help us, but they forsake us, when we have most need. Prove.
11.4. Job 36.18.19. Zeph. 1. ult. They are so vain, that they deserve not the
name of a Being, they are not, they are a mere nonentity, a purum nihil, call
them any thing, and you call them too much.

2. They are exceeding Mutable, they fly suddenly and swiftly from us, they
have not Sparrowes, but Eagles wings to fly aloft out of our reach. Habent non
alas passerinas, sed alas aquilinas.
There is no keeping them, we daily see how they fly from one to another. Opes
non habent stabilem existentiam, sed, instar avis inquietae, vagae and fugacis
transit and avolat, and amplius non appareat, nec esse videatur. a Lapide.
Hence the Apostle calls them uncertain Riches 1 Timothy 6.17.

3. They make themselves wings, we need not invent ways to make them fly, they
have wings enough of their own to fly from us: by the wings of fire, by the
wings of Thieves, by the wings of Taxes, Irus and est subito qui modo Craesus
erat.
Suretiships, Soldiers, Plunder; by Rust, Rats, Moaths, Mice, Pirates,
Shipwreck, etc. So that he who was Dives to day, may be Lazarus to morrow.

Thus let us get our judgments clearly convinced of the Vanity, Inanity,
Mutability and Dagner of Riches; then will not our hearts be easily deceived by
them: to this end remember what our Savior calls them. Luke 10.41. They are
many things, (i. e.) they require much labor and trouble. to get them.

2. They are unnecessary things, one thing is necessary. 3. They will be taken
from us. 4. They are not the best part.
2. Having removed the Causes of Covetousness; in the next place; G^t an
Hatred of it in thy Heart. Do not plead for it, do not extenuate it; but
remember it is Idolatry, the root of all evil, it makes us hateful to God,
odious to men, a burden to our selves, and abusive to our Relations. This will
make us to fly from it as from the face of a serpent. 1 Timothy 6.20, 21. Shun it
with all speed, that you be not tackt or tainted with it. But how may I do
that? why study ye the contrary graces. verse 11, 12. for as Diseases, so Vices
are cured by their contraries.

Est armatura armatura.
3. Pray much against it. Without this, all other means are vain. This has a
special influence on all the other pieces of our spiritual armor, without it
all the rest are unserviceable, and therefore the Apostle adds in the close of
all, praying always. Ephesians. 6.18. Spread thy misery before the Lord and say,
Lord what a heart have I? how full of distracting cares, and inordinate fears,
how dead and dull to the best things? If Riches increase, I can rejoice in
them, or if my substance decrease, I am sensible of that; but in matters of
spiritual concernment, how stupid and senseless am I? oh thou the
Heart-making, be to me the Heart-mending God. When David did but feel this sin
stirring in him, he goes presently to Prayer against it. Psalm 119.36. and so
does Agur. Proverbs 30.8. We have no power of our selves against this Goliath,
we must therefore go forth in Gods Name against it; and then, though it be a
strong, habitual, connaturall sin, yet God is, El, the strong God, and there
is nothing too hard for him. Though the sons of Zerviah may be too strong for
us, yet they are not too strong for him. Prayer is a special means to ri^de
our hearts of all distrustful, d^stracting, tormenting cares. Phil. 4.6, 7. in
nothing be careful, viz. with a care of ^iffidence, though we may with a care
o^ diligence. But what would you have us do? Why? Pray, says the Apostle,
that is (...), a Catholicon, an Universal remedy for any malady. James 5.13. 1
Kings 8.31.33.35.37. Psalm 107.13.19.28. it has virtutem pacativam, a
settling, and composing virtue, (...) quiets and stills the distempers of the
soul; as sleep composeth the distempers of the body; it guardes our hearts,
(...), custiodiet instar custodiae militaris, contra omnes hosts. a Lapide.
and keeps us as safe, as in a Garrison. Hence Luther called Prayer the Leeches
of his cares. When Hannah was in distress, she goes to prayer, and then was no
more sad. 1 Samuel 2.18. Pray says Christ, And your joy shall be full. John
16.24.

4. Get interest in God, Famulanti Dee, famulantur omnia.
and assurance of his favor, and thou have all; He that serves God, all the
creatures delight to serve him. He is too covetous, whom God cannot content. He
that has the Sun, needs not complain for want of the Stars. He that has
tasted the sweetness of better things, will easily contemn these low things.
Let us therefore turn our Covetousness the right way, and if we will covet;
Non ex pecun^^ comparatur virtus, sed virtute pecunia. Socrates.
let it be the best things. 1 Cor, 12.31. and 14.1.

Let it be the chief of our care, first to get Grace, and then Riches will
follow. Matthew. 6.33. Prove. 22.4 Psalm. 112.1.3.

To this end ^et us compare Grace and Riches together.

1. These temporal Riches are but dross and dogges-meat; reprobates, for the
most part, have most of them; they are common blessings. But Grace is a choice
blessing, and peculiar only to the people of God.

2. Riches are Transitory, they may be lost or spent, the more a man spends,
the less he has: but Grace is true Treasure, durable Riches, that better part
which cannot be lost. Matthew. 6.19, 20. Luke 10.42. This increases by spending.
Matthew. 13.12. To him that has shall be given ( i. e.) he that shows his Grace
by Practicing of it, shall have more.

3. Riches hinder many from Heaven; few rich men shall be saved, 1 Cor. 1.26.
some, but not many. Corpulent birds seldom fly high* These many things cumber
them, and this thick clay clogges, and defiles them* Luke 10.41. Hab. 2.6. But
Grace is the Pathway to Peace and Glory.

4. Riches breed discontent, Vnus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis. Juven.
Sat. 10.
the more men have, the more unquiet they be, they are still unsatisfied.
Eccles. 5.10. But Piety breeds contentment, and therefore it is called Great
gain. 1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness, in the Power and Life of it, is Gain, it is no
aerie, notional, empty thing; but it is that which brings Real profit to them
that have it. Now gain is Argumentum cogens, it is an argument that takes with
all men; why? get godliness, and you get gain.

2. It Is great gain, there is none like it; hence it is said to be profitable,
not for some things, but for all things, having the promises of the blessings
of this life, and that which is to come.

3. It Is great gain in respect of the Effect which it produces, viz.
contentment. When the soul is once acquainted with God, a very little of these
outward things will content us. Psalm. 16.5, 6. and 23. 1 Philip. 3.8. This is
the rare privilege of Godliness, that it can make us Rich without Riches, as
we see in the Church of Smyrna. Revel. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but thou art
Rich. Though she were poor in goods, yet she was rich in Grace, rich in
contentment, rich in Capite, in Christ her head, in whom all is Hers; Rich in
Bills and Bonds (i. e.) in the promises, and Rich in Reversion; having Title to
Heaven and Happiness.

5. Exercise your selves daily in Acts of Love to your Neighbor, and pity to
the poor; this will losen your hearts from the World; for as when money
increases, our love to it increases. [ Crescit amor nummi, quantum, etc.] So
by accustoming our selves to give, our love to money is lessened, Habitus tam
vitiorum quam virtutum ex frequentatis actionibus c^mparantur; and illis
intermissis vel omissis omittuntur. Aristot. Ethic.
as our money is lessened. Many Acts beget an Habit, and habits become strong
and delightful.

6. Get contentment with your present condition, what ever it be; when the
Apostle had dissuaded men from Covetousness. Heb. 13, 5. Let your cenversation
be without Covetousness, let not only an Action or two (for one Action does
not denominate) but let your whole conversation, the series and course of your
life, all your Buying, Selling, Trading, trafficking, must show that you are
free from Covetousness. But what means must we use against this sin? Be
content with present things. Do not carke nor care for hereafter, but rest
quiet and content with the present estate and condition of life, which God has
allotted thee. Be it little, or be it much, high or low, a doing or Suffering
condition; be it sickness or health, plenty or poverty; still know that the
present condition which God allottes thee, is always the best for thee;
because it is that condition which the only, and infinitely wise God has
assigned to thee; he knows what is best and fittest for us. The little child
would have a piece as big as the Plowman, but the wise Parent knows he
would but spoil it, if he had it. God knows our strength, our Parts, and
abilities, and therefore that condition which he sets us in, is ever the best
for us. In necessariis est salus, in superfluis laqueus, in mediocritate Dei
gratia, in divitiis Diaboli catena. Salvian.
Hence He commands us, Having food and raiment, to be content. 1 Timothy 6.8.
Having food, not dainties; and raiment, not ornaments; if we have things
necessary for us and ours, though we have not abundance, we must rest quiet and
contented. A shoe too big for our foot, overthrowes us. Nature is content
with little, and Grace with less. Bread and Water with the Gospel (said Master
Greenham) is good cheer, The Lord checkes* Baruc for seeking great things for
himself, especially in troublous and calamitous times. Ierem 45.5. Hence it is,
that the holiest men have ever been the most contented men; and if there be any
Heaven upon earth, it is contentment, and inward Peace. It Is a flower which
grows not in Natures garden, it cannot reach it, it is a Supernatural lesson
taught us by the Spirit of Grace; and he is a good proficient in the School of
Christ, who has learned it. Paul had it. Phil. 4.11, 12, I have learned to be
abased, and to abound. Two hard Lessons.

1. To know how to want Food, Didici longa experientia praesentibus esse
contenius, sive multum, sive modicum, sive nihil.

Nec superbiendum rebus florentibus, nec desperandum adversis. Cicero.

Bonus est bonorum rector, malorum victor.


Health, Wealth, Liberty; to be stripped of all earthly comforts, and yet to sit
down quiet and content is a high and a hard Lesson. 2. Sometimes the Lord gives
abundance to his people (as he did to Abraham, David, Solomon, Job, Iehosaphat,
etc.) and then to know how to abound, is harder then to know how to want, yet
the Apostle was so exact a Scholar in the School of Christ, that he had
learned his Lesson both ways, both backward and forward; he could abound, and
he could want. Benjamin was called Ithar jad, because he could use both hands,
and they were a notable Tribe: but to know how to use both estates well, is a
far greater praise. Jacob who was little and low in his own eyes, Genesis 32.10.
desires no more but food and raiment, and tells his Brother that he had enough.
Genesis 33.9.11. Esau could say, I have Rab, multum; but Jacob says, I have [
Col, omne] all things, for contentment is All in All; None so content as the
Humble man, who sees himself to be less then the least of Gods mercies, This
made the Church quietly to bear, not only the Anger, but the Indignation of
the Lord: when she considered how she had sinned against him. Micah. 7.19. Lam.
3.22. Humble David counts it an honor to be but a doorkeeper in Gods house,
and the prodigal desires to be an hired servant there.
2. Consider, thou have more then many of thy betters. How many of Gods dear
servants have been in a lower condition then thou art in. Consider Jobs
afflictions, Paul's trialls, our Saviors Poverty, who had not a house of his
own to dwell in, nor a bed of his own to lie on. Matthew. 8*20. and barley bread
for his followers. John 6.9.

3. Contentment is the only Riches, It Is not Money, but the Mind which makes
men rich. Dives est, non qui multum, sed qui satis habet. Sen.

Brevissima ad divitias per contemptum divitiarum via est.


Hence Socrates calls contentment the the Souls Riches. We all desire Riches,
behold the way. How many, by overreaching, and being over-eager after the
world, have lost all? This sweetens our little, and makes it more comfortable
to us, then the great heaps of Riches, which the wicked have with vexation and
discontent, Prove. 13.25. and 15, 16, 17. and 16.8. Habent omnia, quiae habent
habentem omnia.
A good man rests as well contented with his little, as if God had made him a
King, or an Emperor, and when they have nothing, yet they have all; because
they have the God of all. 2 Cor. 6.10,

4. It Is a singular, comely, well-pleasing Grace; it adornes our profession,
and winnes much upon the Spirits of men. As Covetousness of all Vices is the
basest, Omne bonum, ingenium est (...), contra fatuum and ambitiosum est, (...).
so contentment of all Virtues is the most excellent. It Is the greatest
happiness that we can attain to in this world: perfect happiness consists in
communion with God immediately; but imperfect happiness consists in
contentment, when we enjoy God in his Creatures and Ordinances; and this is the
highest degree of happiness, which this world affords. This is Heaven upon
earth: Heaven is nothing else but a sweet and quiet Spiritual rest and
satisfaction in the great God. So that this is not only our Duty, Deo
simillimus, qui paucissimis eget.
but our Glory. It Is the ornament of a Christian, and makes him lovely, even in
Gods eye. 1 Pet. 3.4. When your Wills are submissive to his Will, and we can be
content to be what God will have us to be, and to suffer what ever he will have
us to suffer, this is our Glory, 1 Pet. 2.20.

Magni animi est magna contemnere, atque memediocria malle quam nimia. Seneca.

Pene sacere, and male audire, regium est.

Te non adversae timidum, tumidumve secundae Res faciunt, eadem frons tibi,
mensque manet. Natura paucis contenta, libido nullis. Bonus paucis indiget.
Seneca.


5. Its a sign of a magnanimous raised spirit, when we can do well, and yet be
content to hear ill, when we can pass through bad report, as well as good, and
through losses, crosses, trialls, and make nothing of them; yea, can bless God
in the loss of all. Job 1.21. this is Noble and Heroic indeed. 'Twas Socrates
commendation, that though his condition often changed, yet he never changed, but
was still the same. And if Heathens that had but the dim light of nature for
their guide, have loved and practiced (in their way, and according to their
light) contentment; then we that have received more Light and Love from God,
should do more then they. Matthew. 5.47. for he that cannot submit to God in
Passive Obedience, the sincerity of his Active Obedience is justly to be
suspected.

Obj. This is a hard and a harsh Lesson, who can learn it?

Quot genera praeceptorum, tot adversariorum; Mavult quilibet improbus execrari
legem, quam emendare mentem, praecepta odisse quam vitia. Salvian.
Answ. The way to heaven is a hard and a straight way to flesh and blood. Mat.
7.14. All Gods pleasant commands yet seem harsh and hard to wicked and
unwilling men. If God command liberality, then the covetous man is angry; if
Frugality, the Prodigal; if Humility, the Proud; if Chastity, the Incontinent;
if Sobriety, the Intemperate. But get thy nature changed, and get in Love with
contentment and goodness, and then the good ways of God will never displease
thee. Micah 2.7.

Obj. But I am sick and poor, I am lost, and low.

Answ. It may be thou have had a month or two of sickness, but have thou not
had years of pleasure and health? now shall we receive so much good at the
hands of the Lord, and shall we not endure a little evil of affliction,
especially since it is for our good? Job 2.10.

2. Be content with thy Poverty, in some respects it may be better to thee then
the riches and plenty of the wicked. Many esteem poverty the greatest evil,
Perdidi pecuniam, and illa quam multos. Eris nunc in via expeditior, domi
tutior, non habebis, sed non timebis haeredem.
and therefore to avoid it they run into sin. Whereas Poverty (if it be not in
extremity) is the Nurse of Arrs, the School of Patience, Severior disciplina
firmat ingenium, aptumque magnis reddit conatibus. Seneca de Tranquil.
a Teacher of diligence, a Bridle to Vice, a Spur to Virtue; such are apter to
receive the Gospel, and so more capable of grace and true contentment, Zeph.
3.5. See Clerks Mirror. cap 99.
Matthew. 11.5. James 2.5. The middle condition between extreme Poverty, and the
height of riches has always been accounted safest and best. Prove. 30, 8, 9.

3. Consider, though Poverty be a cross, and sometimes a curse for sin. [
Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44. Psalm. 109.10.] yet it is no sin, for Christ himself was poor,
that he might sanctify our Poverty in his own person, and honor it with his
own example, Consule Bezam in locum.
2 Cor. 8.9. For our sakes he became poor, though not so extreme poor, as to
beg his bread, for that was forbidden ^y the Law, Deuteronomy. 15.4. and restrained by
all Well-governed Commonweals; yet he was so poor as to borrow, he had not so
much money as a (...), to pay the Tax with Matthew. 17.24. which was about ten
pence say some, fifteen pence say others.

4. You that are Poor, are freed from many dangers, which rich men are exposed
to; as Poysening, Plundering, Fining, Envying, etc. How many Kings, Auro
bibitur Venenum.
and great ones, have been poisoned in their golden cups; when thou fear
nothing in thy earthen dish.

-- Nulla aconita bibuntur Fictilibus.
Juven. In times of war, the soldier inquires not where dwells the poor man;
Minus in parvis fiteri^ fortuna, leviusque ferit leviora Deus, Servat placidos
obscurae quies, Praebet semnos casa securos. Seneca. Tragoed.
but where dwells the rich man, the Usurer, and the great man? The finger is
cut off for the golden ring: when Zedokiah King of Judah, and the great ones
were in distress, yet the poor were spared, Impedimenta haec sunt, non
adjumenta; onerae non subsidia; p^ssessione enim and usu opum, ron suffulcitur
religio, sed evertitur. Salvian.
Ier. 39.10. So 2 Kings 25.7.12.

2. Thou art freed frow many dangerous Temptations and snares, from many cares
and fears which annoy the rich.

1. They are apt to Pride, V. Augustine. De Civit. Dei. l. 4. c. 3.
2 Chronicles. 26.16.

2. To forget God. Deuteronomy. 8.16. Prove. 30.9.

3. To security and riot. Non venit ad duros pallida cura ^oros. Martial. l. 14.
Luke 12, 19. Besides, great wealth brings great cares, great fears, and at
last, a great account; they that have much, of them shall be much required. As
thou have less; so thy cares, fears and accounts, will be less.

5. The Lord can supply thy want of Temporal blessings with Spiritual ones,
and though you be not so greatly blessed in earthly places as others are, yet he
can bless you in Heavenly places. Ephesians. 1.3.

6. He can and will provide even Temporalls for thee and thine; so far as shall
be for thy good, and will work Miracles, rather then such as fear him shall
want. We have an excellent instance, 2 Kings 4.1, 2, etc. the dead Prophet was
a man that feared God, and served him in his generation, he durst not
Temporize, as did those false Prophets which sat at Iezabels Table: but chose
rather to dye in debt, and leave his children in extreme poverty, then to use
any indirect means to get out of debt. Now see the goodness of God, rather then
such a man's wife and children shall want; the Prophet Elish^ shall work a
miracle for their supply and comfort. Verse 7. Go sell the Oil, and pay thy
debts, and live thou and thy children on the rest. So tender is God over his,
and so careful to succor them in their extremities. God can and (when he sees
it good for his) he will raise the poor out of the dust, and set them with the
Rulers of his people; we have a notable Example in our own Histories of the
Lord Thomas Cromwell, who was at first but a Black-Smiths son, then a soldier
at the sacking of Rome, after that, Cardinal Woolsies Favorite, then Earl of
Essex, and Counselor to King Henry the Eighth.

7. Thy poverty cannot separate thee from Christ, See more consolat. in Mr.
Church his Letters. p. 99. and B. Hall's Balm of Gilead. p. 193, etc.
Romans 8.35. nor bar thee from heaven. Christ and his Apostles, and Lazarus,
were poor; yet are now in heaven, and so are those poor Martyrs that wandered up
and down, destitute, afflicted, tormented. Heb. 11.37.

Now he that would attain this rare Jewel of contentment, and so be freed from
Covetousness, must labor for Real Godliness. 1 Timothy 6.6. For 1. This will
convince us of the Vanity of the Creature. 2. 'Twill teach us to deny our
selves, our own wit, and will; and to resign our selves unto Gods disposing;
what ever God does with him, yet he is silent still; let God raise him, or
ruin him, make him or mar him, his soul keeps silence unto God still. Psalm.
62.5. he does not only forbear murmuring speeches, but even his soul is silent.
In Deo conquiescit anima ejus. Junius.
3. Piety purges out those ill humors of Pride, Passion, Envy, Emulation,
etc. and so calms, and quiets the soul. 4. Godliness will teach us to set light
by the Censures of others. That which disquiets many, is the censures and
reproaches of the wicked; but a gracious soul, Didicit quis maledicere? ego
contemnere. Tacit.
that is little and low in his own eyes, will not be troubled to be little in
the eyes of others. He can never live quietly and contentedly, that has not
learned to bear the slightings, and contempts of the wicked, with an holy
disdain. Paul esteems it a very small matter to be judged of man, 1 Cor. 4.3.
q. d. This is but man's day, and man's censure, and man's judgment, but I expect
another day, when the judgments of men shall be reviewed, and judged again. 5.
Godliness will make us love God, and love will bear all things patiently and
contentedly. Love thinks no evil. 1 Cor. 13.5. it has not hard conceits of
God, it takes not his acts and dispensations in an ill sense; but sees all
workiug together for good.


[1. If any would see more against Covetousness, let him peruse Doctor Preston
on Colos. 3.5. Mr. Fenner on Philip. 3.19. Papillon on the Passions. chap. 18.
Capel on Tentat. P. 3. c. 3. p. 289, etc. D. Stoughton on Luke 12.15. Downams
warfar, p. 430. to 916. Mr. Ier. Dyke's Sermon. on Luke 12.15. Printed 1652. Mr.
Clerks Mirror. cap. 33. Edit. 3. Mr. Buroughs on Psalm. 17.14. The misery of
those that have their portion in this life, and on Phil. 3.19.]

[2. If for Contentment, See Mr. Henry Smith's Sermon. on 1 Timothy 6.6. Mr.
Buroughs Rare Jewel of contentment. Mr. Hen. Mason. D. Ier. Taylor's Rules of
Holy Living. chap. 2. Sect. 6. D. Sibbs Cordialls on Phil. 4.11, 12. Downams
Warfar. l. 2. c. 19, etc.]

3. Boasters. (...).
A second Branch that sprouts from that accursed Root of Self-love, is
Boasting. This sin is fitly linked to the former; for when men by covetous
Practices, have gained Riches, then they begin to boast and glory in them, [
Prove. 18.11, 1 Timothy 6.17.] because of the supposed good which they think riches
will procure them, as Friends, Honors, Fine Clothes, Fine Buildings. The Lord
foresaw this, and therefore has forbidden all glorying in Riches, and commands
us only to glory in him, who is our Life, our Light, our Sun, our Shield, and
exceeding great Reward. Ier. 9.23.

(...), Iactator, Gloriosus, vanus ostentator, elatus, insolens, arrogans; ab
(...) epit. and intensiva. and (...) capio, quia plus aequo sibi assumit.

Arrogans praedicat and ea quae non insunt, and majora quam insunt sibi fingere
videtur. Aristot. Ethic. l. 4. c. 7.


The Greek word is diversely rendered, yet all tend to one and the same thing, and
are coincident; for he that is a Boaster, is usually a Vainglorious, lofty,
insolent, arrogant man: it notes one that is inordinately lifted up with an
high esteem and admiration of his own supposed, or real excellencies; and
thereupon arrogates and assumes more to himself then is meet; or, one that
boasts of the Learning, Virtues, Power, Riches which he has not, and brags of
Acts which he never did. Hinc Pavo dicitue (...), avis ostentatrix.
Such we call [ Thrasones and milites gloriosos.] vainglorious Thraso's. The
proud man boasts of what he has, and the Boaster braggs of what he has not.
This Vice is opposed by Aquinas and othets, to Verity; and in proper speaking
it consists in Words, Iactantia in eo propre consistit, ut homo verbis se
extollat, ac de se aliquid dicendo proferat, supra id quod in ipso est, vel
etiam supra id, quod de se homines opinantur. Aquinas.
rather then in the Heart; for as Pride, in exact and proper speaking, has
relation to the heart, rather then the words; so this sin of boasting has
relation to our words, rather then our hearts: so that this sin is the daughter
of Pride, (and though by an Hysterosis, it be placed here before it, Iactantia
procedit ex superbia, sicut ex causa interius motiva and impellente. Aquinas.
22. q. 112. art. 1.
yet Romans 1-30. Pride is set immediately before Boasting, as the proper root of
it) for when Pride lies hid in the heart, it shows it self by arrogant
boastings, and high flowen words.

Quest. Does the Scripture condemn all kinds of Boasting, and is it unlawful
in any case to Boast?

Answ. We must distinguish of Boasting. There is 1. A Religious Boasting. 2. A
Necessary Boasting. 3. A Vainglorious Boasting. 4. A Diabolical Boasting.


1. The Scripture mentions a Pious and Religious Boasting, when the soul makes
her boast of God. Psalm. 34.2. whilst others are boasting of their Riches, and
Babels, which they have built, a gracious soul triumphs in God, as if it had
found some great spoils, and rich Treasure. Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. So Paul having a
holy confidence in Christ's merits, Glories therein. Romans 8.37, 38. So he
Glories in his sufferings for Christ. Gal. 6.14. and all Believers glory in
their tribulations for him. Romans 5.3. So Paul glories in the Prosperity of Gods
people. 2 Cor. 7.4.14. and 2.9.2. and 2.2.16, 17. This is comendable Boasting,
and is commanded. Ier. 9.24. Isay 41.16. and 45.25. 1 Cor. 1.31. and 2.10.17.
he that Glories must glory in the Lord: he dares not sacrifice to his own net,
nor kiss his own hand, Job 31.17. he arrogates nothing proudly to himself, but
gives all the glory of all his Goods, Gifts, and Graces, to the God that gave
them.

2. There is a lawful Boasting for necessary defense, being urged thereto by
the slanders of wicked men; on this account Christ apologizeth for himself, and
defends his innocence against his adversaries. In Matthew. 12.6.41, 42. So Job
spends some Chapters in Apologizing for himself against the false accusations
of his friends. Job 29. and 31. So Nehemiah 13. Paul spends 17. Verses at least
in a forced commendation of himself, in relating his Service and Sufferings for
Christ. In 11. Cases Self-commendation is Lawful. See Mr. Reynor's Rules for
the Tongue. p 314, 315, etc. It must be right for Matter, Measure, Manner, and
End p. 517.
2 Cor. 11.16. to 33.

3. There is a Vainglorious Boasting and Ostentation of what we are, and what
we have done, that the world may take notice of us, and we may be admired as
some great men in the world. Thus Simon Magus gave out, that he was some great
man. Acts 8.9. he made himself his own Idol, and therefore he expected that all
the beholders should fall down and worship it, which they are ready to do. V.
10. Thus when men set a high rate upon their own Parts and Perfections, they be
very impatient and discontented, if others will not come to their price, and
because other men will not, See my Pulpit-Guard. p. 43. Edit. 4. and Mr.
Reynor. p. 315. etc.
they will Canonize themselves for Saints. So did the proud Pharisee, when he
boasted of his own perfection, and contemned the Publican. Luke 18.11. So
Matthew. 6. and 23, 5. John 12.43. and this is the Boasting which the Apostle
here, and the scripture elsewhere often condemns. Prove. 27.2. and 20.6. 2 Cor.
10.18.

4. There is a Diabolical Boasting, when men boast of their wickedness; like
that Tyrant who boasted what mischief he could do. Psalm. 52.1. So did Stockly
B. of London, who lying on his deathbed, rejoiced that he had burnt 50.
Heretics. These declare their sin-like Sodom, openly and impudently. Isay 3.9.
and rejoice to do wickedly. Prove. 2.14. Ier. 11.15. The Idolater glories in his
Idols. Psalm. 97.7. Hos. 10.5. The fornicator of his Harlots, the Drunkard of
his Dozens, and how many he has laid asleep. Impudent beasts! that instead of
being ashamed of such glorying; they glory in their shame, and are ashamed of
[grace which is] their glory, their end is destruction. Phil. 3.19. These are
ascended to the highest degree of wickedness. Tunc consummata est infelicitas
ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed etiam placent; and desinit esse remedio
locus, ubi quae fuerant vitia, fiunt mores. Seneca ep. 39.
It Is dangerous to excuse and defend sin, but to boast of Vices, as if they
were Virtues, is the height of Villainy.

By the abounding of this sin amongst us, it is evident we are fallen into the
last times. How is the land overspread with impudent, insolent Boasters, from
Dan to Beersheba, from North to South; they swarm amongst us like the flies in
Egypt. The Papist boasts of his Traditions and M^racles, the Anabaptist of his
Revelations, the Quaker of his Perfection, extraordinary Sanctity and
Sufferings: Though they suffer as evil doers, and disturbers of the Peace of
the land It Is Justice, and not persecution to punish such.
never did any Heretics speak greater swelling words of Vanity, and more cry
up themselves, and cry down others, then this generation of perfect Pharisees,
They boast of themselves that they are equal to the Apostles of Christ; yea to
that blasphemous impudency are they ascended (for want of Punishment) that some
of them say they are Christ himself, and that their James is become a Jesus,
the King of Israel, the Judge of the world; and therefore they worship him,
kiss his feet, and strew their garments before him, etc.

Whither will not Toleration and impunity lead people!

Others boast of their own Sincerity, Sanctity, Innocence, Amiableness, and
Moderation; they call themselves men of a Choice anointing, the only spiritual
people, the close walking ones, the meek and quiet of the earth. Real Saints
are humble, modest men, and dare not give themselves such high Titles. Isai
6.5. Dan. 2.30. Prove. 30.2. they are content that another man's mouth should
praise them, Laus proprio sordescit in ore,
and not their own, Prove. 27.2. they are sensible of so much sin and corruption
in themselves, that they are little and low in their own eyes. Others boast
much of their extraordinary Gifts, and ^ll to Preach, when upon trial they
have neither the one, nor the other: but are merely stuff't with ignorance and
impudence, Arrogantia est profectus obstaculum, indocilis enim est, qui mavult
doctus videri quam esse. Diogen.
like those self-confident ones, that thought themselves fit to be guides of
the blind, before they had learned themselves. Romans 3.19, 20, 21.

They boast much of the spirit; I, they are as full of it, as a Barrel is of
wind. This is the Basis of their Pride, and the shelter for their Sin. Ask them
how they dare presume to Preach without a Call? their Answer is ready, They are
called extraordinarily by the Spirit: and yet they cannot show it, by so much
as ordinary Gifts. Let us therefore try these Spirits by the Touchstone of
Gods word, and they will appear to be Satanicall, deluding spirits: For those
that are Sensual, and Separatists (as these men are) have not the Spirit of
God. Jude 19.

Against the sin of Vainglorious Boasting, take these few considerations.

Against such Boasting, See a Sermon. of D. Hinton on Psalm 52.1. Preached at a
Funeral, 1651.

Mr. Beesly's Ser. on 2 Cor. 11.30.


1. Consider that all such Boasting is evil; evil in its own Nature, and the
cause of much evil. James 4.16. God will not have the wise man to glory in his
wisdom, as the Philosophers did: nor the strong man in his strength, as Lamech
did, Genesis 4.23. nor the Rich man in his Riches, Psalm. 49.6. Luke 12.19. nor any
man in men; 1 Cor. 3.21. but he that glories, must glory in this, That he
knows experimentally, and savingly, the Lord his God, Ier. 9.23, 24. 2.
Consider the Judgments of God on such as have boasted of their own strength
and power, as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.15. and 4.27.30, 31. and the Israelites.
Amos 6.13, 12, So the Gentiles, and Philosophers that gloryed in their own
wisdom, were punished with spiritual judgments, and given up to a reprobate
sense. Romans 1.22, 23, 24. Remember Gods judgments on vaunting Pharaoh. Exodus
5.2. Senacherib, 2 Kings 19.23. Haman, Hest. 5.11. Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.8.
Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.4. and generally God has threatened that all such as glory
in Idols (and such are all those that glory in creatures) shall be confounded,
Psalm. 97.7. Now, as Judges hang up some in Gibbets, to make others fear; so,
Gods Judgments on those, should make all to fear. 3. It Is a Sign of a Proud
Heart; out of the abundance of the heart does the mouth speak. Our discourses
are discoveries of what is within. 4. It makes men like the Devil, who boasted
what great things he had to give. Matthew. 4.9. when he had nec ditionem, nec
dationem, neither right to them, nor power to dispose of them. Men's gifts they
boast off, are none of their own, what have we, that we have not received? 1
Cor. 4.7. 5. When men's mouths are so full of their own praise, S^p^^^issimus
quisque in art sua ignavissimus. Rollic.
it argues an emptiness of Grace within; full Vessels make little noise, when
empty ones sound loud. Empty Carts make a great rattle, when the loaded ones go
quietly by you; your poor Pedlars that have but one Pack, do in every Market
show all they have, when the rich Merchant makes but a small show of that
whereof he has great plenty within. The worst mettle rings loudest, and the
emptiest ears of corn stand highest. Labor therefore for the contrary grace
of Modesty, whose excellency you may find in that useful Peace. Mr. Robinsons
Essays. Observation 58. p. 511.
4. Proud. (...)
This is a third branch of Self-love, viz. Pride in Heart. As arrogant Boasters
show their Pride by their words, so these have it in their hearts, and show it
in their actions, by contemning others, and exalting themselves. (...),
superbus qui supra alios vult ^ideri, ab (...) and (...), appareo. Hinc
superbire est super ire.

Qui alios prae se despicientes, se solos sapere putant. Baldwin.


This sin is the daughter of Covetousness. Hence the Apostle would have rich
men take heed of being High-minded. 1 Timothy 6.17 thereby implying, that Riches
are apt to engender pride, Proud persons are like to Oil: which loves to be
above; in their own conceits, they are wiser than all the world besides.

And is not this the Master-sin of this last and loose age of the world? when
did pride ever more abound in City and Country, in Body and Soul, in Heart,
Head, Hair, Habit; In Gestures, Vestures, Words, Works? what Painting,
Poudring, Patching, Spotting, and Blotting themselves? How are men loaded, and
bedawbed with Variety of Ribbons, before and behind, above and beneath, with
yellow, red, black, blew; they have more colors then the Rainbow, and are
more like Morrice-dancers, then Professors. These fantastic garbs, argue
fantastic hearts. They say to their fine clothes, as Saul said to Samuel,
Honor me before the people: to this end every finger must have a Ring, and
every joint a Jewel; what sad Bills of Indictment will one day be put up
against such persons? Imprimis 20 l. for brave clothes, but not 20 s. for a
pious use. Item 10 l. for Gold and Silver lace, but not 10 s. for the poor.
Item 5 l. for Gew-gaws, and Ribbons, but not 5 s. for the needy. Item 20 s. for
a pair of silver-laced shoes, and scarce 20 d. to the poor. -- How will these
one day curse themselves for their folly, and cry out when it is too late; What
has pride profited us? and what comfort (yea what discomfort) have these
Vanities brought upon us? Be wise now therefore in time, and Honor the Lord
with your Riches, which is the best way to keep and increase them; but waste
them not on your lusts, lest you loose them. Hos. 2.8, 9. The plainness of
former times will condemn our Vanity. V Stor. Chron. William Rufus. An. 1
Arminianisme sets up pride of Will, Popery pride of outward sense, and
Socinianisme the pride of carnal Reason.
the very trimming that some in our days wear, would have bought our ancient
Kings a whole suit of apparel. Our Chronicles tell us that William Rufus (who
in his time was accounted sumptuous in apparel) when his Chamberlain had
brought him a pair of Breeches, and he demanding what they cost? it was
answered, 3 s. The King bad him be gone, and bring him a pair of a Mark price.
Heu prisca simplicitas! Whither is our ancient Simplicity fled!

2. For spiritual pride, which is the worst sort of pride, as fighting more
directly against God, who is a Spirit, when did it more abound then at this
day? There is amongst us. 1. Superbia de Religione, men are proud of their
religious duties, as the Pharisees were.

2. There is Superbia in Religione, Religious duties are proudly performed
amongst us.

3. Superbia cum Religione. Pride conjoined with Religion, the Professors of
Religion are men of proud lives, and haughty spirits; and this is the very
Mother of all those Hell-sprung Heresies, which have of late overspread the
Land. Heareticorum matter superbia. Aug.
Make a man proud, and he will quickly be erroneous. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Simon Magus
that great Haeresiarch, was a very proud man; his picture had the Inscription,
Simoni Sancto Deo. Arrius also that Arch-Heretick was notorious for Pride. The
Gnostics of old conceited that they knew more then all the world besides, They
sprung up about 130. years after Christ.

Gnostici propter excellentiam scientiae sic se appellatos esse gl^^antur; cum
sint superioribus omnibus vaniores atque turpiores. August. de Haeresib. c. 6.

Nullum unquam fuit homin^m genus nomen Christianum profitentium, unde plura
and majora infidelibus and Gentibus offendicula praebe^entur quam ab istis:
Danaeus and Eusebius. Hist* l. 2.13. and l. 4. c. 7.

Si superbia non ess^t, nec Haeretici, nec schismatici essent. Aug.


boasting that God had made them of his privy Counnsell, and had revealed those
secrets to them, which others knew not, (this is the song of our Quakers now)
but none were a greater scandal to Religion then these Gnostics. It Is
spiritual Pride which is the Root of all that separation and Semi-separation,
of all those Divisions, and Subdivisions, which are amongst us. The proud
Pharisees were great Separatists. Men of late have gotten very high conceits of
themselves, they say even to the real Churches of God, stand off, for we are
holier then you. They are so afraid of Popularity, that they run themselves
into Singularity. Young Ministers are much to be blamed for their Pride and
Self-conceitednesse; every Novice now thinks himself wiser then the aged,
Pious, experienced Ministers of the Land, yea then all the Churches of Christ
in the world, I had almost said then Christ himself, These want a Rod, I mean
the Discipli^e of Christ, to curb their exorbitancies.

See the danger of spiritual pride in Mr. Gournals Armor on Ephesians. 6.12. p.
273. to 299. etc.
It Is spiritual pride which makes so many boast of their perfections* when he
that has but half an eye, may see their gross imperfections.'It Is this sin
which makes so many to transgress the bounds of their callings, and to become
Teachers, when themselves had need to be taught the fundamentalls of Religion.
These are wiser in their own conceits, then seven men that can render a reason.
Prove. 26.16. though they were the seven wise men of Greece, yet were they all
but fools to them. They know more by the the Spirit, of which they boast (they
never boast of their learning, I cannot blame them, they are loaded with so
little of it) then their betters can know by twenty years study, who yet have a
greater measure of the spirit then they. The people of England were never
poorer and prouder then at this day; even now when the Lord is beating us for
our pride, and is staining the pride of all our glory, and has brought into
contempt the Honorable of the earth, Isai 23.9. yet (such is the height of our
rebellion) that we sin under the Rod, and are the worse for beating; when the
body swells, it is a sign it is diseased: the Tympany of pride, which is now in
the land, is a sad symptom, that all is not well with us; I wish our State
Physicians, and Spirituall-Physitians, may see to it betimes, before the
disease become Chronicall, and incurable.

3. That inundation and overflowing of all manner of sin, too clearly shows
the pride of the land. There is a kind of tacit interpretative pride in every
sin: Superbia est propriae excellentiae appetitus inordinatus usque ad
contemptum Dei, and Legis divinae transgressionem. Aquinas.

(...), superbia, quasi supergressio regulae. It Is a lifting up of the mind
against the Precepts of God.


for in sinning we prefer our own wills before Gods will, and seek to please
and advance our selves, rather then God. Pride affronts God, it stops the ear
against his commands, and will not suffer mon to submit their necks to Gods
yoke. Ier. 13, 15, 17. and 2.31. Hence sin is called a despising, and contempt
of God. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. The voluptuous man says, God shall not rule over me;
and the worldling says, He Will not leave his profit to be commanded by him; and
every rebellious sinner stands it out against God, and says, We will not have
him to rule over us. Thus when men are stout in heart, they are far from
righteousness. Isai 46.12. as we see in Pharaoh, Absolon, Haman, etc. Pride is
the Nurse of Covetousness, the Root of strife, envy, and cruelty; the Mother
of Murder, this put Athaliah upon slaying the seed Royal, that she might get
the Kingdom to her self. 2 Kings 11. In a word, it is the Root of all evil,
which made Solomon to join pride and the evil way together. Superbia habet
quandam universalem in^fluentiam in emnia peccata. Greg. Mo^al 31.

Initium ^mnis peccati est superbia. Aug. de Civit Dei l. 14 c. 13.

Evidentissimum reprobationis signum est superbia; sicut humilitas electorum.
Greg.

Invisa est superbia vel superbis; superbiam in se amant, in aliis
reprehendunt. Aug.


Prove. 8.13. as Humility is the foundation of all Virtue, so is pride of all
Vices; and as that is the badge of Gods children, so is this of the Devils.
It Is so base a sin, that even the proud themselves hate it in others.

4. The great contention that is in the land, shows there is much pride in it;
for by pride (says Solomon) comes contention. Prove. 13.10. and 28.25. Pride
makes men drunk with their own conceits, Hab. 3.5. and drunkards we know are
quarrelsom. The strife that is in Church, State, Families, comes from hence.
Men should strive to love, but now men love to strive; not that it is a sin to
contend for the truth, for that is our duty, yea our glory, and is commanded.
Jude 3. but when men shall contend against the truth, and the true Churches of
Christ, for Vanity and Heresy, making lies their Re^uge: this argues pride with
a witness.

5. Naturally we are all as full of pride, as a Toad is of poison. The Sea is
not more full of Monsters, the air of Flies, the earth of Vermin, and the fire
of sparkles; then our corrupt natures are of proud, rebellious imaginations,
against God. 'Twas the sin of our first Parents, Genesis 3.5. and we their
children resemble them in it. 'Twas not only the sin of Pharaoh, Haman, Herod,
Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. but Gods dearest servants have been tackt and tainted with
it. David out of pride numbers the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. Hezekiah's heart was
lifted up with his Treasures and Riches, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Peter had two good a
conceit of himself. Mat. 26.33.60. even Christ's poor disciples dreamt (as our
Millenaries do) that Christ would set up an earthly Kingdom; upon this they
begin to dispute, who should be the greatest amongst them? Mark 9.34. Hence
it is, that the Lord lets corruptions and infirmities cleave even to the best,
to keep them low in their own eyes. Paul, that holy, mortified man, must yet
have a Thorn in the flesh, Attendant omnes pii quantum sit superbiae venenum,
quod non p^test nisi veneno curari. Calvin in locum ubi plura.
a messenger of Satan to buffet him, and keep him humble. 2 Cor. 12.7. Natural
and Hereditary diseases are hardly cured; when a man is born blind, deaf,
lame, etc. such are seldom cured. Pride is very pleasing and connatural to us,
it is deeply rooted in our natures, we all carry a proud Devil within us, till
the spirit of regeneration dispossess him. Vnusquisque in se naturaliter Papam
habet. Luther.

See 15. signs of a proud man in Master Rogers of Dedham his Comment on 1 Pet.
5.5.


For the expelling of this poison, take these four Antidotes.

1. Consider that Pride is a sin which more especially fights against God, and
God against it. The Proud do as it were challenge, (...), adversatur,
contrasistit, instructa acie opponu: est verbum in litare. L^ur. See Mr. Manton
on James 4.6.
and provoke him to set upon them; God accepts the challenge, and sets himself
in battle array against this chafe and dry stubble. They resist God, his Word,
Ministers, Chastisements; and God resists them, and comes against them as an
armed man. James 4.6. 1 Peter 5.5. Other sin is a turning from God, but this
turns against him, and fights with him; in other sins we fly from God; in
this sin we fly on him: and God lets fly at such, he discharges all his
Artillery in the very face of it. He resists them, this resistance presupposes
an assault, and did ever any man assault God and prosper? let the Potshards
strive with the potshard of the earth, but woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker. Isay 45.9. whose hands can be strong, and whose heart can endure in the
day when God shall deal with him? Ezekiel 22.14. what they said of John, is much
more true of God. 2 Kings 20.4. Behold, two Kings could not stand before him,
how then shall we? So, not two, but ten thousand Kings, and men of might have
not been able to stand before him, how then dare thou contend with him? It Is
madness for a man to provoke Angels, or a potent Host against him; but by his
Pride to provoke the great Lord of Hosts, and God of Angels, is the height of
madness. These are six things which the Lord hates, yea seven are an
abomination to him, a Proud look is the first. Prove. 6.16, 17. and 16.5. he will
have no communion with such, Tanto quisque vilior Deo, quanto preciosior sibi.
he cannot endure the breath of them. Hence he is said to behold them afar off,
Psalm 138.6. and if David could not endure that the Proud should stand in his
sight. Psalm. 101.5. let them not think of coming into Gods Kingdom. 2. Consider
how severely God has punished such in all ages, with remarkable judgments.
They go about to rob him of his glory, which is as the apple of his eye, and
which he will not part with unto any. Isa. 41.8. and therefore God is more
quick in cutting off Proud persons, his patience waits on other sinners, but
his justice suddenly finds out these. Job 40.11, 12. Dan. 4.27. Psalm. 18.27.
and 119.21. when once Pride begins to bud and show it self, See Beards Theater
of Gods Judgments. p. 2. c. 1. and Ravenel in V. superbia. Per Vermes
intellige pediculos qui e corpore putido and foetido ebulliunt a Lapide.
ruin is not far off. Prove. 16.18. and 29.23. Isai 3.24. Ier. 13.9. Ezekiel.
7.10, 11. when men's hearts are lifted, it is to their own destruction. 2 Chronicles.
26.16. If Herod once assume Gods glory to himself, an Angel shall suddenly
smite him dead, and he is devoured of lice, Acts 12.22, 23. God spared him,
whilst he persecuted the Saints, (though that was a crying sin) but when once
he assumed divine honor to himself, down he comes; God loves to level such,
and lay them low. Matthew. 23.12. He pitties the poor, weak bended reeds, but
it is the Cedars of Lebanon and the Oaks of Bashan (i. e.) men that in their own
conceits, and in the worlds eye, are as tall as Cedars, as strong as Oaks, as
invincible as walls of brass, it is these God loves to be dealing with, that he
may bring them down. Isai 2.12, 13. to 18. when Pride is in the Premises,
destruction is ever in the conclusion. This sin turned Angels into Devils.
Sodom into ashes. Ezekiel. 16.49. drowned Pharaoh, hanged Haman, turned
Nebuchadnezzar a grazing with the beasts. This destroys men's dwellings,
Infamia est superbiae comes.
Prove. 15.25. and is often punished with madness. There is but this difference
between a madman, and proud-man, we hate the one, and pity the other. 3.
Consider that Pride is Partus Satanicus, the Devils firstborn, wherewith he
lays his plot for our downfall. Genesis 3.5. For as God abaseth men that he may
exalt them, so the Devil puffes men up, that he may destroy them; blows them
up, that he may the better break them. It Is the first Book which the Devil
reads in his School. Hence Pride is called the Devils Grammar, which teaches
ill construction, and ill versifying. viz. to measure our selves by a large
ell, and others by a short one; it makes long short, and short long: this
Grammar also makes ill Declensions, teaching men to decline from good to evil.
4. It Is the Poison of virtuous Actions; the meat may be good in it self, but if
there be poison in it, it becomes deadly. Praying, Preaching, Alms, are good
in themselves, but if pride get into them, it levens and sowres the best
performances. It Is a worm that devoures the wood that bred it. He that is proud
of his Graces, has no Grace; his Pride has devoured it all, as we see in the
Pharisee. Luke 18.11.14. other Vices feed on that which is ev^ll, but this
feeds on good things. Many are proud because they are not proud: a man might
see pride through the holes of Diogenes's old Cloak; Fastum tuum per palleoli
lateri foramina perspicio* quia honoris aucupandi causa vilem illum elegisti
amictum.

Calcas fastum Platonis, majori fastu.

Cineres reliquorum peccatorum, fomes superbiae.


and see him tread on Plato's pride, with greater pride. This makes some they
will be called Goodman, rather then Master, and sit lowest, that they may more
solemnly be set highest: when other sins are consumed to ashes* yet out of
those ashes, will pride spring. It Is a secret poison, a hidden pestilence, the
Canker of holiness, the blinder of hearts, Perit omne quod acquiritur; si non
humilitate custoditur. Greg.
turning remedies into diseases. Every sin is a Thief, and robs us of our
Grace, but pride is the grand Thief; for whereas Luxury robs us of our
Chastity, Covetousness of Mercy, Anger of Patience, and Envy of Love; Pride
robs us of our Humility, which is the Foundation of all Virtue.
Quest. But how may I mortify this sin of sins, this pestilent evil which
makes us so l^ke to the Devil? Ita bellum geramus non aliis vitiis, ut
praecipuam rem conferamus ad hoc debellandum. Calvin.

As the Husbandman first removes briars and bushes out of his way before he
sowes his seed.




Answ. 1. You must show the Causes of it; The first and principal cause of
pride is Ignorance, 1 Cor. 8.2. 1 Timothy 6.4. the Church of Laodicea was
Self-conceited, and thought her self rich in Grace, but what was the ground of
it? She knew not her spiritual nakedness and misery. Rev. 3.17. who prouder
then the ignorant Pharisees, Nulli sunt magis desperati quam qui sunt minus
desperantes.
whom Christ calls blind guides? Matthew. 15.14. and 23.16.24. Paul, whilst
ignorant and unconverted, had a good conceit of himself, Romans 7.9. he thought
himself alive, and as good as the best, in respect of his own Righteousness and
Duties. Phil. 3.6. but when the Law came in the spirituality of it, he was
dead, and saw there was no trusting to them. Whilst men are in a dark room,
they see neither atoms, nor beams; but let the Sun shine into it, and then we
see the least moat there: So whilst men live in a state of Ignorance, they are
pure in their own eyes, but when the spirit of God shall enlighten the soul,
we shall see the least moats and spots of sin, and this will take down pride.
When God had discovered himself more fully to Job, and given him a clearer
manifestation of his Wisdom, Power, and Purity; it makes him dislike himself,
even to abhorrency, which implies a vehement dislike, and extreme disesteem of
himself* Job 42.5, 6. So Isai 6.5, 6.

2. Shun Idleness, this breeds pride, who prouder then lazy Gentle-folks?
these were two of those sins that turned Sodom into ashes. Ezekiel. 16.49. like
stones in an Arch, they help to uphold each other: get therefore a calling, and
labor in it. It is an humbling thing, and requires some stooping; it helps to
bring down our hearts. Psalm. 107.12. and therefore God who knows what is in
man, and knows our hearts better then we our selves, has ordained, that every
one should serve him in some calling, to keep him from pride and rusting.

3. Look not upon thy Gifts and Graces as thine own; remember they are but
Talents lent us by our Master, to be improved for his honor, and are rather
for service, then for ornament; for Gods praise, and not for ours. Glorying is
for owners, and not for borrowers. The Apostle with one Question blasts all our
pride. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who made thee to differ, and what have thou; that thou have
not received? We have no reason to be proud of our borrowed feathers; if the
Sheep had his Fleece, the Silk-worme her Excrements, the Foul his Feathers,
the earth her Corn, Wine, Gold, Silver, etc. and the Tailor his Fashions, what
poor, naked creatures should we be?

4. Labor for Humility. As one nail drives out another, so contraries expel
each other: as Grace comes in, so high conceits go out. The way to make a stick
straight, is to bend it as much the contrary way. Get thou Humility, which is
the Grace of our Graces. It Is not only our Duty, but our Glory; (...), est
vestimento ornari, nam (...) est certum genus amictus and ornamenti. Hesychius,
Hence it is called a garment. 1 Pet. 5.5. Be clothed with humility. Now
garments are ornaments, a naked man is a loathsome man; so Humility is a most
lovely and adorning grace; he that wants it, is loathsome in the eyes both of
God, Angels, and men. It Is the most attractive, winning grace; by this Hester
gained on Ahasuerus, and Abigail on David. This distinguishes between Saints
and Sinners; Pride is the Character of the Devils children, as humility is the
most proper badge of Gods Children: and therefore of all Lessons, learn this
Lesson; it is the A.B.C. the very first Lesson which God teaches us. When one
ask't Demosthenes what was the first part of an Orator, he answered,
Pronunciation; and what the second and third, he answered still, good
Pronunciation and Action. So if you ask me what is the first Lesson of a
Christian? I answer, Humility, and what the second? Humility, and what the
third? Humility. Look what the sweet Violet is amongst the flowers, the Diamond
amongst the Pearls, and Gold amongst Metals; the same is Humility amongst
Graces. It Is not an aerie, notionall, empty, speculative thing; but it consists
in practice. Christ will have us learn of him to practice it, and not barely to
know it. Matthew. 11.29. John 13.14.17. To quicken you, take these eleven
considerations.

1. Consider Humility is a Radical Fundamental Grace, when the soul is once
truly humble under the sight and sense of sin, then is the Foundation laid for
all Grace. Radix omnis boni and virtutis est humilitas.
Humility never goes alone, it is the root of Sanctity, Sincerity, Peace, and
Wisdom. Prove. 11.2. The empty vessel is capable of filling ( Elisha filled
only the empty vessels) the low valleys of enriching, and the plowed ground
of sowing. It Is a great part of our holiness. The more Holy any man is, the
more Humble: as we see in Abraham, Genesis 18.27. Jacob. Genesis 32.10. Moses. Isay
6.5, 6. Dan. 9.8. Ezra 9.6. John 1.27. Mat. 15.27. Ruth 2.10. Psalm. 131.2. 1 Samuel 25.41. Luke 1.38.43.48. and 15.21. and 18.13, 1 Cor. 15.8, 9. 1 Timothy 1.15.
See Mr. Leigh on the Promises.
To these the promises belong; when the soul is thus qualified, it may
challenge them as as its Heritage. Psalm. 119.111. Prove. 3.34. James 4.6. 1 Pet.
5.5. Luke 1.53. God gives his Grace only to the Humble, not to such as have
only a Moral Humility, which springs from nature, and is mixed with much
Self-seeking, and Vainglory; this is but a shadow, like the apples of Sodom
fair to the eye, at contacta cinerescunt, touch them, and they fall to ashes.
True humility is a holy, spiritual, supernatural grace; it is a brokennesse of
heart for sin, as it is sin. Quia offensivum Dei, aversivum a Deo, because it is
offensive to God. These empty souls God fills full of spiritual blessings; for
as in Nature there is no Vacuum, Cor humile est vacuum spirituale. Gerson.

Absque humilitate nulla virtus est virtus, haec servat acceptas virtutes, and
servatas consum^nat; est tutissimus omnium virtutum thesaurus, Basil.


so neither does grace admit of any. 2. It Is the conserver and keeper of all
Grace. We lay up the richest Wines in the lowest Cellars, and God lays up the
choycest mercies in the lowest hearts. The lowest combs are fullest of honey.
It Is a rich Treasury, and Storehouse of Virtue; every grace has some mixture
of humility, there is no Theological grace can be separated from it. This keeps
the soul free from the dint of Satan's darts, as the low shrubs are from the
violent gusts of wind which shake and rend the taller trees. These are not
affected with Satan's proffers* nor terrified with his threatenings: so that he
can hardly fasten a Temptation on such. I have read of one, that seeing, a
Vision, many snares of the Devil spread upon the earth, he sat down and
mourned, and said within himself, Quis pertransiet ista^ who shall pass through
these? whereunto answer was made. Humilitas pertransiet; Humility shall pass
through them. 3. It makes us conformable to Christ our head, Discite a me n^n
mundum creare, non miracula facere, sed quicquid ago ad gloriam patris refero,
and et omne bonum ascrib^, in medio discipulorum fai sicut qui ministrat, pedes
eorum lavi, in omnibus memet humiltatis exemplum praebui; nullum contemno,
claritatem ab hominibus non accipio.
who from his birth to his death, from his cradle to his cross, was even
compounded of humility. He has set himself before us as our Pattern, and
commands us to learn Humility of him. Mat. 11.29. we cannot write after a
better copy. 4. It Is the Pathway to Peace, both External, and Internal. As
Pride breeds contention and disquietment; So humility quiets and composeth the
soul, and makes it with a holy silence to bear those losses, crosses,
reproaches, which would break the back and brains of a pround and wicked man.
Nil asperum mitibus, nil ard^um humilibus.

Qui ja^et in terris, non habet unde cadat. Vt^m^^es ita and humores,
contemperat bilis.

(...). (i e.) a^imalia quae s^lle carent, ut cervi, sunt longaeva. Omnes
humiliati non sunt humiles.


As Wool, by its yielding and softness does dull bullets, and break their
force, so by stooping to God and man, we pacify wrath. He is so little and low
in his own eyes, that he cannot fall much lower. Christ tells us; that he that
learns of him this Lesson, shall find rest for his soul: though he may have
trouble without, yet he shall have Peace within. Mat. 11.22. 5. It helps to
prolong our days, Impatience and fretfulnesse breed diseases, and shorten men's
lives; but Humility, Meekness, and quietness, are a means to prolong them: as
we see in Moses, one of the meekest men in the world, who lived 120. years,
his eye was not dim, nor his natural strength abated. Deuteronomy. last. 7, God
has promised long life to such. Prove. 32.4. and Hypocrates observes that
Gall-less creatures live long. 6. T's the ready way to Exaltation and Honor.
Mat. 23.12. He that humbles himself shall be exalted. It Is not he that is
humbled against his will, as Pharaoh, Ahab, and the Israelites were, but he
that freely humbles himself; for many are humbled, which yet are not humble;
there may be Humiliation without Humility; men's estates may be broken, yet
their hearts unbroken, humbled they may be in body, yet high in soul. Many
make it their study how they may rise and get promotion, behold the way, humble
your selves, and you shall be exalted, even to Honor here, Descend ut
ascendas, humiliare ut exalteris, qui enim sibi vilis, Deo pulcher, qui sibi
displicent, Deo placent; esto igitur parvus in oculis tuis, ut sis magnus in
oculis Dei August. Sermon. 218: de Temp.
if God see it good for you. As Joseph, Nehemiah, David, Daniel; the Lord sets
humble Mordecat in Hamans stead, and humble Eliakim in proud Shebna's stead.
Isai 22.15, 16, 20, 21. if men would but take this course, it would save them
much trouble and travel, with chargeable expenses. However it would bring them
to Grace and Glory, which is the highest and best preferment. 1 Pet, 5.5. There
is no entrance into the Temple of Honor, but by the gate of Humility, for as
Pride goes before a fall, so before Honor is Humility. Prove. 15. ult. and
18.12. and 22.4. God pulls down the high and haughty, Aesopus interrogatus
quidnam Peu^ ageret resp. (...). (i. e.) humilia exaltat, alia humiliat.
but he exalts the lowly and meek. Luke 1.51, 52. all the world cannot pull
down an Humble man, because God will exalt him; and all the world cannot exalt
a proud man, because God will pull him down; if then you will build high, be
sure to lay your foundations low. 7. The humble soul is Gods House, where he
delights to dwell, it is domicilium Spiritus Sancti, the Temple of the Holy
Ghost. Isay 57.1^. God has but two Thrones, the highest Heavens, and the
lowest Heart. God over-looks the frame of Heaven and earth, to look on a poor,
humble, broken heart. Isay 66.1, 2. The Heaven is my Throne, and the earth my
footstool. But to him, even to him will I look, etc. q. d. It Is true, those
are my creatures, I made them, yet do I overlook all these, to look on a truly
humbled soul, not with a bare look of intuition, or general prudence, but
with a look of favor, and an eye of approbation, complacency, and delight.
Though the Lord be the most High, Deus, cum omnium sit excellentissimus, non
elatione, sed humilitate contingitur. Aug.
yet has he respect to the lowly. Psalm. 138.6. these are Gods Jewels, and as
we prize one jewel above 10. thousand peebles, so God esteems one humble Moses
above 10. thousand other men. The lower we are in our own eyes, the higher we
are in Gods. These are Gods Glory. Isay 4.5. they give all Glory unto God, and
therefore God loves to exalt them to Honor. 8. These are Gods Scholars, whom
he has promised to direct and teach, Psalm. 25.9. these are of his privy
Counsel, to them he reveals the secrets and mysteries of salvation, as
Abraham, Lot, David, Daniel. with these he familiarly walks. Micah 6.8. He that
is most humble, sees most of heaven. He that lies in the low pits rnd caves of
the earth, beholds the stars; when those that walk on the tops of mountains,
discern them not. The proud, God leaves to themselves, to be s^ared in their
own imaginations. Luke 1.51. Had we less pride, and more Humility, we should
have less Error, and more Truth. This is a comely Grace both in Speakers and
Hearers. How many that have affected Metaphysical speculations, and high-spun
Notions, have fallen into the pit of Sin, and Heresy. 9. These are the only
prevailing people with God. These are fit to lie in the gap, and to intercede
for a Nation. The prayers of one such a meek Moses, Samuel, Job, etc. may
preserve a Nation from ruin. Job 22.30. it is their prayers which he has
promised to hear. 1 Chronicles. 7.14. Psalm. 10.17. God will have communion with none
but such. We must humble our selves, if we will walk with him. Micah. 6.8. See
more, Cobbet on Prayer. Part. 2. chap. 5.
10. Such are sure of protection, especially in times of common calamity; Ezekiel.
9.4. when wicked men are broken and cast down, thou shall say, there is lifting
up, and God will save the Humble man. Job. 22. 29. the bending reed is
preserved, when the stubborn Oaks are plucked up by the Roots. Sic ventos
vincit dum se submittit arundo,
In pulsu quorum robora celsa cadunt.
11. They are Blessed men, Matthew. 5.3, 4, 5. Blessed are the poor in Spirit,
who are sensible of their own wants and weakness; of their own nakedness, and
nothingnesse; these have the promise of Heaven and Earth. And if Heaven and
Earth be taken up for the Humble, in what place (think you) shall the proud be
billetted? not in Heaven, for it will receive no proud person; they must be
like little children, for Humility, that will come thither. Matthew. 18.3.
Now by serious Meditation, work these eleven considerations on thy heart, till
they have wrought out pride, and made thee universally Humble; In Vestures,
Gestures, Heart, Words, Works. A man may have it in his Tongue, and be full of
complement (as your Servant, Sir, etc.) and yet be full of craft. But the most
proper seat of Humility is the Heart: We must learn of Christ to be Humble, not
only in Words, but in Heart. Mat. 11.29, For if the heart be once humbled, all
will be humble; if there be a Treasury of Humility within, it will quickly
appear in the Words and Works without: Quo quisque est humilior, ita ad
serviendum Deo promptior. Wickliff.
Such will stoop to any employment, whereby God may be glorified. They can well
be content to be dishonored, so God may be honored; to decrease, so Christ
may increase. John 3.30. This made Paul to become all things to all men, and
make himself a servant to all, that he might gain the more. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20.
How low did Christ stoop, that he might glorify God in the work of our
Redemption, he made himself of no reputation, but laid aside his glory (for a
time) and took upon him the form of a servant. Phil. 2.6, 7. he conversed with
sinners, talks with women, heales the sick, and washes his Disciples feet.
Many could be content to serve in places of Honor, Pleasure, Credit, but a
gracious soul can stoop to the meanest service, and lowest place, Beatus cujus
vita excelsa, Spiritus humilis.

Vere magnum est magna facere, and teipsum putare nihil.


so God may be honored; yea, the Saints in their highest condition, carry
humble hearts: David, when a King, yet is as lowly as a weaned child. Psalm.
131. we need not level good men, they will level themselves, and carry low
minds in high estates. The more they have, or have done and suffered for God,
the more humble they be, they lay all their Honors, Learning, Riches,
Excellencies, etc. at the feet of Christ, as the twenty four Elders cast down
their Crowns before the Throne saying, Thou art worthy to receive Honor, and
Glory, and Power, Revel. 4.10.

Even Agathocles, King of Sicily, being a Potters son, would always eat his
meat in earthen Vessels, the better to mind him of his Original.

Fictilibus coenasse ferunt Agathoclea Regent.
That you may learn this choice Lesson.

1. Be familiar with Humble men, make them thy bosom companions; for as he
that touches pitch shall be defiled, so he that meddles with rich perfumes,
will smell of their sweetness. 2. Remember thy last end, remember thou art
dust, Momento, 1. Vnde Veneris. 2. Quo sis abiturus. 3. Coram quo sis rationem
redditurus* Bernard.
and must to dust again; we dwell in houses of clay, and our foundation is in
the dust. Job 17.14.16. when the house is clay, and the foundation dust, such a
house cannot long endure. What made Jerusalem so proud and filthy? Why, She
remembered not her last end. Lam. 1.9. Pray that you may know in good earnest,
that you are but men. Psalm 9.20. (i. e,) poor, frail, feeble creatures; what
ever thy endowments be, Men. ( i. e.) broken and cracked creatures, morbis
mortique obnoxii, sorry, sickly Caitiffes. This to know savingly, is the
beginning of true Humility. Trapp in locum.
yet this consideration, that thou art Enosh, a poor, wretched, miserable man,
will humble thee. Remember what thou art by sin, and what thou shall be in thy
Grave; and thy Plumes will fall. Every proud man forgets himself. 3. To keep
thee from pride in Externalls, and Natural excellencies, consider how the
creatures excel us therein; the Lion in courage, the Horse in strength, the
Birds in singing, the Lillies in Beauty, the Spider in spinning, the Be in
working, the Eagle in Seeing, the Hare in running, the Dog in smelling, etc.
2. In obedience, every creature excells man in his pure Naturalls. All
creatures are Gods servants, and are ready to do whatsoever their Lord and
Master shall command them: Even the Winds, and the Seas obey him. Hence the
Lord sends us Dullards to learn Industry of the Ant. Prove. 6.6. Prudence of the
Stork, Crane, Swallow, Ier. 8.7. and Gratitude of the Ox and Ass. Isa. 1.3.

[Against Pride, see Alsteeds Encyclop. Ethic. lib. 21. cap. 12, 13. Vol. 2. in
Folio. p. 12.77. Perkins 2. Vol. on Gal. 6.14. Bernards Thesaurus in the end.
p. 134. Mr. Trapps Commonplace on Arrogance, in the end of his Comment on the
Epistles. Mr. Woodwards child's Patrimony. 2. Part. c. 4. Sect. 1. p. 50. etc.
Mr. Clerks Mirruor. cap. 102. B. Hall's Ser. on Prove. 29.23. Vol. 2. Fol. p.
399.]

Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 64.
[For Humility, see Mr. Henry Smith's Sermon. on 1 Peter 5.5. p. 203. Mr. Rogers
of Dedham his Comment on 1 Pet. 5.5. Bernards Thesaurus in the end. p. 136. D.
Ier. Taylor's Rule of Holy Living. c. 2. Sect, 4. Sibelius in Psalm, 132. Mr.
Cawdry, Humility, the Saints Livery. D. Featly on Matthew. 5.3.]

3. Blasphemers. (...).
This sin is fitly linkt to the former, Sins go not single, but they beget one
another; Self-love begets Covetousness, Covetousness Pride, and Pride
Blasphemy. So that Blasphemy is the genuine daughter of Pride; Superbiae proles
blasphemia. Espene.
when men have high conceits of themselves, they are often punished with a fall,
and Pride being properly a spiritual sin, is punished with spiritual
judgments; God gives them up to a reprobate Sense, so that they fall from one
sin to another, till at last they become Blasphemers.

2. Proud persons, are impatient, discontented persons, they can bear nothing:
if God cross them, or curse them (as he delights to resist the Proud) they
presently fly in his face with Blasphemies. Revel. 16.9.11.27. as Jobs Wife
would have had him do. Job 2.9. As a vile person utters Villainy. Isay 32.6. So
a proud Atheist utters Blasphemy.

Quest. But what kind of Blasphemy does the Apostle here mean, when he says,
Men shall be blasphemers?

Answ. Blasphemy in Scripture is taken many ways, but especially two.

1. Largely, and generally, for any contumely or indignity which is done to
men: so, reproachful speeches, tending to the disgrace of another man's name,
(...), neminem blasphemare.

Blasphemia (...), qui laedit alterius famam.


is in Scripture called Blasphemy. Titus 3.2. that they speak evil of no man;
in the Original it is, To blaspheme no man, and so much the derivation of the
word imports, viz. to hurt the good name of another.

2. It Is taken strictly and most properly for opprobrious words which are
uttered to the reproach of God, his Word, his Works, his Spirit, his
Ordinances, Maledici. Beza and Diodate.
his Ministers, his People. Now, though some learned men do take the words in
the former sense, viz. for defamers, and slanderers; yet, our Translation
renders it truly from the Original, Blasphemers; as relating to the highest
kind of evil speaking, even to all manner of Blasphemy against the God of
Heaven. In all ages there have been such, but in the last days men shall
attain to a higher Degree in this Devilish Art of Blasphemy. That the word is
thus to be restrained, is clear from the Context, (...), (i e.) in ipsum Deum
maledici, nam in hoc sensu eminentiore sumendam esse hic hanc ^ocem, indicat
ordo. Grotius.

Per blasphemos intelligimus qui falsa aut impia de Deo loquuntur and sentiunt.
Aquinas.


both before and after. The Apostle uses a kind of Gradation.

1. He tells us, men shall be Self-lovers, Silver-lovers, Boasters, Proud,
insulting over their Brethren, and, which is worse, they spare not God himself,
but are Blasphemers of him.

2. The Apostle in V. 3. mentions false accusers, slanderers, and despisers of
good men, which he would not (in all rational probability) have done, if the
word Blasphemy had been here restrained only to slanderers. So that I take the
word here to signify Blasphemy against God himself; and this has many Branches.

1. Gods name is blasphemed Addendo, by adding or attributing that to God,
which his soul abhorres. As that he is the Author of sin, and approves of
sin. Psalm. 50.21. Mal. 2.17. or that he is cruel, unjust, improvident, not
regarding how the affairs of the world go. This is the blasphemy of Epicures.
2. Detrahendo, by denying God that honor which is due to him; as when we deny
his Omnipotence, and say God is not able to deliver; this was the blasphemy of
the King of Assyria. Divina Attributa in De^ sunt Accidentia and qualitates,
secundum Socinianos.

V. Hornebeck contra Socinian. l. 2. c 4. Blasphemias fecerunt magnas. Mont.
and Vulg.


2 Chronicles. 32.17. or when men deny his Omniscience, Omnipresence, Eternity,
Immensity, Immutability, and so upon the point deny all Gods Attributes, as the
Socinians do: who hold that the Attributes are not Essential, but Accidents
and Qualities in God. So when men give the Honor due to the Creator, to the
Creature, as the Israelites who called their Golden Calfe, God; this is called
a great provocation, and in the Original, Blasphemy. Nehem. 9.18. 3. When men
abuse the glorious Names and Titles of God, by profane cursing, swearing,
forswearing, murmuring, fretting, and storming a^ Gods dispensations, this is
to set our mouths against Heaven. Psalm 73.9. and with Sennacherib, to rage
against God. 2 Kings 19.28. Levit. 24.11, 25. Job 3.1. Ier. 20.14. 4. When men
rail on Christ, and revile him, as the Jews did who looked upon him as a mere
man, and a sinner; as one that was mad, and had a Devil. Mat. 27.39.63. John
9.24. and 10.20. 5. Gods Name is blasphemed, when men speak contumeliously, and
d^sgracefully of the Word of God, as if 'twere false, imperfect, and no Rule
for our lives. Or of the Works of God, saying, This might have been otherwise,
this might have been mended, etc. 6. When men revile the Magistrate, who is
Gods Vicegerent, this is called Blasphemy, 1 Kings 21.10. Naboth has
blasphemed God, (...), blasphemantes eos. V. Schools Guard. Rule 56.
yea, and the King. So 2 Peter 2.10. speaking evil of dignities, Blaspheming
them says the Original. ( i. e.) They make it their work, it is their Trade
to go up and down reviling those in authority. So much the Participle of the
Present Tense implies: this is forbidden. Exodus 22.28. 7. Such as slander and
Disgrace the Ministers of Christ, not so much for any personal defects, but
because of their office, because they are Ministers of Christ; now Christ takes
the contumelies done to his Ambassadors, as done to himself. Luke 10.16. They
are Christ's Organs, and primary instruments, to promote and propagate his Glory
in the world; they are his Heralds to proclaim his Name and Truth unto the
world, See my Sal Terrae. cap. 8.
and he will not suffer any to abuse them unrevenged. Thus when the Apostles
were defamed, it was called Blasphemy. 1 Cor. 4.13. Romans 3.8. 8. When men
calumniate and traduce the servants of God, merely for serving him: when they
scorn and scoff at Saints for their sanctity, this is called blasphemy. 1
Pet. 4.4. they speak evil of you, (...), blasphemeing you. Such were those.
Job 17.6. and 30.9. Psalm. 69.12. and 71.9. Ezekiel. 5.15. Lam. 3.16. Nahum. 3.6.
Mat. 11.18. 1 Cor. 4.9. 9. When men traduce and reproach Gods Ordinances as
low, empty, mean things, Via veritatis (i. e.) vera and orthodoxa fide^ and
religio. Laurent.
so did those false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.2. by whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken off. [(...), blasphemabitur] the Christian Religion is the right
way to salvation, yet those by their calumnies labored to turn men from it. So
Acts 13.45. and 18.6. James 2.7. Revel. 2.9. 10. When such as profess
Christianity, live loosely and licentiously, when they live not up to their
principles, nor answerable to their holy profession, they cause Gods Name to be
blasphemed. 2 Samuel 12.14. Ezekiel. 36.22, 23. Rom, 2.24. and so do those that
apostatize, and fall from the truth to Idolatry; they do, in an high degree,
cause Gods to be blasphemed. Levit. 18.21. Isay 63.7. Ezekiel. 20.27.28. they
disparage the Lords Pastures, and do interpretatively say, There is no
loveliness, truth, or goodness in the ways and worship of God, and therefore
they forsake it; what greater blasphemy! Thus Hymoneus and Alexander, making
shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, are said to blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1.
ult. and if those whom Paul peresecuted, that did out of fear renounce the
Faith, are yet said to blaspheme. Acts 16.11. oh how sad is their condition,
and how high their blasphemy, who do electively, deliberately, and wil^ully
forsake Christ, and his truth, without any such tentation and trial. See a
Pithy descript?on of Blasphem^ against the H. G. in Wilsons Diction. Edit. ult.
on the word Blasphemy.
These come near to that irresistible blasphemy, and upardonable sin against
the Holy Ghost. When men through Ignorance, and for want of Light, shall
persecute Christ and his people; this blasphemy is pardonable, as we see in
Paul, who was a persecuter and a blasphemer, but he obtained mercy, because he
did it ignorantly. 1 Timothy 1.13. So did many of the Jews. Acts 3.17. But when
men shall wittingly, willingly, maliciously, and despitefully oppose Christ,
and his truth, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, this is that blasphemy, which
shall never be forgiven. Luke 12.10. Mark 3.29.
Let us now apply this Character of the last times, to our times, and see if
all these 10. kinds of blasphemy, may not be found amongst us. The Lord is my
Record, that I take no pleasure in the Devils victories, now in raking in this
loathsome dunghill. I desire to write with Tears, what I have read with
trembling. I could heartily wish that the Land were clear of all those
blasphemies, with which it is charged. But alas, if we go about to plead not
guilty in this kind, we shall but double our guilt. Our blasphemies, and
blasphemers, our Copps, and Coppins, our Colliers, and Nailers, our Foxes, and
Farme-worths, our Biddles, and Bests (I might say Beasts) are taken notice of
by Forreiners, D. Maresius, and D. Arnoldus, two learned German Professors,
have taken notice of the Blasphemies of our Biddle.
as well as by Natives: There needs no secret search, or digging for these
abominations, they are Published and Printed to the view of all, so that they
cannot be concealed, or denied. Had they kept their blasphemies in secret, we
had been silent, but since they have been so impudent, as to Print blasphemy,
it can justly offend none, if we Print against them: It Is fit the Remedy should
be as large as the Malady. Since Generals are no charge, let us descend to
particulars.

1. Are there not some amongst us, that have Printed, that God is the Author
of sin; not only of the action, but also of the Ataxy, Anomy, Obliquity, and
Sinfulness of the Action. See London Ministers Testimony against Heresies. p.
6.
Are there not some that accuse him of cruelty, and unjustice in his Decrees?

2. Are there not others that deny God in his Attributes with the Socinians?
and others that give out they are infallible, and equal to God, having no sin
in them? Thus Nailer, Fox, and the rest of that Heretical, accursed,
blasphemous Quaking Crew. Are there not such Ranters amongst us, that by
hellish cursing and swearing, tear in pieces that great and dreadful name of
the Lord our God? Are there not such amongst us as have reviled Jesus Christ,
and with the Arrians and Socinians, make him a man, whilst they publish to the
world, that themselves are Deified, and become Gods? they make themselves
perfect, and Christ imperfect. Have we not those that speak basely of the
sacred Scriptures, Cry down Magistracy, Rail on the Ministry, Revile Real
Saints? Lastly, is not Gods Name blasphemed, and that in England by the loose
lives, and licentious Tenets even of Professors? and this is one sad
aggravation of the blasphemies of our time, that many Professors are turned
Blasphemers. Those that have been nursed up in the bosom of the Church, for 20,
30, 40. years, and had a form of godliness, and (as in Charity we hoped) some
of them had the power of it: yet now are turned blasphemous Apostates, and have
discovered their rottenness by persecuting the Truth, which sometimes they
protest. Had they been open enemies, Turks and Tartars, that had thus
blasphemed, it might have been easier born, but lo these are the wounds
wherevvith Christ was vvounded in the house of his (seeming) friends. Zach.
13.6. they that eat of his bread, and drink of his cup, have lift up the heel
against him. Had he been thus blasphemed and derided in Egypt, it had been no
vvonder. Hos. 7. ult. but to be thus abused and abased in England, where the
Gospel has been preached above 100. years! for us whom the Lord has made his
darling Nation, whom he has loved and tendered above all the Nations in the
world, for whom he has broken the Power and Policy of mighty enemies, and
has given such success by Sea and Land, that all the Nations round about us,
stand amazed; for us, after all these free and undeserved favors, to blaspheme
the God of our mercies, and with the Beast, to crop the tree that shelters us,
and bite the hand that feeds us; is an Act of the highest ingratitude, and
basest rebellion in the world. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Good turns aggravate unkindnesses,
and our guilt is increased by our obligations. Solomon's Idolatry was far worse
then that of his wives, because he had better breeding, and God had appeared
twice unto him, 1 Kings 11.9. As our Savior said sometimes to the Jews. John
10.32. Many good works have I showed you, for which of these do ye stone me? So
may the Lord say to England, O England, See 32. abominable Errors and Heresies
lately sprung up in Mr. Bartlets Balsom. p. 63. London Ministers Testimony, and
176. in Mr. Edwards's Cangreen. Part. 1. p. 15. etc.
I have been to thee a Rock, and a Refuge, a Sun, and a Shield, I have wrought
wonders for thee in Church and State, by Sea and Land; for which of these
favors do thou blaspheme my Name, deny my Word, and overthrow the very
Foundations of Religion? has the Lord been a barren wilderness to us, or what
iniquity have we or our Fathers found in him, that we should rebel against
him? Ier. 2.5. as the Apostle said sometimes to the Galatians, am I become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth? So is God our enemy, because he has given
us his truth, and all the tokens of his love? what could he do more for England
then he has done? if therefore instead of the grapes o^ Faith and Obedience,
we bring forth the wild grapes of Heresy and disobedience, what can we expect
but to have our Vineyard laid waste?

2. A second Aggravation of our horrid blasphemies, is this. That they have
broke forth, since we have made a Covenant to the contrary, and that in the
most solemn manner, that ever any Covenant was taken in this Land, with hands
lifted up to the most high God, That we would extirpate Heresy, Schism, and
profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the
Power of Godliness. But alas, many of us act as if we had taken a Covenant to
promote them.

3. Instead of an extirpation of Schism and Heresy, there is too much
connivence, indulgence, and toleration given them, and that by some of them
whose hands are at this day in Print, set to the solemn League and Covenant.
Durst Heretics and Blasphemers be so bold to Preach, and Print as they do, if
they had not (too) indulgence from some in Authority? Oh that they would no
longer bear the sword in vain, but as they are a Terror to Drunkards, Qui non
vetat p^ccare cum possit, jubet. Qui non corrigit resecand^s, c^mmittit.
Swearers, Thieves, and Vagabonds, so the Lord make them a Terror to those
that are Drunk with Heresies and Blasphemies. That Magistrate which has power
to punish such offenders, and yet spares them, becomes partaker with them. Men
post the punishment of such offenders one from another; the Magistrate says,
Let the Minister reprove it, the Minister says, Let the Hearers reform it, and
they say, Let the offerder answer it. Thus, when the Sea breaks in, all the
Borderers contend whose right it is to mend the damme; but whilst they strive
much, and do nothing, the Sea hereby gets further in, and drowns the Country.
The Application is easy. It Is long since observed, that England has golden
Laws, but leaden executioners; and that we yet want one Law. viz. A Law to
bind Magistrates to put all the rest of the Laws in execution.

Use. Let us be deeply affected with the blasphemies, and dishonours, that are
done unto our God, in the land of our Nativity, Let Us mourn for all the
abominations, and specially for the prodigious blasphemies which are found in
the midst of us. Let them deeply affect and afflict our hearts; if we love God,
they will do so, for Love is very tender of any wrong, that is offered to the
party beloved. Thus Moses burns with an holy zeal, when he heard that one had
blasphemed God, he puts him in Ward, and at last stones him to death. Levit.
24.11, 12. David hated such persons with a perfect hatred, and counts them as
his enemies. Psalm. 139, 20, 21, 22. Hezekiah hearing of Rabsheka's blasphemies,
Rent his clothes. Isay 37.1. So did Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.14. when they
heard the blasphemy of the Lystrians, crying them up for Gods, they rent their
clothes, to express the rending of their hearts with grief and indignation,
at what they heard. And wicked Iezabel's proclaiming a Fast upon the false
accusation of Naboth for blasphemy. 1 Kings 21.10. may teach us to be zealous
against Real blasphemy. So the High Priest rending his clothes for conceited
blasphemy. Matthew. 26.65. if every one of us should do so, when we hear God and
his Gospel blasphemed, we should have more rent then whole clothes, and scarce
a whole garment to be found amongst us.

2. Let us show our dislike of blasphemy, by reproving the broachers of it.
This is the greatest love that we can show them; Hence we are commanded not to
hate our Brother, but rebuking, to rebuke him, ( i. e.) freely, plainly,
soundly, and sincerely. Levit. 19.17. The converted Thief reproves his fellow
for blasphemy. Luke 23.39, 40. So when the Devil began to utter blasphemy, and
to challenge all the world for his own, and began to call for worship, our
Savior cuts him short, and in a holy detestation bids him begone, for he would
reason no longer with him. Matthew. 4.10. yet if we perceive that men are
incorrigible, and incurable, Prudence must be used; we may not give holy things
to dogs, which will but rend us for our pains. Mat. 7.6. reprove not such, lest
you increase the flame, instead of quenching it. This was one Reason why
Hezekiah commanded his Commissioners, when they heard the blasphemous Menaces
of Rabsheka, not to answer a word, deeming it in vain to make any Reply, when
it would but incite him to further rage. Isay 36.21. But where we see any to be
teachable or Tractable, and may be won by our Reproves; of those let us take
compassion, pulling them out of this flame. They will one day bless God for
you, as David did for Abigail, when she stopped him in a way of sin. 1 Samuel
25.32, 33.

3. Let all that profess Religion, be exact and circumspect in all their ways
and walking, lest they cause the Name of God to be blasphemed. The world is apt
to accuse us without a cause, as the Devil did Job; and to call us blasphemers,
as Iezabell did Naboth; 1 Kings 21.10.13. and the Pharisees Christ. Matthew. 9.3.
John 10.33. and the Jews Steven. Acts 6.11. 13. when themselves were the
persons guilty of that crime. So those Hypocrites that called themselves Jews,
and seemed to worship God, when they were the Synagogue of Satan, and worshipped
the Devil; yet could blaspheme and revile the true Saints. Revel. 2, 9. A spot
in fine Cambrick is soon seen, and one dead fly marres a whole box of
precious ointment, when a hundred may fall into a barrel of pitch, Ecce quales
sunt qui Christum colunt! Salvian.
and no body regards it. The sins of a David will quickly cause Gods Name to
be blasphemed, and therefore Gods hand was sharp upon him, and upon the Jews,
rather then the Gentiles. Ram. 2.9.24. Hence the Apostle exhorts Wives and
Servants to walk as becomes the Gospel, that the Name of God be not blasphemed.
Titus 2.5. 1 Timothy 6.1. Some are afraid of blasphemous words, but how many live
blasphemous lives? Hi sunt Christiani ad contumeliam Christi,
they praise God with their words, and reproach him with their covetous,
cruel, unrighteous conversations. These are botches in Christianity. Let the
falls of others make us fear, when Cedars fall, let the Firre-tree howl. Zach.
11.2. The Falling Sickness was never so common as now. One falls to Atheism,
another to Papisme, one falls to Quakerisme, and another to Rantisme. How many
professors, that could have pulled out their eyes, to have done us good,
formerly; yet now be ready to pull out their Ministers eyes? Many that prayed,
and prized Ordinances formerly, yet now have cast off all, and are become
scandalous both in their Practice, and in their Principles. This is a
Lamentation. and should be to us all matter of Lamentation: for this our eyes
should run down with Tears, even for the slain (in a spiritual sense) of the
daughter of Gods people. Ier. 9.9.

4. Instead of blaspheming, Virtus blaesphemiae contraria est (...).
get a habit of good speaking, God loves to do good to those that speak good of
his Name. As in our hearts, we should have High and Reverentiall thoughts of
God, so with our words we should Bless him; that is the proper use, and end of
the Tongue. Psalm. 51, 15. James 3.9. with the Tongue we bless and praise God,
declaratively, and God blesses us imparatively; and this is the advantage a
man has, above other creatures, that we can be distinct and explicit in Gods
praise. Psalm 145.10. all thy works praise thee, and thy Saints shall bless
thee. The creatures offer the matter, but the Saints publish it; their Tongue
is as the Pen of a ready Writer, Gloria (i. e.] Instrumentum piae gloriationis
in Deo, sive organum quo Deum glorificamus. Met. Sub. Polanus.

See my Schools Guard. Rule 23,


to set forth Gods praise. Psalm. 45.2. Hence our Tongue is called our Glory. [
Psalm. 16.9. and 30.13. and 57.9. Genesis 49.6. what David calls his Glory, the
Apostle applies to the Tongue, Acts 2.26.] because with it we should praise and
glorify God. Let your words be always modest and Gracious. The Jews were so
careful of their speeches, and so abhorred blasphemy, that they would not name
the word, but by an Antiphrasis, and Euphemisme, they called it by the
contrary, and often put the word Blessing, for cursing and blaspheming; and this
did not only holy Job 1.5. but even wicked Iezabel, 1 King. 21.10. and Jobs
wife, Job 2.9. yea the devil himself. Job 1.11. we should Answer all Satan's
Temptations this way, as pious and courageous Polycarp did the Pro-Consul, who
bid him deny and blaspheme Christ, and he should live. He sweetly answered,
Fourscore and six years have I served Christ, Octoginta sex annos illi jam
servivi and nihil me laesit unquam, qua igitur conscientia maledicerem and
blasphemarem regem meum, qui salutem mihi dedit. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
neither has he ever offended me in any thing, how then can I revile my King,
that has thus kept me? It had been good for wicked men if they had never any
Tongues, rather then to abuse them to the dishonor of that God that gave them.
Now since the sin of Blasphemy is Epidemical, and very common in the land, I
shall set down some considerations against it.

1. Consider that the sin of Blasphemy is one of the highest and most horrid
sins in the world. Blasphemiae vitium omnium peccatorum ex suo genere est
gravissimum. Aquinas. 12 ae. Q. 13. art. 3.

Quo major persona, hoc and injuria major.


Some sins are more directly and immediately against men's own persons, as
idleness, prodigality, etc. some are against other men's persons, Nakab (i. e.)
perforavit, confi^it. Lev. 24.11
as coveting, lying, slandering; but the Blasphemer fights directly against
God: Other sinners strike at God, but this pierces him, and strikes through
his name with his maledictions, and execrations, and therefore God will have
him stricken dead. Naats, contempsit, irritavit, blasphemavit. Psalm. 107.11.
Levit. 24.10, 11. Isay 36.6. Hab. 3.14.

2. It Is an high contempt of of God, it is a desperate flying in his face, and
charging him with folly, cruelty, and Tyranny. Job 1. ult. This provokes God to
wrath, so that he bears not with blasphemers as he does with other sinners,
but cu^s them off more speedily, as a people ripe for ruin.

3. It argues the highest Ingratitude in the world. For a man like a mad dog,
to fly in the face of his Master, who keeps and feeds him, and to use that
Heart and Tongue which God made for his praise, to the dispraise and
disparagement of his Creator, to load him with injuries, who every day loads us
with mercies, and to curse him, who blesses us. What greater Ingratitude?
These crucify Christ afresh to themselves. H^b. 6.6. and are in a worse
condition then many of those who did actually crucify him; for they did it
ignorantly, but these wilfully against light and conviction. It Is infinite
patience that the earth does not open her mouth, and swallow them up alive; and
if the rocks rent, the fonndations of the earth were moved, and the Sun hid its
self, when Christ was crucified and blasphemed, Magis effendunt qui blasphemant
Christum regnantem in coelis, quam qui crucifixerunt ambulantem in terris. Aug.
by many that knew him not: Oh how does the whole Creation groan under the
burden of such, as crucify the Lord afresh, and wittingly, and maliciously put
him to an open shame?

4. It does exceedingly debase a man, and makes him viler then the vilest
creature, that we tread under our feet; for they in their kind praise God, and
show forth the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of their Creator. But the
Blasphemer dishonours him in all his Attributes.

5. It Is a most unprofitable sin; other sins have some seeming pleasure and
profit to allure, but what pleasure or profit can it be to rage against the
Just and Great God?

6. Such are guilty of a most pestilent scandal, they grieve the godly, harden
the wicked, offend the weak, who are quickly turned out of the way; and become
an ill example to their children, who like soft wax, are ready to be framed to
any thing; like Spunges, which suck up any water that comes near them. Now, Woe
unto them by whom Scandalls, especially Blasphemous Scandalls come. Matthew.
18.6, 7.

Sicut blasphemi filii Diaboli ea cantica discunt in mundo quae canant in
inferno: ita filii Dei divinis laudibus assueti, eos Psalmos addiscunt in
terris quos cantabunt in coelis. Peraldus.

Erit in damnatis Vocalis blasphemia, sicut in Sanctis Vocalis Dei laus.
Aquinas. 22. Q. 13. art. 4.


7. It Is a sin which makes men most like to the damned in Hell. As the Saints in
Heaven being filled with joy, shall Vocally sing the Praises of their Redeemer;
so the damned in hell being filled with the wrath of God, shall Vocally
blaspheme him. Hell is full of blasphemy. It Is the very work of the damned to
lie under the intolerable wrath of God, continually blaspheming him. He that
accustomes himself to such language here, let him take heed that he be not put
for ever to sing it there: See Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 11. Edit. 3. Cum mala
formaliter express et aperie Deo tribuimus, fit blasphemia. Tollet. Ex
personis hominum dicta ac facta pensentur. Reg.
and if the wicked, that in this world do but taste of the cup of Gods wrath,
yet blaspheme him for their torments. Revel. 16.9. how will they be filled with
blasphemies, when they shall be filled with the wrath of God for ever?

Lastly, as it is the greatest sin, so it makes men obnoxious to the saddest
judgments of God, and severest punishments of the Magistrate, when a man shall
directly and purposely speak reproachfully of God, denying him in his
Attributes, or attributing that to him which is inconsistent with his Nature;
this is called direct and immediate blasphemy, and if it be acted not out of
Infirmity of nature, the person not being distempered with sickness,
melancholy, or madness; Saxeus and scelestus lapidandus est saxis ab omni
populo, ut omnes testarentur quam oderint Blasphemiam Drexelius.

John 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, because he made
himself the Son of God.


but out of Malice, Deliberation, and Obstinacy; then the party is to dye
without mercy. Lev. 24.13, 14, 15, 16. this was no judicial Law, peculiar only
to the Jews, but it being of the Law of Nature, is an Universal Law for all
Nations. He, who ever he be that shall directly and obstinately blaspheme the
Name of the Lord; shall surely dye. Hence wicked Iesabel, that she might stone
Naboth to death, proclaims him a blasphemer. 1 Kings 21.11.14. this stoning
endured till Christ's time, as appears by their stoning of Steven. Acts 7. now
if every direct and obstinate blasphemers should be stoned to death in England,
what showers of stones would there be in all parts of the Land? and if
Nebuchadnezzar, a Heathen, by the Light of Nature could make a Decree, That who
ever blasphemed the God of Heaven, or spoke any thing amiss concerning him,
should be cut in pieces, and his house be made a Dunghill. Dan. 3, 29. how
much more ought Christian Magistrates to make severe Laws for the punishing of
such high offenders; lest as their light and charge is greater, so they suffer
double punishment. We see how careful Magistrates are to punish Thieves and
Murderers of men; and shall Spiritual Thieves, who rob God of his Honor, deny
his Being, and since they cannot kill him yet will smite him with their Tongue,
be suffered to go unpunished? We see how tender great men are of their own
Names, Honors, Privileges, and Lives; if any oppose them, he must dye for it,
and shall he that abuses and blasphemeth the King of Kings, Blasphemator
Creatorem cum interficere non possit, lingua ferit. Theoderet.

The Prophet Zachery (13, 3.) speaking of Gospel-time; says, that even false
Teachers and much more blasphemers shall be put to death. Anathema belongs to
other sinners, but Anathema Maranatha is the portion of such High Attainers.


not dye the death? Surely, as this is the greatest sin, so it should be
punished with some eminent and remarkable punishment. This Hellish sin defiles
the land, and cannot b^ purged away, but by the death of the Blasphemers.
Impunity breeds Blasphemy, and all manner of sin. Eccles. 8.11. Paul must
excommunicate such. 1 Timothy 1.1.20. and the Magistrate must cut them off. Levit.
24.6.16. Dan. 3.29. and when men cannot, or will not punish them, God takes the
sword into his own hand. He cut off blasphemous Sennacher^b, with one hundred
fourscore and and five thousand men. 2 Kings 19.35. Blasphemous Arrius voyded
his bowels, See more Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. l. 1. c. 29. p. 130.
and 477. Edit. ult. Aliud est blasphemiam dicere, aliud blasphemum esse;
Blasphema fuit vox Jobi. 34.5. at quia id dixit animi perturbato, non (...) and
deliberative non fuit blasphema. Fayu^.
and so died. The Syrians blaspheming the God of Israel, and calling him the
God of the Mountains, and not of the valleys; many thousands of them fell by
the sword. 1 Kings 20.29, 30. and if the Lord be thus terrible in the Camp of
the Assyrians for blasphemy, where will blasphemous Christians appear, who sin
against greater Light, and greater Love.

Caution, Yet every unadvised speech or act against God, does not presently
denominate a man a Blasphemer. There be may blasphemy in what is spoken, and
yet the person speaking not to be a blasphemer. Job and Jeremy spoke many
things unadvisedly (when under a tentation;) yet blasphemed not. Blasphemy
properly taken, is ever joined with an intent to cast reproach upon God. As
every one is not a liar, that tells what is not true; but he that tells an
untruth, knowing it to be an untruth, with an intent to deceive and wrong
others: so he that thinks or speaks a thing unbecoming God with an intent to
reproach or slander God and his ways: This is Blasphemy directly against God.

6. Disobedient to Parents. (...). Parentibus non obedientes.
Next unto God, our Parents are to be loved and obeyed; he that dares blaspheme
the one, Qui Deo maleditunt quomodo parents venerarentur? novit arrogantia
quae ex blaspemia est, etiam adversus naturam efferri, non ergo solum Deum quem
non vident* sed and parents quos cernunt, ii despiciunt^ Espencaeus.
will never fear to abuse the other; he that dares revile his Heavenly Father,
will not stick to rebel against an earthly one: Hence Haters of God, and
disobedient to Parents, are yoakt together in the same Predicament. Romans 1.30.
This is a branch of pride, it is that which makes men so refractory, (...),
immorigeri, inobedientes, insuasibiles, contumaces, refractarii ab ^ private.
and (...), persuadec.
and rebellious, that no persuasions of their superiors, can work upon them,
nor any entreaties win them to obedience. The words are indefinite, and
equivalent to an Universal. Videtur Parentum nomen in genere amplectiomnes qui
nobis praesunt. Baldwin.
In the last days, men shall be disobedient to Parents, in the Plural number.
viz.

To Parents.

Natural, Political, Spiritual, Domestical.
1. In the last days, men shall be disobedient to their natural Parents of
both sexes, Omnia sunt generaliter accipienda, nisi ubi aliud specialiter
urgent circumstantiae. Mercer.
Father and Mother. Thief especially are here employed in the word Parents,
though I shall not exclude the latter, since the Character in its fullest
Latitude, suits so fully with our times.

1. Was there ever more contempt of Natural Parents? is not the complaint
general, that the youth of our age is exceeding Haughty, Vain, Light, Loose,
Hypocritical, and Rebellious to Parents? it may be, whilst they be rich, and
can give them something, they will show some external Reverence and Obedience
out of Self-respects, that they may get something from them: but let those
Parents become Poor, Old, Sick, or a little burdensome, to them; then oh what
Bitter, Saucy, Reproachful words: what harsh, Vexatious, and Uncivil
carriage, do they express toward them, as if they were some base Peasants,
rather then their natural Parents? The Storks of Heaven shall rise in
Judgment against the rebellious children of this age, for such is their
natural affection to their dams, that they feed them when they are old; V.
Franzium de animalibus. P, 2. c. 8. p. 266. That is a singular piece for
describing the Nature of most creatures.

Parents suos non amare, impietas est: non agnoscere, insania.

Est hoc animi perversissimi indicium, quia Lex naturae jubet, ut
benefactoribus bona referatur gratia, inter quos primum locum obtinent
Parents, quibus' vita hujus initium debemus, and quorum labor educati sumus.
Gualter.


and it is but reason, that as our Parents, have nursed and nourished us, so we
should do the like for them, if need require; this is called a requiting of
their love, and is very pleasing in the sight of God. 1 Timothy 5.4. We must not
only love them, and reverence them externally, and internally, but we must show
our love by succouring, and supporting them in all their necessities: and so
far as we are able, we must answer their tender cost and care to us by doing
good to them again. So did Joseph, Genesis 47.12. and Christ commends the care of
his Mother to John. 19.26, 27. so Ruth 2.18. 1 Samuel 22, 3, 4. consider the
heavy curses which God denounces against such as contemn their Parents. God
will suddenly cut them off, they shall not live out half their days. Deuteronomy.
27.16. Prove. 20.20. As God prolongs the life of the Obedient. Ephesians, 6, 3. So
he has threatened shameful death to the disobedient. Prove. 30.17. the Ravens
shall pick out their eyes. (i. e.) they shall be put to an untimely death, V.
Theater of Gods Judgments. l. 2. c. 1.
and hanging on a tree, they shall be meat for Ravens, and the fowls of the
air. So Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 21, 22. Lev. 20.9. Mark 7.10.

2. As thou have been ungrateful to thy Parents, so thy children shall be
ungrateful to thee. In quo quis peccat in eo punitur.
As men mete to others (especially their Parents) so God raises up some
usually to mete to them again. A scoffing Ham is punished with a profane Canaan,
and both of them are punished in the cursed Canaanites that descended from them,
and proved Imitatours of their Fathers wickedness. Genesis 9.25. This was one of
those sins which caused the day of Ierusalems sorrow to draw near. Ezekiel. 22.7.
I wish it be not a fore-run-runner of some judgment to this Nation.

2. Magistrates are the political fathers of our country. Genesis 45.8. Judge.
5.7. 1 Samuel 24.11. Lam. 3.3. God commands us to honor them, yet how do those
filthy Dreamers (as S. Jude 8. styles them) despise dominions, and speakevill
of dignities; as if God had given them a command to dishonor and abuse them.
We have those that show not so much as external Revererence to them. How
unlike are these to the Saints of old. Mephibosheth falls on his face before
David, 2 Samuel 9.6. and Nathan bows himself before him. 1 Kings 1.23.

Object. Many of our Magistrates are carnal, wicked men.

Answ. Admit they are so, yet they are Magistrates still, and are deputed by
God to that office having power and authorite from him, and in this respect,
though they be never so vile and wicked, yet, we are to give them all due
Reverence and respect both internal and external. Saul was a wicked man, a
persecuter of holy David, and Jonathan; yet David respects him as the Lords
anointed still. 1 Samuel 24.6. The sons of Heth were Heathens, yet Abraham
bowed himself unto them. Genesis 23.7. Esau is expressly called a profane man.
Heb. 12.16. yet Jacob calls him my Lord Esau, and bowed seven times before him.
Genesis 33.3. Festus was none of the best, yet Paul gives him his Titles of
honor. Acts 26.25. Most noble Festus, and if we must pray for Nero's and
Tyrants, and all in authority, which is the great work. 1 Timothy 2.2. then surely
we may bow in a civil way unto them, uncover our heads and give them respective
language. How then can those Monsters, rather then men, boast of their
sanctity, when they have not common civ^^ity? or say they love God, when they
slight his Vicegerents, See Gods Judgments on such. Theater of Gods
Judgment. l, 2. c. 2. p. 158.
and Substitutes.

3. Ministers of Christ are spiritual fathers, they are Instruments of our
Conversion and Regeneration. Per Parents intelligit specialiter veros doctores
qui alios per Evangelium genacrunt. Prim^sius.
1 Cor. 4.14, 15. Elisha calls Elijah his Father, 2 Kings 2.12. and 6.21. and
13, 14. Judge. 18.19. 1 Timothy 1.2. Titus 1.3. now when was there ever more
contempt cast upon the Ministers of Christ solely, because they are his
messengers; and that by a company of proud, censorious Sectaries and Seducers;
unsetlted, turbulent, arrogant spirits; raging waves of the Sea, foaming out
their own shame. Jude 13. See my Pulpit Guard. 4. Edit. p. 77.78.
Calling us Witches, Devils, Serpents, Antichrists, etc. They forget that
Ministers are by Office Elders, and the Apostle would have such to be used with
more reverence and respect then ordinary men. 1 Timothy 5.1. But such railing is
the Livery we must expect from this ungrateful world. Thus did they revile the
Prophets, Apostles, yea and Christ himself; he was called a madman, a wine
bibber, a devil. And if they have called the Master of the House, See D. Haris
on Matthew. 5.11. Sermon. 24. and Mr. Pemble on 1 Cor. 15.19. in Folio. p. 478.
Beelzebub; what may the servant expect, Matthew. 10.25. Thus they called
Cyprian, Coprian; Athanasius, Sathanasius; Calvin, Cain; and Forell, Devil; no
sooner is a man a faithful Minister of Christ, but he is half a Martyr. But
let such Raylers know, that they carry about them the black marks of
unregenerate men, and such as never tasted the Power and comfort of our
Ministry; yea, and, except God give them Repentance, of Reprobation.

4. Masters of Families are called Fathers. Thus Naamans servant calls him, My
Father. 2 Kings 5.23. How do these also complain of the abuses of their
servants? The heels are now where the head should be. Every Jack looks now
upon himself as a Fellow Creature with his Master, and some think themselves
Superior; especially if the Master be a carnal man, and themselves have a
little smattering in Religion, then they think they may leave their callings,
and run from the shop into the Pulpit, contrary to that, 1 Cor. 7.20. let every
man abide in his own calling. It Is true, as a Master is a wicked man, and
commands wicked things, Malo in malo non est obediendum,
as to profane the Sabbath, lie, cozen, etc. he may not be obeyed; it is no
dishonor to earthly Masters, to see their Heavenly Master preferred before
them. Thus we may not be the servants of men. (1 Cor. 7.23.) To obey their
wicked commands; he speaks in respect of conscience, and in regard of the
inward man: He forbids not bodily service to men, for a wicked Master, though
he be never so vile, yet commanding such things, as a Master may command by
virtue of his place, is to be obeyed; as appears, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. he speaks of
servants that had Infidels to their Masters, he would have them so to carry
themselves toward such Masters, as accounting them worthy of all honor; not
derogating ought from their obedience, because themselves are called to the
knowledge and profession of Christ: yea they must the rather be careful to
walk honestly and uprightly, that they may credit the Gospel, and win their
Masters to Christ. However it be, yet servants must not fail in their duty,
because Masters are careless of theirs.

Object. The Anabaptists of our time object, That in Christ all are equal.
Gal. 3.28. and therefore there should be no difference between Master and
Servant, for Christ has purchased Liberty for u^* and has made us free from
Subjection. Gal. 5.2.

Answ. Subordinata non sunt contraria. Our Spiritual privileges do not
abrogate our civil respects to our Superiors. And though believers as they
are in Christ, are all one and equal; yet considered as they are members of a
Politic body, and in civil respects, so there is an inequality; and though
Christ has freed us from the curse of the Law, and from the Tyranny of sin,
and Satan; yet he has not freed us from subjection to men according to those
ranks and callings he has set us in. Hence even in Gospell-times, we read of
Master and Servants, Superiors and Inferiors, with directions how Inferiors
should walk toward Superiors. Romans 13. and Servants toward their Masters.
Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. with promises to reward such as conscienciously perform the
duties of their place. V. 8.

Object. But my Master is harsh and cruel.

Answ. Yet you must obey, and so be subject not only to good Masters, but also
to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. Sarah dealt hardly with Hagar, yet the Angel bids
her return and submit her self to her Mistress, Genesis 16.6. It Is a cross and
affliction which the most wise God has allotted to you, and you must bear it
patiently.

7, Unthankful. (...), Ingrati.
(...) est ingrati animi crimen.

Qui gratiam rependere benefactoribus non noverunt. Heming.


The sin of Ingratitude is one of those sins which do more especially render
these last times so perilous. Men will be unthankful to their Benefactours for
favors received: and how can it be otherwise? since they that are Blasphemers
of God, the great Benefactor of all the world, and disobedient to Parents, who
are the Instruments of their being, must needs be ungrateful to inferior
Benefactours, who have deserved better at their hands.

Quest. What kind of unthankefull persons does the Apostle here speak of,
whether such as are unthankefull to God, or man?

Answ. To both. In the last days men shall be ungrateful to God for peace and
the Gospel of Peace; and to Parents Natural, Political, Spiritual, and to
other their Benefactors. Those that bred them, bare them, and defended them;
those that fed them with the bread of life, and spent themselves like Lamps, to
give light to them; such is, and will be, the ingratitude of the last times,
that men will seek their lives, who endeavored to bring them to life, Ingratus
est qui non reddit, ingratissimus omnium qui oblitus est. Seneca.
and will labor to cast them into prison, and darkness, who labored to bring
them to light, and liberty; and will tread them under feet, whose feet they
should esteem precious, and as for the God of their mercies, either they forget
him and his wondrous works, Psalm. 106.21.24, 25, 26. or else they ascribe all
to themselves, as if if they had merited, and deserved them. Hab. 1.16.

2. They do not once think of the God of their mercies, they forget him days
without number, he is seldom in their thought; like swine they eat the Mast,
but look not to the Tree from whence it comes; like the Lepers, ^en cleansed,
and but one in ten that returns to give thanks. Luke 17.17.18. Like Patients,
when once cured, they forget the Physician. Like Mariners, when landed on the
shore, forget what they promised in the storm. Psalm. 78.34.36, 37.

2. Instead of acknowledging his favors, they fret and murmur at the least
afflictions: if God bestow a thousand courtesies, and lay but one cross on
them, they forget their mercies, to think on the present misery.

3. In their works they render evil unto God for all the good which he has
showed them, Most carry themselves as men to men, recompensing Love with Love
again; but as Devils toward God, recompensing his Love with hatred. Clerk.
(which is the highest ingratitude:) no favors can win them; but, if God had
been their deadly enemy, they could not have acted more violently, and
virulently against him. To do good to those that do ill to us, is (...), it is a
quid divinum. Matthew. 5.44, 45. Romans 12.20, 21. all love friends, only true
Christians can love their enemies.
This makes men like the Devil. To render good for evil, is Divine. To render
Good for Good, is Humane. To render evil for evil, is Brutish. But to render
evil for Good, is Devilish. This brings ruin to a man, and his house. Ier.
18.20, 21, 22. We know what befell Saul's family for his ingratitude to David.
So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 17.13. Who so rewards evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house. Though such may escape the lash of men's Laws,
yet the revenging hand of God will find them out. This we see in the Jews, who
for their Ingratitude to Christ in cursing and crucifying him, who by his
doctrine, labors and miracles, would have converted and saved them; are to
this day the people of Gods curse, dispersed and despised over the face of the
whole earth. And if he deserve punishment who renders evil for evil but to
man, Absque dubio maximi criminis reus creditur qui malum pro bono reddidit,
cui etiam malum pro malo reddere non liceret. Hoc nos, qui Christiani dicimur,
facimus. Irritamus in no^ misericordem Deum peccatis nostris, propitian^^m
sordibus laedimus. Salvian de Gubern. Dei. l. 6.
what shall be done to him who renders evil for good, and to his God; who
never did him hurt? This is not only notorious ingratitude, but perfidious
violating the very Law of Nature, which the God of Nature will not suffer to
pass unpunisht.

1. Let such consider that Ingratitude is a sin against the very Light of
Nature. It Is naturally engraven in the hearts of men, to do good to those that
do good to them. Clerks Mirrot car. 59 60. Ingratum qui dixerit, omne nefas
dixerit*
Mat. 6.46. Hence Heathens have condemned it, as one of the vilest sins; call a
man an ungrateful man (say they) and you need to call him no more. Some vices
are pleasing to Nature, and applauded by it; but Ingratitude is generally
abhorred of all.

3. It debaseth men and sets them below the beasts that perish, all sin does
so, but this especially. Hence the Lord complains of ungrateful Israel, that
they were worse then the Ox and Ass, two creatures, Iudaei rebels and
ingrati hic non assimulantur equo generoso, aut cani sugaci, and grato, sed
stolido bovi and asino; quid enim stolidius bove? quid stupidius asino? his
tamen stolidiores and stupidiores sunt omnes ingrati. Hieron.

Officia etiam ferae sentiunt, nec ullum tam immansuetum animal quod non cura
mitiget, and in amorem sui vertat. Granatensis in verbo (Gratitudo.) Vbi plura.


the most dull and heavy of all the rest; yet these have some expression of
affection to those that feed them, they know and acknowledge them, they be
ready to serve and obey them. Isay 1.3. The kindness of the Lion to the man
which pulled the thorn out of his foot, who lists may read in Aul. Gellius.
Noct. At. lib. 5. cap. 14.

4. The Scripture sets a blot and a brand on such. Thus Laban is branded for
his ingratitude to Jacob Genesis 31.2. etc. and Saul and Nabal to David. 1 Samuel
19.10. and 25.10. and Pharaoh's butler, who, when he was promoted, forgot
Joseph, Genesis 40.22. and Ioash who slew Zechariah, that had been loyal to him.
2 Chr. 24.22, 23. the Lord suddenly punished him for it. 2 Chr. 24.25.
Especially, the Scripture sets a black mark upon those sordid, unrighteous,
disingenious spirits, who fight against God with his own blessings, Omnis
ingratus est injustus.
and bestow his silver and gold on Baal. Hos. 2.8. with the Israelites, they
turn their jewels into an Idol, and then dance before it, and worship it.
Iesurun when fat and full, kicks at the God which fed him. Deuteronomy. 32.15. like
Mules, which being filled with their dammes milk ( matrem calcibus petunt) fall
to kicking the damme that fed them. The Hebrews have a Proverb. In fontem ex
quo semel bibisti, ne projicito glebam, much less in fontem ex quo semper. God
is our Creator, Preserver, Father, and Friend; and therefore they do very
foolishly, who do thus ill requite him. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Take heed therefore of this
Sponge of the Devil (as Austin calls Ingratitude) wherewith he wipes all the
favors of God out of our souls.

Qui non est gratus datis, non est dignus dandis.

See more in Clerks Mirror. cap, 73. Edit. 3,


5. Unthankfullness stops the Current of Gods mercies, and provokes the Lord to
strip us of all. Solomon forsakes the God of his mercies; by it he lost ten
parts of his Kingdom, and had adversaries ever after 1 Kings 11.9. Hezekiah,
when recovered, rendered not according to mercy received, therefore wrath came
upon him from the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 32.25. It maks the Lord to repent of the
blessings he has given us. 1 Sa. 15.11. It made David repent of his care in
protecting the flocks and servants of ungrateful Nabal from violence.
Ingratitudo est ventus urens, siccans pietatis fontem, rorem misericordiae,
fluenta gratia. Bern.
1 Saw. 25.15.16.21, 22. In vain have I kept all that this fellow has, since
he requites me evil for good; I Will destroy all that belongs to him. So says
God, in vain have I saved such a man from the Sword, Plague, Famine, therefore
I will now destroy him utterly for his rebellion. God cannot endure these
Sepulchra beneficiorum, these unthankful buriers of his benefits.

6. It Is a sad aggravation of men's sins; This makes the sins of the Saints so
exceeding sinful, because they are committed against the greatest Light and
Love. God Registers all the mercies which he bestows on us, and when we sin
against them, Ingratitudo velut fermentum omnia peccata permeat, ingratitudo
materialis est in quolibel peccato. Aquinas 22. q. 107. art. 4.
we shall be sure to hear of it. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9, 10. It Is a sin that
levens and sowres our other sins, and makes them far more loathsome. It stops
men's mouths, and makes them excuselesse, so that they have nothing to say for
themselves. Ezra 9.9, 10. when he had set forth what God had done for them, and
how they had rebelled against him, he cries, and now Lord what shall we say
after all this? q. d. We have nothing to say for our selves, since we have
again forsaken thy commandments, notwithstanding all thy mercies and
deliverances given to us; this brought ruin on them. V. 13, 14.

7. Idolaters will rise in Judgment against such; if they will praise their
dung-hill-Gods, shall not we praise the living God? Judge. 16.23.

8. Unthankful men are unfit for Heaven, for there the Saints do nothing but
sing Hallelujahs and praises to their God for ever. Revel. 5.12, 13. Luke 2.13.

This is one of the crying sins of England, Ingratitude both to God and man,
never reigned nor raged more amongst us then at this day; As the Lord loads us
with mercies, so we load him with our Apostasies. No Nation under heaven so
beloved as we, and no Nation under Heaven, that have worse requited his love.
It Is a Miracle of mercy that he yet continues his mercies to us, and that he
has not long ago stripped us naked, as in the day when we were born. Let it
therefore repent us of our unkindnesse to our good and gracious God, and, for
the time to come, let us express our Thankfulness in Real obedience.
Iustitia postulat ut quid cuique debetur, reddamus. Zanchy. Vnusquisque debetur
ex debito honestatis (ut loquuntur Scholastici aliquid ei reddere, qui sibi
gratiam fecit.
We have nothing else to give unto God but Thanksgiving, that is his Rent and
due. Psalm. 29.2. and 50.14. every honest man will pay his Rent, only take heed
that you pay it not to a wrong Landlord; ascribe not the glory of what you
are, or have to your selves, or to the Creature; all must be given primarily to
God: it is true, we may thank, and pay the messenger, but not like the Doner.
Cant. 8.12. the Keepers of the Vineyard have two hundred, but Solomon himself
has a thousand. Secondarily, we may give Thanks to Gods Instruments, whose
hearts he moves to help us. Thus David first blesses God, and then Abigail. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. It Is the Alms (if I may so say) which we give unto God; in all
other things, God blesses us, but in Thanksgiving, we bless God. Psalm. 50.22.
James 3.9. God blesses us Imperatively, we bless him Optatively, when we
desire and endeavo^r to set forth his promises. This is the way to increase and
preserve our blessings, Gratitudo est non solum maxima, sed and matter virtutum.

Gratiarum actio est ad amplius dandum invitatio. Bern. We love to sow in
fruitful ground.


both Temporal and Spiritual, and if we merit in any duty, it is in
Thanksgivings. He that gives Thanks for an old mercy, makes way for a new one.
This is more pleasing unto God then all legal Sacrifices. Psalm. 50.8. and
69.30, 31. It Is one of the most excellent parts of Gods worship, whereby we do
in a special manner glorify him. Psalm. 50. ult. yea in some respects God has
more glory from the Saints on Earth, then from the Saints in Heaven: for they
praise him without opposition, in the midst of his friends; but we praise him
with much danger and difficulty in the midst of his enemies. This is the end
of our Creation. Prove. 16.4. Isay 43.21. every member, every sense, every
faculty of soul, and part of our bodies, calls for Thankfulness. Quot membra,
tot ora. Had we but wanted a Leg, or an Arm, or an Eye, we should know the
price of that mercy. It Is the end of our Predestination. Ephesians. 1.11, 12. The
end of our Redemption. Isay 51.11. Luke 1.74. The end of our Adoption. Ephesians.
1.5, 6. In a word, it is the end of all Gods Mercies, that we should praise him
for them, Psalm. 50.15. Quot beneficia, tot ora. When the Lord had delivered
Israel out of Egypt, he makes it an Argument to quicken them to obey all his
commandments. Exodus 20.2. when the Lord plants his Vineyard in a very
fruitful hill, then he expects the pleasant Grapes of Thankful obedience.
Isay 5.1, 2. Even the Devil could say, Job had good Reason to express his
Thankfulness in serving God, who had made the hedge of his protection round
about him. Job 1.9.

Rule. 8.
See to the manner of your Thanksgiving, God loves Adverbs better then
Adjectives; he regards not so much quam bonum, sed quam been. A good dish may
be marred in the Cooking, and a good Duty spoiled for want of a right
performance. He then that would give Thanks unto God rightly,

Must do it, 1. Cordially, 2. Zealously, 3. Cheerfully. 4. Speedily, 5.
Beleevingly, 6. Humbly, 7. Holily. 8. Considerately.


1. We must praise God cordially, not cursorily, or customarily, in a verbal
formal way, but as God blesses us Really, so our praise must be Real, and
sincere. God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit. Hence David calls
on his Soul to praise God. Psalm. 103.1. and the Virgin Mary not only with her
soul, but with her Spirit: (i. e.) with her understanding; which (when renewed)
is the most noble, sublime, and choycest part of man; not only her Tongue, or
Hand, but her soul, yea, her spirit shall praise him. Anima naturam animae
notat, Spiritus vero mentem gratia imbutam. Anima naturalis est and naturalia
considerat, Spiritus vero supernaturalia and coelestia. a Lapide.
Luke 1.46, 47. The Spirit is more then the Soul. Hence some by soul, would
have the Inferior part of the soul to be meant, as the sensitive powers,
common to us with bruits, which respects natural things. And by Spirit, the
Superior faculty of the Soul, the Rational part (especially, when enlightened
and renewed by the Spirit of God) which respects divine and spiritual things.
So the Apostle distinguishes between soul and spirit. See more, Wilsons
Diction. in V. Spirit. and Ravanell.
1 These, 5.23.

2. Zealously and Transcendently, with the highest intention of affection. As
God is the most High, so our Praise must be answerable. We must extol and
exalt his Name. Isay 25.1. as the Angels in heaven do, though not in Equality,
yet in Conformity, and Similitude. Hence the Saints call up all the Powers of
their souls to this work, and make new songs of praise. Exodus 15. Psalm. 69.30.
See how Deborah rowseth up and quickens her self that she might the better
quicken others. Judge. 5.12. The reiteration of the words do show her earnest
affection to the work.

3. Speedily; without delay; so soon as ever we recive a mercy, we should
presently give Thanks. So did Deborah Judge. 5.1. the same day that she received
a victory, the very same day she sings praise. We may begin too late, we cannot
begin too soon. As God loads us daily with mercies, so we should daily praise
him, Psalm. 68.19, 20.

4. Voluntarily, freely, cheerfully: all Gods people are Volunteers. Psalm.
110.3. it is no service that is not Voluntary; compulsive Praise is no Praise.
It Is for beasts to be driven against their wills, aguntur non agunt. As in
alms, God loves a cheerful giver: so in this Spiritual alms, God would have
our praises flow as water from a spring freely, not as fire from a flint, with
much hammering, and striking.

5. Beleevingly, and in faith. As our Prayers, so our Praises must be put up in
the Name of Christ; Ne gratiae quidem nostrae gratae erunt Deo, nisi per and
propter Christum.
he must sweeten our odours with his incense. Revel. 8.3. he is that golden
Altar, which sanctifies all our services. Colos. 3.17. Ephesians. 5.20. givnig
Thanks unto God always.

1. Habitually and dispositively: our hearts should be kept in such an holy
frame, that on all occasions we should be ready to praise God.

2. For all things, that God shall send on us or ours, for prosperity, and
adversity, for sickness and health, for poverty and plenty; what ever God does
with us, we must Thank him.

3. In the Name of Christ, these calves of our lips must be offered on this
Altar. Hos. 14.2.

6. Humbly, none can give Thanks Rightly, but he that gives Thanks Reverently.
Heb. 12.28. our very rejoicing must be mixed with trembling. Psalm. 2.10. make a
man first Humble, and he will soon be Thankful, as we see in Jacob. Genesis 32.10.
and the Prodigal. Luke 15.19. he counts it an honor to be Gods hired servant.
E primo ordine excidi, dignare me vel secundo, tantum me penitus ne abjicias.
Euthym.
Such a one looks upon all as mercy, no merit. Hence when the Lord would make
men truly Thankful, he sets before them their misery. Ezekiel. 16. and commands
the people of Israel to keep the feast of Booths in remembrance of their misery
in Egypt, Nehem. 8.17, and to remember that their Father Jacob was a poor
perishing Syrian, Deuteronomy. 26.5. they must acknowledge the meanness of their
Original, that they might the better magnify Gods goodness and free Grace in
raising them.

7. Holily, from a pure heart. Praise is unse^mly in the mouth of sinners.
Their sacrifices are an abomination to God. It Is in Sion, and not in Babylon,
that praise waits for him. Psalm. 65.1. It Is only Saints that are called to this
work. Psalm. 33.1. and 145.10. they have special mercies, as Justification,
Sanctification, Salvation, etc. and therefore it much concerns them to be
Thankful.

8. Considerately. Sapiens omnia examinabit secum, quantum acceperit, a quo,
quando, ubi, quomodo. Seneca.
We must weigh and ponder all circumstances, as spices pounded, smell more
sweetly. Hence David descends to particulars. Psalm. 136. per totum.

1. Consider the freeness of Gods mercy, when thou wast dead in Trespasses and
sins, and had no eye to pity thee, nor loveliness in thee, yet then God
spread his skirt of love over thee, and said, Live.

2. Consider the fullness of Gods mercies. They are for number numberless. Psalm.
139.17, 18. Mercies to soul, to body, in estate, in the Church, and in the
Commonwealth, etc. Meditation on these things, will be like oil to the Lamp,
it will inflame and enlarge our hearts, it will sweeten mercies to us. Psalm.
104.33, 34. and strengthen us in Gods way. Neh. 8.10. Since this duty is so
highly pleasing unto God, be much in it. The repetition of the Act, will intend
the Habit, and therefore be practicing it on all occasions. Have children? give
Thanks for them. Genesis 29.35. Have victory over thy enemies? give Thanks for
that. 2 Samuel 22.1. Have good success? give Thanks for that. Genesis 34.48.

[He that would see more for Thanksgiving, may peruse Mr. Sam. Wards Sermon. on 1
These. 5.18. and Mr. Bridge on the same Text. Mr. Ieanes Thanksgiving Sermon. for
Taunton. D. Holseworth on Hos. 14.2. Mr. Gataker on Genesis 32 10. Church his
Treasury. p. 318. D. Spurstow on the Promises. chap. 20.]

8. Unholy.
Fitly has the Apostle yoaked these two together, Unthankful, Unholy; seeing
every act of Unholinesse has much Unthankfulness in it, every sin we commit
against God, is a Transgression not only of the Law of Holiness, Ingratitudo
materialis est in quolibet peccato. Aquinas.

(...), profanus, Beza. Impius, Erasmus. Scetestus, V^^^g. ex (...) priv. and
(...) sanctus (i. e.) non sanctos vel sanctitatis expertes, in quibus est nihil
sanctitatis, sed atrocia perpetrant crimina. Soto.


but also of the Law of love and kindness; there is much ingratitude in sin.
An unholy man is a profane man, one that slights God and his ways, one that
savours not spiritual things, but is wholly addicted to the world, and its
pleasures, preferring these Earthly and Temporal things before Eternal. Now
this Unholiness and Profaneness, is twofold.

1. In Doctrinalls, 2. In Practicalls.
1. In Doctrinalls; (...), tum de moribus, tum dogmatibus profanis intelligi
potest. Aretius.
In the last days men shall publish unholy Doctrines, and profane Principles.
Profane men will invent profane Tenets, and profane fables, which the Apostle
commands us to shun. 1 Timothy 4.7. and 6.20. [what profane doctrines are published
in our days, who lists may see in Mr. Edwards his Gangreen. 1. Part. p. 15.
etc. Edit. 3. and London Ministers Testimony* and Mr. Bartlets Balsom in fine,]

2. In the last days, men will be profane in Practicalls. No true piety will
appear in their lives; Quibus nullum jus est nee fas, (...) sunt. Beza.

Irreligiosi (i. e.) qui maternae Ecclesiae viscera discipant. Aug.


but they will be full of Pride, Self-conceit, Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Malice,
and all Unrighteousness. They will violently rush into sin without any Fear of
God, or Reverence to man. Hence the Apostle rangeth profane persons amongst the
vilest sinners. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.

3. Such as rend the bowels of their Mother that bare them, these are impious
and profane in S. Austins judgment.

4. A profane man most properly is one that lightly esteems the holy things of
God: one that slights God, his Sabbaths, Sacraments, Servants, Ministers, Note.
and all Gods holy things. In a word, he is one that preferres Earth before
Heaven, the World before the Word, Gold before Godliness, the body before the
soul, and the shadow before the substance. These have their portion in this
life, and had rather part with their part in Paradise, then their part in
Paris; like the profane Israelites, that preferred the Garlic and Onyons of
Egypt, before celestial Mannah, and with the ungrateful Jews, prefer
Barrabas before Christ upon this account. Esau is styled a Profane man, [ Heb.
12.16.] because he sold his Birthright (an heavenly privilege) for a meals
meat, (...), profanos, quasi procul a fano eliminandus, quia sacra negligit,
violat, conculcat, unde Virgil. Procul hinc, procul este profani.
for a trifle. The Hogs and Dogs of the world, make light esteem of the Holy
things of God. Mat. 7.6. we have too many such Esanits in our days. But let
such know, that as they have profaned Gods name by slighting him, so he will
set lightly by them, and make them profane, by exposing them to public
contempt and shame. Matthew. 2.8, 9. and as they had no regard of his honor, so
he will have none of theirs. Profanum ducere sanguinem Christi, est illum
habere tanquam rem nihili, nulliusque dignitatis, meriti, efficaciae. Ravenell.

(...) (i e.) profana dicuntur, quae ab omnibus ad conculcandum proposita sunt.
Ducta est vox (...) (i. e.) a pavimento, quod a quovis calcatur. Elias
Cretensis.

See more against this sin in my Beauty of Holiness. chapt. 2.


Psalm. 89.39. Isay 43.28. and 47.6. as they trampled Christ and the tenders of
his grace under their feet. Heb. 10.29. So they, as vile and contemptible
persons, shall be trampled upon by others. Such as despise God shall be
despised. 1 Samuel 2.30. So much the Notation of the word implies. Now for the
coertion, restraint, and condemnation of such persons, the Law was made. 1 Timothy
1.9, 10. they are liable to the curse of God, as profane Esau was. Heb. 12.17,
Oh then labor for Holiness, which is opposite to this profaneness. They
were set directly one against another. Ezekiel. 44.23. as profaneness debaseth a
man, so piety exalts a man, and makes him shine like an Angel amongst men. No
life so Honorable, Comfortable, and Commendable. [as you may see in my Beauty
of Holiness. chap. 8.]

VERSE 3. Without Natural Affection.
IN the last days, (...), naturalis affectus expertes. Grotius.
men shall be so vile, that no bonds of Nature can bind them, and no wonder,
for they that are blasphemers of God, disobedient to Parents, ungrateful to
Benefactors, must needs at last come to that height of inhumanity and
brutishness, as to be without Natural Affection. They shall not only be
without Humane affection, which is a love to men, as they are men, or Christian
affection, which is a love to good men, because they are good; but they shall
be without Natural affection toward those, to whom they are bound by the bond
of consanguinity and affinity, Intelligit Paulus (...), ut parentum in liberos,
mariti and vxoris, and alios hujusmodi, quos Stoici stulte inter vitia
numerarunt. Beza. Consule Stobaeum Sermon. 81, 82.
and by a special instinct of Nature, to show a tender love and respect unto.
These (...), are those inate and tender affections, which are planted in our
Nature by the God of Nature, toward those to whom we are conjoined by the bond
of Nature. Such is that natural affection, which is between Parents and their
children, Husband and Wife, Brother and Brother, Kindred and Country, a
Governor and his Family. See Clerks Mirror. cap. 89. and 90. V, Franzium de
Animalib. p. 44.54.68.229.289. Vehementissimus omnium est hujusmodi affectus,
praesertim vero parentum erga liberos, and liberorum erga parents, utpote lege
naturae inditus. Soto.
There is no Nation so base and barbarous, but there are some sparkles of this
Natural affection toward their own. Yea, the very bruit beasts we see, are
very tender over their young. The very Lioness, the Bear, the Tygre, the
Eagle, the Hen, yea the Bitch will rise up in judgment against those
unnatural Parents that provide not for their own. Men love their Riches, they
love their Houses, they love their Horses, ye their Dogs; but not with that
natural affection, as they love their children. And though some may be so
unnatural, as to blo^ out this natural affection. Isay 49.15. and Saul to his
son Jonathan, and to David his Son-in-Law. 1 Samuel 19.14, 15. and 20.33. and
the Gentiles. Romans 1.30. yet see how tenderly David is affected even to a
Rebellious Absalom, 1 Samuel 18.33. and Paul to his Countrymen and Kins-men.
Romans 9.3. and Jacob to Joseph. Genesis 37.55. and to Benjamin. Genesis 42.38. and
44.22.29, 30. Now is not this unnatural sin, the sin of our Age? Was there
ever more want of Natural affection in Parents to children, and children to
Parents? It Is true, many exceed in their love, and are apt to dote upon their
children (as David did on Absalom) and are too fond of them. But do not many
offend in the Defect for want of natural affection? How many Parents correct
their children and servants without moderation or mercy? How many children do
rise up against their own Parents, and betray them into the hands of
persecutors? Mat. 10.^1. Luke 21.16. yea and Parents against their children?
How many speak against their own Mothers sons. Psalm. 50.20. the Brother
supplants his Brother, and the Neighbor, his Neighbor. Ier. 9.4. The wife of
the bosom, (like Eve) labors to draw the Husband from God, and a man's enemies
are those of his own house. Micah 7.5, 6. 'Twas the glory of the Primitive
times, that they were so loving and unanimous, that their enemies could say,
Ecce quam se mutuo diligunt? Behold how these Christians love one another! but
now we may say, Ecce quam se mutuo dilacerent! Behold how they torture and
tear one another in words and deeds? How many kill the fruits of their wombs?
others never provide for their Families, but spend that on themselves at an
Alehouse in a day, which would maintain their Families a week. Unnatural
bruites! nay, worse then the beasts that perish, for even the Sea Monsters
suckle and support their young. Lam. 4.3. such are worse then Heathens, Cum
bestiae videantur habere nescio quid (...) naturalis dum se mutuo curant, qui
^llius est expers, est bestiis deterior. Fayus.

See Clerks Mirror. cap. 22. and 24. and 34.


let men profess the faith in words, yet if in their deeds they deny it, and
be not careful in a prudentiall, providentiall way, to provide for their own,
they are worse then Infidels in this respect; for they by the light of Nature
know, that it is their duty to provide for their own, and though they be
barbarous, yet are they not so barbarou^, as to cast off natural affection to
them. 1 Timothy 5.8. God will surely visit for such sins. Amos 1.9. Obad. 10.11,
12, 13, 14.

Lastly, whereas there is planted in us a natural affection to the Land of our
Nativity, insomuch that Heathens have been prodigal of their lives, Chari sunt
parents, chari liberi, propinqui, familiares; sed omnes omnium charitates
patria una complexa est; pro qua quis bonus dubitet mortem oppetere, si ei sit
profuturus? Quo detestabilior est istorum immanitas qui lacerarunt omni scelere
patriam, and in ea delenda occupati sunt? Cicero de Offic. l. 1.
for the good of their Country, yet how many are there amongst us, that by
destructive courses, seek the ruin of their Mother that bare them, and the
land that nursed them? True, we must love our Parents, love our children, love
our friends, and neighbors, but the public good must be preferred before them
all,

Stoici sunt furiosi qui ea non temperant, sed abscindunt, rebusque a natura
insitis castrare hominem quodammodo volunt. Lact. l. 6. c. 15, 16, 17.
This then informs us of their folly, who plead for a Stoicall Apostasy,
commending the want of natural affections as a point of perfection, which the
Lord condemns as a great imperfection; accounting that for a Virtue which the
Apostle reckons for a great Vice. So that to banish them out of man, Grati^ non
extinguit sed ordinat affectus, non tollit sed extollit naturam. Aquinas.
is to banish man out of man, and to make him a stock, rather then a Stoic.
The Affections are not sinful per se, and in themselves, but only by Accident,
when they are misplaced and set upon wrong objects, or not kept to their just
proportion, so that they neither exceed, nor come short of their measure. So
that the Affections of Love, Fear, Desire, Joy, etc. simply considered in
themselves, are good.

1. Adam had them in the state of Innocence, when he was free from sin.

2. Christ himself had them, his Reason excited, directed, moderated, and
represt them, according to the Rule of perfect, clear, and undisturbed
judgment. He made use of them; he rejoiced. Luke 10.21, he wept. John 11.35.
he was angry, Mark 3.5. he feared. Heb. 5.7.

3. God commands us to love. Mat. 22.37. to be angry. Ephesians. 4.26. to fear. Luke
12.5. to weep. Joel 2.12. and to be ashamed. Ier. 3.3. It Is a great blessing
that we have them: what Stocks and Sots, should we be without them? they set
the soul on work, and make us active for God. David prepared much for the house
of the Lord; Sunt velut nervi in homine, and quasi funiculi a natura in nobis
inditi, a quibus trahamur. Plato de Legib.
how so? because he set his affections on the house of his God. 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
They are as wind to the Sails, as wings to the Bird, and as feet to the Body. [
Pes meus affectus meus, eo feror quocunque feror.] Neither does Grace
extirpate, but Regulate them; Grace does not root out Nature, it only takes
away our dross, and turns our brass into gold: it removes the scumme, and
takes away the exorbitancy of our Affections. Be angry, but sin not, hold good
in all the Affections, Love the Creature, but sin not; sorrow under affliction,
but sin not, etc. we are as a dead Sea without them, and as the raging Sea, if
they exceed their bounds. As Bias said of the Tongue, that it was the best, and
the worst part of the Sacrifice; Nec meliores unquam servos, nec Dominos sentit
natura deteriores.
so may we say of the Affections, they are the best servants, but the worst
Masters, which our Natures can have. Like the winds which being moderate,
carry the ship; but drown it being tempestuous. And we find it experimentally
true, that things most useful, and excellent in their regularity, are most
dangerous in their abuse. Let us therefore beseech the Lord by his Spirit, to
set and keep our Affections in tune; and then so many Affections; so many
Graces. Our love will be turned into a love of God. Our Joy into a delight in
the best things. Our sorrow into sorrow for sin, and our fear into a fear of
offending God. And therefore in all your excesses and Defects in this kind,
look up unto God for help; it is he only that can command the raging Seas, to be
still, and they shall be still.

[See more, D. Reynolds on the Passions, and Mr. Fenner on the Affections. M.
Herles Policy. l. 2. c. 6.]

10. Truce Breakers.
The words seem to be a Gradation. q. d. The last days will be very perilous,
A(...), foedifragi, foedere nescii Beza, ab (...) private. and (...), foedus.

Sicut cum suis pietatem non servant* ita cum externis amicitiae and foederum
jura non incunt, vel inita violant. a Lapide.

A(...), irreconcil^abiles, qui foedera non servant, jura pacis and amicitiae
violant. Aretius.

Hosts inconsoederabiles, qui nec legibus, nec pactu, sed affectibus, se regi
permittunt. Espencaeus.


for men will be irreligious toward God, rebellious to Parents, ungrateful to
Befactours, and at last perfidious; so that it will be to no purpose to make
any Compacts or Covenants with them: being once provoked, they become
unappeasable, irreconcilable, violating the Laws of Peace, and Friendship, to
advance their own designs, and interests. If we take the word both ways, the
Character will suit with our times.

1. In the last days men will be implacable, So the Grecians call an
irreconcilable war, (...), and unappeasable enemies (...),
irreconcilable, (So the Apostle uses the word, Romans 1.32.) being once
offended, they are hardly ever reconciled, their malice admits no Terms of
Truce, much less of hearty reconcilement, like those Psalm. 120.6, 7. They may
peradventure out of policy say, they will forgive; I, but they will never
forget; but Esau-like they only respite their malice, till a sit opportunity
of revenge appear. Genesis 27.41. These are unlike to God, who is ready to
forgive, and upon Real Humiliation, easily appeased. 2. It argues a graceless
frame of spirit, for as the experience of Gods love in pardoning, inclines us
to an easy forgetfulness of wrongs; so does the continued prosecution of a
revengefull purpose, argue sufficiently, our little or no feeling of Gods
pardoning mercy.

2, The word signifies not only Truce Breakers, ( i. e.) such as break those
Covenants, (...), qui nulla pacta servant, nec promissis stant, nemini fideles,
ne benefactori quidem* Baldwin.
which are made for cessation of Arms, which we call Truces. This exposition
is too strait, for in the last times men shall attain to such a height of sin,
that they shall not only be Truce Breakers but Covenant-breakers. In the last
days men shall be so irreconcilable to the ways of God, that they will not
once bind themselves by Covenant to them: or if, for self ends, they shall
swallow up such a Covenant, yet they will be perfidious, and never keep it;
They Will make no more of a Covenant, then a Monky does of his Collar, which he
can slip off and on at his pleasure. In the last days, men will not only be
Sermon-proof, and Judgement-proof, but Covenant-proof; no bonds so strong, so
sacred, but they can as easily break them, as Sampson did the bonds of the
Philistines. It Is not Personal, Sacramental, or National Vows that can keep
the men of the last times, within the Circle of obedience: and therefore this
also know, that in the last days, perilous times shall come; for men shall be
Covenant-breakers both with Gad and man. That this is Englands sin, I wish it
were not too apparent, to our great reproach in the world; This sin is written
with the Claw of an Adamant, in a Table of remembrance before God and man, to
all posterity. Have we not lifted up our hands to the most high, and vowed a
Reformation? but behold a Deformation. We vowed an extirpation, and rooting up
of Heresy, and false doctrine; yet many act as if they had taken a Covenant for
their propagation. We vowed the setting up of Discipline and Government in the
Church of God; yet it were to be wished that some which have taken this
Covenant, did not oppose it. We have vowed Uniformity; and behold a
Multiformity. I hope there is none that thinks the Substance of this Covenant
to be out of date; the matter of it is such, that we are bound all the days of
our lives, zealously to observe it. I suppose every good man thinks himself
bound to preserve the Purity of Religion, to extirpate Heresy and profaneness,
in his place and calling, not only till our enemies were subdued, but these
are duties to be practiced all our days. A well-grounded Covenant (and such
was this) is a sure, firm, and irrevocable Act, it is Aeternitati sacrum, Mr.
Caryll his Sermon. on Neh. 9. Preached at the taking of the Covenant.
(says a Reverend Divine) to endure for ever. Hence the Parliament ordered,
that it should be taken by all men above 18. years of age, in the three
Nations, and that it should be printed in a fair Letter, and hung up in a Table
in the Church, for a perpetual Memorial. [See more in Mr. Gelaspy's
Miscelanies, chap. 16. p. 201, 202, etc. and Mr. Rutherford against Pretended
Liberty of Conscience. chap. 22.]

Now for men to violate and vilify such an Oath as this, which for Matter,
Persons, and other Circumstances, the like has not been in any Age, or Oath we
read of, in Sacred or Humane stories: is an high provocation, and shall not
escape unpunished (as a Reverend Divine has very well observed) but as they
have been notorious in sin, Mr. Phil. Nigh his Exhortation at the taking of the
Covenant.
so shall they be notorious for shame. Hence a Truce-breaker is here reckoned
among the vilest of Christians, and a Covenant-breaker, is listed amongst the
worst of Heathens. Romans 1.32. God accounts this so far from service, and duty,
that he looks upon it as horrible profaneness and perjury, Vovens and non
solvens, quid nisi pejero? Bern.

The Heathen by the light of nature condemned perjury as worthy of death.


what does more provoke a man, then Treachery and perfidiousnesse? and what
greater Treachery, then to break so solemn and sacred a Covenant? this provoked
the Lord against Judah. Hos. 6.7. but they like men have transgrest the
Covenant, there (even there) have they dealt treacherously against me. There
where they should have been most fast and faithful, there they were most false
and perfidious. What we barely promise, we ought to perform, but a Vow is a
double and stronger bond, and so more carefully to be observed. Hence Gods hand
has been remarkable against Covenant-breakers in all ages. How Ladislaus was
punished for breaking Covenant with Amurath, who lists may see in Bucoltzers
Chronol. in Anno mundi 5414,

See six Reasons against Covenant Breaking, in Mr. Calamies Sermon. on 2 Timothy 3,
3. p. 10. etc.


Saul's posterity was plagued for their breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites.
2 Samuel 21.1, 1.6. So the Heathen that were Covenant-breakers, were given up to
Reprobate sense. Romans 1. Sampson breaking his Vow, had his eyes put out by the
Philistines, and is made to grind. Judge. 6.21. Absolon under pretense of a Vow
seeks his Fathers life, but it cost him his own. 2 Samuel 15.17. King Zedekiah is
punished with death, for breaking Covenant with Nebuchadnezzar a Heathen, and an
Idolater. Ezekiel. 17.15. to 22. it is a signal place, See more in Mr. Blake on
the Covenant. Chapt. 21. and Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 95.
and worthy our serious meditation. So Ier. 34.18. to 22. God will send a sword
on such to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, Levit. 26.25. It Is reported of
the Egyptians, that if any man did swear by the life of the King, and did not
perform his Oath, that man was to dye without mercy; no gold, no silver, could
redeem his life. We have sworn not by a King, but we have lifted up our hands
to the King of Kings, and unless we mean to dye eternally, we must perform it.
The Jews have a Proverb, Non est poena super Israelem in qua non sit Vncia
Vituli aurei. That was such a Transgression, that God remembered it every time
he plagued them. So Non est poena super Angliam in qua non sit Vncia foederis.
In every punishment there is somewhat of the Covenant in it.

I shall conclude with the words of some Reverend Divines, lamenting the Breach
of the Covenant amongst us. The Cheshire Ministers in their Testimony against
Heresies, etc.
That so solemn a Covenant (say they) so gravely and piously penned, so
dreadfully obliging the Conscience (in all sincerity and fidelity, to take and
keep it) so ratified by authority of Parliament, ordering of it with
instructions, exhortations, and satisfactions to scruples: that this Covenant
should be by so many without any sense of Religion, both taken and broken, as
if it were but a King at Chesse, set upon the board for a game, and so shut up
in a bag, when the game is done; this is that which may make us hang down our
heads, and with heavy hearts say, as Ezra 9.6. O our God, we are ashamed to
lift up our faults, etc. So they.

Now, as Covenant Breaking is a God-provoking sin, so Covenant-keeping is a
Sacrifice most pleasing and acceptable to him; and the most compendious way to
exalt a Nation, as we see in the times of Moses, and Joshua, 24, 25, etc. Asa.
2 Chronicles. 15.12.15. Josiah. 2 Kings 23.3. etc. Nehem. 9. when they brought their
people into Covenant, they prospered presently. No sooner did England enter
into Covenant, but from that very day did the Lord bless us, and gave
admirable success to the Armies of his people. Hag. 2.18, 19. The Reason is,
because then we engage God more especially in our cause; we bring him into the
field with us, we put all we are, and have into his hand, we are not now our
own people but the Lords people, the Lords Kingdom. The Lords War, the Lords
Castles, the battle is not ours, but the Lords. So long as Creature opposes
Creature, they may make some resistance, but when the Creator comes against the
Creature, Omnipotency against Impotency, and Wisdom against Folly; who then can
stand? Isay 45.9. when people fall to Covenanting, then woe to Rebels. Ezekiel.
20.37. There Is no way to preserve and establish a Nation like this; Hence Moses
exhorts the people to give up themselves by Covenant to God, that so he might
be their God, and establish them. Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. So when Iehojada had brought
the people into Covenant, then the Lord gave them rest. 2 Kings 11.17, 20. This
is like a wall of brass to a Kingdom, or rather like a wall of fire (as the
Prophet speaks, Zach. 2.5. which none can scale) to defend us, and to offend
our enemies. Now we have special interest in the Lord, so that all that he
has is ours; his Wisdom is ours to direct us, his Power to protect us, his
Goodness to save us, etc. As a woman that is married to a man, partakes of all
the Riches and Honors of her husband, and as Laban said to Jacob, Genesis 51.43.
so may we say to the Lord, All that thou have is mine. This appears
excellently. Psalm. 132.2. where the Lord swears to David, and David swears,
and by a Vow devotes himself to God, then follows blessings Temporal and
Spiritual.

1. They shall have spiritual blessings, they shall have Gods special presence
amongst them, God will dwell there. V. 13, 14. yea such is Gods great
condescension) that he desires no better habitation then amongst his own
people. 2. He will fill them with spiritual joy. V. 16. singing they shall
sing ( i. e.) they shall greatly, and they shall surely rejoice. 3. He Will bless
their posterity. V. 11, 12. 4. He Will bless their provision, and satisfy the
poor in Zion with bread. V. 15. ( i. e.) with all Temporal blessings need^ull
for them. 5. Since the Priests of God are exposed to more danger then others,
therefore he promises to them more special protection. V. 16. 6. He will
subdue their enemies. V. 17, 18. and will make the horn ( i. e.) the power and
might of his people, to prosper and increase. So that this is the only
prevailing way, viz. sincerely to give up our selves to God in Covenant; and
till this be done, we are undone. It Is not Fasting,, Praying, Humiliation,
unless we really covenant for Reformation of our selves and ours, we do but
dodge with God and cannot look to prosper. Hence Ezra 10.1, 2, 3. tells the
people they had sinned greatly, yet there was hope, but what must they do? why,
make a Covenant, and all shall be well. V. 3. God must and will do great things
for his people in Covenant, when they be in distress. Psalm. 105.8, 9, and
106.45. and 111.5. yet he remembered his Covenant, and saved them according to
the multitude of his mercies; with a, notwithstanding their Rebellions against
him. Hence it is, that Gods people in their distress so often plead the Covenant
to move the Lord to pity them. Exodus 32.13. have respect unto the Covenant.
Psalm. 74.20, 21.
Now that we may Covenant Rightly,

We mst do it 1. Judiciously, 2. Sincerely, 3. Unanimously.


4. Affectionately, with Fear, Love, Joy.


1. Judiciously, in judgment, and Understanding, what we do, Nehem. 10.28.
Ier. 4.2. such weighty matters must not be undertaken rashly, rudely, or
unadvisedly, but with serious, grave, and mature deliberation.

2. Sincerely; with all plainness and simplicity of spirit, without doubling,
or dissembling, 2 Chronicles. 15, 12. Ier. 4.2. Thou shall swear in truth (i. e.)
Sincerely, without equivocation, Lingua juravi, mentem injuratam, gero.

Said that Hypocrite in the Orator. Cicero de Offic. l. 3.


mental reservations, or any base and sinister Ends, as to save your land from
sequestration, to get in favor with some great ones, or to get an office, etc.
for such kind of swearing, the land mournes; if we will swear, it must be in
Righteousness, Ier. 4.2. ( i. e.) Just and Righteous things. The subject or
matter of a Covenant must be just and righteous things, such as are agreeable
to the Word of God, and tend to his glory, as to serve, fear, obey him. Genesis
28.20. Take heed of putting what sense you please on the Covenant; Iuramentum
sit Sacramentm Pietatis, non Vinculum iniquitatis.
we may not take it with such limitations, and qualifications, as are against
the Letter, scope, and drift of it. Such may deceive men, but God they cannot
deceive. We should therefore have a Jealousy over our selves, and say as Jacob
did in another case. Genesis 27.12. My Father peradventure will feel me, and I
shall seem as a deceiver to him, and I shall bring a Curse upon me, and not a
blessing. If our hearts be not right with God, they will never be faithful and
steadfast in his Covenant. Psalm. 78.37. Let your hearts choose the things that
please God, and then you will take hold on his Covenant. Isay 56.4. First give
a bill of divorce to your Lusts, say to them, as to a menstruous clout, Get you
hence. Isay 30.22. Hos. 14.8. Till our old Union with sin be broken, God will
not match with us, no sober man will marry with a woman so long as her husband
lives, but when her husband is dead, she is free. Romans 7.2, 3.

3. Unanimously; God loves to see his people, from the highest to the lowest,
to join themselves to him, like one man. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Zeph. 3.9. Ier.
50.5. Ezekiel. 37.17. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13.15. Nothing stronger then such Unity. Si
erimus inseparabiles, erimus insuperab^les.

4. Affectionately.

1. With Fear; we must come to this duty with Reverence, and godly fear,
considering that vast disproportion which is between God and our selves. We
have not to do with men, but with the Almighty, and that in his Excellency and
Greatness. So that as an holy fear must be an ingredient in all our services [
Heb. 12.29, 19.] So especially we must bring it, when we come to swear by his
Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13.

2. With Love; Get your Judgments convinced of the Excellency of a
Covenant-condition, and what a high privilege it is to have God for our God,
this will make us in love with the Covenant, and Love is strong as death. Cant.
8.6, 7. There is nothing so ennobles us (what ever the Esaus of the world say
to the contrary) as to be in Covenant with God. 'Twas a greater honor to Isaac
to be in Covenant, then to be the Seed-Royall, and to have Princely issue. Genesis
17.20, 21. Esaias may have Princely issue, but my Covenant shall be in Isaac. So
Isay 43.4. This will make us remember our Covenants; what we love, we will never
forget. Psalm. 119.16. if David love Gods Law, he will never forget his word. It Is
not the making, but the minding and keeping of a Covenant, which makes us
happy, and we cannot keep it, unless we remember it. One reason why the Iewd
woman forsakes the guide of her youth is, because she forgets the Covenant of
her God. Prove. 2.17. Hence God so often commands, that we forget not his
Covenant. Deuteronomy. 4.23. 2 Chronicles. 16.15. and 29.18. The heart of man is exceeding
prone to backsliding, now a Covenant is a bond that binds us to God (happy
those bonds which bind us to be holy.) It Is like a hedge, to ba^ us from going
astray. It Is a good answer to a Tempter; I have sworn, and I will perform it:
How can I do such wickedness, and break my Covenant with my God?

3. With joy and cheerfulness. We must not come with dead hearts to such lively
work. As God loves a cheerful giver, so a cheerful Covenanter is prized by
him. 2 Chronicles. 15.14, 15. Judah, All Judah, Rejoiced in the Covenant which they
had sincerely made with God, to worship him only, in the purity of Religion.
See the good issue, 1. The Lord was found of them. 2. He gave them rest round
about, so that albeit they were encompassed with enemies, yet none did hurt
them; and if it be matter of joy to come to the Ordinances, Isay 30.29. 2 Chronicles, 29. ult. and 30.13.21, 32.26. Psalm. 122.1. much more should we rejoice
in this extraordinary high service. At marriages joy is seasonable, this is the
souls marriage day. Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth or marry thee unto me. It Is
thrice repeated for certainty.

1. It Is a spiritual Covenant or marriage; and so far more excellent then
carnal marriage. 2. It Is perpetual; not for a day, but for ever: when God
loves once with a conjugall love, he loves for ever. 3. In righteousness and
judgment; he will cloth us with the wedding garment of Justification, and
Sanctification. 4. Though we deserve no such favor, yet of his own
free-loving-kindness and mercy, he will do it; and is not this matter of
exceeding joy?
2. As for Covenants and compacts with men, there were never greater complaints
of falsenes and prodigiousness; Per foedus hic haud dubie intelligit
conventiones and pacta de rebus humanis facta; multi multa promittunt, at pauci
promiss^ praestant. Marloret.
a man can scarce tell who to trust, or where to find a faithful man.
Righteousness is perished from the earth, and faithfulness from the sons of men.
A simple, just, plain-dealing man, is a black swan; if a man buy but a piece of
land, he scapes well if he be not made to buy it a second, it may be a third,
time. What lying, cosening, cheating, in buying, selling, bargaining? What
falfe weights, false wares, false lights, false measures, in every place? Men
sell deceit, to purchase Gods wrath. 1 Cor. 6.9. and 1 Thessal. 4.6. they take
money not for wares, but for cosenage; such may boast of their profession, and
call themselves Saints, but God accounts them worse then Scythians; they are an
abomination, to him, Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14. Levit. 19.13. Some are first Tablemen,
others second, but both miscarry; the one for his unrighteous Holiness, the
other for his unholy righteousness. Christ has redeemed us, that we might
serve him; not in Righteousness or Holiness, but in Righteousness and
Holiness. Luke 1.75. such unrighteous men usually die beggars, treasures
gained by such wicked Practices, See Gods Judgments on such. Clerks Mirror.
cap 35. and Mr. Rous his oil of Scorp. Sect. 5. p. 237. folio. and Mr. Herle's
Policy. l. 2. c. 14.
profit not. Prove. 10.2, 3. Job 20.15. Plain honesty is the best profit and
policy. For though such gain but little at once, yet it gains long, and keeps
its custom; whereas he that couzeneth me once, shall not deceive me a second
time; he loses the custom that he had. It Is a great ornament to Religion, when
the Professors of it are just and righteous, when they pay every man his dues;
restore what they borrow, slander no man, do violence to none, be diligent in
their callings, faithful in their trusts, keep their promises, be merciful to
the poor, and as much as in them lies, have peace with all men. This is the way
to stability, and safety here. Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14. Isay 33.14, 15, 16. Ier.
22.15, 16. and happiness for ever. Psalm. 15.1. it is made a note of a Citizen
of Heaven, that he does not only walk uprightly toward God, but he works
righteousness toward men. He does not only know or talk of Righteousness,
but he works Righteousness; he does not only praise, but he practices it;
and not only by fits and starts, for a day or two, but [ operans justitiam]
it is his Trade, he is daily at it, he always observes that golden Rule, Matthew.
7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to him, even so to do to them: he
observes an equal proportion in the things commuted, he will not ask twelve
pence, for that which is worth but six pence, nor offer four pence for that
which is worth but four groats. He desires that every man should live in his
calling, and therefore observes an equal proportion both in his buying and
selling. This therefore bars all these from Heaven, who Canonize themselves
for Saints; yet walk directly contrary to the Rule of Sanctity, Psalm. 15. they
walk Hypocritically, work unrighteousness, speak untruths, back-bite their
neighbor, countenance the vile, discountenance those that are really good,
break their Covenant with God and man, and be great oppressors, and grind
their brethren. Let such men profess what they please, all their Religion is
vain.

[If any would see more for the Covenant, he may peruse Doctor Burges Sermon. on
Ierem. 50.5. Mr. Case on Leviticus 26.25. Ierom. 50.5. Master Mockets Sermon. on
Deuteronomy 29.9. Master Caryll, and Master Colemans Sermon. at the taking of the
Covenant. Master Shaw's Britains Rememb. on 2 Chronicles. 15.12. Master Ash on
Psalm. 76.11. Mr. Calamy 1643. on 2 Timothy 3.3.]

11. False accusers.
The last days will be perilous, for men shall be false accusers, slanderers,
back-biters, (...), Calumniatores, Criminatores, Obtrectatores, Delatores.
or, in plain English, Devils. The Devil has many names given him in
Scripture, but his most proper and peculiar name, by which he is known, and
his malicious nature is discovered to us, is, Devil. (i. e.) a Slanderer, or
false accuser; because it is his great work to slander both God and Man. He
slanders God to the Saints, and the Saints to God; since he cannot ruin them,
he will raise lies and false accusations against them. Revel. 12.10. See Mr.
Ienkin on Jude 9.
Hence he is styled by way of eminency, (...), the slanderer of slanderers, the
great slanderer and makebate of the world, the Devil, Matthew. 4.1. and 5.5.11.
and 25.41. John 8.44. 1 Pet. 5.8.

2. The word is taken in a more large and general sense, for any one who is
like the Devil, of a Devilish quality, especially in slandering, and falsely
accusing others. Hence the Apostle would have women to be grave, not
slanderers, or Devils. 1 Timothy 3.11. for to carry slanders up and down, is to
act for the Devil, and to act like the Devil, no child so like the Father, Hi
cum Diabolo commune nomen habent, and sunt qui recta aliorum dicta and facta
depravant, corrumpunt, and in alium sensum torquent. Hemingius.

Qui sibi nullius boni conscius est, omnes ut invidus carpit and criminatur.
Bulling.


as these are like the Devil, and therefore in Scripture they have one and the
same name given them. viz. Devils. Thus in the last days men shall be vile,
and void of goodness themselves, and therefore they will maliciously calumniate
the goodness of others, 'Twill be their delight (as it is the Devils their
Master) to coin false Reports, and raise lies against the Saints,
misinterpreting them and their actions to the world, putting false
Interpretations, on what they do or say.

1. If they see any Virtue in the Saints, they either deny it, or diminish it,
or else they put some sinister gloss upon it.

2. If they see any infirmities in them, they presently blaze them, they
aggravate and augment them, making them far greater then they are; they make
pounds of pence, and mountains of Mole-hills.

3. If they can find no faults, (...) sunt, qui mendaciis and confictis
criminibus aliorum innocentiam vexant. Estius.
they will invent some, as the Devil did by Job 2.9, 10, 11, and 2.5. and this
properly is slandring. Thus Ieremiahs adversaries dealt with him. Ier. 13.18.
Come let us devise devices against him. q. d. Though we can find nothing justly
against him, yet we will go and coin something. So that to slander, is not simply
to tell to another, what our neighbor does or says (for that may be done for
our neighbors good, and for public benefit;) thus those that told Eli of his
sons wickedness, were no back-biters: nor Joseph who told his father of his
Brethrens ill-doings. Genesis 37. nor those that told Paul of the contentions and
fornications of the Corinthians. (1.1.5.) because they did it not cum animo
nocendi, maliciously, but out of love, and for their good. But slandering
properly is a malicious, bitter, reproachful spreading of false tales. It Is a
going up and down with an intent to do them a mishchief. Thus Doeg accused
David, and Abimilech to Saul. 1 Samuel 22. and Haman slandered the Jews to the
King, and the Pharisees often traduced Christ and his Apostles. So then, a slander
is the Devils arrow, shot by man's bow, he lends him his lies and malice, and
borrows the slanderers Tongue to utter them. And is not this the great sin of
our Age? Do not many cast off their Trades, and make it their Trade, like
Pedlars, to go up and down with the Devils pack? at one Town they open their
pack, and there they vent Atheism, they come to another, and there they vent
Papisme, they go to a third, and there they cry Rantisme, they go so a fourth,
and there they vent blasphemy against God, and railing against Magistrates and
Ministers Gratis, they expect nothing for their (idle, addle) speaking, I see
no reason why they should, unless they vented better stuff. These Rake-hells
are the Devils Factours, Merchants. Levit. 19.26. Thou shall not go up and
down as a Talebearer; the word is Rachell, (whence our English word Rake-hell)
which properly signifies a Trafficker, that goes up and down with his wares,
so these go from place to place with false Accusations.

2. As those often blend and mix their wares, so these often coin false Tales
against their Neighbors.

3. As those buy at one place, and sell at another, so these Pedling-Devills
make merchandise of their words, hearing a false Tale at one house, and selling
it at another. The back-biter is ( mus nominis says Plautus) a mouse that is
always gnawing on the good name of his neighbor, Infeli^issimum c^n^^lationis
genus, de miseriis pecca^^^um cape^^ solatium. Sa^vian.
Sometimes she whispers in secret, and anon he openly defames, yet subtly
covering all with a deep sigh, professing his great sorrow for such a ones
fall, when they should delight in the virtues of others, they feed upon their
vices.

Let such consider, 1. That this sin is hateful in respect of its Original,
it comes more especially from the Devil, and brings men to him. He at first
slandered God to man, man to man, and a man to himself. Other sins make men
like to beasts, but this makes men like the Devil himself: Hence Gerson calls
them Caniuos dentes Diaboli. The Devils dog-teeth, and the Holy Ghost rangeth
them amongst the wicked. Psalm. 50.20. Romans 1.30. By such persons and practices,
the Devil upholds his kingdom. Lying and slandering, are the pillars of Popery.

2. Such breed great strise in Cities, Families, Kingdoms. Prove. 16.28. and
26.20. especially if it be a son, servant, or bosom friend, and be done
maliciously to get an estate, as Ziba when he accused Mephibosheth to David. 2 Samuel 16. and Tertullus accused Paul for Self Ends. Acts 24.25.

3. They are the worst kind of Thieves, they rob a man of his good name,
which is a choice Treasure. Prove. 22.1. Eccles. 7.3. Thieves may be shunned or
outrun, but who can avoid a slanderous Tongue. Long damnosior est fur
nominis, quam numinorum; quia calumnia leviter volut, sed graviter vulnerat;
leviter volat, sed non tam leviter violatur. Beza.

Calumniare audacter, aliquid saltem adhaerebit.


A Thief may make satisfaction for what he stole, but this sin scarce admits
of any sound restitution. Though the fame be false, yet it leaves a scarre
behind it. Hence Machiavel taught his Scholars to lie lustily, some dirt would
stick however.

4. It Is a kind of murder, it is called the poison of aspes. Romans 3.13. and the
aspe spits poison a great way off. It Is death for one to poison his neighbor;
slandering, is poysening him. Their poisonous mouths breathe forth nothing but
curses, A convitiis ad caedam transitus valde est brevis.
lies, reproaches; upon which murders often follow. Romans 3.13.15.16. Ezekiel.
22.9. 2 Samuel 10.3.18. Hamans Princes misinterpreting, and traducing David's
kindness, brought the sword upon them, and cost many lives. The slanderer kills
three at once, viz. The Speaker, the Receiver, and him that is spoken against.
Hence his Tongue is compared to destructive things, as a sword, a razor and
coals of Juniper (which they say, will keep fire a year about ( Psalm. 55.21.
and 120.3. and Solomon compares the mischief of an evil Tongue, to a hammer
(or maule) a sword and an arrow. Prove. 25.18. a slanderous Tongue is no small
evil, V. Clerks Mirror. cap. 124.
it is a hammer to knock out his neighbors brains, a sword to kill him, and a
sharp arrow to wound him. A malicious slanderous Tongue, is a most pernicious
evil. Prove. 12.18. and 18.8.

5. It Is a sin which Gods soul does more especially abhor. It Is not only
abominable, but an abomination it self (in the abstract) to him. Prove. 6.16.19.
especially when it is raised against his servants; to traduce any man is ill,
but God takes it very ill, when we belie and slander his holy harmless ones.
Numb. 12.8. Were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? We should be
afraid to defame any, but especially Gods meek Moses's, those are his jewels,
and he will not let them and their names lie always in the dirt; David cuts
off such from the earth, Psalm. 10.1.5. and God shuts them out of Heaven. Psalm.
15.1.4. [See more in those that handle the ninth Commandment.]

Helps against this sin.
1. Interpret doubtful things in the best sense, In dubiis semper benigniora
sunt praeferenda.
and put the fairest construction on them. Where we want certainty, judge
charitably. Better offend in being too charitable, then in being too rigid. 1
Cor. 13.5.7. Charity thinks no evil, but hops all things, and believes all
things, that can be hoped and borne with a good conscience; it believes all
things, so far as may stand with Reason and Religion. So Jacob, when he saw the
bloody coat, did not suspect his sons, but said, some beast has devoured him.
Genesis 37.31.33. Gedaliah was but over-credulous, and too charitable in this
kind. Ier. 40.14, etc. He would not entertain a suspicious thought against
Ishmael, though it cost him his life. It Is a Rule in Heraldry, and it holds
good in Divinity, that in blazoning Arms and Ensigns, the Animals must be
interpreted in the best sense, according to their noble and generous qualities.
E. g. If a Lion or a Fox be the charge, we must conceive his quality
represented to be wit and courage, not rapine and pilfring: So and much more in
blazoning my Brothers name, I must find out what is best, and mention that; if
I meet with a sin of iufirm^ty, and humane frailty, I must conceal it; it is the
glory of a man to pass it by. Prove. 19.11. Christ excuses the heaviness of the
disciples, The spirit (says he) is willing, but the flesh is weak; if it be a
great sin, and not public, we may not divulge it, but admonish the party, and
show him his sin, that he may be brought to Repentanc^. And if there may be
twenty Interpretation made of a thing, if nineteen be naught, and but one good,
love will take that which is good, and leave the nineteen bad; when we hear the
innocence of our neighbor called in question, we should open our mouths for
the dumb, and plead their cause, else by our silence we shall become accessory
to their slanders. When David was accused and slandered, by Court-Parasites, to
Saul, then Jonathan pleads his cause; Why should he dye, what evil has he
done? 1 Samuel 20.32. when N^codemus saw the rashness of the Jews in condemning
Christ unheard, he tells them 'twas against their Law so to do.

2. Shun envy, Suffecetur matter, and non erit filia.
which is the Root of slandering and strife. Hence they are joined together in
Scripture. Romans 1.29, 30. and 13.13. God would have us act nothing from such a
Principle. Philip, 2.3. let nothing be done through strife or envy, but let
all wrath, and bitterness, and discontent at the Piety, Parts, and Honor of
others, be laid aside, Ephesians. 4.15. Two sins helped to crucify Christ,
Covetousness sold him, and Envy delivered him. They are still two great
enemies to the Church of Christ. Covetousness sells Religion, and envy
prosecutes it.

3. Shun idleness, which makes people slanderers and busy-bodies. 1 These. 4.11.
Titus 2.3. 1 Pet. 4.15. Peter must look to himself, and not meddle with John's
business. John 21.21. be ever employed either in the general or particular
calling; for when men want work, the Devil cuts them out such work as this;
most of the abuses of the Tongue spring from Idleness. Idle persons are usually
Tatlers, and busybodies, speaking things they ought not. 1 Timothy 5.13.

4. Be not hasty in passing sentence on others actions, hut weigh all
circumstances (for they do much vary a Case) and this makes it so hard to judge
of man's actions, Qui ad pauca respicit, de facili pronunciat. Aristot.

It Is good to let a report be ayred awhile, lest we take the disease of it, and
to hear it twice, before we speak it once. Herle.


because we know not the person, his Ends, Aims, Tentations, etc. 'Twas the
Barbarians rashness ( Acts 28.4.) as soon as the Viper appeared on Paul's hand,
to conclude him presently, without any ^onsideration, a murderer. Be not hasty
to believe Reports, but stay a little till Mephibosheth can speak for himself.
2 Samuel 16, 2. and 19.17. Do as Alexander was wont to do, when he heard one
accuse his Neighbor; he would stop one ear, to hear what the other partly
could say for himself. Judge not according to the outward appearance of
things. John 7.24. Judge not [(...), secundum faciem] by the face or outward
aprearance; many a good man's actions have a face set upon them altogether
unlike both the man and his actings. There is no judging of men or matters, by
bare Reports, and what is said of them. Should we judge concludingly, of men by
some men's Reports of them, how base and contemptible would many gracious men
appear, and how glorious would many appear, who are truly contemptible? and
therefore believe not bare report, it is the greatest liar in the world. Report
nothing upon bare report, else you may soon condemn the generation of the
Righteous. Christ was reported to be mad, Si satis est accusasse^ quis innocens
erit? Seneca.
and to have a Devil; and the Apostles were counted deceivers, though they
were true. If a bare accusation were sufficient to condemn a man, who should be
Innocent?

5. Observe what goodness thou can see in thy Brother, and mention that;
most men observe the sins of others, but Christ in his observation of the
Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. observes their Virtues as well as their Vices; and
commends them for the one, before he reproves them for the other. So the Lord
commends Job for his Patience, James 5.11. and Sarah for her faith and
obedience. 1 Pet. 3.6. passing by the impatient speeches of the one, and the
doubting of the other. and it is worth observing how David fills his mouth, even
with Saul's virtues (though he were his deadly enemy, and Gods too) yet when
dead, he makes a funeral Oration in his praise. 2 Samuel 1.19. etc, Many like
flies, pass over the sound parts, and if there be any galled part, they light
on that. Like Beetles they fly over the sweet flowers, Scarabaeum aiunt fimo
sepultum vivere, oppubalsamo immersum emori.

It Is for scavengers to rake in sinks and gutters, and as we use to stop our
noses, when we come near such places, so should we do too by our cares to such
reports. He^le Policy. l. 2. c. 11.


but if they can find any dung, they love to creep into that. There is none so
vile, but some good or another may be found in him; if with the Chemist, we
would set the fire of our charity on work; for as there is some rubbish in the
best men, so there is some Oar, something of God in the worst.

Aliena vitia in oculis habemus, a tergo nostra. Seneca.

Vt quisque est vir optimus, it a difficillime esse alios improbos suspicatur.
Cicero.

He that is good himself, hopes well of others.


6. Be much in the examination and censuring of your selves, for there are none
so ready to censure others, as those that never judge and censure themselves.
Had they spiritual eyes to see into themselves, they would find so much work at
home, that they would never busy themselves with other men's faults. Now since
all that will live godly, must expect slanders, and false accusations from the
world, take these few Directions to comfort you against them.

1. Get true Grace, that will meeken and humble you, and make you quietly to
bear the vilest reproaches, as Moses did, and Job (31.35, 39.) his advesaries
book of accusation, he accounted a commendation, and therefore resolves to wear
it as a Crown in token of triumph. Ille nobilis and magnus est qui, more magnae
ferae, latratus minutorum canum securus exaudit. Seneca,

Conscia men's recti vulgi mendacia ridet. Ovid.

Dyke on Conscience. cap. 10. p. 149.

Senti de Augustino quicquid libet, sola conscientia me coram Deo non accuset.
Aug.


Christ who was full of Grace, was also full of Patience. 1 Pet. 2.23. Nature
is high and haughty, it quarrels with such as oppose it; but Grace does not
only purify, but it also pacifies the soul. It Is a Dove-like spirit, and quiets
the soul under all indignities; hence the fruits of the Spirit are said to be
Love, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness. Gal. 5.22. This made the Apostles
rejoice, that they were counted worthy of that honor, to be dishonored for
the name of Jesus. Acts 5.41. Paul glories in reproaches for Christ, 2 Cor.
11.30. It Is a dignity above all earthly dignities, it is a greater honor to
bear reproach for Christ, then to be a Monarch in the world. Heb. 11.26. Ierom
comforts Austin, and tells him 'twas a great honor, that all the Heretics
hated him. All the lies and reproaches of such, Et quod majoris est gloriae
omnes Haeretici te detestantur. Hieron.

Hec sola mali deputant mala, quae non faciunt malos. Aug.


are as so many badges of honor to us, and we may put every reproach that we
undergo, (not for sin, but because we will not sin, not for Unrighteousness
sake, 1 Pet. 4.14.) as Pearls in our Crown of patience. The blind world
esteems them evils, but there is no hurt in them, if we be good. Let us keep
Gods way, and then he will keep our names for us. Let us do our duty, and let
God alone with all we have; he will defend us from the scourge of the Tongue, and
maintain our reputation against all opposition. He Will clear our innocence as the
light, and if we can but make it good, that we are the servants of the Lord,
then every Tongue that rises against us, we shall condemn. Isay 54.17. Mendax
infamia terret. Quum? nisi mendosum and mendacem. Hor. Epist, 16. l. 1.

Injuria ad Sapientem non pervenit. Sen.

Come what can come to a good man, vel non continget, vel non conterret, either
it shall not hit him, or it shall not hurt him.


We should therefore walk so uprightly, open^y, inoffensively, that even our
enemies in their own consciences may clear us. E. G. do men accuse us of
Pride, Covetousness, Incontinency? we should walk so Humbly, Liberally,
Chastely, that all that know us may plead our cause. We should get convincing
lives, that none may credit our back-biters, that their slanders may be like
water poured on oyled paper, Mores ita componam ut conviciatoribus fides nulla
habeatur. Plato.
which runs off as fast as it is cast on. Dan. 6.10, Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc.
had a thousand lies raised against them, but being upright, holy, men, the lies
and reproaches of their enemies returned to the reproachers shame. 1 Pet. 2.12.
Ier. 20.10, 11.

Object. They raise such untruths against me, that flesh and blood cannot bear
them.

Answ. Gods people can and must bear that which natural men who are mere flesh
and blood cannot do. Matthew. 5.47.

2. Since they lay false things to thy charge, as they did to David's, Psalm.
35.11. that is thy comfort. So they dealt with Christ and his Apostles.

Object. They reproach me for natural defects and infirmities.

Answ. Then they reproach thy Maker, and not thee.

2. There Is no real dishonor in natural infirmities, it is sin only which
dishonours us.

3. It Is a sign they want matter, when they reproach thee for Sickness,
Poverty, and other Infirmities.

Object. They are good men who should comfort me, that do thus revile me.

Answ. That indeed adds somewhat to the affliction, Ad honesta vadenti,
contemnendus est ipse contemptus. Seneca ep. 77. See Mr. Clerks Mirror cap.
10. Edit. 3.

God will punish such as slander his. cap. 49.


yet it is no new thing, we must look to be counted as Monsters, not only in
Babel, but in Israel. Isay 8.18. Jobs friends were good men, yet they censure
him for an Hypocrite. You must therefore learn to contemn the contemners of
you, and of Gods Image in you. For if you cannot eudure the Tongue of Ishmael,
you will never endure the sword of Esau. If you cannot bear reproaches for
Christ, you will never die for him.

2. Consider thou art not alone, it has been the common lot of all Gods
servants in all ages to be slandered. Matthew. 5.11, 12. Elijah that was the
strength and stay of Israel, yet is called the troubler of it. Jeremy is called
a Traitor, and a common Barretor. V. Aug. Civit, Dei. l. 2. c. 3.
Ier. 38.4. and Paul a pestilent fellow. Acts 24, 5. and the Primitive
Christians were accounted the cause of all the miseries of the times.

3. Consider the good Ends which God has in permitting them.

1. He can use them to the discovery of sin; those sins which Self-love will
not let thee see, an enemy shall discover them to thee. It Is good for every man
to have a deadly foe, or a faithful friend. When Iasons enemy thought to have
killed him, by running him through, he cured him of an impostume. Mihi maxim
prosunt, qui mei pessime meminerunt; Lutherus pascitur convitiis. Luth.
God can make medicines of these poisons, and make this dung to enrich us.

2. To cure us of sin. S. Austins Mother was cured of her drunkenness by her
maids calling her, Meribibulam, a Wine-bibber, she took notice of the foulness
of the sin, Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 8.
and left it.

3. It drives us to prayer, Psalm. 10.4. mine enemies reproach me, but I Prayer,
( i. e,) I give my self up to that duty, I am even compounded, and made up of
Prayer. When we are defamed, there is a time to pray. 1 Chronicles. 4.12.

4. They make us more watchful over our ways. Psalm, 27.11. Help me because of
mine enemies, who watch for my halting, says David.

4. Remember the day of Judgment is at hand, and then thy innocence shall be
published to all the world; Then will be a Resurrection of Names, as well as of
Bodies. Then the wicked that now revile thee, shall tremble at the sight of
thee. Let us then wait patiently, till the Lord arise and plead our cause. Let
our moderation be known to all, for the Lord is at hand, the Judge stands
before the doors, ready to take vengeance on our enemies. Philip. 4.5. Iam.
7.7, 8. Though for the present, you and your walking may lie under reproaches,
yet there is a day of revelation coming, [ Romans 2.5.] when thy integrity and
secret obedience, See D. Preston, Judas Repent. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
shall have open recompense; and the unrighteousnesses and secret contrivances
of the wicked, shall be discovered, to their eternal shame. Then all the
hidden works of darkness shall be brought to light. Now Heretics, Witches,
and Devils incarnate have their day, and the world pleads for them as her own.
But there is another day coming, when all things shall be reviewed, and scanned
over impartially. Then, and never till then, shall we fully and clearly discern
between the righteous, and the wicked, between him that fears the Lord, and him
that fears him not. Mal. 3.18. The remembrance of this day made Paul to slight
the censures of men. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.

[See more cordialls against Reproachful slander. Doctor Hall's Balm of
Gilead. p. 142. etc. Mr. Trapp on Mal 3.17. p. 881.

Mr. Ienkins on Jude 6.


Byfeilds Marrow. p. 319. etc. Burroughes Moses Choice. p. 343.375.412. etc.
Robinson's Essays, Observe. 41. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. c. 46. p.
393. Mr. Young's Cure of Prejudice. p. 24. An excellent piece.

12. Incontinent. (...), Incontinentes, intemperantes, luxuriosi.
Ista vocabula promiscue usurpantur, ita ut incontinens accipiatur pro
intemperante, and vice versa, incontinente. Magirus in Arist. Ethnic. l. 7. c.
1.
This word in the Original is Homonimous, and admits of diverse acceptations;
and therefore some Translations render it Riotous, (so Tindall:) others,
Intemperate (so the Geneva Translation, and Beza:) others, Incontinent (so our
Translation, and the Vulgar Latin.) In this variety, there is no contrariety,
the Reading is Canonical either way. The word is used two ways in Scripture.
Sunt (...), soluti in omnem volupta(...) intemperantiam. Ar^t.


1. Largely; for any kind of Intemperance and excess, Matthew. 23.25. Ye are full
of rapine and excess. [(...), Intemperantiae and luxus.] And so it is opposed
to Temperance [ Acts 24.25. Gal. 5.23. 2 Pet. 1.16. 1 Cor. 9.25. Titus 1.8.]
which consists in moderating of the appetite, so that a man is not a slave to
his fleshly, sensual appetite; but can master himself, and give Laws to his
Lusts, Contrary to these are all intemperate men, (...), intemperans,
incontinens, impotens, q. (...), carens viribus, vel ab (...) priv. and (...),
impero, dominor, (i. e.) qui dominari cupiditatibus and affectibus suis nequit.

Sunt aut Intemperantes ^ibo, potu, vestitu, aut incontinentes qui sibi
^em^erare nequ^ant, and vagas affectantur libidines, ut adulteri and
incestuosi. Willickius in locum.


who have no power or command over themselves* but are led like slaves by every
lust. So that this achrasy and intemperance in the Text, being opposed to
euchrasy and Temperance (which Aristotle makes a comprehensive virtue, whereby a
man fights against all tentations and allurements to vice) must (by the Rule of
contraries) be a comprehensive vice, inclining men to Drunkenness, Gluttony,
Riot, Uncleanness, and all manner of excess. 2. The word is taken sometimes
strictly and restrainedly, for Incontinent, lustful persons, Concupiscentiae
subditi. Syriac.
that have no command over their concupiscentiall affections, but like bruit
beasts they run into all uncleanness. The word is sometimes opposed to
Continency, or Chastity, which is that part of Temperance, which moderates our
fleshly lust, and wars against uncleanness, and lasciviousness. So 1 Cor, 7, 5.
Now since the word is general, and comprehends all kind of Intemperance, Per
incontinentes hic intelligit eos qui cupiditates pessimas (i. e.) libidinem in
cib^s, and in Venerem, non refraenant. Aug.

V. Ravanel in V. Intemperantia.


both in eating, drinking, and concupiscential lusts, I shall take the word in
the largest sense, and shall not restrain, where the Scripture does not
restrain. The character is ours in the largest sense.
1. In the last days men shall be intemperate in Eating. Ordinary food will not
content them, they must have the Lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of
the stall, to maintain their lusts. They Will eat for pleasure, and not for need;
to pamper themselves, and not to preserve nature: they will study how they may
please the flesh, and make provision for it, that they may fulfill the lusts
thereof. Romans 13. ult. Elijah was so temperate, that an Angel was sent to bid
him arise and eat. 1 Kings 19.9.7. but in our days men are so Intemperate, that
we had need of Angels to bid us hold and abstain from our excessive eating and
drinking. How many unfit themselves hereby, for the duties of their callings;
when a man experimentally knows that such a Quantity of food will fit him for
his calling, and yet he will exceed, that is sinful. Many look upon drunkenness
as a great sin, but as for Gluttony, they make no bones of that, whereas a man
may as well offend, and make a beast of himself by excessive eating, as by
excessive drinking; hence the Scripture condemns riotous Gormandizing, as well
as swinish drunkenness. Romans 13.13. Gal. 5.21. the Rich Glutton went to Hell,
not for any drunkenness that we read of, but for Gluttony. Luke 16.19. It Is
true; there is difference in Callings, Constitutions, Regions, and Climats, so
that some may eat more then others, but under these pretenses, for men to give
way to excess and riot, will not hold.

Quest. May we not use the Creature more freely sometimes, and may we not feast
as occasion requires?

Answ. Yes, the Lord gives us liberty to eat and drink not only for necessity,
but also for delight. Thus Joseph's Brethren used the creature beyond mere
necessity, Licet (...) convivia damnentur, tamen moderata quae animi
exhilerandi gratia fieri solent, approbantur.
[ Genesis 43. ult.] for delight, not for excess. God has not only given us water
to quench our thirst, but wine to delight and revive us. Psalm. 104.15. Prove.
31.6. So that feasting in it self is a thing indifferent, and may lawfully be
used as occasion requires: when Isaak was weaned, Abraham made a feast. Genesis
21.8. Iethro made a feast for Aaron, and the Elders of Israel* Exodus 18.12.
Hester feasted the King, and Haman. Hest. 5.5. Christ himself was at a feast
more then once. Luke 5.29. John 2.1.20. and the Christians had their
Love Feasts. 1 Cor. 10.27. Jude 12. yet these Rules must be observed in our
Feasting.

1. It must be done seasonably, 2. Soberly, 3. Discreetly, 4. Religiously,
1. Our Feasting must be at seasonable times; every thing is beautiful in its
season, Eccles. 3.11. and a duty not rightly circumstantiated, is marred.

1. It Is unseasonable to feast and fare deliciously every day. Luke 16.19. yea,
though we be rich, and can afford it, yet we may not do it, we have callings to
follow, and we come not into the world to feast and loyter, but to labor.

2. We may not spend too much time of one day in Feasting, Peccant homines in
exc^ssu, vel ratione Temp^^^^, Qualitatis, Quantitatis, Substantiae. Lescius te
Just. and jure. l. 4. c. 3. Dub. 3.
To sit at dinner till night, and at supper till midnight, is unseasonable, and
an abuse of time; God ordained the night for rest, and not to riot. The loss of
time is far worse then the loss of money; that cannot be regained, this may. To
be prodigal of time is the worst prodigality, and most dangerous. Luther
lamented the spending of so much precious time, (as too many do) in Feasting.

3. To feast at such a time when the Lord calls by his judgments to Fasting,
is exceeding unsuitable, and unseasonable. Isay 22.12, 13, 14. Amos 6.1. to 7.

4. So to Feast on the Lords day, is unseasonable. He has given us six days
for our own use, he has reserved but the seventh for himself, how then can we
do so great wickedness, and sin against so good a God! This is a day for
spiritual, and not for carnal feasting.

Multos morbos multa fecerunt fe^cula. Seneca Epist. 95.

-- Vides ut pallidus omnis, coena desurgat, dubia. Horat.


2. Soberly; beware of superfluity and riot, Christians should be famous for
good works, and not for revelling and costly banquets. The art of Cookery has
killed many, Variety of dainty dishes, breeds Variety of diseases. Whence come
so many Dropsies, Gouts, Rheumes, but from excess?

3. Discreetly; making choice of our company, not calling rich Atheists, nor
profane scoffers at Piety. Psalm. 35.16. Christ would have us call the poor
rather. Luke 14.13, 14. not that Christ does simply condemn the calling of our
friends, or rich neighbors, but he would have the poor especially remembered.
q. d. Call not the rich alone, but let the poor have a portion at, or from thy
Table. Portions should be sent to those for whom nothing is provided, ( i. e.)
who have nothing prepared for themselves. Neh. 8.10. Hest. 9.22. Deuteronomy.
16.11.14. One rich man uses to feast another, when in the mean time good
David is forgotten. 1 Samuel 25.10, 11.

4. Religiously; in the fear of God, no drinking of Healths, no taunting at
Religion, no mocking at such as are in misery. Lam. 3.63. lest we be like to
those that feast without fear, either of God or man. Jude 12. all our feasting
must be as before the Lord, and in his eye. Exodus 18.12. Deuteronomy. 12.7. 1 Chronicles.
29.22. The want of this holy fear is the cause why either in the time of
feasting, or presently after, Bellis homunculis ut suaviter inter se sint, non
opus est calice, non tibicina. Plutarch. Sympos.

V. Plura in Sharpii Symphon. Loc. 45. Q. 9. p. 226. and Sphynx Phylos. cap. 30,


some cross or other befalls men, as we see in Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. at a
feast Absolon caused Amnon to be slain. 2 Samuel 13.28. and the breach was made
between Ahasuerus and his wife at a feast. Hest. 1.10. Job was afraid lest his
sons had offended in their feasting. Job 1.45. and the Lord complains of the
Jews for their profane feasting. Isay 5.12. The Harp and the Pipe was in their
feasts, but they regarded not the work of the Lord. See the fruits of profane
music, it drives out the thoughts of God, and his works. So Amos 6.5, 6. See
their punishment. v. 7. Music should be sent for (said the Heathen) when men
are angry, rather then when they are feasting and merry. Not but that music in
it self is good, especially when we make that use of it, which the Prophet did,
when he called for a Minstrill to raise up his heavy heart, and make him
cheerful, and the fitter to prophesy. 2 King. 3.15. The end of all our
Feasting, must be the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. it must not be to pamper the
flesh, or to get the praise of men, as many do that by riotous feasting, waste
and weaken their estates, that they may get a name for good housekeepers. To
what end is such waste. The end which God would have us to aim at in our
Feasting, is his praise, and not our own. Exodus 34.23. Levit. 23.34. Deuteronomy.
16.25. Oh then let us shun all Intemperance and abuse of the creature; An
Epicure is fit for nothing, but the service of the devil. There was never any
man that made his Guts his God, that ever became famous in Church or State. --
Corpus onustum Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat. Horat.
It Is a sin that besots men, it does emasculate and weaken the powers of the
soul. Hence our Savior warnes his disciples to take heed of being overcharged
with surfeiting. Luke 21.34. Peter calls such bruit beasts, Spots and blots,
which blemish and disgrace religion. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13. A Scavenger, whose living
is to empty, is to be preferred before him that lives but to fill Privies. If
a man strive but for a corruptible Crown, we see he is temperate not only in
some things, but in all things; in eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. 1 Cor.
9.25. and shall not we that strive for an incorruptible Crown, keep under our
bodies, and be temperate in all things, that we may be always fit for our
Masters service. This sobriety of the body, tends much to the furtherance of
Grace in the soul, Qui virtutem colunt, ii non admittunt gulae delicias, aliena
enim ea esse a liberis, quibus servilia ingenia alliciuntur. Plutarch.

See Mr. Gatakers Ser. on Watching, in Folio. p. 85. Sect. 36, 37.


therefore the Apostle joins it with Godliness. Titus 2.11, 12. we should
therefore eat and drink with perpetual moderation, always taking less, but
never more then nature desires, for that measure of meat and drink, which
serves to refresh nature, and make us fitter for the service of God and man, is
allowed us of God, and no more. To arm you against Intemperance.

1. Consider, Plenus Venture non studet libenter; Vesci citra satietatem,
impigrum esse ad laborem; vitare venerem, res esse saluberrimas, dicunt medici.
it hurts the body, makes it dull, diseased, drowsy, and unfit for service,
Temperance preserves health. Tenuis mensa sanitatis matter.

2. It wastes the Estate, and brings men to Poverry. Prove. 21.17. and 23.21.

3. It unfits the soul for Prayer, Hearing, Meditation, or any spiritual
service, it besots it, and makes it stupid, secure, senseless. It brings
destruction. Phil. 3.19. it cast our first Parents out of Paradise, V. Theater
of Gods Judgments. P. 2. chapter 7. p. 96.
Genesis 3.6. brought the flood upon the old world, Matthew. 24.38. fire on Sdom.
Ezekiel 16, 49, 50. and the sword on Israel. Amos 6.4.7. and bars men out of
heaven. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

4. It Is a great incentive unto Lust. Whoring and Riot often go together, Romans
13.13. when men make provision for the flesh, and cater for cates and
delicates, they will soon fulfill the lusts thereof. V. 14. We read of some that
lived in wantonness, and what was the reason? why they nourished their hearts,
as in the day of slaughter, or sacrifices, when they fared deliciously. James
5.5. Gluttony is the very Mother, and Nurse of Lust.

[See more, Trapps Commonplace, Abstinence, in the end of the Epistles. Amos
etc. l. 3. c. 15, Downams Guide to Godliness. l. 3. c. 24. Greenhill on
Ezekiel 16.49. D. Hammonds Practical Catechism. l. 3. Sect. 3. Boltons
Directions for walking, p. 195. Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 1.61. Edit. 3.]

2. As for Intemperance in Drinking; it never abounded more. It has debased
our Nobility, stained our Gentry, beggered the Yeomandry, polluted the Nation,
and made the earth to groan under us, so that it would as fain be delivered of
us, as a woman with child would of her birth: what place, what city, what Town
or Village, what Market or meeting, what feasts or faires that are not defiled
with Drunkenness? we may take up the Prophets complaint. Isay 28.8. all places
are full of vomiting and filthiness (vomiting is one of the beastly fruits of
Drunkenness) so that there is no place clear. We have Drunkards of all sorts
and Sexes, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Old and Young, Men and Women, Gentlemen
and Beggars.

1. The universality of a sin is a sad and sure forerunner of judgment. When
sin grows National, it brings National judgments: as we see in Germany,
Germanorum vivere, est bibere. Prove.
the floods of Drunkenness and Excess, have brought upon them floods of
calamity and War. So that as the Lord said sometime to his people. Ier. 7.12.
Go to my place at Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I have
done to it for the wickedness of my people. So may he say to England, Go to my
place in Germany, and see what I have done to them for their Drunkenness and
riot, and let their falls make you to fear. When All the Old Word was given up
to excess, V. Shchooles Guard. Rule 56.
eating and drinking like beasts, then came the flood. Matthew. 24.38. when All
Sodom was given to uncleanness, then came fire and consumed them. When the
people of Israel assemble themselves by Troops to harlots houses, then God
visits them with his judgments. Ierem. 7.5.

Plus exemplo nocent quam peccato.

Probrosum est si rex cujus est regnum regere, sit ebriosus and regatur a Vino,
tum quia regum est omnia cum ratione, judicio, and consilio facere.


1. When great men are given to sin, that hastens wrath. They draw many away by
their lewd Example; like great Cedars, when they fall, many branches fall with
them. Hence the Lord forbids excess of wine to Rulers, lest they should forget
the Law, and so pervert judgment. Prove. 31.45. The houses of many Gentlemen
that should have been Bethels, houses of God, are become Beth-avens, houses of
vanity and iniquity. The old Proverb was, As drunk as a beggar. I wish we might
not say, as Drunk as a Gentleman, an Esquire, and Lord, etc.

2. Are there not some Ministers (who by their places are bound to witness
against this sin, both in life and doctrine) that say as those, Isay 56. ult.
Come let us fill our selves with strong drink. This made so many erroneous
Ministers, (especially in episcopal times) Isay 28.7. The Priest and the
Prophet have erred through wine. V. D. Wallis, Men's sobria Concio. ad Baccalam.
This clouds the understanding, darkens the mind, robs men of Reason, and turns
them into beasts. Hence the Lord forbad the Priest and Levite the use of wine
and strong drink (upon pain of death) when they were to come into the
congregation, to execute their office. Levit. 10.9. why so? V. 10, 11* that
they may put a difference between the Holy and Profane, and may be fit to
publish all Gods Statutes to his people. Hence the Apostle would not have
Ministers to be wine-bibbers, 1 Timothy 3.3.3, 4, 5. Titus 1.7. Drunken Ministers
(be they never so learned) are but unsavory salt, Ebrietas est crimen in Laico,
in sacerdote sacrilegium. Ravennas.

Aristot. Ethic. l. 3. c. 5.

Ebrietas in Plebeio est simplex peccatum, in Sacerdote multiplex, q. multos
offendit, and secum in eandem foveam and ruinam trahit. a Lapide.


fitter for the Dunghill, then the Temple; and if other Drunkards deserve
double punishment (in Aristotle's judgment) first for their Drunkenness, and
then for the sin committed in their Drunkenness; what then do drunken Levites
deserve? But blessed be God we have lived to see that day, wherein such Sots
are cast out of the service of the Sanctuary.

3. We have Drunkards of all Ages, old, and young; many get such Habits of this
sin, (when young) that they cannot break them when they are old. We have
Drunkards of all Trades; Drunken Shooe-makers, Smiths, Naylers, etc. Drunkards
of all Sexes; not only Drunken Hosts, but Hostesses, even women-Drunkards:
Ebria muliere n^hil turpius. ^hrysost.
this sin is base and beastly in any, but abominable in a woman: such danger
their chastity. It Is Modesty, and Civility, Chastity and Temperance, that
commend a woman. Whom Bacchus baths and washes, Venus lightly warms and dries.
A drunken man I doubt is not honest, but a drunken woman without doubt is
naught. We read but of one drunken woman in all the Scripture, and she is
called a whore, a great whore, the mother of harlots. Rev. 1.1, 2.5, 6.

2. Another Aggravation of the Drunkenness of our Time is, that it is committed
against the greatest Light that ever was in the land. Drunkenness is a work of
darkness, and if men will needs act it, the night is the fittest time for such
black work. So 'twas in the Apostles time. 1 These. 5.7. Those that were drunk,
were drunk in the night. So Acts 2.15. The modest miscreants of those times,
choosing the darkness and secrecy of the night, to cover their filth, will rise
in judgment against those impudent, Noonday Drunken-Devills of our times, who
blush not to act their villainy in the sight of the Sun, and alter the course of
nature, turning day into night, and night into day. And if to act it in the
light of the Sun, be an aggravation, oh what is it to act it against the light
of the Gospel? and that now in an Afflicting time, when the Rod lies upon the
Nation for this sin, among the rest. To sin out of ignorance, infirmity and
inadvertency, may excuse a tanto, sed non a toto: it may extenuate, but it
cannot totally excuse. But he that sinned presumptuously ( i. e.) wittingly and
wilfully, purposely and proudly, desperately and despitefully, out of contempt
of Gods Law, was to be cut off by death. (so much the phrase imports) not only
a cutting off by excommunication) but a cutting off by the sword of the
Magistrate. Exodus 31.14. Levit. 17.4. and 20.2, 3, 4, 5. because he did thereby
reproach the Lord, and did as 'twere say, that God was not to be regarded, nor
his judgments worthy of fear. Exodus 21.14. Numb. 15.30.32. and because
Magistrates many times are partial and negligent in cutting off such
presumptuous sinners, therefore the Lord himself threatens and undertakes the
doing of it. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. an obstinate glutton, a Drunkard, must die for it.

Quest. But how shall we know a Drunkard?

Answ. By his Affections, Words, and Actions.


1. By his Affections; when men's love and desire is set on strong drink, so
that they rise early to follow it. It may be thou have no money, and so can
not be drunk. Voluntas est homo, nihil aliud sumus nisi Voluntates. Aug.
I, but if thy heart be set upon the sin, thou art a Drunkard: for God judges
of us by our Affections, and not by our Actions; that we are which we resolve
and desire to be, whether it be good, or evil. Then a man lives in a sin
when he loves it, though he do not, or cannot act it.

2. By a man's talk; out of the abundance of the heart does the mouth speak.
When men boast how many dozens they have drunk, and how many men they have laid
asleep; Taciturna affectio, non est affectio.
when men shall inquire for the strongest liquor, and encourage each other to
the drinking of it. Isay 56. ult. that is one sign of a Drunkard. Men will be
discoursing of what they love, be it good, or evil.

3. By a man's Actions.

1. When men stagger and reel by reason of strong drink, so that the same legs
which brought him into the house, cannot carry him out again; thus both the Law
of God and man, have made a sign of a Drunkard. Psalm. 107.17. They reel to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man.

2. By their Vomiting, by the redness of their eyes, stinking breath, deformed
countenance, ghastly looks, fighting and quarrelling, swearing and swaggering.
Isay 19.14. Prove. 23.29, 30.

Noscitur ex comite, qui non cognoscitur ex se.
3. By your companions; if you delight in drunken company, it argues an
inclination to the sin. Like will to like, and birds of a feather will flock
together. As sheep love sheep, and Saints will delight in Saints. Psalm. 16.3.
So swine will delight in swine, and sinners in sinners.

4. When men delight to make others drunk (as a woe is denounced against such,
Hab. 2.15, 16.) and to this end put ingredients into their drink, and by pickle
and salt meats, draw men on to this sin; this is to add drunkenness to
thirst, and so become liable to the curse in the very Letter. Deuteron. 29.19,
20.

5. When men call for Healths. A Health to their Master, and a Health to their
Mistress, a Health to this man, and to that, and at last a Health to the Devil
himself, as V. Whites way to the true Church. Digres. 54. Sect. 9.
Pope John the thirteenth did, whose Vicar doubtless he was. This is a
Shiboleth to distinguish between a drunkard, and a sober man. The drunkard
drinks Healths so long to others, that at last he leaves none for himself. Such
Healthing, has brought many men out of Health.

Vna salus sanis non est potare salutem,
Non est in pota vera salute salus.
2. This sin is so odious, that a Heathen condemned it. See Trapps Comment on
that Text.
Hest. 1.8. then drinking was according to the Law which the King had set, viz.
That none should be compelled to drink more or oftener, then it pleased himself.
The ancient Britains drunk no Healths, as Sir Edward Cock observes.

Ecce Britannorum mos est laudabilis iste,
Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo.
Oh that some strict Law were made for the suppressing this sin! That as Iael
was blessed for driving a Nail into the Temples of Sisera; so the generations to
come may bless those in authority, for suppressing this Inlet to so much sin.

2. All occasion and provocations to sin must be avoided. [ Ephesians. 5.15. 1
These. 5.22. Jude 23.] But drinking of Healths, is a provocation to sin. viz, to
drunkenness, fighting, murder, etc. Ergo. Many think it a small matter. but
there is no sin small simply in it self. A spark of fire is a small matter, and
yet it has set a whole Town on fire.

3. All abuse of the creature must be avoided, but drinking of Healths is an
abuse of the creature; God has ordained the creature for his Glory, and our
comfort, but God has no Glory, and we have no comfort, by such abusive
drinking. Ergo.

4. That which is of ill report amongst the Saints, must be shunned. Phil. 4.8.
But drinking of Healths is a thing of ill Report amongst the Saints. Ergo.

5. That whose rise and Original is from the devil, is to be abhorred, But
drunken Healths had their rise and Original from the devil. Hujus legis
authorem Diabolum habent Basil. and August. Ser. de Temp. Ser. 231.232. and
Ambros. de jejun. c. 13.

Peccatum est provocare ad aequales calices, nec fas est respondere. Lescius de
justitia and jure. l. 4. c. 3. Dub. 4. p. 680.


The ancients called it, The devils shooeing-horn, to draw men on to
drunkenness. So that it is no Novell, Puritanicall preciseness, but it has
been condemned many hundred years ago, by the Ancient Fathers. Yea the
sounder sort of Papists have condemned it, and thought it most unreasonable,
that another man's belly should be my Rule.

Object. Suppose a man begin a Health to a Prince, or to the Protector, will
you not pledge him?

Answ. We are commanded to pray for these in Authority, but not to drink
Healths unto them. 1 Timothy, 2.2. As the Lord Virulam said, I will pray for the
Kings Health, and drink for mine own. I will not for drinking in Alexander,
stand in need of Esculapius, said Calisthenes. He is the best subject that
prays most, not he that drinks, and catouseth most.

Object. Drinking of Healths, is the fashion now adays?

Answ. We are forbidden to follow the sinful fashions and customs of the
World. Romans 12.2. nor may we follow multitudes in evil. Exodus 23.2.

[See more. Pryn's Healths, Sickness. Mr. Young's Drunkards Character. Sect.
76. p. 3.9. Pryn's Histriomastix, V. Index, Healths. Mr. Gerec against Healths.]

To arm you against Drunkenness, take these few Considerations.

1. Consider that drunkenness is one of the vilest sins in the World, the
Mother of most abominations. As all waters meet in the Sea, and all the
Creatures met in Noah's Ark; so fighting, killing, lying, swearing, etc. meet
in this sin. It Is a Master-sin which never goes alone. Show me a liar (we use
to say) and I Will show you a Thief. So say I, show me a drunkard, and I Will show
you a whore-master, Voluntarius Doemon, ita saevit, clamat, furit. Chrysostom.
a swearer, a dissolute, unteachable person. Isay 28.7, 8, 9. A drunkard is
Diabolus explicatus, a Devil in his colors, the devil in his Pontificalibus,
a devil clothed with flesh and blood. He cares not to break all the
Commandments. 1. He fears not God. 2. He makes his belly his God. 3. He
profanes Gods sacred Name many ways. 4. He profanes his Sabbath, he is unfit
(to say truth) for any service of God, or man. 5. He dis-regards Superiors,
he is an ill Example to Inferiors. 6. He Is accessory to his own death, he
shortens his days by his Intemperance, and is ready to kill all about him in
his drunken fits. 7. He abounds in acts of uncleanness, Ignis in igne fuit.
and adultery, the fire of Drunkenness, kindles the fire of Lust. 8. He spends
that on himself, which should maintain his family, and so is the worst of
Thieves, even worse then an Infidel, which provides for his own. 9. He Is apt
to belie and slander his Neighbor. 10. His heart is full of lust, a brothel of
sin, a sink of uncleanness, full of wicked devices, against God, and man.
2. Consider the dreadful curses which God has denounced against such, every
Prophet almost has a woe to throw at them. Isay 5.11, 22. Hab. 2.15. Isay
28.1. Joel 1.5. awake and weep ye drunkards here, that ye may not weep for
ever; and at last it brings everlasting woe. 1 Cor. 6.10. no drunkard ( i. e.)
no Habitual, Ebriosi (i. e.) crapulae and luxui dediti. Parae.

Ebriosi vel apud Turcas incarcerantur.


Impenitent drunkard, shall come into Gods Kingdom. If Turks imprison them,
and we will cast them out of our houses; let none think that God will receive them
into his holy Habitation. 3. Consider the sad effects of drunkenness. These
are excellently set forth. Prove. 23.29. ad finem cap. This Text I may call the
Drunkards Lookingglasse: wherein they may see the woe and sorrow that attends
them. To whom is woe, to whom is sorrow? ( i. e.) who draw all manner of sorrow
upon soul and body, but drunkards? They meet to be merry, but the end of such
mirth is heaviness. Ebrietas est unius horae hilaris insania. Sen.
It Is dear bought, that has so many curses attending it. What madness is it
for a few moments of pleasures here, to endure eternity of sorrow hereafter?
Fur the enjoyment of a little wine here, to drink the Vialls of Gods wrath, and
lie in Seas of misery for ever.
2. To whom is strife and wounds without a cause? q. d. Drunkenness breeds
contention, quarrelling, and needless wounds.

3. It hurts the Body, and brings Diseases, Rheumes, Dropsies, Apoplexies, and
Redness of eyes, by reason of abundance of hot humors. How many have shortened
their days, and extinguished the Radical moisture? much water poured on a
little flame, does soon extinguish it. This makes even Kings sick. Hos. 7.5.2.
Verse 30. Solomon tells us how we may know a Drunkard.

1. He loves to tarry at the wine, he spends hours, days, and years at it,
it is his Trade and Calling.

2. He goes and seeks mixed wine. q. d. He goes from house to house to inquire
after the strongest Liquor.

3. But how may we shun Drunkenness? V. 31. look not on the wine when it is red.
( i. e.) Shun the occasions and allurements to this sin, set a watch over your
eye, and stay the beginnings of it.

4. What hurt will it bring upon us? V. 32. In the end 'twill bite like a
Serpent, q. d. Though for a time it may seem pleasant, yet at last 'twill sting
thee very sore; it will bring upon thee troubles Internal, External,
Eternal. Wherefore fly from it, as from a Serpent.

2. 'Twill hurt the soul, and fill it full of noisome Lusts. The soul is the
best and noblest part; Corruption optimi est corruptissima.

Nunquam ebrium putabo castum.

Venture aestuans mero spumat in libidinem Hier. Alexander omnium victor, a vino
victus est.


which if corrupted, becomes the worst. V. 33. It breeds adultery and lust.
Thine eyes shall behold strange women (i. e.) Harlots. Drunkenness, and
Whoring, often go together. A belly filled with wine, foameth out filthiness. Rom
13.13. Lot (though a holy man) yet adds Incest to his Drunkenness. And though
Adulterers are not Drunkards, yet there are few Drunkards, but are Adulterers.
V. 33. It breeds evil speeches. Thy heart shall utter perverse things ( i. e.)
preposterous, foolish, filthy matters. V, 34. It makes men stupid, and
fearless, secure, and careless in the greatest dangers. He Is as one that sleeps
on the top of a Mast in the midst of the Sea. Though he be in great and
continual danger, yet he is insensible of it. He Is in great danger that sleeps
in the midst of the Sea, for he is soon overwhelmed with waves, and he is like to
fall suddenly, that sleeps in the top of a Mast; Non sentire, stipitis est, non
hominis.
yet such is the Drunkards Lethargy, that he cannot feel when he is stricken,
nor know when he is beaten. V. 35. which is the height of misery; it makes men
desperate, incorrigible, and incurable. They become impudent in sin; those sins
which men tremble to commit, when sober, yet they will venture on, Multi
reliquorum serpentum veneno curantur, ebrietate nemo. Basil.
when drunk. I will seek it yet again (says the habituated Drunkard) q. d.
Notwithstanding all these dangers and mischiefs, I will not leave my
drunkenness. As perseverance in goodness (in despite of all opposition) is the
height of goodness; so perseverance in wickedness, in despite of Judgments,
is the height of wickedness. That Is our misery which attends on drunkenness,
that it is usually accompanied with impenitency. Hos. 4.11.

Belial (i. e,) homo nequam sine jugo, qui totus deditus est nequitiae,
impietati, and improbitati.
4. It robs men of their good name. Call a man drunkard, you need say no more.
Hence when the Pharisees would accuse Christ as a great sinner, they call him a
Wine bibber. Mat. 11.19. of old they were accounted sons of Belial. 1 Samuel
1.14, 15, 16. when Eli thought Hannah mas drunk, count not (said she) thine
handmaid for a daughter of Belial (i. e.) for a lawless, loose, disordered
person. It takes away the man, and lays a beast in his room, yea it makes a man
worse then the Beasts that perish, for you cannot force them to drink more then
will do them good.

5. It wastes and weakens the Estate, and so disables men for works of Piety
and Mercy. Prove. 21.17. He that loves wine shall not be rich. Not he that
drinks wine, but he that loves it, so as to set his heart upon it, such lose
both Temporal and Eternal Riches.

6. It lays Kingdoms waste. Isay 5.11.13, 14, 15. as a good man is a public
good, so such a wicked man, especially, is a public evil.

7. The loveliness and beauty of Temperance and sobriety should make us loath
excess and luxury, V. Robinsons Observations. 30.
How sweetly does the sober, holy man enjoy himself? his soul's in Peace, his
house is in Peace, his goods are preserved, his family is the better for him,
he is a blessing and ornament to the place where he dwells. His judgment is
clear, his memory strong, his affections regulated, he is fit to pray, read,
hear, meditate, etc. He has a healthful body, and a comely countenance, wise
discourse. In a word, he enjoyes himself, and sees God in all the blessings he
enjoyes.

There Is no sin but has some pretenses, Improbitas praetextu nunquam caret.
Arist.
and so has this.

1. Object. Joseph made his Brethren drunk.

Answ. That Is false, for Joseph was a holy man, and one that feared God, and
therefore durst not do such a thing for a world. God puts a Spirit of ingenuity
in the hearts of his people, Shacar, inebriari, non semper in vitio ponitur,
sed indicat liberalem vini usum, qui modum non excedit. Weemse.
and writes the Law of love there, which constraines them to be pure and sober
in all their actings, and undertakings; they are born of God and cannot sin,
viz. deliberately, wilfully and habitually.

2. The word Shacar is taken in Scripture in a good sense, for a free and
liberal use of the creature [ ad hilaritatem, non ad ebrietatem.] for mirth,
and not for madness; for cheerfulness, and not for drunkenness. So the word is
used. Hag. 1.6. they shall drink, but not to drunkenness ( i. e.) not
plentifully. So Cant. 5.1. drink ye drink abundantly, Si vultis inebriari
docebo vos salutarem ebrietatem, in qua non est (...), sed (...), haec est
ebrietas spiritualis. Zanchy.
to an holy inebriation. So Ephesians. 5.18. be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess, but be filled with the Spirit. q. d. If ye will be drunk, let it not be
with a bodily, carnal, divellish drunkenness; but let it be with a spiritual,
holy ebriety; do not sip or taste of the Graces of the Spirit, but be filled
with the spirit of Joy, Love, Peace, Temperance, Patience. Acts 2.13.15.
compared with V. 4. spiritual joy is there likened to wine, Vino qui inebriatur
titubat, Spiritu qui inebriatur radicitus in Christo est. Praeclara ebrietas
quae sobrietatem mentis operatur, and ubi Spiritus Dei regna. Illyricus.

(...), liberaliter sitim explere, (...) (i. e.) a relaxatione animi quae fit
per suavitatem and hila^itatem vini paulo copiosius hausti. Eustathius.


which revives and quickens dead and drooping spirits. So Cant. 1.2. thy love
is better then wine. This is Crapula sacra. The word is likewise used in the
New Testament, John 2.10. for a more free and liberal use of the Creature for
mirth and comfort, not for excess and riot. God has given wine to make glad
the heart of man. Psalm. 104.15. and so far as it refreshes and delights us
in a sober way, we may use it. Prove. 31.6, 7. Thus and no otherwise, Joseph's
Brethren drunk, and were merry. The Philosophers make three cups. Poculum
necessitatis and sanitatis, Poculum voluptatis and hilaritatis, Poculum
ebrietatis and insaniae. Ancharsis.
The first of Necessity, the second of Pleasure, the third of Madness. Joseph's
Brethren took the first and second, but not the third.

2. Object. Noah and Lot were Drunken. Genesis 9.21. and 19.32.

Answ. Ebrii, non ebriosi; Actio una non denominat hominem.
Yet they were not drunkards, 'twas not their Trade to sit at the wine; one
action does not denominate, or make a man good or bad. Vitium hoc contigit Noae
inscio, non conscio.
They sinned through weakness and infirmity, against the bent and resolution of
their souls; but thou sinnest wilfully and deliberately.

2. These examples are recorded to fright us from sin (that we may shun the
rocks where others have split themselves) not to encourage us in sin. Sunt
cavendi, non cadendi exempla. Aug.


3. To keep us from despair, that if through weakness, and for want of
watchfulness we have fallen, yet we may remember that God which pardoned
penitent Noah, and Lot, will also pardon us upon our Repentance.

Object. It Is Physical.

Malim mori quam tali remedio convalescere.
Answ. 1. It Is a medicine worse then the disease; for a man to destroy his
soul, that he may cure his body, is worse then death. 2. We may not do evil,
that good may come thereof. Romans 3.8. 3. Very learned Physicians affirm the
contrary; they say that drunkenness destroys the health, spoils the stomach,
hurts the brain, makes the blood watrish, dulls the senses, weakens the
memory, V. D. Venner. Via recta. p. 42, 43.
and destroys the understanding.

Object. They are so accustomed to it, that they cannot leave it.

Answ. An evil custom is better broken then kept, and though custom be a
second nature, yet the God of nature can change nature; he can make a black
more white, and take spots from a Leopard, he can turn a Lion into a Lamb, and
water into wine; he can make iron to swim, and Jordan to recoyle. He is El the
the strong God, and though our corruptions are too strong for us, yet are they
not too strong for him. Spread therefore thy misery before the Lord, and let
him see it is the unfeigned desire of thy soul as freely to forget sin, as thou
would have him to forgive it; and to part with it, as to have it pardoned;
and then in due time he will heal thee of it, what ever it be.

I come now to some brief Rules against it, and so conclude.

1. Kill it in the Root, get a hearty detestation of it, resolve rather to die,
then to be drunk. To this end consider the vileness of the sin (in the effects
before recited) remember the judgments of God, on Nabal, Ammon, Elah, and
Belshazar, who died in their Drunkenness. 1 Samuel 25.36. and 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
and 1 Kings 16.8, 9, 10. Dan. 5.2.30. Let their falls make thee to fear, for
God is the same still, to the same sinners.

2. Be diligent in your callings. Idleness breeds Drunkenness. When men have
nothing to do, Quem Diabolus occupatum non invenit ipse occupat.
the Devil comes and calls them out to work. The flying bird is safe, it is the
bird that sits still, which is in danger. God has promised to protect us, but
then we must keep his way. Psalm. 91.11, 12.

Object. We are Gentlemen and cannot work.

Answ. You must work, or do worse. God has ordained, that every son of Adam,
in the sweat of his brows shall eat his bread. Genesis 3.19. and he that will not
(not he that by reason of sickness cannot) labor, Non est panis cujusquam
proprius, ne summi quidem regis nisi strenue laboret in Vocatione sua. Rolloc.
in Joh.
shall not eat. 2 These. 3.10. and if Adam in the state of Innocence, must work
and dress the Garden; and after the fall, when he was Monark of all the world,
yet must he labor; who then can think himself free? It Is not Idleness which
commends a Gentleman, or following of foolish fashions, drinking of Healths,
lying in an Alehouse, etc. there is no baseness like this. But the life and
soul of Nobility and Gentility consists in noble and virtuous dispositions, in
gallantness of spirit (without pride or insoleuce) to do his Country good.

3. In all places, and at all times set a watch against this sin; when men are
most secure, they are in most danger: where the watch is most careless, there
the enemy enters, And if Christ's own disciples must watch against this sin, who
may be secure? Luke 22.34. Many when they go to Fairs and Markets, they go
without care or fear, they do not take Antidotes with them; hence it is, that so
many fall by this sin. A man that goes amongst such as have Plague-sores
running on them, had need of special Antidotes, to keep out the infection.

4. Shun the occasions of this sin, He that will no evil do, must do nothing
that belongs thereto. He must not once look on the wine when it is red. Prove.
23.31. a little leak may drown a ship, and great fires have come from little
sparks. Especially shun the company of Drunkards, be not amongst wine bibbers.
Prove. 23.20. we should have no familiarity with them. 1 Cor. 5.11. Ephesians. 5.7.
touch not this pitch, lest you be defiled with it, mingle not with them, lest
you learn their work. What Solomon says of the Harlot, that say I of the
Drunkard. Prove. 5.8, 9, 10, 11. remove far from him, come not nigh the door of
his house, etc. especially shun Alehouses, these dens of Devils, and Cages of
unclean birds; those stews and styes of all abominations. Take heed of the
Excessive Use, and the great abuse of Tobacco. Great Tobacconists often times are
great Drunkards. All drunkenness is not by wine or strong drink, Doctor Clerk^
Sermon. on Rev. 17.6.
(as a learned man well observes) the Thracians and Scythians used to burn
certain Herbs, that they might be drunk with the smoke thereof. That Barbarism
our English Nation uses too much in a base Indian weed. It Is pity men of good
parts should be drunk so. They should leave it to idle, empty, witless,
worthless heads. It Is said of Garlic, that it makes men wink, and drink, and
stink; Many use Tobacco to make them drink, till at last they wink and stink.
It Is true, the drugge is good in it self, as it is Gods creature, and the fume
of it taken in a discreet, moderate, physical way, may be useful. But taken
in that excessive, intemperate, Multi nunc dierum Tobaccomania laborant,
irregular way (as most take it) it besots men, and robs them of their Health,
Wealth, Wit, Time, etc. I shall therefore give some Reasons against the abuse
of the creature, because the sin is General, and it is the Devils
shoeing-Horn, to draw men on to Drunkenness. Instead of Salt-meat, the Devil
feeds his followers now with smoke ( fumo pereat, qui fumum vendit) first
drink, and then smoke; Then smoke, and after drink; the Pot and the Pipe, and
the Pipe and the Pot walk so long, till they have Piped themselves out of all.

1. Consider, that Tobacco is a Physical root, and has in it a Poisonous
quality, as appears by its Antipathy against nature. Now he that shall take
Physic every day, may soon put an end to his days. Physic must be taken
rarely and seldom, else if it become familiar to the body, it loses its
operation. It Is a violent purge, which wastes and weakens nature, especially
when taken often. Hence the learned conclude, that frequent using of it is
dangerous.

Frequens suffitur Nicotianae exoticae, sanis non est salutaris.
Qnid censum (vereor ne sensum) insumimus herbis?
India quam mittit, sed minus ind^ boni.
Number sani, insani qui fecimus aspida merces?
Quod prosit sanis non habet, ager habet.
Rex Platon. 1. All excesses are hurtful, and are abuses of the Creature, and
as excessive eating and drinking is unlawful, so also is excessive smoking.
Not one of many but takes it for fashion and custom, more then for need. Any
action (especially Physical) if not rightly circumstantiated, is very
dangerous. If a Physician should advise his Patient to take a spoonful or two
of such a Potion, and he should take ten or twenty; or if he should prescribe
him to take a penny-weight of such or such a thing, and he should eat a pound,
he might soon put himself past eating. So when Physicians shall prescribe one
or two Pipes a day, and men shall take 20. this is causa adjuvans ad mortem,
it is a kind of self-murder, and shortens men's days.

3, This immoderate and excessive use of Tobacco, brings with it many
discommodities. It overthrowes the state of the body, dries the brain, dimmeth
the sight, corrupts the smell, hurts the stomach, destroys concoction, spoils
the spirits, dulls the understanding, confounds the senses, stupifies the body,
marres the breath, and turns it into an unsavory stench, rendering it loathsome
to their Wives, Friends, and such as come nigh them. It turns the Nose into a
chimney, and makes a Kithin of the body, sooting it with an oily Unctious kind
of soot, as has been seen in some great Tobacconists, that have been opened.
It emasculates the spirits, and disables the body for service, when a man
cannot go two or three miles without a Pipe smoking at his Nose. In former
ages, what glorious battles have been fought, and to what a great age did they
live, who never once heard of Tobacco?

Damna fleo rerum, sed plus fleo damna dierum.
4. It consumes abundance of precious time; No loss, like the loss of time.
How many spend two or three hours in a day in smoking, which if they had
spent in Repenting, what abundance of comfort might they have had?

5. It wastes men's estates. How many poor might have been succored with that
which is idly and vainly spent in smoke? some spending 10 l. others 20 l.
others 100 l. per annum in smoke? To what end is such waste? we must all one
day give an account how we have spent our money; our silver is the Lords, and
he expects that we improve it to his praise. Hos. 2.8, 9. How sad will it be
with many, when they shall see how many pounds they have spent in smoke, and
yet how little for Gods honor? It were well if some way could be found to
restrain the great abuse of it, if it were but in the younger, and the
healthful sort, who have no apparent need of it.

Object. We are so accustomed to it, that we cannot leave it?

Answ. An evil custom is better broken then kept, and therefore as you came
to this custom by degrees, so by degrees you must break it. The use of it
(says a learned Physician) is only tolerable by way of Physic, and not for
pleasure, or an idle custom.

Object. It Is the property of a Gentleman to take Tobacco?

Answ. It Is now become the guise of the Riff-raffe, and Dregs of men. Every
Tinker, Tapster, Crate-carrying Vagabond is not well unless he have a Pipe
at's Nose.

Object. It draws away ill and watrish humors, and cures men of most diseases.

Answ. God has ordained watrish humors for the good of the body, and for the
most part they are as necessary in the body, as the blood it self, and
therefore may not be drawn away in that abundant measure by Tobacco. Besides,
it is dangerous for weak and sickly bodies, they may quickly waste the Oil of
their Vital Lamps, and spend their radical moisture. So that instead of
curing, it kills many.

2. Grant it to be Physical in some diseases, does it therefore follow that it
is good against all? and that all must use it; of what age, constitution, and
complexion soever. To argue from a Particular, to a General, is but sorry
Logic. e. g. Such a man has need of such and such Physic, therefore all men
have need of it. Who sees not the vanity of the practice, yet who leaves it?
what should young, strong, healthful bodies do with Physic? They that are
whole have no need of the Physician, but those that are sick; and those that
ate sick indeed, cannot away with it. One man's Physic is another man's poison;
One Medicine cannot cure all diseases, yet men are so bewitched and besotted
with Tobacco, that (if you will believe them) they will tell you it is a Panacea that
will cure you of all distempers; and yet those that take it, abound with
distempers, as well as other men. I wish therefore, and oh that I could
prevail with young Students especially, that they would use their Pens, rather
then Pipes, that we might find them in their Closets Praying, and not in their
Chambers smoking; remembering that time is precious.

[See more against Drunkenness in that excellent Tract of Mr. Young, styled,
The Drunkards Character; it is the best that I have seen in this kind. All the
labors of that holy man, are worthy the perusal of young Students especially,
Mr, John Downams four Treatises against Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, and
Bribery, Mr. Sam. Wards Woe to Drunkards. D. Harris Drunken-cup. D. Ier.
Taylor's. Holy-Living. p. 72. Mr. Henry Smith's Sermon. on Genesis 9.22. p. 284. Mr.
Clerk's Mirror. cap. 42. Edit. 3. Mr. Rous's Diseases of the Time. cap. 16. p.
173. Folio,

Intemperate, or Incontinent.
The word in the Original (as I have showed before) is large and
comprehensive. It denotes all kinds of lustful persons, that have no command
over their concupiscentiall affections, but are led by their Lusts; such are
Adulterers, Fornicators, Incestuous persons, Polygamists, and the like. Now in
the last days, men will be Incontinent every way. There will be incontinency
amongst single persons, See Mr. Edwards Gangreen. 1. and 2. Patt, and Mr.
Bayly's Disswasive.
and this is called, Fornication; there will be incontinency amongst married
persons, and this is called Adultery. There will be incontinency against
nature, viz. when the course of nature, or the Sex, or the kind is altered: all
these sins do and will reign in the last days. Now the more common these sins
are, the greater our praise will be if we keep our selves pure, shining like
lights in the midst of a loose generation. We should therefore be careful not
only to go or run, Non solum cavere aut vitare, sed fugere jubet, ut ostendat
studio, and industria, imo solicitudine non vulgari hic opus esse. Gualter.

Contra libidinis impetum apprehende fugam, si vis obtinere victoriam. Aug.


but with all our power and speed to Fly fornication. 1 Cor. 6.18. as Joseph
fled from his Mistress. Other vices are conquered by resisting, but this by
flying swiftly, from the objects and occasions of this sin.

To quicken you, consider.

1. That this great sin never goes alone; Idleness, Luxury, Lying, and Murder,
See Mr. Hieron on Psalm. 51.14. Lect. 23.
usually accompany it, as we see in David, and the Sodomites. Ezekiel. 16.4.9. the
harlot by her inticements, does not only increase the number of Transgressors,
but of their Transgressions also. Prove. 23.23. when a great beast has made a
gap, Libido insatiabilis est, turpitudinem nectit turpitudini, Scelus sceleri.
Drexelius.
the rest follow after. If Solomon delight in Idolatrous women, they will
quickly draw his heart from God. If once you give way to this sin, you know not
where you shall rest.

2. It Is a sin that is most opposite to the nature of God, who is the most
Holy, and will dwell in none but chaste and Holy ones. Fornication is directly
opposite to Sanctification, Quicquid spurcitias olet carnis, aversatur
spiritus, castis habitat pectoribus, Daemonum cibus fornicatio, ebrietas, and
vitia universa. Hieron.
yea it is made one part of our Sanctification, to fly fornication. 1 These. 4.3.
It makes men like the Devil, who is styled by way of Eminency, The unclean
spirit, Matthew. 10.1. and 12.43. and that 1. Affectu, because he delights in
such uncleanness.

2. Effectu, because he draws men to it.

3. Habitatione, because he dwells in unclean souls, he finds them foul, and
he makes them worse.

Major est Emphasis Praecepti Negativi, quam Affirmativi. V. Schools Guard. p.
142.
3. It Is a violation of Gods most sacred Law. Exodus 20.14. which is set down
negatively, because it binds most strongly, always, and to all times. The
Pope may give dispensations, but God gives none to any, to violate his
commands. Every man must keep his vessel pure. 1 These. 4.4, 5. even the King
must not multiply wives, much less strumpets to himself. Deuteron..17.17.

4. Adulterers are Covenant-breakers; the Marriage knot is called the Covenant
of the Lord. Prove. 2.17. Mal. 2.14, 15. now Covenant-breakers are ranged
amongst the vilest sinners. Romans 1.31.

5. It Is worse then Theft. The thief steals out of want, the Adulterer out of
wantonness. The one may make satisfaction, this can never Prove. 6.31.

6. It Is a sin that does pollute and defile the body more then any other sin.
Hence the Apostle uses many excellent Arguments against it. 1 Cor. 6.13.

2. That which is consecrated to God must not be polluted with whoredom, Number
ego qui Christi servus sum, qui meipsum and omnia illi debeo, ipsi quod suum
est eripiam, and faciam ut scorti membra sint, qua illius usibus debent
servire? Gualter.
but the body is consecrated to God, and made for his honor and service, and
not for fornication. Ergo.

2. V. 14. From the Resurrection of our bodies to Glory, thus he argues. If our
bodies shall be raised to Glory, then may we not pollute them with fornication.
But our Bodies shall be raised to Glory.

3. V. 15. Our bodies are the members of Christ, and therefore it is a great
indignity and dishonor to him to have them given to an harlot. It Is in a
manner to make Christ one with an harlot, then which what can be more
reproachful to him?

4. V. 16. He makes himself one with an Harlot, and what can be more
dishonorable, then for a member of Christ to be joined to such a creature?

5. V. 18. He sins more especially against his own body. Fur non fit unum
corpus cum re furtiva, nec latro cum eo quem caedit; solus scortator se
carnaliter commiscendo fit membrum scorti, quo nihil foedius.
The body is abused by other sins in part, not wholly, as the Tongue by lying,
the Hand by Stealing, Murder; but here the whole body is abused, and abased.

Si scelus est Templa lapidea profanare, quo supplicio non dignus erit qui Dei
Templum vivum profanat? ut ex S. Sancti Templo Veneris prostibulum faciat?
Gualter.
6. V. 19. If our bodies be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, then they may in no
wise be polluted, or profaned. And if all Temples must be kept clean, then
specially the Temples of the Holy Ghost, who is a Pure spirit, and will not
inhabit a Swine-stye.

7. From the work of our Redemption. V. 19 20. We are not now our own to live
as we please, but we must live unto him that bought us, and has paid so great
a price for us.

Zeum. Heb. Ingentem Dei iram and furorem denotat.
None are given over to these sins, but such as God hates. It Is a fearful sign
of his Anger to be given up to Harlots. Prove. 22.14. He that is hated of God,
shall fall by her. Oh that young persons would consider this Text, that it
might be to them a perservative against this Soul-destroying sin! when young
persons grow proud, or walk not answerable to the Light and Means which they
enjoy, but are barren and fruitless trees in Gods Vineyard, then in his fierce
wrath he leaves them to this sin, as a punishment of their former sins. Romans
1.21.26. Amos 7.17, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Let us therefore walk humbly with our God,
that he may delight in us, and save us from this exceeding sinful sin, to such
the promise runs. Eccles. 7.26. Who so pleases God shall escape the Harlot,
but the sinner shall be taken by her. God by his special grace will preserve
such as are dear to him, from this sin; but the sinner that is left to himself,
cannot but fall into this pit and snare.

8. Consider the sad Effects of this sin.

1. It destroys Nations, for this the Lord had a quarrel and controversy with
Israel, Rib, significat in judicio litigare, causam agere, contendere.
Hos. 4.2. and cites them to answer it at his bar. This makes a land to spue
out its Inhabitants. Levit. 18.24, 25.28, 29. as a man whose stomach is
overcharged, can have no rest till he have eased himself; so the land is sick,
till it have eased it self of such Inhabitants. Such sins and sinners put the
Justice of God to a stand, so that he knows not how to pardon them. Ier.
5.7.8, 9. This was one of those sins which made the day of Ierusalems calamity
to draw near. Ezekiel. 22.4.11. This brought the flood on the old world. Genesis 6.2.
fire on Sodom. Genesis 19.25. Jude 7. the plague on Israel to the loss of 24.
thousand men. See Theater of Gods Judgments Part 2. c. 6. p. 76. and l. 2. c
20.22.27. Tollit opes, famam, sensus viresque libido.
Numb. 25.1.9. and the sword on Benjamin, to the loss almost of the whole
Tribe. Judge. 18. and 19. By all this we may see that this is not so light a
sin, and such a small trick of youth, as the profane world makes it. 2. It
consumes the Estate. How many great men has it brought even to a morsel of
bread. Prove. 6.26. and 29.3. Luke 15.30. it is a fire that burns to the
destruction of all that a man has. Job 31.12. 3. It robs a man of his good
name, which is a precious jewel, and by all good means to be preserved. Prove.
6.33. a wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped
away. Though the wound may be cured, yet the scarre will abide? as we see in
David, Sampson, Solomon. Neh. 13.26. Lot. So Prove. 5.9. Genesis 49.4. Levit. 21.9.
Hos. 1.2. Est peccatum maxim probrosum. It Is a most infamous sin. 1 Samuel 2.22,
23, 24. Neither does the unclean person only blemish himself, but his posterity
also. What dishonor is it for a man to have many lovely children, and to have
a Bastard stand in the midst of them, claiming kindred of them, and so become a
living shame to them. This makes men odious not only to God, but to all good
men. Ier. 9.2. oh that I had a lodging in the wilderness? and might leave my
people. Why so? for they be all Adulterers. This makes a man to be esteemed as
a fool in Israel. 2 Samuel 13.12, 13, 4. It destroys the body. It consumes the
radical moisture, and so shortens the life. It impaires the strength, Prove.
31.3. and wastes the flesh. Prove. 5.11. and makes men liable to the sword of
the Magistrate, who ought to punish adulterers with death* Apud Romanos, and
Graecos adulterium capitale fuit. Arabes adulterum capite mulctabant. Polyd.
Virg.
Levit. 20.10. Genesis 38.24. Deuteronomy. 22.22, yea the Pharisees, though they dispenc't
with other sins, yet judged Adulterers worthy of death. John 8.5. The
Anabaptists allege this Text for liberty of conscience, and to destroy the
coercive power of the Magistrate, I shall therefore take a little pains to
vindicate it.
1. Our Savior does not plead for the woman in favor of adultery, for he
condemns even adulterous aspects. Matthew. 5.28. and charge her to go, Non est
generalis regula, sed personale responsum praesenti causae, ejusque actoribus
accommodatum. Gualter.
and sin no more in this, or any other kind, viz. willingly and deliberately.

2. Our Savior does not say absolutely, that the sin deserved not
condemnation, Christus non erat Politicus Magistratus, sed minister Ecclesiae,
ejus erat Evangelium praedicare, non homines occidere. Pet. Martyr in 2 Samuel
12.7. p. 246. ubi plura. and Spanheim. Dub. 108.
or no man ought to punish it; but he only tells her; Neither do I condemn
thee. q. d. Though the sin deserve punishment, yet that is the Magistrates
duty, I have no commission to take his sword into my hand. The end of my
coming into the world is not to destroy, but to save; not to punish as a
Magistrate, but to forgive; not to take away Temporal life, but to purchase
eternal.

3. The Pharisees came to ensnare Christ, but he snares them; q. d. The fact is
evident, but who are ye that demand Justice against her? Look into the book of
your consciences, O ye Hypocrites, and see if you be not guilty of the like
crime your selves.

4. Christ teaches us to be compassionate to poor, penitent sinners, who are
confounded with shame, and cannot speak a word in their own defense. We should
send such away with some comfort and godly admonition, as Christ did this
woman. The Magistrate is to do his duty, and pro re nata, as occasion requires,
to cut off the workers of iniquity. Nusquam sanctius and purius coli and
servari conjugia quam Genevae, vbi capite plectuntur adulteria.

Cons^mmata est improbitas ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed and placent: and
desinit esse remedio locus, ubi quae fuerant vitia, mores fiunt. Sen.


This kept Geneva so pure, even their sharp punishing of Adulterers.

5. It destroys the soul, it besots a man, it robs him of his Gifts, yea of
his heart. Hos. 4.11. It blinds the judgment, draws away the will from
goodness, and makes the Affections so brutish, that they mind nothing, and
delight in nothing but beastly sensuality: Hence such impure persons are
compared to unclean dogs. Deuteronomy. 23.18. 2 Samuel 3.8. and to unruly Stallions.
Ier. 5.8. How sottish did this sin make wise Solomon? and those great
Philosophers. Romans 1.21.26. It hardens the heart, so that such seldom Repent.
Hence the guests of the Harlot are said to be in the depth of hell. Prove. 9.
ult. and 7.26, 27. The Whore is a pit, that he which falls into, hardly ever
comes out again. Prove. 2.18, 19. her house inclines to death, and her paths
unto the dead, none that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of
the paths of life. My heart trembles when I read this Text. None return again.
(i. e.) none return ordinarily, they are very few in comparison of the
multitude, that are delivered from this pit. Prove. 23.27. like a winter Plague;
some do escape, but very few, and that hardly. It Is peccatum maximae
adherentiae, a sin that sticks close to the souls of such, as it has once
possessed.

Such must be cast out of Church Communion here, the people of God must have no
fellowship with such here. 2 Cor. 5.9. Ephesians. 5.11. and God bars them out of
heaven hereafter. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Revel. 21.8. and 23.15. Never
any gave themselves to such sensual lusts, but they paid full dearly for them,
their end is bitter as wormwood. Prove. 5.4. as such sins are committed with
more sensual delight and wilfulness, so they bring more guilt and horror with
them, insomuch as many have despaired under the burden, and have murdered
themselves. We should therefore carefully fly these fleshly lusts, V. Capell on
Tentat. p. 2. c. 10.
because they war against the soul. 1 Pet. 2.11. the other lusts war
against us, yet none war against the Peace, and purity of the soul, like
this. Let no man then think this sin small, as did the Heathen, who numbered
fornication amongst things indifferent. Acts 15.20. when scarce any sin is more
expressly forbidden, or more severely punished in the Scripture. Exodus 20.14.
Deuteronomy. 23.17. let no man deceive you with vain words, Non de rebus secundum
opininem impiorum, sicut nec de saporibus, secundum aestimationem aeg^^torum.
Aquinas.
Ephesians. 5.5, 6. or make you think this a slight sin, but get your judgments
rightly informed by the word of God, and see how contrary it speaks to the
corrupt opinions of the world. God calls it a great wickedness. Genesis 39.9. and
an heinous crime. Job 37.11, 12. and that which has been the bane of
thousands. Genesis 34.25. Judge. 20.35. 1 Cor. 20.8.11. it is called an abomination.
Ezekiel. 22.11. and a sin that ought to be severely punished by the Magistrate. Job
31.11. Numb. 25.11, 12. and though such sinners may escape the hands of men,
yet they cannot escape the hands of a just God. Heb. 13.4. who will punish his
servants (who repent) for this sin, with Temporal Judgments, as we see in
David and Solomon. Prove. 11. ult. 1 Cor. 11.32. or if they be impenitent,
profane violators, and contemners of that Order which God has planted amongst
men, he will punish them eternally. Rev. 22.15.

Object. Sir, What shall I do, I am the man that have fallen once, yea, and
again into this foul sin, my conscience accuses me, and God who is greater
then my conscience, and knows more by me then I do by my self, has seen my
beastly abominations in this kind; so that I am become a Terror to my self, and
am even swallowed up with total desperation, etc.

Answ. Since you have sinned in days of so great Light and Love, and against
such wooings and warnings to the contrary, your sin is so much the greater, and
therefore your sorrow and humiliation for it must be proportionable, and this
let me tell thee, if thou can unfeignedly humble thy self, sincerely
confessing and forsaking thy former lewd ways, God has promised thee mercy.
Prove. 28.13. There is yet hope in Israel, even for this thing. There is a
fountain (not a cistern) opened for repentant sinners, to wash away their
Uncleanness, Zech. 23.1. and that whether it has been acted before
Conversion, as Rahab was an Harlot before her Conversion, James 2.25. yet upon
her repentance she was saved. Heb. 11.31. Poor self-condemned Harlots that have
no Apology for themselves, yet go to heaven before proud and self-conceited
Pharisees. Yea, though you have been as vile sinners, as the Sodomites, yet
upon unfeigned humiliation, God has promised pardon even to such. Isay 1.10.
compared with verse 18. God will wash and sanctify such. 1 Cor. 6.11.

2. If you have fallen after conversion, so did David, yet upon his Repentance
he was pardoned, and that God which pardoned such sins as we committed before
conversion, when we sinned with full consent; will much more pardon our sins,
which with reluctance and unwillingnesse, by the strength and violence of
Temptation, we have fallen into, especially since we are humbled, and judge our
selves for them.

Preservatives against this sin.
1. Take heed of Intemperance in eating and Drinking, Nunquam edacem putabo
castum, ubi satietas, ibi Daemones choreas agunt. Hieronym.
when men are fed to the full, then like pampered Stali^ns they neigh after
their Neighbors wives. Ier. 5.9. Ezekiel. 16.49. Take away the fuel and the fire
goes out, take away the provender, and you will tame the beast. Drunkenness and
Whoring are joined together. Proverbs 23.31.33. Hos. 4.11.

2. Idleness breeds uncleanness, as standing Pooles do mudde. Ezekiel. 16.49.
even a David if he be sleeping at home, Quaeritur Aegyptus quare sit factus
adulter?

In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat. Ovid.

Nunquam vacat lascivire districtis. Seneca Epist. 56.


when he should be at War, may catch a fall 2 Samuel 11.1. Dinah by wandering
abroad, exposed her self to a Tentation. Genesis 34.2. and the feet that wandered
in the streets, became a booty to the Harlot. Prove. 7.5. we should do by our
false hearts, as Commanders do by unruly soldiers, they keep them in action,
that they may keep them from doing mischief.

3. Take heed of evil company, come not near the house of the Harlot.
Proverbs 5. Verse 8, 9, 10, 11. He that would not be burnt, must not come too
near the fire. Suppose we had bodies made of Gunne-powder, or Flax; oh how
fearful would we be of coming nigh the fire for fear of being consumed* This
made Joseph so careful to shun the company of his wanton Mistress: Vitavit
mulieris conspectum, ut libidinis occasiones praecideret. Paraeus.

Oculi sunt fores and fenestrae animae. See Bishop Andrews on the seventh
Commandment. cap. 6. and 7.


Genesis 39.10.

4. Set a watch over the Eyes. The Devil gets into our hearts by these
windows of the soul. Eve by seeing the forbidden fruits, Genesis 3.6. David by
seeing Beethsheba. 2 Samuel 11.2, Sampson by seeing a Harlot. Judge. 16.1.
Potiphars wife by seeing Joseph's beauty, and Herod by seeing Herodias dance,
they were all ensnared, and caught. When men's eyes are full of Adultery, they
cannot cease to sin. 2 Pet. 2.14. Genesis 6.2. The Eye is the Devils Broker, that
gets between the heart and the Object, to make up a sinful bargain. Plato
derives (...) from (...).

Cum oculi concupiscentiae omnis, praecipue Venereae, fontes, proretae peccati;
and duces in amore, itaque firmo proposito eos continui Scul. in Job.


Lusting and looking in Greek, differ but in a Vowell. Hence David, a mortified
man, prays the Lord to turn away his eyes from beholding Vanity. Psalm. 119.37.
and Job, though a holy man, and in years, yea and married too, yet durst not
trust his eyes without a Guard. Job 31, 1.

Quid facies, facies Veneris si veneris ante?
Non sedeas, sed eas; ne pereas per eas.
Sphinxs. Ite mali versus, animam qui perditis ite. Picus Mirand.

Perkins C. C. l. 5. c. 4.

V. Ames C. C. l. 5. c. 39. Q. 7. Bolton of true Happiness. p. 74, 75.

Nunquam fieri debent quae Deum ladant. Salvian.

Obscoenorum librorum scriptores, nihil aliud faciunt quam qui fontes publicos
veneno inficiunt, tot funerum rei quotquot inde biberint. Drexel.

Nihil est tam damnosum honestis moribus quam in aliquo spectaculo residere,
tunc enim per voluptatem facilius vitia surrepunt. Seneca.

Mr. Brokes his Remedies against Satan's Devices. Device 7. p* 85.

Non committam, ut cum viros vicerim, a mulieribus vincar. Plutarch in Alexand.

Pestem and venenum immittunt per oculos in animum, cum tentatio de est,
Pictura supplet. Drexel.


Take heed of reading evil books, they contain evil words, and evil obscene
words corrupt good manners. 1 Cor. 15.33. Ephesians. 5.4. Take heed of
Stage Plays, where many lewd speeches, and lascivious Gestures are used. They
are the very sinks of sin, and Schools of profaneness. As you may see in that
elaborate Treatise of that industrious Patriot of his country, Mr. William
Pryn, in his Histrio-mastix, a book that well deserves Reprinting, and to be
made more common, in these loose times, when lascivious Balls, and profane
Practices are so frequent in the chief city of the land.

Take heed of gazing on lascivious Pictures. Beware of Painting, Poud^ing,
Patching, Naked-necks, and other inticements to sin. He that will not be taken
with a sin, must shun the occasions. Alexander did very wisely, in refusing to
see the beautiful daughters of Darius, that were his Captives, lest he should
be ensnared by them, and he that conquered the world, should be conquered by
women. Lewd pictures are worse then evil words; for those abide and infect
others, when words vanish, and are gone,

5. Stop your ears against profane Songs and Ballads. Suffer not your children
once to hear or read them.

Nil dictu foedum, visuque haec limina tangat.
Intra quae puer est.
Juven. Sat. 14. Lascivi Sermones molliunt animos n^stros, nervos omnes
virtutis elidunt. Cic. Tusc. Q. l. 2.
Little do people consider how sorely and suddenly the heart is infected with
rotten unsavory speeches. Ephesians. 4.29. Colos. 3.8. they soon corrupt men's
manners.

9. Take heed of mixed Dancing, which is a great incentive to uncleanness, and
therefore is often condemned in Scripture. Job 21.11, 12. Isay 3.16. 1 Kings
18.26. Exodus 32.6.19. Matthew. 14.6. Mark 6.22. Job made a Covenant with his eye
not once to look, and dare thou wantonly dance with a maid? neither are the
dancers only themselves, but the spectators also, endangered by beholding those
light and immodest embracings, kissings, motions and wanton gestures of the
body. The flame of lust is hereby enkindled, and oil is added to that flame:
and our hearts which are bad enough by Nature, by beholding such practices, are
made far worse. The ancients have condemned it. We read (says Chrysostom)
of Jacobs marriage, but we read of no dancing that was there, and where wanton
dancing is, there is the Devil says he. Chorea est Circulus cujus centrum est
Diabolus, circumferentia omnes Angeli ejus.

Nemo saltat sobrius, sed is qui insanus ant eb^ius Cicero. Orat. pro Muraea.


None but Madmen or Drunkards dance, says a Second, none but Adulterers says
a Third. Saltatio ad Adulteras, non ad pudicas, pertinet.

Promiscuas saltationes Virorum and Mulierum in divinis literis non legimus
Pet. Martyr. Loc. Com. Clas. 2. cap. 2. p. 339. De Choreis, Aretius Problem. 1.
Locus 14. Ames. C. C. l. 5. c. 39. Q. Taffin on Amendment. p. 228. Piscat. in
Matthew. 11, 17. in Observat. Pryn's Histrio-mastix, Index. Dancing.

Lastly, take heed of barrenness under the means of Grace, and of being dead
under lively Oracles. God often makes this sin a punishment of other sins. Mulier
est Viscus toxicatum, quo Diabolus aucupatur. Aug.
Romans 1.21.24. the man that is good, and sincere before God, shall be preserved
from the harlot; but the sinner, the careless, secure, formal, hypocritical
sinner, shall be taken and ensnared by her. Eccles. 7.26. Oh then let us walk
watchfully and humbly with our God, shunning the occasions and provocations to
this sin, then will God preserve us from the sin it self; but if you will not
fly the occasions of sin, God will not preserve you from the sin; and if he
keep you not, you are undone.

Otia, mensa, libri, vaga lumina, verba, sodales:
Haec toll, hanc minus, hos muta, haec cluade, naec fuge, vita hos.
The war is not done, Castimonia fine bello nulla est.
so long as the enemy lives. He that will keep the Jewel of Chastity, must
fight for it. Let us therefore keep a strict Guard over our hearts. Proverbs
4.23. Resist the first motions to sin. Parle not with a Temptation. Genesis 39.9.
Taste not of the Devils Broth, lest you eat of his Beef. Isay 65.4. Kill the
Cockatrice in the shell, quench the fire when it is a spark, mortify sin in
the Affection. Colos. 3.5. Pray for supernatural strength. 2 Cor. 12.9. It Is a
good sign we hate a sin, when we can heartily pray against it. Walk always
as in Gods eye, that is a special preservative against this sin. Job. 31.4.
Prove. 5.20, 21. Joseph might have sinned secret enough, but the remembrance of
Gods All-seeing eye, awed him. Genesis 39.9. He Is a Martyr indeed who can thus
conquer his lusts, Ah! quanti perierunt ab hac una peste, vel fortissimi,
sanctissimi, sapientissimi.
and stronger then Sampson who was entangled with them. Chastity in youth,
Temperance in plenty, Bounty in Poverty, one calls them Martyrdom, without
Bloodshed.

[See more in Mr. John Downams Treatise against Whoredom. Mr. Hildersham on
John 4. Lect. 15. p. 66. D. Ier. Taylor's Holy Living. p. 83. Ward on Matthew.
5.27. p. 216. Taffin on Amendment. l. 2. c. 17. Capel on Tent. p. 2. c. 11, 12.
Sibelius. Tom. 1. conc. 7. in Eccles. 12.2. p. 669* etc. Pryn's Histrio-Mastix.
Actus 6. Scena 4. p. 376. Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 2. and cap. 20. and 61, 62.
Edit. 3..]

13. Fierce. (...).
This is the thirteenth sin which helps to make the last days Perilo s. Men
will then more especially be of a fierce, rude, savage, barbarous, (...),
immites, feroces, inhumani, and ferinis moribus praediti. Ab (...) Private. and
(...) mansuetus, vel ab (...), dies; q. dies est jucunda, ut nox fera.

Rusticani and inciviles quos belluas verius dixeris quam homines. Bulling.


inhumane disposition. They will be cruelly and bloodily disposed. There will
be in them no meekness, nor mildness, to Regulate the Passions, but like
bruit beasts they will be ready to slay all such as oppose them. This is a
fruit of that Self-love, and Covetousness, before mentioned. This fierceness
they will exercise especially against the people of God, whom they hate,
persecute, imprison and slay; and when dead, yet burn their bones: and if the
Lord were angry with Moab, for burning the bones of the King of Edom, a wicked
man, Amos 2.1. then surely he will punish those spiteful Moabites, who burn
the bones of his deceased Saints, as Bucer, Phagius, etc.

Hominum effigies babent, animos ferarum. Seneca.

See Mr. Clerks Mirror. c. 57


This ferity is made one special note of the wicked. Prove. 12.10. and 17.3.
Genesis 49.7. Hence in Scripture they are compared to Lions. Job 4.10. to Wolves.
Hab. 1.8, Bears. Prove. 17.12. Horses which must be restrained from hurting
with bit and bridle. Psalm. 32.19. Serpents. Psalm. 74.13, 14. Dogs. Phil. 3.2.
Mat. 7.6. Boares. Psalm. 80.13. Threshers which bruise and oppress the people
of God. Amos 1.3. Milners that grind them with their cruelty. Isay 3.75. and to
Butchers, which do not only fleece, but flay the sheep. To Cooks, which do not
only dress the flesh, but they break the bones to get out the Marrow. Micah
3.2, 3. Hence we read of 23. sorts of trialls which the Saints were exercised
with by the brutish world. All wicked men as they are wicked, in all ages are
acted by the same Principles: they are ejusdem ferinae, all of one batch.
Heb. 11.3^. to 39. therefore they chose rather to live in Caves and
Wildernesses amongst wild beasts, then amongst those bruits; yea the Saints
have found more favor from beasts, as Daniel from the Lions, and Lazarus from
Dogs; then from their cruel persecutors. Hence David being in a strait,
chooses the Pestilence (though a sad judgment) rather then to fall into the
hands of merciless men. 2 Samuel 24.14.

1. Then let men get Grace, that breeds Humanity, Civility, and candid Carriage
toward all. Such will not, dare not hurt their Brethren in body, Soul, Goods
or Good name. Psalm. 15.3. we need not fear those, that truly fear God. Genesis
42.18. their natural fierceness is subdued and changed, so that they which
were sometimes Lions, are now become Lambs. Isay 11.6. Hence they are called
Sheep, Doves, little children; all which imply harmlesness, and
inoffensiveness. They had rather take wrong, then do wrong. Hence the Apostle
blames the Corinths for wronging and defrauding their Brethren. 1 Cor. 6.7, 8.
why do ye not rather take wrong (says he) why do ye not suffer your selves to
be defrauded? Grace changes the roughness and ruggedness of our natures, it
makes us kind and affable, full of holy sweetness and gentleness. James 3.17.
many think Religion makes men harsh and sour, as if no trees grew in Christ's
garden, but Crab-trees; when Religion makes men meek and modest ( Acts 16.29,
30.33, 34.) courteous and kind. And that 1. In their Censures; where things are
capable of a candid Interpretation, they take them in the best sense. 2. Modest
in their opinions; they are not wise above that which is written, they hunt not
after Novelties, 3. Sweet and lovely in their conversations; they can part with
their own for Peace. Genesis 13.8, 9. Psalm. 69.4. 4. Ready to yield to the
counsels of others, when better Reasons are discovered. Job (31.13.) will not
despite the counsel of his servant. So Naaman harkened to the advice of his
servant, and was cured. 2 Kings 5.12. David, wise as an Angel of the Lord,
yet, harkens to the counsel of a woman. 1 Samuel 25.33. yea so flexible and
docible are they, (...) est ci cur, quales sunt domesticae animantes. (...)
sunt qui naturae ingenium retinent, ut oleaster, insitionem non serunt,
culturam non admittunt. Aretius.
that even a child with Scripture-Reason, may lead them. Isay 11.6. Many think
it a note of a generous spirit, to render evil for evil, blow for blow,
reproach for reproach; but Christ teaches another Lesson. Matthew. 5.38, 39.
Resist not evil (he speaks of private revenge) But he that smites thee on the
one cheek, turn to him the other also (i. e.) we should be so far from revenge,
that we should rather suffer a second injury, then revenge the former. That
which the world counts baseness, and cowardice; the wisest of men calls it our
glory. Metallum est, sed ex imis inferorum fodinis effossum, reprobum and vile
quod nunquam S. Sancti insculptum imaginem admisit.
Prove. 19.11. and 16.19.32. A man of understanding is of a cool spirit, and it
is the glory of a man to pass by an offense. It Is a dishonor to offer wrong,
but none to bear it. The world esteems such men of mettle, as auswer blow for
blow; it is mettle indeed, but it is hellish mettle. Wrong them never so little,
and they will take Gods office out of his hand, they will be their own Revengers,
breaking forth into Duells, which are utterly unlawful, for these Reasons. 1.
Reason it self says, No man may be a Judge in his own cause, especially when
he has lost himself with anger, impatience, and a vindicative spirit. 2. God
has forbidden all private revenge. V. Beesly's Ser. on Romans 12.22.
Levit. 19.13. Matthew. 26.52. Romans 12.19. telling us that vengeance is his, and
he will repay. Deuteronomy. 32.35. God has ordained the Magistrate as his
Vicegerent, to execute Justice on offenders, he bears not the sword in vain.
Rev. 13.4. now he should bear it in vain, if every private person might be his
own Judge, and if the Magistrate neglect his duty, then must we commit our
cause to God, who judgeeth righteously. 3. It Is a fearful thing to kill, or be
killed in our own private quarrel.



1. He that kills is a murderer, and must die for it; now no murderer shall
come into Gods Kingdom. Rev. 21.8. and 25.15.

2. If killed, he dies in the height of Passion and revenge, desiring and
endeavoring to murder another.

[See more Reasons against this sin. Davenant in Colos. 3.13. p. 318. Brochmane
C. C. 2. T. p. 125. Sayrus C. C. l. 7. c. 13. D. Hammon's Practical
Catechism. l. 2. Sect. 5.]

2. As Grace will keep you from being fierce against others Actively, so it
will be a Shield to keep you from the rage of fierce men Passively. Isay
33.15.19. it is disobedience which brings fierce men against a people. Deuteronomy.
28.50. but when we are obedient, God will restrain their rage, and bound them,
as he does the proud waves of the Sea. Job 38.11.

3. Promote Learning; even Humane Learning (we see experimentally) civilizeth
men, and has a great influence on their conversations, It Is as a blew to the
better taking of a right black. See more in my Schooles-Guard. Argument 9. p.
27.
What makes our Welch-men, Wild-Irish, and Indians, so brutish and barbarous,
but want of Learning and Instruction? -- Didicisse fideliter arts, etc.

Nemo adeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem accommodet aurem.
Hor. 4. Labor for that Graceful Grace of Meekness, which is opposite to
this fierceness. Do not only praise it, but practice it. Put it on as your
Garment, yea, as your Ornament. Colos. 3.12, 13. 1 Pet. 3.4.

It Is an honor to Religion, when the Profes^ors of it are gentle, placable,
clement, ready to forget and forgive injuries. None so mild as the meekened
man, Numb. 12.3. Gal. 4.20. 1 Samuel 10. ult. 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. 1 These. 2.7. Genesis
50.19, 20. Levit. 10.3. and 13.8. they seek not revenge, nor do they study how
to render evil for evil, but what was said flatteringly of Caesar, is really
true of them. Nihil oblivisci solet praeter injurias. They forget injuries, and
remember nothing but kindnesses.

To encourage you to labor for this Grace.

V. Clerks Mirror. cap, 92.
1. Consider that Meekness is the Pathway to Peace and Joy. Isay 29.19. Psalm.
37.11. it brings rest to the Soul. Mat. 11.29. There Is no possibility of living
Peaceably in this world without it; we shall meet with so many oppositions,
Tentations, Injuries, Crosses, Losses, that an unmortified unmeekned Spirit
will never endure them. We live not amongst Angels, and perfect persons, but
amongst Lions, Dogs, Devils, froward, wayward, knotty, stubborn, surly, sullen
pieces; yea, the best have their Passions, so that without great meekness and
moderation, no Family, City, Society, or Kingdom, can long endure.

2. It Is an Evidence of our Election. Colos. 3.12.

3. It Is the way to win the most obstinate sinners; the way to break a flint,
is to lay it on a soft bed; it is the soft wool, that dulls the Canon shot.
Romans 12. ult. as we must constantly, and resolutely oppose the sins of such as
belong to us, so if ever we would win them, and do them good, it must be done
with a spirit of meekness, and of mercy. Gal. 6.1. the reproves that come
from spleen and malice never profit, it is love and pity, that winnes men.

See Clerks Mirror. cap. 36.

Ira heroica, ordinata ^os fortitudini, ^ptimum Dei donum. Luther. See Mr.
Beesley's Sermon. on Romans 12.21.190.


Caut. Yet beware of stupidity, for it is Moppishnesse, and not meekness, to be
silent when God is dishonored. A holy Anger against sin, is useful in its
Place. As there is a vicious, inordinate Anger, so there is a Virtuous,
well-ordered Anger, which is an excellent gift of God.

4. The promises of the Gospel belong to such. Isa 61.2, 3.

5. They shall have protection in troublous times. Zeph. 2.3. Psalm. 76.9. God
loves to beautify such with salvation. Psalm. 149.4. and to raise them to
honor. Psalm. 147.6.

6. Instructoin. God will teach them, and make them profit by his Ordinances.
Psalm. 25.8. James 1.21. and 3.13.17.

7. They have best Title to the Earth, the meek shall inherit the earth. Psalm.
37.11. Matthew. 5.5. their meekness shall in no wise prejudice their Temporal
Estate, he dwells at home where ever he is, he is never off his Masters ground:
as the fierce unmortified, turbulent man runs out of all, and loses the
Possession of himself, and all that he has; so meekness keeps a man in
possession of himself, his understanding's clear, his judgement's right, his
Affections composed and settled, so that he can live in any soil; be content
with any condition, and endure any hardship.

Lastly, since in the last days men will be fierce and cruel.

1. Let us pray the Lord to deliver us from cruel and unreasonable men. 2
These. 3.2. beseech him to correct us himself, and not to sell us into the hands
of wicked men, whose mercies are cruelties. 2 Samuel 24.14. Proverbs 12.10.

2. Admire the Goodness of the Lord, who preserves his Lambs in the midst of so
many fierce Lions. Did not the great Lord Keeper of the world, watch his
Vineyard night and day, the Boar out of the wood would soon lay it waste. The
Thorns would soon overtop this Lilly, and the Birds of Prey devour Gods
Turtle.

Object. We see wicked men are quiet and Gentle.

Answ. So is a Lion in his Grate, but let him out, and you will find him a Lion
still. It Is not for want of malice, but for want of power, that they are so
quiet. God chains them, and restraines them. Psalm. 76.10. But if the Lord
should let out their chain, V. A collection of Letters sent to the Protector.
we should find the Atheists, and Papists of the world, as cruel as ever. As
is apparent at this day, in the barbarous, bloody, perfidious dealing of the
Papists, toward the Poor, Innocent Protestants in Savoy.

3. Walk wisely toward those that be without. Colos. 4.5. be exact in your
walking, give them no just cause of offense. Be wise as a Serpent, that you be
not deceived, be Innocent as a Dove, that you prove not a Deceiver. A man that
lives in the midst of Wolves, Lions, wild Boares, and Bears, had need to look
about him.

14. Despisers of those that are good. (...), Bonorum osores and hosts.
This is the fourteenth sin which renders the last Times so Perilous. Men will
be no Lovers ( i. e.) they will be Haters and Despisers of good men, De
personis ac rebus accipi potest; qui net bonum, nec bonus am^nt. Gerhard. in
locum.

Haec vitia privativa per Meiosim pontivum vitium virtuti, qua privant,
contrarium significat. a Lapide.


yea, and of goodness it self ('it is a Meiosis, where less is spoken, then is
meant) and that not with a light or toothless Hatred, but with a deadly, deep,
intolerate hatred. Hence they are called Lions, which greedily tear and devour
the flock of Christ. 2 Timothy 4.17. (as you may see in the preceding Character.)

This must needs be so.

1. If we consider that strong Antipathy and Enmity which is between the
righteous and the wicked, there is an irreconcilable War and Hatred between
them. Genesis 3.15. the righteons man hates not the Person, but the Practices of
the wicked; but the wicked hate both the person and the Piety of the just,
because by their upright walking, they condemn them, and witness against their
sinful Practices, their purity condemns the worlds impurity; their
Loveliness, the worlds maliciousness; their humility, the worlds pride; their
Self-denial condemns the worlds Self-seeking, and their forwardness, the
worlds Luke-warmness, Hinc illae lacrymae. This is the ground of the grudge.
The godly are the light of the world. Phil. 2.15. and the Judges of it. 1 Cor.
6.2. Now the lewd man hates the light which discovers him. John 3.20. and the
Judge which condemns him. This made Cain to slay his Brother. 1 John 3.12. and
the world to hate Christ, because he testified against its evil deeds. John
7.7.

2. In respect of the dissimilitude of their manners. Dispares mores disparia
studia sequuntur, quorum dissimilitudo dissociat amicitias. Cicero de Amicit.
They have contrary Principles, Practices, Ends and Aims. The men of the world
savor only the things of the world, being filled with Covetousness, Pride,
Idleness, Intemperance, Lust. But the godly savor the things of God, being
Holy, Heavenly, Humble, Oderunt hilarem tristes, tristemque ^ocosi. Hor. l. 1.
ep. 18.
Chaste, Temperate, etc. now as similitude is the ground of Love, so
dissimilitude is the ground of Hatred. Prove. 29. ult. The righteons is an
abomination to the wicked, and the wicked is an abomination to the just. So
that there is no communion between this light and darkness, no concord between
Christ and Belial. 2 Cor. 6.14.15. There is a Canonical truth in that
Apocriphall Text. Wisdom 2.12.15, 16.19. it is grievous to us to behold the
righteous, why so? for his life is not like other men's, and his ways are of
another fashion. q. d. Our ways are loose, voluptuous, Epicurean ways; but
his are precise, strict and pure ways, directly contrary to ours. We are all
for our selves, our own ease and goods; they are all for God, his praise and
honor, so that we can never agree. Hence it is, that those whom God hates, the
world usually loves, and those whom God loves, the world always hates. We have
a notable instance in our days, In the Queen of Sweden, who is now turned
Papist, (for what ends she her self best knows) and is blessed, pardoned,
praised, by Pope, Priests, Jesuits, and is sumpteously entertained by others:
when she is blasted, cursed, and abhorred of God, as an horrid Apostate, and
gross Idolater now in a time of glorious light, when the nakedness of the
whore, is so palpably discovered to the world.

3. The godly are the salt of the world, by their savory reproof, and counsel,
and by their holy Example, they help to keep the world from rotting in sin, yea
the whole life of the godly is a kind of tacit reproof of the wicked ways and
customs of the world. 1 Pet. 4.4. Heb. 11.7. Hence comes the hatred. John
15.18, 19.

4. The men of the world are ensnared in many lusts, and lie tumbling like
swine in their own filth: John 5.19. So that they cannot arise to that height
of Sanctity, Self-denial, Patience, humility, etc. which the Saints attain.
This makes them envy the Saints.

5. The godly are chosen out of the world, and therefore they shun all
needless society and intimate familiarity with the wicked. Thus Saul, when he
became a Paul and was changed, he changed his company, Acts 9.19. and this
makes the world hate them, whilst they look upon them as Apostates from their
society. This made the Papists tax Luther for an Apostate, See more Reason in
M^. Young's Cure of Prejudice. p. 1. etc.
Luther confessed it, but he was an holy Apostate, one who had not kept his
promise made to the Devil, and therefore no more to be blamed then a Heathen
for turning Christian, or a Magitian for renouncing his compact with the
Devil, and giving himself to God.

Now, if despising and despiting of good men, and goodness it self, be a sin
and sign of the last times; then ours surely are the last days. Was there
ever more despising of good Magistrates, good Ministers, good people? when were
the Real servants of Christ more despited, not for any evil that they have
done, but because they will not do evil, in denying Ordinances, Order,
Government, etc. yet be not offended, neither marvel (2 John 3.13.) as if some
strange thing had happened to you; you see here it is long since foretold, that
it should be so in these last days. We are apt to marvel when we see the
godly hated, persecuted, tortured, and abused, who ought rather to be loved,
honored, and countenanced for their Grace, but we might rather marvel, if the
world should love them, for this is no new thing, it ever has been so, it is
so, 'twill be so to the end of the world. There ever will be Cains to persecute
Gods Abells, Pharaohs, to opresse Gods Israel, and tares to hinder Gods wheat.
God has so decreed it for the manifestation of the glory of his Justice in the
downfall of the wicked. Prove. 16.4. he will get himself Glory out of their
malice, as the wise Physician extracts a medicine out of Poison;) their very
rage against his people shall turn to his praise, Psalm. 76.10. as we see in
Pharaoh, Haman, Herod. It Is just with him to render tribulation to such as
molest his people. 2 These. 1.6.

2. To try and exercise the Faith, Hope, Patience, and Constancy of his people.
Marcet sine adversario virtus, tunc apparet, quanta sit quantumque valeat, quid
possit patientia ostendit. Seneca l. de Provid. c. 1.
Isay 27.9. 2 These. 1.4. Dan. 12, 10.

3. To wean them from the world, as the Mother lays wormwood on the breast, to
wean the child.

Now since we live in a time wherein the love of many waxes cold both to
Christ, and to Real Christians; let us be Gods witnesses against a sinful
generation. Quos sine fuco bonos comperiemus, hos prae aliis amemus.
The more the world hates the good for their goodness, the more let us love
them. It Is a good evidence that we are Saints, when we can love not only a
Brother or two, but the whole Brotherhood. 1 Pet. 2.17. 1 John 3.14. and all
the Saints, be they high or low. Ephesians. 1.15. when we can love a Saint in rags,
as well as a Saint in Silken robes; a Job on the dunghill, as well as a David
on the throne. It Is easy to love a good man for his Riches, Learning, Parts,
Gifts; this is but a carnal love, and springs from carnal Ends, and
Principles. James 2.1, 2, 3, 4. True love, is a spiritual love, springing from
spiritual considerations, it makes men love the Saints for their faith, zeal,
etc. and not for any by-respect. As it is the property of a Reprobate, to hate a
godly man for his godliness. 1 Kings 22.3. Ezekiel. 13.22. Prove. 29.10. 1 John
3.10. So it argues Grace to love a good man simply for his goodness. See more
Sheffield on Conscience. chapt. 14.
1 Kings 18.3, 4. and 2.4, 9, 10. he that loves one good man truly, will love
all. Quatenus ipsum includit de omni. In his judgment he highly prizeth them,
though they lie amongst the Pots, and be sullyed with many afflictions,
tentations, and reproaches, yet he preferres society and communion with them on
the hardest terms, before all the honors and treasures of the world. Heb.
11.25. he looks upon them as the Right Honorable of the world, They are of the
blood Royal, Christ is flesh of their flesh, he is their Head, and they his
members, he is the Vine, and they the branches, he is their Husband and King, who
has made them all Kings. Hence the Church is called Jerusalem above. Gal.
4.26, in respect of her noble Pedigree, her birth is from above, her
meditations are above, and her conversation is above. Phil. 3.20.
as the Pillars of the places where they dwell, Gal. 2.9, the strength and
ammunition of a nation, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. 2 Kings 2.12. as
the Lords Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. his pleasant Portion. Ier. 12.10. as his
Inheritance. Psalm. 28.9. and 33.12. Isay 19.25. though all the world be his,
yet he esteems it all but dross, and lumber, in comparison of the godly, who
are his jewels; even a people near and dear to him. Mal. 3.17. though they may
lie under some afflictions, yet they are under dear affections, (as we see in
Job, David, Paul) though the gold lie in the dirt, yet it is gold still, and
when we see it is gold, we pick it up, and prize it. David esteemed the godly
the only excellent of the world. See Doctor Boltons Sermon. on Cant. 4.9. p. 43.
Folio.
Psalm. 16.3. and such as truly deserve respect. Psalm. 15.3. God himself prizeth
them above Kings. Psalm. 105.14, 15. he rebukes Kings, yea, and Kingdoms for
their sakes. Isay 43.14. For your sakes have I sent to Babylon, and brought
down all their Nobles. How did God plague those known enemies of his people,
Moab, Ammon, Edom, Tire, Egypt,

Philistia, and Rome Pagan. Arrian. Antichristian.


God has a precious esteem of his people, their persons are precious. Zach.
2.3. their prayers are precious. Cant. 2.14. their Services are precious; mean
works done in faith, excel the Victories of a Caesar, or Alexander. Their
tears are precious. Psalm. 56.8. their names are precious. Proverbs 20, 7.
Psalm 112.6. and their death is precious. Psalm 116.15. when one ask't Master
Fox whether he knew such an honest poor man? I tell you (said he) I forget
Lords and Ladies to think on such. We should love them [ Intensive and
appretiative, majore affectu and effectu] with the choycest of our affections,
and show it in our Actions. We should do good to all, but specially to the
household servants of God. Gal. 6.10. we should more freely and fully
communicate to their necessities ( si caetera sint paria) then to any others.
As God then delights in his Saints, so must we, for Grace puts a luster on
them, which makes them lovely to the godly, and terrible to their enemies; So
that there is more comfort and safety in the society of a few good men, then in
strong confederacies of the wicked. Psalm 48.2, 3, 4. for God dwells amongst
them by his special presence. Psalm 76.1, 2. and walks in the midst of them.
Revel. 2.1. his special hand of protection is over them, lest any should hurt
his Vineyard, he keeps it night and day ( i. e.) continually. Isay 27.3. It
will be our wisdom then to be familiar with them, they will help us Consilio,
Prece, and opere; by Direction, Prayer, and Practice. Their good Example will
quicken us, and be as a Star to direct us, so that by acquaintance with them,
we may come to be acquainted with God himself. As Iron sharpens Iron, and one
living coal sets his fellow on fire, and one courageous soldier, quickens
another? so good company is a great encouragement against those
discouragements, which we meet with from an ungrateful world; and a special
means to keep u^ from Apostasy. Heb. 3.12, 13. Green wood will hardly burn
alone, but put dry wood amongst the green, and all will flame. When the
disciples were altogether in one place, with one accord, in an holy communion,
then the spirit came on them. Acts 2.3, 4. where Brethren are united, there is
the blessing. Psalm. 133.1.3.

VERSE 4. Traitors.
THE last days will be perilous in respect of the many Traitors which will
then abound, who shall ascend to that height of wickedness, that they will
betray their dearest friends, like Judas who betrayed his Master, and is
therefore justly called, the Traitor, by way of eminency. Luke 6.16. So
themselves may be safe, (...), proditores, qui amicissimos produnt. Grotius.
Proditio a conjunctis quibus ut amicis confidimus proficiscitur. Per. Matt.
they care not who suffers. They Will spy and pry into the ways of others, that
they may betray and destroy them, and reveal their secrets. No bonds of
friendship can hold them, but Brother will deliver up the Brother to death, the
Father will rise against his children, and children against their Parents, and
cause them to be put to death. Matthew. 10.21. Christians will betray their
Fellow Christians into the hands of persecutors. Luke 21.16. and people will
betray their Pastors, and put them to death, as did their forefathers of old.
Acts 7.52.

Now of these Traitors, Nihil prohibet per proditores hoc loco generaliter
intelligi quoslibet homines perfidos, quales quidem constat esse multos and in
bello, and in pace, ubicunque locorum. Soto.
there are three Sorts.

1. Traitors Political, 2. Ecclesiastical, 3. Domestical.
1. Some are Political, State Traitors, such as betray the land of their
Nativity, into the hands of its enemies. Subjects are bound by Oath (often-
times) to preserve their native country, to their power. But if they were not
sworn, yet natural and common right calls for it our hands. If the body be in
danger, all the parts and members of it will act for its defense; and therefore
great is the sin of those unnatural children, V. Stobaeum contra Proditor.
Sermon. 37.
which betray their native country (which like a Mother, bred and bare them) to
ruin and to misery. Of this sort are those who betray their trust in
delivering up Castles and Garrisons into the enemies hands.

2. There are Ecclesiastical Traitors, such as betray the truth of God, which
he has committed to his Ministers primarily, and then to all the faithful, to
be kept as a sacred depositum, and choice treasure [1 Timothy 6.20.] esteeming
every particle of it above the filings of the finest gold. Now when men through
fear and cowardlinesse, dare not profess the truth of God in the midst of a
perverse generation that oppose it; God esteems this a betraying of his truth
into the hands of its enemies. Such are false Prophets, Formalists, and
Time-servers, which for a time make a show, but in time of tentation fall away.

3. Domestic Traitors, who betray the lives and estates of their dearest
relations into the hands of their enemies. Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. Matthew. 10, 21.
So that the Poets complaint was never more true.

Non augenda fides, potius minuenda videtur,
Vix cum sint homines tot, quot in orb fides.
Sortitur sibi quisque fidem, sibi quisque Magistrum,
Nunquam plus fidei, perfidiaeque fuit.
It behooves us then to stand upon our Guards, and to watch against false
Brethren. Qui non fidit vix fallitur.
If ever the counsel of the Prophets were in season, it is now. Trust not in a
Neighbor, a Brother, a Friend, no not in thy dearest friend, the wife of thy
bosom; (how many have been drawn aside to errors in our days, by their wives)
for a man's enemies still be those of his own house. Ier. 9.4, 5. Micah 7.5, 6.
In all ages, Gods servants have been infested by Traitors. David had not only
open enem^es, that conspired his ruin. Psalm. 35.20, 21. but, which was worst
of all, his familiar friends did so. Psalm. 41.9, Christ was betrayed by Judas,
and Paul by the Jews his kinsmen in the flesh, Sampson by his wife Dalilah.
Judge. 14.18. and David by his son Absalom. 2 Samuel 1^.14.

This may comfort us when we fall into the hands of Traitors, and Tyrants, it is
no new thing. So did Christ, so did the Prophets, so did the Apostles, and so
may we.

1. Consider, such cannot escape the revenging hand of God, his Justice will
find them out; Zimri had no peace who slew his Master. Nor Sheba that rebelled
against his Sovereign, 2 Samuel 20.22. Nor Absalom who rose against his Father.
See more Mr. Clerks Mirror. Edit. 2. chap. 94.

Proditores tantisper amo dum produnt, ast ubi prodiderint, odi. Dixit.
Antigonus.


2 Samuel 18.9, 10. nor Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who rose against Moses. Nor
Judas that betrayed Christ. Matthew. 26.24. and 27.5. nor the Papists with their
proditorious practices, and principles.

2. They are often punished by men, who though they love the Treason, yet hate the
Traitor. Though they love the Artifice, yet hate the Artificer, and when he
has done his work he has oft-times an halter for his pains, or at best, he
has the honor never to be trusted more; when Baanah and Rechab had
treacherously slain Ishbosheth one of Saul's sons, David commands them both to
be slain. 2 Samuel 4.9. to 13.

As for our selves, let us walk as becomes the Gospel in all simplicity and
godly sincerity, abhoring all Treachery, falsenesse, and perfideousnesse* Let
us be faithful to the truth of God, faithful to the land of our Nativity, and
faithful in all our Relations. Fidelity is the chiefest bond of Humane
Society; take away this, and you take away all Peace and Commerce from amongst
men. It Is only to the faithful that the promises run. Psalm. 31.32. the Lord
will preserve the faithful, and make them to abound with blessings. Prove.
28.10. Let us then resist the Tentations of Satan, it is he that observes the
Covetousness, Hatred, and Malice, which lies hid in the heart of man, and
accordingly stirs him up to Treachery, and betraying of his dearest friends,
See more, Dr. Prideaux, Gowries Conspi^acy, on Sam, 20.1. and Mr. Ienki^ on
Jude 8. Dolus mal^s, and dolus bonus. See Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 41. ct c,
127.
and Relations. Thus he dealt by Judas, he stirred up his covetous heart to
sell and betray his dearest Lord and Master. Luke 22.3, 4. John 13.7.27.

But here a Case and Question may arise, whether all Simulation, Craft, and
Stratagems, be unlawful?

Answ. Simulation is twofold.

1. Unlawful, when men fain or frame any thing against the truth, and to the
prejudice of others, as Peter did. Gal. 2.13. 2. There is a lawful Simulation,
when men do ^ignify something that is only beside the truth, but not contrary
to it. This was the simulation of Joseph, who carried himself as a stranger to
his Brethren in Egypt. Genesis 42. So Christ when he came to Emaus, See more Capel
on Tentat. P. 3 c. ^. Sect. 2. Foedera injuste frangere impium est, sed hosts
fallere nonnun quam justum est Plutarch.
made as though he would go further. Luke 24.28. and Paul amongst the Jews,
played the Jew. 1 Cor. 9.20. Iael is commended, who by a wile destroyed Sisera.
Judge. 4.18, 19, 20, 21. and Jonathan for discovering Saul's malicious intents
against David. 1 Samuel 16.21. Rahab is commended for hiding the Spies. Josh.
2.4. Heb. 11.31. The Gibeonites saved themselves by a politic and prudent
managing of their design. Josh. 9.3, 4.
16. Heady.
In the last days men will be heady, (...), praecipites, temerarii, qui
cupiditatum impetus sine ratione and consil^o sequuntur, instabiles nihil fixum
firmumque tenentes. Espencaeus.
hasty, rash, inconsiderate, they will be carried by the Violence of their
Lusts without wit or Reason. They will set upon things too high, and too hard
for them, like young birds which flying before they are fledged, (...), cado.
fall to the ground, and so break their bones, so much the word implies. They
will make desperate adventures, they will be rash in their words and works,
precipitate and inconsiderate in all their undertakings, Sine judicio quodlibet
attrectant and mutant quadrata rotundis.

Illa dicuntur fieri temete quae ratione non reguntur. Aquinas.


what they do will be Raw, Rude, Indigested, Unconcocted. Hence the word is
rendered, Rash, and unadvised. Acts 19.36. do nothing (...), rashly, The heady
man is like to a man that rides on a headstrong horse, which carries him none
knows whither, yet will not suffer him to descend neither; so that if a man
should ask such a man whither he is going, he must answer whither my lusts, my
profit, pride, and pleasures, will lead me. Hence wicked men are said to break
forth with impudence and violence into sin. Pharaz, disrupit, inundavit.
Hos. 4.2. they break forth, it is a metaphor from Rivers, which in a flood do
violently bear down all before them; or like an army which having made a breach
in a wall, rush with violence into it. The wicked set themselves against
Christ, and break all those Bonds and Laws which he has made to bind them
from sin. Psalm. 2.2, 3. and 12.4. Ier. 44.16.19. Hence they are compared to the
horse which runs dangerously and desperately on the Pikes and Guns. Ier. 8.6.
Job 39.9. to 26. they make childrens play of Gods threatenings. Temeritas est
florentis aetatis, prudentia senectutis. Cicero.
2 Pet. 3.3. This heady rashness is one of the sins of youth which we are
commanded to fly. 2 Timothy 2.22. every age of man has its peculiar sins, old age
is prone to Covetousness, and youth (for want of consideration and experience)
is prone to rashness and headiness. 'Twere giddy young men that gave rash and
inconsiderate counsel to Rehoboam, to the loss of his Kingdom. 1 Kings 12.8.
he would not hearken to the counsel of his grave and aged Senators, but
followed the advice of his young gallants, to his destruction. Hence Paul would
have young men to be wise, discreet, and sober-minded. Titus 2.6. they must be
like those Impostors, Colos. 2.18. that were rashly puffed up with a high
conceit of their own opinions and practice: but they must try all things, and
be well advised what opinions they take up, and not rashly take or mistake any
doctrine. It Is a part of the wicked man's Curse, that not only his devices, but
his very counsels which are the results of reason, shall be precipitate, and
carried headlong. Job 5.13. there is nothing more opposite to counsel, then
precipitation; long deliberation should go before determination, but these men's
counsels shall yet be carried Headlong, they shall either be overhasty in
counsel, or their counsels shall be over-hastily acted to their ruin. Such
Heady, wilful, men never want woe: as appears by the Israelites. Deuteronomy. 1.42,
43, 44. yea, good Iehosaphat and Josiah, paid dearly for their rashness. 2 Chronicles. 20. ult. and those Exorcists, Acts 19.13.16. want of consideration
brings Kings and Kingdoms to desolation. Isay 1, 3.94. and 5.12. Ier. 12.11.
this ruined Ephraim. Hos. 7.2. and as in all things, (...).
so especially in War and Marriage, Rashness is most dangerous, because if
once you err in them, there is hardly any place left for a second error. This
Headiness and inconsideration is the cause of so much sin abounding. Lam. 1.9.
they are none but fools and sinners, which consider not what they do. Eccles.
5, 1.

Temeritas est inscitiae filia.
Now if you would be free from Rashness, 1. Take heed of Ignorance, which is
the Root of Rashness. Prove. 9, 18.

2. Beware of pride. Colos. 2.18. the best swimmers oft-times are drowned,
because they are too bold and ventrous.

3. Ponder and consider your ways. It Is a sign of wisdom so to do. Prove.
13.10. and the way to establishment. Prove. 4.20. 'twas David's commendation,
that he was prudent in his affairs. 1 Samuel 16.18. and the good man orders his
affairs with discretion. Psalm. 112.5. but the fool ^aith, Had I wist,
Insipientis est dicere, non putaram. Cicero.
or thought of this before, it should not have been done. This will be an
Abigail to stop us from doing evil.

1. Consideration puts a bar to sin, by laying open to us all our losses and
hurts by sin, as the loss of Gods favor, the loss of Peace of conscience, and
the loss of Revvard; and so arms the soul against it. We cannot rush into sin
as the wicked do, when we consider the danger that attends it. Ier. 8.6. This
consideration is the pathway to saving knowledge. 2 Timothy 2.7. this religious
sequestring and abstracting our selves from vvorldly affairs, is a means to
get true vvisdome. Intellectus cogitandus principium omnis boni.
Prove. 18.2. This is a spur to Repentance. Psalm. 119.59. Ier. 8.6. Consider
thy latter end how short and uncertain thy days are. If you are to Pray or
Hear, consider what a glorious presence thou art going into. We should Redeem
some time of every day for this Soul-enriching duty. The worldling considers a
field and buys it, he considers a good bargain, and compasses it. The
voluptuous man considers how he may satisfy his lust; and the persecutor, how
he may catch the godly in his nets. But of all studies and considerations,
that is the best; when we study our own hearts, and dwell at home. Hence God not
only commands it, Kashash sig. non simpliciter inquirere, sed studiose ac
diligenter inquirere: sig. seriam and accuratam disquisitionem.
Psalm. 4.4. Zeph. 2. viz. Hag. 1.5.7. Isay 46.8. but he even beseeches us to
practice it. Psalm 50.22. oh consider his dreadful Judgments to prevent them,
and his precious mercies to improve them. 1 Samuel 12.24. this awed Job, 23.15.

[See the Excellency of Consideration. Barlow on 2 Timothy 2.7. Baxter's Saints
Rest. P. 4. p. 147.179. D. Sibbs's Beams of Light. on Ier. 8.6. p. 103. Fenner
on Hag. 1.5.]

17. High-minded.
(...), tumidi, inflati vana de se opinione quae diictur (...), inflor, ^umeo,
superbio. Grotius.
The 17. Character of the last times is this, men will be high-minded, being
puffed up with pride, and high conceits of themselves. Insolent persons that
pretend to great depth of knowledge, yet prefer their lusts and pleasures
before Christ; Qui sibi-ipsis magni pretii videntur homines. Heming. (...),
fu^iose delirans. Aretius.
such as make their own wills their Laws, and prefer their own idle opinions
before the judgment of all the Churches of Christ in the world. These are like
empty bottles, full of nothing but wind. They are so highly conceited of
themselves, that they are even fanatic, and mad again. So much the word
signifies. Properly it signifies to puff up, and metaphorically its taken for
Pride. So 1 Cor. 4.6.18, 19. and 5.2. 1 Timothy 3.6. and 6.4. This is a branch of
the fourth Character before mentioned, men shall be proud, and they shall show
their pride, by their High-mindednesse, and lofty carriage. Get Love, and then
you will be Humble, and not swell with pride because of your Honors, Riches,
Gifts, or Graces. Love is not puffed up with such vain conceits. 1 Cor. 13.4.
It Is knowledge without love, that puffes men up. 1 Cor. 8.1.

But I have spoken fully against Pride in the fourth Character, I shall refer
you thither for fuller satisfaction.

18. Lovers of Pleasures, more then Lovers of God.
This is the 18. sin which renders the last times so perilous, There is an
elegant Paranomasy in the words (...). The Scripture is no enemy to Rhetoric.
See my Schooles-Guard. p. 150, 151.
men will be so volupt^ous, that they will prefer their carnal and Temporary
delights, before Spiritual and eternal ones. As the Gnostics in those times
did, who were g^ven up to filthy lusts, and placed their felicity in living
deliciously; and this is one special and signal note, whereby we may know the
Heretics, and Seducers of the last times; they are men given, 1. Not to
spiritual delights in God, and his Ordinances, as the Saints are. Psalm. 16.11.
and 65, 4. and 84. 2. Nor only to honest and lawful delights, which God
allows us in the liberal use of the creature. Genes. 49.20. Eccles. 2.1. but
3ly, They will be given up to ca^nall, sensual, sinful delights, such as are
agreeable to corrupt nature (1 Timothy 6.5.) which consist in drunkenness,
fornication, riot, and excess. They will be given up to looseness, and
licentiousness, which is one Reason they have so many followers. V. Lactant.
Institut. Divin. l. 3. c. 19.
As Epicurus had more disciples then the rest of the Philosophers, not because
of any truth he published, but because he invited men to pleasures, and carnal
delights, to which our natures are very prone. Such were those Libertines.
James 5.5. 2 Pet. 2.13. Jude 4.18, 19. peradventure they may give God some
external worship of Cap and K^^^e, but they keep their hearts, and best rooms,
for their carnal Lusts and Pleasures. Naturally, all our hearts are full of
this spiritual Adultery, from the womb we run from God, after the vain
delights, which cannot satisfy. James 4.4. Titus 3.3. How many love their
Hawks, Hownds, Horses, etc. more then Jesus Christ, and are at more cost and
pains to maintain them, then they are in maintaining a Minister of the Gospel.
Many are so bewitched with their Lusts and Pleasures, that they do even
sacrifice their Time, Wit, Wealth, Lives, Souls, and all unto them. They are
even led by them. 2 Pet. 2.10. as an Ox to the slaughter. Prove. 7.22, 23.
Against those see Sibel. in Psalm. 16.5. Tom. 1. p. 341, 342. etc.

Harsnet on Repentance. p. 370. etc.

Downams Warfar. l, 2. c. 5.


They make them their chiefest good, and place their happiness in them. How
many spend their precious time in Playing, which they should spend in praying,
and in serving God in some vocation. Those are dead whilst they live. 1 Timothy
5.6. ( i. e.) they are of no use in their places, as Paul said of the w^dow
that lives in pleasures; though her body be alive, yet her soul is dead. So the
voluptuous prodigal, Mortuus per culpam prodigalitatis and luxuriae, revixit
per gratiam poenitentiae.

Dignus est Deorum conviva, qui rebus creatis moderate utitur; qui vero licitas
voluptates contemnit, non jam conviva Dei est, sed consors. Epictet. art. 20.


that spent all on harlots, is said to be dead, Luke 15.24. It argues a noble
and a rised spirit, when we can live above them. We are now Kings sons, and
being born to more high and noble pleasures, we should contemn these base and
low things. If we are Christ's, we must crucify our lusts. Gal. 5.24. deny our
selves, keep under our bodies. 1 Cor. 9.27. and enter in at the strait gate.
Matthew. 7.13. To this end consider.


1. That sensual pleasures are the very poison and bane of all grace in the
soul, Vbi voluptas regnat, ibi virtus exu^lat. V. Papillon on the Passions.
Chapt. 4. and chapt. 17.
they war against the peace and purity of it. 1 Pet. 2.11. they blind the eye
that it cannot attain to saving knowledge. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. the love of pleasures
eats out the love of God and goodness out of the soul. There may be a form
of godliness, See more Burroughs's Moses Choice. cap. 11. p. 115. etc.
but there can be no power, where pleasures are preferred before God. Romans
13.13, 14. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. such make the r^bellies their God, whose end is
destruction and woe. Luke 6.25. Romans 16.18. Philip. 3.19. Many would fain join
God and their lusts together, but they are contraries, which do mutually expel
each other. James 4.4. 1 John 2.15. Sad it is to consider, that those base
impure delights should expel those pure and heavenly pleasures; that those
poor, fading, low things, should be preferred before God, who is an everlasting
fountain, of pure, divine, and spiritual joy. That men should choose rather to
serve this worldly Laban, who so often changes their wages, rather then God, who
is better then his promise, to his people.

2. It Is these sensual pleasures which stop the ears against Gods call, so
that no Reason nor Religion, can work on men. These choke the good seed of the
Word, that it cannot grow. Luke 8.14. let a Minister preach never so
powerfully, persuade never so convincingly, yet if the heart be stopped, and
stuffed with sensual delights, we do but preach to deaf men, who have stopped
their ears against Christ's calls and invitations; so that they cannot, yea,
which is worse, they will not come to him, though he tender them life and
salvation. Luke 14.19, 20. John 5.40. those whose hearts were set on their
Oxen, Farms, Wives, had no desire after Christ. Some make excuses, but he that
had married a wife, was most peremptory; He could not come. Concupiscentiall
lusts draw very strongly, the wife draws more then five yoke of Oxen, so strong
are women, that Solomon, the wisest of men, and Sampson the strongest, were yet
overcome by them. The Italians have a Proverb, that one hair of a woman, will
draw more then a hund^ed yoke of Oxen. Indurandus est animus, and blandimentis
voluptatum procul abstrahendus. Vina Hannibalem solverunt; armis vicit, vitiis
victus est. Seneca, Epist. 3. p. 104.110.
We had need then to watch over our hearts in these lawful delights, least
they should be stolen from Christ. Licitis perimus omnes. We must be moderate
in the use of them, they that have wives should be as if they had none, and
they that rejoice (in lawful liberties) be as if they rejoiced not. 1 Cor.
1.29, 30. we must do by them as Ionanathan did by his honey, See Rules for
moderating our pleasures. D. Hall's Treatise of Christian Moderat. cap. 2. to
11.
only taste of it for his necessary refreshment. 1 Samuel 14.27. or as the dog
does at N^lus, only lap, and away. Else, if you give your self up to inordinate
pleasures, they will ruin you as they did those Epicures. Amos 6.1. to 8. and the
old world. Luke 17.26, 27. and the whore of Babylon, which lives in pleasures,
Revel. ^8.^. and those young Jovialists, who gave themselves up to carnal
delight^. Eccles. 11.9. and the rich glutton. Luke 16. Turn then all your
carnal delights into spiritual ones, Affectanti caelestia, terrena non
sapiunt, aeternis inhitanti, fastidio sunt transitoria. Bern.

Omnis creatura vilescat, ut creator dulcescat.

Sperne siliquas terrae, and dabit tibi Deus Manna coeli.

Mutantur gaudia, non tolluntur.

Voluptates mentis cateris praestant.

1. Ob facultatem in quae existunt,

2. Propter nobilitatem rerum e quibus hauriuntur.

3. Quia firmiores sunt, nec fastidium pariunt. Alsteed.


your vain delights, into divine delights, instead of delighting in corn,
wine, and earthly possessions, delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee thy hearts desire. Psalm. 37.4. That Is the best pleasure which springs from
the knowledge and love of God. We call not upon you to forsake, but to change
your pleasures. Change your sordid, sinful, sensual delights, into sublime,
spiritual, and noble delights. The pleasures of the soul are more vigorous and
masculine; those of the body more soft and effeminate. Sensitive pleasures have
more of the dregs, Intellectual ones more of Quintescence, and so excel all
other pleasures in eleven particulars, [as you may see in that learned
discourse of the Light of Nature, Voluptatem vicisse voluptas est maxima.
Cyprian. Bis vincit, qui se vicit. Prove. 16.32.
by Mr. Culverwell. chapter 17.] It Is indeed the Hardest, but yet it is the best
conquest to conquer sinful pleasures. No victory like this, for he that
conquers an enemy, conquers another, and that an external enemy; but he that
conquers his lust, conquers himself, and so conquers a domestic enemy, which
is the most dangerous; one enemy within, does us more mischief then an hundred
without.

3. The better to wean your hearts from carnal pleasures, consider the vanity
and shortness of them. They are like a fire of straw, a blast, and gone.
Solomon, that had made trial of them all, concludes, Vanity of Vanities, all
is vanity. See Mr. Cotton's Comment on that Text.

Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat. Effoeminat animos
amoenitas. Seneca.


Eccles. 1.2. they are not only vain, but Vanity; not only Vanity, but Vanity
of Vanities ( i. e.) exceeding vain. They are Hu^ks that rather choke, then
satisfy the soul. Luke 15.16. The pleasure passes, and is but for a season,
but the sorrow that attends it is perpetual. Heb. 21.^5. Do not then for a
mite of pleasure, purchase a mountain of misery; for momentany joys, endure
eternal sorrows.

4. They do emasculate and weaken the mind. Who ever was made more learned,
Wise, Courageous, or Religious by them? They rob man of his Reason, and besot
him. Hos. 4.11. they take away the man, and leave a swine or beast in his room.

Vestis pulchra, jocus, potus, cibus, otia, somnus,
Enervant mentem, luxuriamque fovent.
5. This world is a place of weeping, conflicting, laboring, to all the godly,
and not of carnal mirth, and rejoicing; carnal mirth must be turned into
mourning. Si aliqua amisistis vitae gaudia, negotiatio est aliquid amittere ut
majora lucreris. Tertul.

Delicatus es frater si and hic vis gaudere cum seculo, and postea regnare cum
Christo. Hieron.

Nostrae coenae, nostrae nuptiae nondum sunt. Tertul.


James 4.9, 10. the way to Heaven lies through many afflictions. Acts 14.22. we
must sow in tears here, if we look to reap in joy hereafter. 2 Cor. 4.17. Rev.
7.17. we must not expect to enjoy the pleasures of earth and Heaven too. They
that have their portion of pleasure here, must look for none hereafter. Job
21.12, 13. Luke 16.25. Rev* 18.7.

6. Consider, those sensual pleasures end in sorrow. The end of such mirth
(what ever the beginning is) is sorrow. Men call them by the name of Pleasures,
Pastimes, Delights; but in Gods Dictionary their name is, Madness. Eccles.
1.17. and 2.2. Sorrow. Prove. 14.13. and is attended with Poverty and misery.
Prove. 21, 17. This is Adams apple, which cast him out of Paradise; Esaus broth
which cost him his Birthright, Ionathans honey, which being but tasted, had
like to have cost him his life. The whore of Babylons golden cup, which filled
her full of all abominations. Judas sop which made way for the Devil to enter
into him. Who say to God depart from us, but those that Dance? Job 21.10, 11.
who are void of the spirit, but sensual ones? Jude 18.19. Hence some compare
Pleasures to Pills, which are fairly guilt without, and rolled in sugar, but
within are full of bitterness; or like a painted sepulcher, fair without, but
within full of stench and horror. Admit but of one pleasure, and there will
follow a thousand Pangs. Too much of this honey breeds loathing. Prove. 25.15.
and its love is turned into hatred. 2 Samuel 13.15. they are like the book which
John did eat. Rev. 10.9. sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly. We should
therefore look on pleasures, Dum blandiuntur, necant. Vbi voluptas incipit
vivere, ibi sanitas and vita desinit.
not as coming to us, but as going from us: Though they come with a fair show,
yet at parting they leave shame and sorrow behind them. They destroy the health
and strength of the body, and the Peace of the soul, what got David by his
carnal delights with Bethsheba, but a tormenting conscience, which was to him
as the breaking of his bones? Psalm. 51.8. It Is a good observation of
Chrysostom, that we are hurt more by the pleasures of the flesh, then by the
most grievous torments of tormentors; for torments beget Martyrs, Quo quis
remotior a vanis, hoc vicinior veris gaudiis,

Quam suave est istis suavitatibus carere. Aug.


but Lusts do beget Epicures. The very foundation and beginning of true joy,
is to deny our selves in false joy.

7. Even the wiser sort of Heathens have condemned these sensual Pleasures.
Cicero. de Amicit and de senect.
Tully calls them the bait of all evil, with which men are caught as fishes
with an hook; so says another, Carnal pleasures are full of Anxiety, Satiety,
and Sorrow. They pervert the judgemen^, Vespasian was tired with a triumph, and
if our recreations are toylsom, what are our Toils? I four ease be painful,
what is our pain? On this side the enjoyment of God there is no rest; all the
rest is vanity. Venning.
are an enemy to reason, and opposite to Virtue; for Virtue is a Lofty, Kingly,
Laborious, Unconquerable thing; But pleasure is a servile, sordid, idle, weak
thing; delighting in Stews, and Alehouses, in Baths, and banquets. As,
therefore, you love the Peace and Prosperity of your souls, get them mortified
to fleshly lusts and pleasures; for if ye live after the flesh, ye must dye.
Romans 6.13. Now that ye may mortify them.

Get an eye of Faith, get a spiritualized soul, that you may taste and see the
exellencies that are in Christ, yea in his very cross, this will make you with
Moses to contemn the pleasures which endure but for a season, See Moses Choice.
cap. 11. and 26.27. and Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 25. Edit. 3. and cap. 113.
and to prefer sufferings for Christ, before the Crowns and Kingdoms of the
world. Heb. 11.25, 26. faith raises the Heart above these worldly delights.
Cant. 1.3. Psalm. 4.6, 7. by it we are crucified to the world. Gal. 6.14. and
long to be out of it, that we may be with God, our Portion and delight. Romans
8.23. 2 Cor. 5.2. By this we may know whether we love pleasures more then God,
by observing what our hearts are most set upon ( Matthew. 6.21.) and what we make
our chiefest delight; Vbi major sollicitudo, abundantioris amoris est indicium.

Non dubium est quin illud magis amemus, quod anteponimus: Salvian,


when our greatest care, study, and contentment, is in earthly pleasures, and
we can sit down satisfied with them, though we want Gods favor; when we are
not content with God alone for our Portion, but we must have earthly pleasures
to piece out our happiness withal; its an infallible sign of such as love
pleasures more then God.

2. Be diligent in your callings, then you will be out of the reach of many
Tentations, and be freed from many noisome lusts, which pursue and pester idle
persons.

3. Shun the company of such as are given to pleasures; for as a man can hardly
escape free from Blacking, and Meal, that is familiar with Colliers, and
Milners; so he can hardly escape the lusts and pleasures of the world, that is
familiar with voluptuous ones. There is a secret poison and infection in wicked
society, when men are mingled with them, they learn their works. Psalm. 106.35.
Many that have been good whilst they have been in good company (as Iehoash
which was good all the time that good Iehojada lived. Sit aliorum perditio, tua
cautio.
2 Kings 12.2.) yet when they have changed their company, have changed their
manners also. Let the daily falls of others in this kind, make you to fear.

VERSE 5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; from such
turn away.
THis is the last, but not the least sin of the last times. That we may the
better know and avoid the Impostors of the last times, the Apostle comes now to
give us some special marks (for the former 18. are common to the seducers, and
the seduced) by which they may be known; as

1. By their Hypocrisy, they will be glozing Hypocrites, who, under pretense of
piety, will practice all manner of iniquity, making religion a cloak and stale
to cover all their villainies. Such were the Gnostics of old (to whom some
conceive the Apostle had an eye) who were fleshly Libertines, Epiphan. Haeres.
26.
given up to sensuality, and all manner of wickedness, yet made a show of
Piety, and pretended extraordinary holiness, Such are the Papists now on the
one hand, and the sectaries on the other; both pretend singular piety, when
their lives abound with all manner of iniquity. These painted Sepulchers (in
all ages) have been the greatest enemies to Real Saints, as you may see. Cant.
1.6. Isay 66.5. Matthew. 23.34. John 16.1, 2. Acts 13.50.

In these words the Apostle tells us 1. What these men have, viz. A form of
Godliness. 2. What they want. viz. the Power of it. 3. How we must behave our
selves toward them. viz. we must shun their society, from such turn away.


1. For the first, Speciem and inane pietatis simulachrum. Beza.

Hypocritae sunt, qui latentem impietatem specie virtutis tegunt. a Lapid.
Forma est per quod res est illud quod est.


they have [(...)] a vain and empty show of Faith and Holiness. They are not
men without the Pale of the Church, such as Heathens and Jews, which are open
enemies to the Gospel; but they have a form of Godliness, an external
profession of Religion in Words, Ceremonies, and Gestures; they make great
shows, and put on the Vizard of piety; like stage players, they act the part
of a King, but strip them of their robes, and they are beggarly Rogues. They
have non (...) sed (...), not the true form and essence of Godliness, which
consists in an inward change, and does denominate and give being to things:
but they have formality or an outvvard show and shadovv of Holiness. Like
Pictures and Images, Against Hypocrisy, See Dyke on the Heart, and M. Corshels
Treatise against it, and M. Ant. Burges Spi. Refining. 2 P. Ser. 38, 39, 40,
41, 42 M. Youngs Cure of Misprision. Sect. 70. p. 130. Bolton of Psalm. 1. p.
24. etc. Fenner on Isay 58.4. p. 407. Fol. p. 2.
which have an external show and shape of a man, whose lineaments and
proportion may be so drawn to the life, that there wants nothing but life
indeed to act them: they will be great professors, and look what a sincere
Christian has in Substance, that have these Formalists in Semblance, they have
no life, no power, no principle of operation in them.

2. They want the power ( i. e.) the truth of Godliness, Quidam volunt (...)
poni pro (...), nam veritas tei cujusque ex vi and operatione deprehenditur.
Gerhard. in locum.
which consists in true faith, purifying the heart. Act. 15.9. in love
unfeigned to God and our neighbor. 1 Timothy 1.5. and in the internal and
spiritual obedience of the heart, worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth. John
4.24. It Is a professing of the truth in truth, and walking in the power of it.
But alas where shall we find this? The form indeed is frequent, but where shall
we find the power of grace, the beauty of Holiness, and the efficacy of the new
creature? do not most resist that inward virtue and power of godliness, by
which the heart should be renewed, and the conversation rectified? So that
formality, formality, formality is the great sin of England at this day, under
which the land groans. True, the form and profession of religion abounds, but
alas for the vain, carnal, covetous, proud, censorious, sensual walking of the
professors of it. The complaint is general, there is not that Mortification,
Self-denial, and Circumspect walking as formerly. There Is more light, but
less life; more shadow, but less substance; more profession, but less
sanctification, then formerly. There is more fasting, praying, preaching; but
where is the Practice and Power of Religion? as Isaac said to Abraham, behold
the wood, but where is the Lamb? so behold the Duties, but where, oh where is the
life, the power, the truth of what is done? The voice is Jacobs voice, but the
hands are the hands of Esau; for they deny the power of Religion not only in
their hearts, but also in their works. Titus 1.16. 1 Timothy 5.8. they so live, as
if Godliness were but an aerie notion, and a matter of fashion without all
force or efficacy. The form of godliness is easy, Quid prodest si Deum
gestamus in frente, and vitia in animo recondamus? Aug.
and cheap service, and so has many followers; bodily exercise, and a bare
observation of the Letter of the Law, is delightful even to Pharisees; but the
life and power of Godliness, is hard and ha^sh to flesh and blood. Matthew. 7.13.
Luke 13.24. 1 Pet. 4.18. it teaches high and hard Lessons, such as
Self-denial, Mortification, resisting sin and Satan, living by Faith,
Patience, yea, joyfulness in sufferings, etc. these spiritual Lessons are
distastefull to carnal men, and therefore few they be that go this way.

The Text may be considered two ways, Relatively, or absolutely.

1. Relatively, as it relates to the 18. sins before mentioned, so this sin is
the cloak to hide and cover them all, men will be lovers of themselves, but
under a form of Godliness. Hence Observe. That a man may have a form of
Godliness, and yet live in all manner of wickedness. It Is true, the Power of
Godliness, cannot consist with the power of Ungodliness; but the more the power
of Godliness is lifted up in the soul, the more the power of Ungodliness will
be suppressed, as the house of David grows stronger and stronger, so the house of
Saul grows weaker and weaker. But yet the form of Godliness, may stand with the
power of Ungodliness. A man may be a glorious Professor in the highest form,
and yet a Puny in the form of Grace. He may be a blazing Comet for profession,
and yet be a Devil incarnate, in life and conversation. The Scribes and
Pharisees were glorious Professors, and yet but painted Sepulchers, filled with
pride and oppression, even when they were murdering Christ, they had a form of
godliness. John 18.28. they would not go into the Judgement-Hall, lest they
should be defiled, yet think it no defilement to crucify Christ, and after they
had crucified him, they had a form of godliness; when Judas brought the money
to them. Matthew. 27.6. they refused to take it, because 'twas the price of
blood; and yet they refused not to crucify Christ. Thus Herod when he beheaded
John Baptist, does pretend Religion, it was for his Oaths sake; and under
pretense of a Vow at Hebron, rises in rebellion against his Father, and Herod
under a pretense of worshipping Christ, seeks to kill him. Matthew. 2.8. Iehu
pretends the destruction of Baal, but intends the Kingdom to himself. Saul made
a great show, and killed Witches, yet at last runs to them for help. Demetrius
is zealous for Diana, but it is to preserve his own Silver Trade. The
Anabaptists under pretense of Liberty, destroy Magistracy. The Pope began his
Bulls. In nomine Domini. The Papists cry up the Church, that they may the
better destroy it. They put on a fair glove on a foul hand, and get on the
Vizard of Holiness, the better to deceive. The Devil gets much by such, and
therefore he transforms himself into an Angel of light. No sword like Goliahs,
Vomicae sunt and dehonestamenta religionis, qui sub forma ejus vim abnegant,
quorum culpa fit ut religio male audiat, D. Sibbs Concio ad Clerum. In 2 Timothy
1.14.
especially when wrapped up in an holy Ephod. Of all Devils, the Sanctus
Satanas, the white Devil is the worst, and most dangerous; and therefore when
they cry Ave, do thou cry Cave, when they cry Domine, remember it is but in
Nomine. Saul may tell David of a marriage, Ab hypocritis multo majus est
periculum Ecclesiae quam a manifestis hostibus; nam Tyranni sunt extra
Ecclesiam and omnes eos metuunt and fugiunt ab illis sicut a lapis ^ves: sed
hypocriti sunt in external societate Ecclesiae, and veniunt ^ecti induviis
ovium. Alesius in locum.
when he intends his funeral. 2 Samuel 18.21. many are Cato's without, and Nero's
within; open enemies are better then such secret ones, for when the dog
barks, we may prevent the biting. The Devil cannot endure that sin should be
seen in its proper dress, for then it would be so odious that all men would
abhor it; the Devil therefore puts a garment and cover upon it; Hence we
read of a cloak of Covetousness. 1 These. 2.3. and a cloak of Malice. 1 Pet.
2.16. So Pride goes under the cloak of Decency, and Drunkenness of good
fellowship. Ungodliness could drive no Trade without these cloaks; as a
Fisherman could take no fish, if he had not a bait as well as a hook; so in
every sin there is a bait as well as a hook; a bait of profit, pleasure, etc.
now the Devil hides the hook, and shows the bait, and so makes it take. How
many in our days pretend Religion, but intend their own interest and
advancement. Like Maximilian the Emperor, that pretended to Reformation, and
thereupon pulled down many golden Images, but (says Sleiden) it was not out of
love to the Reformation, but out of love to the gold of the Images. To make you
abhor this sin, consider.

1. That this dissembled Piety, is double iniquity; what a cursed Practice was
it for Iesabel to proclaim a Fast, that she might murder Naboth? 2. As his
horrible Hypocrisy, so it is horrible Atheism also. It Is one of Machiavells
Maxims. I would (says he) have great men to have a show of Holiness, Religion
it self should not be cared for, but only the Appearance; because the credit
of it is an help, but the use a cumber. Machiavell.
because it makes for their advantage; but the power of Godliness is a burden.
They may serve themselves with a show of Holiness, but the truth of Godliness
will not abide it. 3. 'T^s a sin that makes Religion a footstool to iniquity,
and God himself a Pander to your lusts. 4. It Is blasphemy against Religion, and
causes it to be blasphemed, and therefore God never suffers it to go
unrevenged, but sooner or later he will uncase all those that dawb over their
wickedness with pretenses of Godliness. He will send the sword against such
Hypocritical ones, as a people of his curse. Isay 10.6. Oh then let us take
heed of this Land-destroying, and soul-murdering sin of Formality, which so
exceedingly abounds at this day; if any sin ruin England, it is this. It Is said
of King Shishak (1 Kings 14.25, 26, 27.) that he should take away the shield of
gold out of Solomon's Temple, and Rehoboam made shields of brass instead of
them. There was a time when the Professors of England were shields of gold,
when we lived together, and served God with one heart, and one way, in
sincerity and simplicity of heart: but now our shields of gold are turned into
shields of brass (brass may shine more then gold, but there is great difference
in their worth) True devotion is now turned into Hypocritical dissimulation;
and therefore seriously ask your selves this question, Am I a shield of gold,
or of brass? am I a fixed Star, or a blazing Comet? a painted or a living
man? a Formal, or a Real Christian? if you have only a Form: So had Judas and
the Pharisees which are now in hell. Matthew. 5.20. This may as soon carry you to
heaven, as a dead horse can carry a man a journey, a painted ship save a man
from drowning, a painted Helmet save the head from wounding, or painted food
keep a man from starving.
Quest. But how shall I know whether I be a mere Formalist, or whether I have
the power of Religion in me?

Answ. First see whether any of those 18. sins before mentioned, do live and
reign in thee; if so, thou have but a form of Godliness: for if thou had the
Power, it would conquer the power of all those sins. A form of Godliness, and
the power of sin may dwell together, but the power of godliness, and a form of
sin, cannot dwell together, much le^s the power of Godliness, and the power of
sin. Venning.
As we say of a furnace; it is of no use, if it s^parate not the dross from the
silver; and a sieve is of no use, if it separate not the bran from the flower;
so may I say of godliness, if it conquer not all thy ungodliness, it is but a
naked, empty, powerless thing.

2. The formal Hypocrite is all outside in his most spiritual performances;
all duties must be serviceable and subordinate to his private ends, and
interests. View him in his intellectuals or Morals, and you shall find self and
formality in all.

1. His knowledge is merely notional, discursive, and speculative, it is in his
head, Habent cognitionem pure speculativam, non affectivam. Aquinas.
and not in his heart. Hence it is called a Form of Knowledge, ( i. e.) a mere
empty shadow, and show of Knowledge. Romans 2.20. But he that has the Power of
Godliness, has a Rooted, Affective, Saving, Sanctifying, Experimental,
Practical knowledge. He knows Christ as the truth is in him. Ephesians. 4.21. he
knows, and does Christ's will. John 13.17. It Is a soul-convincing and
converting, a sin-crucifyng, and conquering Light. Ephesians. 5.14. It Is not a
dim, glimmering, vanishing Light; but a through, soul-awakening,
soul-enlivening Light.

2. The Formalists Obedience and Practice is merely extenal in words and shows;
In their deeds they deny the Power of Godliness; they live as if Godliness
were but an empty name, and matter of fashion, void of all force and efficacy.
Such are like a wicked Minister in a white Surplice, Extime lineus, intime
lanius, fair without, but foul within; or like an Inn that has an Angel
without, and a Devil within. Of such we may say as Erasmus said of a
Friars-cowle, it covers a multitude of sins. But the truly godly man does all
with Life, Spirit, and Power, as David when he danced before the Ark, did it
with all his might. 2 Samuel 6.14. so what ever he does for God, he does it with
all his might. Eccles. 9.11. As they that love the Lord, so they that serve the
Lord, are like the Sun when it goes forth in its strength, which consumes and
dispells those mists and clouds which hinder its light* Judge. 5. ult. This
Power of Godliness does infinitely transcend all Forms, for what is the shadow
to the substance, what is the Husk to the Kernel, the Chafe to the Wheat, or
the box to the Jewel? what is darkness to light, deadness to life; the
picture to a man, the counter to gold, or Earth to Heaven.

3. He comes short in all Ordinances, if he Read, Pray, Hear, or frequent the
Sacrament, it is all pro forma. God is nigh to their mouths, but far from their
reins. Ier. 12.2. they perform all the duties of Godliness, without Godliness,
they do (externally) what the good man does, and yet like Judas, they are but
Devils. Ordinances may be frequented, and yet no change wrought. Let us
therefore labor for the Life and Power of Religion in our souls. Let Us not be
slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Romans 12.11. Let
us Hear the word attentively, receive it beleevingly, Practice it
conscientiously; Pray with Power, communicate with sincere and earnest desires
after Christ, rest not in the outward baptizing with water, but get the inward
baptizing with the holy Ghost, which may be like fire, to refine and purify the
soul. Rouse up your selves, end shake off that spiritual dullness, and
drousiness which clogs you in duties, lets break through all those
difficulties, and dangers, which lie in the way of Grace. Like so many
spiritual Sampsons, we should break all those cords of Sin and Satan, which
would hinder us in our Christian course. To this end consider.

1. That formality and spiritual sloth is very displeasing to God, it being
directly opposite to his nature, who is a spirit infinitely active and
stirring, and cannot endure dead services. Seee how contemptibly he speaks of
outward services, which separated from inward obedience. Isay 1.11. to 16. To
what purpose is your Sacrifices? I delight not in them, who required this at
your hands? your Oblations are va^n, your Incense are abomination, I caunot
away with your Assemblies, my soul hates them, they are a trouble to me, I am
weary of them. Scarce any sin has harder terms given it in Scripture, then
this of formality, it is compared to Idolatry and Murder (two crying sins;) to
the offering of a dog or a swine in sacrifice, which (in the time of the Law)
had been a heinous offense. Isay 66.3, 4. A bare performance of duties, is
cheap and easy, and is praised in the world; but inward obedience is hard and
hateful to corrupt men. Hence like Ephraim ( Hos. 10.11.) men love to tread out
the corn where they may eat at pleasure, but they love not plowing; that is hard
and hungry work.

2. Consider, formality and spiritual sloth loses all, a man may go a great
way in Religion, and yet for want of a little more pains lose all. Prove.
12.27. The sluggard roasts not what he took in hunting; he took some pains to
hunt for it, but for want of a little more pains, he lost all. The wicked and
slothful servant had his Talent taken from him. Matthew. 25.26. he lost not his
Talent, but because he did not improve it to his Masters advantage, he lost
all. it is not sufficient we do no hurt, but we must do good, else we are but
like painted fire, which as it is heatlesse, so it is useless.

3. He lays himself open to Satan's Temptations, by his carelessnesse he Tempts
the Tempter, and gives him great advantage against his soul; like secure Laish,
which became a booty to its enemies. Judge. 18.10. we are like men upon a river,
if we row not against the stream, we go down; like the Smiths forge; no
blowing, no burnig. It Is the seething pot which keeps off flies, as for the
field of the sluggard, its grown over with nettles, and the stone-wall thereof
is broken down. Prove. 24.30.

4. Consider that formality and spiritual sloth is always a forerunner of
ruin to a person, A Reverend Divine observes four sad presages of some
judgment, yet coming on England. The first is the great indifferency about the
truths of Christ.

2. The great want of the power of godliness.

3. The great contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel.

4. The great inconsideration of the Death of so many choice Prophets and
Servants of God. Mr. Obad. Sedgwick at Mr. Strongs Funeral.


or Nation; where this sin raign^s, destruction is at the heels of it. Isay
64.7. as soon as ever the Prophet had complained, There is none that stirs up
himself to call on God, he presently adds, Thou have consumed us because of
our iniquities. There Is nothing hastens judgment, and provokes the Lord to
remove the Gospel like this. Rev. 2.5. and 3.15, 16. This ruined the Prelacy,
they were (of late) all for outward pomp, and formal service, in bowing to
Altars, setting up Images, reading of Service, etc. but deadly enemies to the
Power of Religion, and for this God spued them out. As zeal and favor is a
means to turn away wrath. Numb. 25.10, 11. So formality and coldness
increases it. Certainly, if England go on to contemn Gods Ordinances, despise
his Ministers, profane his holy things, and to slight the tenders of grace
made in the Gospel; God will slight us, and give his Gospel to a people that
shall yield him better obedience. And since we will not awaken our selves, God
will awaken us by some dreadful judgments; and since we will not strip our
selves of our sins, he will strip us of his blessings. Hos. 2.3. and consume
us after all the good which he has shevved us; Josh. 24.20. that as we have
been famous for Privileges, Victories, and Success; so now we shall become
infamous to the Nations round about us, for our abuse of these mercies. If any
sin ruin Eugland, 'tvvill be the Formality, Hypocrisy, and unfruitfulnesse,
under those rich means which we enjoy, which will certainly do it.

Now if the state of those that have but a form of Godliness be ^o dangerous,
how sad is their condition, that have not so much as a form? that have neither
shadow nor substance, but are open Godless, Graceless, worthless men, that
are hardened, habituated, desperate sinners; such as from top to toe, See
Schooles-Guard. Rule 12.
inwardly, and outwardly, are nothing but sin; as it is said of Antichrist, that
he is a man of sin. 2 These. 2, 3. So are these, men composed an^ compounded of
it; they draw on iniquity with the cords of vanity. Isay 5.18. and are so set
on sin, that they use all means and provocation, to draw themselves to a
violent acting of it, and continuance in it. He that has but a form of
godliness is an Hypocrite, but he that has not a form, is an Atheist. An
Hypocr^^e is a masked Devil, and an Atheist, is a Devil unmasked; such are
our Quakers; See an excellent description of these Monsters, not men; in a book
entitled the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers. p. 28. etc.
an Atheistical generation of profane men, that neither fear God, nor
Reverence man; Gods Sabbaths they profane, they neglect their callings, contemn
the scriptures, vilify Prayer, and all Ordinances, never give Thanks at their
meals, Rail on Magistrates and Ministers, dishonor their Parents, outrun
their wives, neglect their families, being full of Lying, Railing, Idlenes^,
and all unrighteousness. If these be Saints, who are Scythyans? These sin not
through weakness, but through wilfulness; not through Passion or precipitation,
but deliberately, electively, V. The Relation of Nayle^s Trial before the
House.
resolutely, (they tell the Magistrate to his face, that they will seal their
high and horrid blasphemies with their blood; it is time such corrupt blood were
let out of the body) they devise mischief, and set themselves in a way that is
not good. Psalm. 36.4. as the liberal man devises liberal things, and by them
is established. Isay 32.8. so the wicked man devises wicked things, Monstrum
nulla virtute redemptum. Juven. Q^id eo infelicius cui jam esse malum necesse
est? Seneca.
and by them is ruined. V. 7. Though favor be showed to the wicked, yet are
they so wedded to their sin, that they will not learn Righteousness. Isay
26.16. It Is the height of misery when men have sinned so long, that they have
brought themselves into a necessity of sinning. These are not only in a
dangerous, but in a damnable condition; what Solomon says of the Harlots
guests, is true of them: they are in the depths of hell. Prove. 9. ult. all such
(for present) are far from salvation, such as frequent the Ordinances, and live
soberly, though they be not yet alive, yet they sit in the winds way, and
there is more hope of them; as Christ said of the discreet Scribe, thou art not
far from the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark 12.34.

Now if a man may live civilly, soberly, religiously, confess his sins, Fast,
Pray, frequent Ordinances, give Alms, and reform many things, How far a
Reprobate may go. See my Beauty of Holiness. cap. 2. Edit. 2. p. 26. and
Hildersham, John 4. Lect. 37. and Ward on Matthew. 5.34. and Doctor Bolton. See
on Isay 58.2. p. 263.265. etc. Altingius; Problema 51. Tom. 2. p. 192.
Suffragium Britan, in Synod. Dordrech ad Art. 5. p. 246.
and yet come short of Heaven; where then shall the wicked and ungodly appear,
who come short of those, that come short of Heaven?

2. Let us shake off this foul murdering sin, and awaken our selves, that we
may awaken God; if ever there were a time to cry aloud, it is now, when the Lord
seems to be asleep, the work of Reformation seems to go backward; children are
come to the birth, and there wants strength to bring forth: By our Prayer let
us play the Midwife, and help the Man-child of Reformation into the world, let
us give the Lord no rest, till he make Jerusalem the praise of the world. Isay
62.1. See how the Church expostulates the case with God, and by an holy
violence, doubles and trebles her suit, the better to awaken God. Isay 51.9,
10. Awake O Arm of the Lord, awake, awake, and put on strength. God by his
judgments has made many gaps in the Nation, let us humble our selves, and lie
in the gap, and make up the breach; when the Sea has made a breach, so long as
the breach continues, the water overflowes the land, but the way to stop it is
not to murmur or quarrel one with another, but we must fall every one to his
work, and so make up the breach. Remember our time is short, our work is great,
and our wages unspeakable, we serve a Master, who will not let any man serve
him for naught. He Will reward every man according to his works, such as sow
liberally, shall reap liberally, and the more active we have been for God, the
greater our reward shall be. Let us not then give Satan occasion to insult and
say, Lord, my slaves and servants are more active for me, then thine are for
thee; mine can spend their Time, their Estates, and their Lives for me, and in
my service; but thine grudge at every thing they do, or suffer for thee. Let us
by our selfe-denying lives confute this slander, let the zeal for Gods honor,
consume us, and all that we have. And if ever there were a time to rowse up our
selves out of our formality, it is now, when sin is grown so impudent, and
insolent.

1. Let us sweep before our own doors, and stir up our selves against our own
personal sins, against that Atheism, Hypocrisy, and Formality, that sticks
so close unto us. Let Us know the Plague of our own hearts, and arm against the
sins of our complexion, constitution, vocations. So did David. Psalm. 18.23.

2. Let Us stir up our selves against the sins of the age we live in. See Mr.
Strong on that Text. in his 31. Ser. p. 735.
The Apostasies, Heresies, Blasphemies, that we daily hear of, should be as a
sword in our bones, we should be deeply affected with them, and show our
dislike of them. Neh. 13.11.17. Ier. 13.17. Ezekiel. 9.4. Rev. 2.2. We must out of
an holy singularity, See Mr. Gournalls accurat^ Treatise on Ephesians. 6.10. p. 7.
witness against the sinful courses of the world, Romans 12.2. we must do more
then others. Matthew. 5.47. the way of the righteous is on high, above the reach
of carnal men. Prove. 15.24. and therefore when we Pray, it should not be pro
forma, but with life and quickening. Hence David prays, Psalm. 80.18. quicken
us O Lord, that we may call upon thy Name. We should stir up our affections
in this duty, fire not stirred, dies; but stirred, gives heat. 2 Timothy 1.7.
there is no stirring in formality, and so no heat. Hence Christ baptizeth all
his, not only with water, but with fire, Matthew. 3.11. which makes them full of
activity and zeal.

2. Take heed of Formality in Hearing, attend as for your lives, with Life,
Faith, Obedience; come to these lively Oracles, with lively affections. Acts
7.38. be transformed into the Image of the word, Romans 6.17. act the Graces of
the spirit in Hearing, when you hear of Judgments, tremble; of the Promise,
believe; of the Commandments, obey.

3. In observing the Lord's Day, we must not barely do the duties of it in a
flat and formal way, but we must make them our delight. Isay 58.13. we should
rejoice that we have such a day wherein to glorify God, and to meditate on his
word, and works; we should esteem it as an Honorable day, it is one thing to
keep a Sabbath, another to keep it as an high day, a day of honor, laying
aside all worldly thoughts, words, and works; as too base and mean, for so
high a day.

4. In works of Mercy, See Mr. John Downam's plea for the poor. and Mr. Bernard
of Bat. his way to good works.
we should not barely show mercy, but Love mercy. Micah 6.8. God loves a
cheerful giver. We should be glad of an opportunity to express our Love and
Thankfulness to God. We should think nothing too good for God, who has
thought nothing too dear for us. Bring costly services, put him not off with
light and slight duties: which cost you nothing. David would not offer to the
Lord of that which cost him nothing. 2 Samuel 24.24. The fat and best must be
given to him. Levit. 3.9. Numb. 13.12. Learn of worldly men, see how active
they be in Seed-time, and Harvest, for a little temporal gain; consider how
active and stirring, the devil is to do mischief. Job 1. 1 Pet, 5.8. and if
Heathens have been so resolute to walk in the name of their Dung-hill-Gods [
Micah 45.] we should much more resolve to walk in the name of our God for
ever, who is a better Master, has better work, and better wages.

2. Get your Graces quickened, 1. Let your faith be a lively, stirring,
operative faith. Gal. 5.6. James 2. by this we conquer the world; to conquer
the material world; (with Alexander) is not so great, and so glorious a work,
as to to conquer the malignant world. 2. See that your Hope be an active,
lively hope; does it make thee contemn both the worlds promotions and
persecutions, its frowns and favors? can be content to perish, so Christ may
flourish; to be nullified, that he may be glorified? then have thou cause to
bless God. 1 Pet. 11.3. Blessed be God, who has given us a lively hope. 3.
Let your Repentance be sound and saving, even Repentance unto life, a turning
from darkness to light; converted men, are quickened men. Ephesians. 2.1.


3. Get all the Powers of your soul quickened and enlivened.

1. Get your understanding enlightened with saving knowledge, this is the life
of the mind, Psalm. 119.144. Give me understanding, and I shall live. Maxima
pars sanitatis est, Velle sanari. Clemangiis.
2. Get your wills conformable to Gods will. It Is the happiness of the
Creature, to resemble the Creator. The will is the man, get this bended,
rightly biased and reformed, and all is done. 3. Get your affections
quickened, they are the feet upon which the soul runs the way of Gods
Commandments. Eccles. 5.1. Psalm. 119.32. and the wings by which we fly in his
service, Affec^us virum indicat.
they show what we are, and do denominate the man; that we are, that we Love
and Desire to be.
Object. But methinks I hear some gracious souls bemoaning themselves, and
groan under that formality, dullness, deadness, heaviness, and
indisposednesse, which they still find within them, notwithstanding all their
stirring and striving, and praying against it.

Answ. This has been, is, and will be still, the condition of Gods servants,
whilst they are in the world. Heaviness and Holiness, weakness, dullness,
and dutifulness, may subsist together in the same soul; as we see in David,
Asa, Josiah, Job, Peter, Luther, no Saint on earth; Sine omni macula. James
3.2. In many things we offend all. David was a man after Gods own heart, yet
how does he beg for quickening, and for life, which implies a sensiblenesse of
dullness and deadness in himself. Psa. 73. and 119. and yet he had an
intensive love to God, to his Saints, his truth and worship; what bitter
lamentation did Paul make on this account. Romans 7. the purest gold has yet
some dross, the best corn some weeds, the finest wool some moaths, the best
wine some lees. The best man whilst he is in the Vale of Tears will have cause
to cry, A necessitatibus meis libera me Domine. Deliver me O Lord from my
invincible infirmities. viz. Faintness, Drowsinesse, Indisposedness, etc. the
best here are like Prisoners, which though they be got out of prison, yet have
bolts on their legs still, so that they cannot run so fast as they would. Like
a bird with a stone tied to the leg of it, that fain would ascend and be gone,
but cannot. Though they find sometimes a loathnesse and indisposition to
duties; yet have they no loathing of Duties, or decrying of Ordinances. There
may be a weariness in, but not a weariness of Duty. Grace is still
predominant, and so denominates. A part praedominante fit denominatio.
We call it a Corne-field, though there be some weeds mixed with it; and white
paper, though it have some spots on it. Hence Christ excuses his sleepy and
heavy disciples. Matthew. 26.41. the spirit ( i. e.) the regenerate part is
willing, ready, cheerful, to watch, pray, do and suffer for me; but the flesh
( i. e.) the unregenerate part, is weak, impotent, and unwilling to spiritual
duties, till grace subdue it, and bring it into obedience. Christ in much love
and pity does pass by and pardon the weaknesses and infirmities of his people.
A bruised reed he will not break. Matthew. 12.20. he that will not have us to
reject such as are weak in the faith, will not reject them himself. Though it
be but smoke, and not a flame, though it be but a wick in the Socket, likelier
to dye and go out, then continue, which we use to throw away: yet he will not
quench it ( i. e.) he highly prizeth it. It Is a Me^osis. Love.
Romans 14.1. See how gently he deals with Peter, John 21.15. to put him in mind
of his threefold denial, he does not harshly upbraid him with it, but only in
a mild manner ask him thrice, Peter love thou me? He takes no notice of the
sins and infirmities of the people, so as to impute them to them, or condemn
them for them. See that Text clearly vin^icated and expounded in Mr. Ley's
Annot. on the Place.

See Mr. Trap on that Text.

See Mr. Bridge his Ser. on that Text, and Hildersham on John 4 16. Lect^^ 1.


Numbers 23.21.22* Cor. 5.21. As a Father pit^eth his children, so does the
Lord pity his. Psalm. 103.13. he spares them as a man spares his Son that
serves him. Mal. 3.17. and will not reject their Services, though mixed with
many weaknesses, Zach. 3.3, 4. we have a merciful High Priest, full of
compassion, who is touched with the sense of our infirmities. Heb. 2.17. and
4.15. In all our afflictions, he is afflicted. Isay 63.9. he knows whereof we
are made, and remembers that we are but flesh. To express his Pastoral and
Paternall affection toward them he has promised, To gather the Lambs with his
arm, and to carry them in his bosom, to bind up the broken, and strengthen the
weak, to seek that which is lost, and bring again that which was driven away,
and to punish their stout and strong enemies. Isay 40.11. and Ezekiel. 34.16.
Christ will have none to despise his little ones. Matthew. 18.5. Be humbled then,
but be not dejected or discouraged, Quicquid sumus, imperfecti sumus, ad
intelligendum difficiles, and tradi, ad obliviscendum faciles and proni, Abbot
contra Thomson. cap. 20. ubi plura.
for these invincible infirmities of weakness, passion, forgetfulness, etc.
which clog us here. Every Christian carries his clog with him, (says Luther.)
God has reserved perfection for Heaven, there our hearts shall be always in
tune; here our greatest perfection is to bewail our imperfections, and our
greatest Righteousness, to lament our Unrighteousness. We are apt to have
hard conceits of God, and to judge of him by our selves, but his thoughts are
not our thoughts, nor his ways our ways. Isay 55.8. There is no God like our
God, for pardoning, and passing by the sins of his people. Exodus 34.6, 7. Micah
7.18. our distempers cannot distemper him, nor our infirmities interrupt his
favor. The marriage knot is not broken by every falling only, nor the League
between Princes broken by the wrongs done by Pirates. The sickness or weakness
of the child, does not make the Parent reject it, but rather makes him more
pitiful, and tender toward him.

Caut. Yet lest any should mistake, and take his Enormities and gross sins
for infirmities, I will give you four differences between them.

1. He that sins through infirmity, has the life of Grace begun in him, so
Paul, Romans 7. there is not weakness, but deadness, where there*s no life.

2. That Is a sin of infirmity, which is committed against the bent, purpose and
resolution of the soul, when we suddenly fall into sin without deliberation,
either through Passion, Fear, etc as Peter did. This is called a falling by an
occasion. Gal. 6.1. he does not run himself into sin, but accidentally he
stumbles at sin, and catches a fall; so that when a man fully resolves against
a sin, Prays against it, strives against it, groans under it, and uses all
means to overcome it, and yet cannot shake off this Thorn in the flesh, this
may be thy cross, it shall never be thy Curse. Suppose a man be sailing on the
Sea, his intention is for such a Haven, but there comes a violent gust, and
carries him into his enemies coast against his will: so the godly resolve to
keep Gods Commandments. Psalm. 119.106. and pray against sin. Psalm. 19.13. yet
through the violence of Temptations, are often overcome against their wills. Now
it is one thing to sell a man's self to do wickedness, and another thing to be
sold. Ahab sold himself, but Paul was sold against his will. Romans 7. The Virgin
that resisted and cried out, was innocent, Though she were ravished. Deuteronomy.
22.25.27. Quae non placent, non nocent. The sins that do not please us, hurt us
not. The godly and the wicked both sin, as Pearls and Peebles both fall into
the dirt; yet the one is a Pearl still, and the other a Peeble. Two men may
fall into one and the same sin, yet there is great difference in the manner,
though for the matter they may be the same.

3. Even sins of infirmity are displeasing to a gracious soul. As a man that
has a blemish, is ashamed of it, so he is made more humble and watchful by it.
Psalm. 73.22. But to plead for an infirmity, is more then an infirmity.

4. He that sins through infirmity, is soon recovered, and easily reclaimed;
he is like a light that is newly put out, which is quickly blown in again. Let
Nathan but once reprove David, and he is presently on his knees. See more in Mr.
Gatakers Sermon. on Watching Sect* 77, 78.81 Ames Anti-Synodus, cap. 6, p* 371.
Let Christ but look on Peter, and he weeps bitterly. They are truly wise, and
so a reproof works more on them then a hundred stripes does on a fool. Prove.
17.10. A sheep may fall into a puddle, but a swine loves to lie wallowing
there. If therefore no admonitions, nor reproves, can win thee, or work upon
thee; it is a sign thy sins are Enormities, and not Infirmities, sins of
Wilfulness, and not of Weakness.

Object. I see so much sin in my self, that I dare not perform duties, for
fear of increasing sin.

Answ. Infirmities are no warrant for us to neglect duties, it is a greater sin
wholly to omit a duty, then to fail in the performance of it; for in the one
our disobedience is Total, we fail both in matter and manner, in the other
it is but partial

2. Neither do they pray formaly, and for fashion, who see their infirmities in
Prayer, Optimi sumus, dum infirmi sumus.
and are grieved for them; when in humility we like our services worst, they
may please God best. Nehemiah (13.22.) desires to be spared, when he had done
excellent service. The sense of our imperfections does more please God, then
our imperfections displease him. If thy heart be unprepared, he has promised
to prepare it. Psalm. 10.17. and if you be subject to Passions and Infirmities
so was Elias, yet God heard his prayer. When Christians cannot do duties with
life, yet they should do them with obedience; when not with comfort, yet with
fear and trembling; when not as they were wont, yet as they are able; that what
is wanting in strength, may be made up in their Humility. Mr. Clerks

^ Nosegay.


James 5.17. Obedience is most pleasing to God, when there is nothing but a
bare command to quicken us. Blessed is he that believes (says Christ, John
20.29) and has not seen; so blessed is he that obeyes simply out of a respect
to Gods command, though he can see no benefit (at present) by it.

3. Christ by his Mediation and Intercession perfumes all our services (though
weak and imperfect in themselves) and makes them acceptable to his Father.
Ephesians. 1.6. Rev. 8.3. where God finds the mind to be willing, and the heart
sincere, there he accepts affecting for effecting, willing for working, desires
for deeds, purposes for performances, pence, for pounds, and mites for
millions; a little that the Righteous has (in a spiritual sense) is better
then the, seeming, riches of self-conceited Pharisees. A little spring is better
then a great Pond. In all duties God ponders the spirit, Voluntas est mensura
actiounum. Omnis actio tantum habet virtutis aut vitii, quantum voluntatis. Aug.
and if that be right, all is right ( Prove. 16.2. 2 Cor. 8.12.) as we see in
Asa, David, Job, and those that came to the Passover. 2 Chronicles. 30.15. This is
Evangelicall perfection; Legal perfection and Righteousness God does expect
from Christ, he only requires faith and sincerity in us; and then though Satan
do accuse us for our imperfections, yet we may put him over to Christ our
husband, who ever lives to make intercession for us. [ Vxori lis non
intenditur] the wife cannot be sued so long as her husband lives. All that he
has is hers. 1 Cor. 3.22. Vxor coruscat radiis mariti.

Helps against Formality.
1. Go unto God who is a quickening spirit, and beseech him to quicken thy dead
heart. So did David of Psalm. 119. God can make dry bones to live ( Ezekiel. 37.4.
etc.) and raise Lazarus out his grave, when he stinks again. He that at first
raised thee out of thy Deadness, can much more raise thee out of thy dullness.
All men and means are but dead things unless he put virtue in them. Beseech
therefore the Lord to abide with you, for as Martha said to Christ, Lord, if
thou had been here my Brother had not died; so may we say, Lord if thou had
been here, my soul had not been thus dead, and disordered, nor should I drive
on so heavily. When the Sun went down, Abraham fell asleep. Genesis 15.12. and
when the Son of Righteousness withdrawes his powerful presence; it is night
with us, and we grow heavy, but whilst we have Gods Spirit to assist us, our
souls are full of Spirit and Life; Christ's yoke then is easy, and it is meat
and drink to us to be doing Gods will. Note.
It Is the policy of Satan when he cannot hinder us from Duties: then to make us
formal and lazy in Duties; or else he lays clogges on us, to make duties
irksome, and unpleasing to us; and so to bring us out of love with them, and
thus he has prevailed with too many in our days. Let us therefore spread our
case before the Lord, and beseech him, who is life it self, to put life into
our dead and frozen hearts, that they may live unto his praise, and that we may
love his ways, and then nothing will offend us.

2. Act and use your Graces, this is the way to increase and quicken them,
bring good motions into resolutions and actions; blow till the spark become a
flame. This stirring is Painful, but Gainful; drowsy, dead, formal
professors lose all, when the active, stirring Christian, goes forth like the
Sun in its strength. To him that has, it shall be given; exercise your faith
daily [ vita fidei vera vita] be much in meditation, and self-examination;
whetted knives are both bright and sharp; it is the diligent hand which makes
rich in spirituals, as well as Temporalls. Proverbs 10.4.

3. Delight in quickening company, get acquaintance with humble, holy, active
^en; and shun the company of dead, formal, earthly minded men, we must stand
up from the Dead, before Christ will give us Life. Ephesians. 4.14. There Is a
quickening virtue in the society of Gods people. As one living coal, sets his
fellow on fire, So God has ordained the gifts and graces of his people, for
the benefit of others, that those who dwell under their shadow, might return.
Hos. 14.7.

4. Get Sincerity, for therein lies much of the very power of Godliness. Let
your Faith, Love, Obedience, be unfeigned, and without hypocrisy. Be not only
Nominall, and Formal, but be Real Christians, be Israelites indeed. Christ
says to us as Alexander said to one of his name, Aut fortiter pugna, aut nomen
depone. either fight like Alexander, or never bear his name; so either act like
Christians, or else put off that name.

To quicken you, consider that this Grace is Commanded. Commended. Rewarded.


Tamim, signifies a plain, honest, religious, simple disposition without guile
or wickedness. See Doctor Boltons Ser. on Isay 58.2. p. 299. Folio,
1. It Is often commanded, as 1 Samuel 12.24. Genesis 17.1. be perfect, ( i. e.)
sincere, he speaks not of an absolute perfection, that is reserved for Heaven;
but of an Intentional perfection, when we desire and endeavor to walk
sincerely before God. Matthew. 5.48. be perfect, as your heavenly Father is
perfect; not by way of equality, (that can never be) but by way of analogy and
resemblance; not with a perfection of Degrees, but with a perfection of Parts,
q. d. Let grace be sound and sincere in every Part. God does even beg this of
us. Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were in them a heart to fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their children
for ever. God does earnestly seek, and desire such worships. John 4.23, 24.

2. God commends such. He glories in them as a Captain does in a tried and
faithful soldier. See how the Lord makes his boast of upright Job. 1.8. and
2, 3. and glories in David, as a man that fulfilled all his wills and
commmands. (...) (i. e.) omne quod ipsum jubebo. Beza.
Acts 13.22. for this he commends Jacob, that he was Ish tam, a plain, simple,
single-hearted, sincere man. Genesis 25.27. for this Christ set an Ecce on
Nathaniel. John 1.47. and Paul commends the Romans 6.17.

3. God highly rewards it. Such shall have the Upper and the Nether springs,
the blessings of this life, and of a better. Psalm. 84.11. and 15.1, 2. to them
God will be a Sun for refreshing and consolation, and a shield for protection,
they shall have Grace and glory, and as if that were not sufficient, he adds,
They shall want no good thing, God will do good to those that are truly good.
Psalm. 73.1. and 126.1. if Caleb follow God fully, he shall possess Canaan.
Numb. 14.24. such as walk uprightly, their place of defense shall be the
munitions of rocks. Isay 33.15, 16. when dangers, come, he shall dwell in a
safe place, in an impregnable fort, and may with Luther sing. Psalm. 46.

4. It Is the Grace of our graces, it is not properly a distinct grace, but the
perfection of them all. If a man have Faith, Repentance, Obedience, if they be
not sincere, they are worth nothing. A Pearl if counterfeit is good for
little. Gold if mixed with brass or baser mettle, is debased. It Is sincerity
that puts a luster on all our Duties. It Is the salt that seasons them, and
makes them savory. God loves Adverbs better then Adjectives, been better then
bonum; if the matter be never so good, if we fail in the manner, we mar all.
The most glorious actions done in Hypocrisy, are as undone. [ Quod cor non
facit, non fit] The Pharisees made long Prayers, gave much Alms, etc. yet,
because leavened with hypocrisy, they lost all. Amaziah did many good things,
but not with a perfect heart (2 Chronicles. ^^.2.) that But spoiled all. It Is
sincerity that crowns all our Duties, when we hear without Guile. 1 Pet. 2.1,
2. and give alms purely out of love to God, and Pray in sincerity; such
services, (though weak) yet find acceptance. ( Psalm. 145.18. Pr^v. 15.8. Cant.
2.14.) for it is not the multitude, but the Truth of our services, which God
regards. This gives a kind of perfection to our Duties and Graces. Hence an
upright and a perfect man, are made Terms convertible in Scripture. Job 2.3.
Psalm. 37.37. and the Hebrews call sincerity by the name of perfection. Genesis
17.1. what ever then you part withal, resolve not to part with your integrity.
Job 27.5. for it is this that will yield you comfort in every condition. This
Tob leb, this good heart will be a continual Feast. Prove. 15.15. other Feasts
may last for a day, for twelve days, or one hundred and fourscore days, as
Ahasuerus Feast did, but they have an end, but the good man keeps an
everlasting Feast; his joy shall no man take away: he sits at a Feast every
day, [ Omnis dies justi festus] as it is the misery of the wicked, that their
worm never dies, so it is the happiness of the Saints, that their Peace and Joy
shall never end. They feast at home, and they feast abroad; they feast in
prosperity, and they feast in adversity; they feast in public, and they feast
in private; they feast by day, and they feast by night; Lo this is the blessing
of those that get and keep good hearts, be it clear or cloudy, fair or foul, he
enjoyes a continual serenity, and sits at a perpetual feast. He can see light
in darkness, Psalm 112.4. food in famine. Hab. 3.17. Joy in sorrow. 2 Cor.
6.10. Riches in Poverty. Prove. 19.1. 2 Cor. 6.10. comfort in discomfort, 2 Cor.
1.12. and life in death. Job 19.26. Psalm. 16.9.

[He that would see more of sincerity, may peruse D. Preston on Genesis 17.1 Ser.
6.7. Mr. Ball on the Covenant. chapt. 11. Mr. Gataker, and Mr. Barlow on Psalm.
97.11. Mr. Love on John 1.29. D. Downam on Psalm 15.2. and on Luke 1.57. D.
Clerks Ser. on John 1.47. Mr. Scudders daily walking. chapt. 12. Mr. Robinson
on Ephesians. 6.14. Lect. 9.10. and Mr. Anthony Burgess Spiritual Refining. 2
Part. Ser. 8. etc.

5. Let the noise of Gods judgments awaken thee out of thy sleepy formality,
if a man be in a dead sleep, a great noise will awaken him. Gods judgments
have a voice, and we should mark what it says. Micah 6.9. God brings his
judgments to light every day, either on our selves, or on others, these should
fear us, quicken us, and mend our pace [ timor facit consiliativum. Arist.]
when Gods judgments are in the earth, we should resolve to learn
righteousness. Isay 26.9.

6. Let the signs and forerunners of Gods departing from us, quicken us, God
is making a way for his wrath, he has taken away lately above 60. precious
Ministers, burning and shining Lights. When Pillars go down, the house cannot
long stand. When men are packing up their wares, it is no time to sit still, you
must buy then, or never. The Lord is now removing his Gospel to New England,
the Son of Righteousness begins to rise there, and set here.

Religion stands on Tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass unto the American Strand. Herbert. Poem. in fine.

1. We begin to contemn Ordinances, and loath them. Those poor Indians begin to
prize Ordinances, and frequent them.

2. We begin to cry down Sabbaths, and make every day alike; they observe Gods
Sabbaths, and make Leagues for the strict observing of them. We meet to
wrangle, they meet to pray and instruct each other in the things which they
have heard.

3. We begin to contemn prayer, and think our selves above it, they set up
Prayer in their families, and are earnest in it.

4. We grow weary of the Lord, and begin to deny him in his Attributes; these
begin to fear, know, and acknowledge him.

5. We fall away to loose Opinions, and loose Practices, we are barren under
all the means of grace, dry under all the droppings of the Sanctuary, and
therefore the Lord may justly take away his Gospel, and give it to a people
that shall yield him better obedience, then we have done. God has forsaken
better Churches then England. The Jews that were sometimes his peculiar
people, and adorned with many rich Privileges, are now for their unbelief, a
dispersed, despised, accursed people. The seven Churches of Asia, once so
famous, are now a wilderness. God has no need of us, he can call them his
people, which were not his people, and them beloved, which were not beloved.
Hos. 2.23. God cannot want a people if he please to call, he can raise up out
of dead stones, and wild Americans, children to himself. Oh that the poor naked
Indians, might quicken our backwardness, and their fruitfulness rowse us out
of our unfruitfulnesse, and their zeal, and power of Religion, shame us out of
our formality. As Christ said to Peter, ( Luke 7.44.) See thou this woman
Simon? do thou observe how bountiful and active, she has been for me?
compare her zeal and love to me, with thine, and learn to be ashamed. As the
Lord set Israel to School to learn of the Ox, the Ass, the Stork, the Ant;
So he may set us to learn zeal of Indians. Many are like dead Wether-cocks,
they turn, and turn, and turn again, but they never crow against sin, nor be
active for God. E^salice, non e quercu orti. They are bending Willowes, not
rooted Oaks. The living fish swimmes against the stream, it is the dead fish
that goes down. Rest not then content with a form, sit not down content with
gifts and parts (as most do) but covet that more excellent way of Holiness,
Humility, and the power of godliness 1 Cor. 12.31.

Lastly, Prize all Gods Ordinances, and walk in the power of them. He that
despises them, shall never thrive in Grace; if you take away this spiritual
fuel, the fire of zeal will soon decay. Ordinances are services, though not
Saviors; Means though not Mediators; to be used, but not Idolized; we must
not cast them away, but cast them down at Christ's feet, as the 24. Elders did
their crowns. Revel. 4.10. God will be found in his own way, and though he
has promised us grace, yet he has said, we shall seek it, before we have it.
Ezekiel. 36.37. as Baths have their warmth from the Mineralls which they run
through, so the soul by Ordinances draws a spiritual taste and sweetness
from them. We should therefore show our love to them, by promoting them with
our Riches, Prove. 3.9. and coming with the first to them. Luke 1.21. Prove.
8.17.33. Ezekiel. 47.10. Acts 10.33. Hereby we shall bring glory to God in all his
Attributes. We shall continue and increase our communion with God. The
repetition of the Act, will intend the Habit, as fire by blowing, burns the
brighter.

Object. We live not now under the Law, but under the Gospel, and so are above
Ordinances and Duties, which are poor, low, legal dispensations, and breed a
spirit of bondage in men, and therefore ought to be abolisht, as appears. Heb.
3.11. 1 John 2.27 Rev. 21.22. [See these Texts answered in my Sal Terrae. cap.
3.]

Answ. Ordinances do not vanish in Gospel Times, but must endure to the end of
the world.

the end of the world. 1. The Ministry must endure so long as the world
endures. V. Mr. Blake on the Sacraments. cap. 8. Sect 2.
Matthew. 28. ult. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. [See my Sal terrae. cap, 3.]

2. Baptism is of the same continuance. Matthew. 28.19, 20.

3 The Lords Supper must endure till Christ's second coming. 1 Cor. 11, 26. and
if there shall be Ordinances in the most glorious times of the Church to come,
even when the Jews shall be called, and the spirit powered out in an abundant
measure. Isay 2.2, 3. and 66. Zach. 14. then much more have we need of them.
And though they be outward Forms, yet they are not empty Forms, but efficacious
to the salvation of believers. Romans 1.16.

1. Let such profane Atheists consider that Ordinances are Forms which Christ
has instituted, they are divine Forms, and when you reject them, you reject
Christ himself.

2. They are Forms which are the purchase of the Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of Christ, therefore when you reject them, you reject the purchase.

3. They are such Forms as are made by Christ the Conduict of all grace. Christ
and the grace of Christ are ordinarily conveyed by these Forms. They are
golden pipes to conveigh grace, and blessed and admirable Instruments in the
hand of God for the good of our souls.

4. Having begun in the spirit will ye end in the flesh? was there not a time
(and was it not your best time?) when you durst not omit Prayer, Meditation,
Self-examination, etc. was it not your best time when you practiced
Self-denial, Mortification, and all holy duties? and will you now turn
Libertines and Apostates, and so make your latter end worse then your
beginning? may not the Lord expostulate with you as he did sometime with
Israel? Ier. 2.5.31. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are
gone after vanity? have I been a barren wilderness, or a land of darkness to
you? So what evil did you ever find in God or his Ordinances, that ye thus
grow weary of them? speak now before the Lord, what evil did ye ever find in
Praying, Preaching, Sacraments, that ye thus reject and contemn them? Time was
when ye frequented them, found joy and sweetness in them, if you have lost
your taste the fault is in your selves, and not in the Ordinances; you are
grown cold, dead, formal, worldly, Profane, etc. and now instead of falling
out with your sins, you fall out with Gods Ordinances; instead of casting off
your iniquities, you cast off duties. For such I shall only say, Remember from
whence you are fallen, repent and do your first w^rks. Rev. 2.5. Use Ordinances
and improve them, but rest not in a naked formal performance of them, beseech
the Lord to make you profit by them. Isay 48.17, 18. In Heaven we shall enjoy
God immediately without the use of Ordinances, there is (and indeed there
needs) no Temple there. Rev. 21.22. but whilst we are on earth, we must serve
providence in the use of means, and he that despises them, despises his own
salvation, both Temporal and Eternal.

[For Ordinances, see Mr. Lawrence for Ordinances. Mr. Bartlets balsom. Mr.
Bridge his Treat. for Ordinances. M. Brooks his Remedy against Sat. Dev. Device
11. p. 142. Symonds sight of faith. chap. 15. Mr. Ant. Burges. Spi. Refining.
1. Part. Ser. 40. Mr. Strong 31. Ser. p. 314. Clapham against the Quakers.
Sect. 7. p. 38.42. Mr. Strong Ser. 31. p. 314, 315.]

Against Formality, see D. Preston on 2 Timothy 3.5. D. Hall, and Mr. Hooker on 2 Timothy 3.5. Mr. Hierous Bargain of Salt, the second Sermon. 2 P. p. 484. Mr.
Mantons Ser. on Rev. 3.2. preached before the Parliament. 1648. M. Strong Ser.
31. on 2 King. 31. p. 294. M. Ant. Burges Spiritual Refining. 2 Part. Ser. 32.
to 37. and on John 17.8. Ser. 37. Mr. Murcots. Ser. on Ephesians. 3.15. and Matthew.
25.1. M. Chishals Ser. on Acts 26.28. M. Beesly Ser. on John 12.24.] From such
turn away,


The Apostle comes now to show us how we should behave our selves toward such
self-seeking, covetous, proud, blasphemous, heady, haughty, formal, glozing
Hypocrites, viz. we must shun their society, and have nothing to do with them.
Since they err not through weakness, but wilfulness,, not through infirmity,
Non simplici errore sed pe^ve^sitate anim^ ^esistunt Ve^^^ati, proinde sunt
ave^sandi. Beza.

(...), aversare, and adversare; plus est quam (...) de vita, venit a (...),
coh beo, fugio, rejicio, abscindo, non consentiendo, non approbando, ab illu ^e
subducendo, and jugum cum illis non trahende.


but obstinacy, not through ignorance, but against light and conviction; and so
are become habituated, hardened, desperate, compounded sinners, its time to
shun them, and avoid them, that so we may testify our dislike of their ways,
and walking. Yea, we should not only shun them, lest we be infected by them,
but directly oppose them, (as the word signifies) and do what in us lies, to
have them corrected, that (if it be possible) they may be amended.

1. This admonition shows that the Apostle speaks not only of evils to come,
but also of present evils; for how could Timothy shun those evils and errors
which should arise, when he was dead and gone? It appears then that the Church
began to be troubled, and tortured with those, corruptions both in doctrine and
manners, at its first arising. Though it is true those sins, are too much
improved in these last and worst times.

1. Observe, That no sooner does the truth appear, but error begins to appear
also. No sooner does the wheat arise, but the weeds begin to peep up with it,
and (if it may be) to overtop it. As soon as ever the work of Reformation began
in Germany, what abundance of Sectaries and Heretics, did the Devil raise to
oppose it? if one Heresy die, the Devil (who never sleeps, but is is always
at his plough) raises up seven in its stead. I my self (says Luther in his
Preface to his comment on the Galathians) who have been 20. years in the
Ministry, can truly witness that I have been assailed with more then 20.
Sects, of which some are already destroyed, others (as the parts and members of
Worms and Bees, that are cut asunder) do yet pant for life. But Satan the God
of all discention stirs up daily new Sects, and last of all (which I most
wonder at) he has raised up a Sect, that cry down the ten Commandments. Alas
how would this good man have wondered, had he lived to see our days, wherein
Law and Gospel, Christ and all his Ordinances are cast out of doors: wherein
there are so many Deceivers, and Devils incarnate gone forth into the world,
white Devils, black Devils, Pyed and skewed Devils, that are white in their
words, and black in their works, that halt not between two, but 20. opinions;
Menstruam habent fidem, they change their Religion every month, and are as
mutable as the Moon, they are spiritually mad and drunk with errors, and so are
truly Lunaticks. Thus the Church of Christ in this world is always militant,
it must never look for Peace so long as there is corruption within us, and the
Devil and his agents without to oppose us, and therefore marvel not when you
hear of Heretics, blasphemers, etc. such there were in Timothies time, such in
ours, and some such there will be to the end of the world; the world will ever
be wicked, and like it self.

2. Observe. That Christians must shun familiarity with the enemies of Christ,
these compounded sinners are Christ's professed enemies, and it becomes not the
spouse of Christ to hold correspondency with the open-enemies of her head and
husband. It may be thou have not power to punish them, yet thou may shun
them; perhaps you cannot confute them, yet thou can and may avoid them,
since they are such as are given to changes we should not meddle with them.
Prove. 24.21. Hence it is that the Holy Ghost has given us so many Caveats
against familiarity with such wicked ones. Prove. 4.14, 15. and 14.7. Romans
16.17. 2 John 10.1 Cor. 5.11. and 6.9. Ephesians. 5.7.11.14. 1 Timothy 6.5. Sometimes
our callings may bring us into their company, but then we must do as wise
Physicians do, who if they be called amongst such as have the Plague, they
fortify themselves against it, they will not go with an empty stomach, but they
fill all the Passages, that no emptiness be found; they usually in such cases,
carry some preservatives about them. The Application is obvious. When Saint
John went to Ephesus to bathe himself, and saw Cerinthus the Heretic there, he
would not stay for fear the bath should fall on him. We should save our selves
from an untoward generation. Acts 2.40. Zach. 2.7. and not once sit with them,
lest we be tainted by them. Psalm. 26.4. in this sense we must not once know a
wicked person. Psalm. 101.4. though a man be never so great, if he be not good,
he is but a vile person, though he be a Monarch. Dan. 4.17. and 11.21. and
though they be high in their own eyes, yet they must be little and low in ours.
2 Kings 3.14. Hester 3.2. Psalm. 15.4. All their Honor is but a bubble, and all
their pomp a fancy. Acts 25.23. Hence the Scripture calls them chaff. Ps. 1.4.
dross and scum. Ps. 119.119. Dogs and swine. Mat. 7.6.

Caut. Yet in some cases there is a lawful society even with open sinners; as
first there is a necessary society of civil commerce, as in buying and
selling, Trading, and Trafficking; and thus we may be sociable with Turks and
Indians, and the men of the world; if 'twere unlawful to Trade which such, we
must go out of the world. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. we may and must carry our selves
fairly, civilly, affably, and courteously toward all; though we must be
familiar and intimate only with the godly, as they are men, and useful in
their places, in Church and Commonwealth, we ought to reverence and respect
them for their gifts; but as they are wicked men, we must shun them.

2. When we have a Call to go amongst them, we may go with safety, comfort, and
confidence, when another that goes without a Call, runs himself into danger.
It Is one thing electively to choose wicked company, and another thing by virtue
of a Call, to go amongst them. As it is in the Case of the Plague, for a man to
run desperately without a Call from God into a Pesthouse, it is a Temptation,
and he runs upon his own ruin. But for a Physician, a Midwife, or a Tender of
the sick to go when sent for, they may go boldly, for God has promised to keep
us, whilst we keep his ways. Psalm. 91.11, 12. Thus Joseph lives in Egypt,
Nehemiah in the Court of a Heathen King, Lot in Sodom, Job in a land of Vz,
Daniel, in the Court of Darius, God had called them, and he kept them there.

3. We must distinguish of wicked men, some are curable, others are incurable;
some are obstinate, desperate hardened sinners, which hate reproof, those shun;
others are simple, tractable, and hopeful, these we must pity. If when we
would cure men, they will not be cured, we must forsake them. Ier. 51.9. when
Christ saw the Pharisees to be proud, captious and contentious, he denounces
woes against them, and leaves them. But the poor Publicans that were sensible
of their low and lost condition, and came to Christ as the sick to the
Physician for health and cure, those Christ delighted to converse with; for his
mission and Commission runs to such. Mat. 15.24. So that it is not simply and
absolutely unlawful for a good man sometimes to converse with wicked men, how
else should we convince them or convert them if we have not some converse with
them? A love then of pity and commiseration we must show to all, remembering
that we also were sometime foolish, disobedient, and as vile as the vilest.
Tir. 3.2, 3. But a love of complacency, familiarity and delight we must express
only to the godly. Ps. 16.3. and 119.63.

4. See that your ends be good, viz. to convince the wicked of the evil of
there way, to convert them and bring them home to Christ, many are familiar with
the wicked in their wickedness, with the Drunkard in his drunkenness, with
the Idolater in his Idolatry, etc. such harden and confirm wicked men in their
wickedness, but they will never convert them.

Motives and Disswasives from familiarity with wicked men.
I come now to the Motives.

Tales ple^umque sumus, quales ii quibus^um vivimus.
1. Consider that familiarity with wicked men, will make us like them, we are
very apt to resemble those that we converse with, and as he that walks with
wise men, shall be wiser, Prove. 13.20. So he that walks with wicked men, shall
be worse. When the Israelites were mingled with the Heathen, Aspice quid
faciunt commercia! Juven. Sat. 2.
they learned their works. Psalm. 106.35. Joseph living amongst Egyptians, had
learnt too much their language. Genesis 42.15, 16. the holy Prophet living amongst
a polluted people, complains of his pollution, by living amongst them. Isay
6.5. we cannot touch such pitch, but we shall be defiled by it, a little of
this leaven (tolerated) will quickly sour the whole lump. 1 Cor. 5.5, 6. one
scabby sheep, often, infects the flock; See Clerks Mirror. cap. 48.
one rotten grape, corrupts all such as are near it. Woeful experience tells us
how many that were hopeful, and well given when young, yet by frequenting lewd
company, have proved very lewd and profane. There is a secret poison and venom
in ungodly company; if Solomon be familiar with Idolatrous women, they will
quickly draw him to Idolatry. Nehem. 13.26. Iehoram was wicked himself, but
watching with the daughter of Ahab, made him worse. 1 Kngs 8.18. Hence such
mixing and and marrying with Idolaters, is called an abomination. Mal. 2.11.
Ezra 9.14. Rem, rem, quocunque modo rem. Hor.
Nehem. 13.6. many care not who they match withal, so they have money; no
matter how light the Person be, so the Portion be heavy. They make matrimony a
matter of money, and so run themselves into many snares and noisome lusts. 1 Timothy 6.9. Remember we are Denizeus of another society, and therefore must have
no needless society with wicked men.

2. This familiarity with them, may harden them in their sin, God has ordained
our separation, and withdrawing our selves from them, as a means to humble
them, and turn them from sin. 1 These. 5.22. Withdraw your selves from every
Brother that walks disorderly, that he may be ashamed. Our familiarity with
Sectaries and Libertines, is a tacit and Interpretative approbation of their
lewd principles and practices; thereby we partake with them in their sins, and
so become accessory to their Plagues. Numb. 16.26.32. Go not to their meetings,
frequent not their houses, read not their books, have as little to do with them
as possible may be. Sectaries are called Dogs. Philip. 3.2. now it is a
debasement for a man to be familiar with Dogs. The best mettles when mixed with
baser, are embased thereby; mix gold with brass or silver with copper, and you
debase the coin; for Saints familiarly to join with the limbs of Satan, not
only endangers, but debaseth them. Man is a poor, weak, uuconstant creature,
and apt to go astray, and therefore we should shun Temptations. The Devil will
challenge thee for his, when thou go to such meetings, as he did the young
woman which he found at a Playhouse, the Devil carried her away upon this
account, [ Quia in meo eam inveni] I found her on my ground.

3. There Is no comfort to be found in such society, when trouble comes,
miserable comforters are they all. When Judas fell into trouble of conscience,
he ran to his wicked associates, but see what miserable comforters they are to
him in his extremity. Matthew. 27.4.

4. It Is a dishonor to our Lord and Master, to be familiar with known
Traitors and Rebels to him. Every wicked man rebels against God, there is an
enmity and an hatred in him to God, his ways, his word, his worship, his
people. Romans 8.7. Colos. 1.21. now how can he be a true subject, who is
familiar with open Rebels to his Sovereign? or how can an obedient Spouse
delight in her husbands enemies? we cannot approve our selves faithful to God,
unless we hate such as he hates.

5. It Is impossible that ever we should be good so long as we delight in wicked
company; Hence David resolving to keep Gods Commandments, first he bids the
wicked depart. Psalm. 119.115. when a man is changed, he changes his company;
Paul when converted, forsakes the Pharisees, and joins himself to the Church of
God. Acts 9.19. what communion has light with darkness? Psalm. 1.1, 2. and
26.4.6. if ever we would live the life of Grace here, and glory hereafter, we
must forsake the wicked. Prove. 9.6.

6. By familiarity with such we do not only endanger our Spiritualls, but our
Temporal estate also. Lot living amongst wicked Sodomites, suffered with them.
Genesis 14.12. when they were plundered and taken prisoners: Lot also was
plundered and taken prisoner with them. Iehosaphat had well nigh lost his life
by loving those that liated God. 1 Kings 22.32. and 2 Chronicles. 18.31. and 19.2. a
companion with riotous persons shall come to poverty with them. Prove. 23.20.
David by entertaining a league of amity with Hanun, for the courtesies he had
received from his Father N^^hash, had his kindness suspected, and his
messengers disgraced. 1 Samuel 10.4.

Caution. Yet if God have tied us by any Relations to wicked persons, we must
not presently forsake them, or outrun them. Some children have wicked Parents,
some husbands have wicked wives, some servants have wicked Masters; now these
Relations must not be contemned or violated.

1. The husband may not leave his wife, nor the wife her husband, for any cause
but for adultery. Matthew. 19.9. no other cause can annull marriages, and
therefore those Sectaries that outrun their wives, pretending they are
carnal, they are not Saints, nor called, nor spiritual; such must remember
what Christ says, Whosoever puts away his wife, except it be for adultery, and
marries another, commits adultery, and if the husband be wicked, yet the wife
must abide still with him, because she may be a means to convert him. 1 Cor.
7.16.

2. If a godly child have wicked Parents, he must not outrun them, but by
Prayer and Patience, and leading a convincing life, he must labor to win them,
showing all due Honor and respect unto them.

3. If a Religious servant have an Irreligious Master, he may not outrun him,
but must, by a holy, just, religious walking, labor to win him. 1 Timothy 6.1.
yea, though they be froward and pervense, yet must they be reverenced and
obeyed as Masters. We must obey evil men, but not in evil. Saul was a wicked
man, yet David gives him all due respect.

2. Caut. When I say we must forsake communion with the wicked, take heed of
forsaking Sion instead of Babylon. Many (especially in these loose times) call
the Church of England Babylon, a whore, a false Church; which yet the God of
Heaven, and his Churches, acknowledge for a true Church. This makes so many
turn Separatists, and instead of running from Babylon, they run into Babylon;
they run from a supposed, into a Real Babylon of confusion, and disorder. It Is
ill to ^ast off communion with one good man without a cause; but to un-church
all the Churches of God in the world, and to forsake the Assemblies of Gods
people, where he is purely worshipped, is the high way to des^^uction; a member
cut off from the body, must needs dye. I observe that ^he first Lesson which
the Devil teaches his Scholars, is separation; and after that comes a Troop
of errors and miscarriages, both in Doctrine and Practice. Such Practices are
very unseasonable, especially now, when all had need to unite against the
common enemy.

Object. There are Defects and corruptions in our Church.

Answ. And what Church on earth is free? Had not the Church of Jerusalem, the
Church of Corinth, and the seven Churches of Asia, their defects? and yet they
were called Holy. Segregatione, because they were separated by God, and set
apart for his service and worship, the name of God is called on there, the
Oracles of God are taught there, and Religion is professed there, and therefore
they are called Holy.

2. A part praestantiori fit denominatio, because there are some Saints there;
as we call a man a Rational creature from the soul, which is the better part,
and a heap of corn is called Wheat, though it have much chaff mixed with it.

3. Iudicio charitatis. When people make an external profession of Holiness,
in the judgment of charity we must hope they are Holy. Thus 1 Cor. 1.2. the
Apostle calls them Saints at Corinth, such was his charity, Per sanctos
intelligit Apostolus baptizatos and Christianam religionem profitentes, tales
enim charitas praesumit esse revera Sanctos. Davenant.
that he hoped they were such. It were to be wished, that all Gods people were
Real Saints, but Christ tells us his Church is mixed, it has Tares as well as
Wheat, and will have, do what we can. The Church of Christ is called a fold in
which are Goats as well as sheep; a Noble-mans house, in which are vessels of
Dishonor, as well as of Honor.
Matthew. 13.24. It Is a dangerous thing to think that there is no Church where
there is not perfect Purity, such a man must separate himself from all
societies, and like Acesius, find a new way to Heaven. [ Erigito Acesi scalam,
and solus in coelum ascendito.] or else join himself to a few Hypocrites, and
if our Churches and Ministers be not true ones, I wish the Anabaptists would
show us where we may find better. Oh say they, the Anabaptistick Churches are
purer, there they are all Saints.

Answ. As Samuel said to Saul when he boasted of his sanctity, and how he had
kept the Commandments of the Lord, What means then the bleating of the sheep,
and the lowing of the Oxen in my ears? so say I, if the Anabaptists be so
pure, what makes them rail on those that are pure indeed? what means their
railing on the faithful Ministers and the true Churches of Christ; yea, do not
many of them deny Scriptures, Sabbaths, Sacraments, and all Ordinances, etc. If
these be Zion, who are Babylon?

2. Were they Saints indeed, they durst not call themselves so. It savours
strongly of spiritual pride, for men Pharisaically, and Donatistically to
appropriate to themselves the name of Saints, and the godly party, and the
spiritual people. The language of Real Saints, is more meek and modest in
Scripture.

Object. We admit such as are openly profane to the Sacrament.

Answ. This is easily said, but not so easily proved. To call a man a Drunkard
is one thing, but to prove e man a Drunkard, is a harder matter. Let them prove
if they can, that the Ministers of England do admit of such to the Sacrament,
as have been convicted (by two competent witnesses at least) of Drunkenness,
Adultery, etc.

2. Admit this were so, yet another man's sin cannot hurt me, if I no way
partake with him in it. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgemeut to himself, and not to me. Suppose I could have no meat for my body,
unless I would eat in the company of wicked men, must I famish my self rather
then to eat with them? much less may I reject my spiritual food because some
wicked men (without any fault of mine) eat and communicate with me.

Object. The Apostle forbids us to eat with such. 1 Cor. 5.11.

Answ. The Apostle speaks not there of the Sacrament, as the scope and context
clearly show. v. 9, 10, 11. he forbids us intimate, private, voluntary
familiarity with wicked ones: for though in respect of public communion and
commerce in Church and State, I cannot avoid society with such, yet in respect
of private, intimate familiarity, it is in my power to avoid them.

The Apostle speaks here of civil familiarity (says Reverend Mr. Blake, in
his Treatise on the Sacraments, Chapt. 7. Sect. 16,) the Apostle speaks not at
all of the Lords Supper in this Chapter, and it is clear in the Text, that the
Apostle gives direction about the common course of our life, to shun all
voluntary and free converse with wicked men. So he.

Let us not then forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, as too many do. Heb.
10.25. forsake not the Lords barn, because there is some chaff there. If once
the Devil get you to swallow this error, you know not where you shall stop.
As that great Grandmother said sometimes, Rise up daughter, and go to thy
daughter, for thy daughters daughter has a daughter. So will you say in a
short time, Rise up separation, and go to thy separation, for thy separations
separation, has a separation. Such have no foundation, but run on in infinitum.

[See more against Separation, on Verse 1. Hildersham on John 4.21. Lect. 28.
and Lect. 35. Mr. Bernard against Ainsworth and Smith: Pagets arrow against
Separation. Ball against Cen. Mr. Gage his Vindication of our Parish Churches.
Mr. Vines on Sacr. cap. 2. and c. 20. Mr. Cawdry, Independency a great Schism.]

[Against familiarity with the wicked. See instar omnium. The Drunkards
Character. p. 689. to 863. Downams Guide to Godliness. l. 5. c. 32. D.
Cheynell against Antritin. cap. 10. Downams Warfar. l. 1. c. 17, 18, 19.

VERSE 6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.
IN these words the Apostle renders a double Reason why they should turn away
from those wicked Formalists.

1. Because they were an impudent, insolent, fraudulent generation.

2. They were already extant, and had a being in the world to the corrupting
and defiling of it, and therefore he says not, they shall only hereafter
creep into the Church, but they do already begin to creep into men's houses,
and there get Proselites to themselves. Here the Apostle begins to set forth
the seducers of the last times in their proper colors, having before set down
the sins which would be common both to the seducers and the seduced, now he
descends (that we may the better know them, and avoid them) to the particular
marks and characters of these Impostors, whereof the first is impudency, they
creep, yea (in a manner) they boldly invade men's houses, (...). penetrantes
domos.
for their belly, private gain and advantage, like those, Titus 1.11. 2 Pet.
2.15. Jude 11. As Austine said of some in his time, they were afraid of being
too modest. Et pudet non esse impudentes. Good men are modest and must be
entreated to come into men's houses. Acts 16.15. the disciples in a meek and
modest manner, come to the house where Christ was, and desire him to show them
the meaning of the Parable. Matthew. 13.36. they did not interrupt him in his
Preaching, (as our fanatics in a vainglorious, disorderly manner do) but they
consult with him in private. But Impostors are brazen-faced, they intrude
themselves, and come without sending for. Matthew. 7.15. Neither do they come to
feed, but they creep into men's houses like Ferrets and Weesels, (as the Syriack
renders it) to prey upon the Family; and thus do Jesuits on the one hand, and
Sectaries on the other, Irrepunt humiliter, blande capiunt, molliter ligant,
latenter occidunt. Leo,

(...) penetro, and quasi per fallaciam irrepo; est verbum emphaticum quo
Apostolus perite expressit non solum impudentiam and importunitatem singularem
istorum, sed etiam fallaciam, insidias, and blanditias quibus isti erant pleni,
and artificia varia quibus utebantur ad persuadendos errores suos, praesertim
vero mulierculis tanquam sexui and vasculi infirmiori, magisque obnoxin
deceptioni quam viro. Chrysostom.


by flattery, fine words, counterfeit Sanctity and Humility, deceive the simple.

2. As they are impudent, so they are of a fraudulent, subtle, slye,
insinuating temper; they vent not their errors openly (especialy, not at first)
but they secretly and slily creep into private houses, and there they sell
their wares, Jude 4. they privily bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. Gal.
2.4. Truth loves the light, and seeks no cor^^rs. Christ preached openly in the
Synagogues (he was no corner-creeping Preacher) John 7.37. and 18.20. Prove.
1.20, 21. he commands his disciples to preach what he had told them in secret,
upon the house top, ( i. e.) publicly, plainly, freely, boldly. So did Paul
when he disputed openly in the Market with whomsoever he met, and preached in
the midst of Mars-hill. Acts 13.14. and 17.17, 22. and 26.26. though the
Preachers and publishers of the truth be oft-times bound, yet the truth it
self cannot be bound. Ephesians. 6.19. Phil. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.9. truth is bold and
barefaced, Veritas non quaerit angulos, abscondi erubescit. Tertul.

Veritas quoad fieri potest palam est praedicanda, and audiente toto mund^.
Rolloc.


when Heresy hides it self, and hates the light. He that publishes truth is
interdianus sator (as Austin speaks) one that spreads his doctrine in the
Daylight, when he that sows Tares does it secretly, whilst men sleep. Matthew.
13.25. This Pestilence, like the corporal plagues, walks in darkness. Psalm.
91.6. such as do evil hate the light. John 3.20, 21,

Caution. Not that it is unlawful in times of persecution, when public
preachings cannot be had, to preach in houses, for Christ and his Apostles often
preached in houses and other places (as occasions served) in those times of
persecution, when the Magistrates were Tyrants and enemies to the Gospel, then
Christ preached in a Mount. Matthew. 5.1. and out of a ship. Matthew. 13.2. and Paul
preached in a house. Acts 20.7, 8. and sometimes by a river side. Acts 16.13.
yet this does no whit countenance or justify those unwarrantable meetings in
private houses, and that on the Lords day, where their prime work is to rail
on Magistracy, Ministry, Sabbaths, Sacraments, Ordinances, etc. such meetings
are unlawful on any day, but abominable on the Lords day. To such it is dies
Diabolicus non dies Dominicus, their sin is double. These are Conventicles
(truly so called) and are the Nations shame. If such had lived in the days of
Q. Mary, when the public Ordinances were abolisht by a Law, they might have
had some Plea for private meetings; but now in a time when the Gospel is so
openly, fully and faitfully taught, to run from the public solemnities where
the word and Sacraments are dispensed by Ministers whom God himself has sent;
to follow silly, seducing, unsettled Speakers, who feed them with chaff instead
of wheat, and Poison instead of bread; this is a sin of the highest nature, and
should be matter of great Lamentation to us all, yet this we may learn from
these Factors of the Devil, if they will creep into houses to destroy men's
souls; surely we may go to men's houses to preserve them from destruction. So
did Paul. Acts 20.20. this is pure Religion, and pleasing to God. James 1.27.

3. These Impostors observe a Method in seducing. 1. They set upon poor
silly women, Incautus and mollis est hic sexus, in cautus quia omnia quae
vid^^ and audit cum sapientia non considerat; mollis quia facile flectitur de
bo^o adanalum. Chrysostom.

With fair speeches they draw the hearts of sickle minded women unto them, and
lead them whither they will, as men do those that are taken in war. Dutch
Annot.


who being the weaker sex, are sooner won over to their way, as being less able
to withstand the shock of a temptation. As warriors go about a city, observing
where the wall is woakest, lowest, and unguarded, and there they make their
greatest assault. And as thieves set not upon strong, armed me^, but upon weak
unarmed ones, so seducers love not to set upon strong, grounded, judicious,
discerning Christians, but it is the weak and ignorant which cannot discern
their frauds, but like children are tossed to and fro with every mind of
doctrine, that become their prey, Prove. 14.15. Romans 16.18. Ephesians. 4.14. man is
(or at leastwise should be) more strong and prudent to resist temptations, then
women are.

2. They set upon women first, that they may the better win the husband, herein
imitating their father the Devil who first deceived Eve, and then seduced Adam
by Eve. Genesis 3.1.6. Per heras heroes fal^unt.
So the Jews stirred up women to hinder men from salvation. Acts 13.50. and
this is the practice of the Jesuits and other subtle seducers at this day; they
labor to gain the wife, that can may win the husband. Indeed conjugal
affections are very strong, and God would have it so. Prove. 5.19. what is it
that a loving husband (...) almost deny the wife of his bosom, when he
conceives she does truly love him? what have not women drawn their husbands to?
Solomon's wives dr^w him to Idolatry; 1 Kings 11.3.13. the wife drew more then
five yoke of O^en, When people be without understanding of God and his ways,
then even weak women come and set them on fire. Isay 27.11.
Luke 14.19, 20. they steal away the heart, they blind the judgment, and so
infatuate a man; that he is often bufotted with them. Judge. 16.17. They have
daily commerce and intimate acquaintance with their husbands, and so have many
opportunities to compass their Ends. Now an infected person most easily
spreads the infection to those with whom he continually conver^eth. This is one
Reason why women are such dangerous and strong Seducers, as we see in Iesabel,
who drew Ahab to such a height of wickedness, that he became a Non-such for
Villainy, none like him in the earth. 1 Kings 21.25. Iehoram did wickedly, and
one great Reason was, the daughter of Ahab was his wife. 2 Chronicles. 21.5, 6. So
King Ahaziah did wickedly, why so? for his mother Athaliah counseled him so to
do. 2 Chronicles. 22.3. yea even Adam in the state of innocence, yet was seduced by
Eve. 1 Timothy 2.14. Solomon from woeful experience of his thousand wives and
concubines tells us. Eccles. 7.28. that a man amongst a thousand he had found,
but a woman amongst all those he had not found. q. d. I have found out the
depths and subtleties of some men, but the subtleties of the harlot he could
not find.

3. Women are apt to be over-credulous, and to take things upon trust, being
led by affection more then judgment; because such a seeming good man holds so
and so, therefore they conclude it is so.

4. Women are the weaker vessel, and so more prone to unconstancy, and
mutability, and more easily seduced.

5. They have strong Affections. 2 Samuel 1.26. and so are more fierce and
active in defense of their opinions: Hence they are usually the best, or the
worst. We may say of them as it is said of Origin, Vbi been nemo melius, ubi
male nemo pejus, or as it is said of Ieremies figs ( Ier. 24.2, 3.) those that
were good, were exceeding good; and those that were bad, were exceeding bad.
Like the Tongue which is either the best, or the worst member. These are the
Reasons why your Arch-Hereticks have frequently spread their Heresies by women,
rather then by men. The Pharisees had their Gynaecea, Colleges or meetings of
women, Jos^ph. Antiq. l. 2. Omnes Haereses ex Gynaeceis.
the better to spread their Tenets. They set up some Iesabel to devour the
simple. Revel. 2.20. they insinuate themselves into some prime women, and get
an Eudoxia, Iustina, or Constantia on their side, that they may the better
prevail with others* Saint Ierom observes, that Heretics of old made use of
female Instruments, In epist. ad C^esiphon.
the better to deceive. Simon Magus had an Harlot called Helena, which helped to
spread his Heresies. Antiochenus the Father and Fa^tor of much filth, had many
women following him. Marci^n being come to Rome, sent his trull thither before
him, that she might prepare the soil for his seed. Apelles had his Philumen,
V. Epiphan. Haeres. 48, 49.
Montanus his Prisca and Maximilla, Arrius the Princes sister, Donatus his
Lucillia, Elpidius his Agape, Priscillian his Galla, and our James Nailer has
his Minions, his Martha and his Hannah, V. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24.
to vent his blasphemies, and generally all Arch-Hereticks have had some
strumpet or other, by whom they spread the poison of their Heresy. By Mistress
Dier, and Mistress Hutchinson, how many monstrous and Heretical opinions were
spread abroad? See Mr. Wells his History of New England.

Mulier est v^seus toxicatum quo diabolus aucupatur. Aug.


wicked women are the Devils Limetwigs, with which many are ensnared to their
own destruction.

2. These Seducers set not upon all women promiscuously, for some are prudent,
solid, sincere, and have professed Christ, when learned Doctors have denied him,
as in Queen Mary's days. So Luke. 8.2, 3. the women support Christ with their
substance, when Herod, Pilate, my Lord Annas and Archbishop Caiphas crucified
him. Lydia a good woman entertains the Apostles, See more in Mr. Bri^sly's
Lookingglass for good women. p. 42. and Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 135. Edit. 3.
when many men shut them out of doors. Acts 16.14, 15. The time would fail me
to tell of Sarah, Ruth, Abigail, the Shunamite, the widow of Sarepta, the Queen
of Sheba, Deborah, Bathsheba, Hester, Priscilla, Phaebe. Romans 16.1, 2, 3,

6. We may not therefore condemn all for some, nor disparage the whole sex for
the miscarriages of a few; for it is not all women which these seducers set
upon, but they subtly observe which are most easily wrought upon, and these
are, first such silly, simple women as are corrupted in their Intellectuals,
Non dicit (...) mulieres; sed (...) m^lie^culas, ut de ^^s se loqui significet
quae in genere mulierum leviores sun^ and inconstantiores. Estius. [They are
little, not in stature, but in knowledge.]

(...), cumulat^e peccatis (i. e.) magno peccatorum ^ce^vo gravatas ac
depressas.Estius.


and so are fitted and disposed for such seducements. They catch not grave and
truly pious matrons, but light women which prefer their lusts before Christ,
it is the light chafe, which is tossed with every wind, when the Massy wheat
abides in the floor.

2. They make a prey of such women as are corrupt in their Moralls, such as are
laden with sin, that are not only vicious, but loaded with Vices, and are
almost overwhelmed with heaps of enormities. Their corrupt practices make way
for corrupt principles. A mala conscientia ad fidei naufragium p^o^livis est
gradus, peccata enim parant v^am s^ductioni. ^quinas.
God in his just judgment gives them up to vile affections, which blind the
judgment, and so make them fit subjects for seducers to work upon. Who are
they that Papists and Sectaries overcome? usually they are loose, ignorant,
profane persons, who are better lost then found. None worship the beast but
those ungodly ones, whose names are not written in the book of Life. Revel.
13.8. and as loose women; so effeminate, idle, O verae Phrygiae, nec enim
Phryges! Vi^g. Aeneid. 9.
proud men (whom the Poet wittily upbraids with the title of women) are a fit
prey for these Harpyes. Jude 18. and therefore let women and weak Christians
walk humbly, and not meddle with disputes above their capacity, lest God punish
their pride and curiosity with a fall.

3. These silly women are acted and led not by one or two, but by variety of
lusts. Their Lusts lead them by one arm, and Seducers lead them by the other,
and God knows whither these Leaders will lead them. Non ducuntur, sed aguntur,
(...), (i. e.) instar brutorum aguntur. Are^.
They are so blinded and besotted, that they act more like bruit beasts, (as
the word imports) then Christians. They are so taken with Novelty, Curiosity,
Vainglory, and Fleshly delights, that these Impostors with their
Flesh-pleasing doctrines, lead them whither they please. By flattering and
cunning delusions, by false persuasions and subtle artifices they suit
themselves to their lusts, preaching pleasing things, and so draw many weak and
wicked persons after them. These when their consciences begin to stir, affect
ease and deliverance, but not Repentance, they lay out their money but not for
bread, and therefore they labor without being saisfied. Isay 55.2. they
willingly embrace error, because it best agrees with their corrupt
consciences, and hate the truth because it disquiets them. True Prophets cannot
flatter, they commend themselves in sincerity to the consciences of men; they
have their sweets, and ^an find out acceptable, desirable words ( Eccles.
12.10.) but then they are ever joined with boldness, to tell men of their
faults. It Is for wicked men who forsake the Law, to praise the wicked. Proverbs
28.4.

4. These Impostors do not only deceive these silly women, but they bring them
under the Devils yoke, (...), vi and armis cattivum duco, and in servitutem
abduco.
they make slaves and prisoners of them, they bind them with the cords of
error, and then they lead them whither they please. They deal with their
Proselites, as the Devil does with witches, he promises them liberty, but
brings them to prisons; promises them pleasures, yet gives them pain;
promises them Riches, yet keeps them poor; Tanquam servis bello captis, and
mancipiis utentes. Soto.
promises them life, but gives them Death. They ensnare them with their
Pythanalogy, and hold them as fast with their lies and flatteries, as a Jailer
does his Prisoner which he keeps in bondage, 2 Timothy 2. ult. or the fisher his
fish, which has swallowed his bait. 2 Pet. 2.14.18. These Satanicall fishers
of men put on the Visors of Piety, and preach liberty, pleasure, (...),
inescantes animas instabiles, non been in fide and castitate f^rmatas and
solidatas. Cyprian.
ease (as other fishers cozen sometimes the eye, and sometimes the taste of the
silly fish) so these have variety of baits, but none so catching as that of
carnal liberty. Hence they are said to bewitch men, Gal. 3.1. to enchaunt and
delude men. Rev. 18.23. and make them drunk. Revel. 17.2. It will be our wisdom
then to submit our selves to the word of God, and from the heart to obey its
commands, so shall we know the truth, and the truth will keep us free from the
power of sin and error. John 8.32. the keeping of a good conscience is the way
to keep faith and sound doctrine. See Mr. Brinsly's Vertigo, an excellent
Treatise on that Text.
1 Timothy 1.19. get the heart once established with Grace, and then you will not
be carried about with every wind of doctrine. Heb. 13.9. get Gods fear once
planted in your hearts, and then you will never depart from him. Ier. 32.40.

VERSE 7. Which [Women] are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth.
THe Apostle goes on to show what women they are which are brought into
bondage by seducers. viz. such as are unconstant, unsettled, and given to seek
after novelties and curiosities; they are not content with plain truth revealed
in the Scripture, they must have novum aut nihil some new light, some newfound
doctrine, or else 'twill not down with them; this unsettles them, and makes
them run hither and thither, Magno conatis magnas nugas.
after this and that man, but all in vain. They make a great ado, but to
little purpose; they are always learning, yet learn nothing which they should
learn. Now the Reason's of their Non-proficiency are.

1. Either because they have no better Teachers; they follow false Prophets and
blind Guides, If conscience begin to stir, they take the Op^um of some
error, and so quiet all again.
and when the blind shall lead the blind, no wonder if both fall into the
ditch. These may seem wise in their own eyes, when in truth they know nothing,
because they know not the truth, which is the foundation of all knowledge. 2.
They thrive not for want of a right disposition within. They love their lusts
better then the truth, and this bars the heart against holy Learning. Intus
existens prohibet alienum. When their judgments are blinded with lusts, and
their hearts hardened through sin; how should such thrive? 2 Timothy 4.3. 3. Or
else they seek not after sound and saving truth, but all their enquiry is after
some curious novelty, they love to hear and learn nothing else, in this point
being true Athenians. Acts 17.21. Well they may toil and take a great deal of
pains for some aerie notions, Confused knowledge is no knowledge, disti^ctest
knowledge of God not being aff^ctive, is reputed ignorance.

(...) non est qualiscunque, sed experimentalis cognitio, viz. activa illa quae
rebus ostenditu^; ut videre est, Ephesians. 1.17. and 4 13. Colos. 1.9 Philip. 1.9.


and empty speculations, that they may come ad (...) to some kind of knowledge;
but never ad (...) (the word in the Text) to such a knowledge as brings forth
an acknowledgement of the truth in the power of it. 4. Often times they are mere
Scepticks in Religion, they are ready to question every thing, but they believe
nothing, they have no foundation, no resting place, they lay out their money,
but not for bread, and therefore it is no wonder if they spend their labor
without being satisfied. Error cannot satisfy the soul, we must enquire for the
good old way of truth and Holiness, if ever we would find rest for our souls.
Ier. 6.16. God who is the great Lord of all, will have his commands obeyed, not
questioned. He loves Currists, and not Quaerists. Iubent heri, non disputant.
Aristo^ Amat Deus Curristas, non Quaeristas Luther.

Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesiarum scabies.

Spiritus Sanctus non est Sceptie^s, nec dubia aut opiniones in cordibus
nostris scripsit, sed assertiones ipsa vita acomni experientia certiores ac
firmiores. Luther.

Fides est certior scientiis tum certitudine cognitionis tum certitudine
adhaesionis. Baronius Exercit. 3. art 8. Sect. 4.


He prefers obedience before disputes. We have disputed so long, till we have
almost disputed all Religion out of doors. We should study rather to live
well, then dispute well, therein lies our happiness. Mat. 7.24.25. John 13.17,
The Spirit of God writes not Notions but Assertions in our hearts, it
establishes them so with grace, that the gates of hell cannot prevail against
it; though such may (by the violence of a tentation) be moved, yet are they
like Mount Sion, which can never be removed out of its place. Heb. 10.23. and
13.9. [Against Scepticks and Seekers. See that excelent Tract of Mr. Gelaspy
his Miscelanies. cap. 10, 11.] yet how many delight in giddiness, and count it
a bondage to fix a belief; affecting free will in thinking, as well as in
acting. And though the Sect of the Philosophers of that kind be gone, yet there
remain certain discoursing wits which are of the same veins, though there be
not so much blood in them, as was in those of the Ancients. The Scepticisme and
Affectation of Novelties, is the great sin of England at this day. As many are
much taken with new Fashions, so many are much taken with new Opinions, new
Doctrines, new Teachers, and new Expressions. Yet the Apostle does not blame
these women simply for seeking after knowledge (for the wiser sort of Heathens
have commended that) but he blames them for hunting after Novelties, Senesc^
non segnesco semper aliquid addiscens. Dixit Solon.

Nec discere vituperatur sed absque fructu discere, discere and non perdiscere,
discere and non intelligere. Espencaeus.


and vain speculations, and in the mean time neglecting the sound and saving
truths of the Gospel. This is ( celeris cursus extra viam) a swift running to
destruction. It Is true, all the godly are learners, the knowledge of the truth
is not Innata, Vera pietas non discit perpetuo, operatur autem perpetuo quae
didicit compendio.
but acquisita, not born with us, but attained by means; yet they are not ever
learning, they know the truth in which they firmly rest, and from which they
suffer not themselves to be moved: and never till then have we profited in our
learning, when we are made so able to discern the truth as that we are
satisfied with it, and our consciences are at rest by it, even in the saddest
dangers. Ephesians. 4.13, 14. 1 These. 1.5, 6. 2 Pet. 1.12.
2. I wish this were not the sin of silly men, as well as of silly women, to be
always learning, yet never come to the knowledge of the truth, how many are
men in years, yet children in understanding. 1 Cor. 14.20. and when for the
time they might have been Teachers, Turpis and ridicula res est Elementarius
senex. Seneca.
they had need to be taught the elements of Religion. Heb. 5.12. though the
knowledge of the best in this life be imperfect, and we are always learners
here, yet we must strive forward toward perfection, and not always stick in
the place of bringing forth. Hos. 13.13. nor be like a horse in a mill, still
going round in the same place; or like a Picture that grows not, but is the
same now, that it was twenty years ago. Such barren trees are nigh to
cursing. Luke 13.9. and such unprofit able learners are left by God justly to
the power of seducers, as malefactors are to Jaylors. This is the true cause of
all those Errors and Sins amongst us. Psalm. 95.10. Ier. 9.3. Matthew. 22.19. As
for our selves, let us enquire for the good way, and when we have found it, sit
not still, but be walking from knowledge to knowledge, from grace to grace, and
from strength to strength, till at last we come to our Celestial Sion.

3. Since seducers are so ready to seduce women, how careful should that Sex
be to shun conversing or disputing with them. When Eve once fell to disputing
and questioning the Truths of God, the Devil soon overcame her, and was too
subtle for her. Genes. 3.1. do not therefore tempt the Lord by entertaining
disputes with Serpentine disputants; for though every one be bound to make an
open and sincere profession of the truth; yet to be able to defend it against a
subtle adversary, and to answer their Cavills, is a gift that is given but to a
few. Let every one know his own strength, and if he be wise, keep within his
onw bounds.

Sirenes usque ad exitium dulces.
4. Since women often times are Satan's Instruments by which he seduceth many, take
heed of women; let not those Sirens enchant thee so, as to leap into the depths
of errors. Consider how many of thy betters have fallen by them. Adam (at
first) the best man. Solomon the wisest, David one of the holiest, and Sampson
one of the strongest; all deceived by women; and at this day how many wise, and
seemingly holy men, have been drawn aside to errors by their wives. Stop then
thy ears against these allurements, and in this sense be as the deaf adder,
which stoppes his ear against the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely. Whosoever they be that seek to draw thee from thy God, let thy heart
and thy hand be against them. Deuteron. 13.6, 8, 9.

VERSE 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so did these also resist
the Truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.
THe Apostle proceeds in describing the false Prophets of the last times, that
we may the better know them, he tells us they are such.

1. As oppose the truth, and the Preachers of it. As Iannes and Iambres (the
worlds wise men) withstood Moses, so did these also resist the truth. They do
not only catch at silly women, but they strike at the Shepherd, that so the
flock may be scattered. They oppose Moses and Aaron the messengers of God whom
he sent to publish his truth to his people. Yea they resist the very truth it
self, which is worse then to resist the persons that bring it. The Series of
the Speech seemed to require that the Apostle should have said, as Iannes and
Iambres resisted Moses, Amara sunt vitiosis ac male viventibus praecepta
justitiae. Lactant. (...) repugno, adversor.
so do these resist Us: but he alters his style, and says more Emphatically,
they resist the Truth; implying, that the opposition is not so much against the
Preachers, as against the truth they preach, and by consequence, against God
who is the first Truth; and at whose command they publish it. Exodus 16.8.
Neither is it a frigid, infirm resistance, but a violent, vehement opposition
springing from malice and rancour, which makes them resist the truth.

1. With their Lies, Tyranny, and cruel Persecution.

2. By Flatteries, false Miracles, and Sophistry, they cunningly undermine the
Truth. Thus Iannes and Iambres do the same things by slight and art, which
Moses did in Reality: another man would have much ado to distinguish between
the Serpents of Moses, and those of the Magicians, they were so like. Exodus
7.11.

Quest. Some may demand who this Jannes and Jambres were, and how the Apostles
came by their Names.

Answ. They were two of the chief Magicians and Egyptian Sorcerers, who by the
appointment of Pharaoh, opposed Moses and Aaron in the Miracles which they
wrought, that they might obscure the glory of God, and delude the people; they
working Miracles seemingly, by sorcery, and the help of the Devil; which Moses
did really by the power and finger of God.

2. As for their Names, they are not to be found in the Old Testament, nor in
the story to which the Apostle alludes. Exodus 7.11. Neither is it probable,
that the Apostle came to the knowledge of them by Extraordinary Revelation (as
some imagine) since the bare knowledge of the Names of these Magicians is of so
little consequence, and not necessary to salvation.

3. They might be taken out of some ancient record of the Jews then extant, as
diverse other things mentioned in the New Testament were, e. g. Moses his
education in Egyptian Learning, and his age of 40. years, when he went to
visit his Brethren. Acts 7.22. these are not recorded in the Old Testament, but
are found in Midrash Rabbi Berischith. See Mr. Perkins Reformed Cathol. Point.
Vol. 1.1. p. 580. and D. Slatyr. on 2 These. 2.15.
So Jude 14. makes mention of a prophesy of Enoch which yet is not extant in
the Old Testament. So Heb. 11.21. and 12.21. So that here is no ground for
those Numberless number of old, moldy, foolish, superstitious, Popish,
unwritten Traditions, and that not only in matters of Rite and History, but of
Faith and Manners also, Historicas Traditiones cum fidei articulis in Scriptura
revelat^s minime pugnantes non rejicimus, est v^ro haec ^raditio Historica non
dogmatica. Gerherd; cui suffragatur Doctis. Wallae^s Loci com. p. 150.
which tend to the perplexing, but not to the quieting of the soul.

2. They are men of corrupt minds and judgments; their understandings are so
perverted and blinded with corrupt and sinful affections, that they can neither
apprehend nor judge rightly of any thing according to the truth; (...), mente,
perditi, a (...), corrumpo, destru^, stupi^.
their minds go a whoring after lying vanities, and then no wonder if they
forsake their own mercies. The Understanding is the Eye and guide of the Soul,
its the noblest part of Man, if it be corrupted, the Man's undone. Psalm. 14.3.

3. See what follows, concerning the faith reprobate. This is the fruit of a
corrupt mind, they cannot receive, nor perceive the truth, Mentis perfectio est
Veritatis cognitio, unde corruptus mente dicit^r qui deficit a cognitione
fidei. Aquinas.
they have lost all sound judgment in things pertaining to the faith, they
oppose the light which shines into their minds, and with violence rush into
sin as the horse into the battle. This brings Gods sore judgment on them, so
that he rejects and forsakes them, and gives them up to a reprobate mind: (
Ier. 6.30. Romans 1.28) insomuch, as they that would not receive the truth, for
the truths sake in love, but unthankfully reject it, (...) sunt qui usu and
consuetudine vitiorum quasi habitum contraxerunt, ut aliter agere non possint.
Weinrich.

See D. Goodwins Aggravation of sins against Knowledge.


now shall not receive it, and as it is their sin, that their understanding is
corrupt, and they will not see; So now it shall be their punishment that they
shall not approve of the faith, and thus they reject it still actively, and are
actually reprobate to every good work, [ Titus 1.16.] not knowing how to go
about any thing that is good. Such corrupt Teachers we must shun and reject,
least we be corrupted by them; so much the word implies, (...), rejectanei (i.)
falsae and adulterinae doctrinae Doctores, q^ius oporteat ab omnibus rejici.
Beza.
says Beza, yet must we not cast off rashly all those as absolute Reprobates;
for it is one thing to be Reprobate concerning the faith pro tempore, at
present; and another thing to be a Reprobate. Manasses, Paul and those, 1
Corinthians, 6.11. were lewd enough for the time, yet at last were called.
These that are now (...), reproveable and unapproved (as the word signifies, 2
Cor. 13.7. Heb. 6.8. 1 Corinthians 9.27.) yet in Gods due time they may be
(...), accepted and approved. This must teach us to keep our judgments pure,
and our understandings clear, for it is our guide, and if that mislead us, we
must needs fall into the ditch. Corruption in judgment (in some respects) is
worse then corruption in manners, V. D. Hamond, Reasonableness of Religion, p.
86.
especially, when the mind has been enlightened with the knowledge of the
truth; for this is the root of those corrupt manners that are amongst us. No
practical sin is so sinful as some errors in judgment, no men so accursed
with indelible infamy, and dedolent impenitency, as the Authors of heresi^. So
that it is clear, that a sin against the Rule of faith, may ( caeteris paribus)
be far more sinful and damnable then the sin which is against the rule of
life.
In the time of the Law, the Leprosy in the head, was of all other Leprosies
the most dangerous and destructive; the man that had it in his hand or feet,
was unclean; but if it were in his head then he was to be pronounced utterly
unclean, Lev. 13.44. Hence the scripture gives so many caveats against errors,
and erroneous ones Deuteronomy, 13.3. Philip. 3.2. Colos. 2.8. 2 Pet. 3.17. (...),
attendite, cum attentione, cavete*
Matthew 7.13. Beware of false Prophets; the word implies a diligent study and
singular care, lest we be caught by such subtle adversaries. Keep your
judgments pure, then the pure Word of God will delight you, Micah 2.7. you
will delight to come to the truth, that your deeds may be discovered, John
3.21. Part not with a good conscience, and a good conversation, lest you make
shipwreck of the faith, An erroneous Heretical head, and an upright pious
heart are in compatible; a good conscience and true faith like Hippocrates
twins, live and die together. M. Cranford, Ser. ag. Haeres. p. 15.
and a gap be opened in your breasts to all sin and error, that the Lord
knows where you will rest, it may be not till you come to the highth of sin
and depth of misery. Count therefore a corrupt judgment a sore plague; and if
God have given thee a sound judgment able to discern the truth, A man's Opinion
makes him sinful, as well as his Practice; and a man may be damned for a
corrupt opinion, as well as for a corrupt Conversation. Sedgewicke.
and a mind ready to receive it, and approve of it when it is propounded, this
is not a common mercy, but calls for special Thankfulness, Psalm. 16.7.
Proverbs 28.5.

1. Observe, There have been false Teachers in all Ages to oppose the Truth and
the Professors of it. As Iannes and Iambres here oppose Moses a meek, a
learned, a faithful servant in all Gods House; So there were four hundred and
fifty falls Prophets against one zealous Elijah; four hundred, against good
Michaiah, 1 Kings 18.18. and 22.6.14 Hananiah against Jeremy, Amaziah against
Amos [7.10.] false brethren against Paul, Hymeneus, Philetus, and Alexander,
oppose him, 1 Timothy 1.20. The Church shall never want enemies to war withal,
whilst the seed of the Serpent abides in the world. As Pharaoh had his
Magitians, who hardened him in his sin, and deluded him to his destruction: so
the World will ever have its false Prophets to blind and harden them in sin to
their ruin. Thus in the Primitive times there was a Simon Magus, Scribes,
Pharisees, Sadduces, Essens, Vide Godwins Jewish Antiqu. l. 1. c. 12.13. and
Helvici Chronol. ab Anno 60. etc. fol. p. 87.89.

Optimum solati^ genus est si oculos referant fideles ad vetusta Ecclesiae
certamina.


Herodians, Nicolaitans, Elymas, Ebion, Cerinthus, the Gnostics, and many
others. 2 Peter 2.1. Thus when Luther began to reform, thirty several Sects
arose to hinder the work. We should not therefore be despondent or
discouraged, as if some strange thing had happened to us, but comforted rather
in that we are made conformable to Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, Matthew
5.11. Luke 6.22.23. This was, is, and will be the condition of the Church
Militant, from her youth up she must look to be plowed and persecuted by
malicious men, Psalm 129.2, 3. Besides, it is the condition of Truth in this
World to meet with opposition, we can no sooner publish it, but it is enemies
appear, Galathians, 4.16. Truth brings hatred, men cannot endure to have Vngues
in Vlcerre, they are unsound and would not be touched, Truth is a Light which
discovers the intents of men's hearts, Hebrews 4.12. and lays open the evil
of men's ways, and this makes the wicked not simply to oppose, but to rise in
open rebellion against the Truth ( Job 24.13.) which reproves their deeds, See
Mr. Caryll on that Text.
and exposes them to the view of themselves and others. Hence they have
always been esteemed the Pests and troublers of a Land that publish Truth, as
we may see throughout the Acts of the Apostles; where we find some disputing
against the Truth, Acts 6.9. others blaspheming, Acts 13.45. some secretly
undermining it, and seeking to draw men from embracing it, ( Acts 13.8.) others
openly railing against it, Acts 17.18, 19. and 24.5. Some have opposed it out
of ignorance and blind devotion, as Paul before his conversion, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and some of the Jews, Acts 3.17. and 13.50. Others deliberately against
conviction, and out of malice have resisted the Truth, as Alexander, 2 Timothy
4.15. these are given up to a reprobate sense, the Devil having blinded their
eyes, 2 Corinthians 4.4. Some oppose it for their gain, and for their bellies,
Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Pet. 2.3.15, 16. Others from fleshly lusts. 2
Peter 2.18. and 3.3. Others out of pride, loving the pre-eminence, 3. John 9.10
1 Timothy 6.3, 4. yet should not we distaste the Truth, because of those
oppositions which are made against it, for however some profanely scorn at the
name of Truth, and say with Pilate, what is Truth? John 18.38.

Yet wisdom is justified of her children, and they that are of the Truth,
hear his voice who came into the world to bear witness of the Truth. They
come with love and teachable hearts to it, and so are made to know the Truth,
John 8.52. Let not the great host of Truths enemies make us despair, but know
there are more with us, then are with them, Tanto plus gl^riae referemus,
qu^niam to plures sup^rabimus.
2 Chronicles 32.7, 8. and the more they are that oppose the Truth, the more
illustrious will our conquest be. If I must have an adversary, let it be a
wicked one, and then be he never so potent, he cannot stand long, because God
is against him, Job 27.7. Truth may be oppressed, Nisi Haereticis exercitaremur
atque cogeremur, ad inspiciendos and exercend^s thesauros nostros, ignavi
sterteremus, and marcesseremus anim^, Luther.
but never conquered, [ Praemi potest, opprimi non potest] yea oppositions
advance and clear it. Veritas impugnata magis elucet, Bern.

2. Observe, That as the Devil has his Iannes and Iambres to oppose the
Truth, so God has his Moses and Aaron to uphold it. As the Devil has his
Domestic Chaplains, so God has his armed Champions; and as the Devil raises
up oppressors, so God sends Saviors, Obadiah, 21. If he raise horns to gore
the Church; God will raise Carpenters to saw off those horns, See Dr.
Wilkins^n ^ast. Ser. preached 1644. Oct. 25.
Zachary 1.19, 20, 21. The same day that Pelagius was born in Britain, the
same day was Saint Augustine born in Africa, that did confute him. God has an
Athanasius to oppose Arrius, Chrysostom against the Manichees, Basil against
Macedomus, Prosper against the Massilians, Salvian against the Libertines,
Fulgentius against Faustus, Christ against the Pharisees, Simon Peter against
Simon Magus, Paul against false Apostles, Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. against
the Pope; and in these days of liberty, God has something to witness against
Heresy. O^do seculi ta^quam pulcherrimum carmen constat ex quibusdam quasi
Antithetis, antithe^a ve^o sunt ornamenta elocutionis. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l.
11. c. 18.

As it is in the greater world all good and useful things have their contrary
evils, there are Herbs and Weeds; Tares and Wheat, useful and hurtful creaturs:
so it is in the Church, there are false Prophets and true, etc.


Thus the Lord in his Wisdom has so ordered it, that there shall be not only
Schisms, but Heresies, to exercise the Gifts and Graces of his people, and to
discover the rottenness and filthyness of graceless ones, that they who will
not believe the Truth, may be given up to the efficacy of error. This is some
comfort, and may help to uphold our spirits in this day of Jacobs trouble.

3. Observe, A corrupt head, and a corrupt heart usually go together; N^c fere
accidere solet ut ante circa fidem naufraget aliquis, quam naufragere caeperit
circa mores. Bellarm.
no sooner are men's minds corrupted, but presently it follows, they are
Reprobate concerning the faith; and if once men make shipwreck of faith, they
will soon part with a good Conscience too, 1 Timothy 1.19. Corrupt Principles
breed corrupt Practices; and corrupt practices teach men to invent corrupt
Principles. See Mr. Strongs 31. Sermon. on Jude 4. p. 195. etc.
When men grow lawless and profane, then they turn Antinomians, Those which are
for all kind of Tenants are commonly for all kind of Practices; a latitude of
judgment, has a latitude of conversation D. Horton.
and deny the Law; if Mortalists, then they deny the resurrection; if
Libertines, then they cry down the power of the Magistracy, and cry up one
Universal Toleration. Hence when Christ had spoken of false Prophets, he
presently adds, and iniquity shall abound, M^tthew 24. When people go a whoring
from God, then follows corporal whoredom, Hos. 4.12, 13. We see this
experimentally true in our days. How many before they were Sectaries, were
civilly just, pious, and (in the judgment of charity) were thought to be
sincere Christians; yet now are turned Anabaptists, Socinians, Libertines,
Proud, Censorious, Idle, Atheistical, Unclean. These lusts lay unmortified in
their bosoms, and now they rejoice that they have a time of Liberty to vent
them, so that a corrupt life attends on corrupt Principles, both as a
Punishment, and a just judgment of God upon men for resisting the truth; and
in the nature of the thing, for as a foul moist head, causes distillations of
corrupt matter upon the lungs; so loose Principles dispose men to a loose
conversation, the doctrine of Godliness reproving their Ungodliness makes
them cast it off, as you may see in the Epistles of Peter and Jude; who
describing false Teachers and their false Doctrines, presently add their
wicked lives, their filthiness, covetousness, licentiousness, turning the
Grace of God into wantonness. Be sure then to keep your heads pure from
error, if ever you would have your hearts and hands pure from sin.

4. Observe, That false Teachers are very dangerous persons, they are not such
meek, innocent, harmless persons as some imagine. The Apostle here tells us
that they are impudent, fraudulent, resisters of the truth, men of corrupt
Heads, Hearts, and Hands; and what could he say more unless he should call
them Devils? and so he does verse 3. in the last days men, especially
seducing men (for all these 19. sins are appliable also to the false Teachers
of the last times, as appears by the context verse 5, 6.) shall be slanderers,
or in plain English Devils; and he here compares them to Iannes and Iambres two
Egyptian Sorcerers, who were Limbs of the Devil; and verse 13. in express
Terms he calls them Sorcerers, evil men and Seducers, See more in Mr. Gournall
on Ephesians. 6.12. p. 268. etc. Haec vitia Haereticos comitari solent, morum
dissimulatio, ficta retractatio, pertinacia, disciplinae (...). Danaeus.

V, Sleidan, Bullinger, Spanhein. Diatrib. de Anabap. and Hookers Pref. to his
Eccles. Policy.


the words in the Original are evil men and Sorcerers. [(...), incantatores,
praestigiatores.] besides, their Heresies are called damnable, and their ways
pernicious. 2 Pet. 2.1. and themselves are likened to Balaam the witch. 2 Pet.
2.15. It Is true at first they make a show of extraordinary Sanctity and
Self-denial (the better to deceive the simple) and thereupon they rail on all
the Churches of Christ amongst us, as being mixed with wicked men; yet after a
little time these painted Sepulchers appear in their proper colors, and the
vilenenesse of their lives and doctrine is made known to all. The Anabaptists
in Germany at their first arising pretended extraordinary Sanctity, but in a
short time their Villainies, Murders, Polygamies, blasphemies, Heresies,
Adulteries, etc. appeared to the world. These are worse then the Sword or
Plague; men are afraid and fly from those, but they are naturally prone to
embrace these.

2. Those hurt but the body, these destroy the soul.

3. God is glorified in his judgments, but he is exceedingly dishonored by
seducers.

4. By the sword and persecution the Church increases, but by subtle Heretics
the Church diminishes. Hence Luther calls Heretics. Peccatorum poenam and
summam Dei indignationem. Luther in Hos. 9. The greatest Plague, and a sign of
Gods indignation against a people. And the Scripture calls them devouring
Wolves, who come to kill and drink the blood of souls. John 10.8, 9, 10. Matthew.
7.15. such as make their disciples twofold more the children of the Devil,
then themselves. Mat. 23.15. Such as subvert whole houses. See Mr. Cranfords
Ser. against Heresies. p. 2. etc. and Mr. Sherlock against the Quakers. cap. 7.
in fine libri.
Titus. 1.11. whose word does eat as a Gangrene, (2 Timothy 2. which suddenly
over-runs the Parts, takes the Brain, and if not quickly cured by cutting off
the part infected, kills the Patient. Heresy is of a spreading Nature (if it
be not speedily and carefully suppressed) it runs from one man to another, from
one City to another, and from one Kingdom to another. Error begets error, such
fall from evil to worse, Verse 13. Hence false doctrine is compared to a Leaven
( Mark 8.15.) which secretly and suddenly diffuseth it self through the whole
lump till all be leavened. See Mr. John Clerks Sermon preached 1646. Adams Ser.
on Gal. 5.9. p. 69^. folio.

See Mr. Obad. Sedgwich Ser. on that Text. See Mr. Vines Sermon. on that Text.


Sometimes seducers are compared to an overflowing flood, which carries down
all before it, Revelations 12.15. and anon to Cheaters that beguile silly
souls, with their flesh-pleasing doctrine, they catch freshly people, Ephesians
4.14. and to dogs, Philippians 3.2. beware of dogs (i.) beware of false
Prophets, who are like unto dogs. Go not unarmed, get a sword or a staff to
defend your selves against them. If there were ten thousand mad dogs in the
Land, you would keep within doors, or go armed and use all means to destroy
them. Now they resemble dogs in 14. particulars.

1. A dog is a base contemptible creature; hence the Scripture calls vile
persons dogs, 1 Samuel 17.43. 1 Kings 8.13. Matthew 15.26. So such as go about
to draw men from the Truth are vile men, however they may have high conceits of
themselves, yet God esteems no more of them then we do of a dog: and though he
may throw them some off all and bones to pick (as he does to the blasphemous
Turk, that great Dog of a great part of the World) yet his soul abhors both
them and their services, Isay 66.3. 2. It Is an unclean creature, and might not
be offered in sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 23.18. So these being themselves unclean, all
they do is unclean, Titus 1. ult. 3. It Is a libidinous, Palam coit cum matre
and sororibus, canis masculi infinita cubilia. Franz^us.
impudent creature. Hence unclean persons are called dogs, Deuteronomy. 23.8.
Revelations 22.15. without are dogs, who are those? Whoremasters are set in the
front; this made Abner say to Ishbosheth, am I a dogs-head? ( i.) shamelesly
libidinous, that I should commit whoredom with my Fathers Concubines? 2 Samuel
3.8. yet such unclean, ignorant and impudennt Cynicks we have, who though they
want Arguments, yet want not impudence, but have brows of brass, and whores
foreheads to vend their wares. 4. It Is an angry, snarling creature, so long as
you let him alone, peradventure he may be quiet, but touch him, stir him,
awaken him, he barks, he bites and rages so furiously, that (as Plutarch
observes) in some Countries they run blind with very fierceness. So erroneous
persons so long as you let them alone in their errors, they may be quiet; but
let Magistrates or Ministers once oppose or restrain them, and they bark
against them presently, and are ready to fly in the face of a Reprover and
tear him in pieces, Matthew 7.6. 5. They make foul havoc of the flock, when
once let loose. So long as God chains up the Churches enemies they seem meek
and mild, but if once God let them loose, no mad dog makes such havocke of the
flock, as these do of the Church of God. Witness Bohemia, Germany, France,
Ireland, Savoy; and Heretics, especially Papists, have the same nature still,
it is Gods mercy to chain and muzzel them, else they would be as outrageous now
as ever. This made David call his malicious, cruel enemies, dogs, Psalm
22.16.20. 6. It Is an industrious Creature, it will run over much ground in a
short space to get a prey. So seducers are mighty industrious, they compass Sea
and Land to make a Proselite, Matthew 23.15. they are Ubiquitaries, now in the
North, anon in the South; now in the East, and anon in the West. They move
every stone, and leave no means unassayed to destroy souls. As the Devil is a
Peripatetick, Job 1.7. 1 Peter 5.8. So are his Agents, the Jesuits,
Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. 7. It Is a fawning Creature: so seducers, that they
may the better deceive the simple, come in a fawning, flattering way,
pretending much Humility and Love, Romans 16.18. When barking and biting will do
no good, then they try what fawning will do. But of all dogs, beware of the
flattering dog: the barking, biting dog is not so dangerous, men will take heed
of such, but it is the crouching Cur that under pretense of extraordinary love,
undoes men. 8. It returns and licks up it is Vomit, Proverbs 26.11. 2 Peter
2.22. How many in our days have we seen that after their public Recantations
(or rather dissimulations) have returned with the dog to his Vomit, and have
been as vile as ever. 9. It Is a greedy Creature, hence the Proverb, As greedy
as a dog. So false Prophets are exceeding covetous and cruel, Isay. 56.10.11.
they are all for gain, Phil. 3.18, 19. Titus 1.11.

Caution. Yet let none under this pretense accuse the faithful Ministers of
Christ of covetousness and cruelty for demanding their Tithes, and those dues
which by the Law of God and man are due to them. Let us but once demand our
dues, yea, less then our dues, yet how many cry out against us as greedy dogs
and hirelings, that preach only for money, when the salvation of souls is our
Ultimate end, the receiving of money is only in subordination to that, to the
end we may be fitted for your service. Now it is one thing to preach for money,
and another thing to receive money for preaching. The Soldier and Artificer
receive pay for their pains, See more in my Sal. Terrae cap. 9.
yet (I hope) they do not make that their principal end and aim. Never were
the Ministers of England so rayled upon for covetousness, pride, idleness; and
yet there were never more laborious, merciful, pious, public spirited
Ministers in England (I think I may speak it without flattery) since 'twas a
Nation: These must answer for their hard speeches, Jude 15.

Object. There are some covetous idle proud Ministers.

Answer, We grant it, and ever will be so do what men can, but will you
condemn all for some? A pa^^iculari ad Universal non valet argumentum.
shall we say all the Apostles were Traitors and Covetous because Judas was
so? or that all Soldiers are drunk, because some are so? every Child can see
the folly of such Logic.

10. Dogs often times run mad, and then they fly upon their own Masters. So when
men have the vertigo and run madding after errors, they fly upon Christ,
Magistrates, Ministers, every thing. 11. Dogs are apt to quarrel and fight for
bones. It Is animal pugnacissimum, a snarling creature, so the dogs of the world
are apt to quarrel for the bones of the world; let a little trespass be done
them, they will to law presently. They are Reshagnaim, the troublers of the
Families and Towns they dwell in. 12. Many dogs live idle, sleepy lives; other
creatures labor, as the Horse, the Ox, the Be. So many seducers cast off
their callings, and give themselves to an idle wandering up and down like
vagabonds. 13. Dogs feed on off-all, garbage, carrion, and such things as would
poison a man. (...) dicuntur illa quae exi^^estinis boum, ovium, a^t pejorum
canibus projiciuntur, (...), quod canibus objiciantur, a Lapide.
So Heretics rest upon their own merits, righteousness and works for
salvation; all which the Apostle calls filth, dung, dogsmeat in comparison of
Christ and his righteousness, Phil. 3.8. 14. Dogs are fierce against strangers,
and such as are not of their family. So Impostors bark at those who do not
separate themselves from the true Church of Christ, are not Rebaptized, nor of
their way and judgment. Jude. 10, Thus we see what dangerous Dog-dayes we live
in, and how careful every one should be to stand upon his watch.
2. As Heretics are called Dogs for filthiness, and other evil qualities
which have have been named, so they are called Foxes for subtilty and
hurtfulnesse. Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the little Fones that spoil the
Vines. The land was never so full of Foxes ( i. e.) of subtle seducing
Heretics, as it is at this day. We should all (in our places) arise to the
hunting of them. We read of some Hunters in Scripture, as Nimrod, Esau, etc.
but never a good one. But the hunting of this Metaphorical Fox is a pious
Hunting, and none but good and prudent men, can rightly pursue this game.

1. Magistrates must not bear the sword in vain, they must be a terror to
evil doers, and so are those. Phil. 3.2.

2. Ministers must arise against them, we are the Lords Huntsmen, and by our
industry and spiritual wisdom, we must labor to uncase the Fox, and get him
out of his holds and distinctions, what in us lies, we must labor to deliver
the Church from her subtle and secret enemies, not sparing the little Foxes,
but killing the very cubs, which seek by their wiles to destroy the Vine when
it is tender, laboring to pervert young beginners by errors, wine, women, and
other licentious courses.

Object. But they are little Foxes, and not so dangerous as old ones.

Answ. Yet kill the little Foxes (says the Text) kill the old ones, yea and
suppress the cubs too, because of that destructive nature that is in them,
though for the present they do but little hurt. Babylon must not only be
destroyed, but her brats also. Psalm. 137. ult. Arrius was at first but a spark,
yet by connivence we see what a great flame he came to. Now subtle seducers
resemble Frxes in 10. particulars.

1. The Fox is a very subtle creature, so the Churches enemies are subtle
Foxes. Exodus 1.10. 2 Samuel 15.4. Nehem. 6.2. to 10. if Tobiah and Sanballat
cannot hinder the work by threatening and force, Si leo^ina pellis non s^fficit,
vulpina est assuenda.
then they put on the Fox skin, and try what promises will do. They are Wolves,
but in Sheeps clothing, the better to deceive. Matthew. 7.15. Dragons, but with
Lambs horns. Revel* 13.11. Vipers, which hide their teeth in their gummes.
Matthew. 3.8. They are like their father the Devil who is an old Fox, Author
Haeresium Diabolus ita lubritus and mill modis Proteus est, ut non possit
certo const^ingi aut capi. Vna rima obstructa, december alias invenit quibus
elabitur; et seu ventus conclusus omnia quarit, penetrat omnia ut possit ^l^bi.
Contra hu^s pracipue pugnatur, quando cum Haereticis res est. Itaque disputando
nihil prosicitur, eisi disputandum est and disputationibus ministri Satanae
sunt convintendi propter reliquam Ecclesiam. Luther.
having his Methods and Depths, as he has mill nocendi arts, a thousand
devices to do mischief withal, so are these as full of all subtlety, as the
Devil can make them. Acts 13.10. 2. It Is a wild creature, and so are these
wild, unteachable, untractable men. Nomine tenus Christiani, re bellua. 3. Its
a ravenous creature, night and day he is ravening for his prey, Non solum
faciunt mala, sed and defendunt. Hicron.

Etsi vox caprissat tamen per rimulas vulpem videamu^.


he goes from fold to fold, making foul spoil wherever he comes. So these are
active to do mischief, they run from Parish to Parish, making foul havoc
amongst the flock of Christ, doing evil with both hands earnestly. Micah 7.3.
4. The Foxes skin and outside is better then his flesh. So these Hypocrites
have a form and outside and that is all, within they are full of guile and
rapine. 5. Foxes love to live in Deserts and Wildernesses, where none may
disturb them. Lam. 5.18. So these delight in ignorant places, where there is no
light to discover them, nor preachers to disturb them, it is the dark places of
the earth, that are habitations for such. Psalm. 74.20. 6. The Fox is all for it
self, it flayes, but never feeds the flock. So these feed themselves, but
destroy the flock. Ezekiel. 13.4, 5. 7. It Is a stinking creature [ ore and ano
foetet] so these have rotten stinking hearts, words and works, and when they
are dead, their memorial stinks and rots. Prove. 10.7. 8. It never goes in a
strait path, but turns and winds in and out. So these go not in the strait path
of Gods commands, but in the crooked paths of sin and error. Psalm. 125.5.
Prove. 2.15. Philip. 2.15. like Thieves they keep not the ordinary road, but now
they are in the way, and anon they cross it. 9. When caught in a snare they
look pitifully, they seem to he gentle whilst in a chain, but let them loose
and they are Foxes still, and none play such Rekes, as the tame Fox that has
broke loose, and is turned wild again. So these when in prison, or in
distress, they will submit, recant, do any thing; but no sooner are they at
liberty, but they play the Fox again worse then ever. 10. It Is an hard thing to
catch a Fox, especially an old one. Birds are caught with chafe, wild beasts
in grinnes, ( at annosa vulpes haud capitur laqueo.) but an old subtle Fox is
not so easily caught; if you pursue him, he has many holes and dens to hide
himself in. Matthew. 8.19. if you lay for him at one hole, he has another to
creep out at. So these when convinced of their error, yet will not be
convinced, but have their holds and distinctions, and evasions to creep out at.
Now lay all these together, Seducers are Sorcerers, Thieves, Wolves, Cheaters,
Dogs, Foxes; and the point is clear, That seducing Heretics are very
dangerous, and may help to take off that plea which many Sectaries make for
themselves. viz. That those of their way are Holy, temperate, Religious men.
Answ. So have many Heretics been seemingly, but pull off the sheep-skin, and
you shall find a Wolf under it. Thus Arrius, Pelagius, Laelius, and Faustus
Socinus, with Arminius, were Satan's messengers transformed into the Ministers
of Christ. Mente sagax, vita sanctus, calamoque celebris Arminius. V. vitam
Armin.

Bellarmine was such a perfect Pharisee (that if you believe the Jesuit who
writ his life) he could hardly find any sin to confess, when he was dying.

Non vult Diabolus deformis and ater esse in suis ministris sed mundus and
candidus, and ut talis appareat, ornat omnia verba and opera sua praetextu
veritatis and nominis Dei, juxta protri^um illud. In nomine Domini, etc. Luther.


The Devil never deceives more dangerously, then when he appears like an
Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14. nor is he ever more a Devil then when he seems
a Saint, even those that came to apprehend our Savior, pretended holiness,
and feined themselves to be just men. Luke 20.20. The Donatists seemed pure in
their own eyes, yet held desperate Doctrines. The Anabaptists in Germany
pretended they were Saints, yet at last proved to be firebrarnds. The gloss of
Profession without sincerity will soon fade, as we see in the Scribes and
Pharisees, and in the Monks, Nuns, Hermites, and many Sectaries of our time.
It Is a sign men are unsound when they Trumpet out their own abilities,
Sanctity, Sufferings, Strictness, that they may get the more followers. Romans
16.18. the Apostle there gives us two marks of false Prophets.

1. They give out that they are the servants of Christ, but says the Apostle,
^a mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri. Horat.
they serve not Christ, but seek themselves. 2. They have fine words and fair
speeches, to deceive the simple; out of their mouth comes nothing but
Gentleness, Meekness, Love, Liberty, Free Grace, that one would think that
God and goodness were even confined to their lips. This Sanctus Satanas, this
white Devil has deluded many. Nullus Haereticus venit sub titulo erroris and
Satanae, nec Diabolus ipse v^nit ut Diabolus, praeser^im candidus ille; imo
ater Diabolus ad manifesta scelera impellens operculum facit homini ut peccalum
extenuet. Luther.
Many follow such as Asoloms followers did him, in the simplicity of their
hearts. But if you will walk wisely and safely, you must live by Rule, not by
Example. To the Law and to the Testimony. Isay 8.20. The Bereans judged of
Paul's doctrine by comparing it with the Scripture, and not by Paul's life. Acts
17.11. Let men's lives be never so seemingly pious and Angelical, if they bring
not purity of doctrine with it, count them accursed. Gal. 1.8, 9. yet how many
are carried away with the bare names of men, choosing rather to err with them,
then to speak truth with others. It Is common that the same of the Founder of a
Sect makes men drink in his opinions, first in one thing, then in another, at
last in all; especially if he be a man of parts* and famous. Capell.
Whereas we should not pin our Faith on another man's sleeve, because we know
not whither he may carry it. The best men are yet but men still, and have too
often their failings, and observable imperfections. They know but in part, they
believe but in part, and they are sanctified but in part, and therefore the
best may err and be deceived. 1 Cor. 13.9. Peter an eminent zealous Apostle
yet was not in all things imitable, nor did he walk up to the truth of the
Gospel, but by his example (which seemed a Law to others) he compelled the
Gentiles to be circumcised Gal. 2.11.13, 14. and Christ called him Satan.
Matthew. 16.23. Origin, Tertullian, Austin, Apollinaris, all learned men, yet had
their naevos and failings: Let us therefore take heed how we have men's Persons,
S^^. Mr. Tombs his Ser. on 1 Cor. 3.21. G^la^pies Miscelan. cap. 12, 13.

D. Boltons Arraignment of errors. 163. etc.


Parts, or Performances, in too great admiration. Love them we may, but not
Idolize them, prize them for their gifts and graces, but prize the truth above
them all, though they be never so great or good. It Is great folly to promise
our selves more from the creature, then ever we shall find in them.
5. Observe, That false Prophets may be known, Hence the Lord gives us here so
many Characters and Notes of them. And since the land swarms with such, I shall
give you twenty marks, by which you may know them, and the better shun them.

1. The first Note of false Prophets is this, They are such as run before they
are sent, V. D. Arrowsmith Tactica S. lib, 2. cap. 2. S. 3.

See my Pulpit-Guard. Edit. 4. p. 11. Arg. 2.


they intrude themselves into the work, and come without sending for. Ier. 14,
15. and 23.21. this makes their preaching fruitless. verse 32. I sent them
not, therefore they shall not profit this people at all; let people follow them
never so much, they shall never profit by them. These creep into the Church by
the Devils window, they come not in by Gods door. John 10.1. Jude 4. Good men
are modest, Skillful Musicians are hardly induced to play, but unskilful
Fiddlers will scrape without entreating.

Ex sartoribus doctores facti; ut delicate and molliter viverent. Calvin.
contra Liberi. cap. 4.


they are sensible of the weight of the work, and therefore must be thrust
forth. Matthew. 9. ult. So Moses, Jeremy, Isay, etc. false Prophets are
self-called. Rev. 2.20. when men are Idle, and grow weary of their callings,
then they turn Speakers, and as the Monks of old got their livings by singing,
so do these by Prating.

2. They come in sheeps-cloathing, Iactant se sincerissimos, fidelissimos, cum
sunt omnium mendacissimi. Luther.
they pretend extraordinary Humility, Innocence, Simplicity, Matthew 7.15.
their words are smoother then oil, they breathe out nothing but Free Grace,
Gospel, Heaven and Happiness; like their father the Devil, they hide their
horns and cloven feeth with the sheep-skin. They pretend to walk so
spiritually, as if they had no bodies, and yet act so carnally as if they had
no souls, they talk as if they had cloven Tongues, yet walk as if they had
cloven Feet. Mr. Wild in his Assize Sermon. on Romans 1.32.
The sheep trembles at the sight of a Wolf, but if the Wolf get a sheep-skin
on his back, it is the sooner deceived. Therefore it is made a Note of false
Teachers, that with fair words they deceive the simple, Romans 16.18. 2 Pet. 2.3.
(...), Cum vitium virtus putatur, ibi culpa sine metu cumulatur. Greg.
they plaster over foul matters with fair words, like the Harlot. Prove. 7.21.
The worst complexions are deepliest painted, Dum verba molliunt, virus
infundunt, Greg.
the grossest Heresies have the fairest pretenses, that grand Impostor the
Devil, Mr. Firmin has spoken very well to this Point, in his Treatise against
the Quakers. p, 12. to 20.
when he intends most mischief, appears like an Angel of light. These study to
please men, and therefore they are no servants of Christ. Gal. 1.10. all their
fine speeches are but like Poison given in honey, which destroys more swiftly.
They set a gloss upon their false Tenets as Tradesmen do upon their bad
stuffes to make them sell the better. They can cite Scripture to draw you from
Scripture, and tempt you to be irreligious, by religious Arguments misapplyed.
This is the Devillls great Masterpiece which he has now upon the wheel, he
carries his deadliest poison in a golden cup. Revelations 17.4.

3. They wrest and abuse the Scriptures for their own Ends. They do violence to
the Law. Zeph. 3.4 they wrest and wring it, they add, they detract, (...), a
(...)ndo. Torquent, contorquent, detorquent, atque retorquent.
they change the sense, they set it on the tenters to fit it to their fancies,
they turn it this way and that way as may best serve their purposes; they set
it on the Rack, and so make it speak what it never thought. They compel the
Scriptures to go two miles, which of themse^ves would go but one. They deal
with them as Chemists do with natural bodies, which they torture to get that
out of them, which God and nature never put into them. 2 Pet. 3.16. This is the
ground of all that Popery, Arrianisme, Socinianisme, and Anabaptisme, that is
so rife amongst us. Non aliunde natae sunt Haereses nisi dum Scripturae bonae
non been intelliguntur, etiam temere and audacter asseritur. August. Tract. 18.
in Job.
Now as it is a Note of a true Prophet, soundly and savingly to expound the
Scripture, and give the sense thereof from Scripture. Neh. 8.8. Matthew. 4.7. So
its an an infalble note of a false Prophet to torture them. Non est haec
libertas credendi sed errandi; non conscientiae, sed Phantasiae; non libertas
sed Libertinismus.


4. They cry up carnal liberty and licentiousness. 2 Pet. 2.19. Jude 4.
Naturally we cannot endure sound doctrine, because it cuts and curbs our
corruptions, therefore these false Teachers mix the wine of the word, with the
water of their own inventions, the better to allay it, and abate its strength
and efficacy. Isay 1.22, Rat-catchers use to mingle poison and bread together,
that they may catch the sooner. Such Libertines are sent to prove thee, not to
guide thee. Deuteronomy. 13.3. This liberty or rather licentiousness of conscience is
the great Diana of these times, but the way is too broad to be good. Matthew.
7.13.

5. They seek their own Glory, and not Gods. They cry up Nature, and decry
Grace, they cry up a Light within them (which is no better then darkness) and
cry down Gods word without them. Simon Magus sets up himself instead of God.
Act. 8.9, 10. they drive at Self in all their actings. Romans 16.18. 2 Pet. 2.3,
14. Impostours are always great Self-seekers. These are contrary to Gods
faithful Ministers, who always debase nature and exalt grace, they are
content to decrease, so Gods honor may increase. John 7, 18. and 3.30.

6. They cry down the faithful Ministers of Christ who spoil their Markets,
Cum ipsam veritatem criminari and obsc^rare non possunt, homines per quos
praedicatur abducunt in odium, de quibus and fingere quicquid in mentem
venerit, possant. Aug. epist. 137.
and hinder the spreading of their errors. These stir up the Magistrate
against them, as the false Prophets stirred up the Princes against Jeremy, and
Amos 7.10. the false Apostles cry down Paul that they may set up themselves. 2
Cor. 10.10. The Wolves (in the Fable) would make a League with the sheep,
provided they would put away their dogs. They that would seduce children, first
make them out of love with their Guardians; when the Devil would seduce Eve,
he goes about to persuade her that God was too strict and austere, in keeping
them from the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

7. They have new-coyned words, and high-flowen Terms, as bright clouds, dark
clouds, beamings of glorious lights, they speak great swelling words of Vanity.
2 Pet. 2.18. often Allegorizing and uttering much learned Nonsense. They use
ambiguous terms and dark phrases, See the Letters sent to Nayler, Naylers
Examination

Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem. Horat.

Solaecismus in verbis transit in solaecismos in doctrina, barbarismus sepe
abit in Haeresin. Doctor Slatyr.

Peregrina and insolenti utuntur lingua, qua sic cornicantur, ut nihilo plus
perspicuitatis insit, quam in aviam cantu. Calvin adversus Libe^tinos. cap. 7.


that they may bring disciples to their lodgings, and cover their plots the
better, Error shunnes the light. Misty and cloudy expressions serve only to
shadow an ignorant mind or an ill meaning. I find Calvin spending a whole
Chapter in complaining of the Gypsian canting and mystical language of the
Sectaries of his time, by which we may see that the same spirit breaths in our
Sectaries, as did in those Libertines an hundred years ago. I find it so
pertinent to this purpose, that I have translated it for the benefit of all.

CALVIN Against the Libertines, CHAP. 7. Of the Peculiar Manner and Form of
Speech used by the Quintinists (i. e) a Pack of Libertines then living.
FIrst of all as Juglers and other Vagabonds, such are those who coming out of
Bohemiah, wander almost all the world over, and others of that sort use a
peculiar kind of speech understood of none but of their own faction and
fraternity; so that before a man's face they can deceive and betray, and none
perceive them; so the Quintinists use a strange and un-wonted form of words,
whereby they chatter with no more perspicuity then is in the singing of Birds,
I deny not but they use common words, but when they do so, they so disguise the
meaning of them, that none can understand the matter whereof they treat, or
what they would deny or affirm; and this they do maliciously, that they may
closely, as it were by ambushment circumvent silly people, for they reveal to
none the mysteries of their abominations, which are covertly couched under
those Terms, except to those whom already they have bound by oath unto them:
for to those that are Novices they discover no such things, but suffer them to
gape or mutter, as stupefied with admiration of their words, and so they lie
hid under those winding forms, In fruticosis gaudet auceps, fur in tenebris,
Piscator in turbidis.
as thieves hide themselves in their dens. These are those swelling words which
Peter and Jude compare to Bubbles and froth, which end in nothing. But whilst
they study by their lofty style to lead others into errors, they so mislead
themselves, that they understand not their own bablings. I remember when once
Quintin saw me in a great Assembly, sharply reproving his chattering; he
desirous to shun the stroke, said, I reproved his speech, because I did not
understand it. To which I answered, that I understood somewhat in it more then
he did, for he did not at all perceive those things which he uttered, but I
perceived that he meant to bewitch the minds of men with his absurd and
pernicious dotages, which will appear to be so, in that he does so plunge them
in, and involve them with such foolish speculations, that neither heaven nor
earth can appear unto them. By this Note they are discerned from others, when
they speak, they make a noise like a Chough, so that nothing they utter can be
understood. The tongue was created by God, that we might express our Thoughts
and communicate them to each other, but they pervert the order instituted by
him, and with a confused sound beat the air, or by long circumstances they
minister matter of such varying and altering to the auditors, that at last
they are left wholly in suspense, when the mysteries of God are to be handled,
we ought to make the Scripture our Rule; let us then follow the Rule which God
has delivered to us, and not wander out of the compass of it: for God knowing
that if he should use only such words as become his Majesty, our apprehensions
could not reach them; uses therefore such expressions as suit best with our
shallow capacities. And as a nurse speaks broken and imperfect words to her
Infant, so does God to his people, that he may be understood. Whosoever
therefore inverts this order aims at nothing but to bury the Truth of God,
which cannot be perceived any other way, then by that which he has revealed
unto us. See then how we must labor in the explication of their
circumlocutions, so as by force to draw their meaning into light; that so their
abominations which they study to cover, may be made manifest to all men. And
all Christians ought to be admonished, that when they hear their gagling in
this manner, they break off their speech and say, Either speak as the Lord has
taught us, and according to Scripture phrase, or get you gone, and make your
speech to stones and trees. So far pious and judicious Calvin.

8. They preach one thing in public, and another thing in private. In public
I have heard some call for Duties, It Is well observed by Master Clapham, that
seducers do not always deny in down right words great and fundamental Truths
revealed in Scripture; but often whilst they pretend to own the Scriptures
expressions, they pervert and deny the Truths themselves.

Belingues sunt, and in multiplices species se transformant, nunc hoc, nunc
illud asserentes. Calv. cont. Libert. c. 8. ubi plura.


Ordinances, etc. and acknowledge the Deity of Christ: but talk with the same
men in private, and they are other men. They are like Fortune ( Constans in
levitate sua) constant in unconstancy: They are more mutable then the Moon, and
change themselves into several shapes like Proteus. As the Jesuit is omnis
homo; so these can say and unsay, they can play fast and loose with ease.

9. It Is their property to conceal many of their Opinions (especially at first)
till they have fitted their Disciples to receive them. They deal with their
Proselites as Absalon did with his followers; he at first covers his Treason,
with a show of courteous behavior, zeal for justice, and the pretense of
performing a Vow; (2 Samuel 15.2.8.) he never shows himself in open Rebellion
till he was sure of the peoples hearts. Error in it self is ugly, and if it
should appear (especially at first) in its proper colors, men would detest
both it, and those that bring it.

10. They boast much of the Spirit, when upon trial, See Master Sherlocke
against the Quakers cap. 4.5, 6. etc.

Nayler talks much of the Spirit, in his Examination.

Putant se spiritu repletos, cum inani vento distenti sunt and turgidi.
Davenant in Colos. 2.18. p. 241. How to know the Spirit of Truth from a false
spirit, See an excellent little T^act called the True Guide, by R. H. Printed.
1646.

Totus eorum Sermo est de Spiritu. Calvin. V. D. Reynolds de Lib. Apochr.
Praelect, 214.


it is a mere Satanicall, deluding spirit that leads them. For such sensual
Separatists as these, have not the Spirit of God, says Saint Jude 19. They
think they know more by the Spirit, then their betters can know by twenty years
study, who yet are led by a better spirit then they. [V. Tactica S. l. 2. c. 2.
S. 8.]

11. They boast much of New-light, and love to vent such things as savor of
Novelty. They know that itching ears cannot away with common Truths, they must
have novum aut nihil. By this the old Prophet brought the young Prophet into
the Lions mouth, by telling him that an Angel spoke to him, and had brought
him some New-light. 1 Kings 13.18.24. and it is an old Policy of the Devil, to
cry up sin and error under the Notion of New-light. Thus he beguiled Eve. Genesis
3.5. this is rather strange Light, then New. It Is Light in Name, but Darkness
indeed. Let us examine them, and we shall find that these New-lights are
nothing but Old-Errours, and so are Neither Lights, nor New.

1. They are not Light because they are contrary to the Light of Gods word,
from whence all true Light springs. Isay 8.20. neither are they New, but rather
renewed, for most of them were broached in or before Austins time, V. August de
Haeres.
which is above 12. hundred years ago. The Ghosts of those old Heretics are
now come out of their graves to scarre men, and mislead them.

12. They pretend to Miracles and extraordinary Revelations. See more against
them on v. 16.

See Mr. Sherlocke against Quakers, p. 73. to 168. and M. Clapham against the
Quakers. Sect. 8. p. 44.

Initia peccati sunt verecunda. Progrediendum a facilioribus Sib^ Concio ad
Cle^um. p. 49.

V. M^. Edwards Gangreen, Part. 1. Coral. 13. p. 100. and Mr. Young, his C^re
of Mesprision.

Sect 40.44. Incipientibus morbis si quid videtur movend^m, m^ve. Hippocrates,


When they cannot make good their Tenets by Scripture, then, as the Papists fly
to unwritten Traditions, so these fly to Miracles and Revelations. This is no
more then what Christ long since foretold, that in the last days false Christ's
and false Prophets should arise, showing signs and wonders and should deceive
many, Matthew 24.23. So does Antichrist with his lying wonders 2 These. 2.9.
They cry up an extraordinary light within them, and cry down the Scriptures and
Preaching as low things, because they discover their works of darkness. Thieves
put out the light, because darkness best becomes their deeds of darkness.

13. They seem modest at first, they desire you only to hear them speak, then
to separate, and after to be rebaptized, and then farewell all. They drop a
little at once into their followers, and never administer their Physic till
they have first given good Preparatives to make it work, and then stronger
potions, as they find the pulse of the Patient. They do not always deny in
plain terms fundamental Truths, but often when they pretend to own the
Scripture expressions, they deny the Truth. They desire you at first; but to
taste of the Devils broth, Isay 63.4. not doubting but at last to make you eat
of his beef. He that says yea to the Devil in a little, shall not say nay when
he pleases. Sin is gradual as well as Grace. As no man attains to a height
of Virtue suddenly, so neither of Vice. A spark neglected may burn down a Town:
Arrius at first a spark, yet being tolerated, at last set the world on fire. As
diseases so error must be stopped betimes.

14. They are mere Scepticks in Religion. They question all things, but believe
nothing. They question the Law, question the Gospel, Sabbath, Sacraments,
Magistracy, Ministry, etc. They are all for disputing, Sceptici Philosophi
quasi quaesitores and consideratores qui omnia in suspenso relinquentes, nihil
definiunt. Aul. Gellius, Noct. ^ttic l. 15. c. 5.

V. Tactica S. l. 2. c. 2. S, 4.

(...), insano deltrans amore, vel instar faeminae pica laborantis quae
neglectis san^ eduli^, vel n^xia vel minus sana deperit.

They make queries and utrums of every thing.

See more before on v. 7.

See Mr. Viner on that Text. p. 17.


nothing for practicing. That time which they should spend in the examination
of their Consciences, is laid out in the examination of opinions. They
challenge men to dispute, that they may make men doubt of the truth, as the
Devil did Eve, by questioning Gods threatenings, Genesis 3.1. they are sick and
dote on questions, 1 Timothy. 6.4. God will have his command obeyed, not
questioned. How often does he command us to be rooted, steadfast, grounded, royal
Christians; not tossed to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.

15. You may guess at false Teachers by their followers. Who are they that
follow them? 1. They are Idle persons that have no callings, or else follow
none. 2. Or Ungrounded, Ignorant, Unstable persons, though men in years, yet
children in Understanding; such unchatechised persons are a fit prey for the
Devils Instruments. 3. Or else they are Rotten, Proud, Censorious Hypocrites;
such as were never found in the faith, but were justly suspected for their
loose walking.

16. When at last their folly is discovered to all, then they face about and
begin to deny what they hold; or else they mince the matter, they alter it, and
new mould it, and say they were not rightly understood, etc.

17. The Devils Instruments usually are subtle Serpents, Diobolus in Specie non
ovis, non Asini, sed Serpentis tentavit Adam a Lap. See Mr. Gournall on Ephesians.
6.11. p. 106. and a wicked cause needs a smooth Orator, and bad were a
pleasing Chapman Idem ibid.

Great wits, and great gifts are the stock which the Devil desires more
especially to graft on. As Austin said of Licinius, a young man of great
abilities* Cupit abs te ornari, Diabolus. The Devil desired to be credited by
him.


Genesis 3.1. 2 Corinthians 11.3. 2 Peter 21. he gets the choycest wits the
better to carry on his designs. An unsanctified wit is a fit agent for the
Devil. Nor is there a likelyer Anvile in all the shop of Hell whereon to forge
mischief, then one that is lewd and learned. He must have such as can play the
hucksters and juglers, passing that for gold which is but brass, 2 Corinthians
2.17. Such as walk plainly and honestly are not for the Devils turn, God has
planted his fear in their hearts, so that they dare not sin against him. But
it is the crafty companion that is full of all subtleties, sleights, wiles and
deceitful workings, that can cog a Die, and make it answer what cast he
pleases: this, this is the man for the Devils turn Ephesians. 4.14. the Apostle in
three words expresses the subtlety of seducers.

1. They have a slight (...), in cogging the Die, like cunning gamesters they
can so pack the Cards, and pervert the scriptures that they can make it speak
what they please themselves. 2. Cunning craftinesses (...) they turn every
stone and watch all advantages. 3. Lying in wait to decceive (...), they have a
method in deceiving, they have all the Arts, of cozenage, so that if 'twere
possible, they would deceive the very Elect.
18. They separate themselves from the true Churches of Christ. The Pharisees
were rigid separatists and quarrelled with Christ because he would not
separate, but was a friend to publicans and sinners, Luke 15.27, 28. They
pretend they abhor a mixed company, and yet they revile and fly from real
Saints. They are all for gathering Churches out of Churches, which is the very
way to destroy Churches. How do we destroy houses, but by pulling one stone,
and one piece from another? This schism grows into an heresy, as a Serpen^
grows to be a Dragon. This tolerated, will ruin Families, tearing them all to
pieces, whilst the husband goes to one Church, the wife to another, the son to
a third, the daughter to a fourth, and the servant to an Alehouse instead of a
Church. This opens a gap to abundance of profaneness, when there shall be no
cohabitation, but the Church members shall be scattered up and down, some 20.
some 30. some 60. some 100. miles off, who shall have the inspection, teaching
and guidance of these? V. ^urroughs his Irenicum, Chap. 2.3.
Master Buroughs his Argument for gathering of Churches (in my judgment) is
very dilute and weak; it is this, Because our Divines hold it lawful to gather
Churches out of the Church of Rome: therefore it is lawful to gather Churches
out of the Church of England, q. d. because it is lawful to separate from a
whore, Ergo, we ought to separate from an honest woman also. What more ungodly
sacrilege, or manstealing can there be, then to purloin from godly Ministers
the firstborn of their fervent Prayers, and faithful Preaching, the leaven of
their flocks, the encouragement of their souls, the Crown of their labors, and
their Epistle to Heaven? If men will needs gather Churches out of the world (as
they phrase it) let them first plow the world, and sow it, and reap it with
their own hands, and then the Lord give them a liberal harvest. He is a very
hard man that will reap where he has not sown, and gather where he has not
strewed, Mat. 24.25. We have no President in the whole Book of God, to gather
up one Church out of the cream and quintessence of many Churches, As Mr. ^lake
on the Covenant, cap 31. in ^^ne. V. The Assemblies Answer to the discenting
Brethren, p 61. in fine.
a Reverend Divine of ours has well observed.

19. They dawb with untempered mortar, they preach placentia, and flatter men
in their sins Ezekiel 13.10.15. and 22.28. they preach the fancies of their own
brain, there is no truth, and so no strength in what they say; it is all but
arena sine calce, and lutum sine firmitate, the least shower brings it down.
These are those Wells without water, and empty clouds, which promise much, but
perform nothing, 2 Peter 2.17. Jude 12. but faithful Pastors are spiritual
Clouds which water and refresh the Vineyard of the Lord with wholesome,
heavenly showers of saving Doctrine. Isay 5.6. and 60.8.20. They are great
pretenders to an Extraordinary call. Ask them how they dare presume to meddle
with the holy things of God (considering Gods dreadful judgments on Corah and
his company, on Vzzah and Vzziah for the like presumption) their answer is,
they are called; we ask by whom? they answer, by God. If so, then it is either
in an Ordinary, or an Extraordinary way. They tell us they are called
Extraordinary; we reply, then 'twill appear by their Extraordinary gifts: the
Apostles were called Extraordinarily, and they showed it by their extraordinary
gifts; they could heal the sick, cast out Devils, speak Languges without study;
and let these pretenders show the like abilities, and we shall believe them.
But alas, upon Examination, we find they have not so much as Ordinary
abilities. See more of the sleights of False Teachers in Master Wells his
Preface to the rise and ruin of the Antinomians in New England.

E^pedit belluas adeo perniciosas n^ta aliqua insigni^i, ut dignosci possint ab
uno quoque; nec quisquam non monitus damnum aliquod reciptat. Calvin contra
Libertin.


They are infeririour free gifts to many women and children. They are not able
to write a line of true English, I have several of their Letters by me wherein
there are more Literal and Material Errata's then lines: They had more need to
be taught themselves, then to be teachers of others. Thus ex pede Herculem, by
these twenty marks you may know the Impostors of our time, and knowing them you
must avoid them. These are those that poysen not bodies, but souls; as the
harlot, so these hunt for the precious soul. Prove. 6.26. they hatch the
Cockatrice eggs, he that eats of their eggs, dies; and that which is crushed,
breaks forth into a Viper. Isay 59.5. These are those that make rents and
divisions in the Church, whose Peace should be very dear unto us; for though
Unity be not the very being, yet it tends much to the well-being of a Church.
These hinder the progress of the Gospel, when people should be praying,
weeping, and humbling themselves together; these set them to disputing,
wrangling, and malicing one another. It Is Unity that spreads the Gospel, and
makes mountains to become a plain, even the seven hills amongst the rest. Were
there that sweet Synceretismus, or rather Synchristianismus, that harmony of
hearts and ways, as ought to be amongst the people of God, how terrible would
the Church be to her enemies? It Is these that breed tumults in the Church,
commotions in the Commonwealth, that imbitter men's spirits one against
another, waste men's estates, bring men to a morsel of bread, and at last bring
themselves to some untimely end. Oh consider the sad Ends of many Heretics,
and let their falls make you to fear. Arrius voyded his bowels, Julian died
blaspheming, Simon Magus an Arch-Heretick, who by his sorcery and feined
miracles, deluded many people, who took him for a God, Acts 8.10. attempting on
a time to fly in the air in the sight of many people, his divelish art failing
him, Beza epist. 1. ad Dud. p. 10.
he fell to the ground, and brake his leg, which was his death. Servetus was
burnt for his blasphemies at Geneva. Gibraldus the Heretic was swept away by
the Plague. Blandrate, Physician to the King of P^land, a great Patron to
Socinus and his followers, was strangled in his bed by his Brothers son. Alciat
a Socinian died despairing. Pale^logus an Arrian was burnt. Francis David a
proud Socinian died mad, and was distracted with the sight of the Devil:
Lismanninus an Arrian drowned himself in a well. Olympius that denied the
Trinity was burnt to death with three Lightnings. Be^old that Anabaptist King
with his companions, was tortured and put to death. Humber was burnt, Muntzer
and Pheifer beheaded. See more in Clerks Mirror, cap. 63.
So let all thine enemies perish O Lord. Consider Gods hand on Nayler a Quaker,
and Sundercomb a Leveller, and Mistress Hutchinson in New England, who was
banished for her Heresies, and destroyed both she and her family by the Indians.
Parnel a Quaker famisht himself in Colchester Jayle, trying to fast 40. days
as Christ did. Poole a Quaker in Dorcester drowned himself.

Quest. If any desire to know the Reasons why God suffers Seducers to abound,
he may find good store in Doctor Boltons Arraignment of error. Page 5. to 55.
in Mr. Brimslyes Spi. Vertigo. p. 37. etc. and Mr. Sherlock against the
Quakers. In fine cap. 6. p. 205. etc.

Use 1. Since false Prophets are such Pestilent persons, the Magistrate must
not Tolerate them. See many Reasons against Toleration in Mr. Pryns Tract
against the Quakers. p. 15.

Error cui non resistitur, approbatur; and and veritas cum non defenditur,
opprimitur.

V. Mr. Fords ^ssise on Psalm. 75 4. p. 6, 7.

Nullum latrocinium adeo scelestum, nec venenum adeo pernicrosum, quam
haeresis. Calvin.

See the danger of Heresies Mr. Obad. Sedgewick on Rev. 12.15. p 15. to 35.


Who will Tolerate such as have Plague-sores running on them, to go up and down
infecting others: or that have poison to go up and down selling it instead of
food? Seducing Heretics are worse, those kill but the body, these with their
damnable Heresies destroy the soul. 2 Pet, 2.1. and if such as steal away but
their bodies must die. Exodus 21.16. what shall be done to those that ruin the
better part? These are called Foxes, Vipers, Wolves, Thieves, troublers of the
Church, and therefore to be cut off, Magist^ates must not be like the Heathen
God^, Patrons, and Protectours of Villainy. He that commits sin is of the Devil,
b^t he that connives, commands, comm^nd, it when he is entrusted to punish it,
is not only of the Devil, but is a Devil, and a great one too.
not tolerated, Galathians 5.12. Christ blames the Church of Thyatire, for
giveing a toleration to Iesabel, Revelations 2.20. and commends the Church of
Ephesus, for not bearing with such as are evil, Revelat^ons 2.2. and Josiah is
commended for compelling men to the worship of God, 2 Chronicles 34.33. The
Magistrate, is the Minister of God, and must be a terror to them that do evil,
Romans 13. especially, if they be compounded, blasphemous, seducing Heretics,
they must be put to death, Leviticus 24.14. Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy 13.6.8,
Si Haeretici sint manifest blasphemi, and in illis blasphemiis pertinaces,
p^ssunt affici supplicio capitali. Ames, CC. l. 4 c. 4. q. 6. See in Vines his
Se^. on 2 Pet. 22. p 64. etc.
9. and 17.2.5. 2 Chronicles 5.16. Ezra 7.26. Josiah slayes the false Prophets,
1 Kings 23.20. El^jah commands the Priests of Baal to be slain, 1 Kings 18.40.

Object. Lest any should think to evade these Proofs as Legal; the prophet
Zachary [13.3.] prophesing of Gospel times, tells us that, if any shall be so
bold as to teach lies, that his father and mother shall cause him to be put to
death, alluding to that Deuteronomy 13. The equity of which Law still remains
under the Gospel. Better and with less danger is a Thief, an Adulterer, a
murderer, a Witch and Sorcerer tolerated, then such an Heretic and Seducer,
D^. Owens Ser. on Dam. 7.15. p. 54.
(As our large Annotations have it.) It Is observed by a learned Divine, That as
in things of practice, so of persuasion that are impious, either in themselves,
or in their natural unconstrained consequences, the Plea of conscience is an
Aggravation of the crime: if men's consciences are ^eared and themselves given
up to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient, there is no
doubt but they ought to suffer such things as to such practices are assigned
and appointed. Thus he. And if any shall object that these are tolerated but in
corners: The answer is easy, if it be truth they teach, why should it not have
Churches? if error, why should it have Chambers?

See more against Toler. Mr. Ant. Burges, on John 7.21. Sermon. 115. Mr. Gee on
Prayer, cap. 4. Sect. 7. p. 358. Mr. John Clerk Ser. on Leaven, p. 24.36. See
9. ways by which the Magistrate may stop the flood of Heresies. Mr. Obad.
Sedgwicks Sermon. on Revelation 12.15. p. 37. Preached 1646. James 27. Mr. Edwards
against Toleration, Calvin contra Serve. inter Opuscul. p. 694. Beza de Haert.
puniend. and Epistol. contra Deditium. Prins Treatise in defense of the
Magistrates coercive power. Mr. Rudderfords Treatise against Liberty of
Conscience. Doctor Tailor on Titus 3.1.10. p. 347, 715.

2. Ministers must come forth to the help of the Lord against these daring
Goliahs. Even a Dog will bark, when he sees his Master wronged: And a
Craesus son that has been dumb all his life, yet will speak when they offer
violence to his father. We are the Lords Watchmen, and when we see the Wolf or
the Theif approaching, we must give warning: seducers are subtle, and people can
not easily discover their plots, we must do it for them. One great cause of so
many abounding errors amongst us, springs from Ministers. 'Twas whilst the
watchmen slept, that the enemy sowed his Tares, Matthew 13.25.

1. Some are ignorant dumb dogs and cannot bark.

2. Others are scandalous and dare not, It Is observed that the Authors of
errors have been Churchmen, either grossly weak or proudly wilful, who take up
new methods of Language and Doctrine.
for fear of being questioned themselves.

3. Others see which way the times go, and like dead fish they go down the
stream, they dare not displease, they love to sleep in a whole skin, and say as
the great ones say. But let us be the Lords witnesses against a perverse
people, this is one end why we came into the world; viz. that we might bear
witness to the truth, John 13.37. We are Gods salt, and therefore must by our
Prayer, Preaching and Practice, help to season men and keep them from rotting
in sin and error. One part of our work is to convince gainsayers, Titus 1.9.
This others of abilities may do, ex charitate, but we ex officio. We are the
keepers of the Vineyard, and must take care that the Foxes spoil not the tender
Grapes. We are Fathers, and must see that the children have not a stone given
them instead of bread, nor a Serpent instead of a fish. Let the zeal of others
quicken us. How zealous was Elijah and Paul against the false Prophets of their
times? How zealous was Athanasius against the Arrians; Austin against the
Pelagians and the Donatists, Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. against Papists and
Sectaries? of all men it becomes not us to be silent and meal-mouthed, when our
Lord's dishonored.

3. Let every one stand upon his guard, Christ warned his own Disciples to
beware of such Matthew 7.15. the best know but in part, and Satan is so subtle,
that we may soon be deceived. How quickly did the Galathians fall from the
faith to justification by works? in so much that the Apostle wonders they were
so soon fallen to another Gospel, D^c^m annis laboratur, antequam Ecclesiola
recte and pie instituta paratur: and ubi parata est, irrepit aliquis fanaticus,
and quidem Idiota, qui nihil novit nisi contumeliose loqui, contra sinceros
Verbi Doctores, and in uno momento evertit omnia. Luther.
Galathians 1.6. 'Twas Luthers complaint, that an ignorant railing sot could in
a moment overthrow, what we have been building many years. Such is the cursed
depravation of man's heart, I shall therefore give you some preventing Physic
against the pestilent attempt of seducers.

Intellectus est Veritatis sponsa, and est quaedam castitas judicii; and hic
major cura adhibenda est, quia ubi non been creditur, non been vivitur: vitium
primae concoctionis non corrigitur in secunda, Debile fundamenuum fallit opus:
hinc Diabolus Princips tenebrarum tenebras prime ^ffund^t intellectum, ut cum
lucem eripuerit ducat quo velit. D. Sibs concio. ad Clerum p. 39 Ubi Plura.
1. Get your judgments rightly informed, especially in the Principles and
Fundamentals of Religion, as Faith, Repentance, Justification, Sanctification,
and new-Obedience. Our greatest care should be about the greatest things of the
Law. Lay a good foundation, else the building will totter. When men are
children in understanding then they are tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Heresy is most strong where knowledge is most weak.
It Is the weak flies which hang in the spiders web, when the strong break
thorough. The simple are apt to believe every thing, Proverbs, 14.15. and like
children swallow all that is put into their mouths. Mr. Obad. Sedgwick, Ser. on
Rev. 12.15.
There are 7. things (as a Reverend Divine has well observed) which are apt to
be carried away by the Flood of He^esies. 1. Light things. 2. Loose things. 3.
Weak things. 4. Low things. 5. Rotten things. 6. Tottering things. 7. Ventrous
things. How many err for want of knowledge, Psalm. 95.10. Matthew. 22.19. upon
this account the Apostle would not have a Minister to be a novice, 1 Timothy 3.6.
The Devil deals with men as the Cow does by the Lamb, which first picks out the
eyes, and then devours it. Or as the Philistims dealt by Sampson, they first
put out his eyes, and then they make him grind like a slave. Thus he dealt with
Eve, Genesis 3.4, 5. First, he deludes her judgment, Error intellectu parit
errorem in affect^. V. Gelaspy's Miscelan. c. 12.
with ye shall not die; and then he easily persuades her to eat of the
forbidden fruit. We should therefore be wise as Serpents that we be not
deceived, and innocent as Doves, that we prove not deceivers.

Vt nulli nocuisse velis imitare columbam,
Serpentem ut possit nemo nocere tibi.
2. Walk always as in Gods eye, have respect to all his commands, be ready to
obey, ( in revelatis and in revelandis;) whatsoever God shall discover to you
to be his Will: be not Nominall, but Real Christians, rest not content with
the form, but get the Power of Godliness. Heretics are a mere scourge for
Formalists and Hypocrites. When men reject Gods call, he gives them up to
delusions, Isay 66.4. and the lusts of their own hearts, Digus est mun dus cui
scelest nebulones illudant, quandove^am sanctitatem vel contemnit, vel far
non potest, Calvin.

(...), non dicit mittet Deus illis errorem, sed efficaciem erroris, Mascul.


Psalm, 81.11, 12. Hosea, 4.12, 13. When men will not be scholars to truth,
they shall be masters of errors and teachers of lies, well verst in the
blackest and basest Art. It Is just with God, that they who will not have Truth
for their King, should have falsehood for their Tyrant; being given up to the
Efficacy of error, or to error in the strength and power of it, 2 These. 2.10,
11. If Pharaoh will not believe the real Miracles of Moses, he shall be deluded
with the false ones of the Magitians. If Ahab will not hearken to Micaiah a
true Prophet, he shall be deluded by lying spirits in the mouths of false ones;
and this is one end why the Lord suffers not only Schisms, but Heresies to
abound, viz. to discover men's hearts to themselves and others, Deuterenomy
13.3. So long as the glass is still, no dregs appear, but stir it, and then
they show themselves. Fire discovers the mettle, and storms show us which were
rotten trees. No man fully knows his own heart till a temptation comes: If a
man should have told our Apostles 1500. years ago, that they should have
denied the Trinity, Scripture, Sacraments, Ordinances, etc. they would have
been ready to say as Hazael, am I a Dog that I should do such things as these?

3. Grow in Grace. This is a special preservative against Apostasy, 2 Peter
3.17, 18. To this end sit down under a sound, soul-searching Ministry; God
has ordained this as a special means to establish us in the truth, Ephesians.
4.10. Better have a biting Gospel (said Bradford) then a toothlesse Mass;
better it is to sit under the saddest shade of the true Vine, even weeping;
then to frolic it under the greenest trees and most pleasant Oaks of Idolatry
and Heresy. We have been barren stocks in the Vineyard of the Lord, we have
been dead under lively Oracles, like the Smiths Anvill, we are the harder for
beating on; such is our corruption that we are the worse for preaching, Isaiah
6.9.10. Now God in his just judgment punishes sin with sin, he punishes
such contempt of the Gospel with Heresy, Witchcraft, Apostasy, etc.

4. Try before you trust: Tho your Minister be a Holy man, yet 'try what he
teaches; you will tell money and weigh gold after your father, and shall we
only take Doctrines on trust? (...), V. M. L. Critic. S.
Since there are not a few, but many false Prophets gone forth into the world
(as Anabaptists, Arrians, Quakers, etc.) it will be our wisdom to try all
things, weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary, bring them to the
touchstone of Gods Word, (...) diligenter custodite.
and what upon trial you find to be sound and right, hold it fast, retain it
against all adverse power whatsoever, 1 Thessalonians 5.21. Prove. 23.23. buy
the truth at any rate, part with it at no rate, Prove. 4.21. Luke 8.15. Romans
12.9. 2 Timothy 13.14. Heb. 2.1. and 10.3.3 Rev. 3.3.11. The world was never so
full of Spirits as now: Spiritus titulo menda^ia sua venum exp^nunt.
There is the spirit of Error, the spirit of Fornication, the spirit of Pride,
the spirit of Slumber, the spirit of Giddiness, the spirit of Delusion, etc.
Had not we then need to try the spirits? 1 John 4.1. Has not God given us the
ano^nting of his Spirit? to the end, we may be able to discern light from
darkness, and truth from error? when we hear of many cheaters abroad, we had
need to look to our purses. The best may err, every man's a liar, both
actively and passively, subject to be deceived, and to deceive others, Romans
3.4. we should therefore with the Bereans try what is taught. I shall sum up
all in the words of a judicious Divine, A judgment solidly principled, an
heart sincerely renewed, a faith truly bottomed, Truth and love of it cordially
matched, profession and practice well joined, a fear of our selves, and
dependence on God still maintained, Gods Ordinances, and the society of humble
and growing Christians still frequented, watchfulness and prayer still
continued, are the best directions to keep us in the truth, and the best
preservatives to keep us from errors See more Pre^servatives in Mr Brinslyes,
spirit. Vertigo, p. 123. and 190. Mr. Sherlocke against the Quakers. 2 P. cap.
8. and Mr. Gournall on Ephesians. 6.12. p. 127. etc. and Mr. Clapham, against the
Quake^s. Sect. 13.


Lastly, forsake not the way of Gods Churches, especially in these fundamentals
wherein they are unanimous E. g. Suppose the Question be, Whether Infants
Baptism be lawful?

Answer, All the Churches of God (who should know the sense of Scripture better
then any private man) do practice it; or, Whether the Old Testament be
authentic? all the Churches of God believe it, etc. It Is a dangerous thing to
follow the Opinion of any particular man (be he never so holy) against the
current and practice of all the true Churches of Christ.

2. Forsake not the government and discipline of the Church, which is
Unanimously owned by all the Reformed Churches of Christ; It Is the want of this
which is one great cause of so many errors amongst us. If this were fully and
generally established, we should not have an Heresy or blasphemy peeping up in
the land, but there would be a timely preventing of it. Government, Rule and
Order, is the glory of Families, Cities, Churches and all Societies. It Is a
lovely thing, and if the Apostle rejoiced to see the Order and Ecclesiastical
government of the Collossians (2.3.) how would he mourn to see the disorder of
our times, V. Tactica. S. l. 2. c. 2. S. 10. V. Mr. Strong 31. Ser. Colos. 2.5
when the Church of God lies as a Vine without an hedge, a City without walls,
and a Garden without a fence! God takes it ill when we prefer our own private
interest before his public service, and dwell our selves in seeled houses,
when the House of the Lord lies waste, Hag. 1. The greatest sin of this age is
the violent opposition against the Kingly Government of Christ in his Church,
by his own Officers and Ordinances. All the wicked hate it, because it crosses
their lusts, and the Devil hates it, because it destroys his Kingdom. But let
us (according to our Covenant) endeavor in our places the setting up the
Government of Christ amongst us. Since our Church has been as a field without
a fence, how many wild beasts have broken in upon it? Its ill having the reins
on our own necks; when there was no King in Israel, every man did what pleased
himself. Since the reins of Government have been loosed, men have fancied and
found out a thousand bypath. Its good for every man to be bound, the best are
but in part regenerate, and being left to themselves, may fall into dangerous
sins and errors. God is the God of Order, and he will have not only some
things, but all things done in order, 1 Cor. 14.33.40. he commands Order,
commends Order, delights in Order, and would have all his people walk in an
orderly way. It Is the Devil who is the Author of disorder and confusion,
Ordinem non constituimus in illis nugatoriis pompis quae nihil habent praeter
evanidum splendorem. Calvin Lib. Institut. 4. Cap. 10. Sect. 27.28
he knows if Order go up, his Kingdom must go down, and therefore he does
his utmost to hinder Government: But God will have Order both in Substantialls
and Circumstantials, in Reals and in Rituals. This Order is not any
superstitious, humane invention, but an Order grounded on the Word of God, and
agreeable to that Canon

The Titles given to Gods Church imply some order there. It Is called, 1. a
House. 2. a Commonwealth. 3. a Garden. 4. a Vineyard.


1. The Church is Gods house and family. 1 Pet. 4.17. Gal. 6.10. Now what is a
house without government, but a little hell above ground? yea worse then hell,
for in hell there is some order; there is Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Yea,
there is some Unity in hell, Satan's Kingdom is not divided against it self, if
it were it could not stand. Luke 11.17.18. now if we have Order in our own
houses, is it fit that Gods house should lie in confusion? This brings
judgment on a people. Hag. 1.9. At the Reformation of the Lacedemonian state,
some persuaded Lycurgus to set up a Democrasy (i. e.) a popular government,
where all might have equal power. He answered, Begin first and set up such a
government in your own houses.

2. The Church is a spiritual Commonwealth, Ephesians 2.12. Strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel (from the Church of God.) Now what is a Commonwealth
without Order and Unity? we see how careful men are to keep their
Commonwealth in Peace and Unity; O that there were a like care to set up Order
and Unity in the Church of God!

3. The Church is Gods Garden. Cant. 4.12. and must therefore be hedged and
defended with Discipline and Government; else every wild beast and boar, would
suddenly spoil the flowers in it.

4. The Church is Gods Vineyard. Isay 5.1. etc. least any should hurt it, he
himself does keep it night and day. Isay 5.5. and 27.3. as he does fence it, so
should we in our places and stations, do what in us lies to preserve it from
violence and wrong.

3. Order and Government is the Beauty of a Church. Zach. 11.7. this makes the
Church admirable. Omne ordinatum pulchrum.
Psalm. 48. per totum, we should be often surveying Jerusalem, and observing the
glorious power and providence of God in her Order and Protection. What David
says of Unity (one branch of Order) is true of Order it self. Psalm. 133.1, 2.
behold how comely it is for Brethren to dwell together in Amity and Order!
Order is the glory of all societies: a well-ordered Family, Army, City,
Society, are comely sights. Hence God has set an Order in Heaven, an Order in
Hell, V. Plura apud Piscat. in Praefat. ad Numeros,
an Order amongst Angels, an Order amongst the Stars, an Order amongst
rational Creatures, an Order amongst the sensitive Creatures, the very Bees
have a King and Ruler over them. Take away this, and we shall be all in
confusion, if there were not an Order in the Sea, it would overflow the land,
and drown all. The air would poison us, the Creatures destroy us, and every
man would destroy another.

Object. The Presbyterian Government is Tyrannical, and curbs men that they
dare not vent their errors so freely as now they do.

Answ. This Government is Christ's yoke, and so is sweet and easy to a
spiritualized soul. As the yoke of his Doctrine, so the yoke of his Discipline
is delightful and pleasant to them. They say as that good man said of the word
of God. Veniat, Veniat, disciplina Christi, and submittemur ei sexcenta si
nobis essent colla. They willingly obey Church Guides in the Lord, and have
them in singular love for their works sake. Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5.12.

He that has integrity fears no Inquisition, he that has none requires it.
Rulers are not a Terror to good works, but to evil. The Interests of England
by Constantine. 2. P. p. 37.
2. It Is the excellency of the Government, that it restraines you from sin and
error, happy are those bonds that bind us to be holy, They are right sons of
Belial that have lived so long without Government, that now they cannot bear
the yoke, they long to be at their Garlic and Onions in Egypt again, and had
rather lie under Popery or Prelacy, then Christ's Presbytery.

3. This Government rightly managed, is a Meek, Rational, Religious, Merciful
Government; it is so far from being Tyrannical, that it is a singular remedy
against spiritual Tyranny; for if a man be wronged at home, yet there are
Appeals to a Classical, Provincial, National Synod.

Object. Synods may err.

Non dubit amus (caete^is paribus) majorem and pleniorem mensuram communica^i
publicis Ecclesiae minist^is, quam singul^s and privatis, qui neque t^^ donis
sunt instructi, neque tot oculis vident, neque privata and simplici meditatione
aequa^e possunt multorum collationem and disquisitionem. Rivet Isagog. cap. 19.
Answ. True, yet not so soon as a few private, illiterate persons; for (
caeteris paribus) if Piety, Prayer, Parts and study be equal, then a Synod or
Assembly of Divines is likelier to expound Scripture, and decide controversies
fuller and clearer then inferior persons. A whole Court of Justice is less
liable to error, then a particular Judge, a whole Synod then a particular
congregation. Two are better then one, and in the multitude of counselors
there is safety. Pr^v. 11.14. and 15.22. Naturalists observe that creatures
which affect solitude and independency are often Birds of prey; Animalia gregalia
non sunt n^civa, sed animalia solivaga sunt nociva. Aristot.
as Hawks, Kites, Wolves, and Bears; but all creatures the more congregative,
the more harmless and useful they are, as Sheep, Doves, Bees.

2. A possibility of erring is no sufficient ground for us to reject Synods,
for then, because Ministers, Masters, and Tutours may err, Ergo we must
believe nothing which they say, Now if the Spies which brought up an evil
report of the Terrestrial Canaan, were severely punished, what shall be done to
those that reproach the Government of Christ, by which he conducts us to the
Celestial Canaan, calling it Tyranny, Cruelty, Persecution, and what not?

Quest. But how do you prove that the Presbyterian Government is Jure Divino?

Answ. It Is sufficiently proved to any unprejudiced man.

1. By the Assembly of Divines in their Answer to the Dissenting Brethren.

2. By the London Ministers in their Ius Divinum, and their elaborate
Vindication.

3. By Apollonius and Mr. Paget.

4. By Mr. Rutherford and many learned Scottish Divines. Yea Mr. Cotton himself
acknowledges from Acts 15. (where the Church of Antioch was subordinate to the
Synod of Jerusalem) that Synods are Gods Ordinances, and that all things
belonging to a complete Synod, were to be found in Acts 15. How great is their
sin then that fight against Gods Ordinance!
Now the proving of the Divine Reason of Synods in general, does also prove
the Divine Reason of Classical, Practical, National, Oeconomicall Synods in
Particular: for magis and minus non variant speciem, the Government is still
the same, though the extent vary; and if they called for an Oeconomicall Synod,
Acts 15. why may not we have lower and lesser Synods, since many cases call for
them? and if the Jews had their Appeals ( Deuteronomy. 17.8. to 12.) sure the Gospel
does not put us in a worse condition then the Law; V. Paget against Ainsworth.
cap. 2.
since Christ was faithful in all Gods house. Heb. 3.2. Nor were these Jewish,
for Apppeales are de Lege Naturae and jure communi, and if they had a
Natioanll, why may we not have a Provincial combination, since there may be a
stricter Union between a Province, then between a Nation.

2. It Is the way of all the Reformed Churches who are the best expounders of
the word, and whose Example we should esteem. 1 Cor. 11.16.22. All the Churches
of God in Germany, France, Scotland, are Presbyterian, and there are several
Ordinances of Parliament, unrepealed, that do enjoyne the setting up of
Congregationall, Classical, and National Presbyteries; and all Officers are
ordered to apprehend and punish such as shall speak against this Government.
Besides, the National Covenant binds us to the Government for matter and
substance, because it is the Government of the Reformed Churches; but for the
manner of Practice we must exceed them if we can.

3. It Is a Rational Government, founded in the light of Nature and Right
Reason, which tells us that no man should be a sole Judge, Accuser, and
Witness in his own cause. Suppose I be offended at the Heresies of a Church,
to whom shall I complain? to the same Church? she is both Judge and party and
will never do Justice against her self. We cannot remedy thousands of evils
without Appeals. Besides there are many w^ighty causes which cannot be
determined by single Cungregations, as Excommunication, Ordination of
Ministers, and judicial determining of controversies. Upon these grounds a
National Synod in France (1644.) did judge the Sect of Independency to be
prejudicial to the Church of God, as bringing in confusion, and taking away
all means of Remedy, dangerous to the state, bringing in as many Religions as
Parishes. This sets up Altar against Altar, Church against Church, and Minister
against Minister. Man is a weak creature, yea the best standing alone are apt
to go astray, and therefore God in his wisdom has provided the help and
assistance of other Churches. True, a congregational Presbytery have power to
decide lesser matters, but it stands with reason that greater and weightier
matters should be referred to greater Presbyteries. So far as concerns their
own private Interest every congregation is a complete body, yet not in all
respects, and to all intents and purposes, exempt from superior Jurisdiction,
but is subordinate, and a member of a Provincial, National, Catholic Church,
else we should run into Anarchy and confusion. E. g. If a Troop should say we
are a complete body within our selves, therefore we will not be subordinate to a
Council of War: or if a child or servant should say, I am a complete man of
my self, therefore I Will not obey the commands of my superiors: what confusion
and disorder would this bring in amongst us?

4. It Is a charitable Government, it is not harsh and rigid, it debarres not
those from Ordinances, See Mr. Cawdry against Independency, cap. 3. p 97.

See Mr. Paget against Ainsworth in defense of Presbytery, c. 2. p. 2.

See Mr. Edwards his Gangreen. 1. Part. Corol. 14 p 102.


which God has not debarred. It admits the children of Christians to Baptism,
and the Parents which are free from Ignorance and scandalls to the Lords
Supper, without the taking of any Church Covenant, or making any open
confession before the congregation. Nor does it put the Power of the Keys into
the Hands of the people (as Independents do) where all the Church has power of
voting. That house is like to be well governed, where all are Masters.

5. It Is a Religious Government, it suppresseth Schism, Heresy, and all false
ways, and that in the bud; they can no sooner arise, but the same week they
are Questioned. Hence King James called Presbytery Haereticorum malleum, and
thanked God that he was King of one of the purest Kirks of Christendom. Since
then Presbytery is a way of Order against disorder, a way of Peace against
division, a way of Truth against error, and a way that sets up Christ and his
glory, encouraging all the Saints of Christ in all the ways of Christ; why
should any go about to prefer Prelacy or Independency before it, when this
excells them bot^ as will plainly appear by comparing them with each other.

That is proved before.

Heilyn's Geography Edit. ult. q. 266, in Britain.


1. Presbyterytery is Iure Divino.

Episcopacy is Iure Humano, a Plant which God never planted. King James called
them his Creatures, and so they were in more Senses then one. Or Iure
Pontificio, for D. Heylin tells us that Pope Gregory erected them, they are
then by Original the Popes Creatures.

Independency is Iure Politico. A Politic device lately found out, to gather
the choycest flowers out of other men's Churches, and under pretense of
Gathering, breaking, and scattering Churches.

2. Presbytery is Aristocraticall, Episcopacy Tyrannical, Independencie
Democraticall, or Anarchicall.

3. Presbytery is the way of the Reformed Churches; Episcopacy goes too wide
and High, Independency goes too narrow and strait.

4. Presbytery discountenanceth and punishes Heretics and Schismatics truly
so called. Episcopacy indulged such (witness the great increase of Arminians,
Socinians, and Innovators) and punished the truly godly under those Notions.
Independency is too favorable to most Sects, it is the door by which they
creep into the Church, (as sad experience testifies, since the Church has been
Independent, what a flood of errors overspread the land.) It Is the Asylum,
the Catholic shield and buckler of erroneous persons. Lest any should think me
singular, you shall have the Attestation of an Association of Reverend Divines.
Though we acknowledge diverse of our Brethren of the Independent way, V. The
Attestation of the Cheshire Ministers p. 13.
to be Learned, godly and kind to their Presbyterian Brethren, and some of them
to be adverse (in a great measure) to such a Toleration as you may truly term
intolerable. Yet as we take the Tenet of Independencie to be an error in it
self, so do we find it by sound reason, and sad experience to be if not the
natural Mother, yet such a tender Nurse and Patroness to Heretical opinions
of all kinds, that to it we may (for a great part) ascribe the luxuriant growth
and spreading of errors, Heresies, etc. so far over this Kingdom. As on the
contrary, the freedom of the Kingdom of Scotland from the like evils (which
is recorded as their happiness and Honor) to the firm establishment of a
subordinate Presbyteriall Government amongst them. So they.

[See more in Mr. Pagets Learned Defense of Church Government. p. 240, 241.
etc.]

5. Presbytery has Appeals to Synods, aad that not only ad consilium, for
bare advice and counsel; but ad jurisdictionem also; they determine
juridically, and with authority they make Decrees according to the word, which
bind the Churches. Acts 15.17.19. and the people cheerfully and willingly
submit to this authority, Synods have not Potestatem absolutam, sed
conditionalem and ministerialem. viz So far as their commands agree with Gods
commands, Spanheim.
being thereby confirmed in the faith. Act. 15.28.31. and 16.4.

6. In their Sessions they inquire after sin, not coin. Episcopal
Visitations, were Visitationes nummorum. They looked more after the Fees, then
after the Flock.

7. Presbytery allows of no dumb dogs, no railing Sectaries, nor Selfe-called
Seducers. Episcopacy ordained many ignorant Sots, and Time-seerving Levites.
Independency gives too much approbation to Ieroboams Priests, and Self-called
Speakers.

8. Presbytery incourageth painful, powerful, orthodox Preachers. Episcopacy
silenced such, they might not once be Lecturers in the Land. One Bishop (I
remember) gave thanks that he had not a Lecture left in his Diocese.
Independency looks somewhat asquint and sour on plain, powerful, Orthodox
Preachers, that faithfully witness against Schism and Heresy.

9. Presbytery encourages people to worship God in their families, as well as
in the Public. Episcopacy punished such as met together to Pray, or Repeat
Sermons, under the name of Conventicles, They were too straight; Independency
erres as much on the the other hand, and gives a toleration to forsake the
public Assemblies, and lie speaking error and Heresy in corners without
control.

10. In Presbytery there is no Lording it over the flock of God, there is an
order of Priority, but none of Superiority. The President or Moderator pro
tempore, if he have the first voice, yet he has but one voice: his Office is
to avoid confusion, not to seek Prelation. But Bishops Lord it over the flock.
Independency (they say) looks somewhat high, they will be accountable to none
in spiritual things, but only to Christ, and what could the Pope say more?
this is to pull down one Pope, and set up many: and to make the Power of one
Minister equal to the authority of many combined together in Synods. Every
Natural man has in his heart somewhat of Popery, somewhat of Arminianisme,
and somewhat of Independency, so far as it pleads for more Liberty then
Christ has allowed, and it is Natural (I think) to every man to desire to be
judged by no man.

11. Presbytery is candid and clear, it fears not the light. Episcopacy lies
in the clouds. Independency has its Reserves, they will not reveal
themselves, but conceal their way more then the people of God are wont to do,
especially when desired by authority. They never would show wherein this
Newfound way excells the way of all the Reformed Churches.

12. Presbytery is the way of all the Reformed Churches. Episcopacy is disowned
by them. Independency is Via devia, the Reformed Churches look upon it as a
Newfound by-path, which opens the door to Schism, and Heresy. I shall
therefore conclude with the words of those Reverend Divines, that long since
have borne witness to this Truth. V. Testimony of the London Ministers. p. 24.
We are abundantly convinced (say they) that a well-ordered Church Government
is most necessary and effectual for the preventing of Error and Scandal,
Note.
and we are well assured that Jesus Christ whom God has given to be head over
all things to the Church, has the government upon his shoulders, having all
judgment, and all authority in Heaven and Earth committed to him. And that he
has sufficiently revealed in his word, how he will have his Church governed
under the New Testament. And that the Presbyteriall government (truly so
called) by Presbyteries and Synods, in a due Line of Subordination of the
lesser to the greater, with prosperous success exercised in the best Reformed
Churches, is that government which is most agreeable to the mind of Jesus
Christ revealed in Scripture. etc. To this agrees that Encomium of this
Government given by the Church of Scotland. It Is well known (say they) both at
home and abroad, what a Wall for defense, and a band for Peace, and progress
of the Gospel, was that heavenly Discipline whereby Brotherly amity and sacred
Harmony of Prince, and Professors, was continued and increased, etc. It was
the hedge of the Lords Vineyard, and the Hammar whereby the Horns of the
wicked were beaten and broken, etc. The Government of the Kirk of Tcotland in
the Preface, Vbi plura.

[How the Presbyterian Government excells the Independent way in nine
particulars, See Ius Divinum Regim. Ecclesiast. in Praefat. p. 6, 7, 8. See Mr.
Edwards his Antap. p. 124. etc. Edit. 2. Mr. Cawdry against Independency. And
the Vindication of the Presbyterian Government by the Provincial Assembly of
London. Nov. 2. 1649. Mr. Baily's Disswasive. 1. P. Chapt. 9, 10. p. 181. etc.
The Government of the the Church of Scotland, V. the Preface, etc. Printed
1647. Spanhemeus his Epistle against Independency. Rutherfords Plea for, and
His Divine Right of, Presbyteries: Mr. Marshals Sermon. for Unity on Romans 12.4.
p. 24, 25. calls Independency a great Schism.

VERSE 9. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest
to all m^n, as theirs also was, The Geneva thus, But they shall prevail no
longer, for their madness shall be evident unto all men, as theirs also was.
THe Apostle comes now to conclude this Period with a consolatory Epiphonema,
and with this cordial and comfortable promise he encourages Timothy, and in
him all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel successively to the end of the
world, against those discouragements which they should meet withal, from the
Impostors and Seducers of the last times. That they may not be despondent, he
assures them of the good issue and comfortable event of these trialls; to this
end first he tells them, that God will put a bar to the proceedings of these
false Teahers, and stop them in their Career, that they shall proceed no
further, though their desire be still to do mischief, yet God by his Almighty
power will so chain and restrain them that they shall proceed no further. Truth
shall get the upper hand, and shall hinder their prevailing by the discovery of
their folly and madness; so that albeit there may be a remnant left, yet the
rout shall be broken, and the remainder shall moulder away daily more and more;
and as the house of David grew stronger and stronger, so the house of Saul
shall grow weaker and weaker.

Q^est. But how can this agree with verse 13. where the Apostle says that
wicked men and Seducers shall grow w^rse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived; yet here he says, they shall proceed no further?

Answ. To omit those 4, or 5. frivolous conjectures confuted by Estius on the
place. There is variety of senses, but no contrariety in the Scriptures. See my
Schools-Guard. Rule 48.

They shall proceed no further. viz. in esteem with men to seduce them thereby,
although they shall increase in wickedness. Dutch Annot.


I answer, when the Apostle says, evil men shall proceed no further, and
their folly shall be made known to all; these are Hyperbolical speeches, and
must not be taken simply as they are spoken, as if there should be no more
seducing or seducers, or as if their folly should be made so manifest to all
the world, that all should leave them, such an exposition would make the
Apostle to contradict himself, and is directly contrary to the current of the
Scripture. But the drift of the Apostle is this. viz. To animate the faithful
Ministers in their war against seducers, and that upon this account, because
their labor shall not be in vain, but God will bless it with success against
the enemies of his truth; yea by their Preaching, the fraud and falsehood of
those false Prophets should be so plainly discovered to the world, that their
folly should be openly known, and many seeing the error of their ways shall
leave them, though some should still be blinded and deluded by them; yet God
will open the eyes of his Elect especially, that they shall see their delusions
and shun them; in vain is the net laid in the sight of a bird. Prove. 1.17. and
though God may suffer these deceivers for a time to prevail, till they come ad
(...) to their height, yet then they shall surely and suddenly come down, that
Gods glory may be the more perspicuous in their greater downfalls, Now lest any
should grow secure, and think that when they have suppressed some deceivers,
their work is done; the Apostle tells us, Verse 13. there will be seducers
still, and some shall be seduced by them; therefore we had need to watch, for
no sooner is one Heresy knocked down, but two are ready to arise in its stead.
So that both these Verses are useful, the one to comfort us, the other to
Caution and Quicken us.

2. They shall proceed no further, viz. in their hypocritical, juggling
practices, for they shall be all laid plain and naked to the world, so that he
which runs may read them, which brings me to the second particular, viz. the
Manner How, or the Means by which the Lord will effect their downfall, viz. by
the manifestation of their folly, or madness rather (as some Translations
accordiug to the Original render it) for though the word signify folly, (...)
amentia, ab (...) priv. and (...) men's (i e.) sin^ mente, amentes.

Madness ( i. e.) their foolish and false doctrine, or their Hypocrisy, and
show of holiness. Butch Annot.


yet properly it signifies one that has lost his mind and right wits, and is
therefore rendered madness. Luke 6.11. but our Translation following the Vulgar
Latin, renders it, folly. This their folly and madness, or foolish madness
shall be discovered to their confusion, Gods usual method is, first to make
such Impostors naked, and then desolate. Rev. 17.16. First he discovers their
juglings, and then he makes them abhorred. Hypocrites seldom pass
undiscovered before they dye. Hypocrisis sua sponte sese aliquando prodit, non
potest per omnia sui esse dissimilis, deprehensa exploditur. Aretius.
Though at first arising Heretics may get applause (as Simon Magus who was
counted for some great man) and may have many followers, Ea est erroris natura,
omni licet ex part ad tempus invalescat, ad finem tamen non permanet, aliq
andiu floret, ut ci^o dignoscitur. Espencaeus.
so that they seem to carry all before them; yet such Meteors last not long,
God discovers and discards them, so that their end is miserable and
igdnominious. Ier. 28.15, 16. and 29.21, 22, 23, 31, 32. Valent sed non
praevalent, promunt sed non opp^imunt, oppugnant, sed non expugnant, proficiunt
sed non ultra. Estius.
Though this Gangreene may creep, yet shall it not so spread as to corrupt the
whole Church of God, they shall not be able to deceive Gods Elect, in whose
hearts God has written his Law, and against whom the gates of hell shall not
prevail.

Quest. How is the folly of these Heresiarchs said to be made known to all,
when many are still mislead by them.

Answ. The word All is not here taken collectively, for all the world, for it
lies and will lie in blindness and wickedness. But all must be taken
distributively, for some of all sorts, as is frequent in Scripture, where by a
Synecdoche generis, All is often put for Many; and especially for all the Elect.
So Romans 5. All in the 18. verse. is called Many in the 19. So 2 Pet. 3.9. q. d.
Many that before were abused and mislead, shall by the Light of the word so
clearly see the folly and falsehood of these Impostors, that they shall forsake
them. And if any shall be so besotted as still to follow them, they shall sin
against Light and conviction to their greater ruin.

3. He confirms the downfall of these Impostors by an Argument drawn a Pari,
from the Example of those Magicians which opposed Moses in Egypt. q. d. As God
discovered the Folly and Madness of Iannes and Iambres, in opposing Moses and
Aaron, when the rod of Aaron devoured the rods of the Magicians ( Exodus 7 12.)
and when they could not make a louse, which is the smallest and basest of
creatures ( Exodus 8.18, 19.) this tended much to their confusion, and made the
folly of those wise men evident to all men. Now as God confounded those
Egyptian sorcerers of old before all the world, so he will confound those that
oppose his truth and Ministers, that they shall prevail no further.

1. Observe, That Heretics and false Prophets are bounded and limited by God.
They cannot hurt when, where, and whom they please, but whom God pleases;
though the will of hurting and seducing be of man, yet God orders it to his
praise. Revel. 7.3, As God set bounds to the Sea, saying, hitherto shall ye
come but no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. Job 38.11. So he
limits the malice and madness of men how far they shall prevail; he only can
stop these seas of error, and bound these floods of false doctrine which are
ready to overflow the face of the world. The flood of the Arrian Heresy had
almost overflowed the whole world, but the Almighty bounded it; and though in
this age it seem to return, and is ready to overflow the earth again, yet our
comfort is, God has set it bounds which it cannot pass. Progressus aliquos
facient sed non diu. Grotius.

Habet praescriptas metas impietas ad quas ubi impegerit, concidit.


All Heresies have their (...), their Non ultra, their limits which they cannot
pass. Our comfort is, that both the deceivers and the deceived are ordered by
the providence of God. Job 12.16. he sets down the time when they shall begin,
and limits them how long they shall continue, he orders how far men shall
deceive, and to what height they shall come and prevail, and when to stop
them, that they may proceed no further: for as the maliciousness, so the
deceivablenesse of men would know no bounds, if God did not bound it, but
because he does, therefore though they would, yet they shall proceed no
further. No man can do good till God assist him, and no man shall do hurt when
God will stop him. Rev. 20.3. These seducers in the Text had a mind to proceed
further, their will was to oppose truth, and propagate error in infinitum,
without end; but they have now gone to the utmost of their line, they are come
to their border and bound, they shall proceed no further, but it shall appear
to all men that the doctrine which they stood for, was nothing else but a
bundle of folly, and that the Doctrine which they withstood, was the truth and
wisdom of God.

2. Observe here the difference that is between Truth and Falsehood* The one
has its Non ultra, it suddenly rises, comes to its height, and then
vanishes. It Is a plant which God has not planted, and therefore is rooted up.
Matthew. 15.13. it is no sooner discovered, but it is explod^d by the people of God
especially. Ficta non diu durant.

Scbismatici non sunt longaevi. Luther


Heresies are seldom Long-lived, such Meteors last not long, such Mushroms
soon vanish; witness Becold, Knipperdolling, Phifer, etc. Though for a time
they may deceive many, yet in a short time God discovers their Hypocrisy to
their reproach. The Church is like a Lilly amongst Thorns. Cant. 2.2. Tyranny
and Popery on one hand, and intestine Heretics on the other. Yet God in his
wisdom so orders them, that not only their wrath, but their rage shall turn to
his praise, and the remainder of their rage he will restrain. Psalm. 76.10.
Every Heresy is like a cloud which for a little time darkens the Church, See
Doctor Burges on that Text. 1641. Nov. 5.
and then vanishes. We may say of them as Athanasius said of Julian, Nubecula
est transibit cito. But truth though it meet with opposition at first, and has
few followers; yet increases and prevails against all opposition. It has its
Plus ultra, It Is an Hebrew Proverb. Veritatem stabiles, mendacium debiles
habere pedes.
it is perpetual and endures for ever. The devices of men shall fall, but that
which is of God shall stand. Acts 5.38, 39. Heaven and earth may fail, but not
a jod or title of Gods word shall fail. This stands more firm then the Pillars
of the earth, or the Poles of Heaven. There is nothing so perfect on earth but
it has an end; Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, Strength. David saw an end of such
perfections. Psalm. 119.96. only Gods word abides for ever. Isay 40.8. Matthew.
24.35. Truth may be pressed and oppressed, Veritas premi potest, opprimi non potest.
but never totally suppressed, becanse it is built upon the word of God, which is
an invincible rock. Ephesians. 2.20. Let not then the flood of Heresies which has
overflown the land, make us despondent or despair, for as we have seen their
rise and reign, so we shall suddenly see their ruin. What Is become of the
Arrians, Donatis^s, Novatians, Pelagians? etc. though like a mighty flood they
drowned all for a time, yet like a flood they were quickly dried up again. God
is the same to the same sinners, he that brought down the Sects and Schisms of
former ages, can and will in his due time bring down ours.

Quest. But when will it once be, we rather see an increase, then a decrease ^f
Sects and Heresies?

Answ. Yet in due time God will arise and will visit their sin upon them, and
cast them out as an unprofitable branch.

Quest. But when is that fit time?

Answ. When the Church is lowest, and all seems to make against it, so that all
its power is gone, then God appears. Deuteronomy. 32.16. Genesis 22.14. Exodus 3.9. cum
duplicantur lateres, venit Moses. God lets things come to extremity for his own
greater glory. When Ashur cannot save us, but we are fatherless and helpless,
then God loves to show mercy. Hos. 14.3. Psalm. 12.5. and 78.58. when we lie
like dry bones in a helpless forlorn condition, then God comes and breaths upon
us, and makes us live. Ezekiel. 37.11. to 15. when the earth languisheth. Isay
33.9, 10. Now, now, now will God arise. Exodus 14.13, 14. when Job had lost all,
and was poor even to a Proverb, then God appears and gives him double, making
his latter end better then his beginning. Job 42.12. when the Priest and the
Levite pass by, then comes the good Samaritan with the Oil of gladness. When
father and mother forsake us, then God takes us up. There is a wheel in the
midst of all these wheels, and when we think they go backward, God can make
them go forward. Ezekiel. 1.16. and when it is night with us, he can make it light.
Zach. 14.7. at even (when we expect nothing but darkness) then it shall be
light., It Is at midnight (when he is least expected) that the bridegroom comes;
Ludib^ia m^dicorum sunt curae Deo.
when the Ship is sinking, and Lazarus stinks in his grave, and all men forsake
Paul, then Christ appears. When we are in the greatest danger, then God is
nearest to deliver. He Is auxilium in angustiis praesentissimum. Psalm. 46.1.
when there is no visible means by which Jacob should arise, but he is low in
Temporals and low in Spirituals, then God appears. Amos 2.5. God is never
nearer to his people, then when they are in the greatest extremity. Though the
world see it not, and sometimes his own people cannot discern his presence,
Prope est cum procul abesse videtur.
and therefore they cry, How long Lord will thou hide thy self! God was never
nearer to Christ, then when he was on the Cross. Nor to Joseph and Peter, then
when they were in prison. When trouble is near, God is never far off; hence the
godly use this as an Argument, Be not far from us, for trouble is at hand.

2. When the enemy is most high and insolent when he begins to triumph, Nullum
violentum diuturnum.

See Mr. Strong's 31. Sermon. Ier. 3.7. p. 44. and Ier. 39.7. p. 172.

See the fall of the proud Antinomians in New England, in Mr. Wells his Preface
to the History of the Antinomians in New England.


blaspheme and rage, his fall is near. Job 20.5.22. Psalm. 12.3, 4, 5. and 37.
1, 2. 8, 9, 10, 20, 35.36. and 94. 2, 3, 4, 5, 23. Rev. 20. 8, 9. Isay 29.7, 8.
and 30.13. when Sennacherib began to blaspheme, God cuts him off, when none
else could, or would do it. When all creature comforts fail in point of
Prudence and cannot advise, and in point of Power and cannot help, when
Parliament upon Parliament is broken, and the floods of Heresy increase, then
God appears. Heretics are grown to a great height of Pride, and Impudence,
they do not only Preach but Print their blasphemy; Fumus dum e^^ t^llit^r,
(...)
a sign their end is near. Smoke, the higher it ^iseth, the sooner it is
scattered, Psalm 68.1.2. As a beggar dreams he is a King and rich, but when he
awaketh, he sees it was but a delusion, so these may dream of Kingdoms,
Honors, and a fif^h Monarchy, and reigning here a thousand years in carnal
delights, but when God arises, they will see these were but dreams. Fear not then
the power and pomp of prosperous wicked men, Psalm 49.16. God has a thousand
ways to cut them off, he can drown Pharaoh, hang Haman, smite Herod, and make
Jerusalem a cup of poison, a burdensome stone, a torch of ^ire to consume all
that oppose her, Zech. 12.2.3, 6. In patience therefore po^sesse your souls,
for yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come. ( i. e.) He will not
delay his coming, but in due time, and in the ^ittest season will deliver
Is^ael from his enemies.

They shall fall 1. Irrecoverably. 2. Easily. 3. Suddenly. 4. Surely.


1. Ungodly men shall fall irrecoverably, they shall fall, and never rise up
again, Proverbs 28.14. They shall be broken with a rod of Iron, and dashed in
pieces like a Potters Vessel, Psalm 2.9. If a bar of Iron ^all on earthen pot,
it breaks it all to pieces, so as it cannot be sodered together again, as a pot
of gold or silver may.

2. Easily with a word of his mouth, Psalm 44.4. God can speak them into
confusion, and turn them into nothing. He beholds all Nations as a drop, they
are purum nihil compared to him. He can with more ease destroy them, then we
can crush a Moth in our windows, or tread a worm under our feet. Those that
will not bend to Christ's Scepter, must be broken, Psalm. 2.9. a bar of Iron,
easily breaks an earthen pot.

3. Suddenly, in a moment, when they promise themselves victory and success,
and cry Peace Peace, then comes sudden and swift destruction, Ps. 73.19. when
they least think of judgment, then comes fear and sudden desolation, which
like a whirlwind speedily, terribly, irresistably carries all before it, Prove.
1.27. How suddenly was Sisera slain by Abimelech by a piece of a millstone:
Herod in the midst of his pomp by an Angel: and Senacheribs great Army of an
hundred fourscore and five thousand men destroyed by one Angel in one night, 2
Kings 19.35.

4. Surely, they shall not escape, there is no flying when God persues, Amos
9.1, 2, 3, 4. If God be against us, all the Creatures are against us; it is not
Heaven nor Hell, Sea or Land, Height nor depth that can shelter us from his
wrath. Some God destroys by the sword, such as escape the Sword, the
Pestilence shall slay them; and such as escape the Pestilence, the Famine shall
devour; and if any wicked man should escape punishment here, yet he is sure to
be met withal in another world.

2. Observe, That false Prophets and Heretics are fools and madmen. The word
in the Original will bear both, and if false doctrine and heresy be folly and
madness, then by an Argument ab abstracio ad concretum, false Teachers and
Heretics must needs be fools and madmen, or mad-fools. However the blind
world may admire such, and cry them up for Learned Wisemen; yet in Gods eye,
and in the esteem of all such as are truly godly, they are no better then
fools and madmen that have lost their wits, and are besides themselves.

1. They are fools, for they forsake the Fountain of living waters, to go to
broken Cisterns of men's inventio^s, which can yield them no refreshing in times
of trouble. They prefer Chaff before Wheat, Ceremonies before Substance, Dross
before Gold, Drunkenness before Light, and False-hood before Truth. They trade
in sin, and so are the worst of fools: of all fools none so vile as the
sinful rebellious fool. Sinners and fools are Synonyma's in Scripture language,
Proverbs 1.7. and 10.23. and 12.15. and 14.9. Titus 3.3. Hence it is that
covetous worldling are called fools, Luke 12.20. because they prefer Counters
before Gold, Earth before Heaven, and Temporals before Eternals. Such a fool is
the voluptuous man, who for a little momentany pleasure here, will run the
hazard of Eternal pain, Proverbs 7.21.22, 23. and is not the Idolater a fool,
who worships Gods of wood and stone, which follows lying vanities, and so
forsakes his own mercies? Are not the persecutors of Gods people fools, which
heave at a burdensome stone that will recoil on them, and crush them to
pieces? Zech. 12.2, 3. Hence it is that the wise counselors of Pharaoh are
called fools, Isay 19.11. God befools them in their plots against his people,
Job 12.17. and 5.12. So Atheists are called Fools, Psalm 141. and ungrateful
persons who sin against the God of all their mercies are called fools*
Deuteronomy 32.6. yea, when Gods own people for want of watchfulness fall into
sin, its called foolishness, 2 Samuel 24.10. Psalm 38.5. None are truly wise
but gracious men, that can part with all for Christ, Matthew 13.45. The world
is apt to call and count such precise fools, 1 Cor. 4.10. but God calls them
wisemen, Proverbs 17. Job 28. ult. He is the wisest man, Who takes the
Shortest way. Who takes the Safest way. Who takes the Fairest way.


Now gracious men, 1. Take the shortest and the nearest way to Heaven, they
tread the Path of Holiness, which is the direct way to Happiness. It Is said of
Ahimaaz, that he ran the way of the plain and so outran Cushi, 2 Samuel 18.23.
Hypocrites and wicked men go about in the crooked paths of sin, Psalm 125. ult.
but the godly go the way of the plain, and so outrun others.

Qui vadit plane, vadit sane.
2. He Is the wisest man who takes the safest and the surest way. The way of
sin is beset with many dangers, and can assure us of nothing, but misery and
ruin. But the Path of Piety brings assured peace and comfort, Proverbs 11.18.
To him that works righteousness shall be a sure reward, Actio una non
denominat hominem.
Isay 64.3. not to him that does a righteous act or two, (which a wicked man
may do) but he that works righteousness and and makes it his trade to be doing
good, he shall have a sure and full reward.

3. He Is the wisest man that takes the fairest way, now the way of Piety is a
pure path, and leads to the God of Purity, Matthew 5.8. But the way of sin is a
foul and loath some way, and therefore sin is called filthiness in the
Abstract, 1 Corinthians 7.^1. James 1.22. Lay aside all filthiness (i.) all
sin, which mars the glory and beauty of the Soul, and defaceth Gods Image in us.

2. As the wicked are Fools, so they are Madm-men also. Now in Madness there
are two things, viz. furor and amentia, false Prophets have both: See a wo^ld
of Mad men in Master Adams Sermon. on Eccles 9 3. p. 478, etc. And the Ca^ses,
Signs, and Cure, of this Madness. See in Abrenethy his Treatise of Christian
Physi^k, Printed 1615.
First, their judgments are perverted, they have lost their wits, they are so
bewitched with delusions, that they cannot say, Is there not a lie in my right
hand, Isay 44.20. Secondly, They carry the whole man with fury after them,
none more violent in their persecutions, then such men are who have embraced,
for doctrines, satanical delusions: Such are said to be Mad, Ier. 50.38. and
51.7. Hos. 9.7. the days of Visitation are come ( i.) the time is at hand when
God will visit the people for their sins; but how does that appear? why the
Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad; ( i.) those false Prophets
which fed them with vain hopes of golden times and glorious prosperity, they
are but fools, and those spiritual guides which have missed you are no better
then madmen: and why is all this? why, it is for the mulitude of their
iniquity, and their great hatred. q. d. God justly sends such false Prophets
amongst those that will not believe his true ones, as a punishment of their
iniquity, for hating the true Prophets and their Doctrine. This makes many to
doat and distemper themselves about idle and frivolous questions which breed
divisions in the Church of God. Those are said to be sick, or rather mad about
questions (as some render the word, (...) insani^^, Beza Deliret ut saepe
solent aegroti. Grotius.
(1 Timothy 6.4. the part affected is chiefly the imagination, the immediate seat
of opinion. These have lost their wits till by repentance they return to them
again, as the Prodigal is said to do, Luke 15.17. (...) are of so near
affinity; hence wickedness is called the foolishness of madness, Sui compos
effectus, fuit enim quasi extra se and mente captus; delirus and insanus sed
vexatio dedit ei intellectum. A Lapide.
Eccles. 7.25. and 1.17. and 3.12. and 9.3. and therefore these drunkards and
whore masters that waste their estates and consume their Vitals; blast their
reputation, and damn themselves for a little liquor and lust, are Mad, and the
time is at hand that they will curse themselves for so doing: yea, all
wickedness is madness. Causative and effective, it is the cause of madness,
which is a judgment attending upon sin, as the effect follows the cause, and
the thread the needle; where sin and disobedience go before, there madness often
follows in this life, Deuteronomy. 28.28. but always in the next, Matt. 8.12. So the
persecutors of Gods people are called madmen, Luke 6.11. 2 Pet. 2.12. and Paul
said of himself that before his conversion he was exceeding mad against the
people of God, Acts 26.11. and so were David's enemies, Psalm. 102.8.

The wicked are apt to reproach the godly, when they zealously oppose their
sins and errors, with the Title of madmen. It Is no new thing, thus they called
the young Prophet, 2 King. 9.11. and thus they upbraided Jeremiah (29.26.) and
Christ himself (who zealously contented against the sins of the time) is said
to be mad, and to have a Devil, Mark 3.21. John 10.20. the Disciple is not
above his Master. When Paul was zealous in spreading the Gospel, Festus tells
him that much learning had made him mad, Acts 26.24. and not only Heathen
Festus* but even the Christian Corinthians call Paul a madman, to whom he
mildly answers, if we are besides our selves it is unto God, it is out of a zeal
to his Glory, and not our own, 2 Cor. 5.13. as St. Bernard said sometimes of
the Virgin Mary, Domine propter Te, est extra se: and if this be to be mad, we
must resolve to be madder in this kind, 2 Samuel 6.20. So that we see who are the
real madmen of the world, not such as follow Christ fully and faithfully,
without turning to the right hand or the left; but such as give up themselves
to sin and error.

1. As madmen use to wound themselves and hurt others; so these wound their
own souls with their sins, for every sin is a stab, and in their spiritual
frenzy they labor by their sins and errors to wound and kill others.

As madmen prefer strawes and feathers before things of greater value, so
these prefer the Vanities of the world, before Jesus Christ.

3. As madmen break their bonds which should keep them in; so these break the
bonds of Christ's Doctrine and Discipline, and will not have him to reign over
them, Psalm 2.3. but they rush into sin as the Horse does into the battle
fiercely and furiously without wit or reason, Ier. 8.6. It Is the nature of sin
and error to distract such as embrace it: as we see by sad experience in our
days, wherein many of the ancient Heresies which have been dead and buried,
and lay rotting in the Grave of Oblivion for many hundreds of years, are now
revived and raised up again, insomuch that many by reason of these ghostly and
ghastly apparitions, coming out of the bottomless pit of Hell, and walking so
freely abroad without check or control even at Noonday, are even distracted
and scared out of their wits. See more in Mr. Pierce* the Sinner impleaded,
etc. P. 2. Chap. 3 p. 285.
We pity the condition of madmen, and if any of our friends have lost their
wits, we lament their condition; but this spiritual madness is the most
deplorable madness; the other is afflictive, but this is destructive: this is
a great sin, and the punishment of sin.

4. Observe, That God will overthrow false Teachers, by discovering their
coverings, and making known their delusions to the World. As a disease
discovered is half cured, Primus sanitatis gradus est novisse morbum.
so an error discoverd, is half conquered. Usually before God overthrows
wicked men, he discovers their vileness first, that the Glory of his Justice
may be the more apparent, and his people may come out from amongst them.

Thus, the preaching of the Word by Christ has discovered Antichrist to the
World, and has brought him down, so as he can proceed no further, but his
Kingdom daily wastes and moulders away, 2 Thessalonians, 2.3.8.9. as he rose
Gradually, so he consumes by Degrees, in Ireland, Scotland, France, Italy, etc.
Ministers therefore should by their Praying, Preaching, Disputing, Printing,
etc. pluck off the Vizard, and discover the deceits of those deceivers to the
World. We should uncase those Foxes, get them out of their holes, overthrow
their distinctions, make bare their absurdities, Vbi major est (...) ibi major
est (...).
hypocrisy, folly and filth to all men. The plainer the better, a wise man
desires to speak so as he may be understood, that his Auditors may be
convinced of the Truth he pleads for, and the error which he opposes. Where
the Gospel is plainly and powerfully preached, there Satan's Kingdom suddenly
falls, Luke 10.18. When the Sun arises, the Clouds scatter, and where the
Son of Righteousness is powerfully preached and published, Heretics hide
themselves, and dare not make that open sale of their Wares, as they do in
dark corners. Let us therefore pull off their Masks of Liberty, their sleeves
of Sanctity, and their Trappings of Hypocrisy: Let us expose their error,
stripped and naked in their own Natural deformity, and they will soon be exploded
by all, so that they shall proceed no further.

5. Observe, As God confounded the Magitians of old, so he will confound the
Juglers of our time in his due time. They shall not always prosper that oppose
the Truth, See Dr. Burges Sermon. on Psalm. 76.10. p. 50. etc.
the time is at hand when their madness shall appear, and they shall proceed
no further. As God has brought down those which were of No Religion, so he
will bring down those that are of All Religions. -- Deus dabit his quoque
finem. Babel must down as well as Babylon, and the making of them naked is a
preparatory work to the making of them desolate, Deus erga similes similiter se
gerit.

V. Ienkins on Jude 14 Obs. 3. p. 204. fol.

Qa^d convenit tali qua tali, convenit omni tali.


Revelations 17.16. God is a just God, he is always like himself; to the like
sinners he sends the like punishments. He Is Jehovah, he changes not, but is
the same yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. So that as the promises
made of old to believers must be applied by us, Joshua 1.5. compared with
Hebrews 13.5. though the Promise was made to Joshua, yet all the faithful must
apply it to themselves, for that which belongs to one believer as a believer,
belongs to every believer. What he promises to one, he promises to all which
are in that condition; for though some may have more Grace, yet none have more
merit. So on the contrary, the judgments of God denounced and executed on
sinners of old, must be applied by us against the sinners and seducers of our
time; for whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our Learning, Romans
15.4. Gods judgments on Pharaoh for oppressing Gods people, must comfort us
when we lie under the oppressions of Tyrants. Gods judgments on Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, who usurped the Priests Office, and opposed Moses and Aaron,
endeavoring to Level both Magistracy and Ministry, must comfort us who are
troubled with the like or worse sinners. He that punished blasphemers of old,
will not suffer the blasphemers of our time to go always unpunisht. Let this
therefore comfort us, that as God confounded the Egyptian sorcerers of old, who
opposed Moses; so in his due time he will confound those that oppose his Truth
and Ministers, he will discover their madness unto all even as theirs also
was, and then they shall proceed no further: for though they Rage, yet our
comfort is the Lord Reigns, Psalm 97.1. It Is not said the Lord has Reigned,
that we know; nor the Lord will Reign, for that we believe; but the Lord even
now in the midst of all these confusions, yet still Reigns. He destroys
Destroyers, levels Levellers, and spoils the Spoylers of his people. He is not
only a Titular, See Mr. Clerks Mirror, ult. Edit, cap. 112.
but a Tutelar King, he Rules and commands all the Kingdoms of the World as
pleases him, he pulls down one, and sets up another in the Throne, and none
may say unto him, what do thou? If the Devil Reigned, we should all be
ruined; if the people Reigned, we should be confounded: but that which
comfort Gods people is this, that the Lord still Reigns in the midst of all
his enemies: Hence the Church sings five or six Hallelu^ahs together, and all
for joy that the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns, Revelations 19.1. to 7. Let us not
then be despondent, because of the Devil, and his Agents, but remember he is
but a Creature.

2. He Is a chained Creature, Jude 6. Revelations 2.10. under the perfect
subjection of this great King.

3. He Is a conquered Creature, Christ has conquered him for thee, and he has
promised to conquer him in thee, Romans 16.20.

4. He Is a cursed Creature, he was cursed in Paradise, and is under the
everlasting curse of God,

5. At the last day thou shall sit in judement on him, 1 Corinthians, 6.3.

Secondly, What though the Devils Agents are many and mighty, yet there is a
Wiser and a Mightier then they, who has set them their bounds which they
cannot pass. I have read a Story of a company of men that were at Sea in a
great storm, and all being ready to be drowned, and crying out, there was a
little boy, and he was laughing and said, Why are you thus troubled, my Father
is Pilate of the ship; and he will have a care that the ship do not miscarry.
So when we consider though the Church like a ship in a storm be ready to sink,
yet that God is the Pilot of the ship and governs all in wisdom, for the good
of his people, this may quiet us in the midst of all our Trials.

Object. If God thus limit wicked men and rule over them, how comes it to pass
that he suffers wicked men to Tyrannize over his people, as they do?

Answer, We must not condemn Gods ways, because we cannot understand the
Reason of what he does. There are mysteries in Gods Kingdom, as in all
Kingdoms there are secrets of State not fit for all to know. It Is as easy for
a man to rake up all the Sea in a Cockle shell, as to know the Reason of Gods
actions in his Eternal Counsel: we must not condemn what we cannot comprehend,
for God is infinitely wise and knows how to bring light out of darkness, and
order out of confusion.

2. He Is infinitely just, though his ways be secret and full of darkness to
us, yet they are always just. When clouds and darkness are round about him,
then righteousness and judgment are the Habitation of his Throne, Psalm. 97.7.
He can make a medicine of the poysenous oppositions of wicked men, their ^alice
shall be as Horse-leeches to suck out the bad blood; as a File to take off the
rust, as rubbish to cleanse the vessel and wash away the filth, and as a
Touchstone to try the Graces of his Children. And though his Providence seem
to cross his Promises, yet wait the Conclusion, and you shall see and say he
has done all things well. We see in a Clock though the wheels run cross and
contrary one to another, yet they all conduce to the going of the Clock.
Joseph's imprisonment is the way to his preferment, and Iona's drowning was the
means to ^ave him from drowning. We must not judge of Gods Actions before they
be formed and finished. If a man should come to an Embroyderers shop and behold
his work when it is half made, it would look ill favouredly, but says he, stay
till it be all done, and you will commend it. When a man puts silver into the
Furnace, when it is taken out first it is all black, b^t stay till it is finished
and furbisht, and then it is beautiful. The Lord has been doing a great work in
England for many years past, his ways have been in the clouds, and where we
are yet, whether at the borders of Canaan, or going into the Wilderness again,
we cannot tell: it will be our wisdom by Prayer and Patience to wait on the
Lord, and then in the conclusion we shall see that all things shall work
together for good unto Gods people, Romans 8.28.

VERSE 10, 11, 12. But thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of life,
purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, Persecutions, afflictions
which came to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I
endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea and all that will live
godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution.
WE are now come to the Second Part and Period of this Chapter, wherein the
Apostle prescribes the Means how Timothy and all the godly may be preserved
against Seducers, and their Seducements. viz.

1. By imitating and confirming thmselves to Paul's 1. Doctrine. 2.
Conversation. 3. Purpose. 4. Faith. 5. Long-suffering. 6. Love. 7. Patience. 8.
Persecutions. 9. Afflictions.


2. By considering Gods sore judgments on Seducers, how they are given up to a
Reprobate sense, increasing still in all kinds of wickedness. Verse 13.

3. By a constant adhering to the Scriptures. Verse 14, 15.

But thou have fully known my Doctrine.

Lest Timothy should be drawn aside by the subtleties of seducers, Paul
propounds his own example to him as a pattern for his imitation, and so much
the rather because Timothy had experimentally known the truth of his doctrine,
and the sincerity of his conversation both in Doing and Suffering for Christ.
Now since we are more easily led by Presidents then by Precepts, Est argumentum
cum a facili, tum a^ exemplo sumptum. q. d. ^n me exemplum habes tu doctrinam
meam and (...) ^osti, in his me imitare, sicut hactenus s^cist^. (...)
^^mingius.
the Apostle propounds his own example for our imitation, wherein we have the
lively pattern and Pourtraiture of a faithful Pastor; whose office it is, not
only to preach sound doctrine, but also to practice what he preaches in his
own life, that so he may be able to speak from the heart to the hearts of his
people; and may not bring his food as birds do to their young ones, in their
Beakes, not in their Breasts. The word (...) is emphaticall, and signifies not
a a simple, single, notionall knowledge; but a singular, peculiar, intimate,
experimental knowledge of the secrets, counsels, and conversation of a man.
(...) pe^tus asse^^to. Be^^.
So the word is used. Luke 1.3. it seemed good to me having had perfect
understanding of things. Luke being guided by the special instinct and
direction of Gods Spirit, had full and infallible knowledge of the things which
he writ. So Timothy did not barely know, but (as our Translations render it) he
fully knew the doctrines and virtues of Paul, and therefore none more fit to
(...), signifies to follow or to imitate ( ab ^ part. congreg^tiva, simul, and
(...), via) hence our Translation in the Margin renders it, ^hou have been a
diligent follower of my doctrine. etc.
follow his Example. q. d. O my beloved Son Timothy, there is none that knows
me better then thou. Thou thoroughly know not only what I have taught, did
and suffered; but also how I was minded and disposed; Thou know what my will
and desire was, my Faith, Love, Patience, and Perseverance are not hid from
thee; thou being an Eyewitness and inseparable companion to me in many of my
afflictions: wherefore since the time of my departure is at hand, and I must
shortly be offered up as a sacrifice by my Martyrdom for Christ, I now expect
all those things from thee, which a tender Father may expect from his beloved
Son, or a caref^ll Master from his obedient Scholar.

1. Observat.
1. Observe, In that Paul propounds his own Example for Timothy to consider and
follow. That the Pious Example of the godly must be imitated by us. Younger
Ministers especially must observe the doctrine and conversation, the pious
ways and walking of the elder and graver Ministers, and must follow them. Aged
Paul propounds his virtues to young Timothy for imitation. Many young men
praise the gravity, solidity, wisdom, industry, mortification, and
self-denial of ancient Ministers, but they do not follow them. They deal by
them as the world does by Honesty, they praise it, but they never practice it.
-- Probitas laudatur, and alget.
Juven. As Gedeon said to his soldiers. Judge. 7.17. look upon me, and do
likewise; so you that are young and unsettled, rash, and conceited, look upon
the Doctrine, ^
Discipline, Hair, Habit; ways and works of the Holy and the Grave; follow
them now you are young, and then you will be good long. Great is the power of
the Example of superiors, when one praised the Lacedemonian soldiers for
being so orderly, who before had been so injurious, one of them answered; No,
the praise is not ours that we are thus changed, for we are the same men still,
but we have now another Captain, and he it is that orders us. How often does
God command us to follow our faithful Guides? Heb. 13.7. 1 Cor. 4.16. Philip.
4.9. James 5.10. and commends it. 1 These. 1.6. As we must follow Christ, so we
must follow all the Saints, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, etc. So far as they
follow Christ. God has set them before us as our Copy to write by, and our
Pattern to live by; and we must answer not only for sinning against the light
of the word, but against the light of good Example also. It will be one day
said, you had such and such to go before you in Paths of Piety, and yet you
would not follow. The faithful are called witnesses. Heb. 12.1. Rev. 12. now
if we walk contrary to their light, they will witness against us, as Noah and
Lot did against the sinners of their age; but if we walk answerable to their
Light, they will witness for us. Their practice may comfort and confirm us in
Gods way, they declare the possibility of obtaining such a grace, and make it
thereby the more easy, when we have seen it done before us. If a man have a
Torch to light him in a dark and dangerous path, how glad is he; the godly
shine like lights in the midst of a crooked generation. Phil. 2.15, 16. their
life is a Commentary on the Scripture. Now since the nature of man is apter to
be guided by Example then Precept, and to live non ad rationem, sed ad
similitudinem, therefore God has prepared abundance of glorious examples for
our imitation; and thus the Saints that are now at rest and triumphant in
glory, their lives are to be our Looking-glasses to dress our selves by, our
Compass to sail by, and our Pillar of a cloud to walk by.

(...) exemplar. M^taph. a Paedag^gis.
Object. But does not the Scripture propound Christ as our pattern for our
Imitation? Matthew. 11.29. 1 Pet. 2.21.

Answ. Christ is a Pattern of Patterns, he is instead of a thousand Examples,
he is an Example that had no sin in him; so that we may and must follow him in
his Moral Virtues absolutely, Sancta Christi vita est pe^fectissima virtutum
Idaea,
other patterns be imperfect and defective, but Christ is a perfect Copy, his
steps we must follow, his virtues we must imitate, we must show forth not a
virtue or two, but all those virtues which did shine in the conversation of
Christ, and made him glorious in the world, all those must not only be in us,
but must shine forth in our lives also. 1 Pet. 2.9. Matthew. 5.16. 2. He Is an
Example which none can equalize nor sufficiently admire, we are apt to excuse
our selves for not imitating Christ, because he is too high, hence God in his
wisdom has provided Examples of a lower rank, of men subject to the like
Passions as we are. The Scripture reco^ds what glorious things they have done
and suffered for God and his honor. Now these are patterns of our own rank and
nature, whom we must not only imitate, but labor to equalize, and study to
out-goe the best pattern of the best Saints that ever were. We can have no
excuse in these days of light, if we come not up to the best patterns, because
we have more of the Spirit, more light, and more clear manifestation of God,
then they had.

Quest. How far must we imitate the Saints, and be followers of them?

Answ. We may not follow any Saint whatsoever simply and absolutely, but only
with a Quatenus, so far as he is a follower of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.7. the Saints
have had their failings, and the best have a great deal of the old Adam in
them. They are Pillars of cloud for us to walk by, but this cloud has its dark
part, which if we follow, we shall fall as they did. There are 4. sorts of
actions which the Scripture tells us were done by Saints.

1. Some were sinful, as David's adultery, Peter's denial; and these are
recorded not for imitation, but for Caution and admonition. 1 Cor. 10.6. these
things are examples that we might not lust as they did. Their sins are
Sea-marks for men to shun, and not Landmarks to walk by. It Is a sad thing to
love that in David, which he did abominate in himself. Yet 5. good Lessons we
may learn from the falls of the Saints.

1. When thou read of their sins, it should teach thee not to idolize any
Saint, they were men as well as others, and had their naevos, and had need of a
Mediator. 2. It may teach us that the best Saints may fall into the foulest
sins if they do not watch; yea into those sins they most abhor. Of all sins
Peter thought himself most free from that of denying Christ, and if a man
should have come to Solomon when he had made that rare Prayer before all the
people (1 Kings 8.22, 23, etc.) and told him, Well Solomon, for all this Prayer
that thou have made, thou will turn Idolater before thou dye; would not he have
answered with Hazael, Am I a dog that I should do such things? This shows that
the best have in them the Root of the vilest sins, and if we be not upheld and
preserved by Gods assisting grace, we shall certainly fall. 3. We may learn
what sins are most prejudicial to us. viz. Self-confidence, this brought Peter
down, idleness and prosperity, this brought David down. Effeminatenesse
brought Solomon so low. 4. We learn that a holy fear is necessary to salvation.
Prove. 28.14. Phil. 2.12. and to have a holy jealousy over our deceitful
hearts, be not high-minded but fear, Sit casus majorum, tremor minorum. Aug.
for if such great Saints fell to such foul sins, what shall such poor shrubs
do? 5. As you that never fell must read these Examples to preserve you from
falling, so you that are fallen must not despair, but read them that you may
rise again by Repentance, as they did. Let us therefore watch and pray
continually, for the best Christian is like a man rowing against Wind and Tide,
if he let go his Oars, he cannot in a great while recover again what he has
lost.
2. Some actions of the Saints were done by special instinct and instigation
of the spirit, these are not for our imitation. Elijah calls for fire from
heaven, which the disciples desiring were checked by Christ. Luke 9.54. Sampsons
pulling the house on his own and the Philistines heads, was by an immediate
instinct of the spirit. So was Phineas his acts. Numb. 25. we must not expect
such extraordinary instincts and impulses of spirit in our days, we must now
to the Law and to the Testimony. Isay 8.20. we must suspect such extraordinary
impulses, rather then expect them.

2. Some actions they did by special command from God, and if we have not such
an extraordinary command, we may not imitate them. e. g. The Israelites when
they went out of Egypt borrowed Jewels of silver and gold, See my
Schools-Guard. Rule the 17. for expounding the Law.
which they never paid again, because God bid them spoil them, but we may not
do so* Psalm. 37.21. so God commands Abraham to kill Isaac, we have now the
word for our Rule, and must not expect Revelations.

3. Some were occasional actions, which they were not bound to in the general,
but merely for such a time, and in a case of necessity, so the disciples must
carry no scrip nor gold, but preach freely. See my Sal. Terrae. cap. 9.
Matthew. 10.8, 9, 10. 'twas as a Temporary command, as appears Luke 22.35. such
was Paul's practice in working for his living. See my Text fully vindic^ted in
my Sal Terrae. cap. 9.
Acts 13.3. and 20.34.

4. Some actions of the Saints are acts of Holiness and Righteousness
grounded on the word of God, and in these it is that we must imitate them.
There is a magnetical virtue and hidden excellency in good examples, to allure
us to virtue, as there is a divellish efficacy in lewd examples to make us
wicked, Ieroboams wickedness draws Israel to sin, so there is an heavenly
efficacy in good examples (when sanctified) to make us holy. Judge. 2.7. the
people serve the Lord all the days of Joshua who was a good man, and the
Elders who outlived Joshua, so long as they had a good example, they served
the Lord. If Crispus the Ruler of the Synagogue believe, all his house believe
with him. Acts 18.8. Theodosius by his holy example made his Court a Nursery of
Religion. The patient sufferings of the Martyrs made many Martyrs; Justin
Martyr tells us that the pious lives of the Christians were a means to convert
him. Hence the Scripture ascribes a converting power to good example. 1 Peter
3.1.

2. Their example will be a Cordial to comfort us in our distresses. There is
no misery that can befall us, but it has befallen some of the Saints before
us. Art deserted in thy own apprehension? so was Heman. Art poor? so was Job.
Art persecuted? so was David. Art called to difficult duties? so was Abraham:
so were the Martyrs called to forsake all. If a man be to go through a vast
howling wilderness, this is a sad journey, yet if he see a beaten high way all
along, this is a great comfort to him in his journey. This is our condition,
the way to Heaven is through a wilderness of trouble, our comfort is, it is a
beaten way, thousands of Saints have gone before us in it.

3. This following of them will evidence our salvation, and assure us of our
reigning with him in glory. 1 These. 1.4, 5, 6. know Brethren your Election, but
how? because ye became followers of us Peter Martyr tells a story of a deformed
man had married a very deformed wife, and being desirous to have handsome
children, he bought abundance of curious Pictures, and caused his wife every
day to view them, and as (he says) the man had handsome children. The
application is plain, Let us set the beautiful examples of Gods Abraham's, See
more Robinsons Observations. 19.
Paul's, etc. before us, and then though by nature we are deformed, yet by the
assistance of Gods spirit enabling us to follow the holy examples of his
people, we shall become beautiful and lovely in Gods eye.

2. Observe, Observat. 2.
That it is lawful sometimes, and in some cases to mention those Graces which
God has given us. Paul here to comfort and quicken Timothy tells him of his
Faith, Patience, Long-suffering, Afflictions, and how the Lord delivered him
out of all. In other places he mentions what he had done and suffered for
Christ. 1 Cor. 11. total. Phil. 1.12, 13, 14, etc. Job 29. and 31. declares
his innocence and integrity to the world. See Mr Reyne^s Government of the
^ongue. p. 304, 305. etc.
Self-commendation is lawful in eleven cases.

Caut. But then the Idem. ibid. p 317.
Matter, the measure, the Manner and End must be good, it must not be to
advance our selves, or exalt our own names (as many Sectaries do who call
themselves Saints, The holy ones, the servants of the living God) but to bring
glory to God, and exalt his name. What the Pharisees spoke proudly and falsely,
a believer may speak humbly and truly, Lord, I bless thee that I am not as
vile as the vilest, since by nature I am as vile as any, it is thy Free Grace
and distinguishing-love that has made the difference.

My Doctrine.
Q. d. Thou have known my doctrine to be sound and sincere, without the mixture
of humane inventions. Nudus nude, nudam patefeci veritatem. I have faithfully
fed Christ's flock with the sincere milk of his word; and not as the false
Prophets do with the chafe of their own deceits and dreams. One special note
whereby to know a true Minister, is his doctrine, this is that fruit by which
you may discern a false Prophet from a true one. Matthew. 6.16. by their fruit (
i. e.) by their doctrine you may know them: if they teach such things as infect
the judgment with error, or taint the life with uncleanness (though they seem
never so holy) note them for false Prophets. Our Savior by the truth of his
doctrine proved himself to be sent of God. John 7.16, 17, 18. and 12.49, 50.
Paul commands Timothy to keep the pattern of wholesome words. 2 Timothy 2.13. and
Titus must be careful in appointing Ministers for the Church, to choose such as
hold the faithful word. Titus 1.7.9. Moral Virtues may be found with a false
faith, let not those Apples of Sodom deceive you, for as there may be good
doctrine where the life is bad, so there may be false doctrine where the life
is seemingly good. Look therefore in the first place to the doctrine, and in
the second place to the virtues which seem to commend it: so does Paul here,
first he tells you his Doctrine was found, and now he comes to declare his
Graces, and how he lived.

2. Manner of Life.
Q. d. Thou have not only known my doctrine, bnt my life also; neither have
thou only known an action or two, but thou have known the whole (...), est
vivendi ratio, and vitae modus. q. d. neque verbis tantum philosophari soleo,
sed potius rebus and factis magno studio impleo and quasi ad vivum ostendo illa
ipsa quae doceo. Soto.
course and Series of my life; (partly as an eyewitness, and from credible
witnesses and clear demonstrations) and how my conversation and doctrine have
agreed.

Note, That it is an Houourable thing to join with sound doctrine, an incorrupt
and exemplary life and conversation. They that believe in God must be Patterns
of good works, thus must Ministers persuade and induce belief. Believe me for
my works sake, whether my doctrine be of God. John 13.38. It aggravateth the
sin of unbelife, when both doctrine and manners of life testify that it is of
God. Matthew. 21.32. A Minister with true doctrine, and a bad life weakens the
credit of the truth he teaches, pulls down what he builds, declares a profane
heart in despising the doctrine delivered from God; and incurres the
Pharisaicall brand. Matthew. 23.3. They say, but do not.

3. Purpose.
(...), propositum, finis, consilium. Aretius.
Q. d. Thou have thoroughly known my ends and aims, the intention and scope of
all my doings and sufferings of my life and doctrine. Thou know very well
that I never sought my self, my own ease, profit, pleasure or applause; but the
glory of God and the good of his Church, have been the ultimate end of all my
actions.

Quest. But who can know another man's purpose?

Answ. A close Hypocrite will hide it much; but a sincere man cannot but
manifest it to such as live familiarly with him, and observe him. Hence Note,
That good men have good aims, ends and purposes. It Is not sufficient that a
man's actions be materially good, but they must be formally and finally good;
the bent and intent of the heart must be right. It Is the end which denominates
the action, and makes it either good or bad. Religious duties are to be tried
not only by their Acts, Non actibus sed finibus pensantur officio. Cyril.
but specially by their Ends. A man may do that which for matter is right in
the sight of the Lord, To make an action morally good, three circumstances must
concur. 1. The man must be Rectus. 2. He must do Recta. 3. Rec^e:

yet if he do it not with an upright heart, all is nothing. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. John
in destroying the house of Ahab, did that which was right in Gods sight, but
because his End was Self, God afterward deals with him as with a Murderer.
Hosea 1.4. Let us therefore get honest and good hearts ( Luke 8.15.) and then
our intents and purposes will be good, and we shall find acceptance with God
in what we do. 1 Kings 3.6. and 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.

4. Faith.
Long-suffering, Love, Patience. Four Graces which grace and adorn a
Christian, but specially a Minister of Christ. My faith q. d. thou have
thoroughly known my fidelity and faithfulness in the discharge of my Ministerial
duties. viz. in Preaching, Praying, Watching, and disputing against gainsayers.
(...), bonam fidem (i. e) sinceritatem in rebus agendis. Grotius.
So the word faith is used. Titus 2.10. showing all good faithfulness, viz. in
the discharge of their duties.

2. It notes Paul's firm affiance and confidence in God, by which he was
enabled to undergo all those labors, dangers, and difficulties, which he met
with in his way, without despair or despondency: as Antipas is said to be
faithful to the death. Rev. 2.13. so Paul persevered in the faith of Christ
even to the end.

Obsorve, It Is a Ministers glory to be faithful in his place and calling, that
we are which we are in our Relations and Callings. When a Minister is studious
in the Law of God, diligent in praying, preaching, and watching over the flock,
doing all out of a love to God, and deep compassion to the souls of the
people; using all means both by an holy inoffensive life, and sound doctrine,
to win them to God: this is our crown and rejoicing. 2. Cor. 1.12.

2. Take it for saving faith, and so this Grace is very nessary for a Minister,
Tam de fide justificante, quam de fidelitate in efficio intelligi potest.
Baldwin.
that he may constantly and courageously go on with his work, being hereby
assured. 1. Of Acceptance. hereby assured. 2. Protection. hereby assured. 3.
Remuneration.


1. Of acceptance, both of his person and performances in Christ. Ephesians. 1.6.

2. Of protection in all his ways. Christ holds his stars in his right hand,
which shows his special love and tender care over them. See an excellent Ser.
of Mr. Brinslyes on that Text.
Rev. 2.1. as we are exposed to greater tentation, so we are under more special
protection.

3. Of Remuneration and reward. Isay 49.4, 5. though the Labans of the world
change our wages ten times, yet our reward is with the Lord.

5. Long-suffering.
Lenity and Long-suffering is a virtue, which consists in moderating our anger
and keeping us from revenge, (...). lenitas, longanimitas. quasi (...); tardus
ad iram.
it is needful for all men, but specially for Ministers, who must not presently
cast men off as reprobates and dogs, but wait when God will give them
repentance. Hence the Apostle makes this one special Qualification of a
Minister. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. and 4.2. Rigor rather alienates wicked men from the
truth, and drives them further off instead of winning them: but gentleness,
calmnesses and humility melts them, and brings them into their right mind. Now
this Lenity and Long-suffering must be exercised toward all in general. 1.
These. 5.14. but specially.

1. Toward wicked men that are as yet unconverted, there is a possibility of
their conversion, and therefore we must show all meekness toward them,
remembering what we our selves sometimes were. Titus 3. 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

2. Toward those that are lapsed and fallen through infirmities Gal. 6.1. 1.
These. 5.14.

3. Toward such as differ from us in opinion, we must not presently cast off
every one that says not as we say, but wait till God shall further enlighten
them, and discover the truth unto them. Philippians 3.15, 16.

4. Toward persecutors and open enemies of the truth. We must bear and
forbear, even when many and great wrongs are done unto us. Hence Christ prayed
for those that crucified him; and Steven for those that stoned him, and Paul
for such as persecuted him; he was not enraged with anger against them, nor did
he raise tumults or seek revenge, but he takes all quietly, and resists
opposers with a raise, heroic, yet calm spirit.

1. This will make us like unto God, who is slow to anger. Exodus 34, 6. and
bears with much long-suffering the Vessels of wrath. Romans 2.4. and 9.22. we
cannot be so wronged and abused every day as God is, See Doctor Goodwins
Aggrav. of sin. Bonum apud virum cito moriur iracundia. Seneca.
and if he bear with such, we may well bear. Our natures are very apt to
revenge, to give blow for blow, and reproach for reproach; but happy is that
man which has the command of himself, in whom this virtue dwells, How often is
it commanded and commended to us. 2 Cor. 6.6. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 4.2. Colos.
3.12.

2. Consider we live not amongst Angels, but amongst Devils incarnate, amidst a
forward, perverse, rebellious nation; so that without Patience, yea
Long-suffering, which is patience heightened and extended, there is no quiet nor
comfortable subsisting in the world. Patience may enable us to endure the
common and ordinary crosses and calamities of this life; but there is need of
Long-suffering to endure those great and grievous injuries which we must expect
from malicious men: yea and sharp trialls oft-times from God himself.

5. Charity or Love.
(...), dilectio, charitas, amor.
Though in our ordinary speech we confound the words, yet Love is the more
proper and comprehensive word, as including both the Affection and Habit of
love, as also the actions and duties of Love. But charity is too narrow, and
often notes but the effects of love in works of charity and mercy. 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
Heb. 6.10. A man may have much charity, and yet no love; he may give all his
goods to the poor, and his body to be burnt, and yet want Love. 1 Cor. 13.3.
Hence the Geneva Translation and others render the word, Love, both in the
Text, and in 1 Cor. 13. ult. So then we have here in Paul those three
Theological Graces (says Aquinas) of Faith, Hope, and Love; for in
Long-suffering and patient waiting, (says he) Hope is included. By Love may
here be meant Paul's Love both to God and man, (...) (i. e.) Christiana erga
omnes homines dilectio. Gerhard*

Mr. Capel on Tentat. p. 4. c. 1. Sect. 3. p. 22.


but especially it may seem to relate to his love toward men. He loved all
both good and bad, friends and foes; the one with a love of delight and
complacency; the other with a love of pity and compassion. And it is well
observed by a Reverend Divine, that we must love bad men but not bad manners,
and that it is an act more of faith to love such, then good men, etc. Good men
love not to confine their Love, but as the Sun diffuseth its beams to all,
V. Mr. Sheffield on Conscience. c. 14.
so good men wish well to all. Revel. 22. ult. Grace be with you all. This
Grace is very requisite, especially for a Minister. Love is an active thing, it
will make us willing to spend our selves, and be spent for Christ, it will even
constrain us to use our gifts for Gods glory, and the good of men. 2 Cor. 5.14.
for as reward has an attractive, and punishment an impulsive, so Love has a
compulsive faculty: it is a kind of omnipotent Affection, it answers doubts,
Amor meus pondus meum, eo feror quocunque feror. Aug.
removes fears, lessens difficulties, conquers tentations, makes the Coward
valiant, the covetous prodigal, the slothful active, so that then we begin to
live, when we begin to love. Nothing works kindly upon the heart but what
comes from love, the wheels never move well till they be oyled with it: Hence
the Apostle would have all things done in Love. 1 Cor. 13.16. out of love to
our people we should labor to preserve their love, V. Sal. Terrae. cap, ult.
v. Amanter and Barlow in 2 Timothy 1.7. Church his Miscelan. p. 112.
by being helpful, hospitable, courteous, patient, merciful, etc. preferring
their souls before our dues, that they may see we seek not theirs but them;
not that we should betray the Rights of our places, but claim them with all
tenderness and evidences of Love and Peace.

7. Patience.
Q. d. Thou have fully known my Patience in bearing and forbearing, in a quiet
and submissive way undergoing all those adversities, afflictions and
persecutions which I met with from an ungrateful World. Our life here is
surrounded with trials Internal and External; so that without Patience we shall
sink under the burden. (...) tolerantia ita ut sub cruce non fatiscat, (...),
quod est manner sub pondere afflictionum, and earum mole non obrui. Davenant.
This keeps us in the Possession of our selves, Luke 21 19. and enables us to
bear injuries with a quiet moderation of mind. God will try us, Satan will sift
us, and the world molest us, so that unless we be armed with Patience, V. Sal
^errae c. ult. in V. Patienter.

Invalidum omne natura querulum, nec quicquam magnum nisi quod simul placidum.
Seneca.


with All Patience and Long-suffering, we can expect no joy, Colossians 1.11. A
little Patience will not do, for we have no little enemies to oppose us, it
must be All Patience and all strength. This also is a Virtue very requisite for
a Minister, who has to do with all sorts of men; some are dull, some froward,
some weak, some wayward; so that without patience there is no good to be done.
It Is for Pusillanimons spirits to be always murmuring, complaining, and
seeking revenge. The weakest Creatures are most Vindicative.

But noble, Humanis rebus ignoscere aequum and bonum est, and boni viri est
accepta injuria patienter far non ad ulciscendum se parare. Atistot. Rhet.
Lib. 1. Cap. 14.
Heroicke Spirits pass by Offenses, contemn Contemners, and are silent under
the greatest pressures. They are prudent men and so are patiently silent under
Gods afflicting hand, Amos 3.5.13. [See the various acceptance of this Text in
Caril, Job 13.5. page 367.] 'Twas a good Answer of Chrysostom to Eud xa the
Empress, if the Queen (says he) will banish me, let her banish me, the earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. If she will saw me asunder, Let her do
it, Isay suffered as much, yea, if she will throw me into the Sea, I will yet
remember Jonah. This is an Ornament of great worth, not only in the sight of
man, but also of God, 1 Peter 3 4. without it we are unfit for duty, as the
troubled Sea unfit for voyage. Without it we double and increase our burdens,
like a wild Bull in a net, or the untamed Heifer we may gall our necks, Vi^tus
^id^a est quam non patientia sumat.
but never break the yoke. Without Patience no Grace is perfect, Faith has but
half its strength, and hope is feeble, James 1.4. By our Patience we please
God, displease the Devil, rejoice the Angels, and many times melt and convert
our enemies: by this means we heap coals of conversion or coals of confusion
upon their heads, Romans 12.20. This will keep us good in a bad condition, so
that a man enjoyes himself when he has nothing else; and though he have
nothing, yet is as one that possesses all things. Totum seculum pe^eat dum
Patientiam crucifaciam.
The consideration of this made Tertullian to cry, Farewell all, so I may but
get patience. Now that we may attain it.

1. Get Knowledge, that will help to answer Objections and Doubts, and so
quiets the soul.

2. Get Humility; Pride breeds impatiency, but this will make us quietly to
submit our wills to Gods Will. God is the Potter and we are his Clay: We must
be content to be raised or ruined, made or marred according as he pleases. Duc
me parens celsique domitor poli quocumque placuit; nulla parendi mora est
Seneca.


3. Get Faith, this breeds Patience, Romans 5.2, 3.

4. Get love, it endures all thing, and makes hard things easy, 1
Corinthians, 13.7.

[For Patience, See Robinsons Essays Observe. 35. Ames, CC. Lib. 3. Cap. 14.
Bishop Andrews, on first Comment. Cap. 14. Byfield on Colossians, 1.11. Master
Valentines Sermon, on Zeph. 3.8. Preached 1643. December 28. Churches Miscel.
Page 122. Master Samuel Fisher, on Psalm 39.9. Doctor Preston on James 4.7.
Drexelius Gymnasium Patientiae. See 16. Reasons to move us to Patience, in
Master Youngs Counterpoyson against grief, Chapter 17. And Master Francis Rous,
Art of Happiness. Chapter 10.

VERSE 11. Persecutions, afflictions; which came to me at Antioch, at Iconium,
at Lystra, what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered
me.
THere are two things which do usually much trouble the Ministers of the
Gospel.

1. The swarms of false Teachers and Seducers. 2. The persecutions which they
meet with from such.
Against the former the Apostle comforts us, Verse. 9. against the latter in
this Verse; where he shows what persecutions and afflictions he cheerfully
underwent for the Gospels sake, (...) persecutio, a (...) persequor. Hostiles
notat persecutiones utpote apertam vim, exilia, and clandistinas obtractationes
and calumnias, quibus bonorum fama arroditur. Weinrich in Romans 8.
that so he might animate and excite Timothy to a prudent expectation and
patient enduring of the like; and withal he tells him, How the Lord delivered
him out of all.

In this Verse we have first Paul's sufferings set down in the lump in general.
q. d. Thou know what persecutions I endured, and how I was chased from place
to place. Thou know what storms and tempests were raised against me, both by
Jews and Gentiles, by Grecians and Barbarians, by Princes and People; by open
enemies and false Brethren, by violence and deceit seeking my ruin.

2. The better to arm Timothy, he tells him what afflictions he endured both
Internal and External, in soul and body; from the world, from Satan, Per (...)
seu afflictiones omnis generis calamitates and miserias intelligit, quae piis
in hac vita obveniunt.
and from his own corruption. The word is plural and indefinite, including all
manner of afflictions.

1. External, as Imprisonment, banishment, reproach, hunger, thirst,
nakedness, cold, 1 Corinthians 4.11.12.13. he was often in prisons, often in
deaths, five times he was scourged, thrice he was beaten with rods, once he was
stoned, thrice he suffered shipwreck, etc. 2 Corinthians 11.23, 24, 25, 26,
27. and 2 Corinthians 6.4. to 11. there you may see large Catalogues of his
sufferings.

2. As for internal afflictions and trials from sin and Satan, See what sad
complaints he makes against them, Romans 7. and 2 Corinthians 12.7, 8. So that
his life was a perpetual Warrefare, he was beset with enemies within and
without, which put him to much sorrow and affliction.

2. He descends to particulars, and names the places where he suffered, that he
might the better record the whole History; and the better work upon Timothy,
who was partly an eyewitness, and partly an eare-witnesse, and had heard of
many of his sufferings by the relation of credible witnesses: for Paul's
persecutions at Antioch, Iconium and Lystra are recorded, Acts 13. and 14. But
Timothy began not to cleave to Paul till Acts 16.2, etc. Paul had suffered much
in other Cities, as appears in the Acts of the Apostles, but he mentions his
sufferings in these three Cities, because Timothy had heard more of these,
being born at Lystra which was a neighbor City.

1. Antioch and Iconium, and so they were more fresh in his memory. Or else
because the persecutions in those places were raised more especially by the
Jews, who were more violent in persecuting Paul, then the Gentiles were.
However the Apostle the better to animate his son Timothy, puts him in mind of
these particular persecutions of his, that he might not faint, if God should
call him to like sufferings. q. d. O my dear son Timothy, though thou have
suffered something for Christ, yet thou never had those trials that I have
had, thou never wast cast out of so many Cities, nor so often imprisoned, whipped
and stoned as I have been, my troubles have been great, and my afflictions many
yet this is my comfort, let it be thine also, that the Lord who has delivered
me, will also deliver thee out of all thy troubles and afflictions.

1. Paul comes to Antioch in Pisidia, not Anti^ch in Syria: this Pisidia was a
part of lesser Asia, of which Antioch was the Metropolis; here the believers
were first called Christians, Acts 11. hither came Paul and Barnabas, whose
Ministry finding good success, they were envied by the Jews who expelled them
out of their coasts, Acts 13.14.44.45, 50, 51. being expelled from Antioch,
they go to Iconium, the Metropolis of Lycaonia, where many believe to the grief
both of Jews and Gentiles, who with their Rulers thought to stone them, which
the Apostles discerning fled unto Lystra and Derbe Cities of Lycaonia, Acts
14.1. to 8. surely there they will use them better; alas, no, for there they
stone Paul, and leavie him for dead, Acts 14.19, 20. All wicked men hate the
good, as all Wolves do the Sheep.

2. Paul goes on, and tells Timothy, that he knew what persecutions he
endured. viz. besides those which he now mentioned, he had suffered many things
in many other places.

3. Lest Timothy should be dismayed, as he had told him of the sour, so now he
tells him of the sweet; as he had told him of his dangers, so now he tells him
of his deliverance. But out of them all, the Lord delivered me. (...)
significat vi and efficaciter e periculis eripere. Laurent.
I came not out of these troubles by my own power or policy; but by the
strength of the Lord, it is he, even he alone that delivered me not out of one
or two, but out of all my dangers and distresses. When all created comforts
failed me, yet he never failed me, nor forsook me, in six troubles he was with
me, and in the seventh he did not leave me. Fear not therefore Timothy, for
God will be the same to thee, as he was to me, if thou patiently wait upon him
as I have done. Despair not then under the Cross, but assure thy self of
Victory.

1. Observe, That persecutions and afflictions are the proper portion of Gods
dearest servants in this life. Paul a choice and chosen vessel, yet loaded here
with persecutions. But of this, see more verse 12.

2. Observe, That Gods people may tell of their own sufferings; so does Paul
here, See more fully Mr. Reyners Government of the Tongue, p. 303. etc.
and Colos. 1.24. and 2.1. and 2 Cor. 1.6.7. Provided it be done modestly, and
sincerely, not proudly and Hypocritically; for Imitation and Consolation to the
godly, and not for ostentation, and self-seaking.

3. Observe, That a Christian without sin may be sensible of the trials and
persecutions which he meets with from the world. He may groan under them; but
he must not grumble; it must be the mourning of Doves, not the roaring of
Bears: a sheep may be as sensible of the biting of a Dog, Non sentiremala sua
n^n est hominis, and non far non est viri. Seneca.
as a Swine is, though he raise not such a dust, nor make such a din. We may
not be senseless and stupid, for Grace does not destroy, but rectify natural
affections: hence Christ himself in his troubles and agonies in an humble
manner complains unto God, and cries with tears, and was heard.

4. Observe, That persecution attends the preaching of the Gospel; where ever
the Gospel comes in the power of it, it will always meet with opposition from
the Devil and his agents. No sooner does Paul preach at Antioch, but presently
there are some that rise against him. The whole Book of the Acts of the
Apostles proves this point. Per se quidem Evangelium est res pacifica, sed
malorum vitio concitatur divisio.
God came not to send worldy, carnal wicked peace into the world, but a sword,
Matthew, 10.34, 35. by accident the Gospel meeting with men's corruptions,
breeds division.; though per se, and in it self it breeds that peace of
Conscience which passes all understanding.

5. Observe, That persecution spreads the Gospel, if the Apostles cannot preach
at Antioch, they will go to Iconium, and when persecuted, thence to Lystra. So
Acts 8.1.4. the enemies persecute the Church, and thereby spread it, contrary
to their own intentions. Persecution is so far from hindering, that (the Lord
so wisely ordering it) it mightily spreads the Gospel; according to that
Prophecy Dan. 12.4. many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased. Such shakings make way for Christ, Hag. 2.7. Plures efficimur
quoties metimur. Tertul.
The Church like a quick-set hedge grows the thicker for cutting, this Vine is
the better for bleeding, and this Torch burns the better for beating. The more
Pharaoh oppressed the Israelites, the more they increast, Exodus 1.12. As Saint
Augustine says of his times. Ligabantur, urebantur, caedebantur, and tamen
multiplicabantur: the Saints were bound, burnt, beaten, etc. yet they increased
still; Paul's bonds and imprisonment further the Gospel, and made the brethren
more bold in professing it, foecundi sunt vel cineres Martyrum.
Philippians 1.12.13, 14. many by beholding the constancy and courage of the
Martyrs, together with the cruelty of their bloody enemies, have been converted
to the Truth. The Bishops by persecuting the Godly in Old- England, have spread
the Gospel in New- England. Thus the Lord catches the wise in their own Plots,
and snares the wicked in the works of their own hands, Psalm. 9.16. Job 5.12.13.

6. Observe, That when we are persecuted in one City, we may lawfully fly unto
another. The Apostles being persecuted at Antioch, fly to Iconium, and from
thence to Lystra. This is no more then what Christ commands, Matthew 10.23.
When they persecute you in one City, flee to another. Christ does not only
permit but command us (when occasion serves) to fly, Matthew 24.16, 17, 18, 19.
It Is no sign of an ignoble and low spirit to fly in some cases. The best of
men have done it. Jacob when in danger fled, Genesis 27. and Moses, Exodus
2.15. Elijah, 1 Kings 17. Vriah Ier. 26.22. Christ himself often fled from his
enemies, Matthew. 12.15 John 7.8. and 20.29. and those valiant Martyrs, Hebrews
11.37, 38. and Paul a man of an undaunted Spirit, is let down in a basket, Acts
9.25. It Is prudence sometimes to conceal our selves and reserve our selves for
better times. Christianae prudentiae est, ferociae interdum cedere, tumultus
praevertere, and rei commodius gerendae occasionem captare ac redimere.
Espencaeus.
Mariners in a Tempest yield to it for a time, who yet would willingly be at
home. Moses desired to rescue the Israelite, in slaying the Egyptian, but when
he saw the Israelites understood not his calling, and what was the cruelty of
Pharaoh, he gave place to the Tempest, and reserved himself for fitter times.
So that in some Cases it may be lawful to fly. As 1. If a man be but a young
beginner in Religion, and do not find strength to endure the brunt of
persecution. 2. If the persecution be personal, then Moses, Elijah, Christ and
Paul fled: So Joseph, Matthew. 2.13. Athanasius and Polycarp.. 3. If our flight
and concealing our selves may make more for Gods Glory, the good of his People,
and the good of our own souls, it is lawful in such a case to fly: and if a man
(for conscience sake) shall forsake Father, Ipsu fuga est confessionis species,
qui enim non maluerit domi suae manner, bonis suis frui, suae gentis hominum
familiaritate uti, quam pauper and ignotus in longinquam regionem peregre
proficisci. Pet. Martyr.
Mother, Friends, and Lands, this is no deserting of the Truth, but a Degree of
Martyrdom, and very pleasing to God. Yea, not only the Law of God, but even
the Law and Light of Nature bind us to preserve our lives by all just and
lawful means.


Caution. Yet when the Lord shall call us to suffering, and shall shut up all
ways of just escaping, then he will be with us, and enable us to endure the
trial, so that we may not stir. E. g. When a man is cast into prison by the
Magistrate for confessing the Truth, he may not then break the doors, Violate
his Promises, dissemble his Religion, or use any indirect means to get
deliverance. Hence Gods servants when they were in prison, would not use any
indirect means to get out again, Acts 5.19. Excellent is the Example of Master
Frith, See Mr. Clerks lives. 1. Part. p. 279. Edit. 2. Vbi plura.
when some of his friends had contrived his escape, he plainly tells them, that
if they should leave him, and go to Croyden without him, and tell the Bishop
they had lost Fryth, I would sure follow after as fast as I could, and bring
them news that I had found and brought Frith again etc. When God calls us to
witness to his Truth we must stick to it, else if we be ashamed of Christ and
his Truth, he will be ashamed of us, Mark 8. ult. He will take no pleasure in
us* it is a Meiosis (i.) He will utterly abhor us, Hebrews 10.38. the fearful
( i.) such as out of base fear to save their lives or goods deny Christ must be
cast into Hell, Revelations 21.8. Such bring terror of Conscience upon
themselves in this life, as Spira, in Queen Mary's days, they dishonor
Religion, as if it were not worth the suffering for, and so bring dishonor
upon themselves.

He that pleases may see this Case more fully debated. in Master Perkins CC. l.
2. c. 12. Q. 3. Bowler Pastor Evangel. l. 3. c. 8. A very useful piece.
Altingius Problem. P. 2. Problem. 3. there you have the Q. debated Pro and
con. Ward on Matthew. 10.23. Aretius Probl. loc. 2. de fuga.

6. Observe, That these whom God calls extraordinarily, he endues with
extraordinary gifts. Paul and Barnabas were called extraordinarily, and they
show it by the Miracles they wrought, Acts 14.3, 8, 9. by the extraordinary
success in their Ministry, and by their understanding the Lyaconian Language
without teaching: a gift peculiar to those times for the more speedy spreading
of the Gospel, Acts 2.6. which shows the folly of the Impostors of our time,
who pretend to an extraordinary call (as the Apostles had) when they have not
so much as ordinary gifts: when they can heal the sick, blind, lame, etc. and
speak all manner of Languages without study, then we shall believe they are
extraordinarily called; but till then we should esteem them (as they are
indeed) Impostours and deceivers.

7. Observe, That the more laborious and active any are for Christ the greater
opposition they must expect from the world. As Paul labored more then others,
1 Corinthians 15.10. So he suffered more then others. A man that goes soltly
by, is not molested with Dogs, but he that rides faster then ordinary, shall
have all the Dogs in the town after him. The world lies snorting in their sin,
and cannot endure such as would waken them. It Is observed of the Church of
Sardis and Laodicea which were dead and cold, that they had no such trouble as
Smyrna and faithful Philadelphia had.

8. Observe, Gracious men are constant men, no troubles can break them off from
Gods ways and works; Persecute, prison, stone them, they are still the same.
As the Martyr told the Bishop, Rawlins you left me, Rawlins I am, and Rawlins
by Gods grace I will continue. No dangers nor difficulties can drive them from
their duties, but if they be stoned, and knocked down in one place, they rise
in another. They are faithful to the death, and so receive a Crown of Life.
Revelations 2.10. many with Demas begin in the Spirit, but end in the flesh,
they embrace a more easy flesh-pleasing way, and so loose all, Galat. 3.4. but
the faithful have not so learned Christ: They know not what it is to yield, when
they can stand no longer on their feet, they will fight upon their knees. Jacob
will have the blessing though he halt for it, and the woman of Canaan will not
leave Christ, though he call her Dog.

Observe, Not only our dangers, but also our deliverances must be observed and
recorded by us. The Apostle had told us before of his persecutions, now he tells
us how God delivered him out of all. We must not coldly and carelessly pass over
the great things which God does for us, but sit down and consider them with all
their Circumstances, till our hearts be inflamed by them, we should sit down,
and with an holy silence admire the wondrous things which God has done for us,
1 Samuel 12.24. Zech. 2.13.

1. Observe, Gods singular wisdom in turning the Plots of Persecutors an
their own Pates, Psalm 9.16. and to his own praise, Psalm 76.10. by their
opposing the Gospel he spreads it.

2. Observe, His Power in Over-powring all the Tyrants of the world, how easily
and irrecoverably does he break them in pieces even as a bar of Iron falling on
an earthen Pot: Psalm 2.9.

3. Observe, His Truth and Faithfulness to his People, doing for us above all
that we can speak or think; we can speak of much, and we can think of more, but
God does for us above all our words or thoughts.

4. Observe, His tender Love and care over his People. He hides us as the Hen
does her Chickens under the wings of his special Protection from the Birds of
prey, Psalm 91.4. He keeps us as the apple of his Eye, Deuteronomy. (32.10. Psalm
17.8. Zech. 2.8.) which is the tenderest piece of the tenderest part, and will
endure no jests; it is guarded by Nature with many Tunicles. To quicken you to
this duty: 1. Consider, V. Weemse 7. Vol. l. 2. c. 3. p. 13.16.
that it is a point of special wisdom to consider the singular providence of
God toward us, Psalm 107. ult. 2. 'Twill bring us unto nearer communion and
acquaintance with God, Psalm 107. ult. we shall understand the loving kindness
of the Lord, we shall attain to a more intimate, sweet, experimental knowledge
of God. 3. This will be a means to support and comfort us in future evils.
David considering how the Lord delivered him from the Lion and the Bear,
concludes from thence his conquest over the Philistim. So the Apostle reasons
from former deliverances to future, 2 Cor. 1.10. This is Scripture Logic he
has delivered, that we know, he does deliver that we see: therefore we
conclude he will still deliver. This will be meat to us in the wilderness, and
hidden Manna to comfort us in new afflictions. A God tried and found faithful
is a singular support in a time of trouble. 4. 'Twill encourage us to persevere
in Prayer, Psalm 116.1.2. a secure, un-observant Christian, is a Non-praying
Christian. 5. 'Twill quicken us to Praise God. The most observant Christians,
are the most thankful Christians. Who can observe the singular love and care of
God to him and not be thankful for it? This will make us say with admiration,
Lord, what is man that thou should thus magnify him? Job 7.17, 18. Let us
therefore be much in considering both the dangers and deliverance of the
faithful; their example will be a great support to us in the like trials, Psalm
34.4, 5, 6. Hebrews 12.1.2, 3. James 5.10.11. It Is some ease to us when we see
our case is not singular, it is no other then that which befalls other men, 1
Cor. 10.13. and the rest of our brethren in the world, Matthew. 5.11, 12. 1 Pet.
5.9.


10. Observe, Though the righteous meet with many troubles, yet the Lord
delivers them out of all, See Mr. Henry Smiths Ser. on that Text, p. 242. See
Mr. Boltons Fast Sermon. on Lam. 3.26. Preached 1646. Doct. 2. p. 10.
Psalm 34.19. we have here: 1. A concession, many are the troubles of the
Righteous, [ Rabboth ragnoth, multa and magna mala, the word will bear both:]
they are for number many, and for nature great. Per sex and septem plurimas
intelligit afflictiones; septenarius enim numerus est perfectionis numerus.
Lavater in Job.
2. Here Is a consolation, but the Lord delivers them out of all. He is with them
in six troubles, and in the seventh he does not leave them, Job 5.19.20, 21.
Psalm 71.20. and 92.14, 15. and 118.13, 14. and 149.4. and 116.6, 7. John
16.20, 21. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. It Is Gods usual Me^hod to bring his people
through great miseries to the enjoyment of great mercies, He first brings them
through fire and water, before he sets them in a wealthy place, Psalm 66.12.
Joseph is first sold, tried, imprisoned; and at last delivered, and then his
Prison is changed into a Palace, his iron chains into golden ones, and his
Prison Rags, into glorious Robes. Job past through many troubles, yet in the
conclusion the Lord delivered him out of all, and made his latter end better
then his beginning, Job 42.10, 12.


Lastly, Observe, The Lord is the sole deliverer of his People: whatever the
means or instruments of our deliverance be, yet he is the Author and the
efficient cause of them all. It Is he and he only that delivers us out of all
our troubles. As he brings us into troubles, so he only can bring us out
again. He kills, and he makes alive, he wounds and he must make whole, Hos.
6.1. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Ier. 30.7. besides him there is no Savior, hence it is
doubled by way of Emphasis, Isay 43.11. I, even I, am the Lord, and besides me
there is no Savior (i.) none so great, yea none, but by and under him: hence
he is called the God of Salvations by way of Eminency in the Plural number, to
distinguish him from Idoll-Gods which cannot save. Psalm. 68.19, 20. He that is
our God, is the God of Salvations. viz. Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

1. All our Temporal salvations come from him, he saves us from the Sword,
Famine, Plague, etc. 1 Kings 8.33. etc. and this he does either Immediately, or
Mediately.


1. Sometimes he saves his people immediately without means, by his own
immediate power; he is agens liberrimum, a most free agent; and though he have
bound us to the use of means, yet himself is bound to none. Hence when all
means has failed, then his own arm has brought salvation to his people. Isay
63.5. Exodus 14.21. he himself will be to Jerusalem a wall of fire. Zeph. 2.5.
he will take away the mighty without hands. Job 34.20. This is Miraculous.

2. Mediately.

1. By Means, all men and means are at his disposing, The very winds and Seas
obey him, all are his servants ready to do his will. Psalm. 119.91. He Is Lord of
Hosts, all armies are his, whether heavenly as Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars; or
Earthly, as frogs, flies, lice, etc. or men whether good or bad, Vel robur
hostium apud Deum.
they are all raised and ruled by him. He teaches their hands to war, he gives
Courage, Skill, Power, Policy, and Success.

2. By weak means he often delivers his people, it is all one with him to help
with few or many. 2 Chronicles. 14.11. by frogs and flies, he confounds Pharaoh.
By Iael a woman he slays valiant Sisera, 'Twere Trumpets not of silver or gold,
but of Rams-hornes, which blew down the walls of Jericho. Heb. 11.30. what is a
worm against a mountain, it is impar congressus, a very unfit match, yet God can
make Jacob a worm to thresh mountains. Isay 41.14, 15. and his Church that is
weak like a woman, to compass and besiege a man ( i. e.) to besiege Babylon
and take it. Ier. 31.22. Luther* an obscure Monk, King Edward the sixth a child,
and Queeen Elizabeth a woman, shall advance the work of Reformation in despite
of all opposition: when the Temple was to be rebuilt, it was not by might or
power of men, but by Gods spirit on a few. Zech. 4.6. It Is by the mouths of
babes and sucklings, that he confounds his foes. Psalm. 8, 2. God usually hangs
the greatest weights on the weakest wyers, that so his name may have all the
praise. See Mr. Marshalls Ser. on that Text. Oct. 28. ^646. See an excellent
Treatise of Mr. Fran^is Tailor on that Text. p. 123. etc. and Mr. Corbets Fast
Sermon.
By poor contemptible fishermen, he confo^nds the wise men of the world, and by
things that are not, he confounds the things that are. 1 Cor. 1, 27, 28, 29. (
i. e.) those men and means which are so slighted, as if they had no being at
all; these shall confound the things which are, viz. of great esteem in the
world. Of those 277, that were burnt in Queen Mary's time, 84. of them were
Artificers, 100. Husbandmen, servants, and laborers, 55. women and two boys.
Gedeons thirty two thousand must be brought to 300. and those shall get the
victory, that the praise may be given to God, and not to Israel. Judge. 7.2. One
Abraham and his family with a little aid overthrew four Kings. Genesis 14. little
David overcomes a great Goliath. Shamgar with an Ox goad slayes 600.
Philistines, and Sampson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, a thousand. Judge. 3.31.
and 15, 16. Though Gods people be a poor, weak, shiftlesse society, yet better
and safer it is to be one of Christ's little ones, then to be one of the
Zanzummims, Nimrods and men of renown amongst the wicked of the world. This
kind of deliverance is Mavelous.

3. By contrary Means. He can make clay (which in all probability would put
out sight) to open the eyes of the blind. John 9.9. He can make the plots of
wicked men to become their plagues, and their own doings to become their
undoings. He can snare them in the work of their own bands. Psalm. 9.16. He can
make the wheels go forward, when we think they go backward: and those ways of
providence which we think will ruin the Nations, he can make them to raise
them, He can make wounds to heal us, losses to enrich us, and divisions to
unite us. This is glorious.

2. Spiritual deliverances come from him. He wounds the conscience, and heales
it. It Is his Prerogative Royal to bind up the broken spirit, and heal such as
be of a contrite heart.

3. He Is the author of eternal salvation, to all that obey him. Heb. 5.9.
This will further appear, that God is the sole deliverer of his people.

1. Negatively, and exclusively, none else can help us if he be against us, all
creatures answer as the King of Israel answered the woman of Tekoa that cried
to him for help, if the Lord do not help, how shall I help thee. 2 Kings 6.26,
27. as he is the God of all comfort and consolation, both Affirmatively and
Negatively. 2 Cor. 1.3. So he is the God of all our help and deliverance both
Negatively and Affirmatively, all our comfort and help is in him, and there is
none to be had without him. Psalm. 124. ult.

It Is not 1. Idols, that can save us. It Is not 2. Riches. that can save us.
It Is not 3. Friends. that can save us. It Is not 4. Strongholds that can save
us. It Is not 5. Armies. that can save us. It Is not 6. Carnal policy, nor
sinful shifts. that can save us.
1. Idols cannot help us. They are vanities, teachers of lies, Hab. 2.18.
Jonah 2.8. Nothing in respect of any divine power or virtue. Idolum nihil est
(i. e.) nihil tale quale prae se fert, quia nihil habet numinis vel
sanctitatis. Materialiter est lignum, formaliter nihil. a Lapide
1 Cor. 8.4. though it be something in respect of men's vain Imaginations, who
honor it as their God, yet it is nothing in respect of virtue or value, for it
can neither help nor hurt. Ier. 10.5. They cannot save themselves from fire and
plunder, Micah's Gods were stolen. Judge. 18.18, 24. They are cursed that
worship them. Psalm. 97.7. they shall have sorrow that follow them. Psalm. 16.4.
and be greatly ashamed that trust in them. Isay 42.17. great then is the folly
of the Papists, who fly to S. Loy for their horses, S. Anthony for their pigs,
Saint George for their wars, S. Apollonia for their teeth, S. Steven for the
night, S. John for the day; according to the manner of their necessities, so
are their Gods.

2. If God be against us, Riches cannot help us. They often hurt us in a time of
trouble. The finger many times is cut off for the gold Ring, and the soldier
enquires not for the poor, but for the rich man. Riches avail not in a day of
wrath. Prove. 11.4. Ezekiel. 7.19. Zeph. 1. ult. they fly from us when we are
dying or in trouble, and have most need of help. Prove. 23.5. Hence they are
called uncertain riches, they are like a broken reed, that not only fails,
but wounds him that trusts in them. Isay 36.6. he that trusts in them shall
fall. Prove. 11.28. and be reproached for his folly, with a Lo this is the man
that took not God for his strength, but trusted in his riches. Psalm. 52.7. Luke
12.20.

3. Friends cannont help be they never so many or mighty, the greater they be
the worse, and the sooner we are deceived by them, because we are apt to trust
in them: men of low degree are vanity, but men of high degree are worse, they
are not only liars, but a lie in the abstract. Psalm. 62.9. Hence we are
forbidden to trust in them be they never so great. Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5. Trust not
in Princes, (yet if any men can help us it is they) why so? for in them is no
help, they dye or change their minds, and then all thy plots perish.

4. Strong holds cannot save us, if God be against us. They shall all drop as
ripe figs, which with a shake or summons come down. Nahum. 3.12.14. though
wicked men build walls as high as heaven, and make ditches as deep as hell, yea
and make their nest in the stars, yet sin will bring them down. Ier. 49.16.
Obad. 4. if sin reign within, all the fortifications without are but vain. Lam.
4.12.17. Isay 22.8. to 14.

5. It Is not Armies, Charrets, Horses, etc. that can help. A King is not saved
by a great host. Psalm. 33.16, 17, they fall that trust in them. Psalm. 20.7, 8.
many trust in their long sword, and think that it should save them, but God
tells those that work wickedness, yet stand upon their Sword, that the sword
shall destroy them. Ezekiel. 33.25, 26, 27.

6. It Is not carnal policy, nor sinful shifts that can help us. Achitophels
policy ended in folly. And so did Pharaohs working wisely. Exodus 1.10. become
his bane. Hence Henry the third of France, forsaking the truth turned Papist,
thinking thereby to get the Monks on his side, he was killed by a Monk; yea he
became contemptible to his people, Paris and his great Towns revolting from
him. There is no power or policy can prevail against God. Prove. 21.30. many
turn with the times, forsake the truth, make lies their refuge, and under
falsehood do they hide themselves. Isay 28.15. this is the basest refuge of all
others. Sin never did good to any, it is an ill refuge which makes God our
enemy. Isay 47 10. thou have trusted in thy wickedness. Vt domus in arena sita
etsi ventis non sit agitata, ipsa tamen per se ruit; sic fiducia fundata in
flagitiis etiam a nemine oppugnata ipsa per se dilabitur and evanescit. Pintus
in Isa.
What follows? Verse 11. therefore evil shall come upon thee.

2. Affirmatively and inclusively, all our help is only in the Lord. He is the
salvation of his Israel. Ier. 3.23. the creatures answer in this case, as they
did concerning wisdom, Job 18.12.14.20. where shall wisdom be found? the depth
says it is not in me, and the Sea says it is not in me. So where shall help in
trouble be had? Parliaments say it is not in us, and Armies say it is not in us,
and Riches say it is not in us, etc. But it is God only who is El-shaddai,
All-mighty, All-sufficient. Genesis 17.1. who is a strong Tower. Prove. 18.10. and
a present help in trouble. Psalm. 46.1. when trouble is present, then God is (
auxilium praesentissimum) most present by his Wisdom to direct us, by his Power
to protect us, and by his Spirit to comfort us.

Quest. How does the Lord deliver his people, when we often see them lie under
sad afflictions.

Answ. Deliverance is twofold.

1. When the Lord does actually deliver his people, as he did the three young
men from the fiery furnace. Dan. 3. Daniel from the Lions den, and Peter from
prison.

2. Sometimes he lets the trouble continue, but upholds the Spirit under it.
Thus Joseph was in prison, but the Lord was with him. Paul had not the
tentation removed, but he had strength given him to bear it.

3. If God do suffer the wicked to take away their temporal life, yet he gives
them eternal life for it, change (we say) is no robbery, but this change is a
great advantage, so that sometimes the Lord removes the Cross, sometimes he
mitigates it, but he always works patience in the hearts of his people, and
gives a happy issue and event, if not by life, yet by death which is best of
all. Philip. 1.23. neither can any Tyrants take away their lives from them till
they have run their race, and finished the work which God has given them to do.
Luke 13.32. John 17.4, 5. David was often pursued by Saul, yet dies not till he
served Gods will in his generation. Acts 13.36. Peter died not till he was ripe
for Martyrdom. 2 Pet. 1.14. Paul escapes abundance of dangers both by Sea and
Land, till his time was come that he was beheaded at Rome by Nero. 2 Timothy 4.6.
Queen Elizabeth was cursed by many Popes, yet she outlived nine or ten of
them; and when she had finished her course, she died in her bed in Peace. God
has numbered our days which we cannot pass, nor our enemies abridge us of.
Job 7.3. our times are in Gods hands, and not in the hands of our enemies.
Psalm. 31.15.

Quest. But why does not the Lord deliver his people out of trouble?

Answ. It Is not either because he cannot or will not; but for good Ends.

1. To draw out the Graces of Gods people, that their Faith, Love, Patience,
and Constancy, may be made more perspicuous to the world, we had never heard of
the Chastity of Joseph, the Patience of Job, the Zeal of David, the constancy
and piety of Daniel, nor of the Faith of those Martyrs. Heb. 11. if they had
not been tried.

2. It Is but to purge us and try us, not to destroy us. Isay 27.9. James 1.2,
3. 1 Pet. 4.12.

3. To wean us from the world, the Lord lays wormwood upon its breasts. Luther
for a time found some reluctaucy in him to that Petition, Thy Kingdom come,
but after that God had tossed him up and down with the waves and tempests which
he met with from the world, Then no Petition was more welcome to him.

4. For the fuller discovery of the cruelty and malice of wicked men, that all
the world may see and say, The Lord is righteous in their ruin.

Use. 1. If God be the help and deliverer of his people, then woe to those who
hurt them, if he be the preserver of men. Job 7.20. then woe to those who are
like their father the Devil. who is Abaddon and Apollyon the destroyer and
devourer of men. Revel. 9.11.

2. Has God delivered thee? kiss not thine own hand, do not sacrifice to
thine own net, but give all the praise to the God of thy salvation. Jonah 2.9.
say with the Church, not unto us, etc. Psalm. 115.1.

3. As we must praise him for deliverances past, so pray to him for deliverance
out of trouble, Whither should we go for water but to the Sea, or for light but
to the Sun? or for help but to the God of all help? If he but speak the word,
he can command deliverance for us. Psalm. 44.4. for 1. He Is an Omnipotent
Helper, there is nothing too high or too hard for him. The sons of Zervial may be
too strong for us, but not for him. He beholds all nations as a drop, etc. Isay
40.15, 17. 2. He Is an Omnipresent Help, the eyes of his providence run to and
fro through the whole earth in defense of his people. 3. He Is an Omniscient
Help, though we know not how to help our selves, yet he knows how to deliver
his. 2 Pet. 2.9. he knows the fittest manner, Notitiam Dei hic intellige, non
simpliciter Theoreticam, sed Practicam potius and auxiliatricem. Laurent.
time, and season for our deliverance, when 'twill be most for his glory and
our good.


Rules.
1. If we expect help and deliverance from God, we must be such as Trust in
him. Psalm. 37. ult. he is the Savior of all men by a common providence, but his
special providence extends only to such as believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. such need not
fear what man can do unto them. Isay 12.2. Iehosaphat that trusted in the Lord
when a great Army came against him, was delivered from them.

2. We must be sincere and righteous men. Prove. 18.10. 2 Pet. 2.9. when a man's
heart is upright, and his conversation pure, God has a special eye on such. 1
Pet. 3.11, 12. God will be a terror to the wicked, but a strong Tower to the
Righteous. Deuteronomy. 4.3, 4. Zeph. 2.3.

3. We must be poor in spirit, and sensible of our own wants, that we may go
out of our selves and rest solely on God. He gives power to the faint. Isay
40.29. and saves such as have no power. Job 26.2. and when we are children
without a father, then Christ will be a Father to us. John 14.18. he will not
leave us Orphans or fatherless, to such the promise runs. Hos. 14.3. Job 3.15.
Zeph. 3.12,

4. We must be such as mourn for the sins of the times. God marks such in
mercy. Ezekiel. 9.4. he has a Zoar for Lot, whose soul was vexed with wicked
Sodomites, a grave for mourning Josiah to hide him in from evils to come. Job
14.13.

VERSE 12. Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution.
THe Apostle proceeds ab Hypothesi ad Thesin, having mentioned his own
persecutions, he now comes to application. Every man can say in Thesi, he must
expect persecutions, afflictions, etc. and it is good for us; but when we
descend ad Hypothesin, from Generals to particulars, and tell men that even
they must undergo persecutions, this sounds harsh, and is a hard saying. The
Apostle therefore the better to animate Timothy and all the faithful against
persecutions, he tells them it is no new thing, but the common lot of all the
godly: and therefore he speaks emphatically, (...) and praeterea omnes. q. d.
it is not only my lot to be persecuted, but all the Saints that have gone
before me, yea and all that shall come after me, must certainly expect
persecution. The way to heaven is not strawed with roses and carnal delights,
Multi coelum quaerunt in terra, and sine ignominia gloriam, sine paupertate
divitias, sine morte vitam, and sine certamine coronam sibt promittunt.
Scultetus.
but it is beset with many dangerous tentations and difficulties. Matthew. 7.14.
He that will be Christ's, must take up his Cross, Christ and the Cross are
inseparable. We must have fellowship with him in tribulation, if we expect to
reign with him in glory. Rev. 1.9.

I shall explicate the words in the opening of the Doctrine.

Hence observe, All those that show forth the power of Religion in a holy
conversation, must certainly look for persecution.

1. I say All without exception, be they high or low, learned or unlearned, (
qui conatur excipere, conatur decipere) if they walk in the power of Religion,
must expect persecution. Isay a learned, holy man, and of the blood-royall, yet
was sawen asunder. David a man after Gods own heart, a King, a man of rare
accomplishments, a man of men, an expert soldier, a sweet Musician, an
amiable, merciful, upright man, yet how was he pursued by Saul, reviled by
Shemei, molested by Absalom, etc. seldom at rest. The better the man, the
sooner persecuted; the Devil shoots his arrows at the whitest marks. It Is the
innocent, upright man, he and his Agents aim at. Psalm 10.8. and 37.14. Revel.
7.9.14. innocent Abel is persecuted by wicked Cain. 1 John 3.12. Isaac by
Ismael, See more Mr. Buroughs Moses choice. cap. 3. p. 17. etc. Mr. Clerks
Mirror. cap. 96. Edit. 3.
Gal, 4.29. Paul by Jews and Gentiles, and Christ himself by Scribes and
Pharisees, who sought sometimes to catch him. John 7.30.44. and anon to kill
him. John 5.16.18. and 8.59. Luke 4.29. and 13.31. This is a part of that
Cross which every disciple of Christ must carry. Matthew 16.24.

1. He must take it up, viz. cheerfully, God loves a cheerful sufferer, as
well as a cheerful doer. It must not be thrown upon us against our wills, but
it must be willingly taken up.

Cuique sua p^opria cruae est; uni ab uxore, alteri a pau pertate carcere,
exilio, etc. a Lap.
2. His Cross ( i. e.) that Cross whatever it be which God has allotted us,
it must not be a Cross of our own making, but of Gods allotting.

3. His Cross (i. e.) the greatest trialls, he must not only undergo lesser
trialls for Christ, but if he call him to the death of the Cross, which was
the most bitter and accursed death, he must not refuse it. This is that badge
and cognizance by which the Church is distinguished from all other societies.
Isay 54.11. Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempests. God feeds his people
with the bread of Tears, they are the Saints diet. Psalm. 80.5. this is that
cup which all believers must drink off, and that Baptism with which they must
be baptized. Matthew. 20.22, 23. The Church carries the Cross with her, where
ever she goes. Sanguine fandata est Ecelesia, sanguine coepit;

Sanguine suc^revit, sanguine finis erit.


She was at first founded in blood, she flourishes and increases by blood,
and she euds in blood. This plainly appears both in sacred and Ecclesiastical
History.

1. In the Old Testament we read what sorrows the Church endured by Egyptians,
Assyrians, Cananites, Moabites, Ammonites, Ammorites, Perizites, Hittits,
Hivits, Samaritans, Persians, Philistines. Elijah is persecuted by Iesabel. 1
Kings 19. Micaiah is imprisoned, 1 Kings 22. Zacharias stoned. 2 Chronicles. 24.20,
21, 22. Amos (7.12.) banished Jeremy thice imprisoned, Daniel cast into the
Lions den, and many tortures did the Saints then endure, as may be seen. Heb.
11.35. etc.

2. In the New Testament what persecutions were raised: 1. By the Jews who
crucified Christ, killed the Prophets, and Apostles, stoned Stephen, and
scattered the Church. Acts 8.1, 2. 2. By the Gentiles, and Pagans in those ten
bloody persecutions under the Roman Emperors, for 300. years after Christ,
under Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Maximian, Maxentius, Valerian, Decius,
Dioclesian, etc. 3. By the Arrians, who banished, burnt, and butchered the
servants of Christ. 4. By the Turk, how many thousands of Christ's Lambs has
that ravenous wolf worried? and what devastations has that wild Boar made in
Christ's Vineyard? 5. By Antichrist, the Church has longer and sharper trialls
by that man of sin, then by all the rest; as appears by the Martyrologies that
are extant. The time would fail to tell of the cruel and barbarous Massacres
in France, V. Mr. Clerks Martyrologies. Chap. 21. to chap. 40.
Ireland, England, Scotland, Germany, V. A Collection of Letters sent to the
Protector, concerning the barbarous murders in the Valleys of Piedmount.
Savoy, etc. Rome-Antichristian has been more cruel to the Saints, then ever
Rome-Pagan was. Thus if we profess the Gospel in Power, we must look to be
hated of All. Luke 21.17. Matthew. 10.22. not absolutely (for some will embrace
the Gospel and love us) but of very many, for so the particle all is often used
in Scripture. q. d. Where ever you carry the Gospel, you must expect opposition
from some of all sorts, Acts 4.27. as Princes. Psalm. 2.2. Prelates. Acts 4.1.
from friends and foes, from strangers, and kindred. Matthew. 10.21.34. etc. 1
These. 2.14, 15.


1. Sometimes the children of God fall out amongst themselves. Thus many times
we see children of the same family to scratch and tear one another. Thus the
Devil cast a bone of contention between Lot and Abraham. Between Paul and
Barnabas there was a sharp contention, so that they departed from each other;
though God turned it to the spreading of his Church. Acts 15.39, 41. So Paul
and Peter fell out. Gal. 2.11. The best are but in part regenerate, Boni bonis
per infirmitatem aut ignorantiam aliquando molestian exhibent. Estius.
they have the root of Passion, Pride, Self-conceit, and all sorts of sin
within them; there wants but a Temptation, and then (if God leave them to
themselves) they may fall, it is hard to say how far. Asa (though otherwise a
good man, yet) in a rage imprisons the Prophet for telling him of his faults,
and oppresses some of the people also. 2 Chronicles 16.20.

2. There are many secret enemies and false Brethren, that pretend to Religion
and are seemingly holy, of such the Apostle complains. Acts 26.28, 29, 30. 1
Cor. 11.26. Gal. 2.4. 'Twas a Cain which offered sacrifice that persecuted
Abel. A circumcised Ismael, that scofft at Isaac.

Answ. Judas which preached Christ that betrayed him. The Scribes and Pharisees
who pretended most to Religion, were Christ's deadly enemies; he was crucified
by such as styled themselves Abraham's seed. Hence the Church complains. Cant.
1.6. my mothers children were angry with me. ( i. e.) the seeming children of
my mother, or my mothers children by external profession. These, under pretense
of Religion, are the greatest enemies to Religion, and under the name of the
Church fight against it. As the greatest hatred is usually between men of the
same profession, ( figulus figulo invidet) so the greatest enemies to the
Church are those vipers that lie in her own bowels, you must look to be cast
out by these seeming Brethren, Isai 66.5. and to be counted as monsters, and
that in Israel. Isay 8.18. if it be so now, wonder not, the world will be
always like it self, envious and harsh toward the good.

3. As for open enemies (we have seen before) how Gebal, and Ammon, and
Amaleck, ( Psalm. 83.7.. etc.) Papists, Atheists and Infidels conspire her
ruin. Hence the Church is compared to a Lilly amongst Thorns. Cant. 2.2.
Tyranny on the one hand, and He^esie on the other. As ignorant Tyrants, so
proud Heretics are vexing Thorns in the sides of Gods Church. This lilly is
sorely rent and torn by them. The one hurts the body, these later the soul;
and so are the worse of the two. The one is a Lion for violence. Jeremy 4.7.
the other is a Fox for fraudulence. Cant. 2.15. It Is a miracle of mercy to
consider how the Lilly subsists in the midst of so many briars and thorns. How
the Lords wheat grows in the midst of so many Tares, How his Doves live in the
midst of so many birds of prey; and his Lambs in the midst of so many roaring
Lions Were not the Almighty her defense, those bands of ungodliness would soon
destroy her.

2. All that Will live godly.] a man may have many cold Velleities, wishings,
and wouldings, and yet be never molested by Satan; but when men are set upon
it, and are absolutely resolved with Joshua [24, 15.] that they Will serve the
Lord, Evangelio credere nihil aliud est quam malis bellum indicere.
and cleave to him with full purpose of heart. Dan. 1.8. Acts 11.23. when men's
hearts are thus fixed on God, and his worship. Psalm. 57.6. they must certainly
look for persecution.

3. All that will Live.] if men would conceal their godliness in their
breasts, and not show it in their lives, they might pass on more quietly; but
when men make open profession of their godliness to the disgrace of
profaneness, and by their holy lives, convince them of their wickedness; this
breeds persecution.

4. All that will live Godly.] A man may live civilly and soberly amongst his
neighbo^rs, pay every man his dues, and so pass for a right honest man in the
world, and be praised, not persecuted. But let a man begin to be truly godly,
(...). pie and recte venerari Deum. Fidenter dico, minus pie vivis si minus
persecutionem pateris. Greg.
hating every false way, and walking in the power of religion, such a one shall
certainly meet with persecution.

5. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus.] q. d. All that resolve in the
virtue, Modum ostendit per quem solum possumus pie vivere (i. e.) fide Christi
pie vivunt in Christo qui Deo serviunt in fide Christi. Estius
strength, and power of Christ, to walk according to the Gospel of Christ must
look for persesecution. A man may have a form of godliness, a show and shadow
of Piety and may escape troubles; but if a man be really godly and walk in the
power of Religion, he must look for hatred and opposition,

6. Here we have the inevitable and common lot of all the faithful, viz. They
shall suffer persecution: (...), persecutionem patientur. V. Leigh Critica 5.
in verbo (...).
it is not peradventure they may, but undoubtedly they shall. The Devil and his
agents will persecute and pursue them. These Tigers connot endure such pleasant
smells, that which delights others, drives them into a rage.

Objection, How are all the godly persecuted, when we see many good men pass
quietly through the world, and never loose their goods or lives for Christ?

Answer, 1. God is pleased sometimes to grant unto his Church some Halcyon
days, he gives them intervals and breathing fits that they may fit themselves
for fresh encounters. The rod of the wicked shall not always rest on the lot
of the righteous least they faint and be weary. Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam
certa mina desunt.
Satan's time of persecution is limited both in respect of manner and measure.
Yet in the most peaceable times there will be some scoffing Ismalites, or some
thorny Cananites to molest us, and keep our Faith, Patience and other Graces in
exercise. These dogs will be barking when they cannot bite; and be raising lies
and slanders when they can do nothing else.

2. Martyrs are of two sorts, Habitual ones, when a man's heart is ready to part
with Father, Mother, and all for Christ, and thus every Godly man's a Martyr,
quo ad animi praeparationem, dispositively and habitutually.

2. There Is an actual Martyr, when a man actually forsakes all for Christ, and
lays down his life for him. Now this high degree of Honor is peculiar to
some, and not to all the godly; though all suffer, yet all suffer not in the
same Degree, As all are not called to the like eminent services, so all are not
called to the like eminent sufferings.
Manner and Measure. God respects our infirmities, and has one Discipline for
young beginners and weak believers; and another for his old beaten soldiers;
as Isay, Paul, Peter, John Baptist, etc. All are not in the like troubles, yet
none are altogether without troubles: and if men should let us alone, yet the
Devil will not,, Revelations 2.10. Our life on Earth is a perpetual warfare,
Job 14.14. the end of one combat is but the beginning of another, within or
without, in body, soul, goods or good name, we must still be exercised: So that
albeit God call not all to a Degree of sufferings, We should suspect our selves
when all prospers with us. I should be offended (says Luther) if the world
were not offended with me
yet he exempts none from some Degree or other.

2. As we must look for persecution from all sorts of men; so we must prepare
for persecutions of all sorts.

viz. Cordis, Oris and Operis.


viz. Mental, Verbal, Real.


1. In their hearts they hate you, and this is the root of all persecution.
There is a settled enmity between Christ's seed, and Satan's seed, Genesis 3.15.
to uphold us, Christ has pronounced us blessed.

First, When men hate us. Secondly, When they separate us from them. Thirdly,
When they reproach us: And fourthly, When they cast us out, Luke 6.22. Neither
is it a light, but a cruel, deadly hatred, Psalm 25.19. They hate me with a
cruel hatred, and try them with cruel mockings, Hebrews 11.36. Sions enemies
are cruel and have no mercy, Ier. 6.23. yea their mercies are cruelties,
Proverbs 12.10. Neither does God only observe the hatred, but also the look of
his enemies; a sour countenance is persecution in Gods esteem. Vultu laeditur
pietas, Genesis 4.6. and 31.2.5. yea and a jeering gesture is observed by him,
Isay, 57.4.

3. There Is persecution in reproachful words.: Thus Ismaels mocking of Isaac is
called persecution, Galathians 4.29. and the Martyrs of old were tried with
cruel mockings, Hebrews 11.36. Let a man live in the purest Church or Family
in the world, and there profess Religion in the power of it, and he shall be
sure to be smitten with the Tongue, what ever else befall him. Abraham had a
well-ordered Family, yet Ismael was found there.

3. There Is persecution in Good-name, Goods and Person.


1. The Saints are often tried in their Names, they pass through bad report, as
well as good, 2 Corinthians 6.8. They are called mad, drunk, pestilent,
turbulent persons, Acts 2.13. and 17.18, 19. and 28.22. Jeremy was counted a
man of contention, a common barreter, Ier. 20.7.

2. In their goods, Ahab gets Naboths Vineyard, Job is plundered of all. The
Saints had their goods spoiled, Cum mundus propens^ amat aliquem, id Argumentum
est quod Deo non sit probatus, quippe mundus eum non amaret, nisi aliquod quod
suum est videret in ipso, utpote conformitatem cum seculo praesenti: contra cum
mundus odit aliquem, id argumentum est, quod vere bonus est. Rolloc.
Hebrews 10.34.

3. In person. The world loves her own, but she is a stepmother to the people
of God. God has chosen them out of the world, therefore the world hates them.
John 15.18.19. and 17.14.

1. They meet sometimes with blows. Pashur smites Jeremy, and the Apostles
were scourged, Acts 5.40.41. Matthew 10.17.

2. Bonds and imprisonment. Ioseph's put in the stocks, Jeremy is cast into the
dungeon, Daniel into the Lions den, Paul and Silas into prison, Acts 16.24. and
those Martyrs, Heb. 11.36.

3. They are brought before Kings and Rulers who are enraged against them; As
Saul against David, Herod against Christ, and Nero against Paul.

4. They will excommunicate you, and cast you out, Isay 66.5. John 9.34. and
16.2.

5. Banishment. David was banished by Saul, Elijah by Ahab, John was banished
into the I Will of Patmos, Revelations 1.9. so ( Hebrews, 1.3.8.) were the Saints
of old.

6. Death it self. John 16.2. the beast kills the Saints, Revelations 11.7, 8.
We read of thirteen several Trials that the Saints endured, of which this was
one, Hebrews 11.33. to 38. Hence the Churches troubles are called, Great, Ier.
30.7. Lamentations 1.12. Cyprian tells us, that under Decius, some Christians
were sowed up in skins of Lions or Bears, and then torn in pieces by dogs,
others have been cast to Lions; some were drowned, others roasted, some thrown
from rocks and dashed in pieces. V. Eusebius. Hist. Engl. p. 319. and Clerks
Martyrolog. cap. 6, 7 etc. Deo chari domo privabantur, patrimonio spoliabantur,
catenis premebantur, carceribus includebantur, bestiis objiciebantur, ignibus
puniebantur. V. Godwin Jewish Antiquit. l. 5. c. 9.


Use. This may inform us that temporal felicity and external prosperity is no
mark of a true Church: It Is rather a mark of a false Church, for we read that
the wicked often flourish usque ad invidiam, Psalm 73. Ier. 12.1. but the Cross
is the proper badge of Christ's Disciples. A true note of the Church must be
proper and inseparable, but this is neither. For, 1. External prosperity is
common to Turks and Tartars, who have (for the most part) more External riches
and Temporal felicity, then the Church of God. 2. The Church is a true Church
without it, persecution, and not carnal Peace is the badge of the true Church,
as you have seen before. [But this point is so fully handled by others, that I
shall refer you to them for further satisfaction. See Buroughs Moses choice,
cap. 7. p. 62. Gerheards Loc. com. Tom. 3. p. 1314. D. Mortons Apolog. l. 2. c.
35. Camero. Tract. in quo Eccles. Romans praejud. Exam. cap. 8. fol. p. 338, etc.
Sharpii Cursus Theolog. P. 2. p. 185. 2. It shows the folly of the
Millinaries, who look for a Church in this world that shall be free from
troubles and free from persecution. Then shall the Saints on earth (if you will
believe Doctor Homes) be Sinlesse, Sorrowlesse, Temptationlesse, etc. Now
whether shall we believe Saint Paul, who tells us, that all who live godly (in
this life) must suffer persecution, or a Doctor that is lead away with fancies,
as I shall make appear (God willing) when I come to 2 Timothy 4.1. 3. When you
see God changing the condition of the Saints, do not you change your condition
concerning them. Do not c^nsure them for Hypocrites, and such as are hated of
God. 'Twas the sin of Jobs friends. We should judge wisely of the distressed,
else we may soon condemn the Generation of the Righteous; not remembering that
judgment usually begins at the House of God, 1 Peter 4.17. and the Church
though black by reason of persecution and afflictions, yet is comely and
lovely in respect of internal Graces, Canticles 1.5. though for a time she may
lie amongst the Pots, sullied and collied with Tentations, yet at last she
shall be as the wings of a Dove, See more Mr. Buroughs Moses choice, c. 7. p.
67.

Nihil in^elicius eo, cui nihil infelix contigit. Seneca.


Psalm 68.13. ( i.) God will so bless her with Grace and Peace, that in the
conclusion she shall be admired for her beauty and Glory. Gold that is cast
into the fire loses nothing but its dross. Stones by hewing and polishing
are fitted for the building, and pruned Trees are most fruitful. Remember that
to be without Tentation is the sorest Tentation, Job 21.7, etc. Hos. 4.14.17.
Am^s 6.1. Psalm 55.19. Luke 6.26.


3. Sit down and cast what it will cost you, if you will be Christ's Disciple:
it may cost thee the loss of all thou have, and yet thou have made a good
bargain; thou have cause to rejoice with the wise Mercant who parted with all
to buy the Pearl, Matthew 13.44. A man may buy gold too dear, but he cannot buy
Christ too dear; many when they first set upon Religion, promise themselves
ease, liberty, riches, praise, etc. and when these weights are taken off (like
Jacks or Clocks that move artificially, and not from any internal Principle of
life) they stand still, and go no further. See Mr. Ant. Burgess on Ioh. 17.12.
Lect. 72. Morbus, signa, Cibus, blasphemia, dogma fuere.

Causae cur Dominum ^urba secuta fuit.


A respective Religion is no Religion, when the heat of persecution arises,
such fall away, Luke 8.13. as those did in our Saviors time that followed him
for by-respects. Some to be cured of diseases, Matthew. 4. Others followed him
for their bellies, and for loaves, not for Love, John 6.26. some out of
curiosity to see the Miracles which he wrought, John 6. Others out of malice to
carp and cavil, Matthew 22.16, 17. Only some few followed him out of Love and
pure Devotion. Sit down then and ask your souls this Question, Can I part with
all for Christ? can I rejoice that I have any thing of worth to loose for him?
if not, you are not fit to be Christ's Disciple. Minus te amat O Deus, qui ali
quod tecum amat, quod non propterte amat. Aug.
He that prefers any thing before Christ is not worthy of him. O Lord (says
Austine) he loves thee not as he should, who loves any thing else but thee,
which he loves not for thee.

Objection, This will discourage men from embracing Religion to tell them of
such sufferings, etc.

Answer, Not at all, for as our Tentations increase, so will our Consolations:
As we meet with great troubles, so we shall find great joy, (...), abundet,
redundet. Non dicit aequatur consolatio passionibus, sed exuberat, and long
major est. Theophil.
2 Cor. 1.5. If God single us out for Martyrs, he will give us the Consolations
of the Martyrs. If he call us to extraordinary sufferings, he will give us
extraordinary strength, See Sibel Tom. 3. concio 6. in Psalm. 125.3. and Mr.
Robinson, Ephesians 6.13. Lect. 3.
He will give a comfortable issue with the Tentation, 1 Cor. 10.13. Bainam the
Martyr who was burnt in Smith, when his arms and legs were half consumed: V.
Tactica sacra. l. 2. c. 8. S. 4. p. 188.189.
O ye Papists (said he) ye look for Miracles, V. Roberts on New Covenant, l. 4
c. 5. S. 3. p. 1536, etc.
here now ye may see one, For in this fire I feel no more pain then if I were
in a bed of Down; but it is to me as sweet as a bed of Roses.

2. Consider, the Lord does not lay these Temptations on us to hurt us, but to
better us, viz. to file off our rust, to keep us from security, to exercise our
Graces, to make us conformable to Christ, who suffered be-before he was
glorified, V. Perkins, CC l. 1. c. 8 p. 30.
Luke 24.26. We must be like him not only in Sanctification, but in suffering,
John 15.18, 20. Romans 8.17, 18. There are certain remainders of Christ's
sufferings reserved for us, sweetened indeed by Christ's Passion, yet unavoydable
by all Christ's Disciples, Colossians, 1.24. Philippians, 3.10, 11. 1 Peter,
4.13. Matthew, 20.18, 19. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. They make us conformable to all
the Saints, Matthew 5.12. they are the same afflictions which our brethren have
tasted of. 1 Peter, 5.9. all the Fraternity have gone to Heaven this way. By
these he weans us from the World. When Elijah was pursued by Israel, then he
desires to die, when all is Peace we are apt to say, It Is good being here; but
God will have have us to see that here is not our rest. We are but strangeers
here, and may not fall in love with our Inn, instead of our Home. Strangers in
a Foreign Land often meet with hard usage, and therefore long to be at home.
Hence God drops some gall into our creature comforts, Isaac has a profane Esau
to exercise him. David has a rebellious Absalom, and Adonijah that rise
against him. Job with his wealth has a profane wife, Job 2.9.10. Meck Moses
has a froward Zipporah. Lastly, God does it to advance us.

1. To hono^r here; Joseph's abasement was the way to advancement, David's
troubles the way to a Kingdom, Daniel must be cast into the Lions Den before
he be the second in the Realm. The way to Sion lies through the Valley of Baca
( i.) the Valley of tears. We must pass through a wilderness ere we can come
to Canaan. Hereby we Honor God, and so bring Honor to our selves. God has
much Honor by his suffering servants, when out of love to him they can
sacrifice their lives and estates for him. God glories in such, as he suffers
in their sufferings, so he triumphs in their conquests. Hereby we bring more
glory to God (in some sense) then the Saints and Angels in Heaven do: for
there is no persecutions nor losses for Christ there. So that if the Angels in
Heaven were capable of envy, they would even envy the Saints in their
sufferings for Christ.

2. These are the way to everlasting Honor. As women are said to be saved by
childbearing, not as a meritorious cause, but as a way which God has
sanctified for the salvation of such as believe: so those light and short
afflictions work for us an exceeding eternal weight of glory, (...). (i.)
excellentissime excellens, Hebraeo more verbum geminans Apostolus summam
quandam excellentiam indicat. Grotius.
2 Cor. 4.17. not by way of merit, but as a means ordained by God for our
salvation, 1 Peter 4.13.14. Have an eye to the recompense of reward; if your
sufferings be great, yet remember your reward is greater: it is an
unconceiveable reward beyond the Tongues expression, or the hearts imagination.
First it is a weight of Glory. Secondly, An Eternal weight of Glory. Thirdly,
It Is a far more exceeding Eternal weight of Glory. If you loose fading, you
shall have enduring substance, Patiuntur parva ut p^tiantur magna. Aug.
Heb. 10.34. if you loose temporals, you shall have eternals, Matthew. 5.11.
loose what ye can for Christ, you could never bring them to a better market, we
shall have a hundred for one in this life, and in the world to come life
everlasting. So that our sufferings here are not worthy to be compared to the
Glory which shall be revealed Romans 8.18. as you have confessed Christ here, so he
will acknowledge you at that great day, Matthew 10.32.33. and as you have
suffered more for him then others have done, so you shall have a higher degree
of Glory, Matt. 19.28, 29.

[See more, Yongs benefit of affliction, cap. 1. Sibs Cordials, p. 160. Calvin's
Instit. l. 3. c. 8. S. 7.8. Bifields Mirror, Treat. of Promises, cap. 8. p.
336. and Gods Treasury. c. 28.

Objection, But I see my persecutors flourish in health, wealth, prosperity,
whilst I am poor, persecuted and low.

Answer, Fret not your self because of prosperous wicked men, for they shall
soon come down, Psalm 31.1, 2.13.35, 36. and 73.19, 20. it is a righteous thing
with God to render tribulation to them that trouble you, 2 These. 1.6. and
though they be many that rise against the Church yet the Lord has said, he will
make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to All people, be they never so many or
mighty. Zach. 12.3. they shall but wound and cut themselves that meddle with
her, they shall all have enough of it who ever they be: as we see in Pharaoh,
Saul, Senacherib, Iesabel, Haman, Herod, the Moabites and the Jews who
persecuted Christ and his Apostles are to this day a cursed, dispersed people.
Be not therefore terrified by your adversaries, Phillippians, 1.28. though they
be great, yet there is a greater then they, though they plot, yet God has a
plot above their plots, he sits in Heaven and laughs them to scorn, Psalm 2.
they are ludibria coeli, though terrores mundi: Psalm 37.12. the wicked plot,
Verse 13. God comes between the plot and the execution and mars all; He snares
the wicked in their own devices, Psalm 9.16. Higgaon, Selah. This is a matter
worthy of our chifest meditation. God will punish all wicked men, Significat
rem sum meditandam and dignam quae in imo reponatur anim^. Higgaion: comes
from a root which signifies to publish with the mouth, and to meditate with
the heart

Si qui persecutionem patiuntur, beati; qui faciunt quid sunt? Chrysostom.


but persecutors of his people, especially. As the Martyrs shall have the
highest joy, so their persecutor shall have the deepest sorrow. There is a
near Union between Christ and his Church, he is the Head, and and they are his
Members; he the Vine, and they the branches; he the husband, and they his
Spouse, Col. 1.18. Non solum amicorum b^na, sea and mala sunt communia.
Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15, 16. and 3.30. and therefore he must needs be sensible of
the wrongs which are done to them, Acts 9.4, 5. Isay 63.9. Zach. 2.8. Christ
and his people have common friends and common foes. Francis the first, after he
had commanded the destruction of the Protestants, was never his own man after.
Winceslaus King of the Bohemians, within 18. days after he had marked out the
names of some Christians to death, Ra^o antecedentem seclestum deseruit pede
paena claudo. Hor. 1.3. Ode. 3.

See Mr. ^olton ^nstruct. for Comfort. Afflict. Con. P. 1. chapter 10.11, 12.

Gataker, Sermon. on Psalm. 48.7, 8. fol. p 312. Theater of Gods judgments; l. 1.
c. 9.10, 11. Mr. William Cooper on Zach. 122.1649. Mr. Clerks Mirror c. 96. and
83. and Downams Guide to Godliness, l 6 c. 8.


was smitten himself. Though wicked men may forget their wickedness, yet God
will not, Amos 8.7. he can tell Amilek 400. years after what he did against
Israel, and punishes him for it, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. God will destroy the
destroyers of his people. If Pharaoh pursue Israel, God will pursue Phara^h. If
Mount Seir slay Israel, God will destroy Mount Seir, Ezekiel. 45. per totum. If
Pashur smite Jeremy, God will smite Pashur. If Jeroboam stretch forth his hand
against the Prophet, that hand shall wither. If Herod vex the Church, Vermin
shall vex him. And however persecutors may escape in this life, yet they are
sure to pay for it in the next, Phillippians 1.28. If he deserve to have a
millstone hanged about his neck who offends but one of these little ones; how
many milstones do they deserve to have hanged about their necks, who offend
many of these.
2. Thessalonians 1.6, 7.9. Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. let us comfort our selves
with the remembrance of that great day. Here many times they live longest, who
deserve not to live at all: Here the Israelites make brick, whilst the
Egyptians dwell at ease: David is in want, whilst Nabal abounds. Here Sion
(oft'times) is Babylons captive, and they that deserve nothing, are Lords of
all: yet this is our comfort, the day of the Lord will come, and then we shall
be above, and our enemies shall be beneath. Now they cite us to their bar, Et
ego cito vos omnes respondeatis mihi coram altissimo and justissimo judice post
centum annos.
and we cite them as Ierom of Prague did his adversaries to Gods Bar. I summon
you all to answer me shortly before the great and just Judge of all the world.
They prepare evils for the Church, and God prepares rods for them. God is
jealous over Jerusalem for the wrong that is done to her, Zach. 1.4. and though
he bear long, yet he will not always bear. Tempus erit Turno. There Is a time
when they shall pay full dearly for meddling with such holy things, Ier. 2.3.
God has prepared arrows for to shoot at persecutors, Psalm 7.13. and rather
then fail he will make their own arrows to wound themselves, and fall on their
own pates, Psalm. 37.14.13. The fire that should have burnt the 3 young men,
Daniel 3. burnt those that threw them in, and the Lions which should have
devoured Daniel, devoured his enemies, Daniel 6.

See Downams Warfare, p 3. l. 1. c. 1. ^otal.
Lastly, Prepare for trials, look for storms; as sure as now we live, so sure a
change will come, how soon we know not. We should therefore with Joseph in
those years of plenty, prepare for years of scarcity, and in the highest
prosperity remember the days of adversity, for they may be many; so did Job.
3.23.

Rules.
That we may be Real Martyrs, and suffer rightly.

1. The man must be good. The person must please, before the suffering can
please. Uprightness breeds boldness, and the Holiest men have ever proved the
happiest Martyrs; as we see in Paul, Latimer, Bradford, etc.

2. The End must be good. It Is that which denominates the Action; a man may
seem to die for the Truth, yet not in Truth, nor out of love to Christ and his
Truth, but for ambition and vain glory, 1 Cor. 13.7. such suffer Iactatione
magis quam delectatione for self ends, and not out of love to Christ, and so
loose all.

3. The matter and cause for which we suffer must be good: C^usa, non
Martyrium, facit Martyrem
for it is not the suffering, but the cause which we suffer for, which makes a
Martyr. We are never blessed unless we suffer for Righteousness sake, Matthew.
5.11. When men suffer as murderers, malefactors, blasphemers, and disturbers
of the Peace of the Nation (as the Quakers do) this is cause of shame; but if a
man suffer as a Christian its cause of rejoicing, 1 Peter 3.14. and 4.15, 16.
When men hate and persecute us, not for any evil, that we have done but because
we will not do evil, but study to please God, and serve him in sincerity; when
it is for Christ's sake that we are killed ( Romans 8.36.) then our sufferings are
the sufferings of Christ, and reflect upon him, so that he takes them as done
to himself, Matt. 25.45. Acts 9.4. Heb. 11 26.

4. The manner of our sufferings must be right.

1. It must be patiently, without murmuring or repineing: loose this, and you
loose the reward of all your sufferings, 1 Peter 2.19, 20. if when ye do well
and suffer for it, you take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, Hoc est
vald^ gratum De^. a Lap.
or (as the Original renders it) (...), God will thank you for this. This is
stupenda condescentio, a wonderful condescension, that God should account
himself gratified, and as it were beholding to such sufferers. To make you
Patient, consider, that these persecutions and trials come not upon us by
chance or fortune, or according to the pleasure of men or devils, but by Gods
Decree and fore-appointment and special providence, There is no evil (in this
kind) but it comes from God, Amos 3.6. Deuteronomy 32.39. 2 Samuel 16.10, 11.
Psalm 39.9. Job 1.21. Isay 45.7. Hosea 6.1. I create evil, not the evil of
sin, but the evil of punishment, which to our apprehension and feeling is
evil. Sin is simply and per se evil, but these sufferings (...) and in our
apprehension only; whatever the Instruments of our troubles are yet God is the
Orderer and disposer of them. Joseph's Brethren sell him into Egypt, I, but God
disposed it unto good, Genesis 50.20. the Assyrian is but Gods rod, which can do
nothing without the hand that moves it, Isay 10.5. they have only a
dispensative power from God. As our Savior told Pilate, so we may say to all
the wicked, they have no power to take a hair from our heads unless it be
given them from above, John 19. Herod, Judas, Pilate and the Jews, and the
Devil had all ends of their own in persecuting Christ, yet did they nothing but
what God had foreordained and decreed should be done, Acts 4.28. God has
foreordained the Beginning, End, Quantity and Quality of our Sufferings,
Romans 8.18. 1 Thessalonians 3.3. God deals with us as a father does with his
children, turning all to their good, Romans 8.28. There is nothing will still
the Soul like this, viz. that it is the Lord who in wisdom and love is pleased
thus to try us, we shall never be dumb and silent, till we see it is the Lord
that does it.

2. We must not only bear these Trials Patiently (so as a Heathen may do)
but Joyfully. When we suffer for Righteousness sake, we must be exceeding glad
and even leap for joy, Luke 6.22, 23. Though the flesh repine yet God would
have us to mount; it Joy, all Joy, when we fall not into one or two, but into
Variety of Tentations, viz. banishment, imprisonment, loss of goods, Friends,
etc. Iam. 1.2. We must glory in Tribulation, Romans 5.3. Rejoice even to
Gloriation. The Apostles went from the Council rejoicing that they were counted
worthy of that Honor to be dishonored for Christ, Acts 5.41, 45. Paul often
glories that he was a prisoner for Christ and that he bare in his body the mark
of the Lord Jesus, Galathians 6.17. He had been whipped, and stoned, and stocked,
and he carried the marks of these as so many badges of honor. Yea, he chose
rather to glory in tribulation and sufferings, then in his Revelations and
raptures into the third Heavens, 2 Corinthians 11.23.24, 30. His Glorying was
in the Cross of Christ, Colossians 1.24. 2 Corinthians 7.4. See more Mr.
Byfield on 1 Pet. 1.6.
Ephesians 3.13. Philippians 2.17. John did not boast that he was an
Evangelist, or of his Revelations, but that he was a brother in Tribulation,
Revelations 1.9. It Is said of the Primitive Christians, that they rejoiced in
loosing their goods for Christ, Hebrews 10.34. and the Thessalonians received
the word in much affliction and joy, 1 Thessalonian. 1.6. and Paul exceedingly
desired to be made conformable to Christ even in his sufferings, Philippians
3.10. Ignatius cried, Let sire, cross, breaking of my bones come, quartering
of my members, crushing my body, and all the torments that Man and Devil can
invent; so I may but enjoy my Lord Jesus Christ. When the Emperor threatened
Saint Basil with death, He boldly answers, ((...).) O that I might die for the
Truth! Nil praeter peccatum timeo.


When Eudoxa the Empress threatened Chrysostom, He sent her word that he had
learned to fear nothing but sin. A noble spirit knows not what discouragement
means, but like the valiant horse he breaks through dangers, Job 3.22, 23. He
triumphs in the midst of Trials, and in an holy security he laughs at
troubles, Job 5.22. Psalm 46. Romans 8.37, 38. They only are the Men that in a
Spiritual sense do tread on the Lion, the Aspe and Adder, Psalm 91.13. The
water in Wether-glasses rises highest when the Wether is foulest: So Gods
People when at worst, then are they best: See Mr. Strong 31. Sermon. Hab. 3.17.
p. 148.
when they have nothing in the creature, they have most of God, Habakkuk 3.17,
18. Sense can say, if we want Figs yet we have Wine to cheer us; and if the
Vine should fail, yet the Olive may help for a time; or if these should fail,
yet we have Corn in our Fields to support us; or if a Famine should come, yet
if the Pastures abound with Flocks, that will be some help; or if the Flocks
abroad should fail, yet the Herds of the stall at home may support us. Thus far
Sense may go. But when all these fail, and no outward comfort can be seen, yet
then can a Believer rejoice in his God. This is the Happiness of Gods People,
let things go how they will or can, yet he either does, or may comfort
himself in his God. When nothing but darkness is upon the Creature, then
Habbakuk has an Yet, and David a But, wherewith to comfort and encourage
themselves, 1 Samuel 30.6. It may shame us who are cast down by every light
Affliction; when we consider David's condition at that time; he comes to Ziglag,
which was given him for a Refuge, He finds the City burnt, the Inhabitants
taken Captive, and amongst the rest, his Wives and his Soldiers which should
have aided him, they speak of stoning him, yet in the midst of all these
difficulties David corroborates himself in the Lord his God. Roboravit se a
Mont* consortatus est.

Vulg. confirma^vit se. Syr^ac


We use to rejoice in gifts, especially if one should give us a whole kingdom;
but it is a greater Honor to be a Martyr for Christ, then to be a Monarh of the
world. Heb. 11.26. It Is a great privilege, and a high Prerogative to suffer
for the Gospel, it is no common gift, but it is a gift of free grace, and
special love, All the elect are called to be believers, but not to be public
sufferers. Suffering for the Gospel is in some respect a privilege above
believing the Gospel. (...), gratis datum est. Beza.

It is given by grace.

Bodin. Daemonom. l. 4. c. 3. e Tertul.


Phil. 1.29. such are the house and habitation of Gods Spirit, there he rests,
and desires to dwell. 1 Pet. 4.14. the Spirit of God will bring them to glory,
or the glorious Spirit of God will dwell in them in a glorious manner, and fill
them full of Joy and Peace in believing. This made the Saints so forward in the
Primitive times to suffer for Christ, that the bloody Emperors were fain to
make Decrees to hinder their Martyrdom. I have read of a woman that in the
time of Valens the Emperor, ran with her hair loose about her ears, and her
child in her arms, to the place where the Martyrs were slain, and being asked
whither she ran, she answered, Crowns are given to day, and I will be
partakers with them. Thus in the reign of Charles the ninth, when the Duke of
Subaudia misused and persecuted the men of the Valleys, burnt down their
houses, cut down their Trees, took away their cattle and arms, etc. They fled
to the top of a mountain covered with snow, with their wives and children; yet
not one of them, no not one of the women once wept or were dismayed: but
praised God who counted them worthy to suffer for his name, and had turned
their houses into Ashes, to throw in the eyes of Antichrist.

Object. This joy and comfort was peculiar to the Saints of those times, but we
cannot expect the like.

Answ. As it was, so it is, Gods people still find it true, when ever they are
afflicted from God, or for God, then they are comforted by God. When they are
most weak in themselves, then are they most strong in God; when they are
without comfort from the world, they are not without comfort from God. When the
worlds breasts are dried up, then the Heavens and promises breast is full, and
running over with consolation. When they cannot rejoice in the Cross, yet they
can in the benefit of the Cross. We are glad of a foul day in drought, for the
benefit it brings to the earth.

Quest. Whence comes it that the Saints are so full of joy in their sufferings?

Answ. 1. Negatively, it proceeds not from any stupidity, or sinful
insensibility of Gods hand in the trial.

2. It proceeds not from any natural or moral courage and stoutnesse of
spirit, which may make a man to bear some trials with an Heroic mind, as some
of the Heathens did. But Affirmatively, a Saints joy proceeds from three things.

1. From an enlightened understanding, there is first spiritual light in the
Head, and then spiritual joy in the Heart. 1. They know what God is to them. 2.
They know what the promises are. 3. They know the benefit of these tentations,
and what need they have of them. And this is the fouudation of their joy. James
1.2, 3. out of judgment they really account it joy, all joy when they fall
into variety of tentations, Knowing that the trial of faith works patience.
Did men but know what God is, and what it is to have a God to live on, and a
Savior to trust in, and the promises to go to and fill our empty Vessels, they
would not whine under their sufferings as they do.
2. It proceeds from an Active and Vigorous faith. Faith is a fruitful and
cheerful Grace, therefore it is called the joy of faith. ( Phil. 1.25.)
because it brings abundance of joy in every condition. 1 Pet. 1.8. Faith is the
mouth to draw comfort. Now the child never draws the breast so well as when
it is very hungry. The fire never burns so hot as in winter, and faith is never
stronger then in affliction. It goes to God, and goes to the promises of God,
and to the providence of God, ad draws them all, and so fills the soul with
comfort. 3. This joy proceeds from the wisdom and goodness of God, who is
pleased to give out most of himself, when we have least of the creature. Jacob
when he was going out of his own country, was brought to much hardship, and had
nothing but a heap of stones for his Pillar; yet then had he the Visions of
God. God is pleased to reserve the sweetest manifestations from the bitterest
afflictions. The fountain runs most sweetly, when the Cistern is broken. When
comforts are most needed, they will be most prized. The Traveller in Summer,
when the Sun shines, cast's off his cloak, but in winter, or when the wind
blows hard, he wraps it closer to him. So when we bathe our selves in creature
comforts, we value not the promises of God, but when we are stripped of all, then
we look after God. When the salt waters are dried up, then there are fresh
springs in God.
Quest. But do all Gods servants attain a like measure of joy under the Cross?

Answ. No, for, 1. Some are dejected, and have little comfort without, and
less within. The creature is bitter, and God is not sweet. Many can speak of
Gods Supporting presence, but not of Gods Ioying presence. Now this proceeds
either from Gods sovereignty, who may do with his own what he pleases, to this
we must submit; or form our non-acting of faith, of which we must be ashamed.

2. All have not this joy in the same measure; some can say, I am joyful; but
Paul says I am exceeding joyful. 2 Cor. 7.4. There is a measure for comfort,
as well as for Grace.

3. Those that have the highest comforts in God, yet sometimes under this or
that cross, their comforts may fail them, as we see in Elijah, who fled for
fear. And David who had sometimes the heart of a Lion, yet cries out in a
tentation, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. So he looked on Absoloms
death as a misery (and over-mourns for it) when 'twas a mercy

4. The Saints have usually more comfort in their afflictions for God, then in
their afflictions from God. When a man suffers for God in ways of well-doing,
these are for Gods glory, and it is a Christians glory, and so brings joy. But
afflictions from God are a Christians shame, they cannot so much joy in them,
it takes off the comfort, when we suffer immediately by Gods hand for sin, and
so loose our estates, friends, health, etc. It Is my sin that has brought those
crosses and losses on me, I abused them, and therefore I am deprived of them;
this damps our joy. By this we see that the evil of sin is worse then the
evil of suffering; for the one is the bane of comfort, and the other is the
Inlet of comfort. There is a great deal of difference between the Poison of a
Toad, and the bitterness of wormwood, the one is not pleasant but bitter, yet
wholesome: but Poison though pleasant, is deadly. Sin like the Poison of a
Toade is mortal. Crosses are but the bitterness of wormwood, though it be
bitter in the mouth, it is sweet in the belly. Therefore fear sin more then
suffering.

2. See the happiness of a child of God. Take him at worst, and he is better
then a wicked man at best. The one in prosperity has no joy, the other in
adversity is full of joy. A wicked man at best is but sad, or if he sing, it is
like a bird in a Cage, he is the Devils prisoner still, if he have not all that
he desires, all that he has is nothing, Ahab is not well, unless he have
Naboths Vineyard, Haman (with all his honor) is not pleased, if Mordecai bow
not the knee to him. But a good man if he have nothing, yet he has all,
because he has the God of all, and in him alone he can be cheerful. And if
Gods servants have so much sweetness in their sufferings, oh how sweet will
heaven be and what joy in God will the Saints have in glory. If their bitter be
so sweet, what will their sweet be? if their night be so light, what will their
day be? If the Saints have so much joy whilst they are here below, have but
little communion with God, what will be the joy when they shall lie in the
bosom of God to all eternity, being freed from sin and sorrow? Oh then get
interest and propriety in God, get assurance that he is yours, and then though
all Creature Comforts fail, yet you may rejoice. Hab. 3.17, 18. though you
want Starre-light, yet you have Sun-light; having God for your Portion, you
have the Fountain, the Mine, the Treasury, you have an All-suffering, an
everlasting Portion, you cannot want. Psalm. 23.1. Genesis 17.1. if David will have
comfort, he must have interest in God. 2 Samuel 30.6. Then David comforted
himself in the Lord His God. That word My, is a little word, but full of
sweetness, the worldling rejoices when he can say, this is My house, and My
Land, and My Revenue. So when a Christian can clear up his interest in God, and
can truly say with Thomas, My Lord, and My God, let such a one be sad if he
can, said Luther.

2. Act your faith, according to a Christians faith, such is his joy. He that is
full of faith, shall be full of joy. Hab. 3.17. Psalm. 27.18. Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Cling to. Heb. 10.34. the promises, when there is the greatest darkness upon
Providence.

3. Be much in Prayer, it is the Praying Christian that is the Rejoicing
Christian. John 16.24. Hannah after she had been at Prayer, was no more sad. 1 Samuel 1.15, 18. Hence Luther calls Prayer the Leeches of his cares. And when the
Apostle would have us careful in nothing. viz. with a diffidential, vexing,
tormenting care, presently he adds Prayer as the remedy. Phil. 4.6, 7. So
observe that connection. 1 These. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. But how shall we attain
it? why pray without ceasing. Constant praying, is the way to constant
Rejoicing.

VERSE 13. But evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived.
THe Adversative Particle, But, seems to make this Verse opposite to the
former; where the Apostle by a Prolepsis prevents an Objection. Whereas some
might say, Sir, you have told us that persecution and trouble is ^he lot of
Gods servants, but you have not told us what shall be the condition of wicked
men. Yes, says the Apostle, I shall now tell you. Evil men and Seducers shall
grow worse and worse q. d. As good men profit by the Cross and grow better, so
wicked men have their progress, they go forward but it is in wickedness, they
become Graduates in the Devils School, proceeding from evil to worse, and
from error to error, till they become perfect Scholars in the Devils
School. They prosper for a time, and have success in their lewd practices,
deceiving others, and being deceived themselves by the Devil. Hence we may
Observe, that prosperous wickedness is worse then afflicted godliness. But of
this in the close of the verse. In this verse we have a lively description of
the Impostors and Seducers of the last times.

The Apostle tells us 1. They will be evil men. 2. They will be Juglers and
Deceivers. 3. They will be such as grow worse and worse. 4. They will Actively
deceive others, and Passively they shall be deceived themselves.


1. Seducers are (...) mali, evil men, ( i. e.) such as are given to all manner
of vices, molesting the godly for their godliness, and raising up persecution
against them. (...) sunt scelerati non simpliciter (...) mal^, sed qui (...)
bonis and piis exhibent; homines molesti, digni qui male pereant. Aretius.
These offend not through weakness but wilfulness, not through infirmity but
obstinacy, they sit in the seat of scorners, and have left off to understand or
do good. Psalm. 36.3. these are unreasonable and wicked men. 2 These. 3.2. and if
we observe it, we shall see that the seducers of our time are generally wicked
men, such as are led by some reigning lust, as Pride, Self-conceit,
Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Uncleanness, etc. and for this God gives them up to
the efficacy of error in his just judgment, punishing one sin with another.
[but of this before in the observations on verse 8.]

And Seducers.
Hendyadis.
Q. d. Evil men who are Seducers, or amongst all evil men, especially
Seducers shall wax worse and worse; so I find the Particle (...) to be used
exegetically, (...) vim habet interdum exegeticam and interpretativam. Piscator.

(...), imp^stor, incantator, praestigiator, qui p^aestigiis aliorum,
p^aestringit oculos and fall^t, a verb^ (...), incanto, ^ascino: vel a (...)
clamor luctuosus, sit enim (...) sive incantio cum clamore quodam luctuoso.
L^ke ^ur Quakers, Howling before they speak.


and by way of explanation. So Gal. 1.4. Ephesians. 4.20. C los. 2.2. 1 Cor. 15.24.
1 These. 2.11. To God and the Father ( i. e.) to God the Father. The word (...)
is diversely rendered, our Translators render it, Seducers, the Geneva deceivers,
D. Hammond Sorcerers, the Original will bear all these; though most properly it
signify a Jugler, Inchanter, one that by any crafty packing or conveiance
beguiles men with false colors, flatteries, and illusions: as the Magi^ians of
Pharaoh deluded him with juggling tricks and empty shows, in which were no
reality, but mere delusions; and as Juglers deceive the outward senses, and
make us think we hear and see that which indeed we do not: as Saul thought he
saw real Samuel, when 'twas a counterfeit: so these Juglers can pass that for
gold which is but brass, and put such a gloss on their false wares, that they
shall pass with the blind world for real ones. These Dyce-players can cog a
Dye, and make it answer what cast they please. Ephesians. 4.14. by sleight of hand
they can cut your purses whilst they look in your faces. They have an art of
mixing and adulterating the word so as to make it answer their own ends and
interests, (...), cauponantes. Caup^na^t^r v^^bum qui instar cauponum
praedidi^ant q^aest^s g^a^ia, vel adulterantes verbum, ut caup^nes s^pe vina
aliaque quae vendunt aliis rebus commiscent, vitia^ and adulterant pro quaestu.
a Lapide.
their own profit or pleasure, they play the Hucksters with it for their own
ends. 2 Cor. 2.17. yea many of these spiritual Juglers are re- Witches, their
practices show they are in League with the Devil. Simon Magus one of the first
Heresiarchs was a Sorcerer, the people esteemed him as an Oracle, and the great
power of God, for he had bewitched them with his sorceries. Acts 8.9, 10, 11.
Hence the Scripture calls such witches. Gal. 3.1. and compares them to Balaam
the Sorcerer. Jude 11. and to the Magitians of Egypt. 2 Timothy 3.8. To speak
truth, the Devil never drove such a Trade in England as he does at this day,
nor did he ever appear so plainly in his colors. How many Devils incarnate are
there, Devils clothed with flesh and blood, that go up and down Seeking,
Shaking, Speaking, Ranting, and Seducing silly souls. The land is overspread
with such as have acted the Devils part so long, that at last they are become
real Devils, in League and Covenant with him (as many of our Quakers upon good
grounds are judged to be.) I have read of some Stage Players which acted the
Devils part so long, till at last the Devil himself appeared. It Is so now,
there were many counterfeit Devils before ( Diaboli personati) which now have
attained a higher Degree in the Devils School, and are become ( Diaboli
personales) Devils indeed. Such kind of persons the Scripture calls Devils.
Revel. 2.10. It Is apparent.

1. That these kind of persons are led by the Devil.

2. Some of them are actually in League with the Devil. 1. I shall prove that
the Quakers and Seducers of our times are led by the Devil, thus.

All Liars and Blasphemers are led by the Devil, But our Quakers are notorious
Liars, and horrid Blasphemers. Ergo.

The major is clear. The Minor I prove by its Parts. 1. The Quakers are
notorious Se^ Mr. Bourn's disput. against Nayler. p. 47, 48, 49.
liars. They publish nothing but lying doctrine, lying Revelations, lying
Signs. 2. Never men spoke blasphemies with greater confidence and impudence,
they lay all their bastards at Gods door, intitling his spirit to all their
brats, saying they were moved by the spirit to do this and that vile act. They
tell you they are Christ, equal to God, as Holy, as just, as good as he, etc.

2. Argument. All contemners of Scripture, Sabbaths, Sacraments, Order,
Ordinances, Magistracy, Ministry, etc. are of the Devil.

But Quakers are such, as you may see at large in that excellent piece, The
Irreligion of the Northern Quakers. p. 4. etc. Mr. Fowler against the Quakers.
p. 45. etc. and Mr. Claphams whole book.

3. Those that deny the Resurrection of the body, the day of judgment, any
heaven or hell, those are certainly led by the spirit of the Devil, But the
Quakers do thus. [See M. Clapham against the Quakers. Sect. 6. p. 31. etc.]

The time would fail to tell of the Whoredoms, Adulteries, Railing, and
dissembling of these wretches, which may be seen in the Books I refer to.

These Monsters, not men, are not only led by the Devil, but in League with
him, which I prove thus.

Those that have the Infallible Signs of Witches, those are Witches; but many
of these Quakers have the infallible signs of Witches. Ergo.

1. The first infallible sign of a Witch i^, the having of a familiar spirit.
So soon as ever the League is made with the Devil, one or more evil spirits
are familiar with them, (as has been often confessed by Witches) these Familiars
appear in variety of shapes and forms, to some they come in the shape of a man,
to others like a Dog, or Cat, or Rat, or Hare, like an Owl, a Toad, or an
Humble-bee, as did the Familiar of that Quaker which came Buzzing and Humming
about the head of one Spencer, when he lay with a Quaker, See Mr. Clerks
Mirror. cap, 63. Ed^t. ult.
upon which arose a great wind and storm which so affrighted Spencer, together
with his blowing hard in his face, and hissing like a Goose toward his mouth,
bidding him expect the power to come, V. Irreligion of the Northern Quakers. p.
18, 19.
that he was glad to outrun the Quaker. I find also that Fox a Ringleader of
the Quakers, is strongly suspected (by some pranks he played) to be a Sorcerer,
and Martha Simonds is suspected to be a Witch, and a Whore. V. Farmar against
Nayler. p. 3.10.

2. When those about them shall see the familiars of such persons; or when they
shall entice any to receive their familiar, and have offered it to any; or when
their Associates shall peach them; this is a strong presumption, if not a clear
evidence of witchcraft. Thus it was in Spencers case, and in one See Mr. ^l^ks
Mirror. cap. 63.
Toldervey, Thus they dealt with Gilpin, they never let him rest till they had
brought him to the Devil, who entered into him, and made him show tricks; and
then the Quakers bid him hearken to the Voice within him, to the Spirit and
Light within him; ( i. e.) in plain English, they bid the man hearken to the
Devil that was in him. This may give us some Light, what they mean by the
Light, Spirit, and Voice within them, viz. the Devil that is in them.

3. When they can inchant men, when by tying a Ribband or enchanted bracelet
about the wrist, they can make men prophesy, and do strange things; or when men
come to their meetings, and shall be made Quake with them, and fall into
trances (as diverse have done which have gone amongst them) these things smell
strongly of witchcraft. Thus Fox, by holding men by the hand, S^e Naylers
trial. p. 50.
has made those who before were disaffected to his way, to become strong
abettors of it. So when by their howlings and yellings, they affright not only
men, but dogs, swine, and cattle (as these have done) favors of too much
familiarity with the Devil. So does their diabolical trances and raptures, and
their See Mr. Pryn against the Quakers p. 9 So did Witches of old. Rous Greek
Antiq. l. 7. c. 1.
Quaking; and affectation of violent motions of the body. So the ^astinesse and
beastliness of some (in their Quakings) Purging upward and downward with most
distorted gestures, and fanatic postures, grovelling on the ground, See Mr.
Pryn against the Quakers p. 9 So did Witches of old. Rous Greek Antiq. l. 7. c.
1.
foaming at the mouth, running naked in the streets, Roaring and making a
hideous noise, show plainly that they are acted by the unclean spirit, and
doing many strange things, which men ordinarily cannot do, argues some league
with the Devil, by virtue of which they do it.

Object. Some of these have good Parts, and can speak excellently, Ergo they
are not in league with the Devil.

Answ. It does not follow, for Balaam had excellent Parts, and could speak
well, as you may see, Number. 22. and 23. and 24. yet a sorcerer, and limb of the
Devil. So Simon Magus was esteemed an Oracle, when he was a Devil. Acts 8.9, 10.

2. The most of these Quakers are so^s, never did there arise such a sottish
senseless generation in the memory of man. What strange, non-sensical
expositions of Scripture have they. Set the Monks and Friars aside, and I think
there was never such a generation of Sots and Dottrels in the world. Against
them, See M. Baxter, M. Firmin. Pe^fect Pharisee, Mr. (...)'s Ver^^go. p. 132.

Eaton. Clapham. Irreligion of the Northern Quakers.


The Devils Image is most visible on them. He is the Prince of Darkness,
Pride, lying, Malice, Blasphemy, and these are his genuine suns and sujects,
resembling him to the life.

Upon what grounds these persons are suffered thus to sow the Devils seed, they
best know that tolerate them. I wish it be not laid to their charge in the day
when the Lord comes to reckon for the sins of the time. It Is dangerous leaving
it to God to vindicate the dishonours done to his Name in matters of Religion.
Whose heart can endure, or whose hands can be strong in the day when the Lord
shall visit for sin? Exek. 22.14. Might I be so bold, I should supplicate those
Reverend Divines at Court, who are foully abused by one Atkinson (a blasphemous
Quaker) merely for asserting the Fundamentals of Religion. This wretch calls
the Trinity a Lie, denies the Scriptures to be our Rule, denies the Deity of
Christ, and in terminis says, that to say Christ is God and man, is a Lie:
besides he cries down Sacraments, Fasting, Prayer, Magistracy, and Ministry.
To be silent and patient when we our selves are wronged,, is Christian and
Divine; Maledictum silentium quod hic connivet. Luther.
but to be silent when God is blasphemed, and that in Print; Luther calls it a
cursed silence. Far be it from me to asperse those Reverend Divines. They may
have answered Atkinson, and I not hear of it; or if they judge him unworthy of
an Answer, they may have arraigned him for a blasphemer. However I beseech them
in the bowels of Christ, and as they tender his honor, that they would stir
up the Magistrate (since they have more especial influence on him, and are more
nearly related to him) that he may no longer bear the sword in vain; but as God
has made him the Drunkards terror, the swearers terror, and the profane man's
terror; so he may be the blaspheamers terror, and the Quakers terror, making
them Quake in a better kind, etc. That some of these are Witches, accumulative,
compounded, seducing, blasphemous witches in the highest degree, there is none
that has read their books, or known their Practices, but is, or may be fully
satisfied. That such should be put to death is clear. Exodus 22.18. Levit.
24.16. Dan. 3.29. Deuteronomy. 13.6. to 10. Some judicial precepts are Iuris communis,
of common equity, such as are agreeable to the instinct and law of nature,
common to all men; and these for substance bind all persons, both Jews and
Gentiles; as being Moral, and so agreeing with the Moral Law. These judicial
precepts which were Iuris particularis, of particular equity, such as pertained
especially to the Jews commonwealth, and were sitted for them and their time,
are now abolished. E. g. that a man should marry with none but his own stock;
That the brother should raise up seed to his Brother, and that a Thief should
restore fourfold, this was peculiar to their Commonwealth, and not to ours.
For, 1. They were a wealthy people, This being controverted in our times* makes
me willingly to digress, for the Readers good.
had abundance, and could better bear a loss then we can. To steal an Ox from
him that has a thousand, is nothing in comparison of stealing an Ox from him
that has but two or four. 2. Violence is often added to Theft, and the public
peace of the Nation is often broken thereby. Now more regard is to be had of the
public peace, then of a private man's life. Melius est ut pereat unus quam
unitas.


The Question then will be, whether it be lawful to put a man to death for
Theft?

Answ. We must distinguish of Theft.

1. There is a single, simple Theft, and this admits of discreet pity,
especially when it is committed by reason of extreme poverty and necessity.

2. There is compounded Theft, when Violence, Assaults, Frights in the night
time, especially by breaking of a man's dwelling house whereby the life of him
and his are endangered; and in such cases where the offense is multiplied and
increased, there the Magistrate may increase the punishment; and inflict death
upon the party, as appears 2 Samuel 12.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Exodus 22.2. Prove. 6.31.
So then those judicial and civil Precepts which are agreeable to the Moral Law,
and do confirm and uphold it, they bind for ever. E. g. It Is a judicial Law
that adulterers and adulteresses should dye the death; now this being agreeable
to common equity, and to the Law of Nature, as appears. Genesis 38.24. where
Judah (before this judicial Law was publish by Moses) appoints Tamar his
daughter-in-Law to be burnt for this sin, and Nebuchadnezzar burnt Ahab and
Zedekiah for it. Ier.. 29.21, 22, 23. So this judicial Law of putting Witches
to death by the Magistrate, is agreeable to common equity, it helps to preserve
all the Moral Prceepts which are broken by the Idolatry, Murder, and Malice, of
Wiches. It preserves the Peace of the land, and therefore is perpetual, and
must be executed in our days on such as practice witchcraft, be they high or
low, white or black. As witchcraft is the same for substance now, as it was in
the days of Moses. viz. a Covenant with the Devil, whereby men can do strange
things above the Order of Nature: so the punishment ought to be the same; and
Witches should now be more severely punished, because they sin against greater
Light and Love, against greater means and mercies. Yea, though they never hurt
any person, yet if it can be clearly proved that any person has made a League
with the Devil, and is in confederacy with him, this renouncing the Lord, and
contracting with his deadly enemy, is a High Treason against God, and deserves
present and certain death. It Is dangerous for Magistrates to suffer such to
live whom God has appointed unto death. 1 Kings 20.42. True, God is very
tender of the life of man, and therefore the Magistrate must be very cautious,
and make diligent inquiry to find out this great Mystery, he must not judge by
bare reports or doubtful signs, but he must lay all the Testimonies, Signs,
Circumstances, and strong presumptions of witchcraft together, and then judge
of the Cause. What a heap of words the Lord uses by way of Caution, before a
man be put to death. Deuteronomy. 13.14, 15. if a man were reported to be a seducer of
others to Idolatry, he must not presently be stoned, though he were a son of
Belial; But they must enquire, and make search, and ask diligently, and behold
if it be truth, and the thing be certain, that such an abomination is wrought,
then they must surely die. Levit. 20. ult. this made Josiah to destroy the
witches of his time. 2 King 23.14. yea Saul (though a wicked man) yet put
witches to death. 2 Samuel 28.3.9. though his heart was not sincere in what he
did, for he sought to them in his trouble, and if the Magistrate will not cut
off such, yet See Mr. Clerks Mirror cap. 8.
God will; Balaam the sorcerer, fell by the sword. Josh. 13.22. Simon Magus
fell, and perished miserably. Yea, Saul lost his life for seeking to such. 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. and so did Ahaziah, 2 Kings 1.2, 3, 4. Levit. 20.6.

2. Idolaters and enticers to Idolatry must die, [ Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 13.6.9.]
But witches are the grossest Idolaters, they sacrifice to the Devil, they pray
to him, Est Idololatria execrabilissima.
trust in him, and serve him who is Gods professed enemy.

2. They entice others to forsake God. Witches beget witches, they usually
seduce wives, sons, daughters, friends, etc. and therefore they ought to die.

3. Those that do more especially bring Gods plagues on a Land and Nation
ought more especially to be punished. But witches and wizards do more especially
bring Gods Plagues on a Nation. This brought the curse on the Canaanites and
drove them out of their Land, Deuteronomy 18.12, 14, 15. This was that crying
sin which made the Lord to forsake his people; Isay 2.6. Therefore thou have
forsaken thy people, because they are South-sayers like the Philistims.
Manasses witchcraft and wickedness brought plagues on the Jews many years
after. So 2 Kings 17.17, 18. I have insisted the more on this sin, because
witchcraft grows so rife in the Land. Had it been practiced in the midnight of
Popery, it had been no wonder to see such works of darkness in days of
darkness, Revelati^ns 18.23. but now in the glorious Sunshine of the Gospel,
and day of special grace to practice such abominable works of darkness, makes
men's sins out of measure sinful. We look for Peace, but God may say to us
as Iehu did to Ioram, what have thou to do with Peace, since the whoredoms of
thy Mother Iesabel, and her witch-crafts are so many, 2 Kings 9.22. We desire
to see Reformation in the Land, but till we be ashamed of such abominations
(especially as these) God will never show us the form of his House, Ezekiel
43.11. When the Lord will reform a Nation, He first takes away witchcraft from
amongst them, Micah 5.12.

Shall wax worse and worse.
Wicked men proceed, (...) procedent in pejas, vel proficient in deterius.
but it is in wickedness, they go forward, but they had better sit still, for
it is in sin and error. Such progress is no better then a regresse; and
such proficiency is mere Apostasy. This is true.

1. In Thesi, in general; if we consider wicked men as they are in themselves,
they are all strongly bent to Apostasy, every day they grow worse and worse.
As godly men are Graduats in Gods School growing from strength to strength, and
from one Degree of grace unto another, till they become perfect men in Christ.
Every Sermon makes them better, and every Ordinance improves them: So wicked
men are Graduats also, and take Degrees in the Devils School, they stand not at
a stay, but they grow from evil to worse. As he that is Righteous will go on
and be more Righteous; so he that is filthy will go on in his filthiness,
Revel. 22.11. It Is the proper Character of wicked men that they fall away more
and more, Isay 1.5. Prove. 1.22. Wisdom reproves three sorts of sinners in
three Degrees, like steps of a Ladder where men step from one step to another,
and each step argues a higher Degree of wickedness then the former. It is bad
to love (sinful and sottish) simplicity, worse to scoff at Piety, and worst of
all to hate knowledge: they proceed till they become Doctors of the Chair: in
Psalm 1.1. We have all their Degrees.

1. There is the ungodly man, Malus. 2. The sinner, T^es hic gradus
describuntur male vivent^um, eorum qui incipiunt, eorum qui perstant, eorum qui
plane jam in mala vita acqu^^scunt. G^otius.
Pej^r. 3. The scorner, Pessimus.
2. There is Walking, Standing, Sitting. It Is dangerous walking, it is more
dangerous standing, resolvedly in the way of wicked men, but most dangerous
when men become Doctors of the Devils chair of scorners, In Cathedra
pestilentiae. Sept.
making a scoff at all Religion, and Religious ones, such are come to the very
height of sin. Such as give the reins to sin, seldom stop till they come to the
top. E. g. Caine served God in Hypocrisy, his rotten heart harbored malice,
his malice brought forth murder, and his murder despair. So Saul at first an
Hypocrite, then envies David's praise, after seeks his life, then goes to
Witches, and at last kills himself. So Judas, first an Hypocrite, then a
Thief, after a Traitor, at last despairs, and then hangs himself. So the
Gentiles fell first to Adultry, from that to Sodomy, from Sodomy to a reprobate
mind, and from thence to all manner of vileness, Romans 1.24.26, 28. As there is
a concatenation of Virtues, so there is of Vices; one draws on another, wicked
men add iniquity to iniquity. Psalm 69.27. as the godly add grace to grace, 2
Peter 1.5, 6, etc. So do these add Vice to Vice till they be ripe for ruin,
Genesis 15.16. Matthew 23.32.36. 1 Thessalonians 2.16. that they may fulfill
their sins always; always, notes the Progress of their wickedness unto its full
measure. So Psalm 36.1. to 5.

1. the heart is naught.

2. They flatter themselves in their sin.

3. They defend it.

4. They refuse to hear any thing that is spoken against it, they cease to
understand or to do good,

5. They devise wickedness.

Lastly, They set themselves obstinately on ways that are not good, and then
they fear no sin, though never so vile, so Hebrews 3.12, 13.

How the heart comes to be hardened by 7. steps. See Dr. Maxey's Ser. on Exodus
10.20 p. 80.81.
1. He has an heart of Unbeleefe.

2. He is deceived with some sin.

3. He is overcome and brought in bondage to it.

4. He is hardened in it.

5. He departs and falls away utterly from the living God. Thus the wicked add
drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy 29.19. and sell themselves to work
wickedness (1 Kings 21.25.) and that with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. they draw
on iniquity with cords of Vanity, Isay 5.18.19, 20. Iniquity draws not them so
much as they draw iniquity. This drawing implies some resistance and
repugnancie in the Conscience against sin at the first. The cords of Vanity
note the reasonings by which they induce themselves to falls conceits and
notions of sin. The Cart-ropes not the violent oppressing of the conscience to
satisfy their lusts. These heap sin upon sin and add to evil motions, evil
words, and to evil words evil works, till by often winding and wreathing the
threeds of sin they grow to be cords, and those cords at last become as strong
as Cart ropes. So that the wicked are fast bound with the cords of their own
sin, Prove. 5.22. consenting to sin is one cord, acting of sin is another cord,
and continuing to multiply sin is a third; and such a threefold cord is not
easily broken. Thus if we take the words collectively for evil men in general,
it is true, they shall grow worse and worse.

But secondly, let us consider them Specifically and Divisively for such evil
men as are deceivers and impostors, and these we see experimentally grow worse
and worse. They have no foundation to rest on, they know no stay when once they
have past the bounds of the word; no more then a viole^^ stream does when it
has broke over those bounds and bonds which bef^^e kept it in, error knows no
end, when once men forsake the way of Truth they wander in infinitum. Secta
sectas parit, and alia aliam damnat. Luther.
As it is in Logic, grant one absurdity and I will infer a thousand, and as sin
begets sin, blood touches blood, and one murder begets another, Hos. 4.2. So
error is very fertile and prolifical, it speedily brings forth a great
increase. One error is a bridge to another, Arminianisme makes way for
Socinianisme and Popery, Separation breeds Anabaptisme, and Anabaptisme,
Familisme, Antinomianisme, and what not? Thus one error engenders with
another, and begets a Mule or mixed offspring. Affricke it self is not more
full of Monsters. These increase, but it is to more ungodlynesse, 2 Timothy
2.16, 17. Ea est erroris vis ut sisti nequeat, sed. abyssus abyssum invocat.
Calvin.

See Mr. Edwards Gangreen, 1, 2, 3. Parts, and Mr. Bailey Disswasion 1. and 2.
Part.


Ill weeds spring apace, and spread far, when good herbs grow thinn and low. A
little of this Leaven will quickly sour the whole lump, Matthew 16.6. when
once men begin to tumble down the hill of error, they seldom rest till they
come to the bottom. They usually fall to separations and sub-separations;
divisions and sub-divisions till they have broken themselves all to pieces; and
may at last say, as that great-Grandmother did, Rise up daughter, and go to thy
daughter, for thy daughters daughter, has a daughter. Or as King James said to
one that came to be Knighted with a great Ruff; Rise up Ruff and go to thy
Ruff, for thy Ruffes Ruff, has a Ruff: So may these big-bellied Separatists
say, Rise up Separation and go to thy Separation, for thy Separations
Separation, has a Separation. The Naturalists observe, that except a Serpent
do eat a Serpent it cannot become a Dragon; a man must swallow many poysenous
Tenants, before he can be a complete Anabaptist. Even the Devil observes a
method in seducing. Magis magisque fient inverecundi.

1. Qu^sti^nes inferent.

2. Ipsa eve^tent Christianismi fundamenta. G^otius.




1. He makes men Scepticks in Religion, so that they Question every thing, yet
believe nothing. 2. They become Schismatickes and make a rent in the Church. 3.
They become Heretics, Schisma proles superbiae; male perseverando fit Haeresis
and matter Haereseos.
overturning the very foundations of Religion.
First, the Devil makes men unconscionable hearers of the Word.

Secondly, Contemners of it.

Thirdly, Haters of the Preachers of it.

Fourthly, and at last they hate God himself that sends them. Oh then stop sin
and error in the beginning, it is much easier to keep them out, then to cast
them out. Every act of sin is a wound to the soul, Peccatum quod paenitentia
non delevit, ipso suo pondere mox ad aliud trahit. Gregor.
it weakens it, and leaves it more unable to withstand a temptation. Besides,
God in justice often punishes one sin with another, when men will not go forward
nor profit by the means of grace, they shall go backward growing worse and
worse till they come to a reprobate sense and are past feeling, that they may
fill up the measure of their sin, and Gods wrath may come upon them to the
uttermost for their ingratitude and rebellion, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. It Is a sad case
when men are given up to be ruled by unruly lusts; when like Tapsters and
Drawers they must answer all comers. If Pride call, ready Sir. If Pleasures
call, here Sir. If Lust call, anon, anon Sir. If Covetousness call, I come
Sir. This is the miserable slavery of those who serve diverse lusts.

(...). Seducentes and Seducti. Elegans Polyptoton.
Deceiving and being deceived.
In the words there seems to be an Hysterosis and Inversion of the Order, for
in the Order of Nature men first err themselves before they lead others into
error. Or we may take the words thus, whilst those notorious Impostors go
about deceiving others by their Sophisms and shows of Holiness, (...),
i^signis impostor, e^^^ nebalo ver sutur. Ar^tius.
the Devil (by the just judgment of God) deceives them. They cozen others, and
the Devil cozens them, leading them into far greater errors; and so they shall
be punished on a double account.

1. Because they err themselves and resist the Truth.

2. Because they have drawn others into error. The Participle of the Present
Tense notes their assiduity and constancy, they make it their Trade to deceive
others, See my Schools Guard, Rule 56.
they are still Deceiving one or other with their smooth and flattering
Language. The Devil is an old Serpent. he is a Serpent for subtlety, and an old
Serpent for his experience in seducing. He finds by experience that those
things which are taught by men take sooner then if he should personally appear
himself. Per dulces sermones and b^and^^^quen^^as simplic^^m corda seducu^^.
In times of ignorance and Popery, the Devil appeared more commonly and
visibly; but now in these days of light he acts more secretly and subtly
working on man by man. As God loves to employ good men for the conversion of
others, (not that he needs the help of man, but) for the exercising of the
graces of his servants, and for the greater manifestation of his own Glory. So
the Devil who is Gods ape, loves to deceive men by men. He has his Agents and
Emissaries every where. He has Magitians for Pharaoh, a Balaam for Balack, a
Witch at Endor for Saul, false Prophets to delude Ahab, etc. The world abounds
with Devils incarnate, so that if ever that Caveat were seasonable it is now:
Beware of men. Matthew. 10.17. and 24.4. the Devil often deceives by a Father, a
Brother, a Wife, a Friend. Watch against them; and whosoever he be that would
draw thee into sin or error, look upon them as the Devils instruments, and say
to them as Christ did to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. As good men delight
in converting others, so wicked men delight in perverting others, as those
would not go to Heaven alone, so these would not go to Hell alone: and
therefore they labor to make others twofold more the children of the Devil
then themselves. Of this sort are Jesuits on the one hand, and Sectaries on
the other; Plus ad destruendum ^alebit unus nebulo, quam december fidi doctores ad
aedificand^m, quamlibet strenue laborent. Calvin.
either of which with their Flesh-pleasing doctrine will do more mischief in
pulling down, then twenty faithful Ministers can build up again in many years.
Though the Heresies which these deceivers bring are damnable, yet the Apostle
tells us that Many will follow them. 2 Peter 22. This Christ foretold, that
many false Prophets should arise and deceive many, Matthew 24.11. so does
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians 2.10. 2 John 7. Revelations 13.14. and such there
were in the Apostles time, Titus 1.10, 11.

Now the Reason why deceivers deceive so many are these.

1. In respect of the blindness of our minds in Spiritual things 1 Cor. 2.14.
2. In respect of our Natural pronenesse to error by Reason of the Vanity of our
minds which make us far more apt to believe lies then truth, Isay 30.10. 2
Timothy 4.3, 4. 3. In respect of our instability in the ways of God, Seducers
beguile unstable souls, Ephesians 4.14. 2 Peter 2.14. We are unstable as water
which turns with every wind; that which pleases us to day, displeseth us to
morrow. 4. In respect of our sinful simplicity, we are apt to give blind
Obedience suspecting no evil, Romans 16.18. We are apt to follow our own
carnal Reason against the Word of God. 5. In respect of error it self, Its
easy and pleasant to flesh and blood which makes such multitudes to follow it.
The way of Truth is strait and narrow, with much ado is it found, but with the
more difficulty practiced. He who treads this Track, like Jonathan and his
Armor bearer must climb the Hill; when others swim down the stream. This is
the Reason why so many follow falsehood rather then truth, not because falsehood
is in its own Nature stronger then truth, or Satan's stratagems too strong for
the Spirit of God; but because these false, flesh-pleasing doctrines agree with
our corrupt Nature. therefore it is that men do so readily embrace them. 6. God
in his just judgment gives up such as will not believe his Truth, to the power
of error, and to the will of seducers. Since they will be deceived; they shall
be deceived, since they will not obey the true Prophets, they shall be seduced
by false ones, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. Ezekiel 13.23. 2 Thessalonians 2.10.11.12.
Let not then Ministers be discouraged when they see many fall off to these
Impostors, it is no more then what has been long since foretold; God sets them
their bounds, he limits the time how long; the persons deceiving, and whom they
shall dececeive are ordered by his wisdom, both the deceiver and the deceived
are his Job 12.16. Ezekiel. 14.9.
2. The Magistrate should restrain such workers of Iniquity; if those that had
but a Leprosy upon their bodies must be shut up for fear of infecting others,
( Leviticus 13.46.) Surely these deceivers that have a worse Leprosy upon them
should not be connived at as they be. Such evil men will not long be evil
alone, they endanger the good as weeds do Corn, or bad humors the blood, or an
infected house, the neighborhood. Hence Christ blames the Church of Thyatira
not for commanding, but for conniving and tolerating Iesabel to seduce his
people, Rev. 2.20. The simple seduced people would be pitied, but the
obstinate seducers would be punished. See Caryll, ser* on Rev. 2.2.3. p. 33. to
50.
It Is well observed by a Reverend Divine, that such evil men as are public and
scandalous, such as are obstinate and pernicious, such as are evil plotters,
and evil promoters; such as are seducers and misleaders, such as are incurable
and hate to be reformed: these, and if there be any like them ought not to be
born. Qui non vetat peccare cum potest jubet. Sen.
He that restrains not such (when he has power to do it) makes himself guilty
of their sins. When a Judge in Germany was aggravating the guilt of a
Malefactor before him, since he had murdered now six men; No (my Lord) says
one, he killed but one, and you killed the other five, who had him before you
for the first, and yet let him escape. Eli advised his sons, but because he
restrained them not by his authority, himself was punished, 1 Samuel 3.13. and
usually those wicked ones which men tolerate in their wickedness become
scourges to those that tolerate them, Joshua 23.11, 12. The greatest mercy is
to punish such (says the same Reverend Author) If you would be a friend to
them, punish them, favor and compliance fattens their sins and hardens their
hearts, whereas reproof and punishment may possibly reform them.

Objection, But they are Soldiers, and such as have done good service.

Answer, Be they what they will, if they will be so bold as openly to
transgress the Laws of God, the Magistrate who is (or ought to be) a Terror
to evil doers must be so bold as to punish them. He should answer as Canutus a
King of the Vandals did, when one desired him to spare his son who had
committed a great crime, no says he, sed filio nostro sublimiorem erigite
crucem. Make the Gallows higher for my son, who durst break the Laws not only
of his King, but of his father: that the world may see that I will do justice
on my son.

And being deceived.
They Actively deceive others, and Passively are deceived themselves by the
Devil that lying Spirit and Grand Impostor of the world, who is the executioner
of Gods wrath on such workers of iniquity, Revelations 12.9. and 20.10. He is
that great deceiver of deceivers, who cozeneth the whole World ( id est,) all;
all the Reprobates and wicked of the world whose names are not written in the
Book of Life. As Theives when they would rob a man draw him aside out of the
high way into some Wood, and then cut his throat; so this grand deceiver and
his Agents draw men aside from the right way of Gods Worship into some bypath
of error to their ruin, The Devil he is (...), seducens universum orbem, he is
the Cheater of Cheaters, and Deluder of deluders; it is his constant Trade as
the Participle implies. And this is the Reason why many false Teachers may die
with boldness and courage for their Opinions, viz because they are blinded and
deluded by the Devil, they think themselves Martyrs, when they are grand
Deceivers and grossly Deceived. We had need therefore to pray for the Spirit
of Grace and Illumination that we may see the Methods, Depths and Devices of
Satan and avoid them.

In the general, Observe, That the prosperous estate of wicked men, Babylon.
Infeliciter felix, surgens cadet.
is more dangerous then the afflicted and persecuted condition of the Godly;
for the godly by persecution grow better, when the wicked that live at ease
grow worse and worse, inventing errors and mischief to the destruction of
themselves and others. Sion. Feliciter infelix, cadens surget.
The prosperity of such fools destroys them. Prove. 1.32. that which makes
many so unhappy, is their too much happiness the glittring glass is soonest
broken, Mundana prosperitate florentes in malitia sua ultro procedunt.

See Downams Warfare. 2. P. l. 1. c. 5.


the rankest corn is soonest laid, and the fruitfullest bough is soonest slit:
If Joseph be a fruitful bough let him be sure the Archers will vex him, Genesis
49.21, 23. It Is a harder thing to know how to abound, then how to want, though
Paul (A man eminent in Grace) could do both, Philippians 4.12. Elisha prayed
for a double portion of the Spirit, why so? Why Elijah was persecuted and
banished and lived in the Wilderness; but Elisha was to live at Court, and
therefore had need of a double portion of Gods Spirit to assist him.

Prosperity has more dangerous temptations, accompanying it then Adversity.
True adversity has its trials, The Devil like a Fowler lays his Lime-twigs in
the Winter when the Birds can get no food; like the Usurer which lies at the
catch for a good penniworth when he sees thee now arrested and going to prison,
then he offers him money for his Estate, See eight Seasons, in which Satan
Assaults the Soul. Robinson Lect. 2. in Ephesians. ^ 13. p. 20.
When Christ was an hungry then Satan sets on him, Matthew 4.1.2, 3. Hence
Christ calls the time of Affliction the hour of darkness, because then the
Prince of Darkness is most busy, and therefore we read of many that in time
of affliction and persecution have fallen away Mar. 4.17. Luke 8.13. Ahaz is
branded for sinning in the time of his distress, when he should have been best
he was worst, 2 Chro 28.22. Saul in his distress goes to a Witch, and Asa
trusts in Physicians, when we are brought to an Extremity, that is Satan's
opportunity as well as Gods, he loves to fish in troubled Waters; this makes
so many Witches.

When people are poor, sick and vexed with Enemies, then comes the Tempter,
and then is a time for us to Pray that we be not overcome by Power of
Tentation, Luke 22.40. Psalm 50.15. James 5.13. But where the Devil gets one
by Adversity, he gets hundreds by Prosperity, that has slain its thousand,
but this ten thousand. When Gods hand is on men, then they will pray, Isay
26.16. and learn Righteousness, Res adversae Spiritus contrahunt, cogitationes
componunt, in ^nosmetipsos nos revocant, ac necessitate quadam quas^ flagello,
nos ad Virtutem compellunt: Picolomin. Ethic. c. 45.
Isay 26.9. and turn to God, Hosea 5. ult. and 6.1. as we see in Manasses,
Paul, the Prodigal. Then a Saul will Sacrifice, and call on Samuel to pray for
him, and Ioab flies to the Horns of the Altar. We never read of any that were
converted by Prosperity, Nos qui corrumpimur prosperis, corrigimur adversis;
and quos intemperantes pax longa fecit, turbatio facit esse modestos. Salvian.
but many by Adversity, 2 Chronicles 33.12. Job 33.14. Few of the Saints were
ever hurt by Adversity, but almost all of them have been hurt by Prosperity,
Noah whilst kept wakeing by a wicked Generation fell not, but when they were
drowned and he came to live in Peace, then he falls, Genesis 9.20, 21. So did
Lot, when he was got out of Sodom and his Righteous Soul was no more vexed with
them, then he falls, Genesis 19.30. David whilst persecuted by Saul, how
tender conscienced and watchful was he, but when he came to a Kingdom then we
read of his falls.

1. He commits Adultery. 2. It Is double, not single Adultery, both parties were
married. 3. 'Twas committed against great Light and Love, even after the receipt
of signal favors 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. 4. It occasioned much scandal, 2 Samuel
12.14. 5. In stead of confessing it he uses all means to hide it, and so runs
himself into five sins more. 1. He uses unlawful means to father it on
Vriah. 2. He draws him into that foul sin of Drunkenness. 3. After he had
made him Drunk, he contriveth how to kill him. 4. After he was dead, he
Fathers his death on God. 5. He continued a considerable time in this sin
without Repentance. All this David did when he changed his condition and came
to be a King. Hence we read of David's first ways which were his best, when he
was afflicted and low, 2 Chronicles 17.3. Solomon's great prosperity proved a
snare to him, 1 Kings 11.3. Jonah sleeps when in the Ship, but Prays in the
Sea; we have more cause to fear, then to desire prosperity. When the Moon is
in the full, it is nearest an Eclipse: When Iesurun waxes fat, he kicks at
God, Deuteronomy 32.13. to 17. When men are fed to the full, See Mr. Strong on
that Text in his 31. Sermon. p. 313.

The Sedentary life is most subject to diseases; standing waters gather filth:
hence God keeps his in exercise.

Quos amat Deus, bos indurat, recognoscit, exercet. Seneca.


then they go by Troops to Harlots, Jeremiah 5.7. When once men are become
Lords; they care not for God, Jeremiah 2.31.32. When Hazael is a King, he is
not the man he was, his condition was changed, and he changed with it, 2 Kings
8.13. Honores mutant Mores. How humble was Saul before he was a King, and how
insolent and cruel after he came to a Crown? Cataline whilst poor, had many
seeming virtues, but when rich, he put off all Modesty and Honesty. Many like
Jonathan march well, till they come to this Honey. They are good servants, but
ill Masters. Men are seldom religious in prosperity. Rarae fumant felicibus
arae. See Harsnet on Repentance. p. 448. etc.
Like Jeroboam before he was a King, we do not read of his wickedness, but
after he makes the golden Calves. 1 Kings 12.18, 20. Innopem copia fecit. Many
had been rich, if they had not been rich; they had been rich in Grace, if they
had not been rich in Goods. The temptations accompanying prosperity are more
dangerous, as being most suitable to our corrupt nature, and most subtle to
deceive. Mark 4.19.

1. Then we are most prone to Pride. Vzziah when strong, Quatuor numerantur
matres quae pravos pariunt filios. Prosperitas quae parit superbiam, veritas
odium, securitas periculum, and familiaritas contemptum.
then his heart is lifted us. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. yea good Hezekiah had a taint of
this. 2 Chronicles. 32.25. So hard it is to have Honor without Tumor.

2. Then we are most apt to forget God. Hos. 13.6. and ready to say with those
prosperous wicked men, Rich Jacob forgets to pay, what poor Jacob had promised.
Depart from us. Job 21.13, 14. when men have no changes, they fear not God.
Psalm. 55.19. but their Table becomes a snare to them. Psalm. 69.20. and their
prosperity their ruin. Prove. 1.32. most are like to Aesops Hen, the more she
was fed, the worse she laid. Magnae felicitatis est a felicitate non vinci.
Cl^mang.
Hence the Lord gives so many cautions to his people, that they should take
heed of forgetting him in their prosperity. Deuteronomy. 4.1. to 15. and 8.11.

3. Then we are apt to trust in the Creature, and so expose our selves to
knocks and falls. Psalm. 30.6, 7. and 20.

4. Then we are more prone to cruelty. Psalm. 73.6, 7. Babylon that sits at ease
like a Queen, murders the Saints of God. Revel. 18.7.

5. Then we are most prone to riot and security. Luke 12.19. Secundis rebus ea
mala oriuntur in moribus, quae saevientibus pejora sunt hostibus. Hinc Scipio
noluit aemulam Romani Imperii Carthaginem dirui. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 1.
c. 30.
Prove. 30.9. God may speak to men in their prosperity, and they will not hear.
Ier. 22.21. The Sunshine of prosperity makes men put off all, when the storms
of adversity make us wrap our garments about us. Hannibal and his army became
effeminate by the spoils of Capua, which could not be conquered by their
distresses, in passing over the (almost) unpassable Alps. Superfluities in the
body breed more dangerous diseases then defects. A wicked Ludicra ipsa agi jam
non possunt prae egestate and temporis miseria ideo non aguntur. Salvian,
poor man cannot do that mischief, that a wicked rich man may. Both extremes
are very dangerous. Hence Agur prays, Give me neither Poverty nor Riches.
Prove. 30.8. Great Riches are great Temptations, as well as extreme poverty. As
to be very rich, and very good, is rare, so to be very poor and very good, is
rate. When the Devil tempted our aSviour, his first temptation was but the
hungry Temptation. Matthew. 4. to turn stones into bread. But the Devils last
temptation was the sorest, when he offered him all the Kingdoms of the world
to worship him. By the Order of the Devils temptations we may see which is the
greatest, for the Devil keeps his greatest Temptations till the last. Fret not
then at the prosperity of wicked men, they are to be Pitied. rather then
Envied. Nihil infelicius felicitate peccantium, qua paenalis nutritur
impunitas, and mala voluntas velut hostis interior roboratur. August. ep. 5.

Sibbs's Cordials on 1 Pet. 4.17. p. 227, 228.


The sword of Gods wrath hangs over their heads, ready every moment to drop
upon them. Their prosperity is Transient, but their sorrows are permanent. Fear
not their power and pomp, for they shall soon come dowm. Psalm. 37.1, 2, etc.
and 49.16. their joy is but for a moment. Job 20.5, 8. and 21.13. like the
crackling of Thorns which make a great blaze, but are soon extinct. Psalm. 58.3,
4, 5, 6. Hence their pomp is compared to a Dream which quickly vanishes. Dives
est donec evigilet. Aug.
Psalm. 37.20.35, 36. and 73.20. Isay 29.7, 8. and 38.13. Like Ionah's gourd,
they suddenly rise, and as suddenly wither. Like Counters now they stand for
pounds, and anon for pence. Neither let any man conclude of Gods favor,
because he enjoys temporal blessings and outward prosperity, for all these be
blessings, and such as God has promised (with condition) to the obedient. Dona
scabelli, non, dona Throni.
Deuteronomy. 28. yet they are but blessings of the left hand, and the wicked whom God
hates oft-times, have them in greatest abundance. They prosper many times,
usque ad invidiam. See Mr. ^oltons Discourse of True H^ppiness. p. 50, 51.
Psalm. 73. they that do wickedly oft-times are exalted. Mal. 3.15. The great
Turk that fat Hog, and great Dog of the world, yet what rich possessions has
he? and if the Lord do thus for his Dogs, and be so bountiful to such as hate
him, oh what will he not do for his children who serve and obey him? These
outward things are often given in judgment, as God gave Israel a King in his
wrath, and Saul gave Michol to David for a snare; so riches often fit and fat men
for the slaughter. Those beasts which the Butcher intends to kill, he puts them
into fat pastures. Job 21.30. Let us then improve our prosperity to Gods
praise, let our Health, Wealth, Peace, etc. improve our Virtues and our Vices,
let us not fight against God with his own weapons, but the more he exalts us,
the higher let us exalt his Name. 'Twas Jehosaphats great honor, that when he
had riches in abundance, his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. He was made thereby more zealous and courageous in Gods cause, and
went forward with an high and Heroic spirit. We should serve him with gladness
and singleness of heart in the abundance of all things. Deuteronomy. 28.47. This is
the end why the Lord has made so many promises of Temporal good things, even
to make us good. Deuteronomy. 28.1. to 15. Prove. 3.16, 17. and 22.4. Isay 1.19. and
30.23. Ier. 32.39. Hos. 2.21, 22. The things are good in themselves, and enable
us to do good to others, Fortuna prospera per se est bona, ex eventu, mala:
adversa ve^o per se est mala, ex eventu, bona. Picolomin. Ethic. c. 54.

Magni pectoris est inter secunda moderatio, Seneca.


but it is our corruption that turns them into poison by abusing of them. It Is a
great felicity not to be overcome by felicity, and it argues strength of grace,
when we can carry low sayls in a high condition; and like Pigeons when they
fare best, fear most. The only way to have our mercies continued, Prove. 3.9, 10.
is to devote them to Gods praise, he never repents of doing good to those who
speak good of his name. Now in the summer of prosperity let us lay up something
against the winter of adversity. Job 3.25. with the prudent man foresee the
storm and arm for to meet it. Sperat infestis, metuit secundis, Alteram sortem
been praeparatum pectus. Horat. l. 2. Ode 10.
Prove. 22.3. and 27.12. As sure as now we live, so sure a change will come,
which we should wait for and expect. Job 14.14. summer lasts not always, the
Sun does not always shine: we should therefore in health prepare for sickness,
in Peace for war, in life, for death, and in days of spiritual plenty prepare
for scarcity, laying up a good foundation against the time co come, that we may
obtain eternal life.

[See Directions how to use prosperity, in Scudders daily walking. cap. 12.
Chanon of Wisdom. l. 2. c. 7. p. 313. Downams Guide to Godliness. l. 3. c. 33.
p. 343.]

VERSE 14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.
WE are now come to the third and last part of this Chapter, Per antithesin
hortatur ut in iis quae ab ipso didicit perseveret. q. d. utcunque grassetur
impietas and ulterius perrumpat, tu tamen perge. Calvin.
in which the Apostle exhorts Timothy to constancy and perseverance in the
truth which he had taught him. q. d. It Is true, in these last days seducers
shall arise, who shall have success (for a time) in their seducing, drawing
many into errors with them; yet let not these things affright thee, do not thou
malign malignants, nor envy the success of the erroneous, choose none of their
ways: but since thou have a better Master, and have been taught better
doctrine, and that from a child, be not despondent my son, but constantly and
courageously keep the truth committed to thy charge (as becomes a faithful
Pastor,) against all opposers and Impostors whatsoever. Now since man is a
Rational creature, and so is better led by Reasons, Facilius ducimur quam
trahimur.
then forced by Rigor; therefore the Apostle presses his Exhortation to
perseverance upon Timothy, by Arguments drawn, 1. From his Master and Teacher.
2. From Timothy who was the Scholar. 3. From the matter which he had been
taught. The first Argument is drawn from the Authority of the person from whom
he had received the doctrine. viz. from Paul who was an Apostle of Christ
guided and inspired by his Spirit, and had taught him nothing but what he had
received from Christ, and therefore his message was to be regarded, as if
Christ himself had spoken to him. Gal. 4.14. Knowing of whom thou have learnt
them. See how modestly and sparingly the Apostle speaks of himself, and how
unlike the language of the Sectaries of our times, is Paul's language here.

2. From the fidelity which is required in those to whom the truth of God is
committed. Since this heavenly doctrine was committed to him to be kept as a
sacred Treasury and choice depositum, therefore he ought with all care and
courage to preserve it. For what things we are entrusted withal, those things
we must faithfully keep (this even nature teaches us) But the Truths of God
are committed to thee O Timohy to be faithfully kept, and as occasion requires
to be published to the world. 1 Timothy 1.11. and 6.20. and 2.1.14. The words are
diversely rendered, our Translators render it. (...), quae tibi concredita sunt.
Beza, Estius, Syriac, Arabic.
And have been assured of. But Tindal, Calvin, Beza, Aretius, Espencaeus, and
the Vulgar Latin with others render it; And have been committed to thee, or
with which thou have been entrusted. And the Original seems to favor this
last Translation, for the words are not (...), quae credidisti, which thou have
believed or been assured of, but (...) quae tibi credita and commissa sunt
conservanda and promulganda. (...), mihi concreditur. So the word is used, Rom
3.2. the Oracles of God were committed to the Jews as a depositum, which they
were to keep with all faithfulness for posterity.
Keep the things which have been committed and commended to thy charge with all
care and diligence, that thou may be able to give a good account to him
whose these truths are, and who has committed them to thy charge.

3. From his long acquaintance with the Scripture, by reason of his good
education. viz. from his childhood; what we learn when young takes a deep
Impression, so that we cannot easily unlearn it, but thou O Timothy have
learned the Scriptures from thy infancy, Permane in i^s quae quasi cum lacte
suxisti. a Lapide.
and therefore it were a shame for thee, who have been taught so early the way
of the Lord, now to turn from it and forsake it. Continue therefore (...), in
the things which thou have learned, I exhort thee to no new or hard thing, all
that I beg of thee is, that thou would keep the truth which has already
been taught theee; for it would argue want of judgment and folly in thee now
to forsake it.

4. His last argument is drawn from the Excellency of the Scriptures, V. 15,
16, 17.

But continue thou.
(...), But do thou abide, keep thy station and maintain the doctrine which I
have taught thee, against all opposition whatsoever, thou must certainly look
to be put to it be therefore resolute, and constant. The Apostle lays a But in
Timothies way to keep him from wandering. q. d. what ever others do, though they
fall away more and more, and grow worse and worse, yet do thou continue
steadfast in the truth thou have received. Hence Observe, V. D. Sibs Concio ad
Clerum. in 2 Timothy 1.14.
Whatever others do, yet Gods faithful Ministers and servants must not depart
from the truth. Though Israel play the harlot, yet Judah must not sin. Hos.
4.15. will ye also go away? says Christ. John 6.67. though Temporaries may
fall away, yet it becomes not you, who are my disciples indeed so to do. Let
others serve Idols if they please, yet we must resolve that we and ours will
serve the Lord. Josh. 14.15. So did Noah, Tanta est b^no^rum raritas ut pene
unus esse videatur. Salvian.
Lot, Joseph, Elijah, Obadiah, Nehemiah, and the Church of Pergamus, which held
fast the truth, even where Satan had his Throne. Rev. 2.13. and the Saints in
Nero's Court. Phil. 4.22. We must not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus
23.2. nor err with others, though they be never so good. Ne cum Platone
errandum est. We must get an Holy, not a fantastic singularity; we are the
Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the World, and must therefore do more then
others. Matthew. 5.47. Christ expects more from us, then he does from Formalists,
Moralists, and Hypocrites. The righteous excells his wicked neighbor. Prove.
12.26. We must not be like children tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine, but like the righteous, we must be an everlasting foundation. Prove.
10.25. We must be See Mr. Gurnall on Ephesians. 6.10 p 7. Mr. Rob. Bolton's Saints
Guide. p. 128.
singularly Pure, Holy, Humble, Self-denying. etc. Men love to be singular in
every thing, save Piety: they would be singularly Wise, singularly Rich,
singular fine; but oh that men would turn their singularity the right way, and
become singularly Holy, Exact, Obedient, etc.

But continue thou.
Note, Gods servants must continue constant in the Truth received. They must
not play fast and loose, be off and on; but they must be still the same, like
well-tuned Bells, which have the same Note in foul weather, as they have in
fair. Ioh. 1.21. we must hold fast the Truth. 1 These. 5.21. abide in it, and
walk in it. Rev. 3.3. 1 John 2.19.24. and 2.6, 7, 9. we must part with our
lives rather then part with the Truth of God. Revel. 6.9. no frowns or
flatteries must drive or draw us from it, we must lose all, rather then lose
it. Prove. 23.23. buy it at any rate, sell it at no rate. To this end consider.

1. This Constancy is a note of Sincerity, then are we Christ's disciples
indeed, Perseverantia ista non ad tempus neque ad longum tempus, sed ad finem
usque efficit discipulum Christi. Rolloc.
when we abide in the Truth. John 8.32. Job 2.3. when no Storms nor Tempests
can remove us from it, but we stand like Mount Sion which never moves, and like
seasoned Timber, never warps nor yields. As that Divine Poet sweetly sings.
Herberts Poems. p. 80.


Only a sweet and Virtuous soul,
Like seasoned Timber never gives,
But though the whole world turn to coal,
Then chiefly lives.
2. All the promises of Heaven and Happiness, run only to such as are
faithful to the death. Rev. 2.10. endure to the end. Mat. 24.13. and continue
in the faith. Romans 2.7. Matthew. 10.22. Colos. 1.22, 23. Heb. 3.6.14. See what a
cluster of precious promises are made not to such as only begin well, Non
incipienti, non fugienti, sed vincenti dabitur.
but to such as presevere and overcome their spiritual enemies, faithfully
fighting the battles of the Lord against sin and Satan. Revel. 2.7.10,
11.17.26, 27, 28. and 3.5.12. and 22.7. He that is (...) still fighting by the
power of Christ against the enemies of his salvation, though he cannot overcome
them so perfectly as Christ did by way of Equality, yet if by way of conformity
we resemble him, we shall reign with him. We must win the garland before we can
wear it, we must conquer before we can Triumph, Deus nummum nec fractum, nec
falsum recipiet. Bern.
and strive before we can get the Crown. 2 Timothy 2.5. we must run sincerely,
cheerfully, and constantly, if ever we would obtain. 1 Cor. 9.24.

3. A damn^. 1. Such loose all their labor, let a man watch, fast, pray, hear,
read, run, yet if he fall away, all is lost. Ezekiel. 18.24. Gal. 3.3, 4. 2 John 8.
Frustra agitur quod non peragitur, as good never awhit, as never the better,
it is the end that crowns the work. A man may go far, yet for want of
perseverance lose all. Moses came to the fortieth year, yet mist of going into
Canaan. A man may dig within a yard of a golden mine, and yet for want of a
little more pains miss of it. It Is said of King Henry the Eighth, that if he
had gone on as he began, and as he had crakt the Popes crown, so he had clean
dispossessed him of all; as he had got the victory, so if he had pursued it (as
'twas preached before him,) and as he had unhorst the Pope, and put him out of
the Saddle, so if he had also taken away the Trappings and Stirrups, Fox
Martyrol. page 675.
whereby the Prelates went to set him on horseback again, he had cured all.

2. Such bring an evil report and scandal on Religion, they disparage the
Lords Pastures, as if there were no virtue, sweetness, excellency and life in
them, and therefore they forsake them.

3. Satan will deal worse with such then with others, he will lay more irons on
you, as the Jailer does on a fugitive prisoner. He will seek to recover the
time that he has lost, by making thee run more furiously in the ways of
sin, so that thy latter end will be worse then thy beginning. 2 Pet. 2.22.

4. God abhors thee. Heb. 10.38. his soul will take no pleasure in thee ( i.
e.) he exceedingly hates thee. (...), prae metu and socordia se subducet.

See Mr. Strong's 31. Sermon. on 2 Chronicles. 15.2. p. 231.


It Is a Meiosis, if any man draw back, fly from his colors, and forsake God,
God will forsake him, as he did backsliding Saul, the Israelites, Judges 2.12,
13. Jeremy 5.19. Zeph. 1.26. Spira, and Lucian a Professor, who after became a
scoffer and persecutor, and was tore in pieces by Dogs. How sad then is the
condition of those Seekers, Hi in veteri novam quaerunt semitam.
Shakers, Quakers, that are altogether unsettled, and have no foundation, that
are still seeking for New-Apostles, and New-Light; ( i. e.) for false Apostles
and old Errors. These Skeptical Sceptica ^heologia exit in Atheismum, qui enim
de omnibus dabitat, nihil tandem credere incipit. Altingius

See Irreligion of the Northern Quake^s. p. 25, 26.


Atheists have a New Religion every week, yea almost every day in the week.
It Is said of the Northern Quakers (I suppose the Southern are of the same
temper) that in a Months time they so changed their Principles, that a man
could not know them to be the same men, but only by their faces. Lately they
were for Episcopacy, then for Presbytery, now for Independency, anon for
Anabaptisme. and then for any thing. If this unconstancy and mutability in
Religion had been a virtue, then must we condemn the generation of Martyrs in
all ages, who choose rather to sacrifice all they had, then to part with any
part of parcel of Gods truth. As it is said of Athanasius, maluit mutare sedem
quam Syllabam. He had rather lose his Episcopal Seat, then part with a Syllable
of Truth. See Gelaspy Miscol. l. 2. c. 11. and Strong Ser. 31. on Heb. 12.14.
p. 52.
To what end are all those Precepts (if this fickleness were lawful) to stand
fast in the faith, to contend for it, Coals. 1.2.23. Philip. 1.27. Jude 3. to
beware of false Prophets. Matthew. 7.15. Gal. 1.6.8. not to be carried away with
strange doctrines. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. As for those that have put
their hands to Gods plough, they must in no wise look back, but break through
all difficulties and discouragements. Constans contraria spernit. True grace
breaks through all, Jacob will have the blessing, though he halt for it; David
will yet be more vile; The woman of Canaan, though Christ call her a dog, yet
can pick somewhat from that debasing term. Let the wicked deride Gods people,
yea and kill them, yet will they forget their God, nor deal falsely in his
Covenant. Psalm. 44.16. and 119.51. See more Examp^es of Constancy. Mr. Clerks
Mirror. c. 30. p. 104.
It was John Baptists high Commendations, that he was a rock, not a reed shaken
to and fro with the wind of every tentation; ( Matthew. 11.7.) no fear nor favor
could make him conceal the truth, but with the hazard of his life he reproves
Herod, and Zachary, and Elizabeth; how constant were they not in talking, but
in walking the ways of Gods commands. Luke 1.5, 6, 7. They did not take a turn
or two for pleasure, but they walked on.

2. They walked not in one or two, but in all the Commandments of God.

3. Though they were not without sin, yet were they without blame, no man could
justly charge them.

4. They did not only begin well, but they persevered even to old age. v. 7.
when they were stricken in years.

5. 'Twas in a dangerous time when they did thus walk with God. V. 5. 'twas in
the days of Herod, a bloody Tyrant. It Is a comely sight to see Old M^ason's,
old Cedars in the house of God, old disciples, whom no storms nor tempests can
drive from the truth. Acts 21.16. like the Church of Thyatira, to have our
works more at last then at the first. Revel. 2.19. like spiritual Sampson, we
must break the cords of difficulties, forgetting what is past, Quid est Papa?
quid mundus^ quid princeps mundi ut propter cum veritatem Evangelii pro qua
Christus est mortuus negem? Valeat qui valet, pereat qui perit, ego sic sentiam
Deo propitio semper. Luther in Psalm. 16.
and pressing toward the work. Like Heroic Luther whom men nor devils could
draw or drive from the truth. And like another Caesar, not cease from doing,
till all be done.

Nil actum credens, cum quid superesset agendum,
Instat atrux. Lucan Pharsal. l. 2.
To this end we must first labor to know the truth, for how can a man walk in
a way which he does not know?

2. When we have found the way, we must walk in it with full purpose and See
the necessity of Resolution. Robinson on Ephesians. 6.15. Lect. 16. and Gournall on
Ephesians. 6.10. p. 4. etc. Sim^nds his Sermon. on 1 Chronicles. 28.10, Preached. 1641.
resolution. Ier. 6.16. Acts 11.23. let the understanding be never so clearly
convinct, yet if the will resolve not to obey, there is no good to be done.

3. Lay a good foundation, dig deep, he that will build high, must lay low.
Deny your own strength and wisdom, for in his own strength shall no man be
strong. 1 Samuel 2.2, 9. but we must be strong in the Lord, and the Power of his
might, if ever we look to overcome. Ephesians. 6.10. if ever we would be able to do
or suffer, we must get virtue and strength from Christ. Philip. 4.13. We are
never stronger, Frustra nititur qui non innititur, in te stas and non stas. Aug.
then when we are most apprehensive of our own weakness. 1 Cor. 12.10. nor
ever weaker then when we trust most to our selves: as we see in Peter, and in
the book of Martyrs; the timorous trembling souls who suspected their own
strength, were faithful to the death, when the proud and Self-confident basely
turned with the times.

V. Robinson on Ephesians. 6.13. Lect. 5. and 7.
4. Put on the whole armor of God, and gird it close to you. An ignorant,
unbelieving, unarmed man has no heart to fight, it is the man that has the
shield of Faith, the helmet of Hope, the breast plate of Righteousness, the
girdle of Truth, etc. that like the valiant horse, rejoices to meet the armed
man. Job 39.19, 20. the Apostles were armed with these graces, and see how
boldly they go on in despite of all opposition. 2 Cor. 6.4. to 8.

[He that would see more of Constancy and perseverance, let him peruse Dike on
Conscience. cap. 9. p. 130. etc. Barkers Sermon. before the Parliament 1648. on 1
Cor. 15. ult. Gatakers Sermon. on Revel. 2.10. fol. p. 317. Downams Guide to
Godliness. l. 3. c. 1. and l. 4. c. 8, 9, 10 Hildersham on Psalm. 51.7. Lect.
144. to 150. all those six last Lectures are very useful for our times. M.
Vennings Sermon. on Rev. 2.5.]

In the things which thou have learned.
Observe, That even the best are learners here. Whilst we live in this world
(though we should live Methuselahs days) yet we may learn something still. We
know but in part, and the most perfect are imperfect here.

Object. We have the Spirit to teach us.

Answ. So had David, who yet desires to be taught still. Psalm. 119. So had
Paul, who yet pressed forward toward the mark still. Philip. 3.12, 13, 14. he
disclaimes perfection, and desires to know Christ more clearly. Our learning
does not hinder but further the work of the Spirit in our souls. Timothy that
had a plentiful measure of the spirit (for he was an Evangelist) yet must give
himself to reading and meditation still. 1 Timothy 4.13. Such is the profoundnesse
of the Scripture, that he who knows most, may still learn more, and the more
we know, the more we shall acknowledge our ignorance.

And have been assured of, or as others read it, which has been committed to
thee. The truth was not barely delivered to Timothy, Creditum fuisse doctrinam
Timotheo ad (...) valet; plus enim quiddam est commi^ti instar depositi, quam
simplicier tradi. Calvin.
but it was committed to him to be kept as a sacred Treasury with the greatest
care, Observe, That the Truth of God revealed in the Scripture, is a sacred
depositum, a choice Treasure, a precious Jewel which must be carefully kept by
all Christians, and especially, by the Ministers of Christ. Depositum v^cat
sacram doct^inam Evangelii; quia and res est alterius (i. e.) Christi, and
pastoribus fida ejus cust^dia incumbit. G^otius.
The Oracles of God, and the doctrine of the Gospel is more specially committed
to our care and fidelity, that we may publish it to others. It Is true, every
private Christian in his Sphere and Calling, ought to preserve the truth, and
contend for the faith. Jude 3. we cannot keep the truth without strong
contention, (...), super certare, notat ingens, a^^e and continuum certandi and
resistendi hostilus studium. a Lapide in loc^m ubi plu^a
the word signifies to strive with all our might; or (say some) it is to strive
one after another in our places and successive generations. Insuper certare, or
certamen repetere, it is not enough to strive once and to assert the truth, but
we must do it again and again, after one another, as often as the Truth is
opposed. But the Gospel is committed primarily to the care of Christ's
Ministers, they are his Heralds to proclaim and publish it to the world, as
appears. 1 Timothy 1.11. and 6.20. and 2.1, 14. 1 These. 2.4. Titus 1.3. 1 Cor.
9.17. Gal. 2.7. of all men Ministers must hold fast the faithful word. Titus
1.9. we must (...), tenacem and mordicus retinentem. a Lapide.
hold it against all opposition, and hold it with both hands, hold it with all
our strength, hold it in our Judgments, in our Affections, in our Practice,
part with it at no rate to Schismatics, Heretics, false Prophets, etc. As
Moses was faithful, and would not part with a hoof to Pharaoh, so we must not
part with a tittle of Gods truth to his enemies: for all Truths even the least
are precious; truth is like gold, which is glorious in the Ray and Spangle, as
well as in the wedge. As it is in Practicals, he that makes no conscience of
little sins, will quickly be drawn to greater; so it is true, and holds in
Doctrinalls, he that admits of a little error, will soon be drawn to a
greater. Though every truth be not fundamental, yet every truth is a guard to
the foundation, the outer skin of an Apple lies remote from the heart, yet if
you pluck that off, the heart will soon be rotten. The finger is not a vital
part, but a Gangrene in the finger will (in a short time) reach to the very
vitals, and corrupt the blood with the spirits. Not only the garment of Truth,
but the fringes thereof are useful, and must be preserved. Numb. 15.38, 39, 40.
We experimentally see that those who forsake Truth, in Discipline, quickly fall
to errors in Doctrine. We shall hardly find a man that erres in the one, to be
sound in the other. As therefore we must count no sin small, so we must esteem
no error small, for the least truth of Gods Kingdom, does in its place uphold
the whole Kingdom of his truth. Take away the least Vericulum out of the
world, and it unworlds all Potentially, and may unravell the whole Texture
Actually, if it be not conserved by an extraordinary power.

2. Consider that truth is the choycest gift which God ever gave to the sons
of men, it is better then any created Ens or Bonum, which are but Truths
twins. Civil Truth is good, but the least Evangelical Truth is of more worth
then all the Civil Truths in the world, that are merely so.

3. Naturally we desire Liberty, now Truth is the Parent of all true Liberty,
whether it be Political or Personal; so much Untruth, so much Thraldom, so
much Truth, so much Liberty* John 8.32.

4. If you preserve the Truth it will preserve you in the hour of Temptation,
as Solomon says of wisdom. Prove. 4.8. exalt her, and she shall exalt you. So
keep the truth, and it will keep you from falling, as it did the Church of
Philadelphia. Rev. 3.10. so thou shall stand as an impregnable rock, when
others fly as the Chafe before the wind. The Truth of God in judgment is one
of the Eyes of the soul, he that wants it is blind and cannot see afar off. Now
as a clear eye is a very great help for the discerning of a danger before it
comes, so a clear distinct knowledge of the truth, is a very great help to us to
discern a Temptation before it be upon us, and to discover the Methods and
Depths of Satan, that he may not surprise us unawares.

5. It Is a great honor to a person or Nation to be the Conservators and
Preservers of the Truths of God. It Is not only our Duty, but our Glory. This
honor formerly belonged to the Jews, to them were committed the Oracles of
God. Romans 3.2. and 9.4. God has now entrusted us with this choice Treasure,
the Lord help us to keep it pure both in Judgment and Practice, lest it be
taken from us. Let us all in our places preserve it from violence with all our
might. There are many spiritual Cheaters abroad, See ten Reasons why we should
defend the Truth, in Mr. Ant. ^urgess on John 17.12. Lect. 58.
the greater will our honor be in maintaining Gods Truth against them all.
'Twas Shammahs honor (one of David's Worthies) that he kept his ground, and got
a great victory, when others ^led. 2 Samuel 23.12. Say not I am but one, and a
weak one too, but remember what great things the Lord did by Athanasius and
Luther, when they had all the world against them. One man holding forth truth,
shall be too strong for all the world; for truth unites us to God, and God to
us, it ingageth God in our quarrel, and so makes us invincible; for if God be
with us, who can be against us, so as to hurt us and destroy us? Romans 8.31.
Bradford writing to his friends, tells them, never shall the enemy be able to
burn the truth, or prison and keep it in bonds, us they may prison, bind, and
burn, but our Cause, Religion, and Doctrine, they shall never be able to burn.
Raffin. Histor. l. 2. c. 3.
The story of the man in the Council of Nice is well known, where a Christian
of no great Learning, converted a Learned man whom all the Bishops with their
skill and eloquence could not persuade; so long as the matter went by words, he
opposed words with words, but when instead of words, power came out of the
mouth of the speaker; words could not withstand truth, nor man stand out
against God. Many wonder why Ministers are so earnest and zealous in defending
the truth; why it is a dep^situm which God has entrusted us withal, and it is
well observed, Nulla fides sanctior fide depositi, ideoque insames sunt apud
omnes gentes qut dep^situm abnegant. Grotius.
that it is a greater sin to imbezill or alter that, then any thing we have
borrowed, because this is committed to our justice, but a depositum to our
faithfulness, the deposition does rest upon us as trusty men. Let Gods truth
then be dearer to us then our dearest lives; our lives will not be worth the
enjoying, if God take his truth from us; let us beseech him rather to take our
lives away, rather then take the light of the Gospel away.

And have been assured of. If you read the words so, The Observation will be
this. That Ministers should be assured of those things which they teach to
others. They should not only have a Head knowledge, or an aerie, empty,
notionall, speculative knowledge; but an experimental practical knowledge.
Certitudo fidei est maxima certitudo. Scotus.
They must believe before they speak. Psalm 116.10. that so they may speak
from the heart to the heart; and may bring their meat in their breasts; and not
as birds do in their Beaks.

Knowing of whom thou have learned them.
1. Observe, That gracious men are modest men. The Apostle does not boast of
himself to Timothy. nor proclaim his Learning, gifts, etc. He only tells him
in brief, Thou know of whom thou have learnt them.

2. Observe, The excellency of the Teacher makes the Doctrine the more taking.
This we see even in Humane and Moral Learning, the Platonic Doctrine grew
famous because it was professed by Socrates, and the Peripatetick by Aristotle.
The Scholars of Pythagoras did so confide in the Dictates of their Master,
that when any one asked them a Reason of what they held, they would give no
other answer, but (...). Ipse dixit, our Master said so, yet these were
Heathens; but when we have an aged, holy, Paul for our Master, who was an
Apostle of Christ, the Penman of the Holy Ghost, and guided more immediately by
the Spirit of God; then we must with constancy adhere to what they teach us,
and attend to their doctrine as if Christ himself taught us, Gal. 4.14. for his
Ambassadors they are, and he that hears them, hears him, Young Timothies
especially should hearken to the instructions of aged Paul's, who have born the
heat of the day, and by experience can teach us the ways of God. Years should
be heard speak, Job 32.7. Young Ministers should suspect their own judgments
when they vary from an Holy, aged Calvin Beza, and all the Churches of God. As
young Lawyers and Physicians observe the Principles and Practices of the
serious and grave Professors of their way, especially, when grounded on Maxims
and Rules of Art. So should young Divines. It ill becomes a young raw Physician
to contradict a whole College of Physicians; or a Puny Lawyer a Bench of
Judges; or a young Divine, a whole Assembly of Divines. It Is the looseness of
the times that makes young men so bold. When Government is settled, they will
either change their note, or be made ashamed of it.

VERSE 15. And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus.
THese words contain a third Argument by which the Apostle presses Timothy to
perseverance, (...), ab in^antia (i.) cum adhuc esses (...). Piscat.

(...), puer recens natus. In hoc verbo nonnulla Hype^bole sub esse videtur.
Esti^s.


viz. because he knew the Scriptures not only from his Childe-hood, but even
from his Infancy, and from a suckling ( i.) so soon as ever he was able to
learn the Scriptures, he was presently taught them.

1. Observe, Parents ought to instruct their Children betimes in the Word of
God. Its good seasoning the Vessel betimes with goodness. Lois Timothies
Grandmother, Gremium huic maternum prima suit Schola Sacrarum literarum. Espens
Synagog. Iudaic. c. 3.
and Eunice his Mother taught him as soon as he was capable, the way of the
Lord, 2 Timothy 2.5. Timothies Father was a Greek and Gentile, but his Mother
being a believing Iewess sees to the instructing of her son, Acts 16.1. for
the Jews were very careful to teach their children the Old Testament betimes,
so that their skill therein (says the Learned Buxtorfe) was more at 17. then
our men at 70. and they were able to answer any Question in the Law, as readily
as to their own names, says Josephus. Hannah devoted her Samuel, whilst he
was very young, to God, 1 Samuel 1.22. and 2.11.24. He began his service in the
Tabernacle in his Childhood, Naar Na^r (i.). Puer Puer; quae geminatio valde
pusillum atque tenellum Infantem esse doce^; qualis est trimus qui jam incipit
cibis uti pro lacte. Sanctius.
that he might the better be instructed in Gods Law, and be acquainted with all
the Parts, Passages and ways of Divine Worship from his* tender youth; that so
in his age he might keep the closer to it. It Is a singular mercy to have good
Parents, ^. Robinsons Observat 16. p. 533.

^athshebam Sol monem a teneris annis haec docuisse, blanda Lemuelis appellatio
quales matribus erga liberos adhuc tenellos usitatae sunt) ostendit. Cartwright.


and specially a good Mother, for she being much about her children has many
opportunities of dropping good things into her little Lemuels, as Bathsheba did
into Solomon, Proverbs 31.1. The Mothers of the Kings of Israel are constantly
mentioned, and as they were good or evil, so were their Children. Partus
sequitur ventrem, the Birth follows the belly, and such as the Mother, such
usually are the children Ezekiel 16.44.

Question, But at what age would you have Parents begin to teach their children?

Answer, So soon as ever they begin to learn wickedness, we should teach them
goodness; so soon as ever they begin to curse and swear, we should teach them
to bless and pray. When Children can mock Elisha, and call him Bald-pate, it is
time to change their Language, and teach them to cry Hosanna to Christ:
Children are mentioned three times in the Decalogue, to show that God would
have his Lambs regarded, John 21.15.
so that we should endeavor to sow the Seeds of Piety and Religion in their
hearts, so soon as they are able to speak, and are come to the Use of Reason
and Understanding; endeavoring that as they grow in years, so they may
increase in Grace and Knowledge.

Objection, This is in vain (say profane, lazy Sectaries) to teach children
the Words and Terms of Piety, since they do not understand them.

Answer, Though Children whilst very young cannot come to much understanding,
yet the having of Scripture Phrase and Texts by heart, is very useful; and
will much steed them when they come to years of discretion, and are able to
dive deeper into the meaning of those things which they retain perfect in their
memories from their Childehood: We should therefore nurse and nourish them up
betimes in the knowledge of Gods Word as Timothy was, Sugant Infanfantes (quoad
fieri potest) una cum lacte Pietatem, and Lirguam Canaan, vel a teneris
discant. Cartwright.
1 Timothy 4.6.

There are many Reasons why Youth should be seasoned betimes with good
Principles.

1. In respect of that Natural rudeness and ignorance which cleaves so close
unto them, Eccles. 3.18. Job 11.12. Jeremiah 4.22. and 10.14. We are all by
Nature like wild Asse-Colts, Unteachable, Untractable. An Ass is the dullest
and foolishest of all creatures, and a wild Ass is the dullest and most
unteachable of Asses, yet such a wild ^^sse-Colt is man by Nature: lewdness and
folly is bound up in his heart, it is rooted and settled there, till
instruction and correction fetch it away, Proverbs 22.15.

2. The Lord often blesses this seasoning in youth with good success; Cogitemus
faelicem hujus Doctrinae successum in Solomone, qui recte a parentibus
institutus, peritissimus evasit, and undiquaque instructissimus. Cartwright.
as we see in Solomon whom his Father and Mother taught betimes, Prove. 4.3.4.
and 32.1. and here in Timothy, who after became an Evangelist, and a choice
pillar in Gods House for the good of many. So Samuel who was given up to God
betimes, what an excellent instrument was he in the Church of God. Abraham that
taught his children and servants the way of the Lord, Genesis 14.14. and 18,
19. what obedient Children and servants had he?

2. It is usually blessed with continuance and perseverance, such as are good
young, are often good long: what the (...) is first seasoned withal, Matu^e sit
senex, qui diu senex.
it will have a taste of it a long time after. Quae in pueritia discimus
diutius firmiusque meminisse solemus. Plato.

A teneris assuescere multum est. Virg.


What we learn whilst young, it will last with us, so that we seldom or never
loose it, Prove. 22.6. and therefore to encourage Parents, God promises, if
they will faithfully discharge their duty, that he will preserve their Children
from Apostasy, Psalm. 71.5.6, 9.14.17.18.

3. This is an excellent means to propagate goodness to Posterity, as we see
here, Timothies Grandmother teaches his Mother, and his Mother teaches him,
and he teaches the Church of God, etc. So if you teach your children, they
will teach their children, and thou may be a means to propagate Gods Truth
and Honor from one Generation to another. So that you may comfort yourselves
when you come to die, that yet your Piety shall not die, but shall survive in
your posterity, who shall stand up in your steed to profess Gods name and truth
before a sinful world.

4. Such well-bred and timely-taught Children are usually great comforts and
ornaments to their Parents, Proverbs 23.15.16, 24, 25. as we see in Abel,
Joseph, Samuel, Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. Obadiah, 1 Kings 18.12. David, Daniel,
Jeremy. All of them began betimes to serve God, and were men of renown in their
generations, which may help to take off that Satanical slander which is so rife
in the world, viz. that young Saints will be old Devils, Angelicus juv^nis
senibus Satanizat in annis.
they cannot hold out. Whereas the contrary is commonly most true, viz. that
young Devils will be old Beelzebubs; when those that are good betimes, usually
persevere in goodness, Proverbs 22.6. But such as are fondly bred and left to
themselves are the Parents shame and sorrow, and often come to untimely Ends,
Proverbs 29.15. as Absalom, Esa^, Adonijah.

5. Children are the Seminary and Nursery of the Church and commonwealth,
Maxima cum in Repub. tum in Ecclesia copiosae messis Spes, ex familiae recta
and debita institutione pendet. Cartwright.
now as our Seminaries and Seed-plots are, such is the Nation; as the Parents,
House and School are, such are Towns and Cities. Our seasoning in youth has a
great influence upon our lives, A juventu^e pendet reliqua vita, quales enim
sumus juvenes, tales erimus and senes.
and therefore the Devil and the world strive for youth, for look what people
are between 18. years of Age and 30. such usually they are all their days.
Drunkards then and Drunkards for ever, lewd then and lewd for ever

Argilla quidvis imitaberis uda. Horat.

Dum tener est natus, generosos insere mores.


6. Youth is most Teachable and Tractable, like soft wax or clay fit to be
formed and framed to any thing, ready to take any Impression. Like a tender
twigg ^ou may bend it which way you please, but let it grow to be a tree, and
you may sooner break it then bend it. We should therefore take this fit season
of seasoning youth betimes with saying Truths, and killing the weeds of sin
which begin to appear in their lives. Opprime dum nova sunt subi^o mala semina
morbi,

Pharmaca nascenti sunt adhibenda male. Ovid.


Its good bearing Gods Yoke, whether of Correction, Doctrine or Discipline, in
our Youth, Lamentations 3.27. No creature so wild but it may be tamed, if taken
whilst young. We see those that would teach or tame Horses, Lions, Hawks,
Dogs, Bears, they begin with them betimes; the Horse is broken whilst a Colt,
and the Lion tamed whilst its a Whelp, etc.

Use, This must stir up Parents to season the tender years of their Children
with Principles of Grace. This is a duty of Great consequence, and therefore
the Lord (...) presses it upon Parents, Deuteronomy 6.6, 7, 8. and 11.19, 20.
Psalm 78.4, 5. Prove. 22.7. Ephesians 6.4. by Catechizing and instruction, by
Discipline and discreet Correction they must labor to work out that sin and
folly which is riveted in their Natures, Proverbs 13.15.24. and 23.13. and
29.15. Hebrews 12.9. As in the Arc there was the Rod and Manna; so in every
well-ordered family there must be the Manna of Instruction, and the Rod of
Correction. They must go together, we will not beat a dog, but we will put it
into his senses as well as we can, Woodward Child's portion, Chapter 3. Sect. 1.
Aristot. Polit. l. 7. cap. 17. Picolomin. Ethic. l. 10. cap. 30, 31, etc.
Zepper Polit. l. 1. cap. 5.6, etc. And especially, that Excellent Book of
Plutarch, styled The Education of Children, Engl. fol. p. 1, page 1, etc.
and show him what it is that we beat him for. The primary cause of so much
profaneness in youth, lies much in Parents, either they do not instruct them,
or they do not pray for them, or they be too indulgent, and do not correct
them, 1 Samuel 2.23. or they breed them idly and profanely, or they be evil
examples to them themselves; some way or other they fail: which makes so many
children miscarry. When Diogenes saw a child offend he ran and beat the Father:
You that are Parents deserve to be beaten for the disorders of your children,
because you do not teach them better. 'Twas a crying sin in the Israelites to
sacrifice their sons and daughters to Devils, Psalm 106.37. Ezekiel 16.20. yet
in a Spiritual sense negligent profane Parents do worse, for they sacrifice not
only the bodies but their souls to Satan, and so bring forth children to that
great murderer the Devil, Hos. 9.13.

[See ten very quickening Considerations to stir up Parents to this Duty, And
ten more in Master Boltons Saints Guide. p. 230. etc. And 5. Mot. in Master
Croftons Treatise of Catechizing, p. 125, etc.
in Master. Baxsters Saints rest, Part. 3. cap. 14. Sect. 11. to 18. and Master
Woodwards Child's Portion, an excellent piece. Charron of Wisdom, l. 3. c. 14.
Robinsons Essays, Observat. 50. Master Philip Goodwin Domestic Duties, on
Deuteronomy 6.6. p. 358, etc. and Eccles. 12.1. Doctor Cheynels Sermon, on
Genesis 18.19. Master Gatakers Sermon 1. page 8.

2. It must stir up young persons to devote the flower and best of their days
unto God who is the best of beings, Da florem non faecem.
He is our Creator, who has made us the best of beings next the Angels, Verba
notitiae connotant affectus and actus.
when 'twas free for him to have made us the basest of beings, we should
th^^efore remember him Eccles. 12.1.) ( i.) Love, fear, honor, obey him; for
words of Knowledge imply affection and practice, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Psalm 9.17. and
106.21. John 17.3. we should remember him betimes, in the morning of our days
(as the words are rendered by some) in the choicest time of our life, in the
days of our Elections, In diebus Electionum tuarum. Ar. Mont.

Invenes apud Haebreos dicuntur. Bachu^im (i.) electi, strenui, anirmosi;
Iuventus enim est quid activum ( test Aristotele) nec potest quiescere.


in our most flourishing time, when the best of things are to be chosen by us,
from 16. to 40. is flos aetatis, the cream and flower of our days wherein we
are most strong and active, and so most fit for the service of God. Show me any
that can show better Title to thy youth then God can do, and let him take it.
From God we have our being and well-being, our creation and preservation; as we
receive our mercies from him, so there is great reason we should serve and
observe the God of those mercies: and as we expect eternal life from him, so
its great reason we should spend our temporal life to his praise.

He gives the best wages and so deserves the best work: Godliness has the
promise, Proverbs 22.4. Matthew 6.33. 1 Timothy 4.8. and though we cannot see
the profit presently, yet light and joy is sown for the Righteous, Psalm.
97.11. Yea, his work is his wages, It is a work of Dignation, and not of
Indigence, that God is pleased to use us as Instruments in his service.
and such employment is our high preferments which made Paul to bless God who
counted him faithful, and set him in the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. besides
the obedience of our youth is the most free Obedience, Posse and nolle nobile
est. Sen. When men have strong Temptations to sin, and yet can deny
themselves, that is excellent.
and so more acceptable to God, Jeremiah 2.2. He remembereth the kindness of
our youth especially, when we can follow him through a Wilderness of
Temptations and trials, and a Land that is not sown with profits and delights.
This made him to call for the firstborn, Iuventus est purissima pars
Ecclesiae, and primitiae spiritus sunt suaviores and fervidiores. Doctor Sibbs
Concio ad Clerum. p. 41.
the first-fruites, for young and fat Sacrifices, Exodus 12.5. Leviticus 4.3.
Now our bodies are most strong, our wit most sharp, our memories most capable
and retentive, 1 John 2.13, 14. And if we serve him in our good days, he will
help us in our evil ones: if we spend our Youth in his service, See Mr. Philip
G^odwin Domest. Duties, on Eccles. 12.1. p. 493, etc.
he will support us and supply us in our Old Age, Isay 46.3.4. But if you
dishonor God now, and prefer his professed Enemy before him, giving the Dregs to
God, and the Wine to the Devil; he will give you up to spiritual judgments
(which are the sorest judgments) he will hide his face from you and take no
pleasure in you, Isay 9.17. I will not joy in your young men, implying that
when young people walk in Gods way, they are Gods joy and delight. When young
people are proud, profane, idle, wanton, unclean, etc. Then come Fevers,
Sword, Pestilence and cut them off. When Israel fell to Idolatry, then a fire
consumed their young men, Psalm 78.63. and when they grew obstinate and
incorrigible then he gave their young men to the sword, Amos 4.10. that age
which is most prone to sin, is nearest to judgment when God shall awaken
Conscience and set the sins of thy Youth in Order before thee, the end of thy
mirth will be bitterness, Eccles. 11.9. Be therefore persuaded, not only to
creep or go, but to fly from the lusts of Youth, 2 Timothy 2.22. every Age
has its sins, old Age is pron^ ^o security, and Covetousness and Youth to
six sins especially. (...), viz. Magno studi^, magnoque aninimi conatu;
fugimus enim quae periculosissima, and nobis infensa sunt.


1. To Pride and Selfe-conceitednesse, they are prone to Pride in heart, Habit,
Hair, and New-found-Opinions: Hence the Apostle would not have a Minister to
be a Novice, lest he should be puffed up with Pride, 1 Timothy 3.6.

2. To sensual Pleasures, as Gameing, Feasting, Hunting, Drinking, Danceing, (
Eccles. 11.9. Judge. 14.10. Job 1.14.) and especially, to Wine and Women which
steal away their hearts, Hoseah 4.11. It was a young man that followed the
Harlot to her House, Proverbs 7.7. And therefore Solomon's Mother counsels young
Solomon not to give his strength to Women, Proverbs 31.3, 4. Oh how many
persons has the Devil destroyed by Women! How many drown themselves in cares
and sorrows, by marrying too soon. As soon as ever they are out of the shell
(yea, like Lapwings they run with the shell on their heads) they must have a
Wife (forsooth) before they know how to govern themselves, much less a Family;
when they are fitter to be the Heels then the Heads; fitter to be commanded,
then to be commanders of others.

Question, But when would you have young people to marry?

Answer, I would have them observe Gods Method: First, get Grace, first
Spirituals, and then Temporals follow, Matthew 6.33. Secondly, It Is impossible
to prescribe a set time when every one should marry, there is so much
difference in men's Constitutions, Callings, Conditions, etc. Yet if I might
advise young people, I should scarce advise a man to marry before five and
twenty, nor a young woman till twenty; My Reasons are, 1. Because the married
Condition requires people that have some experience in worldly Affairs, and
specially in Religion 1 Peter 3.7. the Apostle would have the Husband to be a
man of Knowledge: Now this Knowledge how to govern a Family wisely and
religiously cannot be attained without a considerable time.

Adam was a Man of full Age, and Eve a Woman, not a Child, when God brought
her to Adam. Of all people that we read of in the Scripture, Kings did use to
marry soonest, that so they might have Heirs betimes, yet we read of few of
the Kings of Israel that married before twenty. It Is not for Children and
green-heads rashly to run upon such weighty undertakings; they that marry in
such haste shall repent by leisure.

3. Mutability and unconstancy, they be not settled nor stayed in their
judgments. It Is the younger sort that usually are led away with error: Old
Birds, stayed Professors, are not so soon caught with this Chafe. Hence the
Apostle Exhorts young Timothy to continue in the Truth, 1 Timothy 4, 16. 4,
Rashness, Headiness and Revenge; such were Rehoboams young Counselors,
Temeritas est flu^entis aetatis, prudentia senectutis. Cicero.
1 Kings 12.6.10. Youth is void of judgment, Prove. 7.7. and apt to fly in the
face of a Reprover. 5. A disesteeming and sleighting of old Age. They were
young ones that mocked the Prophet, 2 Kings 2.24. and despised Job 30.1.12.
'Twill be our wisdom to fly these lusts betimes. Its a comely sight to see
mortified and self-denying young people. They are subject to stronger
Temptations and more violent Affections, there is a greater propensity to sin
in youth; and therefore the Obedience is the more excellent and acceptable,
when out of love to God we can break through all these. Young persons have many
suitors, the World, the Flesh, the Devil, all cry be mine, be mine. They all ly
in wait for the flower of our days. The Flesh casts baits, See more in Master
Henry Smiths Sermon on Eccles. 12.1. Parlow on 2 Timothy 1.5. G^yffith Gods
building. p. 143. etc. Vindication of Presbyter. Government by London
Ministers.. p. 150, etc.
the World digs pits, and the Devil sees snares. So that unless we be
magnanimous and resolute we shall be foiled and overcome. 6. A sixth sin of
Youth is, Neglecting the seasons of Grace, not knowing the day of their
Visitation, a sleighting the tenders and offers of Gods Grace unto them.



There is a time when the Lord comes a wooing to the Soul, and by the motions
of his Spirit knocks at the doors of our Hearts for entertainment, Revelations
3.20. The Devil does his utmost to hinder the match; and therefore he
persuades young persons, that they are too young to be godly, and too young to
deny themselves in point of pleasures and carnal delights, he tells them they
may believe and repent time enough hereafter, when they are Old. He deals
with them as the Philosopher did with the young man that came to him, desiring
him to tell him when he should marry. Oh said the Philosopher, thou art too
young, not yet, not yet; at last he grew old, and then he came to know when he
should marry, Not at all now said he. The Application is easy.

1. Let such consider that there are thousands and ten thousands now in Hell
that thought to have repented Hereafter. Many have an Intentionall, Cras
corvina and reproba, Vox est. Cl^mangiis.
but no solid Repentance, they resolve to repent, but they resolve not when,
Vult and non vu^t piger.
and so delay, till the day of Grace be past.

2. Consider, it is not in our power to repent when we please, God must give us
the Grace, 2 Timothy 2.25. they way of Man is not in himself, It is God must
turn us or we shall never be turned, Iremiah 31.18. He must draw us or we shall
never run after him, Canticles, 1.4. John 6.44. We must observe Gods time or
we loose all.

3. How do thou know that thou shall live till thou art old, younger, and
better then thou are gone. Shorter graves then thine may be seen.

4. Suppose thou should live till thou were old, yet thy heart may then be
so hardened that thou can not repent, and because when God called thou
would not answer, therefore thou shall cry and shall not be heard, Prove.
1.24. Ier. 22.21, 22.

5. If it were in our power, yet we may in no wise deal so dis-ingeniously with
our God, as to give the Devil the Marrow of our Youth, and reserve the dry
bones of our old Age for God. It is no wisdom to lay the greatest load on the
weakest Horse. Old Age, (though in it self it be a Blessing) yet is
accompanied with many troubles, sicknesses, and diseases, they are the Dreggs,
the Lees, the Winter of our days. As all Rivers meet in the Sea, so all
diseases meet in Old Age; Hence it is called the evil day, Eccles. 12.3, 4, 5,
etc. then the Eyes grow dim, the Ears deaf, the Hands tremble, and the
Legs are feeble, and the Memory fails.

It Is a time of spending, not of getting, and such compulsive Repentance is
seldom true. Iuveni parandum seni utendum.
They are cursed that offer the blind and the lame in Sacrifice, Malachi 1.8.
ult. and if the blind and the lame were abhorred of David's soul, much more of
Gods, 2 Samuel 5.8. It Is the greatest Wisdom in the World for young persons
to know the day of their Visitation, and to improve the Seasons of Grace,
seeking the Lord while he may be found, Isaiah 55.6. and opening when he
knocks.

It Is good sailing whilst the Ship is sound, the Pilot well, the Mariners
strong, the Gale favorable, and the Sea calm. The only way to find the Lord
when we seek him, is to seek him in due time, even Now, 2 Corinthians 6.2.
Behold, Now is the acceptable Time. Now he calls all men every where to
Repent. See how the Holy Ghost prevents Objections. I Will repent hereafter. No,
it must be now, Acts 17.30, 31.

Object. I am rich, or I am poor, I am a Jew, or a Gentile, and cannot repent.

Answ. He calls All men.

Object. I dwell amongst ill neighbors.

Answ. He calls all men every where. The time present is the only time, the
Time past is gone, the time to come we have no assurance of, the time present
is our time; Hence we are called upon so often to obey whilst it is to day. Psalm.
95.7, 8. Heb. 3.15. and to return ( i. e.) presently. Isai 21.12. In all
obligations (say the Lawyers) where no time is specified, there the condition
is presently to be performed. So Ier. 13.15, 16. Zech. 1.4. Zeph. 2.1, 2.

Now because we are naturally averse and backward to this special duty, I shall
give you 20. Considerations to Quicken you.

1. Consider that this speedy repenting and turning to God in our youth is
Comfortable, because it is a good evidence of the Truth of our Repentance,
Poenitentia sera ra^o verae.
as late Repentance is seldom true, so speedy repentance is seldom false.
It Is a good sign we have made God our God indeed, when with David we can seek
him early. Psalm. 63.1. and with Zaccheus, we make have to receive him joyfully.
Luke 19.6. This is a reward it self, and carries meat in the mouth of it, there
is a sweet resentment in the remembrance of a well-spent youth. Never did any
repent of repenting too soon, but many have Repented their deferring so long.

2. It Is more Easy; any thing taken when it is young, is more easily wrought
upon. A twig is easily bent, a disease taken in the beginning, is easily cured;
Qui n^n est hodie. etc.
when every thing by delay grows worse. When the fingers are grown stiff,
it is ill learning to play on the Lute. An old disease is hardly cured. The
longer a Tree grows, the harder it is to pull it up. The further a Nail is
driven, Male tincta ingenia ut nigrae lanarum nullum alium colorem imbib^nt. D.
Sibbs,
the harder it is to pull it out again. The acting of sin strengthens the Habit,
and when sin is become Habitual, connatural, and customary, it is hardly cured.
Ier. 13.23. Isay 26.10, 11. let favor be showed to the wicked, ( i. e.) all
those common favors of preservation, supportation, food, raiment, health,
wealth, etc. yet he will not learn righteousness though it be a lovely thing.

1. In the land of Canaan literally, where God had promised all blessings, as
the Church with all her Privileges and Ordinances, yet in despite of all these
favors they will do unjustly.

3. They will not ('it is not so much they cannot) behold the Majesty of the
Lord, ^n Winter Gentlewom^n Can hide their nakedness, but in Summer they Will
not. If a man is to be arrested, he can ^orbear the Alehouse, but let that
danger be over, and he Will not. Dediscit animus sero quae didicit diu. Sen^ca.
in his special works of mercy and judgment, when men are hardened and
habituated in sin, not all that Mount Sin^i or Mount Sion can afford, neither
John's austerity, nor Christ's lenity can work upon them. Matthew. 11.17, 18, 19.
and 23.37, 38. what is bred in the bone, will not out of the flesh, when men's
bones are full of the sins of their youth, they usually go with them to their
graves. Job 20.11. It Is well observed, that in our Saviors time of all that
were possessed with evil spirits, the Devil was most hardly cast out of those
whom he had possessed from their childhood. Mark 9.2, 29. By this delay the
understanding is more darkened. Ephesians. 4.18. the will becomes more stubborn and
unyielding. All the powers of the soul are (as it were) chained and bound up
that they cannot stir to goodness. Thus Simon Magus was held in the bonds of
iniquity. Acts 8.23. Every reigning sin is a bond which the Devil casts about
men. So that they cannot stir a step in the way of grace. Besides Satan has
a strong plea against the soul, he will plead prescription, and so many years
possession which is eleven Points in Law.

(...).
3. It Is more fruitful, we shall do more good, and receive more good, to him
that has, shall be given. We shall bring forth much penitential fruit, which
will bring much glory to God, and in glorifying him lies our glory. Ioh. 15.8.
Suppose a man should never Repent till he were old and ready to dye; though
such a man may be saved, yet his Graces are not so conspicuous, nor can he do
that good, nor bring that glory to God, as a young man that begins betimes to
serve him. Paul was converted betimes, and see what abundance of glory he
brought to God, what good he did in the Church, and what abundance of sins he
prevented, which else would have made head against him, and enslaved him: how
many famous Churches did he plant, Romans 15.19. and what abundance did he do,
and suffer for Christ. 2 Cor. 11.23.24. if a man have a great way to go,
Sancti^icat, di tat, ^^ana^ quoque ^urg^re ma ne. Most true in a spiritual
sense.
it is good rising early in the morning, such a one shall get the start of many
sluggards. It Is a thrifty course to be an early convert, the sooner we submit
to the spirits conduct, the better, the more Peace and Liberty we shall attain.

4. It Is more Beautiful, and lovely. Every thing is beautiful in its season (
Eccles. 3.11.) now Gods usual season for repentance, is when we are young.
Eccles. 12.1. as we see in Josiah, Samuel, Obadiah, etc. As a word spoken in
season, so a work done in season, is both delightful and profitable. Aestatis
tempus est fructificandi tempus, quae aestate sterilis est, hyeme foecunda non
erit. Muscul.
Prove. 15.23. The truly godly man brings forth fructum suum in tempore suo.
Psalm. 1.3. fruit in its due season. Christ delights to set forth his Vineyard
to such as will bring him in his fruit in season. Mat. 21.41. The trees of Gods
planting bring forth pleasant fruit in their months. Ezekiel. 47.12. God loves to
have this Mannah of grace gathered early. Exodus 16.21. it is the kindness of
our youth that he delights in. Ierem. 2.2.

5. We shall resemble the servants of God, all their Obedience has been prompt
and speedy. They are endued with the wisdom which is from above, which is
easily entreated to any goodness. James 3.17. Psalm. 27.8. and 119.60. Abel
brought of the firstlings of his f^ock, and the fat thereof. Genesis 4.4. Christ
calls Matthew from the receipt of custom (a gainful Trade) and he presently
forsakes all and follows Christ, when he called Simon and Andrew, James and
John, to leave all and follow him, they immediately left their nets and
followed him. Matthew. 4.20.22. when Paul was called he made no delays, he
invents no excuses, he consults not with flesh and blood, but he presently
obeyes, and was not disobedient to the heavenly Vision. Acts 26.19. Gal. 1.16.
when the Lord enlarges the heart, they improve the opportunity, when he
strikes, they strike, and when he moves, they move, and promptly obey. We have
an excellent instance in Abraham, when ever the Lord commanded him to do any
thing, though never so difficult to flesh and blood, yet still he readily
obeyed.

1. The Lord commanded him to forsake his own kindred and country, Iussus exire
patriam, exivit; jussus perigrinari in terra Canaan, pigrinatus est; famis
necessitate pressus, patienter tulit primogenitum suum Ismaelem una cum matre
dumo ejicere, jussus ejecit. Muscul.
and to go to a Land that he knew not, he must forsake a certainty for an
uncertainty, and he does it presently. Genesis 12.1, 4. Heb. 11.8. Acts 7.3, 4, 5.

2. The Lord commanded him to circumcise himself and his family; note, though
Abraham were 99. years old, and had a great family, in which there was 300.
and 18. which could bear arms; yet the Self-same day was Abraham circumcised,
and all the men of his house. Genesis 17.23.

3. Above all his sincere obedience appears in his readiness, to offer Isaak
in Sacrifice at Gods commandment. Genesis 22.2, 3, etc. God bids him take his
Isaak, Quot verba tot stimuli and tentationes.
his only son Isaak, his only son Isaak whom he loved, and go offer him in
Sacrifice; and the Text tells us that he rose up early in the morning, and took
Isaak, etc. There were many things which might have discouraged Abraham from so
doing.

1. He must take his Son, not his servant, not his friend, not his beast, but
his son. 2. It must be his own son, not another man's. 3. His only Son, if a
man have many sons, he may the better part with one, but if a man have but an
one and only son, it goes near him to part with him. Zach. 12.10. 4. His
only Son Isaak, his laughter and joy, the Son of the Promise, ( Genesis 21.12.)
in Isaac shall thy seed be called; this was the saddest and sorest tentation
of all the rest, since the Messiah, the Savior of the world was to come of
Isaak; if he were killed, the safety and salvation of the world seemed to
perish with him. 5. Whom thou lovest] To offer up an Ismael, or a son which we
hate, is not so much, but to offer up such a son as was worthy to be beloved
for his Piety and Obedience, was a great trial. 6. He himself must take him, he
must seek no other Executioner, but with his own hands must he sacrifice him.
7. When must he take him? Now. Take now thy son, he must take him presently
without deliberation or delay, God allows him not an hour or a day to confer
with any, or to comfort his distracted heart. 8. He must go to Mount Moriah
three days journey, so long his soul must be kept in suspense. 9. When he comes
there, he must slay him, he must cut his throat, rip up his bowels, and burn
his Quarters to ashes on the Altar; so they did by burnt offerings. Levit. 1.6,
8, 9. 10. This must not be done secretly, Deus imbeciliores medicis, praecipuos
praecipuis exercet tentationibus. Muscul.
but he must be sacri^iced on a Mount, in the fight of all the world. Thus
strong believers must look for strong Temptations. God loves to try us in our
most dear and delightful things which our hearts most affect, that it may
appear which has most of our hearts, God or they.
[If any would see more, let him peruse those elaborate large Annot. on Genesis
22.2, 3. Mr. Herles Ser. on Genesis 22.2, 3, etc. D. George Downam's Ser. on the
same Text, and Doctor Maxey. Venning's Milk and Honey. 2. Part. p. 88. Sect.
257. Sibelius 1. Tom. p. 1. etc.]

6. Consider the shortness and uncertainty of our days, is a notable spur to
speedy Repentance; for as presumption of Long life does harden men, so
Realizing of death, and looking on it as present, does quicken and awaken men;
now our life in Scripture is compared to a span that is soon measured. Psalm.
39.5. to a Tale that is soon told. Psalm. 90.9. to a Vapor that quickly
vanishes. V Mr. Ley's Funeral Ser. on that Tex^
James 4.14. like a flower that soon fades. Isay 40.6, 7, 8. Job 14, 2. Psalm.
102.11. and 103.15. James 1.10. 1 Pet. 1.24. Like a Post or a Weavers shuttle,
that fly speedily. Job 7.6. and 9.25. We are obnoxious to above 300. diseases,
and to excessive Passions of joy, sorrow, fear, envy, etc. which have killed
many: besides thousands of Casualties, a Tile from a house may kill thee, Judge.
9.53. a Beast may slay thee, Mill modis m^rimur, uno been.
a Hair, a Fly, a Raisin stone may choke thee, as it has done others. There Is
death in our Pots, Cups, Beds, Boards, etc. Death borders on our Birth, and our
Cradle stands in our grave; we lament the loss of our Parents, how soon shall
our friends bewail ours, and as our life is short, so it is Uncertain, no man
knows when, where, or how he shall dye. I am old (says Isaak) and know not
the day of my death. Id^o latet ul^imus dies, ut observetur omnis.
Genesis 27.3. God in his wisdom has hid from us our last day, that we might
watch every day.

7. The seasons of Grace are short, time it self is short, (...), opportunitas
est celeris. Hippoc.
but opportunity is much shorter. Every day in the year is not a fair day, and
every day in the week is not a Market day. Non semper sacras reddunt Oracula
sorts Ipsaque non omni tempo^e fana patent. Ovid.
Grace is not every days offer, and therefore we should walk in the light,
whilst we have the light. John 12.35, 36. as the day is ordained for men to
work in, so is the day of Grace, There is but one acceptable time, which being
neglected is as a bird escaped out of the hand, or a shaft shot out of a bow,
which cannot be recalled aga^n. Stock.
wherein we must store our selves against the winter of afflictiou. It Is our
harvest time wherein we must double our diligence. Prove. 10.5. In this we may
learn wisdom from the men of the world; The Smith strikes whilst his iron is
hot; The Husbandman makes hay whilst the Sun shines. The Mariner observes
his Wind and Tide, the Lawyer his Terms, the Chapman his Faires and Markets,
and the Gardener his Seasons. Yea, shall the Stork, the Crane, and the Swallow
know the time of their coming, Tempestates suas vel bruta percipiunt, naturali
instinctu and alteratione quadam in temperatura ad id tempus contingente edocta
Pemble.
and shall not we know the day of our Visitation? Ier. 8.7. Does the Be lose
no fair day, and does the Ant in Summer provide for Winter? Prove. 6.8. and
shall not we in the Summer of youth provide for the Winter of old age?

See Mr. Gournall on Ephesians. 6.11. p. 93, 94. etc.
8. Shall the Devil observe his seasons to do mischief. Matthew. 13.25. and
Thieves, Heretics, and Harlots take their opportunities to act their
Villainies. Job 24.15. Prove. 7.9. Genesis 39.11. Mark 6.21. and shall not we
observe our seasons to do good?

9. In these Seasons of Grace, the Lord is very ready and willing to be found
of us; See Mr. Ant. Burges Spi. Refining. 1 Part. Ser. 6.6 p. 403,
witness those Pathetical expressions. Psalm. 81.13, 14. Ier. 4.14. and 13.
ult. Ezekiel. 18.31. he knocks at the doors of our hearts by his spirit, by his
word, by mercies and menaces, if by any means he may prevail with us. Rev.
3.20. Hence he is said to wait that he may be gracious, to stretch forth his
hands all the day long; to gather us as a Hen does her chickens, and and
promises that we shall not lose our labors, but that they who seek him early,
and with their whole hearts, shall find him. Deuteronomy. 4.29. 2 Chronicles. 15.15. Prove.
8.17. Ier. 29.13.

10. Neglecting the day of our Visitation increases wrath, Demus operam ut dum
tanta in Christo offertur gratia, eam manu fidei continuo apprehendamus, secus
enim si neglecta and elapsa fuerit semel occasio gratiae, tantam aberit ut
aliquid nobis sit profutura ista qua nunc offertur gratia, ut etiam auctura sit
justam damnationem. Rolloc. in John 3.17.
and provokes the Lord to cut off young persons in the flower of their days.
If a man should every day be adding sticks to the fire, and Oil to the flame,
it must needs make the fire very terrible at last. Now the longer the fire
burns, the harder it is to quench it; the further the Lord fetches his arm, the
heavier will the blow come. Such Treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.
Job 36.13. Psalm. 7.11, 12. Romans 2.5.

11. God takes special notice of peoples delays, and sets down every Minute
that they abide in their sin, and abuse his Patience, hence he cries. Proverbs
1.22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and Psalm. 4.2. O ye sons
of men How long will ye love vanity? and denounces a woe against Jerusalem for
her dallying and delaying. Ier. 13. ult. See Mr. Naltons Fast Sermon. on that
Text.
Woe unto thee O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be?
After how many woings and warnings, after how many Invitations and
Exhortations, will thou still continue Impenitent and unreformed? how long will thou defer thy Returning to me? when will thou be cleansed from thy old
abomination, Quamdiu haerebis in vi^iorum tuo^um foeda pluv^e? Sanctius
? thou talkest of turning, and make some offer, but when will thou turn in
earnest? what not after so many years purifying Sermons? not after so many
melting mercies? not after so many purgeing judgments? not after so many days
of Humiliation? Oh when will it once be? They were wilfully impenitent, God
does not say, Can thou not, but will thou not be made clean? many say they
cannot leave their drunkenness, swearing, etc. yet for gain, or for fear, in
some companies they can forbear. So that the will is worse then the
understanding. Jeremy 6.16. Psalm. 78 10. Isay 30, 9.15. and 42.24. Jeremy 5.3.
and 8.5. Zach. 7.11. Romans 8.7.

12. Gods Spirit will not always strive with sinful, rebellious man. Ge^.
6.3. but when he has used all means to reclaim them, and they will not be
reclaimed, he will give them up in judgment to their own hearts lusts, so that
he who is filthy shall be filthy still, Revel. 22.11. and since they would not
be purged, they shall not be purged from their sin, till they dye. Ezekiel. 24.13.

13. Such sin against the Attributes of God.

1. They sin against his Wisdom, as if God knew not which were the fittect
time for them to repent in. 2. They sin against his Justice, whilst they say
in their hearts God will not punish, though they be impenitent. Deuteronomy. 29.19,
20. 3. They abuse his Goodness and Patience, which should lead them to
Repentance. Romans 2.5. Hence those that have favor showed them, and yet will
not learn righteousness, are charged with this, that they will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord, Isay 26.10.
14. Such sin against equity and common Reason. Reason it self bids us speedily
obey such as counsel us for our good, See more in my Beauty of Holiness. cap. 6
per totum.
especially if they be our superiors. If a Prince should send a Pardon to a
Rebel, provided he humbled himself and submit, Reason it self tells us that such
a one were very unwise, if he would not accept of mercy upon such easy terms.

15. Consider what an exceeding hard thing it is to Repent. It Is no less then
the change of nature, old customs and habits which are very hardly broken. Ier.
13.23. To change a Lion into a Lamb, fire into water, darkness into light, is a
work of omnipotency, and such is Repentance, it is not in our power, it is Gods
free gift, and must be accepted of, when he offers it. 2 Timothy 2.25.

16. Consider the vile nature of sin.

1. It Is the V. Crashaw's Sermon. on Psalm. 140.3 and Taylor's Types. p. 306, and
327. Church's Treasury. p. 146. Weemse 1. Vol. p. 97.
Poison of the soul. Romans 3.13. now the sooner we vomit up this poison by a
free and full confession of it, the better.

2. Sin is the souls sickness, it stabs and wounds the conscience; now diseases
and wounds, the longer they go undrest, the ^^rdlier are they cured.

3. It Is a Thief to us, and a Traitor to God. It robs us of our strength,
Peace and comfort, now the longer a Thief keeps possession, the harder it is to
cast him out: and to entertain a Traitor to our Sovereign, is Treason.

4. It Is a Debt, See more Mr. Buroughs evil of sin, and Dr. Bolton in Folio.
Matthew. 6.12. Psalm. 51.1. now the further a man runs in debt, the harder it is
to get out again.

3. It Is Folly, madness, darkness, blindness, filth, etc. and therefore with
all speed to be opposed and purged out.

17. We would have God to hear us speedily. Psalm. 131.2. and 77.7. then it is
but Reason that we should hear him speedily, and if we may not say to our
Neighbor, Go, and come again to morrow, much less to God. Prove. 3.28.

18. We shall cause joy in Heaven. Luke 15.7.

1. God himself rejoices that he has a new son, he esteems more of one poor,
V. M. Calamies Fast Se^m on Ier 18.7, 8. p. 41, 42.
humbled, repentant sinner, then of ten thousand proud Pharisees, who in their
own conceits need no Repentance.

2. Christ rejoices to see of the travel of his soul, and that he has a new
member added to his mystical body.

3. The Holy Ghost rejoices that he has a new Temple to dwell in.

Lac^ymae poeniten^^um sunt Argel^ um vinum. Bern.
4. The Angels in Heaven rejoice that they have a New Fellow Servants to sing
praises to their Lord.

5. The Church rejoices that one more is added unto their number.

19. It Is a point of the highest wisdom to know and improve the day of our
Visitation. It Is only the wise man's heart that discerns times and seasons.
Prove. 22.3. Eccles. 8.5. ^phes. 5.15, 16. he is wise to redeem the Time past
with repentance, the time present with diligence, and the time to come with
providence. Opportunitas vi^um indicat.
He observes the fit time of doing Gods commads. 'Twas the high commendations
of the men of Issacher, that they were men that had understanding of the times,
and knew what ought to be done. 1 Chronicles. 12.32. It Is one of the highest acts of
Practical wisdom, rightly to improve the seasons of Grace.

20. Lastly, the neglecting and squandring away these seasons of grace brings
Ruin to a person or Nation. God has appointed a season wherein to call and
convert men, and those that slight these seasons undo themselves, when the
harvest of grace is past, and the summer ended, no wonder if men be not saved.
This very sin ruined Jerusalem, the not knowing the day of her Visitation. Luke
19.42, 44. when God gives people space to repent, and they will not repent,
then he casts them into a Percutiam cum morbo and aegritudine, ut quae modo in
voluptatum lecto quiescit, decumbat in lecto aegritudinis. a Lapide.
bed of sorrow. Rev. 2.21, 22. Upon the well or ill spending of these seasons
of Grace, depends our eternal Weal or Woe. Let then these Considerations
Quicken thee to a speedy improvement of them, that thou may have cause to
bless God, that ever thou read these lines, and they may never be a
witness against thee for thy negligence, in that great day of the Lord. God
records every Sermon, he sets down the day and year when 'twas preached Isay
1.1. Ier. 1.2, 3. Hag. 1.1. and he will one day reckon with us for them; and
therefore we had need to live up to our Means and Mercies, and to answer them
with an holy and obedient conversation, that our Sermons may rise for our
Justification, and not for our Confusion. Let us sow to the Spirit betimes, for
as men sow, so shall they reap; he that in the Seedtime of his youth sowes
nothing but Tares and wild Oats, in the harvest of his age must not expect a
crop of corn. But he that sowes to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting.

See more Reasons, Madens Ser. on Luke 19.42. c. 14, 15, 16. D. Prideaux Ser.
on Mat. 5.23. p. 20, 21. Fenner on Prove. 1.28. and Genesis 6.3. and Luke 23.42.
Dyke on Repent. c. 16. p. 150. etc. Mr. Ier. Dyke's select Ser. on Prove. 23.23.
p. 359. and on 1 These. 5.19. p. 27. D. Preston. on Sacram. Ser. 3. p. 326.
Tailor on Titus. p. 47. etc. Mr. Obad. Sedgwick. Rev. 3.20. Mr. Gross Ser. on
Luke 19.41. p. 242. Mr. Wheatly's Redemption of Time. Mr. Ant. Burgess Spi.
Refining. 1. Part. Ser. 75. and Mr. John Downams Warfar. l. 2. c. 29, etc. p.
184. Fol. Mr. Sangars Morning Lect. Rev. 2.21. p. 211. Mr. Froysel, his Gale of
opportunity. Mr. Beesly Ser. 8. on Eccles. 12.1. Mr. Chishull on Luke 19.42.

From a child thou have known the holy Scriptures.
2. Observe, Young Timothies should read the Scriptures betimes. Those that are
devoted to the work of the Ministry, should be seasoned betimes with
Scripture-Learning, they must even suck it in with their Mothers milk. 1 Timothy
4.6. They must not give themselves to the Reading of Tristlers, as many young
men that first begin with Schoolmen, Controversialists, Fathers, Postilers,
etc. This breeds so many Arminians, Socinians and Heretics; they are given up
in judgment to believe lies, for contemning the Scriptures of Truth. As for
the Non est ^pe^aepretium (praesertim junioribus) Scholiastico^um plac^^s
inniti, quia tal^s Scholast^cus evadit ple^u^ que phantasticus vt a^anea
seipsum eviscerans ad capiendas muscas. D. Prideaux.

Nihil pejus nimio acumine. In utramque partem d^sputant omnia, vix quicquam
certi habent. V. D. Arrow-Smith. Tactica S. O^at. 2. p. 11. etc.


Schoolmen they bring forth Cobwebs, fine for Thread, but of no use. They
torture their Reader with abundance of vermiculate, rotten, hollow Questions,
with many needless Queries and Ut^ums. One compares them to a man that has
bread and good wine hanging on both sides, yet himself sits hungrily gnawing a
flint stone. One Austin amongst the ancients, and one Question amongst the
modern Divines will yield more solid Divinity, then all the Schoolmen with
their vain disputations, Jejune distinctions, Quodlibetical, idle, curious,
Skeptical Queries, and mere speculations, Yea, Bucer affirms that there is more
Holiness to be found in Seneca, then in most of the Schoolmen. They Hipotius
superstitionibus and subtilitatibus litant, quam Textus simplicitati. V.
Altingium Tom. 2. P. 1. Problem* 3. p. 17. etc.

Bowls Pastor. Evangsl. l. 1 c. 19 p. 125.

D. Prideaux fasci^ul. Edit. 2. in fine. p. 1* 2. etc.

D. ^^bbs Concio ad Clerum. p. 46.47. Tactica sacra. Oration 2. p. 11. etc.


darken the Truth by framing all Religion according to the platform of
Philosophy, confounding the principles of Divinity and Philosophy together. Yet
by men that are solid, seasoned, sanctified, some good may be picked out of
them, which shows the folly of the Papists who cry. Plus apud se valere unum
Lumbardum (Scholasti^ae disciplinae Patrem) quam centum Yet Erasmus confesses
that he learne^ more from one short page of Luthers writings, then from all
Thomas Aquinas his great Books.

Habeantur Patres dum rectam viam indicant pro Luminibus, at nobis sit unicum
numen. Rivet Isagoge ad sc^ipt. c. 18. p. 269. ubi plura. Et Bowls Pastor.
Evangel. l. 1. c. 19. p. 122. etc.

V. Tossanus his Synopsis of the Fathers and the Schoolmen.


Lutheros, ducentos Melancthones, tre^ent^s Bullingeros, quadringent^s
Martyrs, quingentos Calvinos.

2. Others prefer the reading of the Fathers before the sacred Scriptures.
Though we Reverence the ancient Fathers, and bless God for their Light, yet
the Ancient of days is more ancient then they, and his word is to be preferred
before all their writings; for they were men, and had their naevos, their
failings and infirmities, as other men. One ^ound reason drawn from Scripture,
is of more worth and weight then the saying of a thousand Austins, Origens,
Chrysostomes, etc. Men had need to be well grounded in the Scriptures, before
they read the Fathers; for we should try the Fathers by the Scriptures, and not
the Scriptures by the Fathers. He that will not believe Moses and the Prophets,
will not believe though one arose from the dead.

[See Rules for Reading and citing the Fathers. Perkins 2. Vol. Problem. 1. p.
486. D. Hills Sermon. on Ier. 6.16. p. 24, 25. Mr. Trapps Com. on 2 Timothy 3.16.
Weemse Vol. 1. l. 3. c. 1. Reynolds against Heart. cap. 5. Sect. 1. p. 184.
Luthers Colloq. English. cap. 29.]

It is well observed by a Pious and experienced M. Ezekiel Culverwell's Time well
spent. p. 297. and 321.
Divine, that it is a most worthy travail for Students in Divinity, to refer
all their study, first for the true sense of Scripture which only will make a
man a grounded Divine, able to teach the truth, and confute error.

2. For the right use of it in himself and others, for amendment of life and
all good duties. This course have I by experience (says he) found profitable,
and resolved upon, viz. to be diligent in reading the holy Scriptures, and of
them at the least 4. Chapters daily, in like manner (for the increase of my
knowledge) to spend 3. hours in the fore-noon in searching out the sense of
the hardest places, as two in the afternoon in searching out the propriety of
the Tongues, and other two in perusing the Tracts and Commentaries of learned
men; one in Meditation and Prayer, and what time remains, to spend the same in
brotherly conference.

3. Observe, That women and children may and must read the Scriptures Timothy a
child knows the Scriptures, and his Grandmother and his Mother taught him.
Priscilla a woman instructs eloquent Apollos. Act. 18.26. God commands men,
women and children to hear and learn his law. Deuteron. 6.6, 7, 8. and 31.12.
and God promises it as a special privilege, that in Gospel Times all shall
know him from the greatest to the least. Jeremy 31.34. All that expect eternal
life, are commanded to read the Scriptures, but women and children expect
eternal life as well as others, therefore they must read the Scriptures. John
5.39. God would not have us strangers to his word, he would have it not barely
lodge for a night, but dwell in us, and that not only sufficiently, but richly
and abundantly. Colossians 3.16. and therefore it is that he blames his people,
V. Chameir Controvers. Tom. 1. l. 1. c. 1. and B. Vshers Body of Divin.
that when he had preached to them the Magnalia legis, the great and choice
things of his Law, yet they accounted them as strange things. Hos. 8.12.

4. Observe, That the Scriptures are not so dark as some would make them, if
women and children must read them, then sure there is something plain in them.
As there are Depths in them where the Elephant may swim, so there are Fords
where the Lamb may wade. The plainness and perspicuity of the Scripture is so
fully proved by others, that I shall refer you to them for satisfaction. See
Mr. Leighs Body of Divinity. l. 1. c. 8. p. 99. B. Vshers Body of Divinity. p.
21. Hildersham on Psalm 51.6. Lect. 102. and Lect. 144. p. 768. Camero. de
controvers. Iudic. cap. 10. page 598. Folio. Walaeus Loci com. p. 143. etc.

The Holy Scriptures. By the Holy Scripture is here meant principally the Old
Testament. For the New Test. (at least all of it) was not written when Timothy
was a child, the Canon was not then completed. Hence Observe,

Tria sunt quae V. T. dignitatem nobis dicunt viz. ejus Materia, efficiens and
finis. Materia sunt praecepta sacra and Historiae. Efficiens, Deus; finis
aedificatio and salus Ecclesiae. Hornbech.
That the Scriptures of the Old Testament are the word of God; and so are
useful for us still. Many Sectaries cry out of the Law, and the Old Testament
as a low, poor, mean thing; when the Holy Ghost here calls it, The Holy
Scripture, which is able to make us wise unto salvation. How contrary is the
Language of these profane men to the Language of Gods Spirit? This is a great
Controversy in our days, I shall therefore.

1. By Arguments prove the Old Testament to be Authentic, and still in force.
2. I shall answer all the Anabaptistick Cavils that are raised against it. 3. I
shall make some brief Application.
1. The Scriptures of the Old Testament are of Divine Authority, Canonical, a
Rule of Faith and good Life, which appears thus.

1. that which Christ and his Apostles have commended to us as a Rule of Faith
and good Life, must needs be of Divine Authority, and ought still to be
observed by us. but Christ and his Apostles have commended the Old Testament to
us as a Rule of Faith and good Life Ergo, The Major no Sober man will deny. The
Minor I prove; First from John 5.39. Christ sends us to the Old Testament, and
bids us search those Scriptures, (for the New Testament was not then written;)
Now to what end should we search them, if they were of no validity. So Paul
tells us, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written afore-time ( viz. in the
Old Testament) they were written for our Learning. Apollos is commended for his
admirable dexterity in opening the Scriptures of the Old Testament, Acts 18.24.

2. Christ and his Apostles (to show the Divine Authority of the Old Testament
even in Gospel times) did fetch Arguments out of the Old, to confirm many
points of Doctrine and Practice, when some doubted whether Christ were the
Messiah, Christ proves it out of Isay 35. and 53. and 61. when others
Questioned the Resurrection; Christ confutes them out of Exodus 4. I am the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. When a Question arose about Divorcements, Christ
has recourse presently to the Old Testament, and alleges those words,
Genesis 2. For this cause a man shall leave Father and Mother, and they two
(not they twenty, as the Polygamistical Anabaptists would have it) shall be one
flesh. So when the Pharisees accused Christ's Disciples for breach of the
Sabbath, Christ presently defends them with an Old Testament proof, Matthew
12.3. compared with 1 Samuel 21.6. So when the Scribes and Pharisees taught for
Doctrines the Precepts of men, Christ confutes them, out of Isay 29 13. When
Christ would teach men to deal justly and to do as they would be done by, he
proves it from the Law and the Prophets, which comprehend the whole Old
Testament, Mat. 7.12. So did Paul, Acts 26.22. and 28.23. he taught nothing but
what was written in the Law and the Prophets. So Ephesians 6.2, 3. and Peter
confirmed what he said out of the Old Testament, 1 Peter 2.4. and 1.1, 15. When
Paul would fright men from murmuring, he brings an Old Testament Example, 1
Cor. 10.6.11. All these things are written for our Example. So he proves
Justification by Faith out of the Old Testament, by Abraham's being justified by
Faith, Romans 4. He proves the maintenance of Ministers to be due, from the Law,
1 Cor. 9.7, 8. All this proves that the Old Testament is not abrogated.

3. The Word of the Lord endures for ever, not a Jod or tittle of it shall pass
away till all be fulfilled, Matthew 5.18. But the writings of Moses and the
Prophets are the Word of God; Hence they are called, His Statutes, his
Testimonies, his Law and his Commandments, and in our doubts we must to the
Law and Testimony as our Rule. Isay 8.20. and Peter tells us (2 Peter 1.19.)
that we have a more sure word of Prophecy (speaking of the Old Testament)
whereunto ye do well to take heed as to a light shining in a dark place: and if
they do well that take it for their Rule and Guide, then they do ill that
reject it, to follow some Ignis fatuus, some New-light of their own inventing.

4. He that denies the Old Testament (when it crosses his Lusts) will when a
Tempation comes deny the New Testament also; for the Penmen of the Old
Testament were inspired with the same Holy Spirit of Truth, as were the Penmen
of the New.

There is but one Spirit, 2 Corinthians 4.13. and it cannot speak Truth in
Paul, and falsehood in Moses; but the same Holy Spirit which spoke by Peter,
Paul, John, etc. Spoke also by Moses, Isay, David, Jeremy, Luke 1.70. Hebrews
1.1. 2 Peter 1.21. Question one, and you will quickly question all; Question
Moses, and you will question Matthew; Question Matthew, and you will question
Paul; till at last with the Quakers you have cast off all. For what is the Old
Testament but the New obscure? And what is the New Testament but the Old made
plain? both have an eye to Christ, they being saved in the Old Testament by
believing that Christ would come, Novum Testamentum in Vetere velatum, and
Vetus in Novo revelatum esse, dixit, Augustinus.
and we in the New by believing that Christ is come. So that, deny one, and you
will quickly deny both.

5 The Anabaptists themselves who cry out most against Old Testament proofs,
yet are as ready as any to borrow proofs from thence, when they think it may
make for their advantage.

Thus the Anabaptists in Germany (that cried down the Old Testament, yet) went
about to justify their rising against their Superiors from the Example of the
Israelites rising against Pharaoh, and when we demand what grounds they have to
preach without a call, they can then cite, Numbers 11.25. 2 Chronicles 17.7.
Joel 2.28. I hope they will allow us the same Liberty which they take
themselves, and when we cite Old Testament proofs against Tolerations, and for
punishing blasphemers with death, they will not be offended.

6. How shall we be able to convince a Jew that Christ is the true Messiah? It
must be out of the Old Testament, (for the New he will not believe) Now that
Christ is already come, according to the Promises and Prophesies of him, is as
clear as the Sun, by Old Testament proofs. Quomodo probabitur
demonstrative, Christum esse Messiam illum nisi per Vetus Tectamentum?
comparando and c^nferendo praedictiones impletas, Luke 24.27. Hornbeck.


1. He came into the World at the time foretold, Daniel 9.24. after seventy
weaks ( i.) forty nine years the Messiah shall come, therefore the Messiah is
now, for from that time till now is two thousand years and more as appears by
History.

2. The place of his Birth was foretod, Micah 5.2. and accordingly Christ was
born at Bethlem, Matthew 2.6.

3. 'Twas prophesied that he should be meek and lowly (not a glorious earthly
King that should come with fire and sword to subdue Kingdoms) Isay 42.2. Zech.
9.9. accordingly he was so, Matt. 11.28.

4. 'Twas prophesied that he should be crucified, Psalm 21. Isay 53. and he was
so, Matthew 26.3. 'Twas prophesied that he should rise again Psalm 16. and he
did so, Matthew 28. and Gods judgments on the Jews to this day, who desired
his blood might be on them and their children, and it is so, See more in Mr.
Hieron Ser. on Luke 7 70. p. 115.
for at this day they are a cursed, scattered, contemptible people: This
Argument convinced a Jew fourscore years ago in England. Thus we see the
necessity of the Old Testament in this respect. [See more Reasons in Master
Rowles Confession of Faith. p. 30.31, etc.

An Answer to the Anabaptisticall cavils against the Old Testament.
Objection If the Old Testament be not abrogated, then we are still bound to
Circumcision, Sacrifice, and other Legal Rites.

Answer, It does not follow, for though these Jewish Ceremonies are now
abolisht, Abrogata est Lex Ceremonialis non quoad usum Historicum, sed Typicum
ac signifitativum tantum. Arnoldus. The Ceremonial Law is still a Teacher of
Moral Duties, as 1 Corinthians 5.7.13. and 1 Timothy 2.8. and James 1.18.
yet it may be useful to know them, though we are not bound to the Practice of
them.

1. That we may see what the Jewish Paedagogy was, and how God ruled his Church
then.

2. That we may be thankful to God who has set us in a better condition, The
N. T. excels the Old (though the same for substance) in twelve particulars.
V. Pa^aeum in Romans 1.1.

Est fallacia a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.


and eased of all those tiresome journeyes and costly sacrifices. Now what
fallacious arguing is this? because the Types and Sacrifices of the Old
Testament are abolisht. Ergo, all the Old Testament is abolisht. Every freshman
can tell them, a part ad totum non valet Argumentum, E. g. Some compounded
Anabaptists are notorious Heretics, shall we therefore conclude that all are
so? All that they can gather is this, That since the Ceremonial Law is ceast,
Ergo, something in the Old Testament is ceast. This no man denies, but under
this pretense to cast off all the Old Testament wherein are so many excellent
instructions tending to Faith and good Life, is most unjust and ungodly
dealing; and this may serve in Answer to that Socinian Argument from Heb. 8.13.
and 7.18. where the Old Covenant is said to vanish.

Answer, The Apostle speaks not there of the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets
as if it should vanish, By disannulling the Old Testament, he does not mean the
Books of the Old Testament, but that old manner of publishing, administering
and applying the Covenant. Lyford.
for then he should contradict himself, Acts 26.27. and Christ Luke 24.27.44.
and Peter, Acts 10.43. but he speaks expressly of the Ceremonial Types and
Sacrifices, which he calls, V. 5. Shadows of Heavenly things, but Christ the
Substance being come, those shadows are gone, Colos. 2.16.17.

2. Objection, Matthew 11.13. All the Prophets and the Law continued (say they)
but till John.

Answ. We must distinguish of these Terms the Law and the Prophets.

1. Sometimes they are taken Generally for the whole Body and Canon of the
Books of the Old Testament.

2. Sometimes for those Legal Sermons and Types of the Messiah to come, 1.
Loquitur Christus non de tota Lege, sed de Vmbris Legis and Prophetarum, quae
tunc incipiebant impleri, and abrogari.

2. De Vaticiniis implendis in N. ^. quae tunc coeperunt imple^i and
determinari. Paraeus.


and in this latter sense the words are hear to be taken. q. d. The things
which the Prophets foretold of Christ and the Types of him in the Law, began to
be fulfilled in the time of John, and therefore there needed now no more
predictions, but a manifestation of the Messiah to Israel, which was John's
Office to do, John 1.29. the Prophets showed that Christ was to come, and John
shows that he was now come. So that here the Anabaptists run into the former
fallacy, A^gument and. a particulari ad Universal, and a par^e ad totum.
which Christ speaks of; the Types, and part of the O. T. they apply to the
whole, in which are many Evangelical Sermons of the Prophets.

3. Objection. 2 Corinthians 3.11. The Vail is taken away by Christ.

Evacuatur in Christo non V. T. sed velamen ejus. Aug.
Answer, By the Vail is not meant the Law of Moses (as Socinus would have it)
but the blindness and hardness of the Jews, which by their conversion should be
taken away, V. 16.

2. Suppose he should speak of the Ceremonial Law, must therefore all the Law
be abrogated?

3. Suppose he should speak of all the Laws of Moses (which will not be
granted) shall we therefore cast off all the Old Testament, as the Prophets,
Psalms, etc. God forbid. The New Testament does not abrogate but illustrate
the Old, and makes things clearer. Christ is the substance of both; Accessione
Novi T. Non perfectius, sed clarius factum est. V. T.
all the Sacrifices were but Types and shadows of Christ the true Sacrifice.
It Is necessary therefore to read both, for many things in the Old Testament
help to illustrate the New, and many things in the New Testament help to
illustrate the Old.

4. Objection, Isay 54.13. All thy people shall be taught of God, Ergo there is
no need of the Old Testament.

Answer, Nor of the New neither if these words should be taken Simply according
to the Letter. If the single teaching of Gods Spirit were sufficient as the
Quakers say the Light within them is, then farewell Old and New Testament both,
and such high attainers there are (in their own conceits) that have cast off
both: But the words are to be taken Comparatively: In Gospel times they shall
not be so much taught by men, See this Text more fully opened, in my Sal
Terrae. c. 5.
as by God himself; he by his Spirit will bless and water the labor of his
Ministers, and will teach us effectually the mysteries of salvation.

Now what is here to overthrow the Old Testament? because in Gospel times Gods
Spirit shall accompany his Ordinances and make them fruitful; Ergo the Old
Testament is abolished. This is Anabaptists Logic.

2. I answer ad Hominem. Is not this an Old Testament proof, and if it be
abolisht, why do you make such use of it against the Scriptures and the
Ministry?

5. Objection, Christ is the End of the Law. Romans 10.4. Ergo it is now abolished.

Answer, Christ has put an End to the Ceremonial Law, because 'twas but a
shadow of him who was the Body, Truth and Substance, John 1.17. Col. 2.17. but
he has not abolished the Moral Law, Matthew. 5.17. It Is still to us a Rule of
Obedience. Christ is Finis Legis perficiens, non interficiens, the perfecting
and consummating end, but not the destroying and abolishing end thereof.

6. It may be profitable (say the Socinians) but it is not necessary to read the
Old Testament.

Answer, Whom shall we believe, blasphemous Socinus, or our blessed Savior?

1. Christ commands us to search the Scriptures of the Old Testament so that
it is necessary to read them, Necessitate praecepti.

2. It Is able to make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. and so is necessary,
Necessitate medii.

3. Necessitate Signi, it is a sign we are Christ's sheep, when we hear his
voice, and that we are blessed indeed when we can meditate in his Law night and
day, Psalm. 1.1, 2.

Object. There is sufficient for our salvation revealed in the New Testament.
Ergo, there is no need of the Old.

Answ: God knows what is sufficient for man, better then we; he could have
comprised his word in a lesser Volume then the N.T. but since in his wisdom and
goodness he has provided not only sufficiently, Summa sapientia and bonitate
non solum ad sufficientiam, sed ad plenitudinem fidei dispensare nobis voluit.
Polan.
but abundantly for our direction and comfort, we may not quarrel at his
goodness, but do our duty, and answer his bounty with obedience,

[These are the chief Socinian Cavils, if any would see more, he may peruse
Brochmand C C. Tom. 1. de sacra Script. Q. 5. p. 77. and 83. Altingius loci
com. Tom. 1. P. 2. p. 281. Hornbeck contra Socin. l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 1, 2, 3.
Arnoldus cont. Socin. cap. 1. p. 4, 5, etc. and Mr. Lyford, Plain man's Senses
exercised, cap. 2. p, 40, etc.]

Use. 1. Serves for reproof to those Manichees Marcionites, The Manichees 1400.
years ago denied the Old Testament, whom Saint Austin confuted; yet this is
some of the New-light of our Times.
Valentinians, Carpocratians, Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, and Libertines
of our time who decry all arguing from Old Testament proofs; as Legal,
antiquated and childish. This is, and should be matter of deep Lamentation to
us. Psalm. 119.136. It Is time for the Lord to arise when men shall destroy all
his Laws. Psalm. 119, 126. The Court-Bishops went about to destroy the second
and the fourth Commandments, (in their Practice especially) and God has cast
them out; a Sect are now risen, that go about to destroy all Gods Laws, they
will certainly fall. The more they oppose and disgrace it, the more by an holy
Antiperristasis, we should love it. Psalm. 119.127. So shall we have Peace, and
nothing shall offend us. Psalm 119.165. As our Savior prayed for the
persecutors of his person, Father forgive them for they know not what they do;
so shall I pray for those that oppose his Truth revealed in the Old Testament,
Father forgive them, for they know not (or at least consider not) what they do.
Why? what do they? They open a gap to abundance of sin and profaneness; for
how many sins are there which are expressly condemned in the Old Testament,
which yet are scarcely mentioned in the New. E. g. How often is the profanation
of the Sabbath forbidden in the Old Testament, and the profaneness of it
threatened with death, and the due observers of it blessed and encouraged. Now if
the Old Testament were abrogated, we should be at a great loss in this
respect, since the New Testament speaks very little to this point; and one
great reason is because so much was said for it in the Old Testament, which
still stands unrepealed.

2. For the condemning of Usury and oppression, how full is the Old Testament?
yet Usury is scarce mentioned in the New Testament.

3. How then should Magistrates put Blasphemers, Adulterers and witches to
death, since the scriptural warrants which make these crimes Capital, are
contained in the Old Testament, and not in the New?

4. Then it would not be unlawful to marry within the Degrees forbidden in the
Old Testament, See Mr. Edwards's Gangrene. 3. Part. p. 3.14.
and not in the New, hence some Sectaries have maintained that it is lawful to
marry within the Degrees forbidden in the Old Testament, etc.

2. Since the Old Test. is the very word of God, and there are contained in it
so many excellent promises to support our faith, and so many precious Truths
and Commands for the direction of our lives; oh let us read it, study it,
meditate in it night and day. Psalm 1.1, 2. As Ministers must preach the whole
counsel of God to their people. Acts 20.27. so people should desire to hear
and know all Gods counsel revealed to us in the Old and New Testament, things
revealed concern us. Deuteronomy. 29.29. ^ince we have Moses and the Prophets we must
not expect Revelations. Luke 16.29 This is that foundation upon which all the
faithful must build. Ephesians 2.20. being built on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets. (i. e.) on the Doctrine of the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, a house without a foundation will soon fall. He that knows not
Gods will revealed in Scripture, must needs miscarry Hence it is that Christ
would not have us barely. read, Scrutamini (i. e.) cum labor and diligentia
^ff^aite, a^canes Seripturarum thesauros, u^i qui scrutantur venas auri and
argenti terram effodiunt ut aurum inveniant. a Lapide.
but search the Scriptures ( John 5.39.) of the Old Testament, where we shall
find many excellent Lessons.

1. There we may see the glorious work of Creation, how God made man holy and
happy, how we lost this happiness, and how by Christ we are restored again.
Genesis 3. and 2. Romans 1.1. and 16.26.
To fear us from sin, here we may see Gods judgments on the Old world, Sodom,
Pharaoh, Egypt, Jerusalem, and Lots wife, whom Christ commands us to remember.
Luke 17.33. and if we must remember her why not all the rest of these examples
which are recorded in the Old Testam. 1 Cor. 10.1.6. Heb. 11.


3. Here are many sweet promises to quicken us to obedience. Deuteronomy. 28.1. to 15.

4. Here are Precepts for practice to direct us in our duty.

5. Here we may see the examples of Gods servants walking up to those Precepts,
and how wonderfully God preserved them in their integrity. Here you may see
Abraham's Faith, Lots Hospitality, Jobs Patience, David's Zeal, Joseph's
Chastity, Noah's Righteousness, Moses his Meekness, Joshua's Valor, and These
must be as so many goads to quicken us to the like Graces, and as so many
Looking-glasses for us to dress our selves by.

V. T. recte intelligentibus est prophetia Novi. T. nam V. T est occultatio
novi, in N. T. est manifestatio veteris. Aug.
6. The Old Testament gives great light to the New, there is a mutual Harmony
and agreement between them, so that like stones in an Arch, they strengthen and
hold up one another. We cannot so well understand many places of the New
Testamentt, unless we compare them with the Old. Hence Christ often speaks, and
the Law. John 1.17. and and 5.46. Luke 24.27, 44. who could understand that
dark Epistle to the Hebrews, which is even composed out of the Old Test. it is
Types and Allegories, if he have not some insight i^ the Old Test. So John
3.14. cannot be understood without some knowledge of the brazen Serpent
mentioned in the Old Test. The Old Test. in many things is larger then the New,
and so is very needful to be known. There Is Physics in Genesis Job, Psalms.

2. There Is Ethics in Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, for the right ordering of our
lives.

3. Politics in the Judicial Laws of Moses, very useful for the well-ordering
of a commonwealth.

4. There is in the Old Testament the best, pleasantest and truest of V.
Stoughton David's Love to Gods Word. page 4, 5.

Praestat alias. In Authore, in Objecto, in perfectione; and utilitate.
Piscator in Epist. Dedic. ad 1. Chronic.

Lumen rerum est Historia, haec clausa aperit, obscura illuminat.

Historia est magistra, dux and lux vitae humanae, in qua regnorum, rerum
publicarum, vitae humanae ortus* casus, occasus, vitia, virtutes quasi in
speculo cernas, omnemque prudentiam and viam ad felicitatem alieno exemplo,
felicitate vel infelicitate discas, Pezelius. Mellifici. Hist. in Epist. Dedic.
(...).


Histories, from the beginning of the world to our Saviors time; here we have
the Rise and Ruin of many famous Kings and Kingdoms, for the space of nigh
4000. years, exactly and faithfully (which is the life and glory of History)
set forth unto us. Other Histories may be excellent, but Scripture-History
excels them all. Let us then embrace the Scriptures of the Old Testament, as
the good word of God, written for our Learning, and a word that still speaks
unto us as unto Children. ( Heb. 12.5. and 13.5. 1 Cor. 10, 11.) in Doctrines,
Exhortations, and Comforts. And since Old and New Testament are both the
infallible word of God, let us receive it with all Humility and Thankfulness,
as an Epistle sent to us from the great God. Here is the Fountain, the Life,
and all the Treasures of wisdom included. Here is all things needful for our
salvation, in it is nothing superfluous or vain; but a sweet harmony and
agreement of all parts, and therefore is to be wholly received by us: for as
the Philosopher delights in all Aristotle, the Physician in Galen, the Orator
in Tully, and the Lawyer in Justinian; so and much more should a Christian
embrace the whole Bible, and welcome it with (...), prizing it as one of the
choycest gifts which ever God gave to the sons of men. How zealously did our
Forefathers (considering their light) affect the Scriptures? when one of them
in the beginning of the Reformation gave a load of Hay for a piece of the
Epistle of Saint James in English. How will their forwardness condemn our
backwardness, and their zeal our Lukewarmnesse?

The Holy Scriptures, etc.
So here what a large Encomium and high commendation the Holy Ghost gives of
the Scriptures, even such as is given to no other book in the world besides.

1. He commends them in respect of one special property and adjunct. viz.
their Holiness. The Holy Scriptures.

2. From their Effects, they are able to make us wise unto salvation.

3. From their Authority, Verse 16, 17. Utility, Verse 16, 17. Perfection.
Verse 16, 17.


(...), The Holy Scriptures. It Is not simply (...), but (...). Those eminently
holy letters, those sacred Scriptures; the article is emphatical, V. Ravanel in
verbo, Scriptura. Number. 4. distinct. 1.

Scipturae nomine sacra Scriptura per Anton omasiam significatur. Matthew. 22.29.
Joh. 5.39.


and therefore the Holy Ghost to distinguish these sacred writings from all
profane writings, gives them such Adjuncts and Epithets as are incompatible to
all other writings whatsoevr. Now the Reason why God would have his word
written is this, viz. that it might be kept the better, and be propagated to
posterity, and be more easily kept, and vindicated from corruption then
Revelations could have been. 2 Peter 1.19.

Observe, The word of God is holy Scriptures; this is it is proper Adjunct and
excellency, it is holy, Romans 1.2. They are perfectly holy in themseves, all
other writings are profane further then they draw some holiness from them,
which yet is never such, but that their holiness is imperfect. Sacra dicitur,
quia a Deo diclata, et divinitus inspirata, res sacras ad aeternam salutem
necessarias continet. Bucan.
Now the Scriptures are called holy in five respects.

1. In respect of their Author and principal cause. viz. the most holy God. 2.
In respect of the Penmen and instrumental cause, they were holy men of God. 2
Pet. 1.21. 3. In respect of their matter, they treat of the holy things of God,
they teach nothing that is impure or profane. They teach us Holiness in
Doctrine and Practice. They call upon us for Self-denial, Universal obedience,
and teach us to do all things from holy Principles, and for holy ends. See Mr.
Ant. Burges Ser. 91. on that Text.
4. In respect of their End and Effect. viz. our sanctification. John 17.17. by
reading, hearing, and meditating on Gods word, the Holy Ghost does sanctify us.
Psalm 19.8, 9. The word of God is not only pure, but purifying, not only
clean per se, but effectively a cleansing word. 5. By way of distinction and
opposition, they are called Holy to distinguish them not only from humane and
profane, but also from all Ecclesiastical writings. They have their naevos and
must have their grains of allowance, but the holy Scripture is pure and
perfect.
Quo Spiritu Scipturae factae sunt, eo legi desiderant, ipso etiam
intelligendae sunt. Bernard.
1. This must teach us to bring pure minds to the Reading, hearing, and handling
of Gods holy word. The word is pure, and therefore calls for a pure frame of
Spirit in him that reads it: for as no man can rightly sing David's Psalms
without David's spirit; so no man can rightly understand the word of God,
without the Spirit of God. Carnal, sensual hearts, and such divine spiritual
works will never agree. A vessel that is full of Poison, cannot receive pure
water; or if it could, yet the vessel would taint it. See more in my
Schooles-Guard. Rule 1.

Si ab ipsis etiam gentium vanis planeque prophanis sacris arcebantur prophani;
certe multo indignius fuerit quenquam Christianum ad earum quas solas vere
sacras esse scimus, literarum monumenta ac adyta illotis manibus pedib^sque
irrumpe^e. Tylen. Syntag. cap. 9.


It Is not for unclean beasts to come nigh these sacred fountains, lest they
defile them with their feet.

2, Take heed of profaning the holy Scriptures by playing with them, or making
jests out of them. See Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 119. p. 583. Folio.
It Is a dangerous thing, Ludere cum sacris. See 7. sorts of prophaners of the
holy Scriptures condemned, in Mr. Trapps true Treasure. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. to 8.

3. Love the Scriptures for their purity, as God is to be loved for his purity,
so is his word. Many love it for the History, or for novelty, but a gracious
soul loves it for its purity; because it arms him against sin, directs him in
Gods ways, enables him for duty, discovers to him the snares of sin and Satan,
and so makes him wiser then his enemies.

Which are able to make thee wise unto salvation.
In these words the Apostle commends the Scriptures from the effect. viz.
because they are able to make us wise not only in Temporals, (...), non est
simpliciter instruere, sed sapientem reddere. Gerhard.

Qui rite scit uti Scripturis; huic nihil ad salutem, nihil ad been vivendum
deest. Calvin.


but in Eternals; they teach us not earthly, but Heavenly wisdom, even such as
will never rest till it have brought us to salvation. q. d. O Timothy, I am now
dying, and ready for Martyrdom, thou must therefore expect no more teaching
from me, this may trouble thee (as the loss of Elijah troubled Elisha, when he
saw his Master taken from him into heaven) yet be not despondent, for though
thou lose me, yet thou have a better Teacher in my stead. viz. the Holy
Scriptures which are able to make thee truly wise, and to furnish thee with all
Ministerial requisits.

Observe, The word of God alone is able to make us wise unto salvation. Psalm
19.7. Luke 16.28, 29. John 5.39. and 20.31. James 1.22, 25, No other knowledge
can bring us to salvation, but only the knowledge of the holy Scripture. This
excellency is proper and peculiar only to the word of God. Insigne Sacrae
Scripturae encomium, quod non ali^nde petenda sit sapientia quae ad salutem
s^fficit. Calvin.

See B. Vshers Body of Divinity. p 6.


Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, Epictetus, Seneca, Plutarch, may teach us Moral
wisdom; but not a word of Christ or salvation by him to be found therein. But
the knowledge of the Scripture, brings us directly to Christ, and by
consequence to salvation, which is the only true wisdom. John 17.3. Acts 4.12,
it will save a man and his house. Acts 11.14. This made the Apostle prefer
the wisdom of God in the Gospel, before the wisdom of this world. 1 Cor. 2.6,
7. the Virgins that walked according to this Rule are called wise. Matthew. 25.
True wisdom consists in finding the way to blessedness, and walking in that
way to the end. Psalm 2.10, 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 4.6, Prove. 15.24. and 19, 20. Ier.
6.16. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. they dye fools and beasts, how politic soever they
have been for worldly ends, if they have not provided for eternal salvation.
Psalm. 49. ult. Prove. 5. ult. Ier. 8.8, 9. and 17.11. Luke 12.20. This Doctrine
like a two-edged sword, cuts both ways.

1. It cuts down the Papists on the one hand, who deny the Scriptures to be a
perfect Rule of Faith and Manners, and therefore they add many old, moldy,
moath-eaten, superstitious Traditions to be believed as necessary to salvation:
and so come under the curse of Adding to Gods word. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6.
Revel 22.18. They also deserve sharp reproof for keepinng the Scriptures from
the common people and by consequence from salvation, contrary to Gods express
command, who would have all without exception of rich or poor to read his word.
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. and 31.12. John 5.39. Colos. 3.16.

2. It cuts down the Sectaries on the other hand, who deny the perfection of
the Scripture, and cry up up their own perfection, their own dreams, and
fancies. If the Scripture be able to make us wise to salvation, to what end
then serve these Ignes fatui, but to lead men out of heavens path? such have no
true light in them. Isay 8.20. and if Paul durst not publish any New-light
besides or beyond the Scripture, but kept close to the Rule, and preached only
such things as were revealed in the Prophets. Acts 26.22. how great then is the
presumption of the Pharisees, of our time, who dare do that which Paul durst
never do?

2. It may be a singular encouragement to us to be much in Reading and
Meditation on the word. It Is not Plato, Plutarch, etc. that can make us wise to
salvation (though they are useful in their kind, and we may learn many
excellent lessons from them) yet since we cannot find the name of Christ there,
it must abate our delight in them, as it did Saint Austins in the reading of
Tully. August. Confess. l 3. c. 4.
If you will be wise indeed, Read the Holy Scriptures, they will make you
savingly wise, they will teach us all things necessary to salvation, Vis
sapiens vere reddi? lege sacra. Aretius.
and what can we desire more.

[See how the knowledge of Gods word excells all other knowledge in sundry
particulars. Hildersham on John 4.21. Lect. 34. Doct. 3. and Lect. 36. Doct. 6.]

Through Faith which is in Christ Jesus
That is, by faith whose Foundation and Object is Christ with all his benefits.
The holy Scriptures though they instruct us sufficiently unto salvation, yet
cannot save us without faith.

Observe, The word of God cannot save nor profit us without faith. Such is our
blindness, deadness, dullness, yea enmity against the Word, that without Faith
we cannot see, conceive or receive it, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.2. John
3.19, 20. If a man offer us never so good an Alms, yet u^less we have an eye
to see it, with a hand and heart to receive it we are never the better for the
tender of it. So that no Faith, no salvation, this is the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, without which we have no interest in Christ, as is clearly
and learnedly proved by a Reverend Divine of ours. Oh then make much of this
Grace, Mr. Blake in his Treatise of the Covenant. Chap. 12.
preserve her, and she will preserve thee: exalt her, and she will exalt thee
to Honor. As David said to Abiather, so Faith says to us, abide you with me,
Oh quam te memorem, fides Virtutum nobilissima! (...) Ca^d^ es super quem
versitur ^orta coeli situla per quam hau^itur aqua vitae. Ann^lus ille
Nuptialis quo men's Deo desp^nsatur, etc. D. Arrowsmith Tactica sac^a l. 2. c.
7. Sect. 13. V^^ plura.
fear not; for he that seeks my life, seeks thy life, but with me shall thou be
in safety, 1 Samuel 22. ult. This is the Mother of all our Graces, the Fountain
from which they flow. All Grace is in Faith Originally, Radically,
Fundamentally, Virtually. It Is the primum mobile which sets the other wheels
agoing. It Is that work of God which contains all other good works in it, John
6.28, 29, 40. All duties, all doing and suffering without Faith are displeasing
unto God, Romans 14. ult. we must pray in Faith James 1.6. Hear in Faith, Heb.
4.2. communicate in Faith, by this we feed on Christ, and lay hold on him,
creed and manducasti. Aug. This makes all we do to prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.10.
It Is a Grace of perpetual use, Vtilius est quod semper quam quod aliquando
utile. Aristot. V. D. Arrowsmith, Tactica sacra. l. 2. c. 7. Sect. 11, etc.
in prosperity and adversity, in sickness and health; in prosperity it keeps us
watchful and humble. Job 3.25 in famine, fears, wants, it keeps us cheerful.
Heb. 3.17, 18. such righteous ones excel their wicked neighbors. Prove. 12,
26. they are the only excellent of the earth. Psalm 16.3. God accounts them
too good to live in such a wicked world. Heb. 11.38. This is that golden grace
which makes us truly rich, a well tried faith is more precious then gold. 1
Pet. 7. Rev. 3.18. This brings plenty and propriety in all. All is yours; to
believers Christ gives his choycest blessings, as Justification and
Sanctification, Peace of Conscience, Victory over the world, sin and Satan,
Romans 3.30. and 5.18. and 9.3. Acts 15.9. and 16.31. Luke 7, 50. 1 Cor. 1.3.
Gal. 2.16. 1 John 5.12. freedom from death Natural in respect of its sting, 1
Cor. 15.55. from death spiritual, John 5.29. and from death Eternal, John 3.16.

To a believer Christ is all in all, Colos. 3.11. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Christ is
All in all to a believer in 37. Particulars. Robinsons Christ all in all Mr.
Sam. Ward Ser. 1. p. 1. Robotham Pretiousness of Christ. Taylers Types,
Vennings Mysteries of Christ. Moses Unvailed. Sangars Morning Lect. p. 39. and
^8^. Mr. Burrough^, Saints Treasury. See on Colos. 3.11. p. 31.
All comfort and salvation is terminated in him, Zach. 9.9. In him does
fullness, all fullness dwell, John 1.16. Col. 1.19. and 2.3. in Christ is a
fullness of wisdom to answer for our folly, 1 Cor. 1.30. a fullness of life to
deliver all believers from death, John 14.6. We are dead till Christ by his
Spirit quicken us, Ephesians 21. hence he is called a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor.
15.45. a fullness of Liberty to free us from our Spiritual bondage to sin and
Satan, John 8.36. 2 Cor. 3.17. He is that Valiant Joshua which frees us from
the Tyranny of our spiritual enemies, going forth conquering and to conquer, 1
Cor. 15.37. Rev. 6.2. In Christ is a fullness of Glory, Vxor coruscat radiis
mariti.
a man without Christ is a Tohu Vabohu, without form or beauty, an Ichabod in
whom is no glory, like Reuben he can never excel, Genesis 49.4. but being
clothed with Righteousness, we are wholly fair, and there is no spot in us,
Cant. 4.7. Ephesians. 5.27. the Church and Spouse of Christ is actually and
presently fair.

2. She is Universally fair in all parts, though considered in her self she
may err doctrinaliter, in matters of Faith, and moraliter, in respect of
manners; yet consider her in Christ, whose righteousness is imputed to her for
righteousness, and so she is wholly fair, and albeit the law accuse her of
blots and spots, yet the Law is answered by the Gospel; and the Wife cannot be
sued so long as the Husband lives. Though in our selves we are black, Vxori lis
non intenditur.
yet in Christ we are comely; though poor in our selves, yet rich in him;
though black in the worlds eye, and black in her own eye by reason of sin and
misery, yet she is fair in Christ's eye; who is a faithful friend and
soul-solacing Jonathan to comfort his in all their distresses John 15.14, 15. A
Physician to heal them of all their maladies, Mal. 4.2. a Rock to support them,
1 Cor. 10.4. and Mannah to feed them. So that now believers with Paul may
challenge all their enemies to do their worst. Romans 8.33.34.

[For the excellency of Faith, See D. Reynolds Vanity of the Creature, p. 476.
Rogers of Dedham of Faith chap. 4. D. Bolton in folio 18. Royalties of Faith,
on John 3.15. M. Perkins on Heb. 11. Doctor Preston on Faith, Doctor Sibbs
third Volume on Hebrews 11.13. Dykes Righteous man's Tower, p. 32.33. and on
Sacrament, Chap. 11. Boltons Directions for walking, page 52. Barlow on 2 Timothy
1.5. Watsons Charter, chapter 20. M. Sam. Ward Sermon 2. p. 43. and 131. Master
Joseph Symonds sight and faith chapter 11. Master Jeremy Burrowes Treatise of
Faith, Vol. 8. and Saints Treasury, page 68. Dan. Dyke on Matthew 4.3. Doctor
Holidays Nature of Faith, Smith on the Creed, p. 2. and Ambrose his Media,
page, 162.

VERSE 16, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 17.
That the man of God may be pefect thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
THe Apostle the better to encourage Timothy to study the Holy Scriptures,
goes on to prove that they are able to make one wise unto salvation, and that
by an Argument drawn from a full and suffici^nt enumeration of those things
which are necessary to salvation. Where he commends the Holy Scriptures upon, A
threefold account. 1. For their Dignity, and Authority. 2. For their
Utility. 3. For their Perfection.


1. He commends them for their Dignity and Divine Authority, as coming more
immediately from God, Verse 16. All Scripture is given by (i.) By Inspiration
of the holy Ghost who is a Spirit of Truth, and led the Writers of these
Writings into all Truth, so that they could not err. Dutch Annot. in locum.
Inspiration of God.

2. For their singular Utility, which is fourfold.

First, For Doctrine to teach the Truth. Secondly, For reproof of Error, and
false Doctrine. Thirdly, For correction of sin and evil manners. Fourthly,
For Instruction in Righteousness, and good Works.
3. From their complete perfection, enabling a Minister for his Office, verse
17. especially those four Parts of it before named, v. 16.

1. The Apostle commends the Scrpitures in respect of their Divine Authority,
they have not Angels or men for their Author; the Prophets and Apostles were
but the Penmen, Prophetae and Apostoli fuere quasi calamus in manu Dei. Gregor.
Secretaries and Instruments of the Holy Ghost, to write what he should Dictate
to them. So the Angels were but Gods Messengers to declare the Law to his
people, Galathians 3.19. V. Perkins CC. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.

(...), Divinita^ inspirata, vel Spiritu Sancto Dictante conscripta quod non
suo instinctu, judicio, ductu uti profani Historici and Philosophi sua
conscripser^nt, sed Sacrasancto inspirati locuti sunt and scripserunt Sancti
Dei Homines. a Lapide in locum, ubi plura.


The Scriptures have God himself for their more immediate Author, All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, ( i.) all and every part of Scripture
is Divinely inspired, or breathed by God, both for Matter, Order, Style and
Words.

Those Holy Men of God did not only utter their words by the Holy Ghosts
immediate Direction, but by the same Direction did commit them to Writing, that
they might be a standing Rule to the Church for ever: For the bare memories of
men would not have kept them for us with such certainty as they have been kept
in Scripture, and delivered to us. So that what David said of himself, is true
of all the Penmen of Holy Scripture, the Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and
his Word was in my tongue, 2 Samuel. 23.2. it is he that spoke by the mouth of
his Holy Prophets, Luke 1.70. And bid them Write, Revelations 14.13. They spoke
not what pleased themselves. but they spoke and writ as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, 2 Peter 1.21. they were powerfully (...), acti impulsi.
moved, acted, and carried out of themselves to write, say and do, what God
would have them, Nehemiah, 9.30. Micah, 3.8. Acts, 28.25. Hebrews, 13.7.

2. He commends the Scriptures for their usefulness and profit which they
bring both to Teacher^ and Hearers, V^ilis ad omnem vitae partem, ad omnia
Loctrinarum genera. Bulling.
which is fourfold, whereof two are Theorerical, pertaining to the
information of our judgments in matters of Doctrine.

1. Teaching the Truth. 2. Confuting Errors. Two are Practical, pertaining to
the direction of our lives, viz. First, for Correction or Reformation of Vice.
And secondly, for instruction in Paths of Righteousness.

1. They are profitable for Doctrine and Instruction, they teach men what to
know and believe, (...). ad Doctrinam scil. sanam.
they instruct us in all Truth necessary to salvation, viz. concerning God,
Man, Christ, Law, Gospel, Heaven, Hell. He first begins with Doctrine, which in
Order must go before all the rest; for it is in vain to reprove or exhort
unless we first teach a man, and inform him of his duty.

2. For reproof of Error and Confutation of false Doctrine. (...), ad
redargutionem. q. ^ex iisdem fontibus confirmatur Veritas, and refutatur
Vanitas. Rectum est Index sui and obliqui.

Ab (...) capio, and (...) strangul^, nam qui refellitur obmu^escit, vel ab
(...) lux, and (...) habeo, quod is qui aliquem reprehendit, ejus facta
patefacit* and quasi in lucem fert: est enim (...) demonstratio falsi. Aristot.


A right thing is a sufficient judge of its own straitness, and the
crookedness of another thing. There is an Elencticall power in the Scripture
to stop the mouths of gainsayers, and to discover the Bypath of wicked men.
Titus verse 9. We need not run to General Councils, or send for Ancient Fathers
to determine Controversies, or confute Errors; We have the Holy Scriptures
that enable the Man of God, and furnish him richly for that purpose.

3. For correction of sin and evil manners, which is done by admonition and
reproof denouncing Gods judgments against them, (...) ad correctionem.
Redargutio and correctio parum differunt, nisi quod posterius ex priore manat,
nam recipiscentiae initium est malorum nostrorum ^gnitio, and Divini judicii
sensus. Calvin.
that those which go astray may be brought into the way by Repentance.

4. The Scripture teaches us how to lead an Holy and Righteous life according
to the Will of God, Ad instructionem in justitia (i.) ad justam and sanctum
vitae conversationem. Estius.
and so is profitable for instruction in Righteousness and good works; it
being the most perfect Rule of Righteousness.

5. The Scripture allures us to Piety by the sweet promises of the Gospel, Vt
Doctrina est credendorum, redargutio confutandorum, correctio vitio^um, ita
instructio est Virtu^um. A^^tius.
and so is profitable for consolation, Romans 15.4. which is comprehended
either under Doctrine or Instruction, for he that will comfort another must
first inform him of the Wisdom and Goodness of God to his Elect, and how all
things work together for good, to those that are good. There is no internal
tentation, nor any external affliction: but you may find a Medicine for it in
the Scriptures. So that in these 4 branches is contained ^he sum of
Christianity.

Before I proceed any further, it will be necessary to remove a block or two
out of the way. Bellarmine himself confesses that this is one of the chiefest
places that we have to prove the Scriptures perfection: Hic locus est Achilles
Protestantium Bellarm. l 4. de verb. Dei. c. 10.12.
and therefore both he and Estius have invented all the ways they can to
invade the force of it.

1. Say they the Apostle speaks here of the Old Testament, for the New
Testament was not yet added to the Canon, nor some part of it written, as the
Epistles, and the Revelation of Saint John, especially, when Timothy was an
Infant. Now if the Old Testament (say they) were a perfect Rule, then the New
Testament would be superfluous, and void.

Answer, By Scripture here is meant not only the Old Testament, but also the
New (say some) because all the Books of the New Testament were then extant when
Paul writ this latter Epistle to Timothy, which was the last of all Paul's
Epistles as is gathered from 2 Timothy 4.6. So that then there were extant all
Paul's Epistles, all the Evangelists, and all the Books of the New Testament,
excepting the writings of John, and (as some conceive) the writings of Luke.

E^si Apostoli plura scripserint, ea tamen non esse diversa ab iis quae in V.^.
continentur. Nam in V.T. novum latet, in Novo Veins patet. Gerherd.

See this excellently cleared by Mr. Hildersham, on John 4. Lect. 44.
Apostolorum Doctrina non fuit nova quoad essentiam, etsi quoad Circumstantias
habuerit novitates. Arnoldus contra Socin. cap. 2. p. 11.


2. To omit conjectures, let us grant that the Apostle speaks of the Old
Testament, and that he acknowledges they were able to make a man wise to
salvation. It Is true they were so, neither do the writings of the Apostles
add any thing as to the substance of the Old Testament they only explain the
Law and the Prophets, clearly showing that Christ is come according as the
Prophets foretold, Acts 28.23.

3. What was written in every Age was sufficient for that Age: and the Books
which were extant in these times were a sufficient Rule for the Church in those
days. Thus the five Books of Moses (till the other Books of Scripture were
extant) were a perfect Rule. So the Books of the Old Testament which were
extant when Timothy was a child, were a sufficient Rule: yea, and before there
was any thing written, Tradition alone was sufficient, neither was any thing
written so necessary, but they might be saved without it. But now since God
has revealed his mind in the Holy Scriptures, we must to the Law and to the
Testimony.

4. I Answer by way of Retortion, if the Parts of Scripture as they were
delivered were sufficient for the Instruction of those to whom they were
delivered, then the whole Scripture ( a fortiori) which now we have, must needs
be most sufficient for us, and for all the Churches of God to the end of the
world if the Old Testament were so pro^itable, how great is the profit and
perfection of both Old and New together?

2. Objection, A second Cavil is this, That the Scripture is not a Total and
sufficient Rule, but only a Partial one; and though it be profitable, yet it is
not sufficient without unwritten Traditions. They are not here excluded no more
then Second Causes are excluded ( says Bellarmine) from the generating of
things in the World, as the Sun, etc.

Answer, If the Scripture contain all things necessary to salvation, then it is
a perfect and not a partial Rule. But it does contain all things necessary to
salvation: Ergo, The Minor I prove thus: If the O. T. did contain all things
necessary to salvation, and were sufficient without Traditions, then a fortiori
both Testaments together must needs be sufficient. But the Antecedent is true,
and therefore the consequent. The Scripture alone is able (says the Apostle)
to make us wise to salvation, and therefore it must needs be sufficient.

2. The comparison from the Sun holds not, because unto generation second
causes must necessarily concur; but for Regeneration here is such a full
enumeration of all things to be done, that no more needs be added, and
therefore Traditions are vain. Besides it is well observed that the word in the
Original signifies not only profit and convenience, (...) utilis, quod
dicitur non tantum de Vtilitate and convenientia, sed de sufficientia ac
perfectione, ut idem sit ac (...). Baldwin in loc.

Quid ad sufficientiam deesse potest, ubi adest perfectio? D. Morton.


but also perfection and sufficiency, the Scriptures have an All Sufficiency in
them for salvation, the same word is used for sufficient, 1 Timothy 4.8.

3. Objection, Though All the Scripture be thus profitable, yet the whole is
not ( says Bellarmine.)

Answer, Who so blind as they that will not see? what is this but to seek a
knot in a bulrush, and to make doubts where there are none at all. This is to
trifle and not to dispute; for who knows not that All Scripture, and the whole
Scripture are (...), (...) is as much as (...). Consule D^ctis. Chamier. Tom.
1. l. 8. c. ^. and Ames. Bell. ene^vat. l. 1. c. 6. mihi p 81.82.
equivalent and the same. So All is taken in other places Collectively, and not
distributively, as 1 Cor. 13.2. Colos. 2.9. Ephesians 2.21. and 3.15. and 4.16.

These rubs being removed, the sense of the place is this. Tanta est scripti
cujusque authoritas, quanta est Authoris veracitas and potestas. Brochm^nd.
q. d. Great is the Dignity and Authority, the Majesty and Utility of the Holy
Scriptures, (That Gift of Gifts) which have not Angels or Men, but God himself
for their more immediate Autho^r; It is he that has given them, to inform the
ignorant, to recall the erronions, to correct the vicious, and to direct and
comfort the Pious. So that by reading and studying this Word of God, the People
of God and specially the Teacher of Gods People may be made every way fit and
complete for all the services of his calling.

See Mr. Baxters Saints Rest, l. 2. cap. 14.
Observe, That the sacred Scriptures are the very word of God. Holy men were but
the Instruments, it is God that is the Author of them; they were but the
spirits amanuenses to write what he should dictate to them. Hence it is called
the word of God. Mark 7.13. 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.2. 1 These. 4.15. the Oracles of
God. Romans 3.2. and is ascribed solely to the Spirit of God, without mentioning
any Author. Heb. 10.15. what was uttered by the mouths of the Prophets, God
spoke; what they delivered was by direction and inspiration from above. Hence
the Holy Ghost is said to speak by the mouth of David. Acts 1.16. and 4.25. and
28.25. and the word of the Lord is said to come to. Hos. 1.1. and Joel 1.1.
Ier. 1.9. Ezekiel. 1.3. Heb. 1.1, 2. and as the Old Testament, so the New is the
very word of God, for the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from above;
and the Apostle tells us that he had received from the Lord what he delivered
to them. 1 Cor. 11.23. and Romans 1.1. and 15.18. this made the Apostles style
themselves the servants of Christ. Philip. 1.1. Titus 1.1. James 1.1. 1 Pet.
1.1. Jude 1, the foundation of the Church is said to be the Prophets ( i. e.)
the Old Testament, and the Apostles ( i e.) the New Testament, Ephesians. 2.20. So
that the Authority of Scripture is greater then of an Angels voice; and of
greater perspicuity and certainty to us; for besides inspiration, it is both
written and sealed. This is fundamentum fundamentorum, a fundamental point very
necessary to be known, for we can never profit by the scriptures, till we
believe and are persuaded that they are the very word of God: Titubabit fides
si divinarum Scripturarum vacillet authoritas. Hieron.
he that believes not this, believes nothing, and the very ground of all that
Atheism and profaneness, both in Doctrine and Manners, which abounds amongst
us, springs from hence Have at the Root then, and have at all; lay the Axe to
it, and the branches will soon wither.

[To prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, See 18. Reasons in Bishop
Vshers Body of Divinity, and 18. Reasons in Ward on Matthew 1.1. p. 1, 2, etc.
Stock. on the Attributes, chapt. 4. Mr. John Downams Warfar. l. 2. c. 21. p.
160. Fol. Capel on Tentat. l. 4. c. 4. Sangar's Morning Lect. p. 4.20. Mr.
Leighs Body of Divinity. l. 1. c. 2. Walaeus loc. com. p. 124, 125.]

Woe then to those Blasphemous Heretics, and Atheistical Scepticks, the
Anti-scripturists of our age, that cry up their own perfection, and cry down
the Scriptures as imperfect; that cry up themselves as Gods, and cry down
Christ as man, that cry up their own dreams, and cry down the word which
condemns those dreams; even as the Malefactor exclaimes against the Judge,
which he knows will condemn him. O hellish pride! O hideous, horrid blasphemy!
Woe is me that ever it should be told in Gath, and published in the streets of
Askelon, that England which was sometimes the glory of Nations, should now for
such blasphemies as those, become the scorn and reproach of all the Nations
round about us. Yet such there are ( perhorresco refereus) that say the
Scriptures are Mr. Edw. Gangrene. 1. P. p. 15. Londnn Testim. p. 5.
not of Divine, but of Humane authority and invention; that the Penmen wrote
what pleased themselves, that they are no foundation of Christian religion,
etc. Strange it is to me to find Mr. John Goodwin (a man of such knowledge and
parts, See him confuted by Mr. Ienkins in his* defense of the Scripture against
I. E. and Mr. Lyford, Plain man's senses exercised. p. 46. etc.

See the Antiscript. Cavils answered in Polanus Syntag. l. 1. cap. 35.

Diogenes inter homines quaerebat homin^m, at ego in Theologo Theologum.


so well versed in Scripture, a Preacher and expounder of it so long, yet now
in his old age) to fall into that ragged Regiment of Anti-scripturists. Yet
thus it is, when once men give way to sin and error, they know not when nor
where they shall rest. Whither will not Pride and Self-conceit lead men?

As Christ was crucified between two Thieves, so are the Scriptures vilified by
two sorts: by Papists on the one hand, and Atheistical Sectaries on the other,
but all in vain, for magna est veritas and praevalebit. The Truth still gets
ground against them all. Many Libertines cry out against us Ministers as
Antichristian, but whether come nearer Antichrist we or they, the ensuing
Parallel will declare; for though their Heads took several ways, yet (like
Sampsons Foxes) they are tied together with firebrands at their tails.

Papists call the Scriptures
1. A Nose of wax, or Rule of lead, which may be bowed every way as men please.

2. Inky Divinity.

3. They are fallible.

4. They are insufficient without unwritten Traditions.

5. They prefer the Church before them.

6. To defend their errors, they wrest the Scriptures, and make them
Allegorize without a cause.

7. Sometimes they take the bare Letter, and will admit of no exposition.

8. What blasphemous, nonsensicall expositions the Friars made of the
Scripture, former ages can testify. [See Willets Tetrastilon, Pillar. 3.
Synops. p. 1296.]

Atheistical Anti-scripturists say
1. They are uncertain.

2. A dead Letter.

3. They are not infallible.

4. They are insufficient without Revelations.

5. They prefer the dark light within them before them.

6. So do these, yea some have turned all Scriptures into Allegories.

7. So do these.

8. What Non-sensical ones these make, who lists may see, in [Mr. Brinsley's
Virtigo. p. 133, 134. and Mr. Firmin against the Quakers.

Should these men have spoken but half so much against the Higher Powers, How
the Jesuits and they agree in six particulars, see Mr. Edwards's Gangreen. 1 P.
Edit. 3. p 40, 41.
as they have done against God and his word, they would quickly have been
apprehended for Traitors, yea if a man steal above thirteen-pence half penny,
it is death by the Law, but if a man blaspheme the God of heaven, revile the
Scriptures, and overthrow the very foundations of Religion; there is little or
nothing done to such a one. Do we thus requite the Lord O foolish and unwise!
Is this the thanks we give him for all those successes and deliverances which
he has given us? will not this provoke him to repent of all the mercies he
has showed us, and to consume us after he has done us good? These are worse
then Papists, denying the Trinity, Sacraments, Old Testament, and New
Testament, affirming that there is no word but only the word Christ (so did the
Swenck^feildians in Germany) herein betraying their gross ignorance that
cannot distinguish between the word Christ, Verbum Deus, and ve^bum Dei.
and the word of Christ ( Colos. 3.16.) so called because it has Christ for
its Author, Christ for its Object, and Christ for its end, between Christ the
coessential and coeternall word of the Father, John 1.1, 2. Heb. 1.3. the
substantial word of God. 1 John 5.7. Rev. 19.13. and the express Image of his
Father, and the written word of God which is contained in the Old and New
Testament, Scriptura dicitur verbum Propheticum, at fill us Dei est verbum (...)
internum; illud est verbum accidentale, hoc essentiale. Maccovius.
and is called the written word of God. Luke 8.11, 12. and 11.28. Acts 4.31.
and 6.2, 7. and the Bible or Book, as being the book of books ( i. e.) the most
excellent book in the world.

Haeretici lucifugae Scripturatum.
2. As the Papists when they are Non-plust fly to Traditions, so do these fly
from Scripture to Revelations. As the Jews have their Talmuds, and the Turks
their Alcorans, so the Anabaptists have their vain Visions, and etraordinary
Revelations: whereas the Scripture is a surer Guide then a Voice from heaven.
V. Rutherford's survey of Spiritual Antichrist, cap. 7. Perkins on Rev. 1.1.9.
S^latyr on 1 These. 5.19. and 2.2.2. Brinsley's Virtigo. p. 179. ^rreligion of
the Northern Quake^s. p. 30.52. Mortons Ap^log. 2. P. c. 55. Arnoldus contra
Socin. p. 44. Robinson on Ephesians. 6. p. 135.

Perfect Ph^risee. Posit. 11. to 16. Lyford, Plain man's senses exercised. c. 1.
etc. to 46.


2 Pet. 1.19. for that may be more easily counterfeited, Satan can with ease
transform himself into an Angel of light. See this more fully cleared by the
Authors in the Margin.

2. We have those that cry up a Light within them, and extol it above the word
of God; like false Tradesmen that prefer false Lights before the clearest
Sunshine. He that takes the light of nature for his Guide, has but a blind
deceitful Guide, which will lead him into a thousand bogs and ditches of filth
and error. The natural man cannot endure the light of Gods word. Job 21.14.
Isay 6.10. and 30.10. 2 Timothy 4.3. he raises cavils against it, and hates the
light that discovers him. He Is dead in sin, and cannot once discern the
supernatural things of God. See Dr. Reynolds his Latin Sermon. on that Text.
1 Cor. 2.14 hence he is called not only dark, but darkness it self in the
Abstract. Ephesians. 5.8. and therefore great is the sin of those that tell men
they have need of no other teacher but only the light within them.

1. This overthrowes all Scripture, in vain did God bid us search the
Sciptures, if this natural light within us were sufficient to lead us to
salvation.

2. This is the way to make men Heathens, and to set up a natural light instead
of a supernatural.

3. This would overthrow the Ministry and all their gifts, which Christ gives
them for the edification of his Church. Ephesians. 4.11.

4. This would overthrow the Magistracy, for to what end are his Laws and
sword, if every man had a light within him sufficient to direct him? thus if
Aaron go down, Moses cannot long endure. Ministry and Magistracy usually fall
together. Numb. 16.10, 13.

5. Religion has mysteries and depths in it which no natural man can fathom.
1 Cor. 2.9, 14.

6. The Scripture speaks only to Saints, when he says, Christ is in you, the
hope of glory. Colos. 1.27. but to the world he is a stumbing-block, and rock of
offense.

7. Christ calls them slow of heart, who believe not all that the Prophets have
spoken, it seems they were to look to the Scriptures without them, and not
only to a light within them.

8. The Beraeans are commended for searching the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. See
more perfect Pharisee. Posit. 11. to 16. Mr. Bournes disputation against
Nayler. p. 21, 22. Clapham against the Quakers. p. 55.
and not for harkening to a light within them; and we are commanded to try the
Spirits by the Touchstone of Gods word, and not by a light within us.

3. Great is the sin of the Socinians, who make not the Scripture, but Reason
the Judge in matters of Religion, and will believe no more in Religion then
they can comprehend by Reason, Ratio humana non regulata gratia divina secundum
all^gata and probata ex Scripturis, monstrat viam Haeresibus. D. Slatyr. Concio
ad Cle^um p. 36. ^bi plura. and Mr. B^i^sley's Vir^^go p. 181, etc.

Res fidei mysteria sunt and supra ^atiomem, ra^io itaque non supra scripturam*
sed infra eam, captivanda. Hornbeck. c. 6. Gerhards Lo^^com. T. 1. c. 4. Sect.
146 151. Resbu^y against I. Goodwins Lightless star. p. 16 and 153. Robinsons
Observe. 9.

Theologia rationem non tollit sed extollis* non ex^ludit sed includit Prideaux.

Robinsons safe conduct p. 48 49 etc.

Rationem renuit fides ut ducem and Dominum, adhibet ut pedissequam. Tilenas
Synt. l. 1. c. 3. ^hes. 30.

See Mr. Lyford p. 24. etc. Brochmand C C. T. 1. c. 3. Q^* p* 71. and Mr. Ant.
Burgess on John 17.3 p. 152.

A^^iant and Sociniani pro Christianis non sunt h^bendi. Hornbe^k cont^a ^ocin.
p. 73. and Doctor Ier. Tailor scanning the deeps of predestination and original
sin by carnal Reason, into what foul Heresies is he fa^len.


whereas we make not our Reason a Rule of faith added to the word, but we use
it as that light which God has given us wherewith to search into the meaning
of his word, and by studious inquisition and observation to discover it, and by
good Reason out of the Text to convince others of its truth. Reason raised and
rectified, is the candle of the Lord and good, ( Prove. 20.27.) so long as it is
subordinate to faith: but when it goes about to judge it, then it quickly
overthrowes all, as we see in the Socinians, who abound with such gross
Heresies, that Divines Question whether we may call them Christians?

4. Others boast of the Spirit in opposition to the Scripture, these are
certainly led by the spirit of the Devil. Gods word and Spirit go together, as
you may see. Prove. 1.23. Isay 59.21. Galatians 3.2. Gods Spirit teaches us to
try the spirit and doctrines of men by Scripture. Isay 8.20. and if they speak
not according to this word, it is not because they have New-light, but no light
in them. Christ who was full of the Spirit of the Lord, yet does not go about
to prove things by the Spirit within him, but he sends men to the Scriptures,
as their Rule. John 5.39. and when he disputed with men and Devils, he does
not appeal to the spirit or light within him: but he cites Scripture without
them, against them: for though Gods Spirit do enlighten the Saints on earth,
yet it is but in part, this illumination is imperfect and mixed with much
darkness within them, so that they have need also of a light without them,
which is the Scripture. And if Timothy who was enlightened by the spirit in a
more then ordinary measure (he being an Evangelist) yet must give himself to
reading the Scriptures, how much more have we need to read and study them, who
have not that measure of the spirit as he had. And if the spirit were our Rule,
how many would be deluded with Satanical spirits, See an excellent little
Treatis to this purpose, called the True Guide. By R.H.
but God has given us a surer word of prophecy, so that we must not trust
only to the Testimony of the spirit concerning it self, but we must bring
every spirit to the Trial and Touchstone of Gods word. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. yea,
though they pretend to have the Spirit of God, yet must it be tried by the word
of God.

Object. The Scriptures are for Novices and young beginners, but after men are
regenerate and grown up, they must leave these external rudiments, and be
guided only by the Spirit.

Answ. This is a most pernicious and dangerous opinion, for take away the
Scriptures, and you take away the Rule both of good life and sound doctrine,
and so open a gap to all Heresy and profaneness.

2. Neither is the Scripture only necessary for young beginners, but also for
the regenerate and most holy men, as appears by the Inscriptions of almost all
the Epistles which are written even to the Saints themselves. Romans 1.7, 8. 1
Cor. 1.2. and 10.15. Phil. 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.1. 1 John 2.12. Jude 1. Now the more
these wicked ones cry down Gods Law, the more we should cry it up; the more
they loath it, the more we should love it As fountain water is warmest in the
coldest weather, by an Antiperistasis; so should we by an holy Antiperistasis
grow more hot and zealous in the defense of Gods word, by how much the
Atheistical and profane oppose it. So did David. Psalm. 119.126, 127. it is time
for thee Lord to work, for the wicked have made void thy Law. q. d. it is time
for thee Lord to show some remarkable judgment upon these wicked men who go
about to destroy not one or two, See Gods Judgments on such as contemn Gods
word. ^card^ Th^ater of Gods Judgeme^^s. Chapt. 32. p. 140.
but all thy Laws. Though men may connive and tolerate such, yet the Lord who
is a jealous God, will not bear long with the tolerators of such blasphemies,
nor with the persons tolerated. See how this opposition increased David's love
to the word. verse 127, 128. therefore do I love thy commandments above gold.
q. d. The more the wicked contemn thy Law, the more do I prize it, even above
all the Riches and Treasures of the world.

[See more against Antiscripturists in Mr. Joseph Symonds's sight and faith.
cap, 15. Mr. Lyford's Plain man's senses exercised. p. 17. etc. Brinsley's
Virtig. p. 165. etc. Mr. Bourne against the Quakers. p. 3, 4. etc. Mr. Fowler
against the Quakers. p. 47.52. Mr. Clapham against the Quakers. p. 1, 2, etc.]

2. If the Scriptures be the very word of God, then it must needs follow that
they are pure, perfect, infallible, of highest Authority, Majesty, Antiquity,
Excellency; the best Judge of controversies, and the only Rule of our lives
both in Doctrinals and Practicals. This we shall see clearly proved to us,
Adoro plenitudinem Scripturarum Tertul.
in Psalm. 19.7. to 12. where we have sixteen Excellencies and Royalties of the
word of God.

The Law of the Lord is 1. Perfect. 2. Powerful. 3. Sure. 4. Makes us truly
wise. 5. It Is Right. 6. Comfortable. 7. Pure. 8. It Is a Light. 9. It Is clean.
10. It Is eternal. 11. It Is true. 12. Righteous. 13. Profitable. 14. Pleasant.
15. A preservative against sin. 16. It brings great Reward.


Synechdoche Partis.

Whatsoever is of God is like to him. V. M. Philip Goodwin's Family-Religion.
p. 324, 325 Vbi plura.

Perfectus est canon fidei and morum, cui nihil addi potest, nec adimi.
Brochmond, Aquinas.

The who^e Scripture is perfect, perfectione totali and every part of it
perfectio ne partiali. Rivet Isagog. ad Script. cap 24.


1. It Is Perfect, V. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect ( i. e.) the whole word
of God. As God is perfect, and has a self-sufficiency in himself, so is his
word. It Is so perfect, that nothing may be added to it, or taken from it. It Is
perfect formaliter in it self, and perfect effective, making us perfect; and if
the Five Books of Moses, which was the first holy Scripture that was delivered
to the Church, was sufficient for the instruction of the people of that time,
so that they might not depart from it either to the right hand or the left.
Deuteronomy. 4.2. how much more complete is the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
which does more clearly set forth what Moses delivered, both in Precepts and
Promises, in Practice and Examples. Here is nothing superfluous, nothing
defective; it is a perfect Law of Liberty, James 1.25. which admits of no
addition or diminution. See M. Strong's 32. Sermon. p 298. etc.
Proverbs 30.6. Revelations 22.18, 19.

Caut. Not that Preaching is to be counted an adding (as the Quakers vainly and
ignorantly imagine, and therefore cry out when they hear us expound the word,
oh take heed of adding to the word!) whereas adding of men's Traditions and
inventions is one thing, and Preaching and expouding the word in its proper
sense and meaning for the edification of Gods people, is another thing. This
the Levites practiced. Nehem. 8.7, 8. they gave the sense of the Law. So did
Paul. Acts 9.22. he confounded the Jews, how? (...), collatis testimoniis, by
comparing one Scripture with another. So Christ expounded the Scripture, Luke
24.27. and so did Philip. Acts 8.30. Explication is one thing, and adding is
another, we coin no new Scriptures, but only expound the old. what we deliver
is for substance agreeable to Gods word, See more perfect Pha^isee.

Posit. 15. and Sh^lock ^^gainst the Quakers. p 7. and Eaton. p. ^.


and must therefore be believed and obeyed by us. David had seen an end of all
created perfection, but Gods Law is exceeding large. Psalm. 119.96 he had seen
Riches in Saul, Beauty in Absalom, Strength in Goliath, Policy in Achitophel,
and he saw an end of them all, they were but finite, transitory things, too low
to give any true content to the mind of man: but he found Gods word perfect,
and All-sufficient, nothing pertaining to Holiness or Happiness, comfort or
co^tentment is wanting to Gods Law, nor shall be to him that believes and
obeyes it: for the dimensions of it are large as God himself, in truth and
goodness infinite, permanent and soul-satisfying. Hence David expresses his
Transcendent Love to Gods transcendent Law by a Patheticall exclamation. Psalm
119.97. O how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day!

2. It Is exceeding powerful, there is latens (...), a hidden efficacy, Semen est
quo renascimur, lac quo nutrimur, cibus quo pascimur, Vinum quo infirmi
refocillamur, medicina qua sanamur aegro^i. Tactica sa^^a. l. 2. c. 10. Vbi
plura.
in it to convert the soul, ( Psalm. 19.7. and save the soul. James 1.21. Luke
16.29.31. Ioh, 20.31.) which no Philosophy nor humane eloquence can do. Nature
cannot cure us of our Hereditary, connatural sins, but the Scripture offers
more grace. James 4.6. ( i. e.) it gives grace and strength to conquer and
subdue the strongest lusts. Hence it is called a Hammer which can break the
hardest hearts. Ier. 23.29. a fire that consumes our strongest lusts. Salt that
keeps us from rotting in our sin. It Is as a Nail and an Arrow in the hearts of
Gods enemies to subdue them, Psalm. 45.6. and fasten them. Eccles. 12.11. The
Majesty and Power of the Scripture is wonderful almost in every line; See
Rutherford's survey of Spi. ^ntichrist. cap 6.
so that it breeds admiration in a considerate Reader. By this the spirit
changes Lions into Lambs, by it he raises us from death to life, from bondage
to liberty, from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Insomuch as a wicked Minister by preaching it, may convert souls. Ier. 23.22.
See Mr. ^urges Spi. Refining. 1. P. Ser. 84. p. 303. etc.
It must needs be powerful because the spirit is in it, which is mighty in
operation, and the promise is with it, that if we hear and obey; we shall live.
Isay 55.3. This can can change a Saul into a Paul, it can make a Felix tremble,
and an Herod fear. It never returns in vain, like the bow of Jonathan and the
sword of Saul, it never returns empty from the battle. 2 Samuel 1.23. This is
that two-edged sword, by which we offend our adversaries, and defend our
selves. I may say of it as David said of Goliah's sword, There is none like
that.

3. It Is sure. Psalm 19.7. the Testimony of the Lord is sure, the word is
called a Testimony, because it testifies our duty de facto, de jure, de
praemio; it tells us what has been done by others, what we ought to do our
selves, and what our Reward shall be for so doing. This word is more sure then
the Pillars of the earth, or the Poles of heaven, they may fall and fail, but
not one Jod or Tittle of Gods word shall perish. Mat. 5.18. Hence it is called a
more sure, ( i. e.) a most sure word. 2 Pet. 1.19, It Is a certain infallible
word, it has been often tried, yet never failed nor deceived those that
trusted in it. Psalm. 12.6. we love faithful friends, and such as will stick to
us in our misery; oh then love the faithful and sure word of God, which will
never leave you nor forsake you, but in the very pangs of death will minister
strong consolation to you. It Is in the word that we find the everlasting
Covenant, even the sure mercies of David (i. e.) of Christ, who in respect of
the flesh, descended from David. Isay 55.3. there we find by whom our sins are
pardoned, our Natures healed, our Souls are saved: these are called sure
mercies.

1. In respect of performance, they are as sure as if already done. 2 Samuel 23.6.

2. Sure in respect of continuance, they shall never be taken away, his mercy
endures for ever. Once adopted, justified, fanctisied, and for ever so. 2 Samuel
7.13. John 13.1. Let us not then sit down content with those low, perishing,
uncertain things, but get interest in those sure, desirable, and
soule-satisfying mercies. Pray with Saint Au^l^^, Da mihi nummum nunquam
periturum. Lord give me those riches which will never perish.

4. It makes the simple wise, and that to salvation. Many that are sensible of
their ignorance and simplicity, are discouraged from reading the word, when the
promise runs to such, as being sensible of their own silly, brutish condition,
and come with humble, tractable, teachable hearts, that they shall be taught
wisdom. Prove. 1.4. and 19.4. Psalm. 119.130. and become wiser then the ancient,
who by their long experience often times get much wisdom. 2. Wiser then their
Teachers, who usually excel their Scholars. 3. Wiser then their enemies, who
yet by their continual diving and searching into the ways of their opposites,
grow very subtle and cunning. Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.

5. The word of the Lord is right and strait, having no crookedness nor
perverseness in it. Wicked men go about and fetch a compass in ways of sin,
but the godly run the way of the plain, and outrun them as Ahimaaz did Cushi.
2 Samuel 18.23.

6. It breeds joy in every soul that orders his life according to it. V. 8. the
godly find (...), somewhat of kin to them in the word which makes them delight
in it. Though the wicked can find no joy there, yet an upright-hearted David
finds it sweeter then honey, Scripturae tuae deliciae meae. V. D. H. Osworths
Sermon. on that Text.
and more precious then gold, they are even the joy and rejoicing of their
hearts. Psalm. 119.111. this breeds solid, serious, substantial, spiritual joy
in the deepest afflictions and tentation. Psalm. 119.92. I had perished in my
affliction, unless thy Law had been my delight. It was not only delightful,
but even delight in the Abstract; yea delights in the Plural number,
Oblectationes meae. Heb. V^itu^ Plur. number. significans nullum esse genus
afflicti^nis aut d^loris cui non inveniatur in verbo Dei remedium. Moller.
he found delight upon delight ( i. e.) great and sure delight in Gods word. It
upholds the heart from sinking under affliction; 'Twill make a Paul and Silas
sing Psalms in prison, when Creature Comforts fail, yet faith can feed upon
the Promises. Habbak. 3.17, Hebrews 13.5. The word affords us presidents of
greater trialls then ever yet we have undergone, and so comforts us in our
distresses. Do thy children rise against thee? so did David's. Do Princes speak
against thee and thy famliar friends betray thee? so did his. Psalm. 55. Have
lost all? so did Job. Art cast into some loathsome prison? so was Jeremy, etc.
besides the word comforts us by showing how all things work together for good
unto us. Romans 8.28. and that God afflicts us for good ends.

7. It Is pure not only formaliter and in se, being free from all the dross and
dregs, How the word is Holy in six respects, see before on v. 15.
of sin a corruption: but effective, because it is a special means to purify
and cleanse us. John 17.17. Purity is, or at leastwise ought to be the Object
of our love. God is pure, his word is pure, his works are pure, and therefore
do the Saints love them. so did David. Psalm 119.140. thy word is very pure.
What follows? therefore does thy servant love it,

8. It enlighteneth the eyes. V. 8. it is a light and a lamp to us. Psalm
119.105. to have our bodily sight restored is a mercy, but to have our dark
understandings enlightened to see the deeps of our misery, and the riches of
Gods mercy, this is the mercy of mercies. Now the word is the means by which
the spirit conveighs both sight and light to us: by it he calls us out of our
dark and doleful condition, into mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. V. Culverweli
Light of Nature. cap. 17.
The light of the Sun is a pleasant thing, but oh how sweet and pleasant is
this spiritual light which leads us to eternal happiness! naturally there is a
Veil over all our hearts, and therefore before we read, we should beseech the
Lord to remove the Veil, else we shalll never see the divine and supernatural
mysteries of Gods Law. Psalm 119.18.

9. The fear of the Lord is clean. Mundum (i. e.) Sanctum and sincerum cui
nullae sordes falsorum dogmatum sunt admistae. Scult.
V. 9. The world is called the fear of God, effective, from the effect of it,
because it both teaches and works in us the true fear of God. It Is clean. 1.
in se, it has no sin, nor approbation of sin in it. 2. Quoad nos, it is a
means to make us clean, helping to purge out that froth and filth of sin which
makes us loathsome to God and his Saints.

10. It Is eternal and perpetual, the Laws of men are changed and abrogated,
but the Law of God is like God himself, it endures for ever, maugre the malice
of all opposers. The grass may wither, and the flower fade, but the word of
the Lord abides for ever. Psalm. 119.89. Isay 40.8. 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. We use to
prize durable things, lasting clothes and long enduring Leases, men desire; oh
set your hearts on Gods word, which endures, and will make you endure for ever,
if you obey it. 1 Ioh. 2.17.

11. It Is not only true, but Truth it self. (V. 9.) See Mr. Trapps True
Treasure cap. 3. Sect. 8. See the Excellencies of Scrip^ure-Truths in 8,
Particulars. Mr. Burges on John 17.17. Lect. 93. Sym. Partis. See Mr. Trapps
True Treasure. cap. 3. Sect. 5.
John 17.17. the judgments of the Lord are Truth. He calls Gods word by the
name of judgments, either because in it God denounces judgments against
wicked men, or else because we must judge of our actions according to this
Rule. There Is no fraud nor falsehood in them, therefore they are called by way
of Eminency. The Scriptures of Truth. Dan. 10. ult. Colossians 1.1.5, As God is
Truth, so is his Word. He is not like man, that he should lie. Not a
Threatening in the Scripture but shall fall on the wicked, and not a blessing
promised, but shall be fulfilled to the righteous.

12. It Is Righteous altogether; as God is just and righteous, so is his word.
Romans 7.14. the Law is holy, just, and good, three Epithets which can be applied
to no Law but Gods only. Nihil in eis* ne in uno quidem, maculae aut vitii
deprehenditur. Scultetus.
There Is no unrighteousness nor injustice in them. Men's Laws often times are
harsh, hard, unrighteous; so are not Gods, they are perfectly just and
righteous altogether.

13. It Is precious. Lex Dei pretiosior auro, dulcior melle quanta haec
praestantia! quanta dulcedo! Scultet.


1. In respect of profit it is better then Gold.

^. In respect of pleasure, it is sweeter then honey. By gold, David notes all
riches, and the things of greatest worth in the world, Quicquid est quod nos
amamus, illud aureum appellamus.

Est praestantior auro puro puto and puratissimo, nihil habente scoriae aut
sordis.


and by much fine Gold, he means all gold, how pure or precious soever; even
the finest refined gold that has been oftnest tried in the fire. No riches
like the word: Hence David calls it his Heritage and Portion. Psalm. 119.11. as
if he had nothing else in the world to trust to, Aurum est metallum omnium
nobilissimum and praestantissimum.
and therefore he prefers it before all worldly excellencies. Psalm. 119.72.127.
the Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and silver, It
excells Gold in five respects.

1. Gold is but an Earthly good, but the riches which the Scripture brings, is
Spiritual. 2. It Is but a common good, wicked men (as Esaias, Ahab, Nabal, the
Turk, the Pope) have it in abundance: a man may be outwardly great, and yet
inwardly miserable; 'twas great Caesar that said, I have been all things, and
yet am never the better. But the Grace which the Scripture brings, is a
special blessing, peculiar but to a few. 3. Gold cannot comfort a man in the
day of distress; whether it be personal or national. It Is rather a snare, then
an Helper then. Proverbs 11.4. Ezekiel. 7.19. Zeph. 1. ult. But the word of God
has breasts full of consolation for the people of God in all their distresses.
Psalm 119.92. 4. Gold cannot breed contentment, yea the more men have,
ofttimes, the more they covet. But the word teaches men godliness, and this
in the power of it breeds contentment, which is better then gold. 1 Timothy 6.6.
5. Gold may be lost, Thieves may rob us of it, rust may consume it, and
especially when death comes, He that would see more excellent properties of
gold, let him peruse Mr. Vennings Mysteries cap. 27 p. ^00. and Ravenel. in V.
Aurum.
we must part with it. But true Grace which is wrought in us by the word and
spirit of God, can never be lost, Where ever we go, it will go with us. It Is
fidus Achates, a faithful friend, which will never leave us, till it have
brought us to glory. Rev. 14.13. Oh that I could convince men of the truth of
this, viz. that the saving knowledge of God in his word is better then Gold.
Tell men where they may have gold, and we see how they ride, run, dig, delve,
and all for a little perishing gold, which cannot satisfy them. Isay 55.2. But
this true Treasure which is hidden in the word of God; very few labor for, and
the Reason is, men's hearts are earthly, carnal, sensual, and savor not the
things of God. Oh that such would hearken to the counsel of Solomon, Prove.
8.10, 11. receive instruction and not silver, and knowledge rather, then choice
gold. Prove. 3.14, 15. and to a greater then Solomon. Revel. 3.18, Buy of me
gold ( i. e.) the Graces of the Spirit, as Knowledge, Faith, Obedience, etc.
Build not on the Hay, Wood; Stubble of men's fancies and inventions, but build
on the pure, sure, sound doctrine arising from Gods word, this is called Gold.
1 Cor. 3.12. and one day will be better to us then all the gold in the world.
14. For delight and pleasantness, Gods word is sweeter then Honey, yea then
the purest, Favus mellis est maxim laudabilis quod per se fl^^t, and ut^ro e
favo stillat.
finest honey, which flows from the comb. Prove. 24.13, 14. and 16.24. the lips
of the spouse are said to drop as the honey comb, ( i. e.) her words are very
pleasant, sweet and grateful. Cant. 5, 3. and when the Scripture would express
the sweetness of any thing, it borrows this allusion, sweeter then honey.
Ezekiel. 3.3. Revel. 10.9, 10. Old men are all for profit, and young men for
pleasure; here is gold for the one, and honey for the other. Gods word brings
more true pleasure to the souls of those that obey it, then the sweetest honey
does to the taste.

Quest. If the word be thus precious and sweet, how comes it to pass, that
most men in the world see not the preciousnesse, nor taste the sweetness of it?

Answ. The God of this world has so blinded their eyes, that they cannot see
the Excellencies of the word. The Sun is full of light and luster, but the
blind man for want of sight cannot discern it. The word is full of sweetness,
but men's hearts are so taken up with the enjoyment of present things, that they
cannot taste nor relish the things of God. It Is but lost labor to put a
cordial in a dead man's mouth. The fault then is not in the word which is as
precious, pure, delightful, and sweet as ever, but the fault is in our corrupt
minds, which are so blinded and hardened with sin, that we cannot perceive, nor
receive the word. Let Us beseech the Lord to spiritualize our hearts, and then
we shall be able experimentally to say, How sweet are thy words unto my taste,
yea sweeter then Honey to my mouth! Psalm. 119.103. As none know the sweetness
of honey but such as have tasted it; so none know the sweetness of Gods word
but the people of God, who experimentally know the worth of it. To them, and to
them only it is more precious then gold, and sweeter then honey. To them the
most excellent and delightful things in the world are base and bitter, dross
and dung, loathsome and noisome in comparison of Gods word.

15. It Is a special preservative against sin. V. 11. and Psalm. 119.11. it is
one special piece and part of our spiritual armor whereby we defend our
selves against sin and Satan. Hoc gladio spirituali Christus vicit and
jugulavit Daemonemse itentantem and oppugnantem.
Ephesians. 6.17. by this Christ, Steven, Paul, and the Martyrs, defended
themselves, and offended their enemies. Matthew. 4.47. This will Antidote and arm
us with invincible arguments against sin and Satan. Does the Devil tempt thee
to covetousness, cruelty, Usury? the word will tell thee that no such person
shall come into Gods Kingdom. Psalm. 15.5. Gal. 5.22. Art given to fornication,
adultery, uncleanness? the word will tell thee that God will judge such. Heb.
13.4. Art tempted to Apostasy? remember Heb. 10.38. Mark 8. ult. Rev. 21.8. Art
tempted to pride? remember, God resists the proud. James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Art
tempted to hypocrisy? remember Hypocrites have the lowest place in hell. Matthew.
24.51. Art tempted to defraud and overreach thy neighbor? remember the Lord
is an avenger of all these things. 1 These. 4.6. though men may carry many
things so subtly, See more D Gouge on Ephesians. 6.17. and Mr. Robinson on the
same Text. and Mr Sangar his Morning Lect p. 14. etc.
as to escape the justice of men, yet they shall never escape the hand of God.
Art tempted to break thy Covenant? the Scriptures still tell thee what befell
Zedekiah for this sin, Ezekiel. 17, 18. The very root of all that Atheism and
Profaneness that is amongst us, is this, that either men do not know the
Scriptures, or else they do not believe them.

16. It brings a great Reward, not to those that only hear it, know it, praise
it, but to those that practice it. V. 11. yea the very obeying of Gods
commandments is a reward it self, Virtus est abunde su^ praemium.
it is both work and wages, and such employment is our high preferment. It Is not
only For keeping, but In keeping of Gods commandments, V. Beauty of Holiness
c. 8. p. 172. Edis, 2.
that there is reward. James 1.25. Godliness in the power of it is Gain, great
gain, none like it. This reward follows obedience freely, as Punishment
follows the disobedient, though they neither desire nor seek it, yet paena est
finis operis, etsi non est finis operantis. Those that love the commands of
God, and sincerely obey them, shall be certainly rewarded, though they should
not desire or seek it, but in simplicity of heart run the ways of God, making
this their aim, that they may glorify him. Now all these high commendations of
the word, should make us unfeignedly for to love it, heartily to embrace it,
reverently to esteem it, and fervently to desire it, Inter omnia mundi volumina
praestantissima sunt scripta (...), nam praeter id quod Deum habent Autorem,
veram continent Sapientiam, infallibillia praecepta, optimam vivendi normam.
Aretius.
Excellency being the Object of desire. Gods Word is like God himself, full of
Majesty, full of Excellency. It contains ( magnalia and honorabilia Legis) the
great and honorable things of Gods Law, Hos. 8.12. It is not an empty sound or
a dead letter, but full of Majesty, Life and Power, and therefore must be
entertained by us with the greatest respect. Eadem reverentia debetur
Scripturae quam Deo, quia manavit ab eo solo, nec quicquam humani habet
admis^um. Calvin.
Look what See seven Sorts of of Irreveverent handlers of Gods Word. Master
Leigh Body of Divinity, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Page 25. Master Trapps True Treasure.
Cap. 4.
Reverence we give unto God, the same is due to the Word of God.

[See more of the Scriptures Excellency. Master Robert Boltons Saints Guide, p.
42.43, etc. Master Trapps True Treasure, Chapter 3. Sect. 2. Master Leighs Body
of Divinity. l. 1. c. 8. p. 81.

2. If the Scriptures be Gods Word, then it will follow that they are a Consule
Davenant de Iudice ac norma fidei, cap. 10. p. 40. and Mr. Leighs Body of
Divinity l. 1. c. 2. p. 17. Bishop Vshers Body of Divinity. p. 18. Chameir,
Loc. com. l. 1. c. 10. and 12. Ames. Bell. Enervat. l. 1. c. 6.
Perfect Rule and Canon for us to walk by. The Canons and Rules of men are often
times harsh, hard, sottish, superstitious, and disquiet the Conscience; aye,
but the Word of God commands nothing but what is sweet and easy, pleasant and
profitable to the soul that walks according to it, Gal. 6.16. as many as walk
according to this Rule or Canon ((...), so Phil. 3.16.) Peace and Mercy shall
be their portion; Regula est mensura quadam cui nihil adimi, nihil adjici
potest.
hence the books of Scripture are called Canonical, because they are the rule
and Canon by which we must walk; hence it is that the Lord sends us in our
doubts, not to a Light within us (which is no better then darkness) nor to
unwritten Traditions without us which would soon deceive us; but to the Law and
to the Testimony, Isay 8.19, 20. not to witches or wizards, not to the dead for
the ease of the living, Nunquid pro vivorum salute consulet mortua Idola, vel
damnatos Damones: ad Legem ^^currendum est, ea enim docebit nos quid agendum,
quid cavendum sit. ^ Lapide.
but we must have recourse to the Law of God which is given us by him for our
infallible direction; and if any man speak either without or against the word,
it is because he has no true Light of Grace or Understanding in him.

This God has ordained as a Lamp for our Feet, that we miscarry not amiddest
those many Bypath that are in the World. Let us then make use of it in the
course of our Lives; If a Carpenter have a Rule or Line, if he tie it to his
back and never use it, his Work must needs be crooked: So if we have Bibles,
and never read them, nor Meditate on them to practice them, our Lives must
needs be irregular.

They are then to be reproved, who set up false Rules to walk by, As 1.
Antiquity. 2. Custom. 3. Fathers. 4. The Consule Altingium. T. 2. P. 1.
Problem 4. page 26.27. Whitaker, De Scriptur, Controvers. 1. Q 3 Cap. 1.
Church. 5. Reason. 6. Universality. 7. Enthusiasms.


All which you may see Succinctly and Learnedly confuted in Master Anthony
Burgess his Fast Sermon on Mark 1.3. Preached before the House of Commons,
September 17. 1643. Page 3. to 19. where you have six properties of a Rule,
with many motives and directions to read the Scripture. To these I shall add
an eighth sort, viz. those that leave the Scriptures. and make Providence the
Rule of their ways and walking, because they have success and prosper in their
ways: Faelix scel^s vocatur virtus. Sen.
therefore they conclude that their ways are good, and God approves of them.
But if this were good Logic, then thieves and sacrilegious persons might
conclude that their actions were good, because they have success for a time in
their wickedness. Like Dionysius who prospering in his sacrilege, cried, See
h^w the Gods love Sacrilege! Such must know that we may not accept the most
signal Demonstrations of Providence against a Scripture Rule. No alteration of
times, no success of Providence must make us go against the Word of God. See
five Reasons against such in Master Lyfords Plain man's Senses exercised, p. 29.
to 37. and Master Anthony Burgess Spi. Refining, 1 Part. Sermon. 31.

9. Others make Conscience their Rule, wherein Conscience is regula regulata,
non regula regulans. It must be ruled by the Word, and not rule the Word.
Conscience is only a subordinate Rule, and binds us no further then it
receives information from the Word. Many Sectaries cry, their Conscience is
against our Ministry, Churches, Ordinances; and may not a Jew, See 5. Reasons
why an erring Conscience does not oblige. Ames CC. l. 1. c. 4. S. 10.
a Turk or Papist say as much, that it is against his Conscience to join with
us: but who knows not that an erroneous Conscience does not bind; else John
16.2. Acts 26.9. might plead Conscience for persecuting the Church. Thy duty is
not to follow it, but get thy judgment better informed, that thou may leave
it; since the light of Conscience is but imperfect and may err.

3. If the Scripture be Gods Word, then it must needs be the fittest Judge both
in matters of Doctrine and Practice. Hence in all our doubts God sends us
hither for direction, Deuteronomy 12.32. and 28.58. and 31.9.10. Isay 8.20. and
Christ sends us to the Scriptures to decide matters of Controversy. Thus when
a Controversy arose about the Resurrection, Christ determines the Controversy
by Scripture, Matthew 22.29. ye err not knowing the Scripture. So Luke 10.26.
and 16.29. Acts 16.22. 2 Peter 1.19. The Word is the supreme judge in all
matters of Religion; Who is higher then God? when his Word has spoken it, what
exception shall we make? or to whom shall we appeal? Hence Christ himself
submitted his Doctrine to the decision of the Scriptures, John 5.39. so did the
Apostle, Acts 28.23. The Church is Gods House, his City, his Spouse, and He
only is her Lawyer, James 4.12.

[See more, Doctor Davenant de Iudice cultus, cap. 4. p. 5. Doctor Prideaux,
Lect. 22. Revets Isagoge, cap. 19.20. Lyford Plain man's sens. Excerc. Page
9.10. Gerherd, Loc. Com. Tom. 1. Doctor Cheynel against Antitrinit. c. 9. p.
291. D. Morton, Apolog. p. 2. l. 5 Brochmand CC. Tom. 1. Controvers. 1. Q. 19.
and Ames. Bell. Enervat. l. 1. c. 5.

4. If the Scripture of the Old and New Testament be a perfect Rule, and the
supreme Judge, then they are to be blamed, who add Apochryfal writings to it
to perfect it; whereas that which is perfect needs no such Additions: yet the
Papists have put them in the Canon, though there be palpable lies in them, E.
G. Ecclesiasticus 1.14. that the fear of the Lord was created with the faithful
in the womb, so Ecclesiasticus 46.20. is false, so Tobit 6.7. with the smoke of
the Liver of a Fish, he drives away the Devil; but the Scripture says Fide non
Fumo, by Faith and not by smoke we must resist him. So Tobit. 12.9.12.13. he
makes the Angel, not Christ to offer up the Prayers of the Saints to God;
Ecclesiasticus 22.22. and 2 Maccab 12.43.47. there is offering sacrifice for
the dead.

[See strong Reasons against them, Doctor Reynolds Lect. de Lib. Apochry.
Bishop Vshers Body of Divinity, page 14.15. Master Leighs Body of Divinity, l.
1. c. 5. D. Whitaker de script. Controv. 1 Q. 1. cap. 3. Rivels Isagoge ad
Script. c. 7. Sharpii Cursus Theolog. Contr. to page 6.

5. Is the Scripture the Word of God, Oh love it then for the Authors sake, we
usually esteem of writings according to the Eminency and Dignity of the
Author; now all Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is to be
prized as the Love it not only because it is a good Law, but because it is
Gods Law. Master Capel on Tentat. l. 4. Sect. 2. p. 15. ubi plura.

Quid est S. Scriptura nisi quaedam Ep^stola Omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam
suam? Greg.


Epistle and Love-Letter of the Great God to the sons of men. It Is one of the
chiefest gifts which ever God gave; it is a greater mercy then the Sun or the
Light of Heaven. It Is this we must be judged by at the last day, John 12.48.
Not a Chapter we read, nor a Text that is expounded to us, but will be a
witness for us or against us, for our comfort or conviction at that great day.
Be ruled then by it since you must be judged by it, and choose rather to die
then to sin against it? Set your affections on it, see that you love it.

1. Cordially, not Superficially. Write it not only in your Heads or
Note-Books, but get it written upon your hearts, and engraven on your souls,
then you will delight to do Gods Will, Psalm 40.8. do not only read it, but
eat it, and by Meditation digest it, that it may be to you the Rejoicing of
your hearts, Ier. 15.16 We should as readily and willingly receive Gods Word,
as an hungry man does meat.

2. Love it See Master Stoughton David's Love to the Word. Chapter 13 14. Master
Hierons Sermon on Psalm 119.174. Page 215.
Superlatively, do not love it as you do your beast or other creatures with a
low, carnal, sensual Love: but love the Scriptures next to God, Appretiative
and intensive, Affectu and Effectu with the highest intention of Affection;
even above riches, Pleasures, yea, and our appointed food, Job 23.12. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food. Prae dimenso meo
(i.) magis quam res sibi ad vitam necessarias. Lavater.
He loved it more then any food, absolutely; and preferred it before his
necessary food, without which his life could not subsist: he had rather loose
his meals, then his meditations on Gods Word. He esteemed it more, not only
then dainties or superfluities, but then substantial food, without which he
could not live and subsist: As a Master Trapp in locum, Vbi plura.
Reverend Divine of ours has well observed.

3. Love it ^ractically, Love it so, as to obey it; this is the end of all our
Reading, and Hearing, viz. that we may do it, Deuteronomy 4.6.14. and 51. and
6.3. and 11.32. It is not knowing nor praising but practicing that brings
blessedness, John 13.17. Psalm 15. ult. Iam. 1.25. Revelations 22.14.

Though Obedience be not the Meritorious cause of our salvation, yet it is a
good Evidence of it: It is Via ad Regnum, non causa Regnandi, Luke 11.28.
Romans 2.13. At the last day Christ will demand, not what have we read or said,
but what have we done. Matthew 7.22. and 25.35. Many are bare hearers, but not
doers of the Word, and so play the Non quid legerint, sed quid egerint non quid
dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint.
Sophisters in deceiving themselves and others with shows, instead of
substance, James 1.22. To obey the Word of God in our Life, (...), fallaci
Syllogismo imponentes vobis ipsis. Paraeus.
is our Wisdom, Deuteronomy 4.6. Hence Christ calls him a wise man, that
hears the Word and does it. Matthew 7.24. These are Verba vivenda, non
legenda; not barely to be read, but practiced: Hereby we honor God, and so
shall be honored of him again, John 15.8. One Practical Christian brings
more glory to God, then a thousand Notional formal Professors. Is optime
legit Scripturas qui verbae ver^it in opera. Chrysostom.
This made Paul commend the Romans (6.17.) not for bare professing, but for
obeying from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered to them: and
Christ prefers such as Do his Will, before his natural Kindred, Matthew
12.47.

Hereby we shall experimentally know the Truth of Gods Word, Si quis animo ita
comparatus sit ut qualemcunque voluntatem Dei sibi revelatam, licet carnis
affectibus contrariam, obsequenti animo amplecti velit; is demum aptus erit, ut
judicet de meo dogmate, quippe mentem habens non impeditam: Sicut oculi de
col^ribus tum demum recte judicant cum nullo pravo humore suffusi sunt. Soto.
John 17.17. When men believe the Word, submit to it, and are content to be
ruled by it in all things, they shall Experimentally know the truth of it.
Knowledge helps much to Practice, and Practice helps much to Knowledge. It is
not talkeing of Wine, but drinking of it, that comforts and chears the heart.
The Theory of Music is delightful, but the Practice is far more Excellent
and Pleasant.

A real good Man, is Decalogus Explicatus, a living Decalogue, his Life is a
Comment on the Commandments. The Word is written in his Heart, and held forth
in his Life, Philippians 2.16. Holding forth the Word of Life. He does not
only lay up the Word in Hearing, but he does hold it forth in ordering all his
Actions according to it. And this is an Evidence that we are truly Godly, John
14.15. 1 John 3.24. And serves to distinguish us from all the Hypocrites in
the World, who only talk of Religion, and cry, Lord, Lord, Matthew, 7.22, 23.
they come and hear, But they will not do it, Ezekiel, 33.31, 32. that But is a
blot and spoils all.

As it was said of Naaman the Syrian, He was a Valiant man, But he was a Leper;
that but was a blemish. So we may say of many formal Professors, they can talk
excellently, and have good Parts; But they are covetous, cruel, proud,
malicious, censorious, etc. Fie on these Buts, they are the Coloquintida that
spoils all. These are the Botches and blemishes of Religion and cause it to be
evil spoken of; as the Indians said of the Spaniards, when they saw their
cruelty, Surely, that God cannot be good that has such wicked servants. So
Ezekiel. 36.20. the profane Jews caused Gods Name to be profaned and evil spoken
of, Gentium vitiis and idolatriae adhaeserunt, sicque polluerunt Nomen Dei (i.)
ansam dederunt cur gentes blasphemarent Deum. ^ Lap.

Minor reatus est Sancta non legere, quam lecta violare. Salvian.


by reason of their lewdness, when the Enemy cried, These are the people of the
Lord, and are gone forth of his Land: q. d. These are the holy people, see what
kind of Inhabitants God had in his Holy Land.

On the contrary, when Gods people walk up to their Principles and
Privileges, answering their Gospel Light with Gospel lives, being burning and
shining lights, and leading convincing lives.

Vt nihil mali de nobis nisi mentiendo loquantur. Hier.
1. Either they shall convince the wicked, and stop their mouths that they
shall have nothing justly against them.

2. Or else convert them, as Apolog. c. 1. p. 51.
Justin Martyr confesses that the Holy lives of the Christians taught him the
Christian Religion: by seeing their Constancy, Patience, Humility and
cheerfulness in suffering, it won him to the Gospel. Oh then, let us be doers
of Gods Will, this is more pleasing to him then all Duties without it.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15. A heart without words is
better then words without an heart, a grain of Grace is better then many pounds
of gifts. It Is good to Profess, but Practice is better, yea of the two,
Practice without Profession, is better then Profession without Practice: for
Divinity in this life consists rather in Practice then in speculation and
contemplation. Tota Theologia est Practica Baronius, Exercit. 3. art. 28. mihi.
p. 277.
In Religion we know no more then we Practice; then we are said to know God
when we keep his Commandments, Ille plus didicit qui plus facit.
1 John 2.3, 4. Lay aside words, and fall to works.

-- Quid verbis opus est? Spectemur agendo.
Let us imitate the sheep which boast not how much they have eaten, but show it
actually by their fat, fleece and young. We all profess we love God, let us
show it by doing something for his Honor. As the woman that loved our Savior
bestowed a box of precious Ointment on him. Exhibitio operis indicium est
amoris. Bernard.
Love is bountiful. Many read the Scriptures only to fit them for discourse,
Est qui Plantonem legere postulet, non vitae ornandae, sed linguae orationisque
commendae gratia, nec ut modestior fiat, sed ut lepidior. Rul. Gellius, Noct.
Attic. l. 1. c. 9.

Tantum scimus quantum operamur.


as some are said to read Plato. All such unpractical knowledge in Gods esteem
is no knowledge, 1 Samuel 1.12. Jeremiah 2.8. The Priests no doubt had a
Notional knowledge, but because it wanted Practice, God accounted it no
knowledge. This want of Practice breeds Errors and Heresies; Men turn
Scepticks because they will not be Practicks. God plagues the Hypocrites of our
time for their Unfruitfulnesse, Ungratefulness, and Contempt of the Gospel,
by giving them up in his just judgment.

1. Anabaptism, Libertinism, Socinianism and other Heretical ways. Sin has so
blinded them that they cannot see the Truth, Matthew 22.29. Scripturatum
ignoratio peperit haereses, and vitam corruptam invexit. Chrysostom.
Practice is the best Preservative against defection, this will make a man
whose knowledge is less then others to remain steadfast in time of trial like a
fixed Star, whilst others of greater Parts like blazing Comets may shine for a
while, but at last vanish into smoke, Revelations 3.8. It Is obedience to this
Word that will build us up till it have brought us to an inheritance immortal,
Acts 20.32.

[He that would see more Encouragements for Practice, let him peruse Mr. Samuel
Wards Sermon, John 13.17. it is the last Sermon of his Sermons. Master Vennings
sermon on Matthew, 7.21. Doctor Preston on Romans 1.18. p. 170. Downams Guide
to Godliness, cap. 1.2. The Preface to the last Edition of Doctor Andrews
Catechism, Master Anthony Burgess spi. Refining, 1 Peter, 1.2, 3. Master Sanger
his morning Lecture, p. 77, etc.

1. Then let us Read it constantly, Deuteronomy 6.6, 7. Psalm 1.1, 2. least any
should exempt themselves, the Lord names Bishop Vshers Body of Divinity, Page
25.26. Chamier Loc. Com. l. 2. c. 1. Doctor Featlyes Defense Sr. H. L. 2. P.
page 100.
all sorts, men, women, children, strangers, Deuteronomie, 31.11, 12. Jeremiah.
36.6, 7. not only the learned, but the unlearned also, must Read, yea, search
the Scriptures, if they expect Eternal Life. John 5.39. peruse them frequently,
(...), scrutamini (i.) non legite tantum, sed attento animo expendite. Grotius.
and search them diligently, digging for these Heavenly Treasures as men do
for gold, who break every clod that they may find the golden Oar. Singuli
sermones, syllabae, puncta, apices, in Divinis literis plena sunt sensibus.
Hierom.
There is nothing written in vain, but even those places which at first view
seem to contain nothing memorable; yet by prayer and study much gold of
instruction and consolation may be gained from them, neither is there any
danger in a wise, humble and Holy reading of the Scriptures, for then the Lord
would never have revealed them, nor have denounced such terrible Threatenings
against such as are ignorant of them, Isay 27.11. 1 Thessalonians, 7.8. It is
not knowledge but the want of it which makes men err both in Doctrine and
Manners, ( Matthew 22.29.) as we see by sad experience in the dark corners of
the land.

Be not then a stranger to Gods Word, but let it dwell in you, Colossians,
3.16. Let it be your Domesticke Counselor, let it be as Familiar with you as
he that dwells in the same House with you, even as your Brother and Sister,
Proverbs 4.7. Let it dwell not only sufficiently, but abundantly, richly, and
plentifully in you, both in respect of the Object, be not only acquainted with
some Parts and Parcels of the Scripture, but let the whole Word both Law and
Gospel abide in you, be industrious to know all Gods Will, Hos. 6.3. Prove.
2.3.4, 5.

Secondly, In respect of the Subject, Let it rule in all the parts of the Soul,
in the Understanding, Memory, Will, Affections; set open the Doors of the
Soul, and bid light welcome, Let there not be a formido Lucis, a shunning of
the Light, for that argues guilt, John 3.20. But be like Apollos, who was
mighty in the Scriptures, Acts, 18. 14. and like the Eunuch ( Acts 8.28, 29.)
who would lose no time, but as he was traveling and riding in his Chariot he
was reading the Word. Si talis in ipso itinere, qualis in quiet Domi fuisse
credendus est. Chrysostom.


2. Which makes him the more to be admired, he was but a Heathen. We must
esteem reverently of the word though at present we cannot understand it. V.
Hilders. Psalm. 51. Lect. 1. page 2.3.


3. He had much business.

4. He was a Prince, and a great man.

5. Though he understood not what he read, yet he would be reading.

6. He ingeniously confessing his ignorance, God sends one to instruct him.
It Is the Meek, the Teachable, and the Tractable whom God will teach his way,
Psalm. 25.9. Isay 28.9, 10. James 1.21. 'Twas the great praise of Alphonsus King
of Arragon, that (notwithstanding all his Princely affairs) he read over the
Bible 14. times with the ordinary Gloss, and George Prince of Transylvania read
over the whole Bible 6. or 7. times. How will their forwardness condemn our
backwardness!

[See Motives and directions for Reading the Scriptures, Par. on Romans in the
end of his Comment p. 1. etc. Byfields Marrow, p. 550. Master White of
Dorchester Direct. for reading script. Master Sam. Hierons Sermon. on Hos. 8.12.
Downams Guide to Godlyness cap. 28. to 32. Master Traps Treatise cap. 8. Master
Burgess his Sermon on Mark 1.3. p. 14, etc. Master Leigh's Body of Divinity,
l. 1. c. 2. p. 23. Master Philip Goodwin Family-Dut. p. 348.

2. We must remember and Treasure up the things we read. It Is impossible we
should ever practice the things which we forget with Mary, we should treasure
up Christ's sayings in our hearts, Luke 2.19.51. we should lay up something for
the time to come, Isay 42.23. and learn that in Sion which may support us in
Babylon. Ier. 10.11. this will be a means to keep us from sinning against God,
Psalm 119.11. Deuteronomy. 11.18. Job 22.22, 23. Our memories naturally are very
false, and there is a wilful forgetfulness of the best things. Hence the Lord
commanded the Jews to make them fringes on the borders of their Garments that
they might remember the Commandments of the Lord and do them, Vox audita perit,
litera scripta mane^.
Number. 15.38, 39. we should use all good means to keep the word in Remembrance;
as by conference, by loving it Psalm 119.16. want of affection, makes memory
wanting, we use not to forget what we love. By writing it, such as can write
Sermons may do well to write them. Baruc writ from the mouth of Jeremy, 36.32.
and if Kings notwithstanding the multiplicity of their Kingly affairs, yet must
spare time to read Gods Word, and must write out with their own hands a Copy of
the Law, the better to imprint it in their memories ( Deuteronomy. 17.18.) how can
inferior persons who have not that strong employment, be excused?

[See helps to strengthen Memory, Manton on James 1.25. p. 204. Barlow on 2
Timothy 2.8. Baine on Revelations 2.4. p. 13. Fenner on Revelations, 3.1.
Rogers of Dedham on Love, p. 3, 4, etc. Doctor Reynolds on the Passions, p. 13,
etc.

3. Medit on the word. Do not only taste it, but eat it, digest it, and concoct
it, for then it will nourish you Ier. 15.16. This made David to excel Ps.
119.99.100. 'Twas one of Luthers Masters, by which he profited so much.
Meditation, Tentation and Prayer. This will make us know things experimentally,
we shall taste of hidden Manna, we shall be constant and settled in Gods ways.
This lays open to us all our losses by sin, the loss of Gods favor, loss
of Peace of conscience, and loss of Reward, and so imbitters sin to us. By
this we converse with God, it is our Mount Nebo out of which we may behold the
heavenly Canaan. Though our bodies be on earth, yet by Meditation our souls
may be in heaven. Resolve then to spend one hour in 24. every day in this
duty. Satan will lay many rubs in your way, Mihi certe auferre sol^t multum
temporis contemplatio ips^ sapientiae. Seneca epist. 65.

Haec meditatio ut salu^a^is est, ita assidua esse de bet, languescit enim and
evanescit fides si hoc studium remittatur, and sunt illecebrae variae quae nos
abducunt si paululum a contemplatione remittamus.


for of all duties he cannot endure that we should reflect upon our ways, yet
like another Sampson, you must break all the cords of these Philistines; the
benefit, Peace and comfort you will find by it, will abundantly pay for all;
especially on the Sabbath day, we must be much in this duty. Rev. 1.10. As the
rich man thinks it not sufficient that he has Gold, but he loves to think
on it, to see it, to count it: so should we not content our selves with a
notionall knowledge of God and his works; but by meditation we should recount
and ponder the ways and works of God, that we may experimentally tell what God
has done for our souls.

[See more for Meditat. Barlow on 2 Timothy 2.7. D. Holsworth's Ser. on Psalm.
119.48. p. 321. Downams Guide to Godliness. l. 5. c. 14. Mr. Stoughton David's
Love to the word. p. 295. to 434. Mr. Ambrose his Medita. cap. 7. Sect. 1. Mr.
Baxter's Saints Rest. Part. 4. p. 147.179. to 203.]

Let us then with all Thankfulness acknowledge this mercy of mercies, Haec
visus caecis, vita mortuis, ortu, forma, materia divinum est, usu salu^iferum,
effectis mi^ anuum. D. Sibbs Concio ad Clerum. p. 57.
this gift of gifts; what gross Ignorance, Profaneness, Superstition, and
Idolatry, did overspread the world 500. years ago, for want of this light
which we enjoy. Oh what excellent Helps, Expositors, Treatises, Practical and
Polemical on all Parts of Divinity, do we enjoy! what would not our forefathers
have given to have seen this day? and yet we foolish, ungrateful people know
not our own mercies, nor do we prize the things that concern our everlasting
Peace. See Mr. Strong^ 31. Ser. p 617.
As ever we desire to prosper, let us with all readiness of mind receive the
word, none ever yet lo^t by entertaining it, it pays for its entertainment
where ever it comes. 'Twill return Mercy for Duty, and brings with it a sure
Reward: Every line of it runs Wine, Milk, and Honey, to the due observers of
it. We should therefore esteem it above our dearest lives. When the Sanctum
Sanctorum was taken (says Josephus) in the last destruction of Jerusalem, the
Jews desired rather to dye then to live. What crying, yea what dying was
there, when the Ark was taken? 1 Samuel 4.18, 20, 21, 22. if the Lord will take
his word away, we should desire that he would take us away, for our lives will
not be worth the enjoying, if we cannot have the Tokens of Gods love and favor
with them. There is not a surer sign of a child of God, then this sincere love
to the sincere milk of Gods word. 1 Pet. 2.2. Moses esteems it above all the
learning of other Nations. Deuteronomy. 4.6. David spends the whole 119. Psalm to show
his intimate affection to it. He preferres it before Gold, Solomon his son
preferres it before Pearls. Proverbs 3.15. Job (23.12.) preferres it before
his food. and Jeremy (15* 16.) makes it his joy. In a word, all the children of
God have been great lovers of the word of God. They look upon it as a Rich Mine
of Heavenly Treasures, and a storehouse of all spiritual consolations. The
Bible is Promptuarium sacrum, a common shop of medicines for the soul, Nostros
lectio divina solidavit mores, quoniam saepe been geritur si caelestis metus
humanis motibus opponatur. Hinc virtutum omnium sumitur manifesta cognitio.
Hinc sapientia veritatis sapore conditur. Sic ad omnia redditur humilis, quem
imbuit doctrina coelestis. Cassiodorus.
full of rich privileges, promises, and large Legacies to the people of God,
It Is a staff and stay to the old, an ornament and guide to the young. Here you
may read the Love which God bare to his children from all eternity, and will
continue to them when time shall be no more; here are to be found the Leaves of
the Tree of Life, which God has ordained for the healing of the Nations. In a
word, here is a Hammar for Heretics, a Touchstone for doctrine, a Rule for our
lives, a comforter and counselor to us in this house of our pilgrimage.
Verbum Dei est lux ad Deum dirigens in Agendis, Credendis, Sperandis, Amandis.
We should then read Gods word not only as our duty, but as our privilege and
singular happiness; Rejoicing that we have them to read; the child delights to
read his fathers Will and Testament, that he may see what is bequeathed to him.
Denizons delight to read their Charters, S. Scriptura est cor and anima Dei.
Greg. Here we have the very heart and mind of God revealed to us.
and to know their Privileges. The Malefactor acquitted delights to read his
Pardon. and the Prodigal that is received into favor, delights to read the
Affectionate Letters of his father to him. If we be born of God, See Mr. Calamy
2. Ser. on Psalm. 119 92. p. 57. etc.
we cannot but love the word of God.

And it is profitable. etc.
Observe, Such as meddle with Gods word, must profit by it. We abuse the word
when we read or hear it only for Speculation, Novelty, and Curiosity, but not
for Practice, that we may know, love and fear God, and so be happy for ever.
God gave them for this end, that we might profit by them. Those Ministers then
are to be blamed that play with Scripture, and feed their people with the
chafe of aerie Notions, frivolous Questions, Idle distinctions and foolish
controversies; seeking their own ends and praise, and not the benefit of Gods
people. Let such remember that the Scripture was given to Profit us, but not
play withal. It Is said of Bernard, that preaching one day Scholastically, the
learned thanked him, but not the godly; but when another day he preached
plainly, the good people came blessing God for him, and giving him many Thanks,
which some Scholars wondering at; oh said he, Heri Bern^rdum, hodie Christum.
Yesterday I preached Bernard, but to day I preached Christ. It Is not Learning,
but Teaching, not the wisdom of words, but the evidence of the Spirit that is
pleasing to the Saints.

For Doctrine, for reproof. etc.
Observe, The word of God contains in it all things necessary to salvation,
what is there in the whole body of Religion, but it may be referred to one of
these Heads, either Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, or Instruction in
Righteousness? All things necessary to life eternal are here to be found.
Ezekiel. 20.11. John 5.39. and 20.31. This will inform our Judgments, reform our
manners, convince gainsayers, and direct us in paths of Piety. Here Is a salve
for every sore, a medicine for every malady, even a perfect Rule of found
doctrine and good life. [See more in Mr. Leigh's Body of Divinity. l. 1. c. 7.
p. 80. etc.]

VERSE 17. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.
THe Apostle here adds the end of the Scriptures usefulness. viz. to make the
man of God perfect ( i. e.) that the Minister of Christ may be perfect and
complete, every way fitted for the work of his calling, for altho^gh this be
true of every good man, that the word of God is able to comcompleat and perfect
him for every good work; yet the context and scope of the Apostle shows that
he especially speaks of a Minister of Christ, (...). ille homo Dei.
whom by way of honor he styles, The man of God. This Title did properly and
peculiarly belong to the Prophets of the Old Testament, who were by way of
honor and excellency called, Men of God. 1 Samuel 2.27. and 9.6. 1 Kings
13.1.13. Deuteronomy. 33.1. 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Kings 17.18. and 2.4, 7.

1. Because of their Mission and Commission, which they had from God to
dispense his word and Sacraments to his people, they are Gods Legates and
Ambassadors, and therefore are they called, Men of God.

2. In respect of that singular Holiness which is (or at least ought to be) in
the Ministers of Christ, and in respect of their neernesse and familiarity with
God. V. Schooles-Guard. Ru^e 33.
It Is an Hebraisme very frequent in Scripture, when they would express an
excellent thing, they joined the name of God to it, as the City of God, Cedars
of God, Harps of God, men of God (i. e.) excellent Cities, Cedars, Harps, Men.
The Apostle applies this Title to Timothy. 1 Timothy 6.11. in the Text he applies
it to all the ministers of the Gospel. How basely soever this ungrateful world
esteems of them, yet they are men of God, set apart by him for the noblest
employment. They are not only men of God by right of Creation, for so are the
wicked, nor by right of Redemption, so are the Elect, but by special
delegation, God imployes them on his Embassyes and Messages to the sons of men.
Hence Observe, That the calling of the Ministry is an Honorable Calling. They
are men indeed, but they are men of God. They are Ministers and Servants, but
it is for Christ. They are Ambassadors for him. 2 Cor. 5.20. It Is an Honor to
be an Ambassador to an ordinary King, Semel Legatus semper honoratus.
but to be employed as an Ambassador for the King of Kings; how great is that
honor? Three things make a service Honorable, 1. If we serve an Honorable
Master. 2. If our work be honorable. 3. If our wages be Honorable.


All three things concur here. No Master, no Work, no Wages like ours. The
Physician looks to your bodies, the Lawer to your Estates, and the Minister to
your souls. These are the Light of the world, the Salt of the Earth, V. Sal
Terrae cap. 2.
the Stewards of Gods house, Friends of the Bridegroom, and the Saviors of the
world. Kings by way of Reverence and Honor have called them Fathers. 2 Kings
13.14. This is an Honor which none are capable of, but such as God is pleased
to call. Heb. 5.4. How great then is the sin of those Atheistical Quakers, who
load the faithful Ministers of Christ with vile and reproachful language. If
the Spirit of God call them, Men of God, and give them Honorable Titles; then
they are certainly led by the spirit of the Devil, who vilify them and miscall
them. The time is at hand when such shall answer for all their hard speeches
against God and his Ministers. Jude 15. But it is no wonder that we sinful dust
and ashes are abused, when our Lord and Master himself suffers; if they have
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, what may the servants expect? It Is
some comfort that we are abused by none, but such as abuse God, his Sabbaths,
Scriptures, Orders, and Ordinances. But though Israel play the harlot, yet let
not Judah sin. Love you the faithful messengers of Christ. Let their faces, yea
their feet be beautiful in your eyes. Isay 52.7. have them in singular love
for their works sake. Children should love their Fathers, the sheep their
shepherd, and the convert the Instrument of his conversion. Though our persons
may deserve but little, yet our Callings are Honorable. The Apostle would have
you give them double honor. V. Sal Terrae. cap. 9.
1 Timothy 5.17. not only your countenance, but honorable maintenance.

1. That they may live like the Ambassadors of Christ.

2. That by Hospitality and works of mercy they may adorn their profession.

3. We must give our selves to Reading, but without book we cannot read. We
need books Philosophical, Theological, Textual, Polemical, Practical,
Historical, 500. l. (say some) will buy but a competent study for a Minister of
the Gospel.

4. Our breeding is chargeable, and our pains very great, besides we have no
worldly way of Trading whereby to subsist.

5. If the Levitical Priest had honorable maintenance, then we that are put to
greater cost and pains, may much more expect it from our flocks.

See Mr. Brinsley's Sermon. on Rev. 2.1. See more. Sal Terrae. cap. 8.
2. If Ministers be men of God, near and dear to him, then he will defend them. His
stars he holds in his Right hand, he has a special care over them, and
respect unto them.

2. Observe, It Is lawful to give honorable Titles to men according to their
places and callings. The Scripture approves not of any rude, uncivil language,
but expressly commands us to give honor to whom honor is due. Romans 13.7.
Exodus 20.12. The Saints of God in Scripture did not use to Thee and Thou men,
but gave respectful and reverent language to their betters. Sarah calls
Abraham, not Thou Abraham, but she calls him, Lord, or Sir. 1 Pet. 3.6. Luke
calls Theophilus, most excellent Theophilus. Luke 1.3. Obadiah (a Saint) meets
Elijah, and falls on his face before him, and calls him My Lord Elijah. 1 Kings
18.7. here is both reverend gesture and language, and that to a Prophet, a
Minister of God, whom men hate now, not for any evil that we have done, but
solely for our office, because we are Ministers of Christ, and witness against
their wickedness, therefore they call us Conjurers, Juglers, Limbs of the
Devil, Covetous, Proud, Tithe-mongers, Legal Preachers, Baals Priests,
Witches, Devils, Liars, etc. with such Billingsgate language they stuff their
lying Pamphlets. The Lord rebuke them. Solomon will teach them (if they be not
past Teaching) better language, Eccles. 12.11. he calls Ministers Masters of
the Assemblies. The Jaylour calls Paul and Silas, Sirs, or Masters, ( Acts
16.30.) (...), Domini, a Title of Honor, and they reprove him not for it,
which they would have done, had it been unlawful. Paul commands us to give
them double honor. John gives a Title of Honor to a good woman, and calls her
an Elect Lady. 2 John 1.3.5.

Object. These were good and godly persons, but we show respect to wicked ones.

Answ. 1. I hope all the Ministers in England are not wicked men, yet you show
respect to none, but cry down all.

2. The Saints in Scripture have given Titles of respect even to wicked men.
Esau was a profane man, yet Jacob gives him the Title of Lord, not Thou Esau,
but my Lord Esau. Genesis 32.4.18. So Paul to Festus, most Noble Festus. Acts
26.25. Daniel a Saint, yet speaking to Nebuchadnezzar an Idolater, calls him
King of Kings. Dan. 2.37. The Quakers boast of their Sanctity and Perfection,
when they are Sots, not Saints; so far from Sanctity, that they have not common
civility; which plainly shows what Spirit leads them, and what that light
within them is.

May be Perfect.
This Text notably sets forth the Perfection of the Scripture. Quid ^ff^ri
potuit aut before aut potentius pro astruenda S. S. consummatissima
perfectione? nam si (...) sapientem reddit ad salutem, and ad omne bonum opus
plene instrait, q^id quaeso ulterius requires? Brochmand.
The Papists themselves confess that it is one of the most pregnant Texts for
this purpose in all the Bible. Would you be made wise to salvation? the
Scriptures will make you so. Would you inform, reform, convince, confute,
comfort? the Scripture will not only initiate and enter you, but make you
complete and absolute (as some render the word, (...), perfectus, ^^teger,
omnibus numer^s absolutus, cui nihil desit, neque supe^sit, id^m est ac (...).
Baldwin.
and that rightly) in this kind, without the Addition of any Humane Traditions,
unwritten Verities, Revelations, or New lights within them. Perfectus (i. e.)
semper idem, aequalis sibique sim^lis, nec in tristibus contractus nec commodis
instatus, sed in rebus impa^ibus pari modo se habentem* quae est summ^ mentis
integritas, perfectio and aequabilitas. Espencaeus.
The Scripture will keep us in a right temper, so that we shall be still the
same, neither exalted by prosperity, nor despondent in adversity, but like the
righteous, we shall be an everlasting foundation; when others are tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine, and run through all religions, you shall be
like Mount Sion which shall never be removed, though it may by some violent
earthquake be moved.

The word of God is a perfect Rule both for doctrine and manners. There is such
an All Sufficiency in it, that there is nothing to be done by a faithful
Minister for the saving of his flock, but here he may be furnished with it: and
by consequence the people also for whose sake the Minister is thus accomplished,
Quod si S. S. d^ctoribus sufficit, quidni sufficiat auditoribus? Scultet.
may be fully directed and furnished also, So that here are two strong Arguments
to prove this Royalty and peculiar Excellency of the Scriptures, viz. Its
All Sufficiency and Perfection, without the Addition of any New lights, or
Humane inventions. The first Argument runs thus. That which teaches all
necessary truth^, confuteth all errors, corrects all ill manners, and instructs
us in all good duties; that must needs be a sufficient Rule for salvation. This
is so clear, that even Cajetan on the place (though a strong Papist) yet cries
out. [ Ecce quo tendat utilitas divinae Scripturae, ad perfectionem hominis Dei
(i. e.) cujusvis fidelis tum quoad partem intellectivam, tum quoad partem
operativam, ut sit perfectus ad omne bonum. Cajetan. in loc.] Now what
sufficiency can be wanting, where there is perfection?

2. That which is able to make the Minister perfect in all the duties of his
calling, that is sufficient to make all others perfect in all good works. But
the word is able to make the Ministers of the Word perfect. See the T^stimony
of Antiquity for the Scriptures perfection, in Gerhard. Loc. com Tom. 1.

Omnia quae credi sperari ac fieri Deus a nobis volu^t, absque ulla indigentia
S. S. continet, Ge^hard.


Ergo. Hence it is, that the Lord so often sends us hither as to a Perfect Rule.
Isay 8.20. Luke 16.29. Colos. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. he that takes upon him
to teach Gods people, must speak ouely the Oracles of God: 1 Peter 4, 10.

[To prove the Scriptures perfection. See Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 77. See
24. Arguments in Sharpius his Curses. Theolog. controvers. 9. de Script. mihi,
p. 53. Willets Synopsis, controvers. 1. Q. 7. p. 52. Polan. Syntag l. 1. c. 46.
Hommius disput. 3. p. 8. D. Prideaux fasci^ul. Q. 7. p. 45. Mr. Leighs Body of
Divinity. l. 1. c. 6. Mr. Trapps Treat. cap. 3. Sect. 4.]

Away then with all those old, moldy, Unwritten Traditions, which the Papists
add to the pefect word of God, and thereby would blasphemously fasten
imperfection on the Scripture; they go about to deceive men as the Gibeonites
did. Joshua (9.4, 5, 6.) with old bottles, old garments, and old clouted shoes.
These offend against the express letter of the Scripture, Pefectum est cui
nihil addi potest. Aristot.
which tells us that the Law of the Lord is Perfect, and able to make us wise
to salvation, and if God sent a leprosy on Vzziah, for bringing in the Altar of
Damascus, and opposing it to the true Altar; then let not those presumptuous
men think to escape the curse of God for adding to his perfect word, and if the
Jews might add nothing to the Canon of the Old Testament, much less may we
add any thing to the Old and New Testament, and therefore the Holy Ghost
concludes; the whole Bible with a dreadful commination against all such as
shall add any thing to his word, Revelations 22.18, 19. As the Harlot that
came before Solomon would have the child divided; so those divide the Rule
between Gods word and their own Traditions; but God hates such halting and
halving in his worship, Vid. Council. Trident. Sess. 4. decret. 1.

Traditio Scripturarum fundamentum, suam obtinent firmitatem. Baron.


and tells us that they worship him in vain, who teach for doctrines the
Precepts of men. Matthew 15.9. God cannot endure such mixture, he will have none
to plow with the Ox of his word, and the Ass of men's inventions, De Deo nil
sine Deo, he will own nothing in his worship, but what is agreeable to his word.
All men's inventions stink like Carrion in his nostrils. Ier. 16.18. and he will
secretly punish such as offer such strange fire. Leviticus 10.1.2. These Humane
Additions corrupt worship and torture the conscience, Traditiones non scriptae
sunt totidem ad strangulandas miseras animas laquei, adulterant cultum Dei, and
Deum ipsum qui unicus est Legislator suo jure spoliant. Calvin. Instit. l. 4.
c. 10. S. 1.
so that no true peace is to be found in them.

[Against Tradition, see Peter Moulin his Tract against Tradit. Whitak. de
script. controvers. 1. Q. 6. c. 1. Perkins 2 Vol. p. 511. D. Hall's Old
Religion. cap. 16. Mr. It Is a book of little Price, but of great worth, for its
satisfactory Answers of many controversies both Popish and Arminian.
Bernard's Rhemes against Rome, Proposit. 8. p. 60. Sir Humph. Lynd's Via
devia. Sect. 7. p. 144. D. Davenant de Iudice and norma cultus. cap. 6. Rivets
Isagoge ad script. c. 26. Walaeus loc. com. p. 148. Chameir loc. com. l. 1. c.
15. Polan. Syntag. l. 1. c. 35. and 47.]

2. This perfection of the Scripture should stir up our love to it. as
imperfect things are slighted by us, so complete and perfect things are highly
esteemed by all the sons of wisdom. No book to be compared to this for
perfection; and therefore no book should be so loved, read, studied and prized
by us. Here Is nothing vain or superfluous, Nih^l in ea otiosum sed omnia plena
sunt sensis, mysterio, Spiritu. Basil.
but all things full of life and spirit, what ever good the soul can desire,
it is here to be had.

Here is Food for the hungery, Water for the thirsty, Wine for the wearied,
Bread for the weak, Raiment for the naked, Gold for the poor, Eyesalve for the
blind, and Physic for the sick. If thy heart be dead, this will quicken thee;
if hard, this will soften it; if dull, revive it. In all our Temptations this
is a David's Harp that helps to still them, Acts 15.31. we should therefore
with joy draw water out of these Wells of Salvation. Isay 12.3. We see how
worldlings delight to view their Bills and Bonds, their Leases and Indentures,
by which they hold their lands and livings; and shall not we delight to study
the Scripture which assures us of never-fadeing Riches?

May be Perfect.
Objection, The Quakers finding here the word Perfect, presently dream of an
Absolute Perfection, as their Kinse-men the The Monks glory much of their State
of Perfection, when their Idleness and Lustfulnesse shows their gross
Imperfections to the World.
Papists do of a Legal perfection, when they say, a man may live in this World
without sinn^, and may perfectly fulfill the Law in his own person.

Answer. These are mere Fancies; for the Apostle speaks here of a
Ministerial Perfection, and not of any Legal or Absolute Perfection. Now a
man may have Ministerial Perfection, and yet be far from salvation; he may
be fitted for his Office, and yet unfit for Heaven. Witness Judas, and those
Preachers, whom Christ knew not, Matthew, 7.22.

2. In Scripture phrase Sincerity is called Perfection (the ignorance of the
Quakers in this particular is the very ground of this their error) See Genesis
17.1. 1 Kings 15.14. Job 1.1. Matthew 5.48. Colossians 2.28. and 4.12.

Then God accounts us perfect when we sincerely strive after perfection, though
in this Life we cannot attain our full desires, yet in respect of inchoation,
intention and purpose, though not in respect of pervention and full obtaining
that purpose, Perfectio hujus v^^ae consistit non in eo ut simus peccato
prorsus immunes, sed in continua tendentia and cursu ad perfecti^nem.

Nemo in hac vita pe^fecte perfectus est, non est adhuc san^t^, sed quotide
sananda. Prosp.


we are called perfect. Grace in this Life, is but Opus, in fieri, not in facto
esse, a work in doing, not fully done, Perfecti sumus spe, erimus Re. Our
greatest perfection in this life, is to bewail our imperfections, and our
greatest righteousness is to lament our unrighteousness A gracious Soul
sets up no Hercules Pillars beyond which he will not pass, but he has his
Plus ultra still, he striveth forward after perfection Paulus perfectum abnuit,
p^^fectum fatetur.
Phillippians 3.12, 13.

3. There is a Perfection of Degrees, which is twofold.

1. Relative or Comparative, being compared with that which is weak and very
small, and in this sense, Believers that have attained to a great measure of
Gifts and Grace, are called perfect, Aliorum comparatione, and (...), perfect^s
vocat. Zanchius.
Philippians 3.15. Hebrews 5.14. (the word is the same in both places in the
Original) and strong men in Christ: not Simply and Absolutely, but
Comparatively, and in respect of those that are weaklings and babes in the
Faith, and beginners in the School of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.13. 2. There
is an Absolute perfection of Degrees when the whole Man is wholly perfect,
being wholly freed from sin and all its concomitants; and this is not to be
looked for in Via, in this Life; but in Patria, in the Life to come. Here we are
Viatores, traveling toward it; but in Heaven we shall be comprehens^res,
fully enjoying it. Earth is the place of desiring, but Heaven of enjoying the
height of perfection. Here the best are imperfect both in Knowledge and
obedience, Philip. 3.12. James 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.12. but in Heaven we shall be
absolutely perfect, we shall be free from sin, and from the very possibility
of sinning, 1 Corinthians 13.10. Ephesians. 4.13. See Mr. Baxter Saints Rest 1. P. c.
7. Sect. 8. mihi p. 117.
The Quakers boast much of this absolute perfection, but alas, their Railing,
Pride, Lying, Blasphemy, Heresy, Ignorance and Obstinacy, shows that they are
perfect sinners, rather than perfect Saints.
[See their folly in this point discovered fully in Perfect Pharisee, Posit.
10. Reyners Government of the Tongue, p. 327. to 362. Eaton against the
Quakers, p. 17.60, 61. Fenners Remains, p. 105. Doctor Owen against Biddle,
cap. 33.

Thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.
Here is the last, but not the least commendation of the Scripture, viz. That
by it the people of God, and specially the Ministers of Gods Word, may be
furnished, thoroughly furnished, not to one or two, but unto every good work,
especially those of his Ministry before recited. The word in the Original is
Emphatical, and signifies such a complete furnishing as will fit a Minister
for all the Duties of his Calling. (...), perfect instructus and ad omnem
partem officii sui probe comparatus ab (...)* perfect insterno.
It will teach him how to give to every one their Portion: To the Ignorant
Instruction, to the Erroneous Confutation, to the obstinate Terror, to the
distressed Consolation, and to the backward Exhortation. Some Ministers will
open a T^^t well and inform the judgment, but make no Application which is the
life of teaching; no wonder if such see no Fruit of their Ministry, since they
fail in their duty. He that will win souls must deliver to his people the whole
Counsel of God, Acts 20.26, 27. He must not keep back any thing (necessary to
salvation) neither for fear nor favor.

2. As we must discharge our whole duty, so you must submit to all the Parts
and Duties of our calling, you must not only suffer the word of Doctrine to
inform your heads, but you must also suffer the word of exhortation to work
upon your hearts Heb. 13.22. So long as we preach in Thesi, and only inform
your judgments you praise and admire ^^s; but when we come ad Hypothesin to
apply the word to your souls, and lay the axe to the root of the Tree; you fret
and fume, accounting us for your enemies, because we tell you the Truth.

Many can away with Expounding of Scripture for Information, but the
Application of it to their sins and soars they cannot endure. They cry out,
Cannot the Minister ^et us alo^e? Cannot we be Proud and Prodigal, but he must
still be telling us of it? Who bids him meddle with us?

Answer, God, It is he that commands us not only to teach, but to reprove; and
he does his work to halves that only informs the Judgment, and does not
look upon the Affections. It were more for our ease to let you rot and perish
in your sin; but how then should we be Faithful to our God and your Souls?
Had yo^ grace you would find so much sin and scumme within you, that you
would find as much need of Reproof and Exhortation to fight against
Corruption, as Information to convince you of it.

3. As the Pastor, so the People must read and meditate on the Word, that they
also may be fitted for all good works in their places and callings. Here every
man may learn what to believe and do. Here are Lessons for Magistrates,
Masters and Servants, Parents and Children. Here you may be furnished with
Directions how to walk Religiously toward God, and Righteously toward Man.
The Scripture is no Doctrine of looseness, it fitteth and furnishes us for
well doing, and not for ill doing; In every line thereof we may read Holiness
to the Lord. More is required of a Minister who is the Eye and Mouth of a
People, and if he may be perfectly instructed by them how to perform the duties
of his Calling; how much more are they able to give every ordinary Man
sufficient instruction how to walk with his God in the place where he has set
him!

The end of the Third Chapter.
An Exposition upon the Second Epistle of TIMOTHY, CHAP. 4.
VERSE 1. I charge thee therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom;
Preach the Word, etc.
THis Chapter is Paul's Cygnea Cantio, his last, and sweetest Song; by a
Spiritual sagacity he saw his end approaching, and the time of his Martyrdom
to be at hand, and therefore now he does as it were make his last Will and
Testament, wherein he gives Timothy many things in charge, and especially
commends to him the work of Preaching. And since the words of dying friends
usually take deep impression, he does not barely exhort, but solemnly adjure
Timothy to preach the Word with all diligence and care, according to the ends
mentioned in the two last Verses of the foregoing Chapter.

To quicken him, he tells him what dangerous times were coming, and of his own
death approaching. He desires Timothy to come to him, showing how he was
forsaken of all men; and then concludes the Epistle with diverse salutations,
and a Valedictory Prayer.

The Chapter consists of four Parts.

1. Here is a serious Exhortation and Solemn Adjuration given to Timothy, and
in him to all the Ministers of the Gospel successively, to quicken them to a
faithful discharge of that great Ministerial duty, viz. the Preaching and
pressing of the Word in the several Parts of it, Verse 1.2. This Exhortation he
backeth and enforces with several Arguments. 1. From the day of judgment,
Verse 1. There is a day coming when we must give an account of our Stewardship
to Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, we had need therefore to be
faithful and active in our Masters service. ^^ He presses this diligent
Preaching on him in respect of the dangerousnesse of the last times, wherein
men will have itching Ears, be all for Novelty and vain Opinions, and will not
endure sound Doctrine. Now the greater the danger, the more careful he must be
to prevent it, Verse 3.4. 3. By reason of the shortness of his Life, which he
foresaw. V. 6. 4. From his own example, he had fought the good fight, finished
his course, and kept the faith, and now was ready for a Crown of righteousness;
do thou follow my steps and thou shall attain my end.
2. He treats of some private and personal affairs from v. 9. to 19. where he
desires that Timothy and Mark would come to him, 1. Because some had forsaken
him, as Demas, v. 10. Others abused and opposed him, as Alexander the
Copper-smith, and others were sent by him to other places to preach the Gospel.
v. 12. 3. He gives a brief account of his first Answer before Nero, showing how
all men forsook him, yet the Lord was with him, who supported him in his
trials, and delivered him from the cruelty of Nero. v. 17, 18. 4. After some
particular Salutations he concluds with Prayer and Benediction, for Timothy and
the rest of the Brethren with him.
I charge thee before God, etc.
The duty of preaching is full of difficulty, and the matter of great moment,
the Apostle therefore uses a grave obtestation and a weighty adjuration to
quicken Timothy vo the work. v. 1.2. Where we have, 1. The charge with an
adjuration. 2. The ground whence this charge has its force, or by whom he
adjures him, 1. By God the Father. 2. By God the Son, who is here described by
three particular Titles, The Lord, Jesus, Christ. 2. That he is the Judge of
all the world. 3. The time which he will judge it, viz. at the day of his
glorious appearing.

I charge thee, (...), obtestor, testificor, usurpatur cum quad magna cum
Empthasi proponitur. Ser^a est ad nodum ob^estatio and maximi jaramenti vim
habens.
or as the Geneva Translation renders it according to the to the Original, I
adjure thee. q. d. I testify and call God to witness, who shall be revenged on
thee in that dreadful day of the Lord, Quis sub tanta testificatione segnis
esse audeat? Aug.
if contrary to this charge thou be remiss and negligent, and do not preach
the Word instantly and earnestly in season and out of season. The Word in
Scripture signifies to entreat very earnestly. 1 Timothy 5.21.

To denounce and contest. 1 Timothy 6.13. To command with a denuntiation. 1 Timothy
6.17. To adjure, 1 Samuel 14.27. And seriously to admonish. Exodus 19.22. When
Dives would have one sent seriously to admo- his Brethren to change their
lives, (...), ut obtestetur eos, (i.) grav ter moneal and quasi adjaret eos ut
ab epulatione desistant and paeniteant. a Lap.
he uses the word in the Text. Luke 16.28.

Before God.] He does not adjure him by Men or Angels, Haec commemoratio
Majestatis Dei, vim magnam habet ad excitandos animos quo ri^e officium nostrum
in docendo exequamur. Aretius.
or any fallible witnesses, but he charge him by God the Father, and by God
the Son, who are infallible witnesses of all we do, and impartial Judges that
will not spare the Violators of his Precepts, that can neither deceive, nor
will they be deceived. Did you ever hear a charge set with more pressing
Arguments with more compulsive, dreadful and powerful persuasions, every word
is like a crack of Thunder to rise us up to our duty.

Or I change thee in the sight of God,] So the Original carries it, (...) in
conspestum Dei, ab (...) and (...) vul^us, significat id quod cor^^^ est.
who sees all things, who is both Judge and witness of all our ways, and will
Judge every man according to his works, that thou neglect not thy duty even in
perilous times.

He names God the Father, and God the Son distinctly, not as if they differed
in Essence, and Christ were not God (as the Socinians blasphemously reach) but
to distinguish Christ from God in respect of his Humane Nature and Office as
Lord, Deus, hic distinguitur a Christo, ac consequenter v^n Essentiam sed
Personam Patris denotat a Lap.
who has redeemed us from the power of our enemies to be a peculiar people to
himself. Now this his Divine Office does not derogate from his Divine Essence,
but rather presupposes it; for how could he ransom and redeem us if he had
not been God? Thus we find them distinguished. 1 Timothy 6.3. It Is is a Rule in
Scripture when God alone is named it implies the whole Trinity, and is to be
taken Essentially for all the three Persons in the Godhead; but when the Word
God is joined with Christ (as it is here) then it is taken Personnally ( i.) it is
restrained to the Person of the Father only. Who shall judge the quick and the
dead.] ( i.) he shall judge all men without exception of any, all Nations must
be brought before him. Matthew. 25.32. Not only those which are already dead and
sleep in the dust, but those also which shall be found alive at his coming 1
These. 4.16, 17. Acts 20.42 1 Cor. 15.52. 2 Pet. 4.7. Et Deum vindicem, and
Christum judicem Timotheo proponit, si^n officio cessaverit.
So say all the Creeds. Now the Apostle makes mention of the Judgment of
Christ, because as we are his Ambassadors and represent his person, so he will
one day take a strict account of us how we have discharged our trust.

At his appearing and his Kingdom.] Or at his apearing in his Kindom, Non est
(...), adventus, sed (...), ill^st^is apparitio.
or the appearing of his Kingdom. [ Hendyadis, duobus per uno positis.] An
expressing of one thing by two Terms, a thing very frequent in Scripture.
Apparitio Christi and regnum, idem valent, Calvin.
Matthew. 4.16. In the Region of the shadow of death, ( i.) in the shady Region
of death. Adventus Christi secundus ad judicium, est quasi porta and ini^ium
regni and gloriae.
So Revel. 8.5. Thunders and Voices, ( i.) Thundring-voyces. q. d. When he
shall appear in his Kingdom, and shall come in a more glorious manner to judge
the World. At first Christ came into the World in a state of Humiliation, poor
and low, but when he comes to Judgment he shall appear in his glory, viz. in
the full accomplishment and manifestation of his glorious and everlasting
Kingdom. 2 These. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.14. and 2.4, 8. So that the latter word is
exegetical and an explication of the former. Christ reigns now in Heaven and
in Earth, Regnat nunc Christus sed id non apparet in omnibus sicut tunc
apparebit. Grotius.
but it is obscured here by the Cross, and furiously opposed by devils and
wicked men, so that there is not that clear manifestation of his Kingdom now;
but when Christ shall have subdued all his enemies, and shall have destroyed
all adverse power, and made them his fort-stool; then he will appear in his
Majesty and great glory with all his holy Angels, and then will be the day (as
I may so say) of his public Inauguration before all the World, in which he
will begin his glorious and everlasting Kingdom with all his Saints.

Observations.
1. Obs. Grave Obtestations and serious Adjurations (in weighty cases) are
lawful. Moses used them, Deuteronomy. 30.18, 19. and Isai. 1.2. Abraham adjures his
servant, Genesis 24.3. and Jacob adjures Joseph. Adjurare est imperare alicui
Divini nominis authoritate, and simul jurejurundo aliq^em obstringere ad
aliquid praestandum vel non praestandum, ac ei poenas, eo g^avissimas;
denunciare, si contra fecerit Ravanel.
Genesis 47.31. A Minister is not only to beseech and humbly to entreat, but with
all authority to bind men's consciences to the duty he persuades; and to adjure
his bearers (as they will answer it before the Lord of Heaven and Earth at the
great day) to yield obedience to the truths delivered. Cold preaching makes
bold sinners, when powerful preaching awes the conscience. Matters of greatest
importance must be pressed with greatest vehemence. As God puts not sorth
great power but for great purpose. Ephesians. 1.18, 19, So neither must we use
great earnestness, but in matters of great moment. Our natures are very base
and backward to the best things, and so have need of all manner of provocations
to quicken us to our duty: and it is a great aggravation of peoples sin when
they will not obey such powerful preaching, as their contempt is greater, so is
their sin, 2 Chronicles. 24.19.

This shows the folly of the Anabaptists, Socinians, and Quakers, who exclaim
against all Protestations, Adjurations, and Oaths as things unlawful, and would
tie men only to Yea and Nay, whereas we find in Scripture that God himself
swears, (it cannot then be a sin) Genesis 26.12. Esaias 45.23. 1 Samuel 3.14. Psalm.
89.3. and the dearest of Gods servants have sworn, Genesis 14.22. and 21.24.

Ob. Our Savior condemns sewaring, Matthew. 5.34. and so does S. James 5.12.

A. Christ does not simply and absolutely condemn swearing, Iuramentum est
Legis naturae sicu^i ex omnium gentium usu fiquet. Wa^oeas.
for then he should destroy the Law which Commands, swearing as a part of Gods
Worship, and an honor due to his Name. Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. and a special
means to end striffe and contention amongst men. Heb. 6.16. but he condemns
all swearing by the creatures, and forbids all rash and all vain swearing, all
customary swearing in our ordinary talk, and so does S. James 5.12.

Ob. Tho the Law did allow of swearing in weighty cases before a Magistrate,
See M. Manton on that Text, see 11 Reas. against vain swearing Ward on Matthew.
5.34.
yet now in Gospel Times it is unlawful.

A. Not at all, for the Prophet Esaias prophesying of the Gospel Times
times-expresly says, They shall swear by the God of Truth. Esaias 65.16. Paul
often calls God to witness. Romans 1.9. and 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.23. Vehemens est
asseveratio juramento firmata Brochmannus.
Phil. 1.8. 1 These. 2.10. The Angel swears in the New Testament by him that
lives for ever. Rev. 10.6. and Christ uses strong asseverations. Matthew. 5.18.
John 3.5.

Ob. Since many forswear themselves and abuse Oaths, it is best (say they)
wholly to forbear them.

A. The abuse of a thing must not take away the use of it, Est sallacia
Accidentis.
for then we must not eat, drink or wear clothes, because many abuse them. Then
we must cast away our money, cut down vines, and pull out our eyes because all
these are abused. But who knows not that the abuse of these must be taken away,
and the use remain.

See more in M. Firmin against the Quakers, p. 27. M. Fowler against Speed a
Quaker, p. 16. and Walaeus Loci Com. p. 100. de Iuramento. Sayrus, CC. l. 5. c.
3.

2. Observation, The best have need of Obtestations and Adjurations even from
terrors to quicken them to their duty. We are flesh as well as spirit, we are
but in part regenerate and therefore had need of quickening; and if so holy, so
mortified, so laborious a man as Timothy had need of double and treble charging
(1 Timothy 5.22, and 6.13. and 2.4.1.) what need have we who never yet attained
that degree of holiness as Timothy had, to be charged and charged again as we
will answer it at the great day of the Lord to be faithful in the discharge of
the duties of our several places. We must not only allure men by mercies. Romans
12.1. but also quicken them by judgments, for such is the corruption of our
nature, that we are so easily wrought upon by mercies as by judgments; hence
when the Lord had promised six blessings to move us to obedience. Deuteronomy. 28.1.
to 14. he adds 27. curses from (v. 15. ad finem cap.) the better to excite us
to our duty. Mercies draw us. Romans 2.4. and judgments drive us to God. This
awed Job 31.3. and made David tremble. Psalm. 119.120. The Apostle knowing the
terror of the Lord, persuaded men to flee from the wrath to come, that so they
might escape the terrors of that great day. 2 Cor. 5.11.

3. Observation, The godly do all as in the sight of God. They look at Gods eye
more then man's, in all their Exhortations, Adjurations, ways and walking. They
look upon him as a Witness and a Judge of all their doings. They set the Lord
always before them. Psalm. 16.8. They live always as in his eye and presence,
remembering that he beholds all their ways, and Ponders all their paths.
Prove. 20.21. This consideration will be 1. A Motive to sincerity 2. A Spur to
duty. 3. A Corrasive to sin. 4. A Cordial in affliction.


1. It Is a singular means to keep our hearts sincere, and to make us universal
in our obedience, hating every false way. When David was upright before God,
and walked as in his eye, then he kept himself from his iniquity. Psalm. 18.23.
and kept all his Precepts. Psalm. 119.168. This All-seeing eye of God kept Job
from sin. Job 31.4. and kept Joseph chaste and pure. Genesis 39.9. and made Abraham
sincere. Genesis 17.1. Seneca counseled his Scholars to do their actions so
advisedly tanquam speciet Cato, as if some severe Cato looked on them. Vitam
praesentia Dei dignam ducamus.
We are Christians and must do all tanquam spectet Deus, remembering that we are
always under the inspection of the All-seeing God.

2. It Is a spur to duty. The Master and the Commanders eye make the Servant and
the Soldier active. If we do any good in secret, God sees in secret and he will
reward us openly. Matthew. 6.6. Acts 10.4.

3. It Is a corrasive to sin. The Thief durst not steal if he thought the Judge
looked on him, nor the Adulter act his lewdness if he thought the jealous
husband stood at his back ready to slay him. V. Capel on Tentat. l. 2. c. 2 p.
153, etc.
Atheism is the root of all the wickedness amongst us. Psalm 14.2. and 50.21,
22. and 94.5, 6, 8. Ezekiel. 9.9. This breeds Hypocrites. Job 13.16. There is a
grain (at least) of Atheism in every sin.

4 It Is a Cordial in affliction. God is an Omniscient and omnipresent Friend,
he knows all our losses, crosses, tentations, enemies, Rev. 2.2, 3, 9, 13. When
the Priest and the Levite pass by us, then he comes in to us. He was with
Joseph in the prison, and Jeremy in the dungeon, and with Israel in Egypt.

4. Observat. Christ is the Lord, according to his Divine Nature he is Gods
Coeternall, Coessential and Coequal with his Father. This Title Lord answers
to the Hebrew word Jehovah, which the Septuagint render Lord. In the New
Testament this Title is given to Christ about a thousand times. He is Lord over
our Faith, over our Consciences, our Lives and Persons.

The Arrians and Socinians seeing Christ's Humiliation and abasement, denied his
Deity, affirming that he was not God Essentially, but Nominally. Since this
Old, blasphemous Heresy is revived in our days under the Notion of New-Light;
since it is such an Heresy as overthrows the very foundation of our Faith,
the ground of our Worship, and salvation by Christ, and of all the good we
expect from him; I shall therefore give some brief Arguments against it, and
so pass on.

1. That Christ is very God appears by the Titles which are given to him in
Scripture.

1. He is called Jehovah, which is the most Glorious, proper and peculiar Name
of God, Jeremiah 23.6. Malachi 3.1.

2. He is styled Gods equal, Zachary 13.7. Philippians 2.6. of the same Essence
with the Father, he is not Consimilar like the Father, but Consubstantial, the
same with him; the one differs from the other Personally, but not Essentially,
1 John 5.7. these three are One, One in Essence, one in Propriety, one Jehovah:
Hence God himself calls him God, Hebr. 1.8. 1 Timothy 4.19. God manifest in the
flesh, and Immanuel, God with us, Matthew, 1.23. Thomas calls him, My Lord,
and my God. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead, Colossians 2.6. It is
the Fathers Will that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father, John 5.23. 1 Ioh. 5.20. Grotius the Socinian-Arminian-Papist labors to
pervert those texts which hold forth the Deity of Christ, as Philippians 2.6.1.
1 Timothy 3.16. Hebrews 1.2. and especially, Acts 20.28. Romans 9.5. These two
Texts are so clear for the Deity of Christ, that the Learned Socinian has no
shift but this, that some old Manuscripts which he has seen, read it
otherwise. But if a thousand Manuscripts should corrupt the Text (as Grotius
endeavors) to maintain an Heresy, let them be Anathema.

2. It plainly appears that Christ is God by his Attributes.

1. He is Eternal, Micah 5.2. Proverbs, 8.22. John 17.5. Revelations, 1.8. 2.
Immutable, Hebrews 13.8. 3. Omniscent, John 2.24.25. and 22.17. 4.
Omnipresent. Matthew 28.20. 5. Omnipotent, the Almighty able to do whatsoever
pleases him Revelations 1.8. and 11.17. and 19.6. He is the mighty God, Isay
6.9. All Power is given to him both in Heaven and in Earth. He has Power to
forgive sins which is proper only unto God, Matthew. 9.6. He has Power to
Judge, to Justify, to Sanctify, condemn and save.
3, By his Works, if you will not believe him by his Word, yet believe him for
his Works sake, John 14.11.

1. The work of Creation shows plainly his Deity, John 1.3. 1 Cor. 8.6. Colos.
1.16. Heb. 1.2, 3.

2. By the works of Providence, by him all things consist, and subsist, John
5.17. Colos. 1.17. Heb. 1.3.

3. By his Miraculous works: winds and Seas obey him, he cast out Devils, and
cured all diseases.

4. Worship is due only to God, but Christ is worshipped. Steven prays to
him. We are baptized into his Name. We believe in him. Kings must serve him,
Psalm 2. ult. and all the Angels worship him, Hebrews 1.6, 7.

5. There is an absolute necessity that Christ should be God as well as Man;
for as an Infinite Justice was offended, so an infinite Justice must be
satisfied. The intolerable weight of Gods wrath the burden of sin, the power
of Satan which is to be opposed, and the great good which we had lost and must
be restored by Christ, all conclude Christ's Deity. Besides he is Judge of all
the World, which necessarily presupposes his Deity, he must be Omnipotent,
Omniscient, etc. who is this Judge.

If any would see this Controversy more fully cleared, he may peruse Perkins,
CC. l. 2. c. 1. Q. 2. Doctor Owen against Biddle, from Chapter 8. to 15. Leighs
Body of Divinity, l. 2. c. 16. Porters Vindication of 1 John 5.20. Ienkins on
Jude 4. p. 162.163. fol. Polyander contra Socin. cap. 43.

1. This may discover to us the heinous nature of sin, in that nothing could
pacify the wrath of God, nor wash out the stain of sin, but the blood of God,
as the Holy Christ styles it, Acts 20.28. Consider but the price that was paid
for the least sin, it made Christ to groan and sweat non guttas sed grumos
clodded blood, Luke 22.44. great was the soar that needed such a salve, and
sad the malady that could be cured by no other medicine. In nothing is the
horror of sin seen like as in the Humiliation, death and suffering of Christ.
This should make us hate sin as the Evil of evils, better be in Hell without
sin then in Heaven with it. Sickness, Poverty, imprisonment, etc. These are but
outward evils, a man may lie under such afflictions, and yet be under dear
Affections; as Job; David, Paul. It is only sin that makes us odious to God,
and therefore sin should be odious to us, Psalm 97.10. We should hate it not
only Odio aversationis, but also odio inimicitiae. Not only by flying from
it, but by pnrsuing it with an hatred of enmity. Sin fights against the Essence
and Being of of God, it would kill him, and therefore we should kill it.

[See therefore Master Ier. Buroughs, Sin the evil of evils, Master Robert
Bolton Instruction for comfort to afflicted consciences, Chapter 4. Page 110.
Doctor Samuel Bolton. Sermon on 2 Samuel 24.10. folio. Dr. Goodwins Aggravation
of sin, p. 1. etc.

2. It Is matter of singular Consolation. Do thou want wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, etc. Christ is God and therefore infinitely good, able to
supply all thy wants. He Is a rich Magazin, in him are Treasures of Wisdom,
Righteousness, etc. In him does fullness, all fullness dwell, he has not only a
fullness of sufficiency, but a fullness of redundancy, an overflowing fullness,
See Doctor Preston, and Mr. Bridge on that Text.
for me and thee, and all believers to the end of the world, John 1. 16. Colos.
1.19. and 2.10:

2. It may comfort us in respect of the Churches troubles; Christ is God and
King over his Church, though he be a Lamb for Meekness, yet is he a Lion for
Power; and though he may suffer his people for a time to lie, ( Inter oleros,
so the Septuagint read it, as we Clergy men now do) amongst the pots, yet they
shall overcome by the blood of the Lamb, Revelations. 12.11. the sons of
Zerviah may be too strong for us, but not for him, Ier. 50.33, 34. be they
Kings that oppose his Church? Christ has said, He will wound even Kings in the
day of his wrath, Psalm. 110.5.

3. If Christ be God, then extol and exalt him according to his excellent
greatness.

1. Exalt him in your judgments, have high apprehensions of him, in your
judgments esteem him the fairest of ten thousand, Christ must be admired now
as well as hereafter of all that do believe: 2 These. 1.10. esteem his ways the
best ways, his comforts the sweetest comforts, his Rewards the highest
rewards, and his People the happiest People. 2. Exalt him in your Affections,
seeing he is God, love him as God with a transcendent Love; we must not love
him with a low, common, sensual Love, as we love a Beast: such love is hatred
and contempt in his esteem; but we must love him Appretiative and Intensive,
Affectu and Effectu; with the highest intention of Affection, as the dearly
beloved of our souls. Our love to Christ must (in some measure) resemble
Christ's love to us, now his was transcendent love to us, Romans 5.7, 8. and so
must ours be to him. They love not Christ who love any thing more then Christ,
Dilige nil supra Christum nil extra, ni contra, nil aeque. Vide Buroughs
Gracious Spirit* 2 P. Chapter 1. page 285.286, etc.
they love him not at all, who do not love him more then all.
2 It must be Real love. Many will complement with Christ, bow their knee, or
put off the hat to the Name of Jesus, or keep a riotous Feast for him, or
rather for themselves, Zach. 7.6. Christ is never less thought of then at
Christide, See more in Mr. Prins Histrio-Mastix p. 48.225.743. l. 783.
he has more dishonor done him in those twelve days then in all the twelve
months of the year besides, look on men's Actions, and you would think they
were keeping a Feast to Bacchus or some Heathenish God, to Jove rather then to
Jehovah. We see shadows, but where is the Reality of your Love? what do you
more then others? where is your zeal, your mourning for the dishonours done to
Christ? your readiness to do and suffer for him? Exhibitio ope^is indicum est
amoris. Bern.
The woman that loved Christ, bestowed a box of precious ointment on him, Matt.
26.7. Peter that loved Christ, fed his sheep.

3. It must be an United, collective love, we must love him with all our souls
and all our affections together. As all the Rivers run into the Sea, and meet
in one Ocean, so all a Christians affections should meet in Christ who is the
center and resting place for the soul. United love is very strong, the
Sunbeams when contracted and meet in a Burning Glass are of great force and
strength.

4. It must be Spiritual, as Christ's Beauty and Excellencies are spiritual,
such must our love be, it springs from spiritual Principles, and has spiritual
ends.

5. It must be Conjugal Love which is, or ought to be the strongest Love, Prove.
5.18.19. the Spouse of Christ must be sick and transported with love, Cant.
2.5. and 5.8.

6. It must be a Chaste Love, a true Spouse loves none like her own Husband,
though she have many friends, yet she has but one Beloved, one Husband: so the
Saints are chaste, and have not their hearts divided between Christ and the
World, or between him and sin. It is not Harlotry love that can love many at
once; hence the Saints are called Virgins, Cant. 1.3. Rev. 14.4. for their
spiritual chastity, because they are not defiled with the corruptions of the
world.

7. It is a Rational Love, there is all the reason in the world why we should
love Christ best.

1. If we consider him in himself, he is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. and
whom will you love, if you love not God? 2. If we consider the Proximity of his
Nature, he is flesh of our flesh; he is Goel, propinquus noster, our near
kins-man, Job 19.25. 3. If we consider him in Reference to his people, See Mr.
Leighs Crit. Heb. p. 34.
they have the most engagements of all people in the world to love him, all he
did and suffered was for them, they have received most from him, and therefore
he may in equity expect most from them. 4. Consider him in his Relations, they
all call for our love. All Rezelations meet in him Eminently. 1. He is our
Father, Isay 8.18. and whom should children love like their Father? 2. He is
our Redeemer, from how great misery to how great mercy has he exalted us! of
Canaaites he has made us Israelites, of sinners he has made us sons, of foes
he has made us friends, and of heirs of hell, he has made us heirs of heaven.
3. He is our Brother, Hebrews 2.11. our Husband, our Lord and Master. Now a
Brother will love a brother, a Wife her Husband, a Servant his Master; but when
all these Relations shall meet and concenter in one person, how great must that
love be?
5. Consider the Excellencies that are in Christ, and so he (...) the most
lovely and desirable. Three things make one lovely, Fullness, Fairness, and
Constancy, Now all these are in Christ in an eminent manner. 1. Fullness and
riches have an Attractive inviting Virtue in them, all men desire fullness, the
Drunkard loves to fill himself with strong drink, the Worldling loves full
Barns, the Voluptuous man his fill of Pleasures: yet all this fullness is mere
emptiness compared with Christ. In him only is Real fullness and satisfaction
to be found. 2. He is absolutely the most fair and beautiful, in respect of his
transcendent purity he is fairer then the children of men, Christus and Coelum
non patiuntur Hyperbolen.

See Mr* Robinson Types of Christ.


Psalm 45.2. He is a Sun for Light, and Luster, Mal. 4. a Lilly for Beauty, a
Rose for sweetness, a Lamb for meekness, Bread for support, Water for
refreshing, Milk for nourishing, and Wine for comforting, Isay 55.1.2, 3. 3. He
is a constant Friend, the World is off and on, and forsakes us in our greatest
straits, but Christ will never leave his People, he will guide them with his
Counsel till he bring them to Glory.

Lastly, Consider our love, it is the best thing that we can give unto Christ,
it is indeed the man, it denominates a man, that we are that we love most.
Affectus Virum indicat, If a man love pleasures most, then be is a voluptuous
man, if the World, a worldling. Christ I am sure has best deserved our love,
and has paid dearest for it; if any can show better Title to it, let him take
it. It should deeply humble us to consider how there is none less beloved then
Christ who yet has best deserved our love. Every one has his beloved, the
Drunkard has his beloved cups and queans, the Worldling his beloved bags and
barns, only Christ lies unregarded by the most of men. Of all Evils the evil
of sin should most affect us, and of all sins, Gospel sins and unbelief, not
prizing Christ nor receiving him into our hearts, but like the Gadarens
preferring our swinish lusts before him. This is that damning sin which
Virtually is every sin, and binds the guilt of all sin upon the soul, John
3.19. Let us then promptly obey him and readily submit our wills to his Will;
let us take him for our Lord, as well as for our Savior. Many would have him
Jesus to save them, but not a Lord to Rule them; but he will save none such as
obey him, Hebr. 5.9. God has joined Lord and Savior together and we must not
separate them, both in the Text, and Philippians 3.20. Titus 1.4. We must yield
him sincere Obedience if ever we look for any benefit by him, See Mr. Vennings.
Ser. on Matt. 7.21.
it is not crying, Lord, Lord, but doing his will that he expects, Matthew 7.21.
Hence Christ reproves the Pharisees for their Vocal and Verbal subjection and
ingemination of Lord, Lord, Luke 6.46. why call ye me Lord, Audi, nemo melius,
specta, nemo pejus.
Lord, and do not the things which I require? Many speak like Angels of Light,
but they act like angels of darkness. They defy the Devil in words, but
Deifie him in works. All such men's Religion is Vain and abominable, Isay 1.11.
to 16. and 66.3. Christ has abundance of dishonor done to him in the world by
such formal professors; we should labor to fetch off that dishonor by walking
in the power of Religion, and adorning our Profession with a pious
conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Who shall judge the quick and the dead.
Here we have; First the Person judgeing, Christ. Secondly the Persons judged;
All men from the beginning of the World till the end there of; all such as
shall be alive at Christ's coming, or dead before. Vivos and mortuos, sub istis
duabus differentiis comprehenduntur omnes, homines. Aquinas.


That there is a Day of Judgment appointed by God, See Mr. Ienkins on Jude 6.
p. 251. folio.
is abundantly proved by all that have written on the Creed. If any
Atheistical Quaker shall deny it, he deserves Punishment rather then an Answer:
Yet if any desire to be satisfied in that Particular, Clapham against the
Quakers, Sect. 6. p. 31.35.36.
Master Clapham has spoken very well to that point. I delight not if I can
choose to have any thing to do with unreasonable men: I shall therefore confine
my self to the Text.

1. Observation, Christ shall be the Judge of all the World: Now there are many
subordinate, inferior Judges, now Christ judges Mediately by men; but in that
great day of the Lord, Christ only shall be Judge, when he shall have put down
all Rule and all Authority, and shall judge men immediately in his own Person:
Christus est Iudex generalis, coelestis, supremus.
God has committed all Judgment to the Son, John 5.22. and has ordained him
to be Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. Romans 14.10. 2 Corinthians, 5.10.

Question, How is Christ the Judge, when God is called the Judge of all the
w^rld, Genesis 18.25. Eccles. 3.17.

2. The Word is said to Judge us, John 12.48.

3. The Saints are said to Judge the World, Matthew, 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.

4. And one wicked man is said to Judge another?

Answer, These knots are easily untied by distinguishing.

1. There is, Iudicium authoritatis, an Authoritative judgeing, which resides
in the King as in the Root and Fountain, and so God is Judge himself in respect
of Authority, Psalm. 50.6. Romans 2.16. Hebrews 12.23. As for that in Genesis
and such like places, it may be understood of Gods Providential exercise of
judgment in this world as Moderatour and Governor thereof; and not of the
Ultimate Judgment at the last day.

2. There is Iudicium Probationis, a judgeing by way of External
administration, execution and promulgation of the definitive Sentence, and thus
Christ is Judge alone; all judgment in this respect committed to the Son, the
Father judges no man but by him, John 5.22. God has the Power, Iudicium
Universal est commune toti Trinitati quoad authoritatem, and quoad sententiam,
quae omnibus consentientibus dictabitur: Nam opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa. Aquinas.
but the Son has the Commission to execute that Power; for though it be an
Action common to all the three Persons in the Trinity, yet the Execution of it
appertains to the Son.

3. There is Iudicium Declarationis, a Declaration Judgment, and so the Law
judges; the Judge does but pronounce the judgment of the Law, John 12.48.
Romans 2.12.16., We shall be judged at the last day, both by Law and Gospel.

4. There is Iudicium Assessionis, and Approbationis, a Judgment by way of
assent and approbation, and so the Saints shall Judge the world, I^dicant
Interpretative consentiendo and approbando Sente^^^am judicis* ^ quinas Supplem
P. 3. Q 89. Art. 1:

Iudica^uri sunt assessio^a quadam digniate. Estius.


they shall sit as Assessors, and be approvers of what is done. We see at the
Assizes the Judge gives the final and definitive Sentence, and the Justices on
the Bench that sit with the Judge do assent and acknowledge the judgment to be
true and just. This honor have all, and only the Saints, even the least and
meanest of them shall judge their Judges, and help to condemn those that
formerly abused and condemned them, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. they shall be on the Bench,
when Angels and wicked men shall be at the Bar. Those proud, infernal fiends
which did molest and disquiet thee, shall now be disquieted by thee; Ch^istus
and Sancti sunt Corpus and membra Christus judicabit ut primarius j^dex
sententiam ferens, Sancti ut astipulatores sententiae judicis subscribent, and
triumphabun^ de mundo. Paraeus,
in Christ thy head thou shall adjudge them to their everlasting Prison. As
Joshua's soldiers set their feet upon the necks of the Cananitish King; So the
poorest Saint shall at the last day triumph over all the enemies of his
salvation to such the promise runs R^vel. 3.21. Participia haec extensa sunt
(ut loqu. S^holastici) idesque actus continuos denotant.

Schools, Guard. Rule 56.

Vincenti, non fugienti aut molli dabitur.


To him that overcomes ((...)) He that by the Power of Christ is still
overcomming the enemies of his salvation, though he cannot overcome them by way
of Equality so perfectly as Christ did; yet if by way of conformity and
similitude we resemble him in our measure and degree, we shall reign with
Christ, and sit with him in his Throne.

This is a great dignity that the Judge and Savior of all the world should so
highly exalt his poor contemptible servants, See more in Mr. Fenner on 1 Cor.
6.2. fol. p. 67. and Mr. Cawdrys, Ser. on the same Text.
to be part of that Royal train which shall attend the great Judge of all the
world (1 Thessalonians. 4, 15.) and to be Coassessours with him on the Bench in that
great and glorious day of the Lord. But this Dignity calls for Duty, we must
walk as becomes the Judges of the World. Judges must, (or at leastwise ought to
be) Just and inoffensive men, 2 Samuel 23.3. Our righteousness must condemn
the worlds Unrighteousness, our forwardness, the worlds back wardness, our
Faith, the worlds Unbelief; as Noah did Hebr. 11.7. Many walk so loosely and
profanely, as if they meant to Justify, rather then Judge the world; their
Hypocrisy and Apostasy is too visible to all.

2. It should admonish us to beware of wronging the Saints, It Is dangerous
abusing Judges, such will cry one day to be hid from the sight of them. Love
them therefore now, delight in their company, succor them in their
Necessities; Christ takes the courtesies and injuries which are done to them,
as done to himself, Matt. 25.35, etc.

5. There is Iudicium comparationis, a judging by way of comparison; and so not
only the Saints, but one wicked man shall condemn another that is worse then
himself. Tire and Sidon shall rise in judgment against Corazin and Bethsaida.
Sober Heathens and just-dealing Turks shall rise in judgment against
intemperate and unrighteous Christians: yea the Creatures (as Origin conceives)
that have served their Creator in their several stations, shall rise in
judgment against man that has rebelled against his God.

Question, But why has God ordained Christ to be the Judge?

Answer, Because he is every way qualified for such a work.

1. In respect of Knowledge, Isay 11.2. He knows all the Thoughts, intentions,
words and works of men, Matthew 9.4. John 2.24.25, and 21.17. 2. In respect of
Righteousness, He is a just and a Righteous Judge, Isay 11.3, 45. [See more on
Verse 8.] 3. In respect of Power, man may kill the body, but He can kill the
soul, Revelations 20. ult. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy
6.15. Revelations 19.15. 4. The judgment must be Visible, and therefore it is
meet the Judge should be so too. Christus judicabit secundum utramque Naturam,
nam omnia occulta hominum scire and producere est Deitatis; far sententiam
est humanae Naturae Wendelin Exercit. 130.
The Father is Invisible, but the Son in our Humane Nature is Visible, and
therefore God has committed this judgment to the Son, who is also called
the Son of Man, Matthew 19.28. and 25.34. John 5.27. since God intends to
deal with man after the manner of Men, He condescendeth to let them have one
that is Flesh of their Flesh to be the final Judge between him and them, that
he may be the more justified, and they left without excuse. 5. Seeing Christ
abased himself in the State of Humiliation for his Fathers Glory and Man's
Redemption, therefore God has raised him to a State of Exaltation, that to him
every knee should bow, and has given him a Name above every Name, Philippians
2.7. to 12. This is Gods ordinary way to make the deepest Humiliation the way
to the highest Elaltation.
Question, Whom will Christ judge?

Answer, All Rational Creatures.

1. The Devils and evil Angels, 1 Corinthians 6.3. Though they may disquiet
thee now, yet the time is at hand that thou shall sit in judgment on them, and
condemn them for their Rebellion against God. Thy obedience shall condemn the
Devils disobedience, that whereas thou a poor weak man dwelling in an house
of Clay, clogged and clouded with many tentations and infirmities, yet did
worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness; when these Glorious incorporeal
pure Spirits which had no Tempter, yet refused to obey him. These are kept in
Chains for the judgment of the great day, Matthow 25.41. 2 Peter 2.4. Jude 6.
Revelations 20.10. then shall be opened before all the world, the Time, the
Nature, and the Manner of their first sinning against God, and all the murders
and villainies they have committed upon the souls of men. This they know, they
believe and tremble at the thoughts of it.

2. All men, Good and bad, Noble and ignoble, Old and and young, Great and
small, Learned, and unlearned; Dives must appear as well as Lazarus, Kings as
well as Subjects, Ecclestasticus, 3.17. Matthew 25.32. Acts 10.42. and 24.15.
Romans 14.10, 12. 2 Corinthians 5.10. Jude 15. Revelations 2.7. and 20.12, 13.
Men's nets are made in that manner that little Fishes creep through, and great
ones break through; but Gods net takes all, and holds them too. Atheists
must not think to escape for ever, though the Patience of God may wait and not
presently inflict judgments, though he forbear, yet has he not forgot to do
Justice; but will ere long set men's sins in Order before them, Psalm 50.21.
As sure as GOD has Decreed thy Death, so sure is the Decree of bringing thee
to judgment, Hebrews, 6.9, 27.

At this Grand Assizes all must appear in proper person, here is no Answering
by Proxey, Proctours, Substitutes or Atturnies, but every man in person must
give an account of himself to God.

2. Here no Excuses will be taken, no Appeals be heard, in the Courts of men
we may appeal: Jacob appeals from Laban to the highest Tribunal, Genesis,
31.53. So did David, 1 Kings 24.13. and Zachariah, 2 Chronicles 24.22. Paul
appeals from Festus to Caesar, Acts 25.10. But Gods High Court of Justice
knows no Superior, He is King of Kings, Revelations 19.16.

3. Here is no Repealing of the Sentence. In this lif the Sentence may be
Repealed and the judgment prevented by Repentance, Jeremiah 18.7, 8. to 11.
but this is the last judgment, and here men receive their final doom.

4. Other Judges a man may outrun, but there is no escaping the hands of God.
He fills Heaven and Earth, where ever we fly we are still in his
Territories, Psalm. 139.7. to 12.

5. Earths Judges may be corrupted by Briberie, but Christ is the most
righteous Judge, and may as soon cease to Be, as cease to be Just. The Earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, so that all the wealth in the world
cannot bribe him; Riches avail not in this day of wrath especially, Job 36.18,
Manus ille habet, sed Eleemosynis non muneribus implendas. Nullus hic
Eloquentiae, vel Pecuniae louis. Drexelius.
19. Prove. 11.4.

6. Other Judges may judge of Externals, but Christ knows the heart, and
judges accordingly, Hebrews 4.13.

7. Other Judges may be deceived by the sleights and subtleties of men, but
this Judge, Nec fallitur, nec flectitur, No Power nor Policy can work on him,
Proverbs, 21.30.

1. Since Christ is Judge of all men, take heed of offending him. Better
displease all the world then displease him. He can do more for us or against us
then all the world besides. He Is the best friend, and the saddest foe; if he be
against you all the creatures are against you, and if he be for you all are for
you. The men of Tire and Sidon made their peace with Herod, because their
Country was nourished by the Kings. Acts 12.20. We hold all in Capite, Christ
is Lord Paramount of Lands, Life, Liberty, and all that we possess, and can
take all from us when ever pleases him; it will be our wisdom therefore who
ever we fall out with all, yet to keep in with him. See more M. Ienkin, Jude
14. p. 210. fol.
Make the Judge your friend, agree with him whilst you are in the way.

Kiss the Son ( id est) show your Love, Loyalty, Subjection, Faith, Fear,
Obedience to him, Psalm 2.12. Prize his Service, prefer it bebefore all the
Crowns, and Kingdoms of the World. The greater the Prince, the more Noble the
Service: Christ is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; none like him, and
therefore no Service like his. It is more Noble to be his Servant, then to be
King of all the World; As it is more Honor to be a Princes Favorite, then to
be Shepherd of a Flock of Sheep. Christo servire est Regnare, magnus est
animus qui se Deo tradidit.
His very service is Freedom, and his Work is wages. Be not then offended at
Christ now, be not ashamed of him and his selfe-denying ways here, least he be
ashamed of you at that great day, Mark 8. ult. But prize all that is his, Love
his Ordinances, his Ministers, his Saints, his Doctrine, his Discipline. Make
him yours now, and he will be yours for ever. When all created comforts forsake
you, he will never forsake you: Our Fathers dye, and the Prophets dye, but
Christ who is the Father of our Fathers, and the Prophet of Prophets, lives for
ever, Zachary 1.5. When these Cesterns are broken, yet this Fountain abides,
Psalm 18.46. Most men are careful to get and keep the favor of great men,
Proverbs 29.26. but what will it avail us to have the favor and applause of
our fellow prisoners, if the Judge condemn us. It will be our only wisdom
with Paul to labor to be acceptable with Christ, and that upon this very
ground, because we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor.
5.9, 10.

2. This speaks singular Comfort to all Believers who have taken Christ for
their Soverain, as well as for their Savior. Why the Judge is thy friend, yea
he is thy Savior and Redeemer, it is he who was judgeed and condemned for
thee, it is he who has satisfied Divine Justice, and paid thy ransom; So that
thou needst not fear what sin or Satan can do against thee. The Judge is thy
Father, Brother, Husband Head, Non alienum aut inimicum, sed fratrem expectamus
judicem.
thy Advocate and Intercessour, who has so often moved for thee, and prayed
for thee, and therefore thou may now be assured he will not be against thee.
And therefore Christ would have all his people to think on that day with
delight, and to lift up their heads with comfort and confidence, because the
day of our Redemption draws nigh.

This day will be a day of Full Redemption, This day will be a day of
Refrigeration, This day will be a day of Vindication, This day will be a day of
Retribution.
1. To all Believers it will be the day of their Full Redemption, and
deliverance from all their Enemies, Luke 21.28. Ephesians 4.30. Here we lie in
Thraldom to sin and misery, the best must cry with the Apostle, Who will
deliver me from this body of death? Why this blessed day will set us fully
free, Romans 8.21, 23. Now our Redemption is in fieri, Nunc redemptio facta est
merito, tunc fiet efficacia, quando vis Redemptionis plene sese exercet in
nobis. Paraeus.
it is begun; but then it shall be completed. Hence it is called a day of
Salvation, which the Saints do much desire, Hebrews, 9.28. The contracted
person rejoices to think of the day of marriage, the King of a day of
Coronation, the Victorious Soldier of a day of Triumph, Omnis nostra
consolatio in Christi adventu and judicio fundatur, quia tunc apparebit
adsalutem. Paraeus.
and shall not we rejoice in this day of our Jubilee, this day of consummation
of the marriage between Christ and our Souls this day when we shall for ever
Triumph over all the enemies of our salvation, and are therefore commanded to
Comfort our selves with these things, 1 These. 4.16.

2. It Is a day of refreshing to all gracious Souls that are tired with ^in and
sorrow, and schorched with fiery and fierce Tentations. (...), refrigerium; A
refreshing and cooling of a man who has been almost spent with toil and heat.
Acts 3.19.20. they shall now rest from their labors, Revelations 7.16. and
14.13. This brings them to a Remaining Rest, See Master Baxter Saints Rest, P.
1. c. 7. Sect. 8.
and to an everlaing Sabbath, Heb. 4.9. 2 These. 1.7. The time of the Judges
coming is the time of the Saints refreshing, and as the Apostle reasons, Who
shall condemn, it is God that Justifies, so may they say, Who shall condemn,
it is Christ that judges us? the rememberance of this makes them to rejoice
with exceeding joy, 1 Peter 4.13.

3. It Is a day of Vindication; here many times Gods dearest servants are
slandered, misreported, misrepresented to the world, as Hypocrites, turbulent
enemies to Caesar, etc. I but remember that at the last day there will be a
Resurrection of Names, as well as of Bodies; Christ shall then clear thy
Innocence as the light, Psalm 37.6, and Vindicate thy reputation from all the
false aspersions of thine adversaries, this comforted Job, when his friends
accused him wrongfully ( Job 16. and 19. and 19.25.) That his Record was on
high, and his Redeemer lived. The rememberance of this judgment made Paul to
slight the judgment of man, 1 Corinthians. 4.4, 5. Here men have their day and
carry all before them; but I pass not for man's day, for I expect another day.
This may comfort all the meek and poor of the Earth against their cruel
enemies, the Lord is their Judge, and he will save them, Isay 11.4. and 33.22.
Here many times Christ is condemned, and Barrabas set free; the righteous is
condemned in his Righteousness, and the wicked are exalted to honor.

Here they live longest (many times) who deserve not to live at all, Job 21.7.
Here the Israelites make Brick, whilst the Egyptians dwell at ease. Godly
David is in want, when profane Nabal abounds. How often is Sion Babilons Captive,
and Dives in plenty, whilst Lazarus in misery? So that if Gods people, had
hope only in this Life, they were of all men most miserable.

I, but the comfort is, there is another day, and another reckoning, when the
Righteous shall rejoice, and the wicked shall mourn, Isay 65.13.14. Then God
will review the judgments of the World, and those sins which have not been
judged and punished, and the things which have been falsely and unrighteously
judged, shall be brought to open view.

God will not always suffer his Jewels to lie in the dirt, but he will
Vindicate the injuries which are done to them, Luke 18.7. Appeal to this day
from all unjust Sentences, and patiently wait for it, James 5.7, 8. We may
answer our Adversaries, as Ierom of Prague answered the Council of Constance,
when they cited him to appear before them, that they might condemn him. Et
ego cit^ vos ut mihi respondeatis coram altissimo and justissimo judice post
centum annos. And I charge you shortly to answer me before the great Judge of
all the World.

Now men curse you but Christ will then receive you, with a Come ye Blessed,
Matthew 25.34. Then he will supply all your wants, repair your credits, make up
your losses, destroy your Enemies, and make your vile bodies like to his own
glorious Body far surpassing the brightness of the Sun, or the most
Glorious Angels. Christ is thine, and therefore this and ten thousand times
more is thine.

Thou have bought the Field, and the Treasure that is in it is thine also. As
for the wicked, let them quake and tremble to think on that day, but do thou
sing and rejoice, and call on the Heaven and Earth and all the Creatures in
them to bear thee company, Psalm, 96.11.12, 13.

4. 'Twill be a day of Retribution, a day when the Lord will fully recompense
all the service and beneficence of his Saints even to a cup of cold water. Then
all the good and only the good which has been in thy intentions, affections,
words and actions shall be openly proclaimed to thy everlasting praise. Even
thy most secret obedience shall have open recompense. Matthew. 6.6. All thy
praying, fasting, alms, tears, doing and suffering for Christ, yea, those
good works which thou have forgotten, Christ will then remember, Matthew. 25.37.
and they shall be repeated openly. To have a man's goodness proclaimed before a
Nation by some Stentor is an honor; to have Christ himself to publish our
praise, and that before Angels, Men and Devils, at the great and glorious day
of the Lord, is the honor of our honors. Christ will not only be thy
Compurgator, but thy Enchomiast at that day. Alexander admired the happiness of
Achilles because when he lived he had Patroclus for his friend, and after he
was dead he had Homer for his Encomiast. But O the happiness of a Christian who
has God for his friend, and Christ for his Encomiast! He has a Book of
Remembrance, wherein he registers all the good we do, See more M^ryfield on the
^reed.

Art. 7. p. 4^9 and 525.


with all the circumstances which may any way illustrate our goodness. Mal.
3.16. All thy good works shall be brought forth, not as meritorious causes, but
as signs and evidences of thy faith, Christ instanceth in works of mercy,
because they are most manifest to the world, and more visible then faith.
Matthew. 25.35. And this should make us to abound in the work of the Lord, since
our labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Ob. The Godly have had their failings, shall not those be published in that day?

A. I conceive not, all their sins are forgiven and forgotten: and nothing
shall be remembered in that day but their goodness. Quia pii sunt justifica^^
and abs^luti, nullum que jam amplius propter satisfactionem Christi reatum aut
culpam habent, apparent in judicio cum gloria, impios judicaturi (suo modo and
gradu) a nemine judicandi. Bullinger.
1. This is most agreeable to the promises which God has made of pardoning our
sins and remembering them no more, of blotting them out, and casting them into
the depths of the Sea. Psalm. 32.1. Esaias 33. ult. and 43.25. Jeremy 31.34. Micah
7.18.

2. God has often confirmed these promises both by his Spirit inwardly, and by
the Word, Sacraments and Prayer.

3. The godly are said not to come into judgment, viz. of condemnation,
Fid^les non sunt judicandi judicio discussionis, quia ob sanctitatis
exc^llentiam sunt Christ conjanctissimi. Estius in Sent. l. 4 did. 47.
but of absolution. John 3.18. And there is no condemnation to them. Romans 8.1.
they are already perfectly justified, and absolved from all their sins. Romans
3.24, 25. and 8.33.

4. The godly confess and forsake their sins, they daily repent of them and
judge themselves for them, and therefore God will not judge them, but according
to his promise he must and will forgive them, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9. and by
consequence forget them as if they had never been. Ier. 31.34. If men must
forgive and forget, shall not God much more? Levit. 19.18.

3. Is Christ the Judge of all the World? then this speaks terror to all
ungodly men who would not have Christ to reign over them, but grieved his
Spirit, abused his Ministers, contemned the Gospel, persecuted his Saints, and
trod under foot the Son of God. These will not be able to stand in the
judgment of that day. Psalm. 1.5. 1 Pet. 4.18. Romans 2.5. This will be a
comfortable, yet terrible day, a day of the greatest comfort to the godly, and
of the greatest discomfort to the ungodly that ever was. The good man's best,
and the bad man's worst are both to come. Now God executes some judgments on
wicked men, but these are but praeludia futuri judicii, tokens and forerunners
of that great judgment. Some are now punished, as Sodom, Old World, Egypt,
Jerusalem, the Jews, etc. that we may know there is a providence taking notice
of all; yet all are not punished that we may know there is a judgment to come,
to which the wicked are reserved. 2 Pet. 2.10. Here Gods way is in the clouds,
and we see not the reason of many things, but then his Justice and
Righteousness shall be gloriously apparent to all the world. Rev. 2.5. The
judgment of God righteous now, but it is not so manifest to the world, but at
the great day there will be a public revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. Here wicked men have their day of sinning, and God bears, I but the day
of the Lord will come. (2 Pet. 3.10.) when the wicked must answer for their
abuse of his patience, and God will bear no longer. Who can conceive, much less
express the horror of that great and terrible day of the Lord, when the Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood. Joel 2.31. Acts 2.20.)
which shall burn as an Oven, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, Mal.
4.1. when the Heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth and all that is therein shall be burnt
up. 2 Pet. 3.10. When Christ shall come in his glory, and ten thousand times
ten thousand of Angels shall attend him. Dan. 7.9.10. when he shall come in
flaming fire to take vengeance on such as disobeyed him. When all the kindreds
of the Eearth shall weep and wail before him, Rev. 1.7. And shall at last hear
that fearful sentence passed on them, Depart ye cursed, etc. When Kings, and
Captains, and mighty men of the earth shall cry to the Rocks and Mountains to
hide them. Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. They that made others fly into Caves and Dens,
shall cry themselves to be hid in Caves, and 'twill not be. Then Alexander,
Caesar and others that made the World to tremble, shall themselves tremble, and
cry for fear. If we hear but a crack of Thunder in a Cloud, we are ready to
tremble, and with Caligula seek a place where we may hide our selves. What then
shall we do when the whole frame of Heaven and Earth shall break in pieces, and
all the World shall be on a flame about us? Oh who may abide the day of his
coming, and who shall stand when he appears! Mal. 3.2. If Felix a Heathen
trembled when he heard of a judgment, what will Infelix Felix do when he shall
feel it? Nec me revocabat a profunditate voluptatum carnalium gurgite nisi metu
mortis and futuri judicii. Aug. Confess. l. 6. c. ult.
This was one means to convert S. Austin, and if thou be not past grace, it
may be a means to work on thee. And if Moses in the Mount did so exceedingly
fear, and quake at a glimpse of Gods presence. ( Heb. 12.21.) and Daniel,
Quoties diem illum considero toto corpore contremisco; sive enim comedo, sive
bibo, sive aliquid facio, semper videtur mihi tuba illa terribilis sonare in
auribus meis; Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium. Hieron.
and John were so affrighted at the sight of an Angel (tho he came with good
tidings, and they were men of good consciences) oh then how dreadful will the
sight of all those thousand thousand of holy Angels be to the wicked with their
guilty consciences? It will be a terrible day, especially to all Ignorant
impenitent sinners who know not God, nor obey his Gospel. 2 These. 1.8. Isai.
27.11. They would not hear his soft Voice in the Ministry, and now they must
hear his terrible Voice in Judgment. They say unto him depart for we desire not
the knowledge of the ways, Job 21.14. and therefore Christ will say to them,
Depart from me, I know you not.

2. To the Persecutors of Gods People. 2 These. 1.7.

3. To all cruel, mercyless, rich men. James 2.13. and 5.1. to 6. Matthew. 25.41,
42.

4. To all whoremongers and adulters, those sins are ofttimes so secretly
committed, that the Magistrate cannot punish them, and therefore God himself
will judge them. Heb. 13.4. Jude 7.

5. To all gross offenders, See more in M. Love on Colos. 3.4. p. 42.43.
at the day of judgment he will be a swift witness against sorcerers, murderers,
etc. Mark 3.5. Revelat. 22.15.

6. At that day will Christ reveal all the secret abominations which have been
committed in the world. Those sins which are now written as it were with the
juice of Lemmons, shall by the fire of that last day be made visible and
legible to all. There Is nothing so secret but shall be then revealed, all
things shall be brought to light, even the hidden works of darkness. Luke 12.2.
Eccles. 12.14. Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 4.5. These secret plots of villainy which men
would not have made known to the World for a World, shall then be written as
with a beam of the Sun upon their foreheads, and shall be fully with all its
circumstances disclosed, and laid open before all the world. And if it be a
shame to have ones sins published and ripped up before a Congregation, tho it be
for our amendment, and where there are many that pity us, and pray for us: oh
what confusion will seize on men in that great day, when not one or two, but
all their sins shall be laid naked to the view of the world, where there shall
be no eye to pity them, nor any to pray for them. The eminent and signal work
of the day of judgment is, to bring secret things to light, viz. Heart-pride,
Heart-adultery, Heart-murder, Hypocrisy, etc. These secret lusts which no eye
but Gods can see, shall be brought into the open light, and the more craft and
subtlety, and secret contrivance there has been in thy sin, the greater shall
they shame be in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.
Cogitationis poenam nemo patitur. Iuriscons.
1 Cor. 4.5. Amongst men, thoughts are free, but God will bring all the
thoughts and devices of men to light. Prove. 15.26. Not only the acts, but the
thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord; and therefore go not
about to commit any sin under pretense of secrecy, for we see how even in this
life secret sins have bin brought to light, as David's murder and adultry. 2 Samuel 12.12. Thou did it secretly, but I will publish it before all Israel.
Reverebaris magis oculum hominum quam m^um, non patiar; ergo peccata tua
occulta esse c^^am hominibus pudesies. Pet. Martyr.
q. d. I will publish it openly, and at noonday that I may bring upon thee that
shame and disgrace which thou did more carefully avoid then my displeasure.

2. Men must then render a strict and particular account of their words. Then
men must answer for Verbum (...) and otiosum, est vanum, frivolum quod^ nec
loquenti nec audienti utilitatem assert, etiamsi nulli sit noxium nec in se
reprehensible. a Lap.
idle, much more for filthy and hard speeches against God and his People.
Matthew. 12.36, 37. Jude 15. God has given us tongues to bless and glorify him,
and if we abuse them to cursing and dishonouring of him, how shall we answer it
in that day?

3. Then much more shall men answer for their evil works. God will bring every
work to judgment, whether it be good or evil. Eccles. 11.9. and 12.14. Jude
15. Then shall thy conscience be suddenly, clearly and universally irradiated
with extraordinary light to look upon all thy life at once as 'twere. Then must
thou give an exact account for every thought of thy heart, for every lust full
glance of thine eyes, for every word of thy mouth, for every moment of thy
time, for every motion of Gods Spirit which he has made to thy soul, for every
office thou have born, and how thou have discharged it in every point and
particular. We are all Stewards, and must shortly give an account, 1. De bonis
commissis. 2. De bonis dimissis. 3. De malis commissis. 4. De malis permissis.


See Mr. Strong Ser. on Luke 16.2. p. 17.18. Preached 1647.
1. We must give an account of all these Talents of Time, Truth, Wit, Riches,
etc. which have been committed to our trust, and how we have improved them to
our Masters praise. Matthew. 25.14, 15, etc. Then must you account for Personal
mercies and National mercies, for the houses you have dwelt in, for the
creatures that have died for you, and toyld for you, for the clothes on your
back, the meat in your mouths, for every Sermon thou have heard, and what
benefit thou have reaped by it, for every Sabbath thou have spent, etc.

2. You must answer for the good, which has been omitted and neglected by you.
Matthew. 25.42, 43. I was hungry, and ye did not feed me, etc. He does not say,
ye robbed me, ye persecuted me, ye cast me into prison; but he condemns them
for omitting the duties he required of them. Many civil men bless themselves in
that they are no drunkards, adulterers, thieves, etc. but a negative Christian
is no Christian. It Is not sufficient, we do no evil, it is damnable not to do
good. Isai. 1.18. Psalm. 34.14. and 37.27. 1 Pet. 3.11.

3. For sins committed, then shall the book of men's consciences be opened, and
all their works of darkness be brought to light. Rev. 20.12.

See my Schools-guard in the Rules for expounding the Law. Rule 9.
4. For all the sins which thou have suffered to be done, and have any way been
accessory to, either by commanding, commending, conniving, etc.

Now this particular and strict account implies, that the day of judgment will
be longer then some imagine, tho happily, not so long as others imagine. Some
say, it is called a day, and therefore it shall last no longer; but this does
not follow, for the day of the Lord is not taken for a day natural, consisting
of four and twenty hours, but for time indefinitely, it being frequent in
Scripture to put day for time, as Isai. 49.8. Luke 19.42. John. 8.56. Others
say that God can in a moment inlighten and dilete the conscience, so that a man
presently shall see all that he has done; this is true, but yet God will not
only have men themselves to know, but all the world shall know and see the
Justice of that day; and therefore it is very probable 'twill take up some
considerable time. As the day of grace consists of many years, so will the day
of judgment, says M. Cotton. There shall be a day of public hearing, things
shall not be suddenly shuffled up ( says Mr. Sheapard) as carnal thoughts
imagine. Lincer. Conzert p. 88.
No, it must take up some large quantity of time, that all the world may see
the secret sins of wicked m^n, and therefore it may be made evident (says he)
From Scripture and Reason, that this day of Christ's Kingly Office in judging
the world, shall happily last longer then his private administration now
(wherein he is less glorious in governing the world. Tho I cannot assent to
these opinions, yet that matters of such great and public importance will take
up a considerable time, I think no rational man will deny, who either considers
the number and nature of the things to be judged, and how strict and particular
the Scripture affirms that judgment shall be. But positively to affirm, that
it shall last so many hundred years, or so many thousand years, is to be wise
above what is written.

2. Since the day of Judgment is of such general concerment both to good and
bad, and since there is no Doctrine so powerful to awaken secure, impenitent
sinners out of their sins; it may teach us Ministers to be much in preaching
and pressing this day upon the consciences of people. As King James said of one
that preached before him of death; this man (says he) preaches of death as if
'twere at my back. So Ministers should preach so powerfully of judgment as if
'twere at men's backs ready to arrest them. This Christ himself expressly
commands us to preach unto the people. Acts 10.42. As they should desire to
hear of that day, that so they might be kept in a continual preparedness for
it, so we should delight to be setting it forth in its lively colors for the
comfort of the godly, and for the converting (if it may be) of others; for if
this will not work, nothing will, if the terror of this day will not awaken
thee, thy case is dreadful and desperate. The hearing of this day made a Felix
to tremble, and if thou be not past grace, it will make thee to tremble. When
Solomon would fright young men from their sinful pleasures, he tells them of a
stinging But. Eccles. 11.9. but remember that for all these things he will
bring thee to judgment. If our heart be not harder then the Adamant, the
remembrance of this day will quicken us to amendment. And this is the reason
why Gods servants in all ages have been so careful to mind people of this day.
Enoch of old prophesied of it. Jude 14.13. so did Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. and David,
Psalm. 96. ult. and Solomon, Eccles. 11.9. and Daniel 7.13, 14. and Joel 3. and
Malachy 3. and 4. and Christ, Matthew. 24. and 25. and Paul, Romans 14.10. 1 Cor.
4.3, 4. and Jude 6. and John, Rev. 1.7. and 20.12. So that this is no such
Legal Doctrine as some Illegal and Lawless Atheists do imagine, for Christ,
Paul, Peter, John, etc. that were Evangelical Preachers often treated of it, yea,
before ever the Law was published by Moses, this Doctrine was preached presently
after the fall by Enoch. Jude. 14.

3. It must quicken Judges, and these in authority to execute righteous
judgment, remembering that they judge not for men, but for the Lord whose
Vicegerents they are, and to whom they must shortly give an account. He
judges among the Gods by discerning whether their judgment be right or not. 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 8. He is with them in the judgment, though Iehoshaphat could
not ride circuit with them, yet God did; he is with them not only by way of
assistance and protection, but also by way of observation, he takes notice of
every sentence that passes, and will bring it again to judgment; for one
special end of that great day is, judicare non judicata and male judicata. To
punish those sinners which have escaped unpunisht here, and to rectify the
unrighteous judgments of the world. Let there be no partiality, bribery,
oppressing of the fatherless and the widow, but hear both sides patiently,
fully, indifferently; so acting and so judging, as remembering that you your
selves must ere long be judged.

[See more in M. Clerks Mirror, cap. 74.75. M. Gataker Ser. on Psalm 82.6, 7.
p. 71, etc. M. Henry Smiths Ser. on Psalm 82.6. p. 336. M. Sam Wards Ser. on
Exodus 18.21. p. 395. M. Strong 31. Ser. p. 389. and 623.

Let every one watch and prepare for this day, let the thoughts of it sleep
with us, and wake with us, rise with us and rest with us, and be familiar with
us; think you hear that voice sounding in your ears, Come, give an account of
your Stewardship, for thou must be no longer Steward. Put not the remembrance
of that day far from your souls least you draw near to the seat of iniquity.
Amos 6.3. Most certain it is that the day of the Lord will come, but when, we
know not. 2 Pet. 3.10. Hence he is said to come as a thief in the night. 1 These.
5.2. (1.) Secretly; As the day is certain, so 'twill be sudden and if it were
the last hour in Paul's time, sure now it is the last minute of the last hour.
The Judge was never nearer coming, and never less preparation for his coming.
suddenly, terribly and unexpectedly: blessed therefore is he that teaches.
Mark 13.35, 36, 37. Rev. 16.15. We should shun those sins which breed security,
as drunkenness, gluttony and. the cares of the world. Matthew. 24.38, 39, 42. Luk
21.34. God has hid this day from us, that we might be prepared every day. Ideo
latet unus dies at observeutur omnes.
Let Us get the Oil of grace in our Lamps, that we may be ready when ever the
Bridegroom shall come. Be much in works of piety and mercy, get your souls
clothed with Christ and his righteousness, which only can shelter you from
wrath to come, and make you stand with comfort and comfidence in that day.
Let Us realize that day to our selves, if we were sure the day of judgment
should be the next week, what a strange alteration would it make in the world;
how would men slight these worldly things, as fine houses, fine apparels, fine
fare, etc. which now they dote on. Then they would fast and pray, weep and
repent. Why, this day may be the day of thy particular judgment, and therefore
whilst it is to day we should do these things. Now let us deny our selves, follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes, part with all for Christ, take him on his own
Terms, and give him no rest till he have assured thee by his Spirit, that thy
sins are forgiven thee, and then you may bid that day welcome and rejoice in
the thoughts of it. 1 John 2.28. Walk exactly and sincerely before God now,
live soberly, righteously, religiously; do all as for Eternity. Xeuxies being
asked why he was so curious in his painting, answered, Quia Aeternitati pingo,
it is for Eternity said he. So should we be exact in our walking and working, in
our doing and suffering, remembering it is for eternity. None can dwell with that
devouring fire but he that walks uprightly. Isai. 33.14, 15, 16. To such as
faithfully discharge the duties of their callings this will be a day of
blessing. Luke 12.43. and of comfort. Isai. 38.3. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 John 3.21. See
Dyke on Conscience chapt 12. p. 203. and Slesfield on Consc. chapter 23. In die
judicii plus valebit conscientia pura quam mursupta plena. Bern.
We should therefore get and keep a good conscience which will be a feast to
us, especially at that day. Acts 23.1. and 24.16. Whilst it is called to day,
then let us return, and cause others to return, and so fly from the wrath to
come, preventing it by judging our selves, and setting up a Judicatory in our
souls; examining, arraigning, inditing, and condemning ourselves for our sins,
and then will Christ acquit us: if we humble our selves he will exalt us, if we
remember our sins he will forget them, if we take an holy revenge on ourselves,
we shall prevent his vengeance. The serious remembrance of this day has a
great influence on our lives, and therefore it is good to possess our minds with
the truth of it, and our hearts with the terror of it, that it come not upon
us unawares. If this Principle were truly believed, oh what, holiness,
humility, fear. Rev. 14.7. Patience in suffering. James 5.8. Constancy in
well-doing. 2 Pet. 3.11.14. and contempt of the world and weanedness from these
low things which must then be consumed with fire. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. Would it
work in us.

At his Appearance and his Kingdom.] Hence Note,

That the second coming of Christ will be a glorious coming. In his first
coming he vayled and covered his glory. Phil. 2.7. But now he will reveal and
display it, so that the glory of a thousand Suns made into one will be as
darkness compared to the glory of that day when Christ shall come in the glory
of the Father attended with Myriads and ten thousond thousand of glorious
Angels. ( Dan. 7.10.) and all the Saints that ever have been, attending him. 1
These. 1.13. The Scripture speaks much of the glory of this second coming.
Matthew. 19.27. and 24.30. Mark 8. ult. and 13.26. Colos. 3.4. Philip. 3.21 Titus
2.12. 1 John 3.2. Jude 6.14. See more in D. Tailor on Tit. 2.13. p. 480 10.
At first he came in a poor abased condition to be judged and condemned by man,
but now he comes to judge his Judges, and to condemn the world for its sin. Now
Pilate must to the Bar, and Christ is on the Throne. At first he was attended
by twelve poor Fishermen, contemptible persons in the worlds eye, because his
Kingdom was not of this world; but now he has a glorious train of Saints and
Angels to attend him. 2. As Christ the Head, so the Saints his Members shall
then appear in glory. Here we are in our Minority, in our Pilgrimage, and our
life is hid, ( Colos. 3.3.) Under many tentations, tribulations, persecutions,
doubts, diseases, desertions, perplexities, infirmities and sins. Our spiritual
life is hid under much corruption, there is such a smoke and smother in the
soul that the godly can hardly see Gods face. Grace in a good man's soul is like
a Jewel in a pond of mud, it is there, but there must be much raking to find it.
Now it is Winter with us, and tho we are the sons of God, yet it appears not
what we are. 1 John 3.2. But when Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in glory. Colos. 3.4 Here it may be thou art poor
and have not a house of thine own to dwell in; I, but if thou belong to Christ,
the time is at hand when thou shall have more glory then all the Monarchs in
the world ever had. Dives will not be Lazarus now; Aye, but he would be glad to
be Lazarus then. Wherefore let all the Saints which suffer for Christ now,
comfort themselves with the remembrance of the glory to come; Matthew. 20.32. 1
Pet. 4.13.14. Heb. 12.2. Let it quicken us to be much in glorifying God here,
who has promised to glorify us, with himself hereafter, John 17.4, 5. 1 These.
2.12.

[If any would see more on the day of judgment, let him peruse those that
write on that Article in the Creed, and those that write on the four last
things. See Byfield on Colos. 3.4. and M. Love on Colos. 3.4. Ser. 4. M.
Burges, M. Baxter, M. Durhams Ser. on James 5.9. M. Sam. Smith, Grand Assize,
M. Buroughs Saints Treasury. on Heb. 9.27. Barlow on 2 Timothy 1.8. D. Tailor in
Folio, in Fine lib. p. 54.

VERSE 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine.
IN these Words we have the duty expressed, to the due performance of which the
Apostle so solemnly, and seriously adjures Timothy, and in him all the
Ministers of the Gospel successively to the end of the World, viz. to Preach
the Word. I may call it The Preachers Directory. Where we have, 1. A duty
enjoined, viz. the Preaching of the Word. It Is not a Toleration, but an
Injunction; it is not a bare allowance, but a peremptory command, as of that
which not only may be done, but upon the greatest peril must be done.

2. The time when we must Preach, or the measure how often we must preach; it
must be in season and out of season, (i.) at all times as occasion shall
require.

3. Here is the manner how this duty may be rightly performed, viz. 1. In
general by being instant and zealously urgent in it, by indefatigable industry
and undaunted resolution. 2. Particularly, by discharging the particular duties
of our office, which are to Reprove. Rebuke. Exhort.


3. By a due Qualification and right tempering of all these, with
Long-suffering and Doctrine, with Lenity and Instruction.

Preach.
The Word is Metaphorical, and is borrowed from Heralds and public Cryers,
(...), praedica, velinstar praeconis palam proclama Evangelium.
which are sent from Rulers and States to make known their minds and edicts
plainly and punctually to the people. The Word is taken two ways in
Scripture, 1. Largely and improperly for any declaration of Gods wisdom,
power, praise and goodness, thus every creature may be called a Preacher, so
the Heavens preach Gods praise. Psalm. 19.1. and 145.6. Isai. 60.6. Thus every
man is a Preacher, and must show forth Gods praise in his place and sphere. 1
Pet. 2.9. Thus reading the Word may be called Preaching. But the Question is
not whether reading (in some sense) may not be called Preaching, taking
Preaching in a large sense, for any Declaration of Gods Will; but the question
is whether it be Ministerical preaching^; whether when the Apostle bids us
divide the word aright, he means no more then to read aright? and when he
says, who is sufficient for these things, he mean, who is able to read a
Chapter? 2. It Is taken strictly and properly (so in the Text) for the action of
a lawful Minister, who in an Authoritative way does soundly interpret the Word,
and apply it to his hearers. This is the formal act and duty of the Ministry,
it is a Pastoral Act which is not common to every gifted Brother in the Flock.
Others may be speakers (as they call themselves) of Blasphemy, Heresy,
Nonsense; but none are true Preachers but such as are sent by God in an
ordinary, orderly way, Romans 10.15. These have their Commission from God to
declare all his Counsel with Majesty and Authority publicly and power-fully,
fully and faithfully to his people.

(...)* Verbum, The Word.
We must not Preach our own inventions, Non quicquid in buc^as venerit, our own
idle, addle conceits; but we must Preach the pure Will and Word of God revealed
to us in the Scriptures of the Old and new Testament. So much the Word (...)
imports, Luke 11.28. Acts 11.19.

2 The Gospel is called the Word, Verbum antonomastice pro Evangelio ponitur.
by way of Eminency, because it contains the marrow and Quintescence, the sum
and substance of the Word, John 17.8.14. Acts 13.26. and 15.7. Ephesians. 1.13. This
is called the written, inspired, created Word.

3. There is the Essential, Divine and uncreated Word, and this (...) is Christ
himself who is the subject of the Gospel. John 1.1. In the beginning was the
Word (i) The Eternal Son of God, the Essential Word of his Father, so called
because he is the sum and substance of that Word; in him that great promise,
Genesis 3.15. yea and all the promises are made good to us. Now a Minister must
preach the whole Word, ( Acts 20.27.) but more especially, Christ and his
Gospel. Thus John Baptist was a Crier* Matthew 3.3. He proclaimed the coming of
Christ into the World. Thus Paul was (...), a Herald to publish the Gospel.

Be instant.
The Word signifies to stand over it, (...), adsto, insto, urgeo, Acts 4.1.39.
stand close to it, or to stand much upon it.

To be instant in Preaching implies a standing to it with diligence and
earnestness; Insta cum sedulitate, Syriac.

Incumbe operi, Instanter age quod agendum est. Estius.


hence Tindal renders it, Be fervent in Preaching. We must rouse up our selves
to the work, we shall meet with many dangers, difficulties, discouragements; we
must expect many Temptations from within and from without us, from profits,
pleasure, ease; so that if we be not Instant and Urgent in the work, offering a
kind of holy Violence to our selves, we shall fail in the duty: and though for
the present we see no fruit of our labors, yet must we not give over, but be
instant and unwearied in the work of the Lord, and even compel men to come in
to Christ, Luke 14.33.

In season, out of season.
Q. D. Preach the Word on all occasions, take all Opportunities, be active in
the duty, (...); tempestive, intempestive; opportune, importune. Paran^masia
est Proverbialis locutio, significans idem quod assidue and instante^.
he that will be a Bishop must be apt to teach, 1 Timothy, 3.3.

1. We must Preach in season, ( i.) on the Lords Day, that is the ordinary time
set apart by God himself for this duty. This season Christ and his Apostles
usually observed, Mark 6.1. Luke 4.16. Acts 2.46. and 13.14. and 20.7.

2. There are times and seasons when the Word may be most acceptable and most
profitable to the hearers, as when Gods hand lies heavy upon a people, and they
are broken with some great affliction; then is a time to speak a word in
season, then they will hear our words for they are sweet, Psalm 141.6.

2. Out of Season. Not that the Word is ever out of season in it self, for it
is the Bread of Life, all other meats have their times and seasons, but Bread
is the Staff of Nature, and is never out of season. There is no season
unseasonable for so seasonable, for so necessary a duty in the Opinion of a
Natural man, and in the eye of carnal reason it seems sometimes to be out of
season, as when it is preached on the week day, when Pastor and people have
profits and pleasures, and worldly employments to draw them off: Now a Sermon
seems like snow in Harvest to such earthly souls, it is out of season with
them, yet even these seasons which the world judges unseasonable must a
Minister redeem for preaching. Thus Christ himself did not only preach on the
Sabbath day, but on the week days also, Luke 8.1. and 19.47. We must not to
favor our selves preach once a month, or once a day, but we must be diligent
laborers in the Lords Vineyard if we expect our penny: So that there is no
contradiction in these commands, both may and must be done by a faithful
Minister, who must Preach in season when God gives the opportunity, and the
people desire it, Nehem. 8.1. Acts 13.42. and out of season, when peoples
hearts are so distracted with worldly cares that they have no desire after it.
Now if Ministers must preach the Word in season and out of season, then People
must hear the Word and be instant in season and out of season. Preaching and
Hearing are Relatives, if there lie a Necessity on us to Preach, by the same
Rule there lies a Necessity on you to hear, you must redeem time from your
worldly affairs to attend on this Ordinance, not only on the Lords day, but
even on the week day. It will not repent you when you come into your Kingdom.
The comfort and peace which you will gain by a right attendance on this
Ordinance will abundantly recompense all worldly losses, you shall incur by it.
Let thy bodily affairs wait on thy Spiritual, and the lesser give place to the
greater, we have a notable instance for this in the men of Bethshemesh, who
were busy at their Harvest till the Arc came, and then for joy they lay by
all, and go to offer Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 6.13, 14, 15.

Question, But would you have us cast off our callings, and do nothing but
follow Sermons?

Answer, By no means, for he that commands us to be swift to hear, James 1.19.
commands us also to be diligent in our callings, yet whetting is no letting,
the oyling of the wheels does not hinder the going of of the Clock. An hour
spent in hearing a Sermon is no hinderance to our particular calling. We can
spend two or three hours in Visiting our friends, and think it no impediment
to our Temporal employments. So that in Cities and Towns especially where
people may meet conveniently in respect of cohabitation it will be their
wisdom to improve these opportunities for their spiritual advantage, as they
did ( Acts 13.42.) who desired the Apostles to preach in the space between that
and the next Sabbath (...), medio tempore inter duo Sabbata. Grotius. See this
Case excellently cleared by Master Hildersham on John 4. Lect. 51. p. 218. And
Church his Miscelan. 2. P. p. 41, 42.
on the week day, says Diodat.

Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort.
Having spoken before of Preaching in General, now he comes to the particular
branches of it; whereof the first is to reprove such as are erroneous in
Judgment, by Scripture demonstrations to confute and confound them and put
them to silence, (...) (i.) Argumentis convince, nam si absque Argumentis
aliquem increpes, temerarius esse videberis, and ille increpes fiet impudens
and obstianatus. Chrysostom.
Titus 1.9.

2. Rebuke and chide such as are exorbitant in their manners and corrupt in
their lives, (...) reprehendo, objurgo.
others may do it ex Charitate, Leviticus 19.17. Ministers ex Officio with all
authority, Titus 2.25. 1 Timothy, 5.20. Isay 58.1. Many call it Railing, when
it is only Rebuking: by this means some may be reclaimed, others restrained,
and the wicked left without excuse.

3. Exhort such as run well to persevere, (...) hortor, consolor.
Comfort the dejected, quicken the slothful, the words of the wise are as goads
to rouse men out of their dullness, Eccles. 12.11. people then must suffer the
word of Exhortation to work on their Affections without quarrelling or fretting
against it, Hebrews 13.22. q. d. Reprove all errors, rebuke all sins, Mitem
and pacatum animum praestare debemus peccantibus, and illos non persequi, sed
revocare. Seneca de Ira l. 1. c. 14.
and exhort to all Duties, yet still with the spirit of Love and meekness:
that we may convert and not exasperate them: so that the Apostle here repeateth
and presses again these Ministerial Duties before mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.16.

With all Long-suffering.
Here is the manner how all these must be done, (...), longanimitas, lenitas,
(i.) Patientia and tolerantia injuriarum. Paraeus.
viz. with a great deal of Patience and lenity, least we become dispondent
because we see not the present fruit and success of our rebukes and
exhortations. Our reproves never work kindly, unless people see that they come
from a patient and a loving mind. We must do all in Love and in the spirit of
meekness, Dilige and dic quod voles. Aug. Vide Sal. Terrae cap. ult. Plus in
corrigendos agir benevolentia quam severitas; cohortatio quam commotio:
Charitas quam potestas. Lev. Epist. 84.
mourning for their folly, and endeavoring their restoration. We must do
nothing proudly, superciliously or Tyrannically, but do all with a Paternal
affection without malice, wrath, bitterness. If a man have broke his bones or
lost his sight we do not use to revile him, or rage against him, but we pity
him, we pray for him, we bemoan his condition. A little Patience will not serve
a Ministers turn who has to do with all sorts of persons, he must get a
suffering frame of Spirit, Long-suffering, yea, all Long-suffering and
Patience, that he may be able to bear with the weak, not despair of the wicked,
nor rashly cast off any, but patiently wait till the Lord shall give them
repentance to salvation. As the Apostle prayed for his Colossians (1.11.) that
they might be strengthened with Patience, yea, all patienee; so we had need to
pray for our selves that God would strengthen us with Long-suffering, yea with
All long-suffering that we may patiently endure the reproaches and indignities
which attend our callings, and are annexed to our Orders, that so we may
condescend and stoop to the slowness and dullness, weakness, and waywardness of
our people.

See more on 2 Timothy 3.10.
This will make us like to God who bears long, and is slow to wrath, Exodus
34, 6. Romans 9.22.

Objection, The Apostle commands Titus to be sharp and severe, Titus 1.13.

Answer, Distinguish the persons and the doubt is resolved. The Cretians to
whom Titus preached were rugged and refractory, now a hard knot must have a
hard wedge. But the Ephesians to whom Timothy was sent were of a better temper
and disposition as appears, Acts 20.32. and therefore to be more meekly and
mildly dealt withal.

2. Others draw the difference from the persons to whom the Apostle writ, the
one was Timothy, who (they say) was severe and austere, and is therefore
exhorted to lenity and patience. The other Titus, who (they say) was gentle of
nature, and mild, and is therefore stirred up to sharpness and severity.

And with (All) Doctrine.
The Apostle very seasonably adds this Caution and Qualification, viz. That
all our reproofs and exhortations should have a good foundation and be grounded
on sound Doctrine; being clearly agreeable to Gods Word and Will. Vbi non
subest Doctrina, ibi frustra laboratur; quia est aedificatio sine fundamento.
Paraeus.
Let a man preach never so fervently and affectionately, yet unless by
Scripture Arguments he convince me of my sin and error, he does but beat the
Air, and all that he says does but vanish into smoke. Doctrine must be laid
as the ground of all, and a reason of the reproof must be given. Man is a
rational creature, and it is not words but solid Arguments that must convince
him, stir him, comfort him. Many young men make a great noise, they Primaria
dos Episcopi est Scientia and Doctrina. Hilar. Parum eruditi nimium fervidi
Calvin.
flutter and make a great clutter in a Pulpit, they have many high-flowen
words, and that is all. The emptiest carts makes the greatest rattle, and the
emptiest barrels the loudest sound; but for want of substantial Arguments they
leave their Auditors unsatisfied and unwrought upon, To such we may say, as the
Echo to the Painter.

Vane quid affectas similem mihi pingere Pictor?

Si mihi vis simile pingere, pinge sonum.


would you not then have their advice contemned, convince their Auditors of the
Truth of what you say, and then they will, yea they must submit or do worse.
Now these two Qualifications are very necessary for a Minister.

1. He had need of a great deal of patience to undergo the oppositions and
reproaches of an ungrateful world. 2. He had need to be accomplished Vox omni
refertur ad utramque, ut and nulli succumbat adversitati, and nullum documentum
necessarium praetermittat. Espencaeus.
with all manner of Learning, that he may be able to stop the mouths of all
gainsayers.
Observations.
1. Note, Gods Timothies only, who are called and set apart by Imposition of
hands for the work of the Ministry, V. Tactica. S. l. 2. c. 2. Sect. 5. and
Mr. Ienkins on Jude to p. 5.6. folio.
must Preach the Word. Preaching is not every man's work in common, it belongs
not to the flock, but to the Pastors and Leaders of the flock. The Apostle
lays not the Injunction upon all, but only on Timothies, who are fitted and
ordained to the work. Every Minister is an Herald, an Ambassador, an Officer,
and must not go without his Commission, nor deliver any thing but what his Lord
who sends him shall give him in charge, Acts 20.27. Faith comes not by hearing
every speaker, but by attending on such Preachers as are sent, Romans 10.15. If
any run before they are sent, they may speak as long as they please, but they
shall never benefit the people, Ier. 23.32. But of this see more at large in my
Pulpit-Guard.

2. Observation, Ministers must be Preachers. As they must be Ministers, ( i.)
Men called to the Work, So when they are called, not only they may, but they
must Preach. There is a necessity lies upon them, yea, a necessity backed with
a Woe, 1 Corinthians 9.16. So that they must either Preach or perish: this must
be done, or they are undone. Verbi Minister es, Hoc age, was Master Perkins his
Motto. Reading is not sufficient, we must Preach and Expound the Word. When God
had given the Law to his People, he presently appoints Priests and Levites to
expound it to them, Nehem. 8.7, 8. Mal. 2.7.

This is that Est ad hoc primum and maximum Episcopi officium ad quod Episcopus
Iure Divino obligatur, Test vel Concilio, Trident. Ses. 24 c. 4.
great Ministerial Duty which the Apostle does so seriously here press upon us.
This was the first thing which our Savior gave in charge to his Apostles, when
he sent them forth into the World, Matthew 10.7. Go Preach, and this was his
last charge to them when he was leaving the World, Go Preach and Baptize,
Matthew 28 19. This he commanded Peter once and again, that as he loved him he
would feed his sheep, John 21. So that if we either love Christ or the souls
of our Brethren, or our own souls, The necessity and Efficacy of Preaching,
you may see in my Sal Torrae. cap. 1.2, 3^ 6.
we must feed the flocks, and be prompt and ready to Preach on all Occasions,
1 Timothy 3.2. and 2.2, 24. He must not conceal his gifts to himself, (...),
significat non simpliciter Doctorem, sed facultate docendi praeditum, and ad
docendum appositum. Muscul.
but on all occasions he must be ready to communicate them to others. It Is
true, a Ministers Conversation must be unspotted and blameless, but let him
live never so well, yet unless he Preach and faithfully discharge the Duties
of his calling, Ignavissimum hoc animalium genus vix porcis alendis idoneum.
Luther.
he shall never convert souls. As for dumb Dogs, and blind watchmen, they
are worthless, useless things, not fit to be swineherds. Let such lazy droans
read, Ierem. 23. and Ezekiel 34. and if they have not lost all sense and savor
it will awaken them.

3. Observation, Ministers must not preach the fancies and inventions of men,
nor the Canons and Decrees of Prelates, but they must Preach the pure Word of
God. They are Heralds and must keep to the instructions of him that sent them
without adding or dectracting: If any man speak in the Church, he must speak
the Oracles of God, 1 Peter 4.11. and what Christ commands, Matthew. 28.20.

It Is the whole Word of God which we must preach both Law and Gospel, the One
will keep us from Presumption, and the Other from Despair; the One will
Humble us, and the Other will Raise us.

The Law makes way for the Gospel, it breaks the stubborn heart of man, and
makes him prize a Savior, and cry out with Paul, Acts 9.6. Lord what will thou that I shall do? q. d. I do now Resign and Devote my self wholly to
thee, I am ready to do and suffer what ever thou shall command me.

Thus the Preaching of the Law prepares the heart for Christ, and must first
be preached, the Spirits Method is first by the Law to convince us of the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and then by the Gospel to convince us of Christ's
Righteousness, John 16.9, 10. But our great Work is to Preach the Gospel,
and the Law only in Reference to the Gospel.

The express words of our Commission are, Go Respectu externae praedicationis
and Vocationis omnibus qui Evangelium audiunt, respectu efficaciae, fidelibus
tantum.
Preach the Gospel to every Creature ( i.) to every Rational Creature of what
Nation, Language, Sex or Condition soever; make a tender of Christ to them all:
Hence we are called Ministers of the Gospel, because it is our Primary work to
publish Christ and his Benefits to the World.

The Gospel inlightens and enlivens us, it purifieth and pacifieth the soul:
light is a desirable thing, this is a light to them that sit in darkness, Esaias
9.2. It Is the Horn of Salvation, Luke 1.69. The Scepter of Christ Kingdom,
Psalm 44.7. The Kingdom of Christ, because it shows us the way thither. By
it we receive the Spirit, Galathians 3.2. Hence the Preaching of the Gospel is
called the Ministry of the Spirit, (2 Corinthians 3.5.) by which the Spirit is
conveyed into our souls.

It Is the Vide Master Strongs two and thirty Sermons, p. 309. Matthew, 11.23.
and Robinson on Ephesians, 6, 14. p. 603.
greatest Honor any Nation can have to be the Seat of the Gospel, As the Arc
was the Glory of Israel, so is this of Gods People. It ennobles and raises
men's spirits, and enables them to do more then others, Matthew 5.47. We
dishonor the Gospel, when we suffer Heathens by their Moral low Education to
excel us who have the Gospel which is mighty to raise us to supernatural
Operations: Hence the Apostle blames the Corinthians, because they walked like
Natural men, 1 Corinthians 3.3. We are Redeemed from the Earth, Revlations 4.3.
and therefore must not live like men of the Earth, but must walk up to our
Principles and Privileges, leading lives suitable to the Gospel, Philippians
1.27. Let us highly prize it and receive it with all readiness. As Rachel
cried for Children, Give me Children or I die; so say you, Give me Christ, or I
die.

A man may want liberty and yet be happy, as Joseph. He may want Peace and yet
be happy, as David. Want Children and yet be happy, as Job. But he that wants
the Gospel which should discover Christ to him, wants every thing that is
good.

A Throne without the Gospel is but the Devils Dungeon. Wealth without the
Gospel is but Fuel for Hell; and Honor without Christ, is but mere dishonor
and a Cipher. Let us then entreat the Lord to discover to us the deep Mysteries
of it, Ephesians 1.17, 18. They are above Natures reach, 2 Corinthians 2.9. and
1.2.14. Nil dat quod non habet.

The Vegitative Creature cannot do the Acts of the Sensitive, nor the
Sensitive of the Rational, nor the Rational of the Spiritual and believeing
Christian: Hence more Errors have risen about the Gospel, then about the Law:
because the Principles of the Law are written in men's Natures, Heathens have
made Laws against Drunkenness, Whoredom, Theft, etc. But the Gospel is
Supernatural. Hence Arians, Arminians, Socinians, and Papists, have erred
exceedingly concerning it.

4. Observation.
Ministers must be Instant and Urgent, Active and Zealous in the discharge of
their Duty. Many tentations from profits and pleasures, from ease and
quietness will assail us on the one hand; and many discouragements from an
ungrateful malignant world on the other hand; His verbis non assidaitatem modo
commendat sed etiam contentionem quae oinnia difficultatum obstacula superat.
Calvin in locum.
so that if we be not instant and earnest we shall never break through them,
but shall be ready to look back, yea, and to leave Gods Plough in the open
field. Men are dead in sin and therefore we had need to Cry aloud and lift up
our voices like Trumpets, that we may help to raise them, Isay 58.2. Cry, it is
not Say or Read a Sermon, but Cry it, and that aloud, with fervor and
affection that the dead may hear and live.

2. Be impartial, spare not for fear or favor, but be they high or low, rich
or poor, show them their sins.

3. Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet ( i.) set to all thy strength, Summa in
vendorum affectuum in ^o est ut prius ipse sis m^tus. Quintilian.
and rouse up others; the speech is borrowed from soldiers in battle, where if
any be faint-hearted or drowsy, yet the sound of the Trumpet quickens them to
the battle.

4. Show my people their transgressions, viz. plainly and particularly, cause
them to know their own abominations. Thus it is good to be earnest and
zealously affected in a good thing, Gal. 4.18. We cannot be zealous in a better
cause, for it is Gods cause, the Churches cause, and the cause not of bodies
but of souls, their Eternal happiness depends upon it. This made Ap^llos so
fervent and diligent in teaching the things of God, ( Acts 18.25.) and Isay,
and Christ to labor and spend their strength, Isay 49.4. laziness is naught
in any calling, but most odious in a Minister who is called to the highest and
hardest work in the world. This will require the whole man, Examples of zealous
Ministers. See Mr. Sam. Cle^ks Mirror, chap. 82. edit. 3.
and therefore we should give up our selves wholly to it, Acts 6.4. 1 Timothy
4.15. for who is sufficient for this alone? 2 Cor. 2.16. There is no grace that
more graceth a Minister then zeal for God and his Worship; hence Christ sent
not fleshly, but fiery tongues on his Disciples that they might inflame the
hearts of their hearers, Acts 2.3. The Angels that publish the Everlasting
Gospel to the world, do not creep or walk, but speedily fly upon that
service, Revelations 14.6. We must be Seraphims with ^ix wings which are most
ready to do what ever God shall command us. Isay 6.2. we must be burning and
shining lights, John 5.35. So was Elijha, Isay, Jeremy, John B^ptist, they were
all men of fire, who helped to ^haw the frozen and cold hearts of their hearers.
Such a one was Ardeat orator qui v^lt accendere plebem.
Luther, what ever he spoke or writ was operative on men's hearts, what an
intense and high degree of zeal was in our Savior, John 2.17. his zeal for
Gods House and the purity of his Worship was so vehement, that like Quicquid
dicit Lutherus, quicquid sc^ibit id in anim^s penet^at, and mirificos relinquit
acule^s in cordibus ho^min^m. Adam. in vita Luth.
fire which eats up and devours that whereon it lights, it even eat him up;
Dicitu^ Zelus exedens, quia tan quam ignis inter praecordia conclus^s u^it,
torquet and consumit animum, moleste fere^tem prosanationem D^mus De^
Chemnitius.
it even consumed his very moisture and exhausted him and made him unmindful of
himself. He neither regarded life nor limb, but exposed all to hazard in
defense of Gods honor against a pack of malicious, covetous Scribes and
Pharisees. Zeal in an Holy Sense, consumes the Flesh, and eats the bones,
Ierem. 20.9. many waste and consume themselves; some in drunkenness, some in
whoreing, some in moyling for the world; woe to such as dye of these unholy and
unhappy Consumptions: but when the zeal for Gods Glory consumes us, happy those
that dye of such holy consumptions.

Thus to Perde te ne Pereas. Salvian.
loose our lives is to save them, and to wast them is the way to preserve and
renew them; no man ever yet lost by spending himself for God. Abjicere curam
nostri propter Dei zelum, est Dei custodiae fidelissimae nosmetipsos
committere. Rolloc.
And though we cannot be zealous as Christ was by way of Equality, yet by way
of Conformity and similitude we must in our Degree labor to resemble him.
Christ will own none for his peculiar people, but such as are zealous of good
works, Titus 2.14. The dull Ass is no sacrifice for the Living God, Exodus
13.13. and the lingering Snail is reckoned amongst unclean creatures, Leviticus
11.30. Grace is no sleepy, idle, drowsy habit, but an active, lively,
operative thing; hence all Gods servants have been men of fire. Abraham how
zealous in Praying for Sodom, how ready to circumcise himself and all the men
in his house, how ready to part with all at Gods bare command. Lot does not
only abstain from the sins of Sodom, but his soul was (...), Excruciabat se
adeo ut a^xiam ac doloribus confectam traheret animam.
tortured and tormented with their wickedness. 2 Peter 2.8. Moses, one of the
meekest men in the world, yet when God was dishonored in an holy heat he
throws down the two Tables of stone, and breaks them, signifying thereby
their breach of Covenant with God by their sins; yet did not the Lord check
him for it, He only bid him go make new ones: where we may observe the
goodness of God, that if our zeal transport us too far, yet the Lord pardons
the error of our fervency, rather then the Indifferencies of Security and
Luke-warmnesse.

Thus Scipsum accendit, he burst out into an holy heat, and built his part with
a special fervor of Spirit.
Bar^e how earnestly does he act in Gods work, Nehemiah 3.20. Nehemiah forsook
all his Court preferment, passed through many dangers and difficulties and
contends even with Rulers for profaning the Sabbath, he cursed them ( i.) he
caused them to be excommunicated and driven out of the Congregation, or he
sharply reproved them, telling them they had made themselves guilty of the
curses whereinto they had entered, Nehemiah 10.29. and 13.25. Holy David was a
man even compounded of zeal, as appears, Psalm 119.53, 97.136.139.158.174.
How did he prepare with all his might for the House of God, and thinks all
the gold and riches he had given to be as nothing, 1 Chronicles 29.2, 3, 4. he
prepared an hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand Talents
of Silver; he gave of his own proper goods thirteen Millions, eight hundred
seventy five thousand pound sterling. But what makes David so magnificently
liberal? Why it was his zealous affection to the House of God. It is want of
affection, not want of money that makes men give so basely to the promoting of
Gods Worship: yet so enlarged was David's heart, that he accounts all this but a
poor gift, 1 Chronicles 22.14.

In my Begnani, in afflictione mea Montan. In paupertate mea. Vulg. (...),
secundum inopiam meam, Septuag.

Paupertatem nominat modestiae and humilitatis ergo, quod sciret illa nihil
esse comparatione illorum quae Deo debentur. Lavater.


poverty (so it is in the margin of your Bibles) have I prepared all this, he
accounts his 1300. cart load of gold and silver, but a poor gift, it was no^
answerable to his desires, nor according to that which the transcendent Majesty
of God might require, but it was according as he was able by reason of his
continual troubles and afflictions, what a Seraphim was Paul? how did he burn
with a zeal for Gods Glory? how was his Spirit kindled in him when he saw the
Idolatry at Athens? Acts 17.16. How gladly does he spend himself for the Church
of God? 2 Cor. 12.25. What pains did he take, Quasi fulgur celerrime orbem
pertransiit and subegit Christo. Chrysostom.
what hazards did he run that he might win souls? Romans 15.19. He surpassed
Alexander the Great, and all the Conquerours of the world, for they conquered
men by the Sword, but Paul by the Word, Paulus est verus ille Hercules, verus
Sampson, qui non duodecim, sed mill trephaea, mill triumphos peregit. a Lap.
they gained Kingdoms to themselves, but Paul for Christ; they conquered
bodies, he souls; they men, he devils. But where shall we now find a zealous
Elijah, a man of fire against sin and errors? where are our Luthers, Lattimers,
Bradfords that fear not the faces of great ones? Blessed be God, he has many
in the Land that both in the Pulpit, and by their Pens, do witness against the
enormities of the times, yet in comparison of the swarms of idle, heretical,
profane, self-seeking Ministers, they are thin sown, for 1. Some are ignorant,
and cannot. 2. Others are scandalous, and dare not reprove sin, for fear of
being upbraided themselves. 3. Others are Time-servers, and to keep their
places, they go along with the current of the times, and say as the great ones
would have them. Are the times for liberty? so are they. Are the times for
Anabaptists? etc. so are they: Doctores aerei, like wax, ready to take any
impression, that the Rulers and great ones will put upon them. 4. Others are
zealous, but it is against zeal; instead of being instant in Preaching, they are
earnest against zealous Preachers and preaching. Instead of heavenly fire, they
are full of strange fire. They are zealous, but it is for Superstition,
Will Worship, Anabaptisme, etc. When they should use all means to keep in, and
increase this holy fire, as the Priest was commanded. ( Levit. 6.12, 13.) not
to suffer the fire of the Altar to go forth, but he must bring wood to it, and
nourish it that it always might burn; yet these by their negligence suffer it
to decay. It Is said that the Image of Isis was carried by a dull Ass, Isidis
effigiem tardus gestabat asellus.
such a servant may fit such a saint: but dead Ministers are no servants for
the living God. I rejoice not in these victories of the devil, Qui de lapsu
gaudet alieno, gaudet de diaboli vict^^ia.
but shall turn my complaint into a prayer, that the Lord would purify the
sons of Levi, and purge them as gold, that they may offer in righteousness.
Malac. 3.3. And that all Zions Nazarites may be purer then snow, Omnium
divin^rum est divinissimum c^opora^i Deo in conve^si ne errantium, qui puro
amore pro univ^^sorum salute laborat, recte Deiformes and divini imo
divinissimi nuncupantur. Dionys. reop.
and whiter then milk. Lam. 47.13. That all those whom the Lord has set apart
for his own immeditate service, may in some measure resemble their Lord and
Master in the beauty of holiness, that they may be like Apollos, who was
fervent in spirit, mighty in the Scriptures, and taught diligently the way of
the Lord. Acts 18.25, 26. that like Micah (3.8.) we may be filled with the
Spirit of God, and so may be enabled to fulfill our duty. That he would flame us
with the fire of love, that we may help to inflame others. Did Ministers love
their peoples souls more, they would be more zealous for their good. Love is an
active thing, it will make one do and suffer much for the party beloved. A
mother loves her child, which makes all her pains with it light. One being asked
out of what book he got such fiery, Ex Libro Charitatis, buic uni studeo, ex
coque verba non inflantia, sed inflammantia depromo.
fervent Sermons, answered, I get them out of the Book of Love. This will make
us fervent in prayer for our people, and faithfully to discharge our duty, by
admonishing the wicked, comforting the afflicted, resolving their doubts,
sympathizing with them in their sorrows, and visiting them in their distresses,
as Esaias did Hezekiah in his sickness. 2 Kings 20 1. The false Prophets are
branded, for feeding themselves, but not the flock, the sick they did not heal,
nor bind up the broken. Ezekiel. 34.24. Much of the sins and errors of the times
lie at Ministers doors, and cold Ministers make bold sinners. Hence Christ
blames the Angels and Pastors of the Churches for the sins of the Churches,
Rev. 2. and 3. Our Apostysy makes others to apostatize, many begin like
thunder, but they end like smoke. We may say of many Ministers as they say of
Butter, it is gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night, or like
one Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, whom Pope Urban greets in the style of a
fervent Monk, a warm Abbot, a Lukewarm Bishop, and a key cold Archbishop. Cum
religiosus essem been spera^am de salute anim meae, Cardinalis factus, extimu^;
nunc ^ontifex creatus pene despero. V. a Lapide in number. 11.11.
Or like Pope Pius the Third, who was wont to say of himself, that the higher
he was raised, the worse he was.

2. It should be a matter of great lamentation to us, when we consider the
great Luke-warmness, and want of zeal that is amongst us; we may take up the
Prophets complaint, Ier. 9.3. there is no man valiant for the truth. If men can
save themselves they care not what becomes of Gods Paul's or service. Acts
18.14. There is indeed a great profession of Religion in the Land, but where,
oh where is the power! There is more light th^n formerly, but where is our
ancient heat? Ignis qui in parentitus fui^ calidus, in nobis lucid^s.
most are become like Pharaoh King of Egypt, who was nothing but a noise, Jer.
46.17. Nothing but words, he promised much, but performed nothing. So that our
Nation has lost it is former glory, piety is now turned into an empty show, and
those Ordinances which formerly converted many, now seem to have lost their
converting power. S. Peter at one Sermon converted three thousand, but we may
preach three thousand Sermons before we can convert one. After the world, how
furiously do men drive like John, as they would break their wheels in pieces;
they rise early and break their brains, they pant after the dust of the earth
Amos 2.7. and run themselves out of breath in pursuit of wordly things. Ahab is
sick for Naboth's Vineyard, and cannot sleep till he have it. Men are as hot as
fire for earth, but as cold as ice for heaven. So that it is not now the Kingdom
of Heaven that suffers violence, but the Kingdoms of the Eearth suffer
violence, and the violent take them by force. The voluptuous man follows his
pleasures with all his might, and gives his strength to women, Prove. 31.3. with
dangers and difficulties do they break through to obtain them, and what great
expenses to maintain their lusts. Herod can part with half his Kingdom to
please an harlot; yet had no zeal for the Ministry, but suffers John to be
beheaded, whose life was more worth then his whole Kingdom. The Ambitious man
how active is he for promotion, how does he ride and run for a little
preferm^nt? ^ cluster of honor is more esteemd by him then all the vintage of
Piety and Religion. The envious man, how full of siery indignation is he
against his adversaries. James 3.14. and 4.12. Galath. 5.20. The superstitious
man how zealous is he in his blind way? how does he compass Sea and Land to
make a proselite? what pilgrimages, whipping, cutting, lancing, selling
estates, and offering their very children unto Molech. See 12 Sorts of false
Zealots, Byfield on Col^s. 4 14. p. 194.
Ezekiel. 26.20, 21. they can part with thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of
Rivers of oil, and give the fruit of their body for the sin of their souls.
Micah. 6.7. The Israelits can freely part with their ornaments of gold and
silver to make a golden Calf. The Seducing Sectary, the white Devil that under
pretense of extraordinary sanctity practices all manner of iniquity, how
active is he to sow the Devils seed. As the Devil their Master, so these who
are his Factors, rage because their time's but short, Revel. 12.12. The Devils
themselves seem to be possessed of far worse Devils, and to act with greater fury
then formerly. The Sacrilegious-Church-robber, when the zeal for Gods house
should eat him up, Against these see Perkins on Jude ^ Vol. 3. p. 432. and 555.
such is his zeal, that it eats up Gods house. He devours Tithes, Glebe, all
that he can lay hands on, all is Fish that comes to his Net; It Is a World of
hurt that comes to the Church by impropriations, especially in the North parts,
in great Parishes to set up poor weak men and others, to receive all the
Revenues, this increases Popery in those parts. D. Sibbs Ser. on Heb. 11 30.
p. 82.
he thinks all is gain that he can get from the Minister. These are Latrons not
Patrous, not Church-pillars but Church-peelers. They should maintain the
Ministry, and they get Impropriations (a very proper Term for their improper
Tenure) into their hands. It Is true de facto, that the Tithes are sold, but quo
jure? what power had they to sell that which was devoted to the immediate
worship of God? Had there been a sufficient maintenance left for the Ministry,
they might the better have taken the remaining superfluity. But to take away a
Ministers necessary maintenance, and thereby to starve souls (for scandalous
means breeds scandalous Ministers) is the ready way to bring a curse on such
persons, and all they possess. It Is a snare to devour holy things. Prove. 20.25.
They that take the Lords possessions into their possession shall perish like
Oreb and Zeeb which lay like dung on the earth, Psalm 83. There Is a curse
attends such Thieves. Belshazar drunk but once in the Vessels of the Temple,
and it cost him both his Kingdom and his life to boot. There is no way (in my
opinion and experience) to uphold the Ministry of England, but by gaining
Impropriations out of the hands of private persons, and laying them to the
Church, to whom most properly they belong. We see how Augmentations fly and
fail, and if we should be put to live on the Peoples benevolence, it would soon
prove a malevolence. But of this I have spoken at large elsewhere. Others are
zealous but it is for sin, their tongues are set on fire of hell. V. Sal. Terra.
cap. 9.9.
Their heads are always plotting miscief, they cannot sleep till they have
done some evil ( Prove. 4.16.) as a zealous good man sleeps not till he has
done some good. Psalm. 132.4, 5, 6. His house was no house, and his rest no rest
to him, till he had finished Gods work. So the wicked man sleeps not till he
have brought his wicked devices to pass, and as the good man has his awaking
thoughts with God and goodness. Psalm. 139.18. So soon as ever I awake my
thoughts and meditations are with God: So the wicked man when he awakes, he is
still with sin; his waking-thoughts in the night are to do mischief in the
morning. Micah 2.1, 2. they hinder themselves from sleep that they may further
themselves in sin; the night is spent in plotting and contriving mischief, and
the day in accomplishing these plots. Thus night and day they follow the Trade
of sin, and so are justly styled workers of iniquity. Now as to be zealous in
goodness is the height of goodness, so to be active in wickedness is the height
of wickedness, when men shall sell themselves to sin, and work wickedness with
greediness. 1 Kings 21.20. and 2 Kings 17.17. Lastly, others are zealous
against zealous ones; they cannot endure to see any better then themselves. The
Scribes and Pharisees will not go to Heaven themselves, nor yet will they
endure that others should go. If Christ do but set his face toward Jerusalem,
the Samaritans will hate him. While Paul was a Persecutor, he met with no
persecution, but when he was converted and preached the Truth, then he is a
pestilent follew, and is mad. In other Religions the more zealous a man is, the
more he is esteemed, but amongst us the more zealous, the more hated. These
hate their best friends, for these zealous Elijahs are the Pillars of a Land,
the very Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel, the strength and ammunition of
the Land, that by their prayers and tears keep off many a Judgment. The wicked
fare the better for them every day, why is the heap of chaff kept from burning,
but because there is some wheat mixed with it; but if once the wheat were out,
the chaff should soon be set on fire. When once the number of Gods Elect is
accomplished the world shall not stand a moment. It Is just with God to take them
from us for our abusing them, we cast dirt, and God casts dust on them, many
great men are fallen of late in this our English Israel, nigh an hundred godly
Ministers are taken from us within the space of three years past, many of them
young and eminent for Piety; so that we this day are weakened both in Church and
State. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and Benjamin is not, all these things
are against us. This is and should be a Lamentation to us.

Now since there is such abundance of false fire and fein'd zeal in the world;
we had the more need to try our own. Some are mislead by a blind zeal. Romans
20.2. Others by an indiscreet zeal. Matthew. 26.51. Luke 9.52, 53 54. John 8.
ult. Others by an hyrocritical zeal, they pretend Religion, but they intend
their own enriching. So Demetrius pretended the preservation of Religion, when
indeed he intended his own silver Trade. Acts 19, 24.

1. True zeal is known by the Rise and Original of it. 1. If it be wrought in
our hearts by the Spirit of God; It must be ^ight quoad fontem and quoad finem.
we are not born zealous for God, his Truth and People, but by nature are full
of enmity to all these. Acts 9.1. Phil. 36. Paul in his natural state
persecutes the Church out of a blind zeal, many mistake the fire of their own
flints, and the fire of Hell for this celestial fire. But the Author of all
true zeal and Heavenly fire is the holy Spirit of God, which is often called
fire. Acts 2.3, 4. Matthew. 3.11. because like fire it inlightens, and heats our
cold and frozen hearts. Luke 24.32. A man that has fire in his bosom will
quickly be sensible of it. Prove. 6.27, 28. 2. It Is operative like fire, daily
burning up our lusts, purging out our dross, and working out our scumme. It Is
the true purgatory fire which all believers pass through Isay 4.4.

2. It springs from knowledge, as David first believed, and then spoke, so the
zealous man first knows Gods Will, and then is zealous in the prosecution of
it. Verus zelus non est sinevera cognitione. Rabies est non zelus sine vera
scientia. Rolloc.
Blind zeal is rather fury and madness, rashness and rudeness then zeal. It Is
celeris cursus extra viam. It Is like mettle in a blind Horse, which carries the
Rider into many dangers. Like a Ship without a Pilot, which runs it self on
many Rocks and Sands. Like wildfire in a Fools hand, or the Devil in the
Demoniack, which cast him, sometimes into the fire and anon into the water. The
Jews had a zeal after Legal Rites and Ceremonies, but 'twas a blind zeal: that,
But spoiled all, Romans 10.2. as without knowledge the mind is not good, so
neither is the man, nor his zeal. Prove. 19.2. as blind obedience is no
obedience, so blind zeal is not zeal. Such is the zeal of Papists and Sectaries.

3. It springs from a Love to Christ, this constrains us to do and suffer for
Christ. Dilectio Christi ^ita suos constringit, ut non possint non velle
extrema quaeque pro Christo perpeti. Aretius.
2 Cor. 5.14. As Christ loved us, and spent himself for us, so the sense of
this love being shed abroad in our hearts will make us to spend our selves for
him. This fire of Gods love to us will make us contemn all other fire.

4. When it springs from a Love and Compassion to our Brethren, when all our
admonishions and reproofs come from a spirit of love and tenderness, Ignis zelt
ardeat olco misericordiae.
and are mixed with meekness and mourning, this is true zeal. Thus Samuel
(1.16.) tells Saul plainly and sharply of his sin, yet mourns for his person.
Lot reproves the Sodomites for their wickedness, yet calls them Brethren. Genesis
19.7. Christ was angry at the sin, yet mourned for the sinners. Mark 3.5. So
does Paul. 2 Cor. 12.22. Hot and moist is the best temper, both in nature and
grace. When men rave and rage, and are full of bitterness, then Satan casts out
Satan, and they do more hurt then good. These hate the sinner and not the sin,
when the good man is merciful to the sinner, but cruel and unmerciful to the
sin.

2. True zeal is known by its End: Bonitas Theol^gica pendet a sine.
viz. Gods glory. It can be content to decrease, so Gods, honor may increase.
John 3.30. As true zeal comes from God, so it is for God and his glory, and not
for self. The hypocrite may seem very zealous, but it is for his own ends, like
the Sheca^ites that would be cirumcised, that they might get cattle. Genesis
34.33. Iehu did an act that for the matter was good, but his selfish,
Vainglorious ends marred all, and made it murder. Hosea 1.4.

3. By the properties and effects of it, which are five. 1. It increases by
opposition. Like Fountain Water, it is hottest in the coldest weather. As water
cast on lime. (by an Antiperistasis) burns more fiercely. The more the wicked
oppose Gods Law, the more David loves it. Psalm. 119.126. If Michol mock David
for dancing before the Ark, he will resolve to be yet more vile. 2 Samuel 6.22. True
zeal over-looks and over-leaps all lets and impediments, difficulties are but
whet-stones to fortitude. Heroic spirits know not what discouragements mean.
Many waters of opposition cannot quench this ardent love, but intend it rather.
Cant. 8.6, 7. As we see in Jacob, (Genesis 32.24, 25, 26.) and the Woman of
Canaan. Amor nescit difficultates.
Tell Caleb, there are Anakims, and he will say, lets go up courageously against
them. Numb. 13.30. Tell Paul of bonds, why he fears not death. Hypocrites make
a great show till they meet with oppositions, and then like snailes they pull
in their horns.

2. It will make us abound in duty, if there be the fire of zeal within, there
will be a flame of a holy Conversation without; love, especially zealous love
is bountiful, it thinks it can never do enough for God, he is glad he has any
thing of worth to lose for him, and resolves with the Martyr, Zelus est
intensus gradus purae affectionis.
if he had as many lives to lose as he has hairs on his head, and as much
blood to venture as there is water in the Sea, it should all go for Christ.
They are ready to act to their power, yea, and beyond their power. 2 Cor. 8.3.
Zeal is a very high and intensive heat of all the affections, it makes us burn
in our love to God, in our desires after him, Zelum qui habent omnes sibi
inimicos suos putant qui sunt hosts Dei, quamvis patrem, fratres, socios,
Ambros. in ^sal. 118.
our joy in him, our fear to offend him, our indignation against all that speak
or do any thing against him, or his. Psalm. 139.21. Ier. 13.9, 10. It Is not so
much any one Affection, as the intensive Degree of all, when they are all
improved to the utmost for the furtherance of Gods glory, and the good of his
People. A zealous man is a man of mettle and spirit, he is all life and
activity. It Is the very formalis ratio, the quintescence of zeal, to be intense
and increased to the utmost, It Is not every degree of Affection, for a
formalist may have some cold Vellieties and Lukewarm desires, and a carnal man
may have some joy and fear. But zeal is another thing; it is a boiling over
again with extremity of heat. It Is sacra ebullitio, a holy heat, and rising of
the heart against sin. It makes a man fervent, (...) a (...), ferveo, bullio.
or seething hot against sin. Romans 12.11. Water may be hot in some measure and
yet not sees, seething hot is the highest degree of heat. But the Hypocrite is
afraid of being too zealous and active for God; whereas we can never be too
zealous in that we know to be good in it self, and good for us to do. We cannot
exceed in our love to God, nor in our obedience to him. No virtue in its formal
reason can be too much intended; In eo non potest esse nimium, in quo debet
esse maximum.
a man cannot be nimis liberalis, tho he may be nimius in largitione. Keep the
horse under the bridle, and in the right way; and keep the stream within its
banks, let it run in a right channel, and then the stronger the better.

3. It will make us sharp and severe against our own sins, but pitiful and
compassionate to others. As charity so zeal begins at home, no man can speak so
sharply against him, as he does against himself; though others may excuse him,
yet he will not excuse himself* 2 Samuel 24.10. But the Hypocrite he is parcus sibi,
severus aliis. High and harsh in his censures of others, but indulgent to
himself. Matthew. 7.4. the worst men are usually the greatest censurers. Acts
28.4.

4. It makes a man more zealous in great matters then in lesser. In great
causes, he shows great zeal, and in lesser causes, lesser zeal. He calls not
for a Sword to kill a Flea, nor for an Axe to crack an Egg. Ne scutica dignum
horribili sectere flagello. Horat. l. 1. Sac. 3.
He well knows that the same fire is not requisite for the roasting of an Egg,
as is for the roasting of an Ox. But the Hypocrite he is magnus in minimis, he is
fiery in small matters, and cold in weighty ones. With Saul he kills the lean,
but spares the fat. And with the Pharisees, he Tithes Mint and Cummin, but
neglects obedience in the great things of the Law. Matthew. 23.23.

5. He Is more zealous in Gods cause then in his own. Moses, how meek and quiet
in his own cause. Numb. 12.3. Yet how hot in Gods. Exodus 32.9.19.27. Hezekiah
mourns more for Senacherib's blasphemy, then for the Sword that was drawn
against himself. 2 Kings 19.3, 4.16. David when himself was persecuted became
as a deaf man, but when Gods Law is transgressed his zeal consumes him, and
rivers of tears run down his eyes. Christ himself in his own sufferings was as
a Sheep before the Shearer dumb, but when Gods house is profaned, he does not
only by words, but blows drive them out with an holy violence. Nehemiah, how
silent when himself was reproached, but when Gods Sabbaths are profaned he
contends even with Nobles about it. Joshua (7.8.) is more tender over Gods
Name, then his own: he does not say, what shall our names, estates and lives
do, but what will thou do for thy own name? The Church of Ephesus could bear
any suffering, but not sin. Rev. 2.2. But the hypocrite is hot in his own case,
and key-cold in Gods, let any wrong him, or rob him, he is all on a flame, but
let Gods Name, Sabbaths, Servants be wronged, he cares for no such things.

4. True zeal may be known by it is concomitants and companions, which are 4.1.
It Is ever attended with wisdom and discretion. It Is not a rash ungrounded
zeal, but a wise, sober, well-grounded fervor. As a good dish may be spoiled
in the dressing, so a good reproof for want of observing due circumstances of
persons, time and place, may loose it is due operation. Hence Solomon commends a
word that is spoken, Beophman, super rotis suis, running on the wheels of all
due circumstances. Psalm. 25.11. Fire on the hearth is good, but fire in the top
of the house is dangerous. Love allows us to be warm and plain, but not
scalding hot in our reproofs. A well-ordred zeal will teach a Nathan to catch a
David in a parable.

Caut. Yet must we beware least under pretense of discretion we destroy zeal,
of which see more in the Objections.

2. It keeps the bounds of its calling. It dares do nothing without a call from
God. Simeon and Levi were good men, and the cause was good, but the prosecution
of it was ill, for they assumed the Magistrates power without a call. Genesis 3.4.
Excessive heat, or excessive cold is poysen.

3. He loves to see, and to make others zealous. It Is the nature of fire to
multiply, one living^coal kindles another, zealous Abraham will not keep his
goodness to himself, but he will communicate it to his family. So Moses, Numb.
11.29. and Paul Acts 26.29.

4. It Is of a growing nature, we must grow in zeal as well as in other graces.
Ignis charitatu semper aerdere debet in Altari cordis; G^eg.
A grain of mustard seed though it be little, yet it is lively. Fire on the
Altar might not be suffered to go out. Levit. 6.13. As natural strength, so
this is increased by exercise. To him that has true zeal shall be given more.

Lastly, this must quicken us all to an holy zeal and emulation in well-doing.
Most men seek to excel their Neighbors in riches, fine houses, fine fare, but
who labors to excel in virtue? The living God delights not in dead hearts,
dead spirits become not his servants; cold wishes, and faint desires please not
him, we must be active and stirring, if we desire that God should be with us;
for our God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Who should be
zealous and active for God if we be not? as Nehemiah said in another case, (
Neh. 6.11.) Should such a one as I fly? I that am under such special promises,
special protection, special providence, should I dishonor my profession and
in a fearful manner fly? so should such as we be cold and dead who live upon
the bread of life, and drink the water of life, who have lively Oracles, and
lively Ordinances, and all means to make us lively? Let us therefore do what
we do with all our might, as David did when he danced before the Ark. 2 Samuel
6.14. Let us oppose sin with all our might, Preach, Pray, and praise God with
all our might. Judge 5.12. Psalm. 103.23. Romans 12.11. We should burn and boil up
in our spirits in duty. By this means we shall prevent abundance of dangerous
temptations which seize on Lukewarm professors. When Honey is cold, every Fly
and Wasp robs us of it, but when it is boiling and scalding hot, they dare not
come near it. When men are cold, and indifferent in Religion, every Sectary and
Seducer (which are the Devils, Flies, and Emissaries) makes a prey of us, but
when we are hot and resolute, we dis-hearten them in their attempts, and dismay
that great Beelzebub the Prince of these Flies. Let therefore this salt season
all our services. Christ calls for such Worshipps. Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39.
Christianity is a work of activity, we must ask, seek, knock, strive, wrestle,
run, and work out our salvation with the greatest accuratness, Non dicit (...)
operamini, sed (...) accurate magnoque cum studio operamini. cum multa
diligentia and solicitudine pergite vestram operari salutem; operari enim hic
non inchoatum ( ante enim coeperant been operari. c. 1. v. 6.) sed continuatum
significat. a Lapide.
care and diligence. Philip. 2.12. We must not rest content with the beginnings
of grace, but we must work it up, and increase with the increasings of God.
Colos. 2.19. We must be filled with the Spirit and with the fire of zeal, we
must have fiery-heads, and fiery-hearts, fiery words, and fiery works, that
(what in us lies) we may set the whole world on fire with the love of Christ.
If we be to hear the Word, we should be swift to hear, and gladly embrace the
opportunity, flying as the clouds and flocking as the Doves to their windows.
When we come to the Sacrament, we must earnestly desire it as Christ did. Luke
22.15. With a desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you. (...),
desiderio desideravi, (i.) summopre desideravi. Est Hebraismus.
( i.) I have earnestly and heartily desired it. Hezekiah kept the Passover
with joy. 2 Chronicles. 30. If we be called to Covenant with God, we must do it with
joy, and with all our hearts, as Asa and the people did. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 15. If
we be to Pray, it must be fervent, operative, energetical praying. James 5.16.
We must strive in our prayers. Romans 15.30. and stir up our selves, that we may
lay hold on God. Cant. 3.4. Isai. 27.5. and 647. That Is the way to have peace
with him. When we see a man angry, those that are friends lay hold on him to
prevent a danger: so when we see God angry with his People, we should compass
God about like an Army, one lay hold on him, and another lay hold on him till
he be pacified with his people. But then we must be holy men, else if a Rebel
or Traitor should come to the Princes Chamber, and lay hold on him, it would be
accounted Treason, before we come to reason with God, we must wash our selves,
and then come and welcome. Isai. 1.16, 17, 18. We must get a spiritual
induration and holy impudency, let God do what he will with us, let him oppose,
delay, deny us, yet we will not let him go till he bless us. As Pharaoh had a
cursed Induration, and a plerophory of hardness, so that no plagues could work
on him; so we should get a blessed induration and fullness of assurance,
resolving though God should crush and kill us, yet that we will trust in him.
Job 13.15. And when we find our spirits flat then cry, because thou can not
cry; and be in an agony, because thou can not be agonized. Formality in duty
is the bane of duty and Religion. There Is little difference between a careless
performance of duties, and a total omission of them, since men loose both
ways. Let us then rouse up our selves, remembering that the more zealous any
are here, the more glorious they shall be hereafter. Let us all in our several
callings be active for God. Let Magistrates and Rulers rule for him, as
Nehemiah did. Let them not bear the sword in vain, nor tolerate such things as
are intolerable. There Is no Precept or President in the whole Book of God for
any Toleration of one Error, much less of all; but promises that God will give
us one heart, and one way. If Magistrates suffer Gods Name to be despised, he will
make them to be despised. 1 Samuel 2.30. Ahab lost his life for not punishing
blasphemous Benhadad with death. 1 Kings 20.42. I Plead not for Cruelty, Vide
Cobbet for Magistracy. p. 86, etc.
but Justice; as Magistrates must be clement and merciful when occasion
requires, so they must be just and sharp against incorrigible and incurable
offenders. If Abishai out of love to David would have slain Shim^i, who reviled
him, saying, Why should this dead dog curse my Lord the King, let me go to
take off his head, 2 Samuel 16.9. and shall the Magistrate be silent when the
King of Kings is blasphemed and reviled to his face? if men will still bear
with such, yet God will not.

Objection, If we punish them we shall loose a party.

Answer, Such a party (as I now speak against) are better lost then found.
They cannot long prosper with them who ever has them. But by punishing such we
shall make God our friend, who has promised to defend those that defend his
Truth: They are false Worshippers, and not true ones that destroy a people,
H^seah 8.5. Thy Calfe has cast thee off. They had cast off God, and now the
Cal^ casts off them
We have a notable instance in the City of Geneva, which from the beginning of
the Reformation to this day have punished Sectaries and Heretics, and yet God
has kept them safe and sound. Many create to themselves needless fears.

2. Governors of Families should be zealous against sin in all their
Relations; hate it in father, mother, wife, children. Asa punishes his own
mother for her idolatry, 2 Chronicles 15.16. The Lord takes notice what every
man does in his Family, he observes who prays, who reads, who supresseth sin
in his Family, who acts for him, and who for themselves, Mal. 3.16. Our zeal is
the best thing we have, and therefore to be given to God who is the best of
beings. But yet there is nothing that the world so much opposes as zeal; the
Devil and his Agents can bear with any man save the zealous man. The Hypocrite,
Formalist, Civilian, Temporizer, etc. All pass through the world with praise.
It Is only these Zelots that oppose the sins of the time which are counted the
troublers of the places where they come, though they be never so peaceable. To
discourage men from this course the world has raised many Cavils.

1. Objection, I am but one, and what good will my zeal do?

Answer, One zealous man may, yea, and has done much good to a whole Land. One
Phinees by executing Justice turned away Gods wrath from all Israel, Numbers
25.6, 7, 11. One faithful Hushai by his Counsel spoiled Achitophels policy, 1
Samuel 17.14. One poor man saved a City, Eccles. 9.15. and the Prayers of One
righteous man avails much, James 5.16. When Gods judgments were falling on
Jerusalem, he sought but for a man that he might spare it, Jeremiah 5.2. A
carnal man dares not stir without company, especially the company of great
ones, they enquire whether any of the Rulers and learned Pharisees have gone
that way, John 7.47. Jades will not go unless some lead them the way; and
Cowards stand still to see who will go first, but a gracious soul is content to
fit alone, Lam. 3.28. and go alone in the way to Heaven, 1 Kings 19.10. He
stays not for company, but if the cause be good, rather then it shall fall, he
will endeavor to uphold it himself. Hester will venture all for Gods people,
and if she must perish, she will perish in this cause. Let nothing discourage
you, if God have called thee to a good work and none will join with thee in
it, yet remember he that called thee alone will bless thee, Isaiah 51.2.

1. Objection, I am but a woman, the weaker Vessel, and therefore my zeal can
do but little good.

Answer, Yet thou may do somewhat for God; we read in Scripture what great
things God has done by women, Deborah and Iael two excellent women. The one
ruled with an Heroic Spirit, the other killed Sisera a valiant Commander,
Judges 4.4, 5.22. The woman of Abel by her prudence saved the City, 2 Samuel
20.16.22. Abigail by her wisdom preserved her husband and family from an
imminent danger. The Shunamite that great good woman stirred up her husband to
entertain Elisha to the great benefit of her family, and Hester was a means to
save the Jews from ruin. God loves to hang the greatest weights on the
weakest wyres, and to do great things by weak Instruments, that his Name may
have all the Glory.

3. Objection, It is good to be discreet and wise in what we do.

Answer, Discretion does not hinder but further our zeal, it does not diminish
it, but directs it; and therefore they are not to be Opposed, but Composed and
made subservient to each other. Prudence does not abate our Diligence, but
guides it in its work, it teaches us not to do less, but to do better.
Thus there is an Harmony amongst the Graces, and we may in no wise set them at
variance amongst themselves. Yet it is the property of the men of the world to
accuse Gods faithful ministers (who tell them discreetly and zealously of their
sins) for rash, heady men, and such as want discretion..

Thus when Bishop Latimer Sermon before K. Edward 6. p. 101.102. edit. ult.
Latimer reproved the sins of the Court, they would accuse him for lack of
discretion. It rejoices me (says he) when my Friend tells me that they
find fault with my indiscretion, for by likelihood the Doctrine is true; for
if they could find fault with my Doctrine, they would not charge me with lack
of discretion, etc.

4. Objection, It is good to be moderate, Virtue consists in a mean.

Answer, Moderation in our own causes and quarrels does well, Phil. 4.5. But
moderation and indifferency in Gods Cause is not moderation, but luke-warmness
and coldness, which God abhors; and if wicked men will not content
themselves with moderation in pursuit of their lusts and Idols, Ier. 8.2. but
will spend their estates, lavish Gold out of the bag upon them, Isay 46.6.
shall not we in an holy prodigality spend our selves and what we have from God
for his honor?

It Is true in Moral Virtues which are circa res medias, the mean is best. But
Religion admits of no mediocrity. e. g. our love to God, and our hatred against
sin can never be too intense. Yea, no Virtue in its formal Reason can be too
much intended nor admit of an excess: that man that says he has zeal enough,
had never any true zeal at all. The Apostle says its good to be zealous in a
good thing, and is not zeal then best in the best things? and are there any
things better then God, his Truth, Worship, People? Is it good to be earnest
for a friend, and is it not much better to be zealous for God? The things we
strive for are so Excellent that no zeal can be too much. It Is for a Kingdom,
for an Heavenly Kingdom, it is for Christ for grace and glory; and if thou
can find any thing in the world that better deserves thy zeal, let it have
it.

5. Objection, The Apostle would have Timothy to be gentle, 2 Timothy, 2.24.

Answer, True, for he was employed amongst the Gentiles who were newly
converted to the Faith, and therefore must be wisely and gently handled, such
bruised Reeds must not be broken, but when men are obstinate they must be
rebuked with all authority, Titus 2.15.

6. Observation, If we be thus zealous we may loose all.

Answer, True, and yet be no loosers neither. The Martyrs lost all and yet were
gainers. God will make up your losses in a better kind, Matthew. 10.37. Let us do
our duty, and commit the success to God. Many like Ammaziah could be content to
do Gods Will, but they are afraid of looseing some hundreds of Talents by it,
but the Prophets answer may satisfy us. The Lord is able to give thee much
more then that, 2 Cor. 25.9.

7. Observation, I may bring pain and sorrow on my self by my forwardness.

Answer, Thou may bring greater sorrow on thy self by thy backwardness.

2. We see what pain men will endure to preserve a Natural life, and shall we
endure nothing for our spiritual life?

3. God will assist thee, and in the multitude of thy perplexities he will
delight thy soul, Psalm 94.19.

8. Observation, The world will think us mad and out of our wits if we thus
oppose their sinful counsels.

Answer, This is no new thing, Christ himself was called mad, and they said
that he had a Devil, Mark 3.21. the Disciple is not above his Master.

[But of this see more in 2 Timothy 3.9.

9. Observation, I am of a dull and heavy constitution, and therefore it cannot
be expected that I should be so hot as others.

Answer, See how it is with thee in other things, art full of life, spirit and
activity for profits and pleasures; and yet have thou no mettle nor life for
God and his worship? certainly the fault is not in thy cold constituti^n, but
in thy wretched corruption; where thou love thou have heat enough. Let a man
touch the coldest of you in your gains, pleasures, reputations, and you have
heat more then enough* only Gods honor lies unregarded by you.

2. Suppose thou art of a sad and heavy constitution, Gratia non tollit, sed
attollit naturam.
yet Grace is above Nature, it rayseth and rectifieth it. It Is like gold in the
Mine which turns every thing into the nature of it. Hence the Spirit of Grace
is compared to Oil which is a Royal liquor and will be above all.

Now to quicken you, take these Considerations and Motives.

1. Consider this is no Arbitrary or indifferent thing, but it is that which God
has often commanded, That we should love him with all our strength. ( i.)
zealously and sincerely, Deuteronomy. 6.5. and do what we do with all our might,
Eccles. 9.10. Romans 12.11. Striving and earnestly contending for the faith,
Jude. 3. The compound implies an ardent and vehement defense of the Truth, It
is not (...), but (...), supercertaris. (...) super, notata ingens; acre,
continuum certandi studium* significat strenuum, and quasi super Vires
certamen, instar athlet arum qui in agon^ suas vires and seipsos quasi
transcendunt dum de vita agitur. a Lap.
we must contend for it with our utmost strength. Truth is a precious Jewel,
and heavenly Treasure which we must labor to preserve unto Posterity. One
grain of it is of more worth then all the world. Malim ut pereat totus mundus
quam veritatis mica, said Luther. Little deviations from the Truth must not be
suffered, least they increase to greater, as thin exhalations turn into thick
clouds, and little sparks make great fires. God will not have his least
commandments contemned, For zeal to Gods Word and Worship. See Doctot Burges
his Tract. of Zeal. Chap. 3. p. 27, etc.
Matthew. 5.19. Hence Christ commands us not only to destroy Vulpes, sed Vul
peculas; even the little Foxes, that hurt his Vine, Cant. 2.15. But we are not
put to contend pro tricis and terminis, for the outworks of Religion, but for
the Fundamentals, and for the whole possession. We must contend with Papists
about our Justification, with Arminians about our Election, Talia Zizani a non
sunt toleranda in agro Domini maledictum silentium quod hi^ connivet. Luther.
with Antimonians for the Law, with Socinians for the Gospel, and with the
Antiscripturists for all. 2. The Lord commends this in his servants, he has
recorded the zeal of Moses, Phinees, Paul, Apollos, etc. to their everlasting
praise, they are the Apple of his Eye, which is Oculus Oculi, the glory of the
Eye, Zach. 2.8. They are his jewels, he counts himself honored and adorned by
such, and therefore he calls them his glory, Isay 4.5. These glorify God on
earth, and therefore we will glorify them with himself, John 15.8. and 17.4.5.
God has more glory from his little zealous flock then from all the world
besides. Hence he so much glories in him, Job 2, 3. Acts 13.22. 3. He Rewards
it where ever he finds it; Phinees for his zealous execution of Justice was
blessed both he and his posterity, Numb. 15.11, 12, 13. Levi for his zeal in
vindicating Gods Honor was exalted to the Priesthood, Exodus 32.29. Deuteronomy. 33.8,
9, 10. Zabulum and Napthali that ventured their lives in Gods cause, Judge
5.18. God remembers the kindness and rewards it many years after, in sending
Christ to preach the Gospel first to them, Matthew. 4.13.14. yea so greatly is
the Lord delighted with zeal that Iehu his Hypocritical zeal went not
unrewarded, 2 King. 10.30. 4. It graceth all our graces, and is the Honor of
our honors. All Grace without this is nothing, V. My Schools Guard Rule.
Dead Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, are of no esteem with God: dead Prayer is
not Prayer. As under the Law no sacrifice was acceptable without fire; so no
duty now is acceptable without the fire of zeal. 5. Christ has paid best for
our zeal. The fair price that he paid to Redeem us, the same precious blood he
gave to purchase us to himself a zealous and peculiar people, Titus 2.14. If
any have paid dearer for it, or can show better Title to it, let him take it.
6. Our zeal does denominate us that we are, that we are zealous for. It Is true,
we may love the creature but it must be with a subordinate and inferior love:
but our zeal which is the cream of our affections must be given only to God.
It Is a glory which he will not suffer to be given to another. 7. Our zeal may
provoke others, the Corinthians zeal provoked many, 2 Cor. 9.12. When the
Lovesick Church began to commend Christ, Cant. 5. ult. This is my friend, and
this is my Beloved, in the very next Chapter 6.1. Others begin to inquire,
Where is thy Beloved, that we may seek him with thee. 8. Such help to save a
Land from ruin: One zealous Moses kept off judgment from Israel, Psalm
106.23. One zealous Phinees stays the Plague. One zealous innocent man may
save an Island. Job 22. ult. 9. This makes a man to excel, we are all by Nature
of one blood, it is Holy zeal that makes the difference. This makes the
Righteous to excel his Neighbor ( Prove. 12.26.) both in life and death one of
these Pearls surpasses ten thousand peebles; as one living creature excels a
thousand dead ones. These are called lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. 1. They are
stones in respect of stability and solidness, they stir not from their
principles, but are an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. 2. Lively, because
of their Zeal and Activity, they are prompt and ready for every good work, 2
Timothy 2.21. Their spirits are raised to the highest excellencies, and so are
capable of the high stactings. They live the life of God, Ephesians, 4.18. or
a godly life, because it is from God as the Author, it is according to God as
the pattern, and it tends to God as the end. Others may do well, but the
zealous man excels them all. Hence he is called in Scripture not Adam, a common
man, but Ish quasi Esh a man of fire, heat and courage; a man of spirit, life,
activity, a man of men, an excellent man fitted to honor God, and rule others.
10. You will have no cause to repent of this zeal; yea if the saints in Heaven
were capable of sorrow, they would grieve for nothing so much as that they had
not done more for God in their generation. How many have repented of their
superstitious, carnal zeal, as Cardinal Woolsy sometimes did, Had I served God
as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have given me over in my
gray hairs, but this is my just reward for serving men before God. 11, There is
an absolute necessity of it in respect of the many enemies that oppose us. So
soon as ever a man begins to look toward Heaven, he must look for Giants and
sons of Anak to oppose him. We have the Devil above us with all his methods,
Ephesians. 6.11. depths, Rev. 2.24. Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. The world about us, with
all its baits and snares; and an evil heart within us ready to betray us into
the hands of our enemies. So that unless we be resolute, violent men we shall
never get Heaven, Matthew. 11.12. it is not the lazy, somnolent Christian, but the
active and the violent that take Heaven by force. 12. All thy gifts and parts
without zeal to improve them, become useless. A Stag or Heart that has great
strength and horns, yet does little with them for want of courage. As a bird
without wings, a body without a soul, and salt without savor, so is a man
without zeal; like Ieremiahs rotten girdle that was good for nothing Ier. 13.7.
Zeal is to the soul that which spirits are to the body, and wine to the
Spirits, it puts activity and quickening in us. It Is as wheels to the Chariot
which make us run the ways of Gods Commandments; as courage to a soldier, as
mettle to the horse, and as manure to the ground which makes it abound in
fruitfulness. Now that you may get and keep this Gace we must shun those
Quench^coals which extinguish this holy fire in us.
1. The first is the retaining of any one bosom beloved sin, be it Pride,
Idleness, Formality, Covetousness; either thy zeal must destroy thy sin, or thy
sin will destroy thy zeal. Zealous affections are the wings of the soul, but
sin like bird-lime intangles them that they cannot fly Heavenward. They are
the feet of the soul, but sin like fetters hinders us from running. They are
the fire of the soul; but sin like water quenches this fire. We must resolve
therefore against all sin if ever we would have the Spirit of zeal to dwell in
us.

2. Take heed of the inordinate love of the world. These thorns will choke our
zeal, and this outward heat extracts and consumes our inward. Cast earth upon
fire and you put it out; Demas and Judas the love of the world drew them off;
we must get our affections loosened from the world, and use it as though we
used it not. Use it we may as the Traveller does his Staff, but love it
inordinately we may not, unless we will renounce the Love of God, 1 John 2.15.
Our love cannot stand in intense degrees to two such contrary Masters.

3. Evil company is a great extinguisher of this Holy Fire, scarce any thing
more. Hence zealous David commands evil company to depart, Psalm 119.115. We
must therefore be very choice of our company for it has great operation upon
us either to good or evil. As iron sharpens iron, and one edged tool helps to
sharpen another; so God has ordained the society of men to quicken men.
Conference and communication of experiences has incredible profit in all
Sciences. Hence the Saints that lived in dead times did by conference excite
and quicken each other in the ways of God. Mal. 3.16, 17

4. Formality in Religion is a great enemy to zeal, When men rest in a bare
performance of duties without any power of godlyness, this is the Sea notes on
2 Timothy 3.5.
bane of Religion: when ever we come to duties we should stir up the graces of
Gods Spirit in us, 2 Timothy 1.7. If fire be not blown and stirred up, it will
decay and go out. We must also daily be adding fuel to it, for where there is
no fuel the fire goes out, Proverbs 26.20. Pray much, men of much Prayer have
been men of much zeal, as we see in David, Daniel, Paul, Bradford. Frequent the
Preaching of the Word. Accede ad hunc ignem, there is a hidden Virtue in this
Ordinance to kindle this fire in our breasts, which makes the Devil so busy
in drawing men to separation, for he well knows by long experience that if he
can but get men out of Gods way they will soon decay in grace; the body may
as soon live without food as the soul can live without this bread of Life.

[If any would see more, let him peruse D. Corn. Burgess Treatise of Zeal.
Master Henry Hall's Sermon on Matthew 11.12. and Master Loves 4. Sermon on
Matthew 11.12. Master Fenner on the Affections Sermon, the ninth, tenth,
eleventh, Hildersham on John 4.32. Lect. 56. Doctor Sibbs Beams of Light,
Sermon on Matthew 11.12. Master Ash his Sermon of Zeal.

5. Observe.

Ministers must take all occasions to preach the Word. They must preach on the
Lords Day, and on the week day, in public and private, at home and abroad, In
prosperity and adversity, In War and Peace, In Prisons and Palaces. We must not
be Strawberry-Preachers (as Bishop Latimer calls them) which come but once a
year and are quickly gone again. Not long since the Church was troubled with
Canon-Preachers, who preached according to the Canon once a month, or once a
day; instead of these we have State-Preachers who preach such stuff for
quality as may please the State; and so much for quantity as will bring in
their Angmentations, no Catechizing of the flock, no preaching on the week day
unless Angels or Nobles call them. No baptizing of Infants, no fitting of the
flock for the Lords Supper, but all lies at random and in confusion; surely
such Halving-Preachers should have half-pay. Does not he that commands us to
Preach command us to Baptize also, and to dispense the Lords Supper often.
Surely, this is either not Scripture, or else some of us do not do our duty.
Let us therefore either do our duty, or else cast off our Ministry, and give
place to such as will. As the woman said to the King, either do me justice and
act as a King, or else put off the Title: so either let us do the whole work of
our Ministry, or put off the Name. For nomen inane, crimen immane.

Let us preach in season and out of season, so did our Savior; he took all
occasions to preach; sometimes he preached in the Synagogues, anon in a
Mountain. See Dr. Harris on that Text. p. 99. folio.
Matthew. 5.1. sometimes in a ship Luke 5.3. and anon in a desert, Luke 4.42.
when the heart is willing it will find out opportunites of doing good. So Paul
preaches in Synagogues, in Houses, by a Rivers side Act. 16.13. in prison
Philem. 9. and on other occasions. We are Gods Husbandmen and in the morning we
must sow our seed, and in the Evening not be idle, for some may prosper: when
we consider the great price that was paid for souls ( Acts 20.28.) it must
quicken us to redeem all opportunities to gain them to Christ. Love is active,
but lazy persons; have a thousand excuses, either their bodies are unable, the
place unfit, the company inconvenient, etc. Many Lions ly in the way of the
sluggard, but willing minds know no difficulties.

6. Observe,

We are exceeding backward to the best things, and have need of many
admonitions and exhortations in season and out of season to quicken us in Gods
work. It Is much ado to make us begin, and when we have begun, we are ready to
look back on every discouragement. Were there in us that Tractableness and
teachableness which ought to be, how easily might Ministers lead us in good
paths.

It Is prophesied of Gospel times that so meek and teachable men shall be, that
even a child with Scripture reason shall lead them, Isay 11.6. A wicked man,
though you bring an hundred plain Scriptures yet he will not be convinced; but
a gracious soul if he have but a little hint from Scripture, that what he holds
or does is displeasing to God, he presently casts it off. We should therefore
lament the sad depravation of our Natures that have need of so much quickening
to the best things. Many wonder why we are so fervent and frequent in reproofs,
why our necessity requires it, and God in this Text injoynes it. Many love us
whilst we comfort them, but when we come to cutting, reproving and launcing
their soars, then they look upon us as enemies. [See more before on 2 Timothy
3.16.]

7. Observe,

Application must be joined to Doctrine. The Foundation and the building must
go together; for a foundation without a building argues the folly of him that
laid it; and a building without a Foundation will soon fall. It Is not
sufficient that by sound Doctrine we inform the judgment, but by Application
we must work it on the Affections.

This is the very life of Preaching Doctrine is the whole loaf (as 'twere) but
Application is the dividing the word aright, and distributing thereof to every
one according to their several conditions. For these very ends and uses God
has given us his word, 2 Timothy 3.16.

VERSE. 3, 4. For the time will come, that they will not endure sound Doctrine,
but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching ears. 4. And they shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and
shall be turned to Fables.
IN these words we have an Apostolical Prophecy of the petulancy and peril of
the last times, when men will grow weary of sound Doctrine, and fall to the
embracing of fabulous and vain opinions instead of truth. The words are to be
considered Relatively, as depending on the precedent Verses, and so they
contain in them a Reason of the Apostles solmemne Adjuration, by which he
stireth up Timothy to a careful discharge of his Duty in Preaching the word,
viz. in respect of the Apostasy of the last times when many would fall from the
truth, grow weary of sound Doctrine, and follow fables: where we have:

1. The grounds of their Apostasy, viz. their hatred of the Truth, they will
not endure sound Doctrine, ( id est) they will Rejicient. Aethiop. Verse.
reject it and cast it behind their backs, they hate and abhor it: It Is a
Meiosis where less is spoken then is meant.

They look upon it as a grievous burden, as Israel did upon the Doctrine and
Visions of the Prophets, Jeremiah 13.34.36. It Is not so much they cannot, but
they will not endure sound Doctrine, they love their lusts above the Law, and
therefore they hate him that reproves in the gates.

They are so far from obeying it, that they will not once hear it, and so far
from loving it, that they will not so much as It Is not (...), substineo, as the
Vulgar; but (...) tolero. Beza.
Tolerate it. Errors they can tolerate, and superstition they can tolerate,
but the Truth they cannot bear.

By sound Doctrine, is meant the pure Word of God which has no Error nor evil
mixed with it, Ea quae vitam exigit ad Evangelii ^mussim. Grotius.
but is sound in se, and sound Effective. It shows unto men their sin which
is the Souls sickness, brings them to a Savior, and so makes the conscience
sound and whole.

This is called Saving Doctrine and sound Wisdom ( Proverbs 2.7. and 3.21.)
and is opposed to Fables and Humane inventions by which the simplicity of the
Gospel is corrupted. Sana Doctrina ea est quae vera. and sincera est, and
salutem affert, quae Deum habet Authorem and refertur ad Glo^iam Dei.


2. A second ground of their Apostasy is their delight in false Teachers;
(...), acumulo, acervatim aggero.
they so dote on them, that one or two will not content them, they must have
heaps of them. They love their lusts, and therefore they seek out for such
Teachers as may not disquiet them. Such as err cannot rest, but they must run
from one Teacher to another, they get heaps of such claw-backs to themselves. (
i.) They wittingly and willingly suffer themselves to be deluded by them.
Asciscunt sibi Doctores qui aures sculpant, non qui rodant mardaci vero.
Sasbout in Locum.
The word sinifies, 1. An earnest desire of getting such Teachers. 2. It notes
an indiscreet and confused gathering together of such a multitude of Teachers
without wit or reason, without any respect either to their life or learning; as
in an heap all is confused, there is neither first nor last, head nor tail, but
all is mixed together; so amongst these confused persons all is confused, Sine
judicio as temere colligunt Doctores suos. Aretius.
there is no Master, and Scholars, superior and inferior, but all are levelled
and equal like themselves, hence they are said to heap to themselves Teachers.
The Disciples create their Doctors ( and talis creatio fit ex nihilo) they be
not chosen and ordained in an orderly way; but (which is the height of
baseness) the lusts of their followers are their call. One loves Antinomianism,
and he gets an heap of Antinomians to speak to him. Another loves Quakerism,
and he gets an heap of Quakers to scratch his itch. Thus according to men's
corrupt humors they have their Teachers. As the Lord complained of his people.
Ier. 2.28. According to the number of Cities thy are thy Gods O Judah. So
according to the variety of men's lusts, they get them Leaders. They cannot
endure to be bound to one faithful Pastor who watches over his Flock, and
preaches solid Truths, but they love such as will claw their itch, and sing
Placebo.

3. A third cause of their Apostasy is that inmate malice and inbred
concupiscence which is in the hearts of men. They are lead by their (...) (i.)
secundum suas illas peculiares cupiditates. Beza, Opponitur (...), peculiare,
el doctrinae quae est Catholica and toti Ecclesiae communis.
peculiar lusts, every one has his dilectum delictum, his darling sin, one's
for luxury, and another for heresy, etc. Now according to these lusts they
earnestly seek out for Teachers, which may in no wise disquiet their lusts,
which are their Lords, and which they love as their lives. Romans 1.4. (...) est
cupiditas and ardens appetitus, a (...) ardere.
Jude 16. The Vulgar renders the word, Desires, after their own desires they
shall get Teachers. But the word in the Original is Lusts, which implies not a
simple desire or sudden motion, but a vehement, ardent, earnest desire, and
pursuit of a thing.

4. They have itching ears, Prurire eos dicit auribus (eleganti Metaphora) qui
sermones quaerunt vitia sua ti^illantes. Grotius.
this is another reason why they seek out for false Teachers, they love not
such as deal plainly and faithfully with them, they must have such as will claw
their itch, please their humors, tickle their fancies with novelties and
curiosities, but they must in no wise touch their vices.

2. Here is the issue and consequence of their contempt of the truth, and the
fruit of this mad Itch. viz. the loss of truth, and following Fables. They
shall turn away their ears from the truth, viz. of the Gospel which flatters no
man, they will reject sound doctrine which is sharp and curbs their lusts, and
turn to Fables which will gratify them since they can find nothing in the word
which may please their itching humor, they will see what Fables and lying
Legends will do; but all in vain, for as a man that has his itch scratcht, for
present is pleased, but after has more pain then before: so these after they
have wearied themselves in pursuit of lying vanities, at last lie down in
greater sorrow. These are marble to God, and wax to the Devil; the truth they
cannot obey, but they willingly obey unrighteousness. This is the Devils
method. First, he stops the ear against sound Doctrine; and then he opens it to
error. Like a cruel Thief he draws the soul out of the right road, into some
wood, by-lane or corner, and there binds, robs and rifles it.

Quest. What Fables does the Apostle here mean?

Answ. 1. Some say Judaical Fables, as Titus 1.14. 1 Timothy 1.4. Where Fables and
Genealogies are joined together.

2. Others conceive the Apostle Means the Fabulous Divinity of the Gnostics,
made up of Judaism and Gentilism. These are too narrow; the words are to be
taken more largely, and generally for any Fables and erroneous Doctrine be it
never so absurd or impious, (...), (i.) ad falsas and inutiles doctrinas quibus
fascinatus mundus veritatis lucem mavult medis omnibus extinctam, quam e
tenebris emergere. Beza.
proceeding whether from Jews or Gentiles, from Heretics or Schismatics,
they will prefer falsehood before truth, darkness before light, and death before
life. The sum and substance of all is this. q. d. O my son Timothy, this
exhortation and adjuration of mine in pressing thee to an ear^^^ and diligent
preaching of the Word is not need less and vain, for although thou have now an
opportunity of preaching, yet the time will come, yea, is already begun when
men will not away with sound doctrine, but by reason of their lusts they will
multiply to themselves variety of pleasing Teachers, having itching ears which
altogether affect Novelty of Doctrines and curious speculations insomuch that
they will forsake the truth to follow Fables, which will lead them to
destruction.

Observations.
Observation 1. God not only knows what Men do at present, and what they
have done, but what they will do in time to come. He tells Timothy here what
will be done many years after he is dead and gone. He tells what Josiah will do
before he is born, and it came to pass. 1 Kings 13.2. and 2.22, 17. What is to
be done a thousand years hence is as present to him as a thousand years that
are past, which are but as yesterday. Psalm. 90.4. His knowledge is like
himself, infinite, he perfectly knows all things past, present and to come,
nothing is hid from him. Heb. 4.13. He calls the things that are not as if they
were. Romans 4.17. and knows us before we had a being. Ier. 1.5. This is Gods
prerogative royal, whereby he is distinguished from all false Gods. Isai.
41.23. 1. He knows all things to come, in himself, as able and willing to have
them done if good, or else to suffer the doing of them being evil, and to order
them to his own ends. 2. He sees them in their causes, by which they shall be
done. Pernovit omnia proprie, vere, persectissime per suam Essentiam; distinct
non confuse; certo and evidenter, non obscure and ex opinione, simul and semel,
uno actu and ictu.
3. He knows them in themselves altogether, not successively as we do by
reasoning and searching out the causes, but by one eternal act of
understanding. Acts 15.18. This will further appear, 1. If we consider how he
made all things, and therefore he must needs know all things. As an Artist that
made an Instrument, knows all the secrets of it. God that has made the eye
must needs see, and the heart, must needs know what is in it. Psalm. 94.11. He
knows all by way of ca^sality. 2. He rules and governs all things, and
therefore must needs know all things. 3. He Is the righteous Judge of all the
world, yea, he is both Judge and Witness, Mal. 3.5. which he could not be, if he
did not know the thoughts, words, and works of men.

1. This reproves these Atheistical Against these see M. Gataker, Gods Eye on
Israel. M. John Sedgwick against the Antinonians. M. Anto. Burgesi Vindic.
Legis.
Antinomians, which say God sees not the sins of his people, when he sees them
more perfectly then our selves see them, and sets even our secret sins before
him. Psalm. 90.8. He saw David's adultery, and Solomon's idolatry, and punished
them for it. He saw the sins and his Churches, and reproves them for them. Rev.
2, and 3.

2. This must teach us to walk sincerely with our God, who sees even our secret
vices as well as our duties. He sets a print on our heels and spies out all our
paths. Job 13.17. He knows our thoughts before we think them, our words before
we speak them, and our works before we do them. Psalm 139.2. to 16. He knows
more by us then we know by our selves, we know but in part, but God knows us
thoroughly; and if our consciences do accuse us of some things, yet he is
greater then our consciences, and knows all things. 1 John. 3.20.

3. It may serve to convince us of the truth of the Scriptures, and that they
are the very Word of God, in that all its Predictions have been fulfilled. [See
B. Vshers Body of Divin. p. 9. and M. Baxter's Saints Rest. p. 2. c. 6. Sect.
1. p. 250.]

4. It serves for singular comfort to the Godly, and that many ways, 1. In
point of weakness, it may be thou can not pray nor do as thou desire, yea,
but the Lord knows onr desires before hand, and has promised to answer them.
Neh. 2.4. Psalm. 10.17. he knows the intents and bents of our hearts, and will
deal with us accordingly. 1 Cor. 4.5. 2. It may comfort us in all our troubles
that our God knows them before they come upon us. When we know not how to
deliver our selves, yet he does. 2 Pet. 2.9. And therefore to comfort his
Churches, he tells them more then once that he knows their sufferings. Rev.
2.2, 3, 9, 13. and the plots of their malicious enemies. Ier. 18.32. Exodus 3.9.
2 Chronicles. 16.9. He knows thy strength and thy parts, and will not suffer thee to
be tempted above what thou art able to bear. 1 Cor. 20.13.3. It may comfort us
in case of reproach, cruel witnesses may rise up against thee, and lay to thy
charge things which thou know not, I but the Lord knows thy innocence, and
will one day clear it before all the world, this comforted, Job 16.19.

4. It may comfort us against Apostasy, many good souls fear they shall never
persevere, I but the Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19. and he will not lose one
of his. John 10.27, 28, 29. and 17.12.

5. It may comfort us against inordinate cares, he is an Heavenly Father that
knows our wants, and out of the riches of his goodness will supply them. Math.
6.30, 32.

6. It may comfort us against the ingratitude of the world, here ofttimes the
more we do for men the less they do for us, and the more we love the less are
we beloved. But our comfort is that our God who sees in secret, he will one
day reward us openly. Matthew. 6.6.

Observat. 2. The more perfidious the world is, and the more false Teachers
abound, the more careful must Christ's Ministers be to oppose them by preaching
sound Doctrine. The badness of the Times approaching must make us to redeem the
present season. The Sun will not always shine, tempests will arise, and the
night will come when no man can work. Besides the affections of people are
mutable, they that at first seem to love the Gospel, after a time will loath
it, they that to day are ready to adore us as Gods, to morrow are ready to
stone us as Devils. Acts 14.12, 13, 18, 19. Those that reverence Moses to day,
to morrow are murmuring against him. Exodus 14. ult. and 15.14. So unconstant
are the affections of this ungrateful world to Gods faithful messengers,
especially when they apply sound Doctrine to their soars.

Observation 3. Saving Doctrine is sound Doctrine. It Is pure and sound in it
self, and it is sound effectively, it cures and heales the soul which is sick of
sin, and brings it to salvation, hence it is said to save the soul, James 1.21.
and it is called healthful and wholesome words. 1 Timothy 1.20. and 6.3. and 2.1.13.
Titus 1.9. and 2.1.

Observation 4. Unsound persons cannot endure sound Doctrine. It Is salt which
searches men's sores and puts them to pain. V. Sal. Terrae. c. 1.
It Is light which these soar eyes cannot endure, nor these Thieves abide. They
do evil and therefore they hate the light. John 3.20. They are sick of a Noli
me tangere, and had rather perish in their sins then part with them. They V. M.
Ant. Burgess on John 17.12. Lect. 69.

Amant veritatem lucentem, oderunt redarguentem. Aug.


imprison the Truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. There is in them not only a
f^rmido but a detestatio lucis, they do not only fear, but hate the light.
They cannot endure to have the Law preached, their consciences searched, nor
their sins discovered. The light to them is as the shadow of death, as Job
(24.17.) speaks in another case. This made Ahab to hate plain-dealing Micajah.
1 Kings 22.8. and Asa to imprison the Prophet. 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 20. Gravis malae
conscientiae lux est. Seneca.
and Herod, John the Baptist. So Ier. 11.21. Amos 7.12. Micah 2.6. Light is an
unwelcom guest to evil consciences. Wholesome instructions will not down with
them, they must have sweet and pleasant things, or nothing. They forbid Gods
messengers to preach to them, unless they will preach smooth and pleasing things,
of peace prosperity and pleasure, though they walk in a sinful path, and have
no right to them. Isai. 30.9, 10. They say to the seers see not, and to the
Prophets prophesy not to us right things, speak unto us Chalakot, (i.) lenia,
mollia, blanda, suavia.
smooth things, prophecy deceits. They love such as preach the visions of
their own brain, and sow pillows under men's elbows, dawbing with untempered
mortar. Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. When Prophets prophesy falsely, and people shall love
the lies and flatteries of such Impostors better then Gods truth, what will the
issue and end of such practices be but misery and destruction? Ierem. 5.31. and
6.12, 13, 14. Micah 3.11, 12. But as for sound men they love sound Doctrine,
they desire it. Psalm. 43.3. They come to it, John 3.21. and bless God for it. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.

Observation 5. In the last days there will be many false Teachers. There will
not be one or two, but there will be heaps of them, the world will swarm with
them. Men will have variety of lusts, and those call for variety of Teachers to
uphold them. Good Men, and specially good Ministers are rare, they are one of a
thousand. Job 33.23. But wicked ones abound; there is much dross, but little
gold; much chaff but little wheat, many weeds, few good flowers. If the Devil
have any work to do, he wants no Agents to effect it. If Ahab will not hearken
to Micajah a true Prophet, the Devil has four hundred false ones ready to
delude him. 1 Kings 22.6, 21, 22. If men once set open their doors, they shall
not want Deceivers. When Prophets prophecy falsely, and people love to have it
so, it is just with God to send them Teachers according to their own desire,
that he who is Heretical, may be Heretical still, and he that is profane, may
be profane still. When men slight truth, they shall have Teachers which shall
be Gods Executioners to bind them and blind them, and lead them into error. As
God punished the contempt of light in former ages, by giving men up to
Antichrist, to be deluded by Monks, Friars, and Liars, because they received
not the truth in love; so now, he punishes formality, and contempt of the
Gospel by giving men up in the hands of Socinians, and such like Seducers which
shall feed them with fables instead of truth. Such as go to their Assemblies
may say of them as Dionysius Calderminus said of the Mass. Se: M: B^i^s^^^
Virtigo. and M. Anto. Burgess his 120. Ser. Lect. 51. p 316.
Eamus ad communem errorem, Let Us go to the shop and sink of errors. Let us get
our hearts stablisht with grace, and then we shall not be carried about with
these strange Doctors and their various doctrines. Heb. 13.9.

6. Observe, as all other parts of man so amongst the rest, the ear has it is
diseases. Since the fall, we are ^razed in our intellectuals, in our morals,
and diseased in eyes and ears: hence we read of a deaf ear. Isai. 6.9, 10.
Micah. 7.16. Romans 11.8. an uncircumcised ear. Acts 7.51. a dull ear. Heb.
5.11. and an itching ear which is all for vain, new, curious things. In the
last days men will be so delicate that they will not endure common truths, nor
plain and profitable preaching, but their Itching ears must have Clawing
speakers which will speak sweet and pleasing things. Vt ^aro pruriens semper
appetit fricari, sic istorum a^res nunquam non cup^unt audire, verba quae
vanitatem d^c^ant, and ad voluptatemilliciant. August. in Joh^ Tract. 97.
And this is the reason why one false Teacher prevails more in an hour in a
corner, then a Preacher of Truth can do in many years, it is because he
preaches Placentia, and vents such things as are suitable to corrupt Nature.
Salt is fitter for such then Oil, though it be more searching, yet it is more
sovereign.

This Itching-disease was never so common as in our days, we can meet with few
but they have scabs upon them, one has the seal of Arminianism, another has
the botch of Socinianism. One has the itch of Anabaptism, another has the
scurff of Antinominianism. Some have the itch in their feet, they run after
fools and fables, some in their eyes they wander after vanities, and others in
their ears, harkning after novelty. We read in Scripture of a twofold itch. A
penal itch, afflictive itch upon the body. Deuteronomy. 28.27. The Lord shall smite
thee with the scab, and with an incurable itch. Now this is nothing
comparatively, for though it be irksom to the body, yet it may be good for the
soul; however it is a judgment by which God is honored, but the itch of sin is
the evil of evils, there is no goodness in it.

2. There is a sinful spiritual itch upon the soul, which is sevenfold, viz. an
itch of 1. Novelty. 2. Curiosity. 3. Singularity. 4. Popularity. 5. Flattery.
6. Disputing. 7. Quarrrelling.


Qui novitatibus student nusquam erroris finem inveniunt, sed nova semper
commenta proferunt; ^a enim est erroris vis ut sisti nequeat Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy 3. Hom. 8. Non est hodie sciens qui novitates non invenit.

Against these see Bohemus his Meditat. 100. p. 233.


1. There is an Athenian Itch when men are all for Noveltie, They must have
Novum aut nihil. Ordinary Truths will not down with them, they must have
New-notions which are extraordinary. They are surfeted with old and wholesome
Truths, they must now hear some New Doctrine. Acts 17.19. Not that a modest,
humble inquiry after Truth is to be condemned as Novelty, as the Papists
condemn us for Novelists, because we have forsaken their bypath to walk in
the good old way which leads to rest. Quid monstri est si nova illis videantur
omnia pia* quibus novum est Evangelium. Bilney.
Ier. 6.16. But it is no wonder that pious paths seem new to them, to whom the
Gospel it self is new.

2. An Itch of Curiosity, when men will be wise above what is written. Romans
12.3. 1 Cor. 4.6. And love to pry into Gods secrets, and scan the Mysteries of
Religion by carnal reason. God often plagues such curiosity with a fall; when
pride is in the saddle, a fall is on the croop^r, this pride is the mother of
heresy. Multi propter arborem scientiae, amittunt arborem vitae. Aug.

Euclid^s interr^gatus quales ess^nt d^i and qua re delectarentur? Caetera
quidem ignoro (inquit) at curiosos illis odio esse cerio scio. M^llem ignorare
sine crimine, quam scire cum discrimin^.


Yet how many pry so long into the secrets of nature till they are past grace,
and seek so long after the Philosophers stone till at last they find the Devil
himself. God is displeased with such. 1 Samuel 6.19. It Is his prerogative royal
to have something in several, that he might be the more admired in his deep
mysteries; we should not therefore desire a reason of his ways beyond his
revealed will. Deuteronomy. 29. ult. Romans 9.20. In this our safety is to ^it still.
Exodus 33.18, 20. And with the Apostle to adore those depths and counsels which
we cannot fathom. Romans 11.33.

[See more in Church his Treasury. p. 149, etc. Granatensis. p. 436, etc.
Tactica 5. Cap. 4. Sect. 4. p. 50.51.

3. An Itch of singularity, how many in our days for fear of popularity run
into singularity, they grow weary of sound, solid, savory and approved
doctrine, hunting after some aerie speculations, delighting themselves in some
Terr^ incognita, in some untrodden paths of Divinity, till thy fall into a
snare. This was the disease of the Sea 2 Timothy 3.15. Observe 2.
Schoolmen, like Nimrod to get themselves a Name they builded Babels to their
own confusion. I wish this scabies scalpenda, this skurvy itch had only
infected the Vulgar, but alas those that are clothed in scarlet are tainted
with this du^ghil disease; the Oaks of Bashan, and the Cedars of Lebanon are
become as so many Reeds shaken with every blast of strange Doctrine, and every
N^vel opinion is ready to transport them from the Truth to Fables. 'Twas John
Baptists glory, and 'twill be ours to be no such Reeds. Matthew. 11.7.

An Itch of Popularity and applause, they long to be in Print, when they have
been in travel with their New-notions, they are even sick till they be published
to the world. They love to have it said, (...), this is he that is in Print
against Infant Baptism, against Magistracy, against Ministry, against the
Trinity, etc. It Is pity but some were better physickt for this Itch. V.
Tactica S. l. 2 c. 2. f. 5. p. 112.
Others have an Itch to be in the Pulpit, and must in all have be Teachers of
others before they have learned themselves. These would have some salt thrown
on their Itch.

5. An itch after smooth, pleasing preaching. These itching ears love
flattering Pr^^chers. Isai. 30.20. They love to be clawed. They have
Musical-ears, the Prophet's eloquence may delight them as some pleasing song,
but his wholesome direction they will not follow. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.
Plain-preaching is too harsh for their dainty ears, they cannot endure to have
those courses contradicted which they have pitched upon, and to which they have
addicted themselves. Neither can they endure to hear any one man long, they
must have an heap of Teachers. They love to hear high-flowen-notions that they
may discourse above the rate of their neighbors, their curious Palats
disrelish common food. Privileges when preached please them, but positive
duties distaste them. These are high in their Notions, but low in their
practicals, like children that have the Rickets, grow in the head, wither in
the feet.

6. An Itch of disputing. We have many that love to question everything, but
they believe nothing. They desire rather to dispute well then to live well.
This is the scab and blemish of our age. This Itch of Disputing has almost
destroyed all the Power of Godliness. Pruritus disputandi fit Ecelesiarum
scabies.
When men fall to wrangling they deal but truth as I have read many Suitors,
Inter disputandum amittitur pietas, unitas, veritas. I speak now only of
wrangling, Anabaptistick disputes, and not of grave and serious ones, which
search out truth to the bottom.

Against these see an exc^llent Sermon of M. Anto. Burgess his Spiritual
R^fining. 1. Part. Lect. 51. P. 316.


did by a Virgin, one would have her and another would have her, tell at last
they had pulled her all to pieces. Luthers prayer therefore shall be mine, From
frivolous, fruitless controversies good Lord deliver us. Whilst men spend their
strength and time about mint and cummin the weighty matters of the Law lie
unregarded. Better want a disputative-knowledge, then that savory, sanctifying,
affective-knowledge, which will enable to die for the Truth, though we cannot
dispute for it. It Is holiness and obedience, not disputing and wrangling, which
is the way to happiness. L. Robinson his Essaies Obseserv. 7. p. 79.80. and ubi
plurima.
It Is well observed by one, that disputations in Religion are sometimes
necessary, but always dangerous, drawing the best spirits into the head from
the heart and leaving it either empty of all, or too full of fleshly zeal, and
passion if extraordinary care be not taken still to supply and fill it anew
with pious affections toward God, and loving toward men.

7. A quarreling, contradicting itch which like a tetter the more it is rubbed
the more it spreads it self. They have critical ears, they come to arraign the
Minister at the Bar of their own judgment, and to judge that word by which they
must be judged. These come not to practice the Sermon, but to quarrel with the
Preacher. Salamander like they love to live in the fire of contention. God
loves not (says Luther) such Curists and Quaerists (i.) Such as are always to
their Cur, Such questioning for disputation and not for edification hinders
much the Practice of Religion Such may well be called Seekers, since they are
always seeking, but never find the right way.
why is it thus and thus? and their Vtrums whether it be so and so? We must
believe and obey, but not reason with God about his Commands, there must be a
quiet resignation of our wills to Gods Will. Thologia nostra est Pythagorica,
God has said it and that is sufficient to quiet a gracious soul. Fides est
quietativa, non disputativa, Faith quietly and readily obeyes it; does not
dispute Gods Command. A believer is not quarreling when he should be doing his
duty. It Is a good sign we are sincere when we do all things without murmuring
and quarreling. Philip. 2.14, 15. We should therefore cast off all wranglings
about toys and trifles, about niceties and novelties, about things whereof we
can neither have proof nor profit.

The cure of this Itch is, 1. To acquiesce in the pure Word of God, without any
hunting after Novelties and Curiosities. Love the Law, and then ye will neither
forget nor forsake it to follow Fables. The root of Apostasy is want of
affection to the Word; when men serve not God with gladness of heart in the
abundance of spiritual mercies, but grow weary of truth and loath this
Heavenly Mannah, then it is just with God to give them up to strong delusions,
to believe lies. Job 12.16. Ezekiel. 24.4, 9. 2 These. 2.11. When men will not be
servants to Truth, it is just with God, that they should be slaves to sin and
error, and when they will not serve God in the enjoyment of Ordinances, they
should serve their lusts in the want of them. Amos 8.11.

2. Take heed, 1. Whom ye hear. 2. How ye hear. 1. Take heed whom and what you
hear. Faith comes not by hearing every Self-called-speaker, but by hearing sent
Teachers. Romans 10.14, 15. Such as have Itching-ears and love to hear all men,
many times grow out of love with all, so that they can endure to hear none
long. If the Devil but can set the Itch upon thee of hearing New-teachers, he will
soon draw thee to believe lies and fables. His great design is to undermine the
Ministry, and steal peoples hearts from them, if the Wolves but can get the
Sheep from the Shepherds they will soon devour them. If then you love your
souls, love your faithful Pastors, and stick to them.

V. Hildersham on John 4.32. Lect 58, p. 241.
2. Take heed how you hear, as all the senses must be guarded, so must this, set
a Watchman on it, and take heed how, see to the manner, as well as to the
matter of your hearing. Luke 8.18. The ear is an honorable part, it is sensus
disciplinae, the sense which conveighs instruction into the soul. For delight
it is an excellent sense, therefore the ears are called the daughters of Music.
Eccles. 12.4. By it Faith which is the Grace of graces is conveyed into the
soul. Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing and not by seeing. Labor then for an
intelligent, obedient, circumcised, mortified ears which is a choice mercy.
Matthew. 13.16, 23. Romans 2.29.

To this end we must hear the Word 1. Preparedly. 2. Attentively. 3.
Intentively. 4. Retentively. 5. Understandingly. 6. Discreetly. 7. Beleevingly.
8. Reverentially. 9. Affectionally with Love. Desire. Joy.
10. Obedientially.


1. There must be preparation before we hear, and that not only habitual, but
an actual washing of our hearts and hands before we come to Gods Altar. Psalm.
26.9. Ezra 7.10. Job 11.13, 14. Eccles. 5.7. Sancta sanctis, these holy things
call for holy Ones. We must first take an holy Vomit, and by a sincere
confession of sin rid our stomachs, and purge out of our souls those malignant,
peccant humors of malice, guil, hypocrisy, filthiness, and superfluity and
naughtiness, before we can receive the Word with meekness so as to grow
thereby. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. James 1.22. Jacob purges his family before he goes to
Bethel. Genesis 35.1, 2. The husbandman first rids his ground of those bushes,
briars and brambles which stand in his way and then falls to plowing before he
goes to sowing, and so must we, first rid our hearts of all inordinate cares
which like thorns choke the good seed of the Word, and then receive it into
honest and good hearts, Matthew 13. Ier. 4.3. when the people were prepared for
the hearing of the Law, Exodus 19. Then, and not till Then does God speak unto
them, Exodus 20.1. Our Translation reads it, And, but former Translations
render it, Then, and so says the Arabic Version Deinde, then, or after that,
viz. they were prepared. Many come but like Rachel they bring their Idols with
them Genesis 31.19. like the Samaritans they will serve the Lord and their
Idols too, 2 Kings 17.33. Such God disownes, Ver. 34. They serve not me says
God, he will have all or none at all, and therefore he threatens to set himself
against such, Ezekiel 14, 7, 8. there is no standing with comfort or confidence
before God in our sins, Ezra 9. ^lt. The prime cause of so little profiting
after so long hearing is our unpreparednesse for the duty. This hardens the
heart Accidentally makes it more blind. Isay 6.9, 10. The Sun softens wax,
but hardens clay; and if the word be not the savor of Life, then contrary to
its own Nature meeting with the rebellious hearts of men, it hardens them,
and becomes the savor of death unto them, 2 Corinthians, 2.16.

2. Hear Atte^tively, give heed to what is delivered. Acts 5.16. There is no
getting or keeping knowledge without attention, Proverbs 5.1, 2. Let a Minister
preach never so powerfully if the people sleep, talk, gaze, or come when ha^^
is done, they cannot profit. We should rouse up our selves to attend, as for
our lives remembering it is for Eternity. The people that heard our Savior
attended, or (as the word signifies) they (...) pendebant ab eo, (i)
a^tentissime ipsius Sermonem audiebant, quasi ab ipsius ore pendentem. Beza.
hanged upon him ( Luke 19. ult.) as the young birds do upon the Bill of the
Damme, every one opens his mouth to see which can catch it, and that bird
which is not sed, waits till his turn comes: They hung upon him as Bees on
Flowers to suck out the Virtue that is in them, so Luke 4.20.

3. Intentively, with the highest intention of Affection. We must hearken
diligently and incline our ears to hear, Isay 55.2, 3. We must set our hearts
on the things we hear, for it is our life, Deuteronomy 32.46. Ezekiel. 40.4. The word
must not swim in our Heads, but sink down into our ears and Hearts, Luke 9.44.
we must mark it diligently, and entertain it readily; The Kingdom of Heaven
must suffer violence and we must take it by force, Matthew 11.12.

4. R^tentively, We must retain the Word, and lock it up in our hearts as a
Jewel of the greatest price. So did Mary, Luke 2.51. and so must we Deuteronomy
11.18 Job 22.22. Proverbs 2.1. John 15.20. an holy remembrance of Gods Word is
an excellent preservative against sin, Psalm 119.11. and a singular support to
us in our trouble^, Psalm 73.17. Hereby we shall be the better enabled to
practice what we hear, we cannot practice what we forget. The sciens must be
grafted into the stock before it can grow, the Word must be graffed in our
heads and hearts before we can bring forth fruit to Christ, James 1.21. The
Devil uses all means to steal the word out of our hearts, and to make us
forget it, Matthew 13.19. For he knows it is the way to blessedness, when
men hear the Word and keep it, Luke 11.27, 28. We should therefore pray for the
Spirit of Grace which may lead us into all Truth, and bring all good things to
our remembrance, John 14.26. and 16.13. and pray with David that God would keep
his Truth in the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts, 1 Chronicles 29.18.

2. Love the Word, we do not easily forget the things which we love Jeremiah
2.32. If Rachel love her Fathers Idols, she will lay them up, Genesis 31.34.
Want of Affection breeds want of memory. If David delight in Gods Law, he
will never forget his Word, Psalm 119.6.

3. Use the Means, Read, Hear, Meditate, Confer, Apply the Word, and write
it as Baruc did Ieremies Sermons, Ier. 36.

4. The Israelites must make them Fringes that they may not forget the Law,
Numbers 15.38.39. and above all, be sure to receive the Word with all
readiness of mind, Acts 17.11. It is a mercy that we hear the Word, a
greater mercy when we can approve of it, but the greatest mercy is to receive
it into our hearts in the Love of it. 1 Thessalonians 2.13. When we can eat
the Word, Jeremiah 15.16. and receive its sharpest reproves with submission
and Thankfulness, 1 Samuel, 25.33. Psalm 141.5.

5. Understandingly, We must not barely read, but we must search the
Scriptures and labor to understand what we hear, Matthew 15.10. John 5.39.
Praying for the Spirit of Illumination, Ephesians, 1. 17.18.

6. Discreetly, we must Try the Doctrine before we trust it. Though it be Paul
that Preach yet the Beraeans will try his Doctrine by the Scriptures, Acts
17.11. and Paul calls on his hearers to Iudicio discretionis.
Judge and consider what he said, 1 Corinthians 10.15. and 2 Timothy 2.7. 1
Thessalonians, 5.21. and bids them Try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1. God has
given his People an Anointing to this end, that they may be able to judge and
discern of things that differ, Colossians 1.9, 10. We will not take gold, but
We will try it first, and we will count Money after our own Fathers, and shall
we take Doctrines only upon trust?

7. Beleevingly, we must by faith apply it to our selves, whether it be for
Humiliation or Consolation, Job 5.27. It must be engraffed in our hearts by
Faith, James 1.21. This is the way to make it effectual, Romans 1.2.16 1 Cor.
1.21. Unbelief bars the heart against the Word, and makes it unprofitable to
the hearers, Heb. 4.2.

8. Reverentially, no service pleases God that is not mixed with Reverence and
fear, Psalm 2.1. Hebrews 12.28. We must set our selves as in Gods presence,
and so hear as if God himself spoke to us, so did Cornelius, (though a
Soldier and a great man) Acts 10.33. So did the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
They received not the Word as the word of Paul, but as the Word of God. It is
God that speaks to us by the mouth of his Prophets, Luke 1.70. and 10, 16.
Daniel 9.10. Micah 6.9. John 1.23. 2 Corinthians 5.20. We are Christ's
Ambassadors, and the words of an Ambassador are esteemed as the words of him
who sends him. When our Preaching agrees with the Word it is as the Word of
God himself. This believed would make us come with fear to Sermons, as Jacob
did, Genesis 28.16. when he said, Surely, the Lord is in this place; then Verse
17. He was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place? God highly prizeth
such hearts as tremble at his Word, Isay 66.2. He overlooketh the Frame of
Heaven and Earth to look on such; neither does he look on them with an eye
only of Intuition, as he looks upon the rest of the Creatures, but with an
eye of special complacency, approbation and delight. These humble ones he will
teach his way. Psalm 25.9. and meek hearers he will save, James 1.21.

9. Affectionally, with singular love, as the Word of the great God which
should be sweeter to us then honey, and more precious then Gold.

2. With Joy should we draw waters out of these Wells of salvation.

We should See Master Case, his Morning Lecture, Page 1, etc.
fly to Gods House even as the Doves unto their windows, Isay 60.8. We should
come into his Courts with Joy, and as the terrors of the Law should make us
melt and mourn, 2 Chronicles 34.27. Acts 2.27. So the Consolations of the
Gospel should raise us to joy Luke 1.46, 47.

3. We should earnestly desire the Word, 1 Peter 2.2. Appetite and desire of
food is a sign of Life. Such hungery ones shall be filled with good things,
Luke 1.53. as Drunkards look on the Wine to quicken their Appetite, Proverbs
23.31. So should we on the excellencies of the Word to quicken our desires
after it.

10. Obedientially, We must resolve to obey whatsoever the Lord by his Minister
shall command us whether it be for Humiliation or Consolation, Jeremiah 42.5,
6. If the Lord will be pleased to draw us we must resolve to run after him,
Canticles 1.4. If he will Teach us we must resolve to keep his Precepts, Psalm
119.33, 34. Isay 2.3.

This is the end of our hearing that we may do Gods Will, Deuterrnomy 4.5. and
5.1. and 11.32. This prompt Obedience is better then Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22.

1. A wicked man may offer Sacrifice, but no wicked man can obey.

2. The sacrificer offers the flesh of another in sacrifice, but the Obedient
man offers himself. Per victimas aliena caro, per Obedientiam tua propria
Voluntas mactatur. Gregor.
But the wicked are Sermon-proofe, the Hammer of the Word cannot work upon
their Adamantine hearts. There is not a more evident sign of one devoted to
destruction then this. If Eli's sons will not hearken to the Voice of their
Father, it is a sign the Lord has a purpose to destroy them. If Amaziah will
not hearken to the Prophets Counsel, he shall to ruin, 2 Chronicles 25.16.
When men have been often reproved, and yet still harden their necks refusing to
obey, they shall perish, they shall suddenly perish, and that without remedy
See Master Fenner and Master Hooker on that text.
Proverbs, 29.1. (...) is a dreadful Text, every word has its weight.

1. Man of reproves: It is an Hebraisme and is very Emphaticall in that
Language which knows no Degrees of comparison, Vir redargutionum. Hebr.
it caries the force of the superlative Degree, Vide Schooles-Guard. Rule 12.
as Eccles. 7.1, 2. Vanity of Vanities, (i.) Exceeding vain men, of blood (
i.) most cruel, bloody-men. So a man of reproves ( i.) A man that has had
many and various reproves, God has reproved him by his Ministers, by Friends,
by Foes, by Checks of Conscience, by Judgments on others, by Judgments on
himself, and yet the man is so hardened that nothing will work. Well what of
him? why, 1. Though such a man may escape for a time, yet the Word will at last
arrest him and lay hold on him, Zach. 1.6. 2. He shall be destroyed, he shall
not be annihilated that were well for him, but he shall be destroyed; it is not
a destruction in respect of being, but a destruction in respect of Joy and
Comfort here and hereafter. He does not say he shall be lightly chastned or a
little punished, but he shall be destroyed. 3. See the Certainty, shall be (i.)
It is decreed in Heaven that he shall certainly perish. 4. See the suddenness
of it, shall suddenly be destroyed. They look on Judgments at a distance and
put the evil day far away, crying, Peace, Peace till judgments come suddenly
on them as pangs upon a woman in travail; as we see in the old World Sodom,
and the Jews and Pharaoh.


4. It Is irremediable, no Prayers and Tears can help him, no power can rescue
him, no Mercy pardon him, no Mediator intercede for him; Qui frequenter ob
vitia increpatur, vel ab homine per verba, vel a Deo par flagella, aut per
internas inspirationes and tamen instar tauri indurat cervicem certissime
citissimeque confringetur.
there is no remedy, all the world cannot help that man, which after many
reproves, heardeneth his neck. Oh then, Come with Tractable, Teachable Hearts
to the Word, and bidd reproves welcome, for they are the way of Life,
Proverbs 6.23.

VERSE. 5, 6. But watch thou in all things endure Afflictions, do the work of
an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry. 6. For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
IN these words the Apostle goes on with the prosecution of his former
Exhortation, wherein he Epilogus est quo repetit omnia quae hac praecipue
Epistola disputavit, eaque nunc infigit altius mire brevi praeceptiuncula.
Baldwin.
Epitomizeth all that he had said before, and exorteth Timothy, to four
Duties. 1. The first is to watchfulness, But watch thou in all things. Having
in the two precedent Verses told him of the danger, now he exhorts him to his
duty, where we have, First the duty it self, Watch. Secondly, The extent of
it, not in some things only, but in all things. We are beset round and must
therefore keep watch and ward at every turn: q. d. since false Teachers will
abound, and people will turn from the Truth to Fables, it becomes thee O
Timothy, and such as thou art to act the part of Faithful Shepherds, and
diligently to watch over the flock that it suffer not by your negligence.


The word (...) which we Translate watch, signifies also to be sober, not
only in body, but specially in mind. Though most usually and properly it is
taken in Scripture in the former sense. The word implies, that Ministers of
all men must be sober and watch, God has joined them together, and we may not
separate them in our lives (1 Thessalonians, 5.6. 1 Peter 5.8.) they are like
stones in an Arch, the one helps to uphold the other; we cannot watch without
sobriety, and we cannot be sober without watchfulness.

2. Constancy and courage against all opposition. It Is true, faithful
Ministers of all men must undergo much labor and sorrow, many dangers and
difficulties; yet must they not be daunted or discouraged but like valiant
soldiers of Christ we must endure hardship, and undergo all manner of evils
and injuries cheerfully for Christ, and fulfill our Ministry in despite of
them all. (...) significat non tantum affligi, sed quasvis injurias perferre,
and nullis malis absterreri quae comitantur praedicationem Evangelii. 2.
Significat laborem, taedium and periculum superare, mala sustinere, and pro
Evangelio obdurare.
He that fears the face and frowns of man, can never discharge his Ministry
faithfully to God. 3. Fidelity, he exhorts him withal faithfulness and
diligence to discharge the duties of his Calling. Do the work of an
Evangelist. (i.) That work which becomes an Evangelist, Plena ani^i ^id^c^a
and Spiritu intrepido parts Officii tui perfice, qui mundi odia nimium
pertimescunt, in Ecclesiastico Ministerio non po^erunt cum fructu versari
requiritur igitur (...) ac (...) per quam pericula, odia and quaevis adversa
contemnantur. Gerhard.
viz. To preach the Gospel purely and sincerely, not shrinking from his Duty
for any persecutions or troubles whatsoever.

Evangelists were Extraordinary Officers (but Temporary) they were Coadjutors
and Helpers of the Apostles in spreading and publishing the Gospel. They for
the most part attended on them and watered what they planted, Acts 8.39, 40.
Ephesians 4.11. such a one was Timothy, as appears, 1 Corinthians 4.17. and
16.10. and 2.1. 1. Philippians 2.19.22. Now Paul makes ^n honorable mention
of Timothies office.

First, The better to encourage him in the faithful discharge of his Duty
against all Opposition. Secondly, That the World might see he had Authority
for what he did.
4. Sincerity. Least any should accuse thee of negligence, make full proof of
thy Ministry, (...). Ministerium tuum imple (id est,) plene perfice
Ministerium tuum, ut perfect expleas and perfungaris tuo docendi officio, and
nihil omittas eoru^^ quae a ^ono and fideli Ministro jure exiguntur. a Lapide.
fulfill and accomplish it, Let it be fully known. q. d. So behave thy self in
this Office, that men may be able to charge thee justly with nothing, but
rather approve of thee in all things; Let the World see that thou make it
thy own and only work to winn souls by a faithful discharge of every part of
thy Ministry, both in public and private, revealing the whole Counsel of God
and boldly rebuking all sorts of sinners.


By Ministry is not here meant any Civil Office or attendance on the Poor (as
the Word imports in Scripture) but it notes the Office of Preaching the
Gospel, which is called The Ministry, Colossians 4.17. and the Preachers of it
Ministers (1 Corinthians 5.3. Colossians 1.7.) by way of Eminency.

Verse 6.
The Apostle gives a Reason for this his so serious an Exhortation, drawn from
the time of his death which he discerned to be now at hand, and therefore he
Exhorts Timothy to be so much the more diligent, that the Church might not
suffer by his negligence after his departure, g. d.

So long as I lived I was a Father, a Counselor and a quickner of thee both by
word and example; thou have hitherto had my help, but now thou must shift for
thy self, and swim without one to hold thee up; for the time of my
Martyrdom is now at hand.

Hence briefly Observe. That we must not only be go^d whilst we have good
company, as King Joash was when de had good Jehojada the Priest to quicken him,
2 Kings 12.2. but when good men leave us, yet must we not leave our goodness,
Galathians 4.18. Philippians 2.12. A man that is truly good is always good,
in all places, times and companies; he is still the same.

In this verse we have Paul's intimation of his death.

Verse 7.
We have a brief Narration of his life.

Verse 8. We have his hope and expectation after this life.
1. By a Spiritual instinct he saw that his departure was at hand, and his
Martyrdom near; He was now in his last bonds, and he saw the cruel actings in
Nero's Court against him, and therefore he concludes he had not long to live.

2. The Terms and Titles by which the Apostle sets forth his death unto us,
are worth the observing.

1. He calls it an offering. I am now ready to be offered up as a sweet
sacrifice to God in my Martyrdom for his Name. Paul having spread the Gospel
far and near, at last came to Rome, and there was beheaded in the thirty
seventh year of our Lord, and the last of Nero's Reign. Vide Eusebius. l. 2. c.
25.
It Is usual in Scripture to put that in the Present Tense as done, which yet
was not done till afterward. Thus Christ's body is said to be broken, and his
blood powered out, Matthew 26.28. ( i.) This was shortly after to be done on the
Cross: So Matthew 26.45. John 20.15. and 14.3. The Word in the Original is
very Pathetical and Emphaticall, it signifies a Drink Offering, (...), pro
libamento offeror percutio foedus.
he was now ready to be offered up as a Drink Offering on Gods Altar; he
chooses this word rather then that of Sacrifice. Libamen non ex part, sed
totum and in solidum offertur Deo. Chrysostom. in locum.


1. because the Drink Offering (says Chrysostom) was offered up whole, but so
was not the Sacrifice, for part of it was given to the Priests.

2. This consisting of Wine and Oil which was powered out when a meat offering
was made was most fit to set forth the death by which he should die, viz. by
shedding his blood for Christ, which he cheerfully powered out as a
Drink Offering to God in sealing of his Truth. This is the most genuine sense
of the Word, it signifies a Libation or Drink Offering of which we have
frequent mention in the Law, (which the Septuagint, render by the word in the
Text) when they powered out Wine, In usu erant sub Veteri Lege praeter
sacrificia ex animalibus, obla^iones, partim liquidis, Vino praesertim quae a
Graecis (...) dicebantur, a Latinis Libamina. Tactica. S. l. 3. c. 3. Sect. 15.
Water, Oil or the like in Sacrifice to God, this they called a
Powred-out-offering, or an effusion, because it was only of moist things. Thus
Genesis 14. Exodus 30.9. Leviticus 23.13. Numbers 6.15, and 15.5.12. and 28.7.
Deuteronomy 32.33. 2 Samuel 23.16, 17. 2 Kings 16.13. Jeremiah 32.29. and
44.17.25. So that by this allusion he seems to Intimate the manner of his
death, Libor (i.) mactor (Meton. adjuncti Metaphorica) nam Sacrificiis Libamina
adjungebantur.
which was not by being offered as an Holocaust or Burnt-offering by fire (as
the Martyrs were) but by a death wherein his blood was shed and powered out:
viz. by beheading.

He does not say, I shall now be slain as some vile, guilty person, but I shall
now be offered up in Martyrdom, as a sweet smelling sacrifice to God.

3. He uses this Metaphorical word to intimate his Confirmation of the Truth
he had preached. As the aspersion of blood Blood or Wine was used in sacrifices
for the Confirmation of Covanants; or as Covenants were confirmed by effusion
of Wine, which the parties contracting had first tasted of: so his death was
not only an oblation or Sacrifice, but a Libamentum, a Drinke-offering powered
out for Comformation of the Gospel which he had preached.

The Apostle expresses this more clearly, Phil. 2.17. Yea, if I be offered
upon the Sacrifice and service of your faith ^ joy with you all. q. d. I have
not only labored amongst you, but if I may die for the confirmation of your
Faith, and be powered out as a drink offering for the sealing of the Doctrine
which I have taught you it shall be that whereof I shall rejoice together with
you. Let Nero kill me because I converted you and others to the Faith, it shall
not tro^ble me, but I will freely give my self in sacrifice for you, that you
may be ^n Oblation to God, and my Blood the Drink Offering; Sacrificium erat
quasi convivium Dei in quo victima erat i^star ^ibi, Libamen instar potus Dei.
V. Ravenal, in Verbo Libamen.
that so I may offer up an entire Sacrifice to God. Briefly, the Levitical
Sacrifice consisted of two parts.

1. There was the Victima, the Sacrifice it self, viz. a Bullock, a R^m, or the
like. 2. There was the Libamen, the Drink Offering of Wine, Oil or the like;
now the Philippians faith was the sacrifice which was seasoned with Paul's blood
as a Drink Offering.
2. He sets forth his death unto us by the term of A departure or
dissolution. It Is not a destruction, but a resolution or loosing of the soul
from the bonds of the body. (...). dimissionis meae. Beza. Resolutionis meae
Vulg. Migrationis and reditus mei. Sculte^.
Death is a taking asunder the parts of which we are composed, it is a freeing
the soul from this house of Clay. The same word is used, Philippians 1.23. I
desire to be dissolved. q. d. I desire to be discharged and released out of the
Prison of the body, Mori est resolvi; mors enim nihil aliud est quam (...) and
resolutio quaedam.
that I may be presently with Christ in Heaven: Or as the word will bear, I
desire to depart this life and to dislodge, Cupio (...), dissol^i, quod est
vo^is mediae, unde non tam active quam passive sumi potest and significat non
solum dissolvi, sed etiam dissolvere vel solvere ut nautae a portu. Scult.
as those that quit their Innes to further their travel homeward; or such as
go to Sea, and set sail for another Country, who weigh Anchor and are gone.
So says the Apostle. I am here as an exile, and like as a stranger, I desire
to be freed from this banishment, and to set sail for Heaven. Thus the Word is
often used for a departing, (...) propri^ significat domum r^dire. Scultet.
exercit. l. 1. c. 62.
Luke 8.38. and going home, Luke 9.31. and 12.36. Matthew 14.23.

Observations.
Observation, 1.

1. But watch thou] The Apostasy and looseness of the times we live in must
make us the more watchful. Their falls must be our fears; their Levity must
quicken us to Constancy, and their negligence must quicken our diligence in
keeping the Watch of the Lord. Like Salmons we must swim against the stream
of corrupt times, and keep our selves pure not only from the gross Blottes,
but even from the Spots of the Age we live in. Good men in evil days are
compelled to be Vide Master Buroughs Gracious Spi. Cap. 7.
Singular in many things* as Lot in Sodom, and John in the Land of Vz, but
they never affect singularity, affectation of singularity argues pride.

Observation 2. Good men desire the Churches good after their departure. Paul
is dying, yet he commands Timothy to improve his talents for the Churches good
when himself was dead. Moses before he dies prays the Lord to set up a fit
Ruler in steed, Numbers 27.16, 17. Elisha wept for the mischief that Haza^l
would do to Gods people when he was gone. So did Isai, (22.4, 5.) when he saw
a day of trouble coming on the Church (though himself lived not to see it) yet
he wept bitterly. David set his son upon his Throne before he died and gave him
a strict charge to maintain the truth. Peter (2.1, 15.) endeavored to keep the
truths he had taught in remembrance after his death. Christ prays for the
welfare of the Church after his departure. John 17. Wicked men care not what
becomes of the world, when they are dead and gone let heaven and earth come
together, and all be in confusion, they care not. But good men have public
spirits.

Observation 3. As all persons so Ministers especially must watch. The Devil
has a special spite at them, he commands his agents as the King of Aram did
his followers to fight neither with small nor great, but against the King of
Israel; so he bends all his strength against the Ministers of Israel. What
Luther said of Magistrates, Qui regit, signum est in quod Satan omnia jacula
dirigit. Luther.
is most true of faithful Ministers. They are the common Buts which the Devil
and his Factors shoot at. We are watchmen by office, and so are bound to the
duty by a double tie. 1. As Christians. Mark* 13. ult. What I say unto one I
say unto all, watch. Christ's Disciples must not be secure. Luke 21.34. The
better the man the more watchful must he be. The Pyrat sets on the laden Ship,
and the Thief upon the wealthiest Traveller. But we must watch as Pastors too,
we must stand upon our watchtower to descry dangers, and discover Wolves that
would destroy the Flock.

2. We must watch at all times, 1. In prosperity, as Pigeons when they fare* V.
Tactica s. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 5. p. 283.
best, fear most. Then we are most apt to forget God. Hence Job (3.25.) in his
highest prosperity foresaw a storm and prepared for it. Christ would have his
to watch and pray always. Luke 21.36.2. Watch in adversity, the Devil is busy
then in laying snares, as the Fowler does for Birds in frosty weather. When we
be in tentations, then watch and pray that you be not overcome by them. Matthew.
26.41.

3. In all places, in public and private, at home and abroad; the world is
full of snares. Art solitary? yet watch, for then Christ was tempted. Matthew.
4.1. Go thou to Markets, fairs and public meetings? thou art encompast with
dangers. Quoties inte^ homines fui minor hom^ redii.
Ibi latet, imo patet, anguis in herba.

4. Watch in all things, so runs the Text. Watch unto prayer, take the fittest
opportunity for that duty. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Pet. 4.7.2. Watch in prayer, against
destractions, sleep, etc. Colos. 4.2. So watch unto hearing, take all
opportunities to hear, James 1.19. Wait on wisedoms posts. Pro. 8.34.2. Watch
in hearing, take heed how ye hear. Luke 8.18. Vigilate fratres quia ne^
sanctiores Davide, nec fortiores Samsone, nec sapientiores Solomone vos esse
cogno^citis. August.


5. Watch against all sins. We carry about us a proness to all sin. Even the
best men have the root of the basest sins in their bosoms, as we see in Lot,
Noah, David, Solomon. How foully did they fall when they did but a little
neglect the watch of the Lord? especially we must watch, 1. Against the sins of
our natures and constitutions. Psalm. 18.23.

2. Against the sins of our particular callings. There are several sins which
accompany several callings. Ministers are prone to idleness and flattery,
Magistrates to covetousness and bribery, Tradesman to consenage and forgery,
etc.

Watch against the sins of the Nation which thou live in. The sins of our age
are Atheism, Formality, Hypocrisy, Pride and Impenitency.

6. Watch over all thy senses, stop thine ears, make a covenant with thine
eyes. Job 31.1. Set a watch before thy mouth. The whole soul is out of order,
and therefore we must set a Guard upon all its faculties, especially upon the
understanding which is the primum mobile, and sets all the rest on work.
Warring and watching go together. Our war is perpetual and so must our watch
be. Job. 14.14. We are beset round with many dangerous enemies, which calls for
sobriety and watchfulness. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1. The Devil is a dreadful enemy if we
consider his power, malices, subtilety and sedulity. If one of these make an
enemy terrible, how terrible must that enemy be in whom all these four meet? if
an enemy be malicious, if yet he want power, or if he have power and malice,
yet if he want policy, or if he have malice, power and policy, yet if he be
lazy and careless there is the less danger. But where malice is accompanied
with power, and that seconded with craft, and all heightened with diligence, it
concerns men to watch against such an adversary. The World also has many
dangerous tentations; and above all, we our selves are the sorest enemies to
our selves. Saul, Goliath and Absalom; now of the three Absalom was the worst,
because a child and so a bosom enemy. This inbred enemy which lies in our own
bosoms is that which does us all the mischief. God who has made our hearts,
and knows them better then we our selves has told us. Ierem. 17.9. That the
heart of man is deceitful. 2. Deceitful above all things. 3. Wicked. 4.
Desperately wicked. 5. Yea, so desperately wicked that none can thoroughly know
how wicked it is. A sad clymax and gradation. By which we see that the heart is
the most deceitful and the most deceiveable both actively and passively of any
thing in the world. This should make us keep a very strict watch over it. Prove.
4.23.

[For watching see M. Ambrose his Media, p. 38. Fenner Folio in Fine, p. 32. M.
Scortretch an excellent Tract. on watching. M. Obad. Sedgwick on 1 Cor. 16.13.
M. Rous Art of Happiness, cap. 5. folio. p. 55.

Observation 4. Ministers especially must be hardy men. They must not be
dainty, delicate, soft, effeminate ones which can endure no labor, taunts, or
trials; but they must be hardy, hardened, seasoned, solid pieces which will not
warp or wind what ever the seasons be. This the Apostle enjoined Timothy more
then once. 2 Timothy 1.8. and 2.3. And brands those temporizers for their
cowardice, in that for fear of persecution they preached circumcision. Gal.
6.12. We are called Militi multa agenda, patienda plura; solis and laboris sit
patiens.
Soldiers, Shepherds, Watchmen, Husbandmen, all which must endure
Summers-heat, and Quis nisi vel miles vel amans and frigora noctis, Et denso
mixtas preferet imbre nives. Ovid.
Winters frost. We have to do with wicked men who have brows of brass, and we
had need of brows of brass to oppose them, Ier. 1.17, 18. we have to do with
briars, and thorns, he that touches them had need to be fenced with iron,
staves and spears. 2 Samuel 23.7.

1. We must endure hardship in our preparatory studies, we must give up our
selves to reading, (...) perdurare, (i.) vehementer and assidue incumbere uti
rei alicui difficili and laboriosae.
study and prayer, these require the whole man, and therefore we are commanded
to abide in these. 1 Timothy 4.15. to give up our selves unto them. Acts 6.4. and
to attend on our ministry. Romans 12.7. Thus Ezra (7.10.) prepared himself
before he preached.

2. He must endure hardship in the actual performance of his duty. Honor
Ministerii est in opere, dignitas in diligentia, corona in contemptu.
He must do this work of the Lord diligently, preaching in season and out of
season. In the morning he must sow his seed, and at evening he must not hold
his hand, for he knows not which shall prosper. The Prophets rose early to
preach the Word. Ier. 7.25. Christ himself was a frequent Preacher. Luke 4.16.
How industrious was Paul, how many Cities and Regions did he win to Christ?
Romans 15.19.

3. Most properly and genuinely this hardship in the Text consists in a patient
undergoing of those injuries and oppositions which we must expect from an
ungrateful world. 1. We must expect hard words. To do well and hear ill is the
proper lot of all faithful Ministers; This we see in Christ who did all things
well, and yet he was called Beelzebub, Madman, Riotous, etc. Paul was called a
pestilent fellow, Cyprian was called Coprian, and Athanasius Satanasius.

2. Expect hard dealings. Bonds and imprisonment are often times the portions of
those who have set the world at liberty from sin and Satan, as we see in Moses,
Samuel, Paul and Christ himself. We must look to be defrauded of our temporals
and robbed of our dues; yea, the more we love, many times the less are we
loved, (2 Cor. 12.15.) as B. Hooper foretold, that where he had taken most
pains, there should he be burnt to ashes. We batter the Devils Kingdom about
his ears, no wonder then if he raise batteries against us. We have a door of
doing good opened to us, and therefore must expect many adversaries. 1 Cor.
16.9.

4. The Lord himself sometimes is pleased to exercise us, and to inure us to
hardship, that we may be the fitter for his service. Isai. 6.5, 6. Luther
complains of many tentations, and that he had Horribilia de Deo, Terribilia de
Fide.

We must therefore arm, and inure our selves to hardship betimes. Of all men
idleness and effeminacy becomes not Gods Ambassadors. Yet how many live
careless that have cure of souls: Vivunt sine cura cum veniunt ad animarum
curam. But let us like good Soldiers of Christ endure hardship 1. Patiently.
2. Courageously. 3. Constantly.


1. Patiently, without this we shall tire in our race, and never do the Will of
God. Heb. 10.36. This is one special qualification of a Minister. 1 Timothy 3.3.
and 2.2, 24, 25.

2. Courageously, magnanimity becomes Soldiers. We are Captains, and if we be
faint-hearted or despondent we shall prejudice Christ's cause and dishearten
others: When the Shepherd flies the Sheep will scatter. Every (...). Aristo.
Coward (especially in such a cause as this) is a Murderer. We must harden our
faces like a flint against all the oppositions of men (as Christ did Isai.
50.7.) remembering we have a Master that will bear us out. Ier. 1.8* 17, 18, 19.
This made Paul indifferent whether he lived or died, (...) might be glorified,
and Luther to contemn both the fury and favor of the Pope.

3. Constantly, not like Frenchmen which begin their Wars like Thunder, but
end like smoke. Better we had never lifted our selves in Christ's service then
to forsake our Colors, and leave our plow in the open Field. Too many like
Nebuchadnezar's Image are gold at first, silver in the middle, and iron at last.

To encourage us, let us consider, 1. The great recompense of Reward. Dan.
12.3. 1 Pet. 5* 4. Paul cast up his accounts, and found that the sufferings of
this present life are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be
revealed. Romans 8.18.

2. Consider what you fight for, it is not for silver or gold, but for the souls
of men, one of which is of more worth then all the world. S. James makes it a
great honor to have a hand in such a work, and therefore he puts an Emphasis
upon it. Iam. 5.20. He shall save a soul from death.

3. Love Christ, this makes hard things easy, it can endure all things, and
overcome all difficulties. This will constrain us to do our duty. 2 Cor. 5.14.

Observation 5. The Ministry is a work, 1 Timothy 3.1. Hence they are compared to
(...) Ministri. 1 Cor. 4.1. ab (...) and (...) remex quia remum in navi agit.
Rowers which take pains at their oars, to Laborers and that in Harvest, to
Fishermen and that in the tempestuous Sea of this World, and to Stars which
are in perpetual motion. V. Attersot on Philemon 2 p. 33, etc.
It Is no easy calling (as some Sectaries imagine) if rightly followed. The
sweat of the brow is nothing to that of the brain: besides the dangers we are
liable to for our works sake. This made Luther affirm, that a Minister labors
more in a day many times then a Husbandman does in a month; and that if
'twere lawful for him to leave his calling, he would with more ease and
pleasure dig for his living, or do any other hard labor rather then undergo a
Pastoral charge. [See more on V. 2. Obs. 4.]

Observation 6. Do the work or service of an Evangelist. Observe. (...)
Ministerium Evangelii quo nihil sublimius, nihil utilius, nihil itaque majore
fide and diligentia tractandum. Davenantius.
Ministers are Servants, and their Office in Service. They are not Lords to
tyrannize over the Faith of Gods people, but Servants to Christ and his Church.
Romans 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.4. Neither is this any disparagment, for Christ himself took
upon him the Title of a Minister. Romans 15.8. As the Magistrate is the Minister
of God to see to the Civil Affairs of the State and to defend the Church; so
the Pastors of the Church are the Ministers of God to see to the souls of men.

Observation 7. Of an Evangelist.] 7. Observe Ministers must preach the Gospel.
We must publish the glad tidings of a Savior, (what in us lies to all the
world) this is to do the work of an Evangelist, viz. soundly and sincerely to
publish the Gospel. True, Ministers must preach the Law, but then it must be
preparatory to the Gospel, to convince them of their sin and misery, and so fit
them for mercy; and after their conversion as a Rule for direction, etc. This
work is so that Christ tells us it was the primary end of his coming into the
world, viz. to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel. Isai. 61.2, 3. Luke 4.18.
It Is true, the four Apostles which wrote the Gospel, are properly or rather
appropriately called Evangelists; but in a large sense he is an Evangelist that
teaches the Gospel.

Observation 8. Timothy was no Diocesan Bishop. See Mr. Pryn's Treat. Timothy
and Titus in Bishops.
He was an Evangelist, and so not fixed as Bishops were to any particular
Congregation, City of Diocese; but he was to go up and down pro re nata as
occasion required, and to preach the Gospel as other Evangelists did.

Objection, In the Postscript it is said that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus.

Answer These Post-scripts are no part of Canonical Scripture, but were added
by the Scribes who wrote out the Epistles.

2. It contradicts the Text which expressly calls him an Evangelist which was a
distinct Officer from a Pastor or Bishop. Ephesians. 4.11.

3. It may help to take up the Cavel of Sectaries, who would have us live as
Timothy and others did without Tithes or fit Maintenance; when the case is not
the same. For 1. They were not tied to any particular charge as we are. 2. The
Magistrate was an Heathen and an Enemy. 3. They had all things common, and they
sold all and brought the money to the Apostles. 4. The Apostles had their
learning by inspiration, and they could work miracles and so could not want
maintenance.

Observation 9. Make full proof of thy Ministry. Observe, Ministers must fully
and faithfully discharge all the duties of their callings. They must so behave
themselves in their office, that they may be charged justly with nothing. Thus
Barnabas and Saul fulfilled their Ministry, Acts 12. ult. and 14.26. so did
Paul 2 Cor. 4.1, Omnia ea facere quae incum^unt Ministro, and quae conducunt ad
hominum salutem and regnum Christi promovendum. Davenant.
2. Archippus ( Colos. 4.17.) must not do his duty to halves, but he must
perform it in every respect, as it ought to be done, and accomplish all the
parts of his Ministry, strengthening the weak, comforting the afflicted, raising
the lapsed, reproving the wicked, convincing the erroneous, and confirming the
strong; adorning our pure doctrine with a pure conversation. This is to fulfill
our Ministry.

Verse 6. OBSERVATIONS.
1. When God takes away faithful and laborious Ministers, those that survive
them must stand up in their stead, supply their loss, and be so much the more
active, careful and vigilant in the discharge of their office. When Paul dies
then Timothy must double his diligence. If Eliah be taken away, Elisha must
pray for a double portion of his spirit to carry on the work. Eleazer succeeds
Aaron; Haggai and Zachary supply the loss of Daniel, and Christ arises in John
Baptists stead.

Observation 2.
2. The godly by a spiritual instinct and sagacity foresee their ends; so did
Jacob, Genesis 48.21. and Joshua (23.14.) and Christ, John 17.2. and Peter 2.14.
They always watch and wait for their Masters coming. Their acts, diseases and
disquietments which they meet withal from the world are as so many petty
deaths unto them. A man that dwells in an old crazy house where the walls fall
down, the foundation sinks, the pillars bend, and the whole building craks,
concludes such a house cannot long stand. As for the wicked they are insensible
and secure, and though gray hairs (which are signs of old age and death
approaching) be here and there upon them yet they know it not. Hos. 7.9.

Observation 3.
3. Death is not dreadful to good men. The Apostle speaks of it here not by way
of Lamentation, but of Exultation and in an holy triumph tells us that he had
fought a good fight, and finished his course, and now the time of his departure
was at hand when he should receive a crown of glory. Death to him was but a
departing from one room to another, from a lower room to an higher, from earth
to Heaven, Death in exi^us non obitus, a departing of Soul and body for a time
that they may meet mo^e gloriously. Philip. 3 21.
from troubles to rest, from mortality to immortality. They are long since dead
to the world and so can part with it more easily. Paul died daily, he was
sending more and more of his heart out of the world so that by that time he
came to dye, he was fully weaned from the world and desirous to be gone. Phil.
1.23. When Moses had finished his course, God bids him go up and dye, that is
all. Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. Death, which to wicked men is the King of terrors and
makes them fear and tremble, It may be said of all the godly in some sense as
'^is said of Moses ( Deuteronomy. 34.5.) he died secundum os Domini, God did by him as
a fond Nurse by her Babe, killed him and laid him down to sleep.
Job 18.14. That to a good man is the King of comforts, and like the Valley of
Achor a door of hope. In an holy security at death and destruction they can
laugh, Job 5.21, 22. The wicked look on death as a dreadful, dismal thing; but
Gods people looking on it through the Spectacles of the Gospel, s^e it to be a
conquered enemy, having its sting taken out, Hos. 13.15. so that what Agag said
vainly and vauntingly, Christian may speak truly and seriously. The bitterness
of death is past, 1 Samuel 15.32. As Christ said of Lazarus, this sickness is not
to death but unto life; so may we now say, this death is not unto death but
unto life. So that now the Saints can embrace it, go forth to meet it and bid
it welcome. They know it is but winking, and they are presently in Heaven. This
made the Martyrs go as cheerfully to their Stakes as others do to a Feast or
Marriage; when Basils enemies threatened to kill him if he would not turn, he
boldy answered, Oh that I might dye for the truth! Hilarion chides himself for
his backwardness, why do thou fear Oh my Soul to dye? thou have served thy
God these seventy years and art thou now afraid to dye? Egredere anima,
egredere. Even Sapientis animus totus in m^rtem prominet, hoc vult, hoc
meditatur, hac semper cup^dine fe^tur. Seneca ad Ma^cium. c. 23^
Seneca makes it the property of a wise man to desire death. We must not judge
of death, or of any other thing (as Sin, Riches, Afflictions, etc.) as the
world judges of them, but as Scripture speaks. Now the Spirit of God in
Scripture clothes death with very lovely and pleasing expressions.

See more in Mr. Robert Boltons four l^st things, page 62, etc.

See ten Consolations against death, in Gerhards Loci Commun. Tom. ^. p. 336.
edit. novissima.


1. It calls it a going to our Fathers. Genesis 15.15. A going to the Spirits of
just men made perfect. Heb. 12. 23. A going to God, to Christ and to the
blessed Angels, Phil. 1.23.

2. It is called an Exaltation or lifting up John 3.14.

3. A sowing which will rise in glory, 1 Cor. 15.43.

4. An undressing and uncloathing of our selves, a putting off our rags that we
may put on immortal Robes, 2 Cor. 5.2. 2 Peter 1.14.

5. A going to sleep, when men are wearied with labor they desire their beds.
The grave is a bed of rest, Isay 57.2. Job 3.13. Dan. 12.2. Rev. 14.13. and
death is but a long sleep till the Resurrection, John 11.11. Acts 13.36.

Let Atheists and Epicurean worldlings who have their portion only in this
life, fear death, because it puts an end to all their pleasures and hopes Job
11. ult. Hence Lewis the Eleventh King of France, a bloody persecutor,
commanded his servants in the time of his sickness that they should never once
name that bitter word death in his ears. But Christ has died to free his
people from this slavish fear of death, Heb. 2.15. by his death he has
sweetened our death unto us, and changed the nature of it, and has made that
which was sometimes a curse, now to be a blessing, of a foe he has made it a
friend, See Master Strong 31. Ser. p. 212, etc.
of a poison a medicine, and of a punishment an advancement. He lay in the
grave to sweeten and season our graves for us, so that now our flesh may rest
in hope, Psalm. 16.9. Proverbs 14.32.

Observation. 4.
4. The soul of man is immortal. Death is not an Annihilation, but a Migration
of the soul from the body for a time. As soon as ever the soul departs from
the body it is presently in bliss, (...), ab instanti.
Revelations 14.13 they are not only blessed at the day of judgment, but also
in the intermission. The soul does not sleep or perish, but the souls of the
Saints go to a better place, and to better company, viz. to Christ and to the
spirits of just men made perfect. Josiah was gathred to his father in peace,
(1.) to the spirits of his fathers who enjoyed peace; for in respect of his
Body* he was slain in battle. The soul never dies but subsisteth still, The
Heathen had some glimps^ of this. Part tamen meltore mei super alta perennis
Astraferar. Ovid. Met. l. 15. in fine.
even when it goes out of the body it returns to God that gave it, Eccles.
12.7. Hence Paul desires to be dissolved, why so? that he might be with Christ,
Philippians 1.23. and desires to be loosed from the body, that he might be
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. Christ tells the thief on the Cross, this
day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. Steven when stoned, cries,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. Christ has prepared immortal mansions
for it, John 14.2. and what should mortal souls do in ^mmortal dwellings, and
why is the Devil so serviceable, why does he make Covenants and Compacts with
wicked men for their souls; yea, and why does he offer the world in exchange
for a soul, if it be but a mortal perishing thing? To what end are all those
promises of Eternal life which are made to those that deny themselves if in
this life only they had hope? Then all the Threatenings of Eternal death, and
all those sorrows which the Scripture affirms shall light on the wicked,
would be false; for here they have mirth ease and pleasure, and if they had no
punishment hereafter where were the Truth of Gods threatenings and where his
Justice? The Scripture is clear that the pleasures of good men and the pains of
bad men are eternal; then it must needs follow that the souls of men which are
the Subjects of these pains, and pleasures cannot be mortal.

But here our Mortalists Object.

1. Objection.
If the soul of man be ex Traduce (as some affirm) then it is mortal for Omne
generabile est corruptibile.

Answer, The soul comes not ex Traduce by Propagation from our Parents, as the
souls of Beasts which come e potentia materiae: but the soul is created and
infused by God, and not propagated as appears, Genesis 2, 7. Eccles. 12.7. Zach.
12.1.

[See Doctor Reynolds on the Passions, cap. 32. p. 392. Piscator his Annot. on
Genesis 2.7. Baronius de Origin animae Exercit. 2. art. 3.

2. Objection.
The dead are said to sleep, and to perish Psalm 6.5. and 104.29. Isay 38.18.
and 57.1. Job 14.7.10.

Answer, This is spoken in respect of their bodies, not of their souls. The
dead do not praise thee (says David) viz. not in the land of the living on
earth, but in Heaven they sing Hallelujahs, Rev. 5.9.

A tree when it is cut down may sprout again (says Job) but man dies and
gives up the Ghost and where is he? This will not help the sleepy Sadduces of
our times, for tho Physically, and by the course of Nature man cannot revive
again; yet Hyperphysically and by a supernatural Almighty power he shall arise.
So that Where is? is to be restrained to where is he in the world? look for him
in City or Country, at home or abroad, he is not to be found. Man gives up the
Ghost, and where is he with all his riches, honors, plots and purposes?

3. Objection.
Eccles. 3.19.20, 21. As the beast dies so dies man, they have all one breath.

Answer, 1. Solomon here as often elsewhere in this Book does bring in the
Atheist deriding the immortality of the soul, he speaks the opinion of other
men and not his own. Solomon's own judgment you may see, Eccles. 12.7.

2. Take it in the Letter, and then Solomon speaks not of the soul of man,
but of animal and vital breath which is common to both; he speaks of man's
mere natural condition; else in respect of man's future condition his body shall
rise again and come to judgment. So that here is no comparison between the
soul of man and that of beasts, but between the death of the one and of the
other. q. d. both are liable to death, pains and diseases.

4. Objection.
Matthew. 8.22. and 10.28. Ephesians. 2.1. The soul is said to die.

Answer, The soul is not said to die in respect of Existence and being; but
relatively in respect of Gods grace and favor. It Is a separation of the soul
from God, who is the fountain of life, and is a living death, and a ceasing,
not to be, but to be happy.

5. Objection.
1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16. God only is said to have immortality, How then are
men's souls immortal?

Answer, The answer is easy. Immortality is twofold.

1. Essential, Absolute, Natural, and Independent, and so God only is
immortal; a part ante from all Eternity, he is the only Author and continuer
of it. 2. Derivative, and by Donation communicated to man, and so our souls are
immortal, and our bodies though subject to corruption, yet by Divine Ordination
shall be immortal after the Resurrection.
Woe then to those Atheistical Mortalists and Libertines which have sinned away
conscience, and have led loose lives and now are fallen to loose opinions. Open
but this gap and farewell Laws, Civility, Religion and all that is good. Grant
but this and farewell all noble actions, and all spiritual comforts, then
Christ died, the Apostles labored, and the Martyrs suffered in vain. If this
Doctrine were true, then all our Faith, our Hope, our Praying, Preaching,
Fasting, self-denial, mortification, sowing in tears, and spiritual combats
would be in vain, and we should be in a worse condition then the beasts that
perish.

If this were true, then why did Abraham forsake all? Joseph forbear his
Mistress, Moses refuse the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, and the Martyrs wander
up and down in Sheep-kins and Goat Skins being destitute, afflicted, tormented?
Heb. 11.

Grant but this, and then Cain need not fear to kill his brother, Saul to
persecute the Church, Herod to kill the Saints. Who will study to keep Gods
Commandments or make any conscience of his ways? As for ourselves, let us
abhor that desperate Opinion which opens the floodgates to all villainies and
abominations. The broachers and obstinate defenders of such Tenants should die
without mercy, Zach. 13.3. And if the murderers of men's bodies must die for it,
then such murderers should die some remarkable death; for as there are no
mercies like soul mercies, so there are no murders like these.

2. The Immortality of our souls should make us have a special care of them, we
should see to them diligently, Deuteronomy 4.9. Nature teaches us to look to
our bodies, but grace to our souls.

The soul is the man, and if that be lost, all is lost, but if you have a care
of your souls, Esanitate animaefi^ sanitas in corpore Aristot.
God will have a care of your bodies. If the Mid-wives fear the Lord, he will
provide them houses, Exodus 1.21. If Solomon seek soul- mercies God will cast
in Temporal blessings into the bargain, 1 Kings 3.12. There are many sicknesses
now abroad, the way to remove them is to cleave to the Lord and serve him with
all our souls, then he has promised to bless our Land, and to take all
sickness from amongst us, Exodus 23.25. Solomon tells us that the soul is a
precious thing, Proverbs 6.26. and a wiser then Solomon has told us that One
soul is more worth then all the ^orld, Matthew 16.26. Ten thousand worlds could
not ransom one soul. Nothing but the precious blood of Christ who was God and
Man could do it, 1 Pet. 1.19. We see how careful men be for their bodies, to
feed them when hungry, cloth them when naked, Physic them when sick, and arm
them against dangers; but the soul, the immortal soul lies starved, naked,
sick and unarmed; most with Martha carke and care for the body, but few with
Mary see to the better part. We see how highly men prize their Natural Lives,
Skinn for skinn and all that they have they will give for them, Job 2.4. Offer
a man all the World for his life and he can readily answer, what will this
profit me when I am dead? but offer the same man a little gain, honor, pleasure
for his soul, and he will part with that for it. Esau sold his soul for a mess of
pottage; Judas his for 30. pieces of silver; the Prodigal his for husks, and
the worldling for mere vanity drowns his soul in perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. Let us
from time to come set a higher price on our souls, let us so pray, so hear, so
live as those that believe that our souls are immortal; It Is true, we must
have a moderate care of our bodies, 1 Timothy, 5.23. but the welfare of our
souls must be chiefly regarded. Matthew. 6.33. John 6.27. 'T was an high
commendation of Gajus, when the Apostle wishes he might be in health and
prosper even as his Soul prospred, 3 John 1.2. I see more in Mr. Calamies
Sermon at R. Bolto^s Funeral, and Mr. Ambrose his Prima, 2 P. p. 61. etc. See
20. Reas. for the Souls Immortality in Mr. Baxters Saints Rest. P. 2. c. 10. S.
1. p. 298. Norton Orthodox Evangel. c. 15. D. Arrowsmith Tactica S. l. 3. c. 3.
S. 12. Prideaux Fascicul. p. 315. Calvin de Psychopannychia inter Opuscula, and
contra Libertinos, cap. 22.

Observation, 5.
5. The death of the Martyrs is a most pleasing Sacrifice to God. The obedient
life and death of all Gods Saints is very pleasing to him, Psalm. 116.15. but
the death of Martyrs who do actually seal to his truth with their dearest blood
is a most deligthful sacrifice to him. Quid generatim mors omnium fidelium?
nihil aliud nisi beata (...) and migratio ad, Deum. S^ulter.
How vilely soever the world esteems of their sufferings, yet they are precious
in Gods eye, and their blood shall pay for it who have made themselves drunk
with the blood of his Saints. Isay 63.13. Rev. 17.6. When ever therefore the
Lord shall call for our lives especially by way of Martyrdom we should
cheerfully offer them up in sacrifice to God; rejoicing that we have a life or
any thing of worth to loose for him. We should be holily prodigal of our lives
in Gods cause, so were the Martyrs, and so was Paul, he did not value his life
when he came to part with it in this kind, Acts 20.24. Neither should we mourn
inordinately (moderately we may as they did for Steven, Acts 8.2.) for such as
dye in the cause of Christ, nor yet hinder our Relations in such resolutions;
but say, The will of the Lord be done: rejoicing that we have any children or
friends that are worthy of so great an honor.

Observation, 6.
6. The death of the Martyrs does confirm the truth. The Church is Gods garden
and it is watered and enriched by the blood of Martyrs. By sealing the truth with
their blood, and not loving their lives unto the death, the weak are
strengthened, and the strong confirmed: Quid est mors Martyrum? est Libamen
effusum arae Dei, gloriosum libante, fructuosum Ecclesiae. Scultet. in locum.
and though they be dead yet their Testimony speaks, Heb. 12.4. they conquer
even when they seem to be conquered; and Christ is magnified by their death, as
well as by their life, Phil. 1.20.

Caut. Not that the sufferings or constancy of the Martyrs is the foundation of
our Faith, but God has ordained it as a means to strengthen it.

VERSE 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the Faith. V. 7. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of Righteousness
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me
only, but unto them also that love his appearing.
THE Apostle being come to the end of his race he looks about him, he looks
downward, backward, upward.

1. He looks downward into the grave (v. 6.) whither he was going, and there he
sees comfort, his death was a pleasing sacrifice to God, and a friend to
conveigh him to his fathers house.

2. He looks backward and views his well-spent life with joy and comfort, and
in an Holy gloriation breaks forth, I have fought the good fight, En floridam
and quasi triumphantem (...) asyndeto conjunctam; nam initia sententiarum and
fines similem inter se sonum habent.
etc. A Soul that has made its peace with God may with comfort and confidence
look death in the face, and say with good old Simeon, Lord now let thy servant
depart in peace.

3. He looks upward, and there he sees Heaven prepared for him. v. 8. So that
in these two verses we have Paul's work, and Paul's wages, we see what he did for
God, and what he expected from God.

Objct. But does not this savor of vainglory and Spiritual Pride?

Answer, Non haec jactan tia verba sunt, sed bonae conscientia. Estius.
Not at all, for the Apostle speaks not this Proudly or Thrasonically as if he
had merited any thing at the hand of God, for he testifies against this in all
his writings, especially in Romans 4. and Phil. 3. and tells us plainly that what
ever he was it was by grace. 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am that I am;
and through Christ that strengthened him he could do all things, Phil. 4.13.
and that 'twas mercy and not merit that ever he was faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. But
being a man of a good conscience and knowing whom he had believed, in an Holy
confidence, exultation and triumph he breaks forth into this heavenly
gloriation, and publishes this his Cygnean song, Cygneae voces Pauli morituri.
Scultet.
I have fought a good fight, etc. For though in the case of Justification we
must renounce our own righteousness, yet out of that case we may rejoice in the
good we have done.

2. He speaks this partly to comfort Timothy, and to encourage him to walk in
his steps, keeping Faith and a good conscience, that as he died now in the
peace thereof, so he walking in the way which he had prescribed might attain to
that end.

3. To encourage himself against the reproach of his reproaching violent death,
he eyes that heavenly reward and that crown of life prepared for such as have
fought the good ^ight as he had done, who was now to dye, not as a Malefactor
but a Martyr, not for any evil that he had done, but for his fidelity to Christ
whose faithful servant he proves himself to be, by a threefold Metaphor in the
Text.

1. The first is taken from a valiant Champion, I have fought a good fight, or
I have strove a good strife, and wrastled a good wrestling. (...); agonizavi
agonem illum pulchrum, egregium, gloriosum, quo pro fide Christi divulganda
plurimos labores, arummas, persecutiones and afflictiones generose superavi.
Beda.
The life of the Apostle was a continual conflict, he was never out of action
but was still combating either with his own flesh and corruption, 1 Cor. 9.25.
Romans 7. or with Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7. or else with the instruments of Satan, with
Jews and Gentiles, with Pharisees and Sadducees, with false brethren and
seducers, and such like beasts as Elymas the Sorcerer, Hymenaeus, and Philetus,
Alexander the Smith, the Epicures at Athens, and the beastly men at Ephesus, 2
Cor. 15.32. If after the manner of men I have fought with the beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not? Some take this Text
literally, that Paul did really fight with wild beasts, it being one kind of
punishment commonly inflicted on the primitive Christians when any thing went
amiss presently they cast the Christians to the Lions imputing the cause of
their calamities to them. But the most genuine and proper sense of the words
seems to be this: viz. that Paul had contested with such men at Ephesus as we
Barbarous in opinion, These Beasts were Metaphorical, men in shape, beasts in
condition, Dr. Halls Contempl. on N. T. p. 433. etc. folio edit. ult. ubi plura
ed.
and beastly in practice, such as Demetrius and his followers, Acts 19.9. Such
wicked men the Scripture frequently styles, beasts, Psalm. 68.30. Dan. 7.3, 4. 2 Timothy 4.17. Grotius and Dr. Hammond his disciple do illustrate this from 2 Cor.
1.8, 9. where Paul received the sentence of death in Asia of which Ephesus was
the Metropolis; q. d. If, as it is the manner of men to be put to fight with
beasts in their Amphitheaters, so I have been put to fight with bestial men at
Ephesus, and have with them been exposed to so manifest and great peril, what
am I the better, or to what purpose have I done it, if there be no
Resurrection? This sense agrees best with the scope of the Text, especially
seeing Luke describing that which happened to Paul at Ephesus, Non erat rem tam
insignem praeteriturus Lucas, qui and minora Pauli annotat. quare rectius erit
intelligere, concertandum sibi fuisse Ephesi cum ferinis hominibus. Grotius.
Acts 19. makes no mention of his being cast to wild beasts to be torn by them,
and of his miraculous deliverance from them, so great a matter would not have
been omitted by the Evangelist, who carefully sets down far lesser sufferings
of the Apostle. So then the Apostle glories how much he had done and suffered
for Christ, what death and dangers he run for him; he reckons eight distinct
perils in one verse 2 Cor. 11.26. Besides other hazards that he run, 1 Cor.
4.9. to 14. and 2.23. to 28. He bare in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus:
Gal. 6.17. Yet in all these fights and conflicts he conquered still, for he
fought not as one that beat the air, but the enemy; if he had to do with
Heretics he reproved them sharply; if with his own flesh, he did not lightly
chastise it, but by force of arms he brought it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.26,
27.

Object. But does not the Scripture condemn fighting in a Minister. 2 Timothy 3.3.
and 2.24. Tit. 1.7.

Answer, This doubt is easily resolved by distinguishing. Fighting is twofold.
1. Corporal and that also is twofold. 1. Lawful, as when a man fights in
defense of the truth and of his Relations. 2. Unlawful as rash, drunken
quarrelling and fighting; and this is that the Apostle condemns in a Minister,
he must be a man of patient and peaceable temper, not given to fighting and
quarrelling, else a Minister may (as occasion requires) correct his children
and servants, and se defendendo strike an assaulter. 2. There is a spiritual
fight against sin and Satan, and of this the Apostle here speaks. Paul was a
warrior, his weapons were spiritual (2 Cor. 10.4.) his adversaries spiritual
or for spiritual respects, and his victories were spiritual, Romans 7.24, 25. God
had placed him in the head of his Army, Agonizari, alludit ad athletas
pancratiastas qui toto corpore, manibus pedibusque certabant, Aul. Gellius
Noct. Attic. l. 13. cap. 26. Aristot. Rhetor, l. 1. c. 5.
he kept his station in despite of all opposition, and through Christ that
strengthened him came off a conqueror. And in this sense every Minister must be
a striker, else God will strike him, he must be a man of strife and contention,
not a beast must come in his way but he must give him a bang. He must not play
with them, but fight with them, he must not flatter or humor them in their
sins, but throw salt on them and reprove them. We have seen the Apostles
activity, he fought. We now come to the Adjunct of this fight, it is a Good
sight. He calls it That good fight Emphatically, as being good for Matter,
Manner, End and issue; hence the Article is doubled. (...), certamen illud
p^aecla^um. Beza.
Other fights as corporal ones for Masteries at the Olympic games, such
agones, wrastlings and combatings are poor, low, sensual things not worth the
mentioning; See the five Olympic certamen^ fully set sorth by Baldwin in his
comment. on 2 Timothy 2.5.
but the fight that I have fought is that good fight against sin and Satan, no
battles like these, no agonist or champion like this spiritual one who fights
the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. q. d. I have fought that excellent,
glorious, pleasant and profitable fight. Glorious in Gods eye, profitable to
the Church, (Phil. 1.12, 13.) and pleasing and profitable to my self what ever
the world judge of it, and though my end may seem reproachful in their eye, yet
it is glorious in mine: and it is my joy that I have broke through all
impediments, I have not fled from my colors, nor been faithless in Gods
Covenant, but like a faithful Soldier of Christ I have fought against the
temptations of Satan, the persecutions of the world, the corruption in mine own
bosom, and the oppositions of false Teachers.

2. The second Metaphor is taken from a strenuous runner. (...), cursum
consummavi, vel ad finem pe^duxi. Beza.
I have finished my course, I am come to the period of my days and to the end
of my race. I have not only begun, but grace assisting me I have finished,
fulfilled and consummated my course or race. (...) cursus a (...) curro. (...)
pr^ficio, consummo, impleo.
He seems to allude to the course of his whole life which after his conversion
was spent in the service of Christ, and as it were wholly in running from place
to place speedily to disperse the Gospel, and now he was come to the last stage
or Goal at Rome, where he was to receive his Garland after the manner of those
who ran for prizes, Refertur praesertim ad cursum Evangelica praedicationis,
quae Paulus universum pene orbem procurrit, ac sono and luce praedicati nis
Evangelicae celerrime complevit ac per lustravit. Soto in locum.
1 Cor. 9.24, 25. And if the life of other men be called a course Acts 13.25.
Surely the life of Paul may well be called a Race, who so swiftly ran through
so many places and Provinces and won them to Christ, Romans 15.19. Gal. 1.17, 18.
and 2. 2 Philip. 2.16. Heb. 12.1. q. d. I have accomplished the course of my
Ap^stleship, of Christianity, of my afflictions and combats; as my Savior when
he was giving up the Ghost said, it is finished, so may I say according to my
measure and degree, I have not only begun, but I have finished the work of my
Lord and Master.

(...). Fidem servavi.
I have kept the Faith.
3. This third Metaphor (say some) is taken from Depositaries who faithfully
keep the things committed to their trust without embezelment. Fidem intelligit
eam quam miles Imperatori, quamque Minister ac dispensator Domino suo debet
(.i.) fidelitatem. Estius.
2. Others say the Metaphor of a Soldier is still continued, who promises
fidelity to his commander and performs it to the death. The sense is the same
either way. Fidelity is required of all servants, but specially of Depositaries
and Soldiers. This Faith Paul had. 1. He kept the grace of saving Faith which
was committed to him as a signal gift of God, in which he persevered to the
end. 2. He was faithful in keeping the doctrine of Faith (what in him lay) from
corruption, and in a faithful propagation of that choice Treasury to posterity
in despite of the Legal Jew or the profane Gentile. And thus the word Faith is
often taken in Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.19. and 3.9. and 4.1. So Acts 6.7. they
obeyed the Faith (.i.) the Gospel which is the doctrine of Faith. So Acts
24.24. Romans 1.5. and 3.31. Rev. 2.19. So Saul is said to preach the Faith (.i.)
the doctrine of Faith which sometimes he persecuted, Gal. 1.23. so Phil. 1.27.
Jude 3.3. The word Faith sometimes signifies fidelity and constancy in our
promises and engagements. So Paul says of himself that he was a Teacher of the
Gentiles in Faith and truth (.i.) he was a faithful and sincere Teacher of
them, 1 Timothy 2.7. I have not taught for gain or applause, neither have I taught
the fancies and inventions of men, but I have plainly taught them the Faith of
Christ. So Tit. 2.18. Though it be true that Paul kept the Faith in all these
acceptations of the word, yet Calvin conceives that the Apostle has some
allusion to military fidelity, Non dubio quin ad solenne militiae jusjurandum
alludat, q. d. sed probum and fidelem Du^i suo militem fuisse. Calvin. in locum.
q. d. I have been faithful to Christ my commander to the last breath and have
kept the Faith committed to my trust in despite of all the frowns and
flatteries of its enemies. 'Twas a custom amongst the Romans that none should
go to the wars till they had first taken the military Oath (called the
Sacrament) to be faithful and true to the Emperor, to observe all his
commands, never to fly from their colors, nor to refuse any death so they
might be serviceable to the Commonwealth. Such an Oath we all take at Baptism,
we there renounce the Devil and all his works, and devote our selves to God and
his service for ever. This is general and common to all Christians. But there
is a more special fidelity required in Ministers whom God has in trusted with
his Sacred Oracles and truths; such stewards especially must be faithful, 1
Cor. 4.2. such a one was Paul, he was not only faithful as a Christian in
general, but as a Pastor he faithfully distributed to all the bread of life
without the leaven of superstition, the poison of heresy, or the chaff of man's
inventions, 2 Timothy 2.15. and therefore now he is dying he cannot but glory in
this and speaks of it with confidence and comfort, I have kept the faith. Now
happy, yea, thrice happy are those who when they come near their end, and are
within the Horizon of eternity can speak Paul's words with Paul's Spirit, and can
truly say, I have fought the good fight, etc.

Verse 8.
Paul now looks upward to the Reward, and there he sees heaven prepared for
him, yea, he sees himself (as 'twere) already there, which makes him speak so
confidently both of a safe deliverance from all miseries in this life; v. 18.
and of enjoying eternal blessedness after this life. He still persists in the
Metaphor taken from valiant wrastlers, and strenuous runners which conquer in
the Olympic games, Hic juvenum quicunque manu, pedibusve, rotave vicerat,
escul^a capiebat frondis honorem. Ovid. Met. l. 1.
they had a crown either of Bays, Ivy, Olive or Parsley bestowed on them by way
of honor: much more will the Lord bestow an everlasting crown of life on those
spiritual Heroes who overcome the enemies of their Salvation. Many take great
pains to little purpose, I have not done so (says Paul) I have fought a good
fight and am assured of a crown of life at last, however it go with me now. He
had committed a depositum to God, he trusted him with his Salvation, 2 Timothy
1.12. and God had deposited his truth to him; now Paul kept the truth which God
had left with him, and therefore he did believe that God would keep that which
he had committed to him. So that if I had three things to wish, I should wish
for Paul's threefold crown.

1. The crown of Grace, a great measure of Grace to do Christ much service. 2.
His crown of Joy, a great measure of joy to go through with that service. 3.
The crown of Glory which he was here assured of. In the words we have first the
concluding Particle, henceforth, lastly, as for that which remains.
2. We have the Reward of the faithful, no less then a crown, not gold or
fading flowers, but a crown with an adjunct, a crown of Righteousness, which is
a Periphrasis of Heaven and eternal happiness.

3. The person Rewarding, Christ who is here Periphrastically described by two
Titles, viz. Lord and Judge, together with an adjunct, a Righteous Judge.

4. Here are the persons Rewarded, not only Paul, but also all the faithful
who are here described by their affection to Christ they love and long for his
coming to Judgment.

5. Hence the certainty of this Reward, It Is laid up for them, and he is
righteous and faithful who has promised.

6. Here is the Time when they shall receive this Reward, or the day of their
Coronation, and that is, In that day, (.i.) at that great and glorious day of
the Lord when he shall come to Judge the quick and dead, and shall give to
every one according to his works.

The Explication.
Henceforth. Lastly, or as for that which remains. q. d. I have fought a good
fight, what now remains but an assured expectation of a crown of Righteousness.
(...) pro (...), quod superest, vel quod reliquum est, Ellipsis Graecis
familiaris. Beza.


There is laid up for me.] Here is the Assurance he has of his Reward, he
speaks of it as if he were already possessed of it. (...), reposita est mihi.
It Is safely and surely kept for me. The word imparts two things: 1. A
designation of that which is laid up to some peculiar person. 2. A reservation
and safe keeping of it to the use of those that it is assigned to.
He alludes to Parents who lay up something as an Inheritance for their
children: God has prepared eternal life for the elect before the foundation of
the world. Illa dicuntur (...) quae liberis and amicis nostris in futu^um
recondimus. Zanchy.
Matthew. 25.34. Ephesians. 1.4. So that there is no danger of the godlies loosing
it, since it is laid up in so safe a hand, Matthew. 6.2. 2 Pet. 2.3, 4.

A Crown of Righteousness.]
Gloriatur Apostolus De Reposita hac corona, e^si nondum erat Imposita, quoniam
in coelo reponebatur, atque ad^o in loco constituta ubi perdi nequit aut
intercipi. D. Arrowsmith.
Crowns are for Kings and Conquerours, I have fought the good fight and Christ
assisting me I have conquered all the enemies of my Salvation; and though my
combats have been hard, yet the more glorious are my victories. Now therefore I
expect a Crown, not of gold, silver, pearls, laurels or such like fading,
perishing, corruptible things, Esai. 40.6. Job. 14.2. But a crown of
Righteousness (.i.) everlasting happiness which God has promised as a reward
to his servants for their service, whose imperfect works he crowns as if they
were perfect. This elsewhere is called a crown of life, James 1.12. Romans 2.10.
(.i.) an ever-lasting, never fading crown, 1 Pet. 1.4. and a crown of glory, (1
Pet. 5.4.) beeause it consists in the fruition of that eternal weight of glory
of which Paul speaks, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Now this eternal glory is called
a crown for many Reasons.

N^n incipienti, sed vincenti dabitur.
1. A crown is not given till the victory be gained, 2 Timothy 2.5. It Is not to him
that begins, but to him that overcomes which the promise runs, Rev. 2. and 3.
None can have this crown but such as in their measure resemble Christ their
head who went forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. It Is not the somnolent
but the violent ( non lenti, sed violenti) that get this crown, Matthew. 11.12.
The Crowns of the greatest Monarchs in the world (though they last long) yet
are corruptible, subject to wearing, cracking, stealing, they will be taken
from them as they from their crowns suddenly. Hackwell.
2. It notes the perpetuity of the glory, a crown is round and has neither
beginning nor ending; so the glory of the Saints in heaven is an immortal,
immarcessible, incorruptible, never fading crown, 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 9.24.
Forma rotunda perfectissima.
3. It notes the per^ction of it, as the crown compasses the head on every
side; Faelicitas est aggregatio omnium bonorum. Aristot.
so there is nothing wanting in this crown of life: here is an Aggregation of
all good things for Soul and body, Matthew. 25.35. Rev. 31.4. etc. as God is said
to crown the year with his goodness, Corona (apud Hebraeos) abundantiam and
cumulum omnium bonorum significat.
( Psalm. 65.11.) when he showers down plenty of Temporal blessings on us; so
the Saints in glory shall be crowned with goodness when all the faculties of
the Soul and members of the body shall be perfect and filled with glory. 4. It
represents to us the dignity of the Saints and the glory of their reward. They
are all Kings and shall be crowned. The day of Judgment is their
Coronation-day, it is in That day which the souls and bodies of the Saint shall
be crowned with everlasting bliss. A crown is the choicest and chiefest of all
humane rewards, amongst all t^rrene gifts none more glorious then a crown. This
is the height of humane excellencies, men use to desire no more then a Crown,
and for this men will do much.
Of Righteousness.]
It is so called, not because we of our selves have any right by way of merit
(...) it, Est justitia promissionis. non operum dignitatem sed verbi veritatem
respiciens; justam enim and Deo dignum est servare ea quae promisit. Gerhard.
but the reward of Eternal life is called a Crown of Righteousness.

1. Because it is purchased for us by the righteousness of Christ by his
perfect Kighteousness and Obedience he has merited this for us, and so in
Christ it is due to us by way of merit, though in respect of us it is of m^re
Grace.

2. In respect of his Promise, his Omne promissum transit in debitum. Fidelis
Deus qui se nostrum debitorem fecit, non ali quid a nobis accipiendo, sed tanta
nobis promittendo. Aug. in Psalm. 104.

Promissio divina non facit rem promissam debitam debito justitiae, sed
fidelitatis tantum, nec arguit meritum ex part recipientis, sed meram liberam.
Davenant de Justitia actuali. cap. 60. Aquinas 22 ae. qu. 58: Art. 2.


fidelity binds him to perform it, God has promised a Crown of Life to such
as serve him sincerely, James 1.12. 1 John 2.25. Revel. 2.10. and 3.21. Now it
is this promise of God, and not any merit of ours which makes God our debtor.
Though God make the promise in Grace, yet being once made his Truth and Justice
obliges him to perform it. God cannot but act condecently (as the Schoolmen
speak) and agreeable to his goodness; as he cannot deny himself, so he cannot
do any thing unworthy of himself. So that Eternal life is a crown of
Righteousness ex part Dei, Iustitae pars est, stare promissis.
God has promised it to such as overcome, and ex part rei, it is just with God
to give unto his suffering servants rest and peace, 2 These. 1.6, 7. So that
this Crown is due in Debetur personae in Christo, non operi, simul atque Deus
nos in gratiam recipit opera quoque nostra grata habet, ut praemio quoque
(licet indebito) dig, netur. Calvin.
Justice Evangelical.

3. It may be called a Crown of Righteousness, because it is given only to
Righteous men, and so it shows who shall be crowned, and what is the way to
it; but not for what merits or desert of ours it is given. It implies not any
condignity or efficiency in good things we do, but an Sunt bona opera spei
seminaria, Charitatis incentiva, Praedestinationis occultae indicia, futurae
felicitatis praesagia, Via regni, non causa regnandi, Bernard Tract. de Gratia.
Ordinability of them to eternal Life. So that God crowns his own work in us
in which we make not God a debtor to us, but we are made debtors to him for his
grace received by which we work.

Objection.
The Papists wring and wrest this Text exceedingly that they may build their
Merit of works upon it. Here (say they) is 1. A Crown of Righteousness. 2. Not
barely given but rendered. 3. And that by a Righteous Judge.

Answer, 1. The Apostle speaks not here of any righteousness by way of
Obligation, commutation or commensuration; but of a Righteousness (as I have
showed) of fidelity and condecency, so that righteousness here has no respect
to our Merits, but to Evangelical promises which admit of no merit but that of
the Son of God, and therefore it is not said that Christ will give this Crown of
Righteousness, Merentibus, to such as merit it, but diligentibus, to such as
love him and his appearing: Now our love (as all our other graces) is imperfect
and so cannot merit this crown of perfect righteousness.

2. We must distinguish of righteousness.

1. There is a Legal Righteousness, and this the Apostle disclaimeth,
Philippians 3.7.8. 2. There is an Evangelical righteousness, and this excludes
all Merit, Romans 4.2, 3, 5.
2. We must distinguish of Reward, there is a reward of Merit, and this the
Saints disclaim, Meritum meum ministratio Domini.

A genere ad speciem affirmative non valet argumentum


Isay 64.6, 2. A reward of mercy, Psalm 103.4. He crowns us with mercy, and
not with Merit: both Grace and Glory are his free gift. Now it is fallacious
arguing to reason from a reward to a reward of merit, for it is a reward of
mercy which God bestows on his people.

3. The Saints in Heaven cast their Crowns at the feet of the Lamb, they part
not stakes with him, but ascribe the glory of all to him, Rev. 4* 10, 11. Yea,
they are so far from pleading the merit of their works that they forget them,
which is mentioned to their praise, Matthew. 25.44, Phil. 3.13. yea they disown
them as to this account. Job. 9.15. and 10.15. Isay 64.6. yea the Apostle tells
us here that this Crown of Righteousness was laid up by God in Heaven as an
Inheritance freely prepared for him, but no way merited by him.

4. This wrestling and running of the Saints can no way merit salvation,
because it is imperfect and impure, being mixed with many sins and failings, but
the works which merit salvation must be perfectly pure, for to make a work
meritorious four things must concur.

1. The work must be properly our own, and not his of whom we pretend to merit.
Now all our good works come from God, Quisquis tibi enumerat merita sua, quid
tibi enumerat nisi munera tua? Aug. confess. l. 9. c. 13.
James 1.17. it is he that works in us both to will and to do, Philippians,
2.13. Nemo consequitur praemium, eo quod facit ex officio debitum. Juriscons.
2. It must be opus indebitum a work to which we are not bound, but the
Apostles running and wrestling was opus debitum and imperfectum; yea, if we
could do ten thousand times more then we do, Vae etiam laudibili vitae
hominum si remota justitia discutias eam.
yet still we should be but unprofitable servants and so might expect punishment
rather then reward. 3. It must be some way profitable to him from whom we
expect our reward; but if we be never so righteous, the God uses us out of
Indulgence, not out out of Indigence; to honor us, not to help him. The
greatest honor that God puts upon men is to make them isntrumental in
promoting his service.
benefit is ours, not Gods Job. 35.7. Psalm 16.2. 4. It must have condignity to
the reward expected, and have an equal worth and proportion with it. Now what
proportion is there between our finite imperfect actings, and the reward of
Eternal life which is infinite and perfect.
[Against these Merit-mongers, see Davenants Determine. Quaest. 34. Doct. Downam
on Justif. l. 8. c. 1. p. 347. Perkins Reform. Cathol. Point 5. Willets Synops.
controvers. 19.2, 3. p. 1305. Doctor Halls old Relig. cap. 6. Master Gatakers
Sermon on Genesis 32.10. p. 269.291.303. fol. Alting. P. 2. Q. 61. p. 292, and
above all, Doctor Mortons Antidot. contra merita.]

Objection.
Estius and Jansennius urge yet further that Christ will not simply Give, but
he will Render this reward to the godly as a due debt for their good works.

Answer, 1. They are weak Arguments which are grounded on mere Criticismes.

2. The words (...), dabit; and (...) reddet are used promiscuously one for the
other in Scripture, as Matthew 27.53. Luke 4.20. and 9.42, Acts 4.33. So in
other words and languages compounds are often used for simples.

3. Dabo, Deus dicitur Retribuere non proprie sed (...) cum stat promissis.
Camer.
yet this Rendering denotes Gods free-gift according to his gracious promise
to his people, and that after their labors, and according to their works, not
for any merit in their works foreseen. Hence it is called the reward of
Inheritance, Colossians 3.24. Now as the Son is born an Heir, and so cannot
merit his Inheritance; so the children of God are all Heirs, and the
Inheritance is prepared for them before their good works are done.

Which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me.
That is, Christ who is the Lord and righteous Judge of all the world. He is
called The righteous Judge, because he will Judge in righteousness, Acts
17.31. and will execute the righteous judgments of God on the wicked, and
relieve his people, 2 These. 1.6, 7. The Apostle keeps to the Metaphor still
taken from Runners and wrastlers for prizes at the Olympic games, in which
there were certain Judges (called Brabentae) to observe those that were
Victors, and to give just sentence on the Conquerours side.

In that day] (i.) that great and glorious day of the Lord Christ when he shall
come to judge the world in righteousness rendering to every man according to his
works, 1 Cor. 3.8. then shall all believers be glorified both in soul and body,
and shall receive the full reward of all their labors.

The day of the general judgment is often called in Scripture Emphatically,
That day, 2 Timothy 1.12. Matthew. 7.22. and 24.36.) by way of eminency as being the
day of days, the most illustrious and glorious day that ever was or ever shall
be: The most terrible to the wicked, and most comfortable to the godly who are
commanded to lift up their heads for joy when they but think of it, what will
they do when they shall see it?

Question, Did not Paul's soul receive the Crown of Righteousness as soon as it
was separated from his body? how then is he said to receive it at the day of
judgment?

Answer, It is true, the souls of the Saints as soon as ever they part from the
body go immediately to bliss, Revel. 14.13. and dwell with Christ, Philippians
1.23. John 17.24. 1 Cor. 13.12. and 2.5, 6. Revelations 4.8. and 5.8. and 7.9.
They receive a great measure of happiness before the day of judgment for they
enjoy the beatifical vision of God now: Hence the spirits of just men are said
already to be made perfect, ( Hebrews 12.23.) comparatively, viz. in
comparison of what they were here; though in comparison of what they shall be
after the Resurrection they are still imperfect, Rev. 6.10, 11. But at the day
of judgment then the saints shall receive a full and perfect reward both in
soul and body conjunctly, Colossians 3.4. 1 John 3.2. Now they are in glory,
but then they shall be in perfect Glory and enjoy a clearer Vision of God. Then
the desire which the soul has to its body shall be fulfilled. As the damned in
Hell have not that full torment they shall have at that day; so the saints in
heaven have not that fullness of joy which they shall have at that day when soul
and body shall be united.

[See more to this point in Master Baxters Saints rest, p. 2. c. 10. Master
Newtons Orthodox Evangel. c. 15. p. 327.336.]

And not to me only, but to those also that love his appearing.
Q. d. He will give this Crown of Life, not only to me, but to all the
faithful who may be known by this note, that they love and long for the (...),
apparitio illustris cum apparebit christus veniens ad judicium eximio
splendore, charitate and Majestate.
glorious coming of their Lord and Savior to judgment. Least any should
think that this Crown was peculiar to Paul, who had done and suffered so much
for Christ, he extends it to all believers, and tells us that Christ has
prepared it for them as well as for him. Vt eodem reliqui omnes animo secum
militent, ad cor^nae societatem eos invitat. Calvin.
Having spoken of himself in Thesi, he comes ad Hypothesin and applies it to
all the faithful. The wicked have guilty consciences, and so can have no love
nor desire after that day, Nemo adventum judicis diligit, nisi qui se habere
causam bonam novit. Gerg.
they are besotted with the world, they have their joys, and their portion
here, they have their heaven and happiness here, they can expect none
hereafter.

The godly like Lazarus have their sorrows here, now they are tempted, tossed,
troubled which makes them long for Christ's coming. They are married to Christ,
Diligere adventum Christi est sinceritate fidei, firmitate Spei, ardore
Charitatis adventum ejus expectare. Aug. ad Hesych.
and therefore like a faithful Spouse, they long for the Bridegroomes coming.

The sum and substance of all this. q. d. My life is a warfare and behold, I
have fought a good fight (which I mention not Vain-gloriously, but Thankfully)
against both men and devils, and beastly Barbarians, I have contended for the
Gospel constantly and courageously. My life is a race, and I have run my course
even to the very goal in despite of all opposition, I have maintained and
defended the truth of Christ's Gospel inviolably according to my Christian
profession and office Apostolical, and now from henceforth I comfort my self
with the expectation of that crown of immortality, which upon the gracious
promises of a righteous God is laid up for me, and not for me only, but for
all the faithful who love Christ and long for his coming.

Observations.
1. It Is lawful sometimes to speak of those gifts and graces which God has
given us, that we may comfort and quicken others by our example. But of this
see the Observations on chapter 3.10.

2. The sweetest songs of the Saints have been toward their last ends. The sun
shines sweetliest when it is setting, the wine of the Spirit is strongest in
the Saints when they are drawing to an end. His motions are quickest when
natural motions are slowest; as we see in Moses his Swan-like Song, Deuteronomy. 31.
and 32. and 33. and David how sweetly does he sing a little before he dies of
Gods mercies to himself, of the covenant of free Grace which God had made with
him, and his judgments on the sons of Belial, 2 Samuel 23.1. to 8. Joshua
dying, how sweetly does he exhort the people to obedience by setting before
them the mercies of God, Joshua 24. All Christ's sayings are excellent, but none
so sweet and comfortable as those which he delivered a little before his death.
His last Sermon and Prayer how sweet are they? John 13.14, 15, 16, 17. Jacob
dying, how sweetly does he bless his sons? Genesis 49. Steven dying prays for
their life who put him to death; so did the Martyrs. Doctor Prestons last
Sermons were on the Attributes. Doctor Sibbs his last Sermons on that
comfortable Text, John 14.1. and Master Robert Boltons on the Joys of Heaven:
Wicked men when they die they set in a Cloud, and like the going out of a
candle they leave a stench behind them: as their bodies, so their names rot and
stink when they are dead and gone. As wicked men grow worse and worse and their
last days are their worst; so good men grow better and better, and their last
days are their best; having hut a little time to live in the world they are
willing to leave it with a good savor.

Observation 3.

3. The sweet resent which a good Conscience has of a well spent life is
matter of singular comfort and rejoicing in death. The Apostle was now near to
death and what does he rejoice in? why it is in this, that by the assistance of
Christ he had fought a good sight and finished his course; and therefore he had
hope (as the righteous have) even in death, Proverbs 14.32. Elijah that had
been zealous for the Lord of Hosts can with comfort desire the Lord to to take
his soul, 1 Kings 19.4.10. Hezekiah that great reformer when he heard that he
must die, Sicut dum vivimus debemus bona nostra oblivisci ne extollamur; ita
approqinquante morte ea ad memo^iam revocemus ad nosmetipsos consolandos.
Gregor.
yet comfort himself with this, that he had walked before God in sincerity
and singleness of heart, Isay 38.3. this upheld Job in the midst of all his
trials, Job 27.5, 6. This comforted the Apostles when they were in deep
distress, 2 Corinthians 1.12. This is our rejoicing the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation
in the world. Not that the conscience of our sincere walking is the Deserver,
but the Assurer of our salvation. Well-doing may Evidence to us our Election,
though it cannot Merit it, 2 Peter 1.10. Men of good consciences sit at a
continnal Feast, Proverbs 15.15. a Tob leb, a good heart. Heb. The Scripture
often puts Heart, for Conscience, 2 Samuel 24.10. Acts 15 9. 1 John 3.20. B^num
Ethice (i.) purum and sanctam. Bonum Physice (i.) laetum, hilare juelludam;
tale enim est pu^um and sanctum ^or.
good heart, or a quiet merry heart (as some Translations render it) Is, not
may be or shall be hereafter, but is already a real Feast, and hereafter shall
be consummate. It Is not a dead, Ignorant secure, benumbed, erroneous, seared
Conscience; but it is an enlightened, inlivened, renewed, pure conscience which
is purged from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, and delivered from
the Tyranny of sin, by the Spirit of Christ: Puritatis individua comes est
laetitia.
This, this only is a good Conscience. This purity of Conscience breeds
Peace, and Peace breeds Joy, and Spiritual Mirth; this reconcileth those
Translations which render it a quiet or merry heart, which is true in respect
of the effects and fruits of a good conscience. Now this good conscience is
called a Feast.

1. Because at a Feast there is variety of dainties and dishes, abundance of
cates and delicates; it is not a Feast without variety and plenty, and more then
ordinary fare. So at this Feast there is great variety.

1. Here is Joy, this is most suitable and seasonable at a Feast, not a carnal,
sensual, external inferior joy; but a spiritual, supernatural, Holy, Heavenly,
solid, serious, well-grounded, durable Joy, which none can take from us, John
16.22. They rejoice in the Lord always, Psalm 33.1. Philip. 4.4. yea even in
Tribulation, Romans 5.3. James 1.2. and that with a superlative transcendent
Joy, hence called Joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Peter 1.8. and compared to
Joy in Harvest, when the husbandman after long toil reapeth the fruits of his
labors, Isay 9.3. yea, it surpasses that joy, Psalm 4.7. it mortifieth our
delights to these low things, makes us to rejoice in them, as though we
rejoiced not, 1 Cor. 7.31. Lo this is the first dish which is served in at this
Royal Feast, Matthew 13.44. Acts 16.34. and therefore it is called by a special
propriety, the joy of Gods people, Psalm. 206.5.

2. At this Feast here is Peace, not a Fading, unsettled, transitory Peace, such
as wicked men have; but it is a well grounded and a well bottomed Peace; it is
built on the Word, and it is foundation is laid in Humiliation, it had a storm
before it came to this calm.

2. It Is not an ordinary but a transcendent Peace, such as passes all human
understanding, Phil. 4.7. man's wit cannot sufficiently conceive it, nor value
it according to its worth. To have Peace with men and Angels is a mercy, but
when the soul lies groaning under the sight and sense of sin, then for the
Spirit to speak Peace to us, to assure us that God in Christ is reconciled to
us, this is a mercy of mercies. David had this Peace and therefore he fears not
though ten thousand should compass him about, Psalm 3.6. Peter that was in
great danger of his life, yet having a good cause and a good conscience he
sleeps in Peace, Acts 12.6.

3. It Is an everlasting peace, Christ has bequeathed it to his for ever, John
14.27. Peace I leave with you my Peace I give you. The Lord has bound himself
by Covenant to continue it, it is more firm then the pillars of the Earth, or
the Poles of Heaven, Isay 54.9. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my Peace be removed. Their Peace may be interrupted and clouded for a time,
but it shall never be totally taken away, for their seed abides within them,
even the spirit of Peace and comfort.

Though the good man's beginning may be troublesome and sorrowful, yet his end
is Peace, Psalm. 37.37.

3. This Feast is an excelling Feast, all other Feasts compared to this are
mere hunger and empty things. This excels all other Feasts in three
particulars especially.

1. In respect of the Founders of it, viz. the Lord of Heaven and Earth, the
God of all comfort and consolation. He only that made the conscience can
remove the guilt of it, and by his Spirit infuse comfort and make peace there.
Other Feasts have men for their Founders. 2. In respect of the nature of it.
This is a Spiritual Feast full of Spiritual delights and comforts; other Feasts
are but carnal, corporal, sensual ones that feed and delight the carcass and
outward man only. 3. In respect of Duration, it is not for a day, or twelve
days, but for ever, it is a continual Feast; it is a Feast in prosperity, and a
Feast in adversity, a Feast at home, and a Feast abroad, a Feast in public,
and a Feast in private, a Feast by day, and a Feast by night, a Feast in a
prison, and a Feast in a Palace: this is the happiness of such as get and keep
good Consciences, they keep holy day every day, be it clear or cloudy. He
enjoyes a perpetual serenity and sits at a continual Feast. As it is the
misery of the wicked that their worm never dies, so it is the happiness of the
Saints that their joys which are begun here shall never end. This is the
beginning of Heaven here, Romans 14.17. it is Heaven upon Earth, it is praeludium
caeli, a taste of the joys of Heaven. This is the Heaven of Heavens, as in ill
conscience is the hell of hells: without this heaven would not be heaven to us.
When all other Feasts can yield us to comfort yet this will, and that in three
times especially. 1. In the times of common calamity, when sword, plague and
famine are abroad, Nihil jucundius, nihil est tutius, nihil ditius bona
conscientia, premat corpus, trahat mundus, terreat Diabolus illa erit secura.
Bern. de conseien.
then shall such be secure and safe, Job 5.19, 20. and 22.29. Psalm 91. In
troublous times this will be a Noah's Arc to save us from perishing with the
world; A Zoar to shelter us from wrath to come. This will be a Simon that will
help us to bear our Crosses; when the Spirit of a man is once assured of Gods
favor it can cheerfully endure all losses Huic non est onorosa paupertas, non
sentit injurias, ridet opprobria, contemnit damn^. Bernard.
crosses, and calamities, Proverbs 18.14. His Motto is, Miser sit, qui miser
esse potest. Let who will be miserable he cannot. 2. At the hour of death,
when mirth and music can do us no good, then a good conscience like a
faithful Jonathan will speak comfort to us, and be a David's harp to refresh us
even in the pangs of death, as we see Nehemiah 13.22. Isay 38.3. This inward
Peace made the Martyrs go as cheerfully to their stakes as many do to their
weddings. 3. At the day of judgment a good conscience will stand us in more
steed then all the riches or privileges of the world, such shall then be
received with an Euge, well done good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much, enter now with thy Lord
into that place where he has his joy and glory, Matthew. 25.22.

4. Observation.

4. Every faithful Christian is a spiritual Soldier, for Paul speaks not of
himself only as he was a Minister of Christ but as he was a faithful
Christian he fought the good fight in his general and particular calling, he
kept under his body and subdued those carnal lusts and affections which warred
against the peace of his soul, he did not make a flourish like a Fencer which
beats the Air, but he fought in earnest and beat the enemies of his salvation,
1 Cor. 9.27, 28. This he enjoynes Timothy, (1 Timothy 6.12.) to fight the good
fight of Faith, and to defend it against all the temptations of the Devil,
oppositions of the world, and lusts of the flesh. For this reason he calls
Achippus his fellow-souldier, Philemon 2. V. Raworth Jacobs wrestling, p. 269.
All the saints in their several generations have been fighters in this
spiritual sense (for in this war all is spiritual, our weapons are spiritual,
our enemies spiritual; our warfare spiritual, and our victories Spiritual, 2
Cor. 10.3, 4.) Noah by his righteousness warred and witnessed against the
unrighteousness of the old world, Lot against the Sodomites, Moses against the
sins of Egypt and Israel, Daniel and the three Chaldaean worthies fought
against the Idolatry of their times; Elijah, Isay, Jeremy and all the Prophets
and Apostles fought this good fight against the sinners of the several Ages,
which they lived in. All these agonies and combats are but the same which the
Saints did formerly pass through, Philippians 1. ult. here the Church is
Militant; in Heaven, she is Triumphant, here she is said to be terrible like an
Army with banners, Non est via ad Regnum sine primitiis Regni, nec sperare
potest coeleste Regnum cui non super propriam regnare Concupiscentiam adhuc
datur. Bernard.
Canticles 6.4. and to have an Armory whereon there hang a thousand bucklers
all shields of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. No man can get one foot of ground against
sin and Satan, nor keep it without fighting. Let Nehemiah but once begin to
build the walls of Jerusalem, Tobiah and Samballat with his confederates will
presently oppose him. Let Zerubbabel begin the work of Reformation and
Mountains of opposition will suddenly arise, Zach. 4.7. If Christ set but his
face toward Jerusalem, and Samaritans will hate him. Let Saul become a Paul
and what persecutions abide him in every place, Acts 21.23. When the woman (the
Church) is in travel of the Man-child of Reformation, then expect from the
Dragon floods of Persecution, Revelations 12. Let a man be once enlightened and
converted to the Faith, he must presently look to endure a great fight of
afflictions, Heb. 10.32. Satan will be wrestling with him and try to give him a
fall. Hence it is that Job (7.1. and 14.14.) calls the life of man a warfare,
Is there not an appointed time to man, or as the margin of your Bibles, Is
there not a warfare? because war of all other actions has its appointed times.
Tsaba proprie militiam, exercitum and totum tempus quo quis stipendium meret,
quo bellum geritur. Lavater.
We are all Way-fairing and war-fairing men, our life is nothing else but a
continual bickering with a world of tentations, corruptions, and dangerous
assaults. We are beset round, and therefore we must fight round. Especially
Gods faithful Nec de^rit militia quamdiu fuerit malitia. Hieron.
Ministers who are the Captains and Leaders of the Lords people, and are placed
in the Front of the battle must expect the most furious assaults. See how
Ministers are Soldiers, Dyke on Philemon. 2.
The Devil hates every good man, but he makes his fiercest onsets on the
Ministers of Christ which makes Christ hold his See an excellent Se^mon of Mr.
Brinsly's on Rev. 2.1.
Stars in his right hand, as we are subject to greater opposition, so we are
under Christ's special protection. People therefore had need to be much in
Prayer for their Ministers, warriors had need of Prayers, and if I must pray
for mine enemy, then sure much more for my Minister, and if Christ prayed for
them shall not we? John 16.26. and 17.

1. Consider we are men, and so subject to like Passions as other men, and
therefore we have need of your Prayers.

2. We are Brethren, and in respect of this Relation we may justly challenge
your prayers. Whom will you pray for if you will not pray for your Brethren?
This made the Apostle so earnest with the Romans (15.30.) I beeseech you
Brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that
ye strive together with me in your Prayers to God for me. See with what
earnestness this great Apostle begs for Prayers. So Ephesians. 6.19. 2 Cor. 1.11. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. He does not say Brethren commend us, or Brethren maintain us, but
Brethren Pray for us: In this the poorest may be helpful to us. Pray that our
number may be increased, Matthew 9.35. Atheists cry, it was never good world
since there was so much Preaching, I say the world would be better if there
were more. Pray that they may be continued, its a special mercy when our eyes
can see our Teachers, and they be not removed into corners, Isay 30.20, Pray
that we may be restored, Hebrews 13.18, 19. Prayer has a Virtue in it to
bring back those banished ones. Pray for us in our Temptations and Afflictions
that God would sweeten and sanctify them and uphold us under them. The Devil
winnowes all but he sifts Christ's Peter's as men do wheat which they sift most
accurately; he shoots his sharpest arrows, and chooses out the smoothest
stones to throw at these Leaders of Gods Host. Pray that God would give us
abilities and hearts to improve these abilities, that he would give success to
our labors, and enable us to persevere in despite of all discouragement
whatsoever.

3. Consider we are your spiritual Fathers, 2 Kings 2.12. Nature teaches men
to pray for natural Fathers, and grace for spiritual.

4. They pray for you, great reason then that you should pray for them. Yea, in
praying for them you pray for your selves, for they are your servants in Christ.

Now if we must pray for those to whom we are related but as men, how much more
should we pray for our Ministers, in whom all these Relations concenter and
meet, who are Men, Brethren, Fathers, Watchmen, Shepherds, Nurses, Warriors,
(1 Timothy 1.18. and 2.4.) that fight for the Churches safety.

Woe to those that in stead of Praying for us, they Carp at us, and Curse us,
and cry they are covetous, proud, graceless, giftless, etc. vain man! when thou
see such thou should pity them and pray for them that God would give them
free, humble gracious spirits; and thou revilest them because they cross thy
sin and errors, as if Meroz should curse the Angel, because the Angel cursed
him for his neutrality. These show what spirit leads them. Now the life of man
is compared to a warfare in eleven respects.

1. In war there is watching soldiers must stand on their guard continually
for fear of a surprisal to the (...).
loss of all. So every Christian being Though Emperors may turn Christians yet
the Devil will not, as Austin observes.
surrounded with spiritual enemies must watch and pray continually, Matthew,
26.41. It is the way to blessedness, Matthew, 24.46.

2. In warring there must be arming, another man may go unarmed, but he that is
a soldier must be armed Capape (as they say) from top to toe, if any part be
unarmed it may cost him his life as it did Ahab, who was wounded between the
joints of the harness, 1 Kings ult. 34. So a Christian must gird on his
spiritual armor (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, such as
swords, staves, crosses, pictures; etc.) but spiritual and mighty to throw down
the Devils strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. that is armor of darkness, this is
armor of light, ( Romans 13.12.) such as shines to the glory of God and the
good of our Brethren. Arma lucis sunt opera fidei, gratiae and virtutum quibus
veluti armis contra tres h^stes bello tam offensiv^ quam desensivo depugnamus.
a Lapide.
We must not content our selves with one or two pieces of this armor, but we
must put on the whole Armor of God, which consists of six pieces, Ephesians.
6.11, etc.

1. We must get the girdle of truth, we must be all Nathaniels, not only
Israelites in name and profession, but Israelites in deed and truth. There must
be sincerity and truth, in our judgment, affections, words and actions. He
that is thus ungirt is unblest, and will never endure in a day of trial;
painted armor is good for little. 2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness; Get a
gracious life and a good conscience this is armor of proof against all the
assaults of the Devil. 3. Patience. V. 15. We must pass through many thorny
temptations and persecutions so that unless we be well shod with patience we
shall tire and faint in our warfar; there is no running our heavenly race
without it, Heb. 10.36. and 12.1. 4. The shield of faith. V. 16. This grace
leads us out of our selves to Christ whose righteousness covers all our
unrighteousness, and whose perfection covers all our imperfections and so
defends us against all the fierce assaults and fiery darts of Satan. 5. The
Helmet of Hope, This expects what faith believes, and keeps the soul from
fainting; a head without an helmet is exposed to danger. 6. The Sword of the
Spirit which is the Word of God; of all the pieces of armor this must not be
forgotten, no sword like this, it is two-edged, it is both offensive and
defensive, with this Christ cut off Satan's temptaions thrice together, Matthew.
4. These are those weapons of righteousness on the right hand and the left with
which we must war against all the enemies of our Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.7.
[See more in Dr. G^wge on Ephesians. 6. Mr. Gournall, Mr. R^binson and Dr.
Arrowsmith Tactica Sacra. l. 2.1. to 11.

3. He must have Skill and knowledge how to manage his weapons, his hands must
be taught to war and his fingers to fight. 'Twas the commendation of David's
Champions that they were men of might, fit for the Battle, that could handle
shield and buckler whose faces were like the faces of Lions, and they were
swift as Roes, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. Here were men fitted and accomplished with skill
and courage for their work, they were apti nati (as we say) cut out for
Soldiers. Raw, untaught, untrained men will either fly before the enemy, or die
by his sword. Solomon therefore would have us with counsel and good advice to
make war. Prove. 20.18. For wisdom is better then strength, Eccles. 9.18. He
must have the Art of fighting, as there is an Art of Holy living and an Art of
Holy dying, so there is an Art of Holy fighting which every Christian must
learn, he must have skill to know the Method, depths and periods of that old
serpent the Devil and his Agents the Jesuits and Sectaries who are as subtle as
the Devil can make them, their lips drop as the honey comb, they promise
liberty but bring men into slavery, they promise riches and bring men to
beggary, they promise life and bring men to death. We had need therefore every
day to be exercising our selves in the Word of God that we may be able to
resist the Devil and put him to flight. Blind men are unfit to fight unless it
be under the prince of darkness, without knowledge they may loose their colors,
and oppose their friends instead of their foes, they may take Saints for
Scythians and persecute them under such a notion as Paul did in the times of
his ignorance, and the Jews when they crucified Christ as a Malefactor.

4. Courage and Valor; Even Rabshakeh could say counsel and strength are for
war, 2 Kings 18.20. Policy and Power are very requisite for a Soldier. Galeati
lepores, harnessed hares (.i.) fearful faint-hearted men are not fit for
battle, Deuteronomy. 20.8. A Soldier must fight courageously, let us play the men
(says Ioab) for our people and the Cities of our God, 1 Chronicles. 19.13. God
would have all that fight his battles to be comfortable and confident, Deuteronomy.
20.1. to 5. Josh. 1.7. 2 Chronicles. 32.7. Hence came the use of Trumpets, Drums,
Flutes and Cymbals in wars to raise the Spirits of their Soldiers to the
battle: so God has ordained his Ministers to lift up their voices like
Trumpets to quicken us to this Holy war against sin and Satan. They call upon
us to fight the good fight of faith, to play the men and be strong, 1 Cor.
16.13. Let the wicked fly when God pursues them, but it becomes the righteous
to be magnanimous and bold as Lions, Prove. 28.2. ( Et nescit remeare Leo) The
Lion will turn his back at no creature. Resolve to die in thy colors, say with
Nehemiah (6.11.) should such a man as I fly? Better to die sighting with
honor, then live with shame; what though there be Lions or Bears in our way,
Pulchrior inpraelio occisiis miles quam fuga salvus.
if thou will be a Sampson or a David encounter them; there is no great glory
to be looked for but with hazard and difficulty. When the Soldiers said the
enemy was strong, 'twas bravely answered, The ^ictory will be so much the more
glorious. We should resemble the valiant horse which laughs at fear, and
rejoiceth at the sound of the Trumpet, neither turns he back from the Sword,
Arrow, Spear, etc. Job 39.19. to 26. We must not sit still like idle
spectatours and see others fight, (...) ab (...) (.i.) viriliter and strenue
ago, (...) enim est certamen and labor cum difficultate
but if we will get the Crowns we our selves must in our own persons fight for
them with all our might; for in these spiritual Agonies we must look for strong
Antagonists. We wrestle not simply against flesh and blood but against
principalities and powers, there is no way to conquer the Devil but by
resisting, James 4.7. and no resisting but by fighting; so that we must either
fight or be slaves for ever. Besides the temptations of the world from profits
and pleasures on one hand, and crosses and persecutions on the other hand; the
flesh also is a deadly enemy, its lusts within war against the peace of the
soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. This Domestical enemy, this bosom Traitor it is that does us
all the mischief; and therefore 'twas a good Prayer of the good man, Deliver me
O Lord from that evil man my self. It Is a beloved, powerful, politic enemy
which must make us the more watchful against it.

5. In respect of hardship a Soldier must be an hardy man, he must not be a
puling pusillanimous milksop, but he must be one that will run hazard, break
through dangers and difficulties, endure blows and wounds to the Miles (...),
q. minime mollis.

V^es animosque a vulnere sumit Pulchramque petit per vulnerae mortem. Vir.

See what hardship Sou^diers endure. Plutarch. Moral. Orat. 7. de fortun.
Alexandri.


raising of his spirit. So must every Christian that will get the Crown be a
hardened, seasoned, self-denying man, resolving to break through all
difficulties till he have gained the Victory. But of this see more in verse 5.
observe. 4.

6. In respect of Obedience. A Soldier is under the most absolute command of
any man. He must obey and not dispute the commands of his Commander to whom by
Oath he is bound to be faithful. The Centurion in the Gospel sets down the duty
of Soldiers, Matthew. 8.9. I say to one go and he goes, to another come, and he
does it. He dares do nothing without a command, if a Soldier kill a man
without command it is Murder. So every Christian must yield absolute obedience
to Christ, it is his part to command, it is ours to obey: if he bid us go, we
must go; if he bid us do this, (though it be never so cross to flesh and blood)
we must do it. Alexandri milites intenti fuere ad ducis non signum modo, sed
and nutum. Curtius lib. 3.
We must not stir a step without a word of Command from Christ our General. His
word must be our Counselor in all that we do, Psalm. 119.24. It Is reported to
the praise of Alexanders Souldires that they were observant not only of
visible signs of their Commanders, but even of their least nod; So should we
not only obey the clear Commands of Christ, but even the least hints of his
will in his Word.

A wicked man must have plain, syllabical proofs, and when we bring them, (yet
such is their rebellion) they will not yield; but a gracious soul promptly
obeyes the least intimation of Christ's will.

7. In respect of Order. In war there is much Order. Soldiers must keep rank
and and file, they must abide in that place and keep on that ground on which
their Commander sets them, they may not stir a foot, (in some cases) upon pain
of death. Ordinatusexercitus aspectu jucundissimus, hostibus molestissimus,
Xenophon.
An Army in confusion is contemptible, but an army in Order is terrible, Cant.
6.4. So every one must keep that station and abide in that calling wherein God
has set him, 1 Cor. 7.20. its a dangerous thing to neglect or outrun our
callings. So long as we keep Gods way, God will keep us, Psalm. 92.11, 12. but
if we break down his hedges a Serpent will bite us, Eccles. 10.8. God is the
God of order, and his people delight in Order, Colos. 2.5.

8. In respect of their unsettled abode. A ^ouldier whilst he is in actual
service has no settled abode, but he is always either marching, chargeing,
watching, fighting, lying in his Tent for a night or two and is gone. So we
have no abiding City here, strangers and pilgrims, and tho some saints have had
great possessions here, yet have they esteemed themselves as house-less and
home-less. Heaven's their home, their house, their country, 2 Cor. 5.2. Heb.
11.16. though they live In the world, yet they are not of the world. Though
their bodies be on earth, yet their meditations, and conversations are in
Heaven, Philippians 3.20. Hence the Saints have always confessed they were but
strangers here. See more in Master Robinsons Sermon at Paul's Hebr. 11.16.
preached, 1654.
So Abraham tells the Cananites, Genesis 23.4. and Acts 7.3. Hebr. 11.9, 10.
Jacob tells Pharaoh that his life was but a Pilgrimage here, Genesis 47.9.
David acknowledges that he was but a stranger and a Pilgrim here as his
fathers were, Peregrini officium est colligi sub alieno tecto, pacifice
pertransi^e, and anhelare ad patriam.
Psalm 39.12. and 1 Chronicles. 29.15. and so said all the Patriarks, Hebrews
11.13, and Peter calls the time of our life on earth a Pilgrimage, 1 Peter
1.17. we do not dwell but sojourn as strangers in Gods Tabernacles, Gur,
significat peregrinari and habitare ut advenam, and pertinet ad hanc vitam,
sicut habitare ad futuram.
Psalm 15. to see in ten particulars how a Christian is like a Pilgrim here.
See a Lapide on 1 Peter 2.11.

9. A Soldier must attend the wars, he must forsake house, land, wife,
children and other lawful delights (for a time at least) and give up himself to
his martial affairs; he cannot work and war, follow a Trade and fight too;
but he must wholly devote himself to his Military employment that he may please
his Commander. He must attend the marchings and motions of the Army, the
commands and service of the General, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that wars intangles
himself with the things of this life that he may, please him who has chosen
him to be a soldier. It Is true, Ministers and Christians may and must in a
moderate manner provide for their own, 1 Timothy 5.8. but to be entangled, or as
the word signifies to be ensnared to be wholly taken up with inordinate cares,
and habitually and excessively to mind these earthly things, (...) (i) Tricis
and laqueis implico. Amor rerum terrenarum fit viscus spiritualium pennarum.
August.
destroys men. Phil. 3.19. 1 Timothy 6.9.

10. In respect of Unity soldiers must be unanimous. United forces prevail
much, but if soldiers be divided and mutiny they ruin themselves. See more
allusions in Master Bernards Bible-battlers.
It Is Machiavels Maxim, Divide and impera, Nothing stroner then Unity, nothing
weaker then discord. Ierusalems divisions helped to ruin it. It Is the glory of
the Church when it is as a city of compact together and at Unity within it self.
Discord and Division is the Devils Music. Let Babels builders be divided and
scattered; but let Unity and Unanimity be the portion of Gods people, Zach.
14.9. Philip. 2.1, 2. This is a most desirable thing. [See Mr. Marshalls Sermon.
on Unity, on Romans 12.4, 5. Buroughs his Irenicum. Venning New Commandment p.
10; 11. Brimsly against Separation p. 60, etc. Mantons Ser. on Zach. 14.9.
preached at a Fast, June 30. 1647. Tactica Sacra, lib. 2. cap. 6. Sect. 8.

11. Lastly, In respect of Activity. A Soldiers life is a laborious life, they
are cut out for Ad agendum nati milites. Cicero.
Action They must never be Idle, but always either Training, or Skirmishing
and using their Weapons (Use makes Masteries) that when they come to actual
fighting they may not be to seek. Inde dictus exercitus quod melior fit
exercitando. Vario.
Idle Soldiers are to be cashiered out of the Camp. Xenophon. Cyropaed. l. 2.
So must we in peace prepare for war, and in a calm foresee a storm, Job 3.25.
we must still be laboring 1 Cor. 15.10. and make it our daily (...) (.i) me
exerceo, laboro. q. d. T^tus sum in hac re ut inculpa^e Deo serviam, nec
homines effendam.
exercise to keep a good conscience, Acts 24.16. It Is an active thing to be a
Christian, he has many battles to fight, and a Race to run, he has much work
to do in a little time. Idleness is the very bane of a Christian Soldier. It Is
the hour of Temptation. The root and mother of most horrid sins; of (...)
Chrysostom.
Idleness comes no goodness, by doing nothing men learn to do evil; when the
Quem Diabolus occupatum non invenit, ipse occupa^. Greg.
Devil finds men without employment then he cuts them out work. This is the
root of Pride labor is an humbling thing, but the proud man cannot stoop. It Is
the root of fornication and adultery and all uncleanness, Otia si tollas
periere cupidinis arcus. Ovid.
2 Samuel 11.1, 2. Ezekiel. 16.49. What filthiness is there amongst idle Friars,
Monks and Nuns? It Is the Mother of theft and cousenage. Idleness breeds
poverty, and poverty theft hence the Apostle propounds labor as a remedy to
theft, Ephesians. 4.28. It is the root of Tale-bearing, when people are idle then
they talk, 2 Timothy 5.13. Like Momus that carping god of the Heathens who would
never do any thing himself, but curiously pry into the lives of others that he
might carp at them. It Is the root of Error and Heresy, whilst men be idle and
sleep the Devil sowes these Tares, Matthew. 13.24. When men's souls be untilled
then like the field of the sluggard they are overgrown with the weeds of sin
and error, Prove. 24.30. This made Solomon the wisest of men so often to testify
against idleness, Prove. 13.4. and 14.23. and 19.15.24. and 21.25. and 15.19.
and 12.24, 27. and 18.9. and 26.13. Eccles. 10.18. The Sedentary life is most
subject to diseases. Standing ponds breed filth and vermin, when running
waters keep themselves sweet and pure. The best mettles if not used, Rust. The
finest garments if not worn, are eaten with moaths. The sitting bird is easily
shot, and secure Laish soon ruined. So long as Rome was kept in action and had
wars the Soldiers were not vicious, but when Carthage was destroyed and they
lived at ease they quickly became dissolute. Anima est (...) (i.) continuata
and perennis motio. Arist.
The Soul of man is a very lively active thing, it is never idle, but is in
perpetual motion, and if it is not well employed it will be ill employed, like
Millstones, if they have no Corn to grind they wast themselves. Use strength
and have it, many loose their limbs for want of using them; if a man indulge
and favor his body 'twill quickly become useless and burdensome; and it is just
with God that such as will not consume themselves with labor, should wast with
rust and diseases. Rest is reserved for Heaven, this life is for action.

Let such consider that they are 1. Useless. 2. Graceless. 3. Comfortless. 4.
Cursed. 5. Disorderly Men.


1. Idle men are Useless men like Ieremiahs Girdle, good for nothing, Ier.
13.7. They are droanes that live on the sweat of other men's brows, a burden to
Family, Church and State; such are dead whilst they live, as it is said of the
voluptuous Widow that lives idly and disorderly, Otium est vivi hominis
sepultura. Seneca.

Nihili est qui piger est.


1 Timothy 5.6. yea it is worse then corporal death for a man to be thus dead ere
he die, to bury himself yet breathing, and wind himself alive, is
praeternatural. The poorest Thresher that labors in his calling is better then
the greatest Emperor that lives in idleness. A living Dog is better then a
dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4. A Dog is the basest amongst beasts, and a Lion is the
noblest; yet the basest creature that is living and active, is better then the
noblest that is dead and useless.

2. They are Graceless persons; Grace will not be had without pains. We must
ask, seek, knock, (...), contendite, conamini omnibus vi^ibus.
strive, wrestle, run for it. Luke 13.24. Ezekiel. 36.37.

3. He is a Comfortless man. The idle and unprofitable servant can have no
comfort in his Masters coming. The guilt of his negligence will put him out of
countenance. It Is the faithful servant that shall be received with an Euge,
Matthew. 25.27, 30.

4. He is a Cursed Man. God blesses labor, but curses idleness. The
sluggards coat is made of rags, Prove. 23.27. whilst he lies sleeping Poverty
comes marching against him like an armed man suddenly and irresistably, Prove.
6.11. Poverty is a sore curse especially when it comes by Idleness which in its
own nature tends to poverty; when a man gets not he must needs spend. He that
is sloathful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster, Prove. 18.9.
When men have no callings, or do not follow their callings but set others to
work whilst themselves do nothing, they must needs come down. The good
house-wife sits not still, bidding her servants go, but she her self gets wool
and flax and makes one with them, So Lucan. (Pharsal. l. 9.) says of Cato.
(...) Monstrat tolerare laborem, Non jubet --
Prove. 31.13, 19. As Julius Caesar would say to his Soldiers, not ite, Go ye,
but eamus commilitones, go we, I will make one amongst them as Abimelech said
to his followers, Look upon me, and do likewise, Judge. 9.48. Besides idleness
leads men into wicked company, it brings loss of credit, and brings loss of
custom, and that beggary.

5. They are Disorderly persons. God has allotted to every one his calling
wherein he must be serviceable to the public good, 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. Now when
men sit still they break that Order which God has set and so are called
disorderly walkers, 1 These. 5.14. It Is with the Commonwealth as it is with
inferior bodies, if they be well ordered three things must concur. 1. Ordo
partium, the ears must not be where the hands are, nor the feet above the head.
2. Symmetria, a due proportion, the head must not be bigger then the body. Non
est panis cujusquam proprius ne summi quidem regis nisi strenue la b^ret in
Vocatione sua Roll.
3. Functio, every part must have some distinct office wherein to exercise it
self. Those Gentlemen then and Beggars that lead idle lives are Wens and
burdens not members of the body. They live in the express violation of Gods
Commands, Genesis 3.19. Such have no right to a bit of bread, God would not have
us succor them in this condition, Prove. 20.4. 2 These. 3.6. As for our selves
let us be active Soldiers abounding in the work of the Lord: many desire to
abound in Riches, it is more noble to abound in Labors. As In operibus sit
abundantia mea, divitiis per me licet abundet quisquis voluerit. Phil. Melanct.
Melancthon said well, Let others take Riches, give me Labor. Shall a Nullus
mihi per otium exit dies, partem noctium studiis vendico, non vaco sommo sed
succumbo, and oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere detineo. Seneca
epist. 67.
Heathen glory that he let no day pass in idleness, but he redeemed some time
from his sleep, for his studies; and shall we that have better Principles and
light to walk by come short of Heathens?

[See 12. Reas. against Idleness in Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel. 16.49. p. 287, etc.
and Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 63. p. 303. edit. 3.

Now the Lord will have us all to fight for these Reasons: 1. For the greater
manifestation of his own glory, he could deliver his people without fighting,
but then the glory of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness in their preservation and
deliverance would not be so perspicuous to the world; nor his Justice in the
downfall of his enemies be so apparent to all.

2. For the good of his people, hereby he exercises their Graces and keeps
them from rusting, Virtue decaies if it have not some opposite to quicken it,
and draw it out; hereby also he proves their Valor and makes it more apparent
to others. We had never heard of the Patience of Job if Satan and his friends
had not opposed him. The skill of a Pilot is not known till a storm, nor the
valor of a Soldier till the day of battle.

3. To make us long for our rest in Terra est domus militiae. coelum laetitiae.
Heaven. This wormwood upon the breasts, these conflicts and spiritual combats
imbitter the world to us. The poor wether-beaten Mariner longs for the Heaven,
and the tired Soldier for Victory that he may triumph.

How silly then is the expectation of these that look for a Crown without a
Combat, for Victory without Fighting, and for a Prize without any Striving.
They sit down secure and careless yet dream of Heaven and happiness. Like dead
fish they go down the stream without any resistance. They give the reins to
their lusts and are so tender and Delicatus es miles si putas te posse sine
pugna vincere, sine certamine triumphare.
delicate that they can deny themselves in nothing. How many are Ignorant and
know not what belongs to these Spiritual battles, they cannot watch, pray, arm,
wrestle, run, fight, etc. Others rest in a bare profession, crying Lord, Lord,
yet fight not a stroke against sin and Satan. Others fight but it is not the
good fight, we read of many fighters in Scripture but few good ones. The Devil
and his Angels fight, but it is against Christ and his Church, Rev. 11. and 12.
The wicked they fight too, but it is for their lusts, Iam. 4.2. it is against
Christ, Psalm. 2. Rev. 17.14. and against his people. Gebal and Ammon and Amelck
can fight, but it is against Israel, Exodus 17.8. the comfort is these cannot
prosper, 2 Chronicles. 13.12. Rev. 17.14. and 19.19, 20. Christ comes from Edom
clothed in red, from Bozrah with his garments died in the blood of his
enemies, Isai. 63.1. It may greatly encourage us to fight this heavenly fight
when we consider that we have Christ for our Leader, he is that true Joshua
that fights for us against the Canaanites. He has led captivity captive, and
has conquered all our enemies for us, Col. 2.14. He is not only a Spectator
but our Coronam parare potest qui indixit certamen, vires subministrare non
potest: Deus autem quando spectat certatores sucs adjuvat eos. Aug. de Temp.
Sermon. 105.
help, he teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. Though we be
weak yet our Redeemer is strong. An Army of Hearts having a Lion for their
Leader, is better then an Army of Lions with a Heart for their Leader. Christ
who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is Lord of our Hosts, and therefore we
will not fear what man or Devil can do against us. When Antigonus saw his
followers afraid by reason of the multitude of their enemies, and how many do
ye reckon me for (said he) One Christ for us is more then all the world against
us. 2. The goodness of the fight may much encourage us, which brings me to the
fifth Observation.

5. Observation.

5. This Spiritual fight is a good fight. It Is not a warring after the flesh,
but a Spiritual, Holy, Honorable war, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4.

It Is a good fight in nine respects.

1. Of the Author. 2. The Man. 3. The Matter. 4. The Manner. 5. The End. 6. The
Armor. 7. The Issue. 8. The Fellow Soldiers. 9. The Reward.
1. The God of Goodness (for Good Ends) has ordained this good fight. He has
decreed that there shall be an Irreconciliable enmity between the seed of the
Serpent and the seed of the Woman. It Is he that gives Grace to his people at
the first whereby they are enabled to fight this good fight, and he maintains
it when it is once begun against all opposition whatsoever. As at the first he
made all things of nothing by his All-mighty power, and since maintains them in
their being by his Providence; Deus luctatur in nobis, ipse congreditur, ipse
in certamine agonis nostii and coronat pariter and coronatur. Cyp^ian l. 2. ep.
2. ad Donatum.
So at first he creats grace in the soul, and after seconds it with his
conserving, cooperating, assisting, perfecting, persevering Grace.

2. The Men that fight here must be good men; a wicked man may fight other
battles, a Heathenish Tu servus servorum es, illis enim cupiditatibus quibus
ego impero, tu inservis, Vt Diog^nes Alexandro.
Alexander may conquer cities, but not himself, they must be Holy men that
fight these Holy battles of the Lord, such as can conquer themselves. Alas! how
should he prosper whose sins fight more against him then all the power of his
enemies, whose main adversary is in his own bosom? With what face can he fight
against the beasts of the time, who is himself a beast?

3. The Matter is good, it is for Christ and his Kingdom, for his truth and
people, and that against the basest enemies, against sin and Satan and a world
of wicked men. There is nothing worth contending for in comparison of Gods
truth and worship; as we must contend for the obtaining of it, so also for the
preserving of it, See Mr. Rous his diseases of the time, cap. 4. p. 121. and
folio.
Jude 3. 'Twas the great honor of Chamier that he strenuously fought the Lords
battles against that man of sin, and though many sons of the French Church had
done worthily, yet he excelled them all.

4. The Manner of this fight must be good; we must strive Rectius, recta, recte.

Legitime certare est ad pugnam se praeparare, animose adversarium aggredi,
plagam cautem declinare and mascule infligere, quod qui faciebant, coronabantur
in ludis Olympicis. Baldwin.


Lawfully if ever we would be crowned, 2 Timothy 2.5. As those that strove for
Masteries were not presently graced with Garlands unless they strove according
to the Laws prescribed though never so difficult and painful; So unless we
fight both for matter and manner, both in preparation and execution, according
to the Rules prescribed in the Word, we can never attain the Crown of
Righteousness.

5. The End must be good, it is that which crowns and denominates the work. The
end of all our working and warring must be to the Glory of God, and the
salvation of our own and others souls. Else let the matter be never so good if
the end be self, all is lost, as we see in Iehu and the Scribes and Pharisees.
Many fight but it is for their lusts and not for God, James 4.1. As the heathen
in their Agonies fought and run for the honor of Apollo, Neptune, or Jove, but
nothing for Jehovah.

6. The Armor is good, it is composed of the Graces of the Spirit which are
compared to Gold, Psalm 45.13. it is golden and complete armor, Ephesians 6.13.

7. It Is good in respect of the Issue. See my Tract. de perseverantia Sanctorum.
It Is victorious, the gates of Hell connot prevail against it.

As Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, could not conquer Christ, so they shall not be
able to conquer the servants of Christ who are by faith ingrafted in him: Hence
Paul so confidently assures himself of a Crown of Righteousness.

8. Our fellow soldiers are good, all the people of God throughout the world
daily fight this good fight against the enemies of their salvation, yea the
Saints in Heaven were all soldiers in the Church Militant, before they came to
the Church Triumphant.

9. The Reward is good, there is none like it. It is no less then a Corona,
non qualecunque praemium notat, sed praemium victoriae (id est,) pugnando and
vincendo partum. Vbi durior pugna, ibi gloriosior est Victoria. Sculte^.
Crown not of silver or Gold, but of Eternal life. The Glory of it is
unspeakable. Hence it is called hidden Mannah, a Tree of Life, etc. Rev.
2.10.17.26. and 3.21.

I have finished my course.
Q. d. I Paul the aged have fought the good fight, and have not only begun,
but I have finished my course.

Observe.
It Is a great comfort to be an old soldier of Christ. Turpe miles senex. Ovid.
Men cashire old decrepit men out of their camps; but the older soldiers we are
in Christ's Church the better and the more acceptable to him. 'Twas Mnasons
commendation that he was an old Disciple, Acts 21.16. Paul was converted (as
the learned conjecture) about 25. (for he is called a young man, when Stephen
was stoned, Acts 7.58.) Now adolescency by Physicians and others, is conceived
to begin at 12. extend it self to 25. for when a man is come to his full
stature, he is called, Adult. now Paul lived 34. years after his conversion,
(for he died in the thirteenth of Nero) so that by this computation he was 61.
when he suffered Martyrdom, yet he was still the same, even when he was Paul
the aged (as he styles himself, Philemon 9.) as when he was young. Old age is
a Crown of Glory, and Honorable in it self, God commands us to honor such,
Leviticus 19.32. the Ancient and the Honorable are joined together, Isay 9.15.
but then it is most honorable, Canities venerabilis est quando ea gerit quae
canitiem decent Chrysostom.
when it is found in a way of Righteousness, Proverbs 16.31. and if in any way
of Righteousness, then specially in the Ministry, when it is fully and
faithfully discharged. An old Professor of the Truth who has served God in his
Generation deserves respect and honors, but an ancient zealous Minister of
the Gospel who has done and suffered much for Christ, his white-head and
silver-hairs call for double honor. God oftentimes blesses such with Raro
utilis Doctor invenitur in Ecclesia quin sit longaevus. Origin.
long life as some reward of their labors, Psalm 91.16. Prove. 3.16.

1. Such begin betimes to serve God, and the sooner we come in to him the more
honor and service we do him. The Apostle mentions it to the praise of
Andronicus and Iunia, that they were in Christ before him, (i.) they believed
and were Christians before him, Romans 16.7. This made Saint Austine lament
that he was converted so late to Christ.

2. He is an old acquaintance of Christ's, to whom he more familiarly reveals
himself then to young Novices, Genesis 18.17. Moses, was but 40. days in the
Mount with God, and his face did shine, what is 40. days to 40. years walking
with God. Such a one may do much with God for a person or Nation. God delights
in the prayers of his old servants, such as Moses, Samuel, Noah, Job, and
Daniel, etc.

3. He is one that has got the Art of serving God. All Trades have a Mystery,
Religion has its Mystery also; young beginners are bunglers at it, but old
Christians are Naturalized and habituated to the holy duties of Mortification
and self-denial.

4. He is rich in experience, a young beginner has no experience of the
dece^ts of sin and Satan; it is the old soldier that can tell you of the
Policies and stratagems in War, Job 12.12. it is with the ancient that there is
wisdom and much experience. A young man is happier that does live well, but
an old man is happier that has lived well, he has passed through those
dangers and difficulties, those temptations and Passions which young ones are
sailing toward.

5. He is a well-rooted, firm resolved Christian. An old Disciple is like a
Rock, Senectus ipsa in bonis moribus duclci^r, in consiliis utilior, ad
constantiam paratior, ad reperimendas libidines fi^mior; infirmitas quoque
corporis sobrietas mentis, unde Apostolus, cum infermor tunc potens sum.
Ambros. l. 1. Hexam. c. 8.
when a young one is like a Reed tossed too and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians 4.14. These adorn Religion in holding out to the last
against the solicitations and allurements of sin and Satan. They esteem Christ's
service the best service, they are never weary of it, (though sometimes the
flesh clogging them) they may be weary in it: and this is a great Argument of
our sincerity, when we are rooted trees of Righteousness, fruitful and
flourishing in old age, Psalm 92.14.

6. They shall have a greater reward. As they have done more service in their
Generations, so they shall be recompensed answerably. They have been
instruments of winning many souls to Christ, and so shall shine as the Stars
for ever and ever, Daniel 12.3. Childrens children are the crown of old Age,
it is true of Natural children, Proverbs 17.6. But no children are so glorious
and glistering a Crown as those which are spiritual: what a comfort is it to a
good man when he comes to die, and reflecting on his life past, shall see how
many he has won to Christ, and can say, Behold I, and the children which the
Lord has given me.

And if Hercules had a Crown of Poplar given him for his Conquest over some
Monsters; what Crowns may these Spiritual Hercules expect, See more in Master
Buroughs ninth Volume on Prove. 16.31. and Master Ash, on his Sermon at Master
Gatakers Funeral on the same Text: and Doctor Andrews on the fifth
Commandment. Chapter 9. Mihi. p. 387.
who have conquered the Lion of anger, the Cacus of covetousness, the Hydra of
luxury, the Cerberus of pride and the Geryon of persecution?

I have finished my Course, Or I have ended my Race.
Hence Observe, 1. That the life of a Christian is a Race. 2. We must not only
begin, but finish this Race. The life of a Christian is often compared to a Race,
we must not creep, but Run the ways of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.31.


We must not only be Peripatetickes and Walkers as Enoch and Noah were,
Genesis 5.22. and 6.9. Though the times that Noah lived in were corrupt times,
yet he kept himself pure, showing like a Light in the midst of a sinful
Generation, the Iill-hallech in conjugat. Hithpael. significat quod sese
composuit ad ambulandum cum Deo.
bent of his heart was set to walk with God. So did Hezekiah Isay 38.3. and
Zachery and Elizabeth, ( Luke 1.5, 6.7.) In persecuting times they walked with
God, even in Old Age. But we must also Run; we have a great deal of work to
do in a little time, For walkeing, see Doctor Preston on Genesis 17.1. page
181. Doctor Hill on Jeremiah 6.16. Dyke on Conscience cap. 5. p. 54. Dyke Right
receiving of Christ, cap. 10.12. Godolphus Holy Limbecke, page 42, Master
Iacomb, Master Vines Funeral Sermon, page 5. Master Burroughes on Genesis 5.24.
page 261.
and therefore had need to be active. All our Graces are imperfect, as we know
but in part, 1 Corinthians 13.9. So we believe but in part, and hope
imperfectly, but our Knowledge must increase, Ephesians 1.17, 18. Colossians,
1.9, 10. Our Faith must increase, 2 Corinthians, 10.15. and our Hope abound,
Romans 15.13.

We must forget what is past, and press forward toward the mark, Philippians,
3.12, 14. We must Sic, nota^ certitudinem, Diligentiam, celeritatem, ac
perseverantiam. a Lapide.
So run* that we may obtain, 1 Corinthians, 9.24.

To this end we must Run, 1. Rightly. 2. Speedily. 3. Patiently. 4. Cheerfully.
5. Circumspectly. 6. Resolutely. 7. Persevereingly.


1. We must run Rightly and Well; So did the Galathians for a time, Galathians,
5.7. Many Run, but it is Celeris cursus extra viam, in a wrong path. We are
all by Nature out of the way, we must therefore inquire for the right way which
is the good old way of Truth and Holiness, Jeremiah 6.16.) which may be known
by its narrowness, strictness, preciseness, it is a way beset with many
dangers and difficulties, it is not strawed with Roses, but Crosses, it is
beset with many Oppositions and Tentations: So that we must strive till we come
to an Holy (...); quasi in agone contendite. Luke 13.14.
Agony, putting to all our strength as Wrestlers do, that strive for
Masteries, it is a quickening expression.

2. You may know which is the right way; it is an Holy, not a loose licentious
way, Isaiah 35.8. Having found the right way we must not sit still, but

2. We must speedily go forward in it, we must not step too and fro for
Recreation, but still go on till we come to our journeyes end. If God call us
to seek his Face, our hearts must answer presently, Thy Face Lord we will
seek, Psalm. 27.8.

3. Patiently, we must Run and not be weary, Isay 49. ult. We shall meet with
many difficulties, there are many Briars and Thorns in our way, so that without
the shoes of Patience we should tire in our Race, Hebrews 12.1. Many think to
come to Heaven presently at a Jumpe, with a Lord have mercy upon them, but
Christianity is a Race, and not a Jumpe.

4. Cheerfully, As God loves a cheerful Giver, so he loves a cheerful
Observer of his Sabbaths, Isaiah, 58.13. and of all his Commands, he will be
served with a willing mind, 2 Chronicles, 28.9. Psalm 110.3.

5. Circumspectly, Ephesians, 5.15. and discreetly, Colossians 4.5. We have
many eyes upon us that watch every step we take, both God and Satan set a
Print on our heels, and observe all our goings, Job 13.27. and the wicked
watch for our halting, Jeremiah 20.10. Besides, there are many impediments that
lie in our way to hinder us in our Race, as the cares and pleasures of the
World, we must get wisdom to discern these snares and avoid them.

6. Resolutely and courageously; Like spiritual Sampsons we must break the
Cords of all Oppositions which would hinder us in our Race, if all Nations will
walk in the name of their Idol gods, much more should we Resolve to walk in
the Name of our God for ever and ever, Micah 4.5. To encourage you, have an eye
to the Prize, and the recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.26. and 12.2.

7. Persevereingly and constantly. We must not only begin, but finish our
course, so did Christ, he finished his Work, John 17.4. and John fulfilled his
course. Acts 13.25.

Paul regarded not his life, so he might finish his work, Acts 20.24. We
should serve out our whole time that at last we may be Denizons and Freemen,
of Heaven, Acts 13.36. Such a^ abide with Christ in all Temptations, he will
appoint to them a Kingdom, Luke 22.9.

Sad then is the condition of those, that instead of Running sit still all the
day idle, Matthew. 20.6. like dead fish they go down the stream of the times
without any resistance.

It may be they go round in Duties (like a horse in a Mill) but they never go
forward; but dream (as some Quakers do) of such an absolute perfection and
equality with God, that the very glorious Saints and Angels dare not assume to
themselves, and upon this blasphemous conceit they sit Idle; which plainly
shows they have no true Grace, for that is like fire; it is an active,
lively, purifying thing, it will make a man flourish in his Old Age, Psalm
92.12, 13. like the Sun, it never rests but is in perpetual motion, like the
Light that shines more and more to the perfect day, Proverbs 4.18.

Others like Crevi^e go backward, the former sort like Joshuas Sun stand
still, and these like Hezekiahs Sun go backward, few are like the Natural
Sun which goes forth of his Chamber like a Bridegroom rejoicing to run his
Race, Psalm 19.5.

These like the Galatians, begin in the Spirit, but end in the Flesh: Like the
stony and thorny ground, they begin to make a show, but it was the good
ground only which brought forth fruit with Patience, Luke 8.14, 15.

Others Run, but it is after their Lusts, they pursue shadows and vain
delights which cannot profit them.

Others Run, but it is after the vain fashions and sinful customs of the
times; It is a sign men are but carnal when they walk according to man, 1 Cor.
3.3. Romans 12.2.

Others Run, too much on the Right hand, as our Separatists, and
Semi-separatists.

Others Run, too much on the Left Hand, As Atheists, Papists, Ranters.

Now the Devil cares not which way we fall, whether on the right hand or left,
so he can but ruin us he cares not how. We must therefore keep the narrow way
of life without turning on either hand, Deuteronomie, 5.23.

[See Rules for Right Running in Master Henry Smiths Sermon, on 1 Corinthians
9.24. and 5.35. and Doctor Tailors Sermon in Folio on the same Text in fine
Pages 78, etc. Master Hierons Sermon on Matthew 7.13. page 10. Folio. Doctor
Sibbs on Philippians 3.14. page 136, etc.

I have kept the Faith.
Hence Observe.
The Doctrine of Faith must be carefully kept. It is a sacred Depositum, which
God has entrusted us withal, and we may in no wise falsify our trust. We are
Stewards, and fidelity is especially required in them, 1 Corinthians 14.2. Paul
kept the Faith both ways.

1. As a Christian in his Judgment, Will, Affections, and in the whole course
of his Life after his conversion. 2. As a Minister he published it fully and
faithfully and defended it with the loss of Liberty and Life.
He had rather die then any man should make his rejoicing, in the faithful
spreading of the Gospel, vain, 1 Cor. 9.15.

He did not conceal for fear or favor any part or parcel of Gods truth from
his people.

He taught the whole truth and nothing but the truth in truth unto them.

To quicken us, let us Consider, 1. If we keep the Faith it will keep us, what
Solomon says of Wisdom is true also of Faith. Proverbs 4.8. Exalt her, and
she will promote thee to honor. It will protect its Protectors, and is its own
reward, they shall be Conquerours that embrace it, Revel. 12.11. 2. We shall
get such Riches as will go with us to Heaven. It will comfort us when we come
to die, if we can truly say with Paul, I have kept the Faith.


A Faithful Steward gives up his account with joy, and Christ will receive
him with an Euge, Matthew 25.21. For this Christ commends Moses Hebrews 3.1,
2. and the Church of Thyatira, Revelations 2.19. I know thy Faith, ( id est,)
Thou have faithfully served me in thy place and calling.

This was the honor of Tychicus, Ephesians 6.21. and Timothy, 1 Corinthians
4.17. that they were faithful Ministers of Christ such shall abound with
blessings here, Proverbs 28.20. and shall have a Crown of Glory hereafter,
Revelations 2.10.

Let us then every one in our several places, Magistrates, Ministers, Parents
preserve the Faith of Christ, and propagate it to Posterity, as Abraham did,
Malae conscienscientiae poena est a recto defectio. Hoc execrationis geuere
hypocrism ulciscitur Dominus. Talibus exemplis Evangelii Majestas palam
vindicatur, and palam ostendit Deus se ejus profanationem nullo modo far
posse. In aliis ambitio in aliis avaritia sincerum Dei timorem obruebat: Hinc
errores ab exordio Ecclesiae, mala conscientia harese^^ omnium matter. Calvin.
Genesis, 18, 19. Let us keep a good Conscience which is the Cabinet of Faith,
he that makes shipwreck of the one cannot long keep the other, 1 Timothy 1.19.

VERSE 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at the last day: and not to me
only, but unto them also that love his appearing.
Observe,
THe godly in this life may be assured of their salvation: Paul had fought the
good fight, and now see his confidence and assurance of a Crown of Life: many
run in other Races and loose all, but Paul was assured of his reward, Romans
8.38. and least any should think he had this by extraordinary Revelation, he
tells us that all believers have it; this Crown is not only prepared for me,
but for all that love Christ's appearing ( id est) for all believers. They that
believe know they have Eternal life, 1 John 5.13. This assurance is common to
them, though not in a like Though every Faith has not a full assurance and
persuasion, yet every true Faith has assurance and certainty in it, and
tends hereunto more and more: yea, that Faith that is weakest has certainty
in it, being built on certain grounds, as the word, and promise and witness of
the spirit. As a pur-blinde man sees the Sun as Certainly, though not so
clearly as the quick sighted. Rogers of Dedham, of Faith, Chapter 1. Page
23.24.
measure to all. The certainty of Faith is stronger then that of Sense, because
of Gods Power and Promise who is Faithful and cannot deny himself nor deceive
his People. This is that hundred fold which is given in this life, which is of
more worth then all the Riches of the World. It Is that better part which can
never be taken from us.

Objection
The grand Objection of the Arminians is, That no man can be assured of his
perseverance, and by Consequence he can have no Assurance of his Salvation.

Answer.
I deny the Argument, Quis falli timeat, cum promittit veritas! August.
God has by his Promises (which are infallible) assured them of their
perseverance, and by Consequence of their Salvation. He has promised to build
his Church, and if he will build it, it is not all the power and po^icie of
Hell that can prevail against it, Matthew, 16.18. God who has chosen them is
stronger then all, and none can pluck them out of his hand.

He has promised to keep them by his Almighty Power through Faith to
Salvation, so that the Mountains shall remove, and the Hills depart before he
will break his Covenant of Peace with his People, Isay 54.10.

And because we are weak and unable of our selves to persevere, therefore God
has promised abilities for that, Ezekiel, 36.27. I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes to keep my judgments and do them.
And I will plant my fear in their hearts that they shall never depart from me,
Jer. 32.40.

So then this assurance is 1. Attainable. 2. Tenable. 3. Desirable.


V. Bohemus, Meditat. 10. Page 30.31.
1. It Is attainable Paul here had it, and all the Saints first or last: David,
Job, Thomas, and the Martyrs and if a man may know he believes, then he may
know that he shall be saved, for whosoever believes shall be saved, John 3.16.
the promise is general, and includes all particular believers, as if they had
been named. Hence believers are said, to have Eternal Life already begun, John
5.11, 12. and 6.47.54. and 14.20. and that they are past from death to life,
John 5.24. and that they assuredly know this a posteriori, by the Effects of
Vocation and the Fruits of Election, for Grace and Glory are linked together,
Romans 8.30. 1 John 3.2.14.19.

Hence they are said to have Assurance, much Assurance, and full ass^rance,
Hebrews, 6.6, 11. and 10.22, 23. Colossians 2.2. 1 Thessalonians 1.5. If this
were not attainable here, why are we commanded to give all diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure to our selves, 2 Peter 1.10. Impossibility of
attainment deadens endeavor, no man will take pains for that which cannot be
gained. No wise man will seek after the Philosophers stone, because it is
impossible ever to be attained. The first work therefore of the Spirit is to
convince the soul that its sins are pardonable, and that reconciliation may be
had.

2. It Is Tenable, a man that has this assurance of his salvation may keep it:
whilst we walk circumspectly and answerable to our Principles, none can hurt
us. Hence Paul challenges all between Heaven and Hell to do their worst,
Romans 8.35, etc. Who shall separate us from Christ, shall tribulation or
distress, or persecution, etc.

The Apostles Interrogation is a strong Negation. Q. d. Nothing whatsoever
shall be able to separate us from Christ, neither the pleasures of Life, nor
the pains of Death, neither the height of Prosperity nor the depth of
Adversity, neither present nor impendent evils, nothing can separate us from
Christ.

1. The Elect cannot separate themselves from Christ: they cannot sin as the
wicked do, because the seed of God abides in them; ( id est) his Word and
Spirit dwell in their souls; besides Christ ever lives to make Intercession
for them, and they are kept by Gods power against that inbred corruption that
is in them, 1 Peter 1.5.

2. Not the World with all its Terrors or Pleasures, for in Christ our Head we
have overcome the world, John 16. ult. and by Faith we daily overcome it, 1
John 5.4.

3. Not Heresies nor Heretics; well may they try and trouble the Godly, but
they shall never be able to deceive the Elect with a Total and Final
seduction, Matthew 24.24. The Righteous are an everlasting Foundation, Proverbs
10.25. They build on the Rock, so that no storms or tempests can remove them.

4. Not Death it self; carnal marriages may be and must be dissolved by death;
but this spiritual marriage of the soul to Christ is perfected and consummate
but not abolisht by death: hence the elect triumph over it, O death where is
thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55. This may kill us but it cannot hurt nor conquer us.

5. Not the Devil nor all the powers of hell, Matthew. 16.18. the gates of hell
shall not prevail. It is a Meiosis. q. d. The Church of Christ shall be so far
from being overcome, that it shall overcome all Satanical power and policy
whatsoever. Christ is stronger then the strong man armed, the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah is too strong for the roaring Lion. He has led captivity captive
(.i.) sin and Satan that sometimes led us captive, Christ has conquered them
and Triumphed over them openly upon the Cross, Colos. 2.15. God may and does
suffer Satan to tempt and try us but never to overcome us totally and finally.
He has promised that the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, and
that he will tread down Satan under our feet, ( Romans 16.20.) So that the evil
one shall not touch us so as to hurt us with any deadly wound, (1 John 5.18.)
or with a qualitative touch (.i.) to alter our quality from good to evil, so
that we should loose our gracious disposition and prove perverse.

6. No Creature, nothing within us, without us, above us or beneath us, in all
these we are more then (...), supervincimus, vel supersuperamus.
Conquerours even Triumphers through Christ that loved us, Romans 8. ult.

7. Not Non ex su^ natura, sed ex Dei gratia ut Medici venena venenis, ita Deus
dolores doloribus tollit. Aug.
Sin it self; if any thing in the world could hinder our Salvation it is sin,
but as a wise Physician so orders poison that it becoms a Medecin, so the most
wise God who brings light of out darkness and good out of evil, makes the sins
of his people a means to cure and kill sin. Their falls make them more humble,
wise, watchful and circumspect for time to come. Thus all things work together
for good to those that are good, To. 8.^8.

3. It is a most desirable thing. If it be wisdom and desirable to make
houses and lands sure ( Ier. 32.9. to 11, 12.) and riches sure, (which yet are
but unsure and uncertain riches when we have done all) then (a fortiori) to get
assurance of these durable and everlasting riches is the greatest wisdom in the
world. We should therefore (...), magis Studete, festinate and omnem adhibitote
curam and diligentiam.
rather give all diligence to make our calling sure, we should studiously and
earnestly labor after this assurance in our selves of our effectual calling,
by our faith and good works, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. We have many things to do and
suffer and what our ends may be we do not know, but without some assurance of
Gods favor we shall not be able to hold out, but shall sink under our burdens;
and therefore the Lord is pleased to give his some clusters of these grapes,
and some glimpses of his favor before they come to their celestial Canaan. It
is true, he might have kept us in doubts and darkness all our days and have
given us no light of his face nor evidence of his love till we came to Heaven.
But such is the riches of his goodness to his people, that he does not only
give them Heaven hereafter, In two cases God gives early assurance when he
makes others wait longer for it. 1. When he intends men shall die betimes, he
does ripen their graces betimes. 2. When he calls men out to great services
immediately after their conversion, as he ^id paul. Strong. 31. Ser. p. 603.
but he also assures them of it even in this life, and so they have Heaven upon
earth, and are happy here under the assured hope of happiness hereafter. These
comforts have begun here which shall never end.

[See more in Davenants Determine. q. 3. Prideaux fascicul. p. 269. Paraeus
contra Bellarm. 1. Lect. 272. c. 8. Dr. Wards Suffrag. page 199. Wendelin.
Theolog. l. 1. c. 25. p. 145. and his Exercitat. 122. Mr. Brooks Treat. of
Assurance. Mr. Culverwells Sermon. on 2 Pet. 1.10. Mr. Burgess Spi. Refining.
Sermon. 1. l. 12. Mr. Baxter Saints Rest l. 3. c. 7. p. 147. and if any yet shall
desire more let him peruse Dr. Wilkins his Ecclesiastes p. 125. edit. 3.

Observation 2.
2. The Salvation of Gods Elect is sure. It is laid up by a righteous Judge for
them. As they are assured by Gods Spirit of it, so it is made V. Dr. Prideaux
Lect. 7. De certitudine salutis, and Tactica S. l. 2. c. 9.
sure to them. They are in Covenant with God, and Covenant mercies are
sure-mercies, 2 Samuel 23.5. Isay 55.3. So that this Crown of righteousness is
sure. 1. In respect of the keeper of it. viz. The great Lord keeper of Heaven
and earth, he keeps this crown for us, and us for it, 1 Pet. 1.4. He is our
father who has prepared for us a Kingdom, Luke 12.3^. 2 Cor. 5.1. 2. In
respect of the Place where it is kept, it is laid up in Heaven where no moaths
can corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal, Colos. 1.5. The crowns of
Kings are kept in Castles, but the Crown of Gods people is kept by God himself
in Heaven.

Observation 3.
3. God has a Crown of Glory for his people. Here we have a crown of Thorns,
but in Heaven we have a Crown of Glory. Here we are afflicted, tossed, tempted
and have no reward many times for our labors, I but great is our reward in
Heaven, Matthew. 5.12. James 1.12. Earth is the place of weeping, Heaven is the
place of rejoicing. Christ himself was crowned with Thorns here, but in Heaven
with Glory, Heb. 2.7. He that has the crown of Glory here must look for a
crown of Thorns hereafter. He that has all his consolation in this life (as
Dives had Luke 16.25.) must look for none in the next. We must suffer with
Christ here if ever we will reign with him in Heaven, 2 Timothy 2.12. Rev. 4.4.

Observation 4.
4. All Believers are Spiritual Kings. Crowns are for Kings and Conquerours and
not for ordinary persons. We are not born Kings but we are made so by Christ,
Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. 1 Pet. 2.9. They rule over sin and Satan and conquer all
the enemies of their Salvation in Christ and by his power, John 16.33. Romans
8.37. Gal. 5.24. 1 John 5.4. They are married to Christ and by reason of this
Spiritual Union they come to have communion with him in his privileges, as the
wife partakes of the husbands honor. Christ has made us Heirs and Coheirs
with himself, Romans 8.17. This may Comfort us in our straits here, it may be
thou art poor, contemned and cast out of all; I but remember Christ has made
thee a Spiritual King, and so thou art rich, Rev. 2.9. In him we are Lords of
all. all is yours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. though we have little in possession for
present, yet we have much in reversion. Only it behooves us to walk as
Spiritual Kings, leading Holy, Heavenly, Spiritual lives. It is a debasement to
a Christian who looks for a Crown of Glory to mind earth and to pursue these
low things, this is as if a King should leave his throne and go rake in a
kennel, or fight for bones. We may well trust God for crusts who has promised
us a Crown, he that has given us his Son (which is a greater gift then ten
thousand worlds) with him will much more give us all things, Romans 8.32.

Observation 5.
5. Christians may have an eye to the recompense of reward. In our race we may
eye the crown which is set before us to quicken and encourage us in our course.
Though our work be hard yet our wages is great. We shall have a sure Reward,
Prove. 11.18. a full Reward, 2 John 8. an everlasting Reward, 2 Cor. 4.17.

1. That which God himself has used as an Incentive and Motive to Obedience
that we may use as a Motive and by consequence have an eye to it. But God has
used Heaven and Happiness as a Finis dat amabilitatem and facilitatem mediis.
Motive to quicken us to obedience, as appears, 2 Timothy 2.12. James 1.12. and
5.7. Rev. 2.10. God will not be served by his creatures for naught, all his
precepts are backed with promises, he never says to the house of Jacob seek my
face in vain, Isay 45.19.

2. The Servants of God have practiced it. Moses had an eye to the recompense
of Reward, yet was no Amor mercedis non est amor mercenarius.

V. Buroughs Moses Choice cap. 40 and 53.

Contemplatus est Moses mercedem ut beneficium non ut de bitum, ut haereditatem
non ut salarium, filial^ affectu non mercenario, non ut mercedem dandam ex
commisso sed ut premium dandum ex promisso Vt acu^e Spanhem. Dub. Evangel. 88.


mercenary man, Heb. 11.26. and so had Christ who was greater then Moses, Heb.
12.2. Paul had a most free and ingenuous Spirit yet he had an eye to the price
of the high calling of God in Christ, Philip. 3.13, 14. Colos. 1.5. and David
comforted himself in the midst of his conflicts with this, that God would yet
bring him to glory, Psalm. 73.24. Only this Caution must be remembered that in
all we do or suffer Gods glory must be the Aliud est ad mercedem respicere,
aliud rantum ad illud respicere. Aliud primario, aliud secundario ad illam
respicere. Vix diligitur Jesus propter Iesum. Aug

Solus est Dous summum bonum and ultimus finis intellectualis creaturae, and
propter se amandum.

V. D. Kendal Sancti Sancit^. c. 5. and Dr. Bolton Bonds of Christ's freedom p.
241. etc.


ultimate and primary end we look at, 1 Cor. 10.31. Colos. 3.17. We must love
Christ for himself and for his own excellencies, and not for loaves or
self-respects. We are never sincere till we can serve Christ simply out of love
to himself, purely in obedience to his Commands only because he requires it.

The Lord. Observation 6.
6. Christ is the Lord. He is God coeternal and coequal with his Father. See
this largely proved. V. 1.

Observation 7.
7. Christ is a righteous Judge. Yea, Christ is called (...), that just one by
way of eminency and special propriety, Acts 22.14.

Nemo hunc judicem poterit fallere quia est ipsa sapientia, nemo poterit
delicta sua occultare, quia pollet Omniscientia; nemo judicii sententiam
flectere, quia est ipsa Iustitia; nemo poterit ^ffugere quia est ipsa
Omnipotentia. Bonavent. Sorm 72. de Temp.


righteousness it self. He will give to every one according to his works. His
Judgment is the Judgment of God and so must needs be true and just, Romans 2.2.
He is the Judge of all the world and cannot act unrighteously, Romans 3.5, 6. He
may as soon cease to be, as cease to be just; with him is no respect of
persons, no power, kindred, gifts or greatness has influence upon him, Romans
2.11. 1 Pet. 2.17. He judges not according to the outward appearance and
colors of things, Isay 11.3. but according to the truth of every case and
cause, Romans 2.6. His judgment is true without error or mistaking, Rev. 19.11.
Then poor, afflicted, oppressed ones shall be relieved, Psalm. 72.24. and the
wicked shall not be able to stand in Judgment, Psalm. 1. ult. God smites his
hands in anger against unrighteous persons here, Ezekiel. 22.6, 7.12, 13. And bars
them out of his Kingdom hereafter, 2 Cor. 6.9. Be Patient then my Brethren till
the coming of the Lord, and let the remembrance of this righteous Judge comfort
thee against all unrighteous judgments which shall here pass against thee,
Eccles. 3.16, 17. and 5.8. 1 Cor. 4.3. James 5.7.

2. Labor to resemble Christ in Righteousness. As we must be perfect as he is
perfect, so we must be righteous as he is righteous by way of similitude,
though we cannot by way of equality, yet in our degree and according to our
measure we must resemble him; having righteous Habits, righteous Principles and
righteous Practices. God loves to meet those in ways of mercy who are not
only Facienti justitiam, Hebraei utuntur Participio praesentis Temporis ut
significent non unam actionem sufficere, sed totum vitae tempus requ^^i ad
justitiae studium. ^eatus non qui cogitat, audit, loquitur, sed qui operatur
justitiam. Luther.
Praisers, but Practisers of righteousness, Isay 64.5. The eye of Gods special
Providence is on such, Psalm. 11.7. and 34.15. He will so openly and visibly
reward them that even the wicked shall say, Verily there is a reward for the
Righteous, Psalm. 58.11. When Families be habitations of righteousness then they
are blessed habitations and prosper, Ier. 22.15. and 31. 23. This exalts a
Nation, Prove. 14.34. and brings peace to people, Psalm. 72.1, 2. Isay 26.2. and
32.17. To such God will reveal his secrets, Prove. 3.32. Their memorial shall be
precious here, Prove. 10.7. Psalm. 112.6. 2 Cor. 8.18. and they shall have Heaven
hereafter, Psalm. 15.1, 2. Ier. 33.15, 16. The Crown of righteousness belongs to
such righteous ones, Matthew. 11.43. and 25.46. Though the wicked may kill them,
yet they cannot hurt them, for the righteous have hope even in death, Prove.
14.32. Magistrates especially must do Justice impartially to all, like Levi (in
this case) they must know neither father nor mother, Deuteronomy. 33.9. they must
resemble Christ for whom they Judge who is no respecter of persons, John 2.4.
No Nec Hesperus nec Lucifer form^sior justitia. Aristot.
Star so beautiful as Justice. It pleases God above all Sacrifices, Prove.
21.3. It is a mean to stay plagues, Numb. 25.17, 18. When Achab was stoned
there was peace in Israel, Josh. 7. When Saul's sons were hanged the famine
ceased, 2 Samuel 21.24. It is not See Dr. Stantons Sermon on Psalm. 106 30 p. 9.
1644. Mr. Fairecloth Sermon. on Josh. 7.25. p. 24. preached 1641.
Cruelty but Mercy to cut off incorrigible evil doers from a land, with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Shall give me. Observation 8.
8. Eternal blessedness is the free gift of God. Here is no foreseen faith,
works, Causa efficiens impulsiva Electionis est solum Dei beneplacitum and pura
puta (...) in gratuita ejus dilectione erga nos funda'a.

Vocatio ad foedus, ad munus, ad martyrium est a gratia. Phil. 1.29.


merit, desert; but from our Election to our Salvation all free grace, love and
mercy. Grace is the springhead of all our mercies, it is the Title page of the
book of Life.

1. Our Election is wholly free. It is but a remnant through the Election of
grace that are saved, and if it be of grace then not of works, else grace were
no grace, Romans 11.5, 6. and 9.11, 18.

2. Our Vocation is of free Grace. When we were dead in trespasses and sins he
quickened us, Ezekiel. 16. Ephesians. 2.1. he called Abraham when he was an Idolater,
Josh. 24.2. Manasses a blood-sucker, Paul a persecutor, it is not for any merit
of ours, but of his own mere goodness that he calls us, 2 These. 1.11. 2 Timothy,
1.9. God freely called and quickened the Ephesians (2.5.) when they were dead in
sins (.i.) Insensible, Impotent and odious to God and good men, by reason of
their Idolatry ( Acts 19.) And hatred of piety, there is but one good man
amongst them and (it is said) they banished him out of their city; Magic and
witchcraft abounded amongst them witness those Magic books which they burnt
at their conversion, V. D. Hammond in locum. They used curious Arts (.i.)
Magical Charms and Sorcery.
Acts 19.19. Hence that Proverb, Ephesiae literae, Ephesian words or writings
(.i.) their charms, and spells; yet these Idolaters and Sorcerers God was
pleased at his own free grace to call, here he planted a famous Church, and
Christ himself writes an Epistle to them, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. and commends those
that sometimes were the worst in the world.

3. Our Adoption is free, of Canaanites he has made us Israelites, of sinners
sons, of foes friends, and of heirs of hell, heirs of Heaven; before we were
born he did predestinate us to be his Adopted ones, Ephesians. 1.5.

4. Our Redemption is free; God freely sent his Son into the world to save us
John 3.16. it was grace, the riches of grace that redeemed us, Ephesians. 1.7.

5. Our Justification is of free grace. Christ's righteousness is freely imputed
to us for righteousness; and faith is freely given, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.8.
Philip. 1.29.

6. Our Sanctification is free. He heals our backslidings and loves us freely,
Hos. 14.4. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. to extract sweet out of sweet, nature and Art can do
it, but to bring light out of darkness, good out of evil, and sweet out of
bitter is a work of Omnipotency, it is no less then the change of nature.

7. Our Salvation and Glorification is free, Luke 12.32. Romans 6. ult. This then
overthrowes the doctrine of the Papist, Arminians and Semipelagians who cry up
foreseen faith, preparations, good works, and an improvement of the means of
grace, as causes of Election; whereas God chose us not because we were Holy,
but that we might be Holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.10. we are created to good works,
not for them. He did predestinate us not because we were conformable, but that
we might be conformable to his Son in Sanctification, Quicquid est causa causae
est causae causa^i sive ^ffectus, at effectus non potest esse prior sua causa.
Romans 8.29, 30. Predestination is the cause, Vocation and Faith which comes by
hearing is but the effect of it, and so cannot be before its cause; hence the
Scripture so often tells us that we are chosen to Obedience, not for Obedience, 1
Pet. 1. 2. and that as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, they did
not first believe that they might be ordained, but they were first ordained
that they might believe, Acts 13.47. 2 These. 2.13. Paul obtained mercy not
because he was faithful, but that he might be faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. Prioritate
naturae and ordinis elegit homines ad vitam aeternam tanquam ad sinem, deinde
ad media conducentia ad sinem.
So that in order of nature faith is after the decree of Election, for God
first decrees the end, and the means conducing to that end; so that it is not
by works of righteousness which we have done either before conversion or after
(the Apostle excludes them all from meriting Salvation) but by mercy we are
saved, Tit. 3.4, 5. this grace unexpectedly appeared when we were dead in sin
and so were merely Passive in respect of the habit of grace, though in other
respects we are partly Active and partly Passive; when we did not once dream of
such a mercy yet then did it shine upon us; Illuxit gratia (.i.) subi^o and
improviso nobis illuxit nil tale quaerentibus aut sperantibus.
and if God should choose men for their foreseen goodness he must choose none,
for we are all by nature alike, there is no difference by nature between Jacob
and Esau, Peter and Judas, Ex mera (...) discrevit istas personas ab aliis in
eadem massa and sub eodem reatu existentes, nec ulla dignitate, qualitate vel
dispositione aliis praecellentes.
Romans 3.9, 22. and 4.9. what did God see in Abraham, Rahab, Manasses, Paul why
he should choose them? There was much in them why he should refuse them.

Let us then renounce all confidence in our selves or any thing that we have
done, In nullo gloriandum est quia nihil est restrum. Cyprian.
for if we merit any thing it is destruction, for sin is our own and perfectly
evil, but good is not our own nor perfectly good. The Apostle excludes all
distinctions and ascribes all to grace, Ephesians. 1.4. to 11. So that as they at
the building of the material Temple from the laying the foundation to the
laying on of the top-stone cried grace, grace, Zach. 4.6. So must we from our
Election to our Glorification cry grace, grace. How does Paul in all his
Epistles exalt grace and ascribe all to it! By the grace of God I am that I am,
1 Cor. 15.20. Let the wise man glory in his wisdom, and the rich man in his
riches, as for me I will glory in the Grace of God, for by the Grace of God I
am that I am. All is grace, abounding superabounding grace, Romans 5.8.

1. It is God that gives preventing and preparing grace, ( Psalm. 10.17. Phil.
2.13.) whereby he draws us to himself, and makes us willing to believe and
obey.

2. He follows us with his subsequent Grace whereby he upholds us in Grace
begun and enables us to persevere; there is a Divine manutenency which keeps us
from falling, Psalm. 73.23. Hence the Scripture takes all from man and gives all
to God, It is he that works all our works in us and for us, Isay 26.12. Every
good gift comes from him, Jam. 1.17. It is by mercy and truth and not by our
merit that our sins are pardoned, Prove. 16.6. As Jacob said of his riches and
children ( Genesis 33.5, 11.) God has showed mercy to me and has given me all
this, and these are the children which the Lord has given me. So the Lord has
showed us mercy in giving us Faith, Repentance, Obedience, and these are the
Graces which the Lord has given us; and therefore as all rivers come secretly
and silently from the Sea, but return openly thither again; So those Graces
which God has secretly wrought in our hearts must openly appear in our lives
to his praise. We must not kiss our own hand ( Job 31.27.) nor sacrifice to our
own nets, but with the Church give all to God, Psalm. 115.1. So did Christ
Matthew. 11.25, 26.

2. This may comfort us in the sight and sense of our wants and weaknesses,
that we are not now under a Covenant of works, but under a Covenant of
Free Grace, now we may buy without money, Isay 55.1. God is gracious and loves
freely, he loves us because he loves us, it is his good pleasure so to do, the
moving and impulsive cause is in himself, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. he is gracious and will
not contend for ever* Psalm. 1.3, 8, 9 but though he see our ways (how evil
they be) yet he will heal them (freely) Isay 57.18. I have seen his ways and I
will heal him, a strange expression, one would think he should have said, I
have seen his ways and I will destroy him, but such is his pity to the sons
of men that though he see their rebellions and perverse ways, See Mr.
Culverwell on Isa. 43.25.
yet for his own Name sake he freely heals and pardons them.

2. It may comfort us against final Apostasy, if our Salvation were grounded on
our selves, if it were conditional depending on our free will we might justly
fear; but since it is grounded on the unchangeable purpose and good will of God
we are safe, for his purpose is sure, Romans 9.11. And his foundation firm, 2 Timothy 2.19. His counsels shall stand in despite of all opposition, Our estate
in Christ is better then that of Adam in 6. respects.
Isay 14.27. and 46.10. We stand not now by our own power or will, our
Salvation is not now in our own keeping, but in Gods (1 Pet. 1.5.) and so it is
safer then Adams was in the state of Innocence.

3. It may comfort us in respect of the Nation, Smith on Creed. A^t. 7. Ser.
49. p. 450.
though we be a sinful rebellious people, a Nation unworthy to be beloved by
reason of our Apostasy, unfruitfulness, unthankfulness and unanswerable walking
to the light and love which God has showed us, yet as he saved Israel with a
Notwithstanding all their ingratitude and disingenuous walking toward him, See
M^. Bridge his ^erm on that Text preached. Nov. 5 647.
Psalm. 106.8. So we have hopes that for his own Names sake he will save
ungrateful England. No Nation under Heaven has such cause to admire free grace
as we have. The Lord has made us wait on him in a way of mercy, when for our
great provocations he might have made us wait on him in a way of Judgment. We
have great reason to serve him with gladness in the abundance of all things,
since he might justly have made us serve him with sadness of heart in the want
of all things. He has made us the Head of the Nations; when he might (for our
abominations) have made us the Tail; he has set us above in Victories and
successes at Sea and Land, when he might justly have set us beneath. Well, let
these mercies improve our Graces and not our Vices, least the Lord consume us
after he has done us good, and as he has made us famous for blessings, so he
make us infamous for our abuse of them to all generations, I^sh. 24.^^0. If we
still do wickedly what can we exspect but that we and our Rulers should perish,
1 Samuel 12. ult.

Oh then let the remembrance of Gods free grace and mercy Humble us, nothing
melts the heart like this, when the Soul considers how God has pardoned his
sins, washed him and cleansed him who was a poor loathsome polluted wretch,
quickened and revived him who was dead in sin: nothing works such an absolute
and strong aversation of the heart from sin, and fortifies it against it, as
the remembrance of this Gratia gratis data est gratissima.
free love does. This makes a man even to loath and abhor himself for his
disingenuous carriage toward God, Ezekiel. 6.9. and 16. and 20.43, 44. and 36.31.
This makes the soul to say as Mephibosheth said sometime to David, (2 Samuel 9.8.
and 19.28.) All my Fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King, yet
did thou set thy servant to eat bread at thy own Table.

At that day. Observation 9.
9. The day of Judgment is a signal remarkable day. It is That day of days,
that great and glorious day of the Lord when Christ shall come in flaming fire
attended with all his Holy Angels to execute vengeance on all his enemies;
hence the Scripture puts an Emphasis on it. That day (.i.) that great and
terrible day to the wicked ( See Mr. Ienkyns p. 246. folio.
Jude 6. when Angels and men shall be brought to the bar, and the great ones of
the world who have judged others must now be judged themselves. That great and
comfortable day to all the Saints when Christ will own them with an E^ge before
men and Angels. but of this before V. 1.

Observation 10.
10. The full reward of Gods servants is reserved till the last day. It Is at
that day: the day of judgment when Gods Paul's be fully rewarded. It Is true;
the righteous have some gleanings here, some clusters of Grapes they have
before they come to their Celestial Canaan, and as soon as ever their souls
depart they be in bliss, but their full reward and blessedness is reserved for
the last day, 2 Cor. 5.10. Hypocrites are all for present reward, they must It
is not (...), habent, sed (...) recipient (i.) Portionem solatii ita habent, ut
poste^ nullam aliam expectare possint.
have it here, and they have it out and out, they must expect no more, Matt.
6.2. But a gracious soul looks for his reward herefter, he expects his
recompense at the Resurrection of the just, Luke 14.13, 14. This then must
comfort us against the base usage of an ungrateful world, here many times
Labans of the world change our wages ten times, Genesis 31.7. Aye, but remember
great is your reward in Heaven. It Is not in this day, but at that day which we
must look for our full reward. Here is the place of fighting, Heaven is the
place of rewarding. The Butler may forget Joseph, men may forget our kindness,
yea and the Saints themselves may forget what they have done, but God is not
unrighteous to forget our labor of love, Heb. 6.10. Never any lost by serving
God, not only For, V. Buroughs Moses Choice cap. 39.
but In the very keeping of his Commandments there is great reward, Psalm
19.11. Prove. 3.16, 17. Secret Obedience at that day shall have open recompense,
Matthew. 6.6. and the least service shall not lose its reward, Mal. 1.10. Matthew.
10.41, 42. Be it but a cup of cold water, yet if it be given in sincerity, it
shall be surely rewarded.

Pro poculo frigidae torrens Voluptatis.
Water is a common Element, and cold water costs us no charge to heat it, yet
this almost undiscernable Charity shall in no wise loose its reward, it is a
Meiosis (i.) it shall be fully and surely rewarded. And because we are hardly
brought to believe this, our Savior uses a double Negative, and to put yet
further past doubt, he adds a Verily, a note of asseveration to confirm it.
He that receives a Prophet shall have a Prophets reward (i.) the Prophet shall
teach him the Truths of God, (...) nequaquam perdet.
and instruct him in the way of life.

2. After this life God will give him the reward of the Prophets in Glory.
Gaius lost nothing by entertaining John, nor the Shunamite and Widow of Sarepta
by loving Prophets. Yea, he that receives a Righteous man (though no Minister
of Christ) yet receiving him because he is Righteous, and for the Truths sake
shall not miss of a reward: yea, he that shall show the least kindness to one
of Christ's little ones (so the Saints are called: 1. Because they are a little
little flock, Luke 12.32. 2. Because they are little in their own eyes. 3. And
most genuinely because they are accounted as Abjects and little set by in the
world. 4. They are beloved of God as little ones are of their Parents,) they
shall surely be rewarded. Now if such small works of mercy be thus rewarded,
what shall be given to those who are magnificently liberal for Christ, and give
as Arannah to David, as Kings unto the King? 1 Samuel 24.23.


If water be thus rewarded, what may we expect for our blood that is shed in
Christ's cause? and if cold water from the Spring (which can hardly be called
ones own) be thus recompensed, what may we expect for warm water from our
brows and bodies in sweating and laboring for the Church of Christ? There is
not a man that serves God faithfully, but he shall be rewarded fully, Numbers
14.24. If Cornelius pray and give Alms, they come for a (...), Monimentum quod
nobis alicujus rei memoriam renovat.
memorial and standing Monument before the Lord, Acts 10.4. God has a Book of
remembrance for all that we do, Mal. 3.16. or suffer for him, our tears and
flittings when driven from our habitations by wicked men, are all noted in his
Book, Psalm. 56.8. So that we never lose tho we lose all for God, If Abraham
part with all for God, God will be to him his exceeding great reward ( Genesis
15.1.) according to the Saints desire, non Tua, sed Te, Lord put us not off
with these low things, it is thy self that we desire for our choycest good,
Psalm 73.25. Yea so bountiful a Master is he, that even external and
Hypocritical service shall not go unrewarded, as we see in Iehu, 2 Kings 10.30.
Ahab 1 Kings 21.29. the King of Babylon, Ezekiel 29.18, 19, 20. and those
wicked ones, Maluchi, 1.10.

And not only to me, etc. Observation 11.
11. Difference of Grace makes not a nullity of Glory. Weak believers whose
Faith is true, though it be but as a grain of Mustardseed, or as smoking flax
which has neither light nor heat, yet in the conclusion it proves victorious
and gets the Crown. It Is true, there are Degrees of Glory. Dantur gradus in
glorificatione, consule subtis Altingium Probl. 64. Wendelin, Theolog lib. 1.
cap. 27. These. 17. Cudworth on Gal. 6.7. Spanheim Dub. 135. Brochmand CC. De
vita aterna. T. 2. p. 7072.
Eminent Saints, Ministers and Martyrs shall have a higher Degree of Glory then
ordinary ones. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of
the Stars, and one Star differs from another Star in Glory, 1 Cor.
15.41, 42. John 14.2. As there are Degrees of Torments in Hell, Matthew 10.15.
and 11.20. Revelations 18.7. So on the contrary there are Degrees of Glory in
Heaven. God will have it so to quicken us in his way and work, remembering that
they which sow liberally, shall reap accordingly. All believers shall shine
like the Sun, with the beams of Righteousness each one according to his Degree.

As God in this life gives to some a greater measure of Sanctification, so he
will give to some a greater measure of Glory. As men's work is not alike, so
their reward shall not be alike, 1 Cor. 3.8. else all believers being Kings and
Conquerors shall have Crowns. Christ Will at last be admired not only of
some, but of all that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. They shall be gathered to the
general Assembly, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
which may comfort weak believers if their Faith be sincere, (for it is not the
strength but the truth of Faith which justifies) Though it be not so eminent
as others, yet God will not despise the day of small things, he preserves not
only strong Oaks, but also the bruised reeds; not only the light Torches,
but the smoking week. Only we should not rest content with our wants and
weaknesses, but strive after perfection that we may have a full reward.

Suppose there be an hundred pots of different sizes filled with water, though
their sizes differ and some are bigger then others, yet all are full, the
little one has its fill (according to its capacity) as well as the greater. So
nothing shall be wanting to perfect the felicity of every Saint, God will be
Deus eri^ omnia in omnibus, sed non dicit omnia aqualiter in omnibus.
All in All to all believers, Psalm 17.15. 1 Cor. 15.28. Rev. 21. So that in
respect of Objective blessedness it is the same in all, viz. God and the
beatificall Vision of him and our full satisfaction and glorification with him.
Yet there are Degrees of this Glory, as there is an Order and Degrees amongst
the Angels whom we shall be like in Glory, Colos. 1.16, 17. Ephesians. 1.21.
Matthew 22.30.

But unto them also that love his appearing. Observation 12.
12. It is the property of the Godly to love and l^ng for the second coming of
Christ. As the faithful before Christ's coming in the flesh longed for that
first coming and rejoiced to see that day though it were far off, Luke 2.25.38.
John 8.56. So believers now desire his second coming to judgment, and greatly
long for that day (except it be in case of desertion, or after some fall, or in
respect of their defects and unpreparedness) else when the Saints are
themselves, and walk up to their profession, they cannot but long for that day,
and that for these Reasons.

1. It Is the day of consummating the marriage between Christ and his People,
and therefore must needs be longed for by the Spouse of Christ. The Quaevis
vere^ fidelis anima u^pote Christi Spansa, quae a^^habonem Sipritus accepit,
cupide desiderat sponsi coelestis adventum, sciunt enim, imo quotidie
experiuntur pii quod in hac vita velut in quodam carcere captivi ten^antur,
sed. in die nov^ssimo sequitur liberatio. Gerherd de extrem. Iudic.
Spirit in the Bride says, Come, Rev. 22.17. She has made her self ready and
therefore rejoyceeth in this marriage of the Lamb, Rev. 19.7. His appearing is
not their fear, but their hope, Titus 2.14. they wait for it, 1 These. 2.10. and
earnestly expect and desire it, Rev. 6.10 Heb. 9.28. and this is the difference
between a chaste Spouse and an Harlot, the one rejoices in her husbands
coming, the other fears it. Yea, they do not only expect, but even hasten
the coming of that day, by their earnest desires after it, and preparations for
it, 2 Peter 3.12. and by keeping old and new fruits for Christ with sweet
things, Canticles 7. ult. Christ has promised to come quickly, and therefore
their hearts like an Echo cry, Even so Lord Jesus come quickly, Revelations
22.20. Canticles ult. ult. They daily pray, Thy Kingdom come: Non potest esse
verus Christianus nec recitare orationem Dominicam, qui non toto cord huno
diem desiderat. Luthe.
They long to have these days of sin finished and the number of Gods Elect
accomplished.

2. Now things are in confusion, and there is no effectual remedy against
male-administrations and wrong judgments, but then Christ will review the
judgments of the world and set all strait. As good men long for a Parliament,
because they know that abuses will then be rectified; so these long for this
general Assembly, when God will Rejudge the judgments of the world and
vindicate the wrongs done to his people. Now Christ raigns in the midst of
his enemies, and his Kingdom has much opposition from the World and the
Devil, but at that day Christ will fully subdue all his enemies, and take away
every thing that hindered his Kingdom and obscured his Glory: and this also
makes the Saints long for his coming.

3. Here Gods people are tossed and troubled with many Tentations and our life
is hid under many afflictions, but when Christ who is our life shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in Glory, Tot persecutiones animus quotidie
patitur, tot periculis pectus urgetur, and delectat hic inter Diaboli gladios
diu stare; cum magis concupiscendum sit, ad Christum, subveniente velocius
morte, properare. Cyptian, Sermon 4. De Morta.
Colossians. 3.4. This made Luther who in his younger days said, Thy Kingdom
come, with some regret: yet after he had been exercised with variety of
Tentations, there was no Petition more pleasing to him, Perversum est quem
diligit timere ne vemat, and orare, Adveniet Regnum tuum timere autem ^e
exaudiaris. Vnde autem timor, q. Iudex est? Number quid injustus? Nun quid
invidus? nihil horum. Quis enim venturus est judicare te nisi qui venit
judicari pro te? August. in Psalm 147.
nor which he more heartily desired then that Gods Kingdom might come.

4. Now we live by Faith, but then by sight, here we sow in Tears, then we
shall reap in joy, now the world laughs and we weep, but then our sorrow shall
be turned into joy. Here we are as unknown, then as known. Here we are
vilified, then we shall be glorified, when in the sight of those that hated us
we shall be for ever with the Lord, Luke 13.28, 29. and such glory put upon us
as Christ shall be made mavelous in us, 2 These. 1.10.

5. Believers are good and faithful servants and therefore love their Masters
coming. They observe his command, and make in their daily exercise to keep a
good Conscience, Amat advertum Domini qui illi^s Leges sequitur, and ex illis
vitam instituit. Theodoret.
they cast up their accounts, and are friends of the Bridegroom, and therefore
they long for his coming.

6. The blessings which we shall receive at that day are very desirable
blessings. It will be to us a day of Iubilee, when we shall for ever be set
free from all our enemies. It will be a day of rest when we shall enter upon
our everlasting inheritance, a day of receiving wages for all our service. A
day which will free us from all our miseries, (...), in g^miscimus, suspiramus,
anhelamus.
and supply us with all mercies. No wonder then that the Saints so earnestly
long for it, and if all the creatures groan, and vehemently desire that day,
Romans 8.21, 23. shall not the Spouse of Christ much more? 2 Cor. 5.2.

Wicked men have their portions in this life, and rest content with present
enjoyment,, and so desire not that day, besides they are men of evil
consciences and are condemned already in the word, and in their own consciences
( John 3.18.) which makes them fear, and not desire that day, they could wish
that Christ would never come. But the Godly who have faith and a good
Conscience do with joy long for this day of their full redemption, when Christ
shall appear to their everlasting comfort. So that to love and long for Christ's
appearing, Sermon 7. R. more in D. Sibbs his Sermon at S. Tho. Crews Fun. p.
49, etc. Symonds sight and faith c. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ca^yl on Job 19.^5.
is the Character and almost the definition of all true believers None can love
it but they, and they cannot but love it.

VERSE 9, 10. Do thy diligence to come shortly to me. VERSE 10. For Demas has
forsaken me having loved this present World, and is departed to Thessalonica,
Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
WE are now come to the second part of this Chapter, wherein the Apostle
treats of many private and personal affairs.

1. He desires Timothy to come speedily to him to Rome, the Apostle had once
some thoughts of going to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.14. but since he was shut up in
prison and deprived of that liberty, he now sends for him to come to him,
having many things to impart to him before he died, probably touching the
weighty affairs of the Church, or else that he might be helpful in promoting
the Gospel in Rome, Italy, and in the places adjacent, since he wanted other
helpers. What ever it was, it was no mean matter which made the Apostle send
for Timothy beyond Sea, from his charge at Ephesus in Asia minor to come to him
at Rome.

(...), da operam; festina, genuine.
Do thy diligence, or hasten to come to me, he was near his end, and therefore
he bids him hasten, and come speedily before winter, Verse 21. q. d. defer
not thy coming till another year, but come speedily before I die.

1. Observation.
Nil mihi rescribas attamen ipse veni. Ovid.
1. Personal presence is to be preferred writing. The Apostle does not say,
Write unto me, but come unto me. Letters (we say) do not blush, yet they
cannot express the lively affections of our breasts, as when men are present
face to face with us.

Vox Hominis, Vox Leonis.
Writing, is more general and flat, but the lively voice and quickening presence
of a friend works more effectually upon us, Proverbs 27.17. Acts 18.5. When
the Apostle would comfort the Romans he tells them that he will come to
them, ( Romans 1.11, 12. and 15.24. 28.29.) that he might be comforted by
them, and might comfort them.

So John will not write to his friends but that he might the more effectually
comfort them, he promises to come and speak with them face to face, that
their Joy might be full, 2 John 12. and 3. John 13.14. Paul will not write, but
he will see the Thessalonians (1.2, 17, 18.) There is more Vigor in the Voice,
then in dead Letters. Writing does well, but lively conference does much
better. Habet nescio quid latentis energiae vivae vocis, actus, and in aures
Discipulorum De Authoris ore, transfusa fortius sonat. Hieron. ad Pavlin.
The speech of good men does whet and excite men to love and good works,
Hebrews 10.24. it does Minister Grace to such as keep company with them,
Proverbs 10.11. and 15.4. Ephesians, 4.29.

2. Observation.
2. The society and help of good men is much to be desired. There is much
comfort and good to be gained thereby. Paul would never have sent so many
hundred miles for a Timothy if there had not been more then ordinary sweetness
in his society. Man is a sociable Creature, and God has ordained mutual
society for the quickening and increasing of his Graces in us.

We want much of our comfort in the want of a good friend, which made David so
sadly to lament the death of Jonathan, and to complain that he was desolate,
Psalm 25.16. and this made Paul to rejoice in the recovery of Epaphroditus his
Friend and fellow Soldier, as a great mercy, Philippians 2.25, 26, 27. Solomon
tells us that two are better then one, Ecclesiasticus 4.9. As Ointments and
perfumes delight the senses, refresh the Heart and quicken the Spirits, so the
faithful Counsel of a loving friend is very precious, Prove. 27.9.

Hence this communion amongst friends is called sweet Counsel, Psalm 55. 15. We
are subject in this World to many Trials: Now God has ordained the society of
his People as one special See Capel on Temptation Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Page 104.
Edit. ult.
means to comfort us in them, Malachi, 3.16. James 5.16. This made Christ to
send his Disciples out by two and two that they might have mutual Comfort and
Confirmation of their Doctrine, Luke 10.1. Unsociable men are like blunt and
rusty iron unfit for service. Solitariness and strangeness is not good:
Solitary Birds are Birds of Prey: Communion is a means to breed and increase
brotherly love, and to enlarge the Church, Acts 2.46.47. They were all together
with one accord, and then it follows, The Lord added to the Church daily such
as should be saved. This is an Article of our Faith; we believe, a Communion of
Saints, and oh that we did live as a People that believe our Principles.

It Is Communion with the Saints on Earth is a glimspe of thy Eternal society
which we shall have with them in Heaven, when we shall all be gathered together
into one Body, 2 Tessalonians 2.1. as the society of wicked men in their
wickedness is a glimpse of Hell.

3. Observation.
3. The strongest Christians, sometime, may be helped by weaker. A Paul may
stand in need of a Timothy. There is not a member in the body but is some way
serviceable to the head.

4. Observation.
4. A Minister upon weighty and just occasions may lawfully be absent from his
flock for a time.

1. It must be but for a time. 2. The cause must be weighty. Timothy comes
from his charge to Paul (yet Tychicus supplies the place the while) who had
great things to impart to him for the Churches good it is noted as an act of
cruelty in the Ostrich, that she leaves her Eggs, Lam. 4.9. Bishop Latimer
wondered how men could go quietly to bed, who had great cures and many of them,
and yet peradventure never preached in any of them constantly. It were easy to
confute and confound these by Scripture, Reasons, Fathers, Councills, etc. But
it is so fully done already by Master Blaxston in his Remonstrance against
Non-Residents, and blessed be God it is so well purged out of the Church that I
need say no more against it. See Bishop Jewels Sermon on Josh. 6. In the end of
his Apology, Page 170. and Master Bowls his Sermon, John 2.17. Page
20.21.16.43.


5. Observation.
5. We may love one friend more then another. Timothy was Paul's beloved Son in
the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.2. He was one whom he had taught and seasoned, he knew
Paul's manner and course of life, he was one that Paul durst trust with his
secrets, and so more fit to come to him and to serve him. Christ himself when
he was upon Earth, and as he was man and lived amongst men as man, he was more
familiar with some then others, and loved them more choicely. Christ loved all
good men, but Lazarus, Mary and Martha, he loved more peculiarly John 11.5.
Christ loved all his Disciples, John 13.1. But he loved John more especially,
and therefore he is called by way of Eminency and special propriety, That
Disciple whom Jesus loved. John 13.23. and 21.7.10. To him Christ reveals his
secrets, he tells him who shall betray him, and after reveals the
Revelation to him.

As John excelled in Purity, meekness, sweet disposition and love to Christ.
So Christ loved him accordingly. Parents do so, they have a more tender
affection to one child then another, and friends do so, and we do so. True,
we may not contemn any, no not the weakest, where we see but aliquid Christi,
any glimpse of Christ's Image, we must love it, but where we see most of Christ,
we may lawfully love most. According to the diverse measures of Grace, so may
the measures of our love be proportioned, hence we read of love and singular
love, 1 Thessalonians 5.13. and though Paul's care were for all the Churches,
yet was his love more abundant to that at Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.28. and 2.4.

VERSE 10. For Demas has forsaken me having loved this present World, and is
departed to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
HEre we have the reason why he would have Timothy come so speedily to him.

1. Because some had forsaken him, as Demas. Others were dispersed and gone, or
sent by Paul to other places to preach the Gospel, as Crescens to Galatia, a
Region of the lesser Asia, where the Jews were dispersed, 1 Peter 1.1. to
these Paul writes an Epistle, blameing them for their Apostasy. Thither
Crescens one of Paul's Disciples and Companions goes, not out of any love to
this present world as Demas did, but to preach the Gospel. Titus went to
Dalmatia. Paul had two Disciples which he loved as sons, viz. Timothy, and this
Titus, the one he left at Ephesus, and this at Crete, Titus 1.4, 5. Paul's dear
affection to him appears by that famous Epistle written to him. Dalmatia was
a Region of Illyricum, where Paul is said to spread the Gospel, Romans 15.19.

A great Question here arises, Whether Demas did well or ill in forsakeing
Paul, and whether he were a good man or an Hypocrite?

Answer, Interpreters here are much divided, some (and those of the Calvin in
locum, Ames.

D. Reynolds, De lib. Apochryphis Lect. 207. p. 1135.


better sort) go about to excuse Demas, and say, that his love to all the
world was only an ordinate, moderate love and care of the world.

2. Others say, his Apostasy was not total, but partial, and that although he
loved the World more then was meet, Some say Demas did repent (which I think
to be the Truth) and then he did embrace this World but for a fit. Capel on
Tent. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. S. 3.
and thereupon left Paul in his troubles and went to Thessalonica (a famous
City of Macedonia) Either that he might get out of danger, or that he might
Merchandise there, for there was great traffic, yet say they he repented of
his fall and returned to Paul, as they would gather from Colossians 4.14.
Philem. 24. Though he did for fear forsake him yet at last (say they) he
returned.

3. The Arminians to defend that uncomfortable Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy,
would fain make Demas a Real Saint, and his Apostasy to be Total. But they
must seek out for better grounds, for Demas (in all probability) was an
Hypocrite, who had no rooted Faith, but went out from Gods people because he
was never truly of them, Elumbe est Argumentum a Meteoris ad fixas Stellas, ab
Umbra ad substantiam, ab Hypocritis ad electos.
1 John 2.19. he was a Meteor that blazed for a time, and presently vanished;
like Jonathan that marched well till he met with honey.

2. I answer, that the salutations mentioned in Colossians and Pilemon were
written before this Epistle to Timothy which the Apostle writ in his second
bonds at Rome, as the context and whole scope of this Chapter, (which is of
more weight with me then a thousand Authors) shows, especially, Verse 6.7,
8.16.17. So that it is gratis dictum said, but not proved, that those Epistles
were written after this.

3. It is said he forsook Paul now he was in trouble and had most need of
help; he knew he could not side with Faul but he must run many hazards in life
and estate, and therefore he resolved to sleep in a whole skin and to save one,
he leaves him, choosing rather to follow his worldly occasions, and to provide
for his own ease, profit, pleasure, then to suffer affliction with the people
of God. Diligere hic (ut alibi in Scripturis) pro prosequi and amplecti
usurpatur. Gerhard.
Hence he is said to embrace this present world, every word has its weight.

1. He did not lightly glance at the world, but he (...), amplexus est hoc
praesens seculum, (id est) praesentis vitae commoda.
embraces it with delight and contentment as his summum bonum and chiefest
delight, and therefore Quem elgis praetulisti. Salvian.
prefers it before Christ; He set his affections on it (says Grotius) like
the thorny ground, where the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of
riches choke the Word so that it becomes unfruitful, Matthew. 13.22.

2. The World (id est,) the things of this world (by a Metonymy of the Subject)
such as riches, pleasures, ease, safety and carnal delights.

3. This present world which is Transitory is opposed to Heaven and the world
to come which shall have no end. Titus 2.12. We have seen before Verse 8. that
the Saints loved the coming of Christ, but Whether ever he recovered himself
or not, and renounced the world which he overmuch loved is doubtful, seeing
Paul ends with forsaking of him, and the Scripture leaves him in the
embracing of this present world. A^tersol.
Demas is all for present profit, he loved this present world, he desired to
have good days here and to live a quiet life without persecution or trouble.
Now such love of the world is enmity against God, James 4.4. and a sign of a
carnal man, 2 John 2, 15. Hence it is that the Scripture makes the love of the
world and the love of God diametrally opposite the one to the other.

Is departed to Thessalonica.] Where he became an Dorotheus in Synopsi, Adeo
proclive est ex servo Mammonae transire in Sacerdotem Diaboli. Doctor
Arrowsmith Demas relicta veritatis via, fit Haereticus eadem sentiens cum
Cerintho. Epiphan. Haeres. 51. Malit molliter quiescere and deliciari in
s^culo, quam cum Paulo periclitari pro Christo. Rolloc. in Colos. 4.14.
Idolatrous Priest (say some) others say that he turned Heretic denying the
Dorotheus in Synopsi, Adeo proclive est ex servo Mammonae transire in
Sacerdotem Diaboli. Doctor Arrowsmith Demas relicta veritatis via, fit
Haereticus eadem sentiens cum Cerintho. Epiphan. Haeres. 51. Malit molliter
quiescere and deliciari in s^culo, quam cum Paulo periclitari pro Christo.
Rolloc. in Colos. 4.14.
Deity of Christ. See whither Apostates fall when God forsakes them, and
whither the inordinate love of the world leads men. However, away he goes to
Thessalonica where he might be far enough from danger, where he might more
securely enjoy the world.

Observations.
1. It Is lawful (in some Cases) to name men. The Apostle to make others fear
Apostasy names this back-slider. So verse 14. He names Alexander who was a
malicions inveterate enemy to the Truth: yet this must be done with a great
deal of Caution, it must not be used but when the person is an open,
incorrigible, impenitent and gross offender, in this case Paul names Hymenaus
and Alexander, Scelerati qui publicorum suo exemplo scandalorum Authors sunt,
illi demum jure and merito suo personaliter taxantur^ suisque nominibus
exprimuntur. Zepper De Art Concion. l. 2. c. 12.
and excommunicateth them for their blasphemy and heresy, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.
Such as sin in private must be admonished in private, such as sin of
infirmity must be gently dealt withal, Galathians, 6.1. But when men will be
so bold as to sin before all, Ministers must be so bold as to reprove them
before all that others may fear, 1 Timothy, 5.20. If it do not better the
party reproved, yet it may better others they may fear and say, either we Aut
sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic est.
are, or we have been, or we may be what this man is.

Be the persons never so great we must not fear them, our Commission extends
to all, we must say to Kings and Queens, humble your selves, Jeremiah, 13.18.
Hosea, 5.2. Elijah tells Ahab to his face that it was he that troubled Israel
by his wickedness, 1 Kings 18.18. and Nathan tells David a King, Thou art
the man, John Baptist tells Herod to his face of his incest.

Ministers must so preach, as that the people they preach to may be made to
know their abominations, Ezekiel 16.1. We must not beat the Air and reprove
the sins of the Court in the Country, but with Amos when we come to Bethel,
we must preach against the sins of Bethel, and in our particular
Congregations we must preach against the sins of our Congregations.

Our Application must be as a Garment fitted for the body it is made for: A
Garment that is fit for every body, is fit for no body. What is spoken in
general to all, few will apply to themselves. The only way to benefit our
people is to apply the plaster to their particular sores. Quod dicitur omni,
dicitur nullo.
This made Ahab to put on sackcloth, 1 Kings 21.20. And brought in so many
thousand Converts, Acts 2.37. One Preacher that thus faithfully applies the
Word to his People, shall do more good in one year then another that
preaches in a general way and never comes home to the Consciences of people,
shall do in many.

Caution, Only we must be careful that we do it not out of spleen or malice,
See excellent Rules for this in Master Bernards Faithful Shepherd. Lib. 4.
Cap. 5. Page 334. etc.
or by-respects, We may in no wise shoot Gods Arrows at our own marks; but
all must be done in a Spirit of Love and meekness, so as we may win men to
Christ, and then when people see that we do it sincerely, See four Reasons
why people should not fret at such Preaching. Hildersham on John 4. Lect. 80.
p. 329.
and out of love to their souls, though they may fret for a time, for sins
are called Members, Colossians 3.5. and it is no pleasant work to part with
them. The sheep should not hate the shepherd when he kills the Vermin that
would destroy them.
) Yet after they come to themselves, they will bless God for us. I have some
experience of what I write, though I have met with some storms in the practice
of it, (which thought to have blowed me out of all) yet God in his Wisdom
has so ordered it, that they settled me faster there; and I saw the Fruit of
my Labors in the restraint of sin, and which is strange.

I was unexpectedly a gainer in Temporals also; so good it is to venture for
God. I know the World accounts this to be Railing and Indiscretion; then
Christ was a Rayler, for he preached against the sins of the Pharisees to
their Faces, and denounced eight woes against them, Matthew 23.

Then, all the Prophets and Apostles were indiscreet Preachers, for they
practiced it: Paul was a discreet Preacher, yet when Peter had sinned openly,
he reproves him openly, Galathians 2.14. But why did Paul dishonor Peter
before them all?

Saint Jerome gives the reason. The offense was Pulbicum scandalum non potuit
private curari.
public, and the cure must be answerable. It is the complaint of a Learned
man, that such discretion has almost destroyed devotion, and this carnal
Policy has in a manner thrust out Piety: It Is no indiscretion to do what God
commands us, See the necessity and excellency of such close Preaching in
Master Hildersham, on Psalm 51. Lect. 8.9. Page 136. and 707. Hookers Souls
Preparation, Page 94. and Atersol. on Numbers, Page 1080.
Isay 58.1. Ezekiel 16.1. 1 Timothy 5.20.

2. Observation.
2. The Godly must look sometimes to be forsaken by their bosom friend^.
Demas was Paul's intimate acquaintance and coadjutor, yet Demas has forsaken me.

That David's enemies warred against him did not so much trouble him, but to see
his Friends Who did eat of his bread and drink of his Cup to rise against him,
this went near him; neither were they carnal Friends which thus forsook him,
but even his Religious Friends, and such as went to Gods House with him, and
with whom he delighted to confer about the things of God, Psalm 55.15.

Elijah complains he was left alone, Job had his Wife and Friends against
him, Christ was forsaken by all his Disciples, and had a Judas, one of his own,
that betrayed him, John 13.18.

God in his wisdom has so ordained it to wean us from the creature, and to
make us trust in him and not in man who is a liar* either Actively and by
Imposture; or else Passively by reason of impotency, he cannot perform what we
expect from him, Romans, 3.4. Take heed then whom ye trust, be not hasty in
this kind, wise and godly men have been decived in their choice of Friends,
the heart of man is exceeding deceitful, we may eat many bushels of salt with
them, and yet be deceived by them.

True friendship is like a well built Arch which stands at first at a greater
distance, Vide Tract. Danaei De amicitia Christo. Page 208. Fol. Clerks
Mirror, Chap. 56. Alsteeds Ethickes, Lib. 21. Chap. 25. Page. 13.12. Aristot.
Rhet. Lib. 2. Chap. 4. Weemse, 1 Volume Page 2. Lib. 2. Chap. 2. Page 103.
Herles Policy Lib. 2. Chap. 16.
and thence leisurely grows up into a greater closure at the top, and so it
will stand the better for weight.

Observation 3.
3. Eminent Professors may become See this point fully cleared by Mr. Ant.
Burgess on John 17.12. Ser. 7^. and Attersol on Philem. 24. p. 484. Gataker
Ser. 2 P. in folio. p. 323.
grand Apostates. Demas is a Preacher of the Gospel, Paul's coadjutor, and is
joined with Luke the Evangelist ( Colos. 4.14.) yet for all this Demas has
forsaken me. This doctrine needs no proof we have too many sad instances of it
in our own days. Such as begin in Hypocrisy will end in Apostasy. So did
Hymenaeus, Philetus, Alexander, who at first were great Professors, yet at last
become gross Apostates, 1 Timothy 1.20. and 2.2, 17. So did Amaziah 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
see his fall, V. 14. Hypocrites seldom die undiscovered, such as pervert their
way first or last will be known, Prove. 10.9. Such may fall fearfully and
foully, totally and finally. Pelagius a man so seemingly religious that they
who wrote against him were fain to conceal their names for fear of the people,
yet at last became a great enemy to the Free Grace of God. Now the Reason of
all this is, the way to Heaven is a strait and self-denying way, beset with
many troubles, hazards, losses, reproaches which make soft and delicate
Hypocrites forsake it; they love with Ephraim to tread out the corn where they
may have present pay, a bird in the hand with them is worth two in the bush,
but they cannot endure plowing which yields no present profit, Hos. 10.11.

Let the fall then of this great Professor make us all to fear, let him that
stands take heed least he fall. Rest not in a bare Profession of Religion, a
man See Mr. Chishulls Sermon* on Acts 26.28.
may go far this way (as Demas did here) and yet be nothing. A man may be a
great Professor, yea a great Preacher as Demas doubtless was who was Paul's
assistant, they may have the gift of working Miracles as Judas and others had,
which is the greatest gift next to grace, they may cast out Devils out of
others, and yet the Devil may dwell in their hearts and they be workers of
iniquity whom Christ will never own, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. Nothing but sincerity
can preserve us from Apostasy. Let us therefore especially at our first setting
forth, Dig deep, lay a good foundation, consider what the truth may cost us,
and ask our selves whether we can deny our selves universally for Christ if we
cannot or will not we are not fit to be Christ's disciples, we shall shrink in
the wetting and start aside like a broken bow when a tentation comes, 2 These.
2.10, 11.

2. Be familiar with the Godly, one living coal sets his fellow on fire. Two
lamps or torches joined together burn the better. The Godly by their example,
prayers and counsel will better us; good exhortations are a special
preservative against Apostasy, Heb. 3.12, 13. When men delight in evil company
they will forsake the Law, Prove. 28.4. If Solomon delight in Idolatrous women
they will soon entice him to Idolatry.

3. Take heed of spiritual Pride and Multi ad solidam eruditionem pervenissent
nisi se pervenisse jam putassent.
self-conceitedness which is often punished with a fall, as we see in Peter, and
in Q. Mary's time.

4. Be not bare Hearers but be Doers of the Word, and then you have a promise
that you shall never fall from grace here nor from glory hereafter, Psalm. 15.
ult.

5. Improve all the means of grace, be much in Prayers, Hearing, Meditation,
etc. God will be found in the use of means, Ezekiel. 36.37.

6. Consider the Judgments of God on Apostates. See 7 more Preservatives
against Apostasy in D. Sibbs his Cordials. Sermon. 10. page 185.
There is a woe gone out against them, Hos. 7.13. Psalm. 125. ult. God loathes
them, Heb. 10.37. If any draw back his soul will take no pleasure in them. It
is a Meiosis (.i.) he greatly abhors them. Julian the Apostate died blaspeming.
Lucian a Professor turns a scorner and is torn in pieces by dogs. Spira dies
despairing. Henry the third King of France turning Papist thinking thereby to
get the Monks on his side, See more Examples in Mr. Clerks Mirror. cap. 6.
edit. 3.
a Monk killed him, he became contemptible to his people, Paris and all his
great Towns revolted from him. So true is that, Such as despise God shall ^e
despised.

7. Consider that Apostates are Idolaters, they forsake their Creator to follow
the creature and so make it their God; they forsake the fountain of living
waters, and go to broken cisterns that can hold no water. This is so great a
sin that God calls on the inanimate creatures to stand astonished that ever any
people should be so mad, Amor tuus, Deus tuus.
Ier. 2.12, 13. These bring an evil report on Gods ways as if there were more
comfort to be found in sinful ways then in them. We see many fall; one falls
into poverty, another into sickness, a third into disgrace, but none falls so
foully as the Apostate for he falls from God and goodness to the Devil and
wickedness; yea, God complains of such as being worse then Id^laters who are
constant to their Idols, Ier. 2.10, 11. Yea they are perjured persons who have
broken their baptismal Vow and are fled into the tents of Gods professed
enemies.

Woe then to England for Apostasy. Never was the Nation so grossly guilty of this
sin as at this day, A calore ad frigus transitus est periculosus. V. Dyke on
Conscience. c. 9. p. 145. etc.
how many have forsaken their first love and are grown old and cold? How many
with Demas have preferred the love of this present world before the love of
God; yea how many professors have turned blaspemers? And such as would formerly
have pulled out their eyes to have done Ministers good ( Gal. 4.15, 16.) now
they are ready to pull out the eyes of those Ministers. Those that formerly
could have gone ten miles to a Sermon, now will not go ten strides to hear one;
formerly the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence and the violent took it by
force, now the Kingdom of Heaven offers violence to us and we run from it.
Never such palpable Apostasy both in Doctrine and Manners (all things
considered) since England was a Nation. It is easier now to write a book of
Apostates then a Book of Martyrs. Oh foolish ungrateful England! do thou thus
requite the Lord for all his cost and care over thee? Is this the fruit thou
give him for above an hundred years Preaching? He comes now to look for
grapes, and do thou give him such wild grapes? Is this the Thanks thou give
him for answering all thy Prayers, for breaking the Plots and Powers of so many
potent enemies, for giving thee so many glorious Victories and such undeserved
success both by Sea and Land? He has blessed us with Peace plenty and the Gospel
of Peace, for which of these mercies do we thus dishonor him? Ierusalems
Apostasy was Ierusalems ruin, Isay 1.4, 7, 8. and if England go on thus to
render evil to the Lord for all his kindness unto us a man that is no Prophet
may see and say that Englands ingratitude and Apostasy will be Englands ruin,
when Bethel becomes Bethaven God will mak^ it a Beth-any a place of sorrow and
affliction. God may bear with other sins but he cannot, he will not bear long
with this, Ier. 5.7, 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 9.9.

[Against Apostasy see Dr. Prideaux. on Rev. 2.4. Mr. Baine on Rev. 2.4. Mr.
Venning. on Rev. 2.4.


Barlow on 2 Timothy 1.15. page 210, 211. Gatakers Ser. on Watching. p. 69. folio.
Buroughs Hos. 2.7. Lect. 5.6. Church his Treasury page 73. Trapp's common
place on Apostasy at the end of his Commentary on N. T. fol. page 1076. Pembles
Ser. on Heb. 3.12, 13. page 563. folio.

Observation.
4. The inordinate love of this present world is the high way to Apostasy. It
is not the world or the creatures, which are good in themselves, but the
excessive and inordinate love of them, which ruins men. Other sins have slain
their thousands, but this it is ten thousands; Hence the Scripture so often
condemns it, Matthew. 6.24. to the end of the Chapter, and 13.22. James 4.4. 1
John 2.15. How many wise, and seemingly holy men has this Witch deluded? How
do these damps of the world extinguish the light of grace in the Soul? The
hatred of the world is not so dangerous to us as the inordinate love of it;
Persecutions quicken us, when the delights of the world lull us asleep, and the
Devil rocks the cradle till we snort again in security and then he cuts the
throat of the Soul. Why are so many like Nebuchadnezzars Image, they have heads
of gold but feet of clay? ( Dan. 2.32, 33.) In V. Attersoll on Philem. 24. page
488.
youth they were gilded Christians, and seemingly full of spirit and life, but
now they are old and liveless? The reason is the world and these present
enjoiments have besotted them. This will keep men either from professing
Religion, as the young man in the Gospel or from the power of it as Judas, or
else it will draw us from the profession and power of it, as Apostates. So that
this may be the backsliders Epitaph, Here lies one that forsook Christ to
follow the world, that has parted with Spirituals for Temporals, gold for
dross, wheat for chaff, and Heaven for Hell. We should therefore moderate and
mortify our affections toward these earthly enjoiments remembering that Our
time is but short; we should therefore use the world as not abusing it by
setting our hearts upon it, and so possess these worldly things, that we be not
possessed of them, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. As we tread these earthly things under
our feet so they should be little and low in our affections. Say as Luther in
another case, Contemptus est a me mundanus favor and furor.
The Church is clothed with the Sun, but she treads the Moon under her feet,
(.i.) she has a low esteem of all these mutable worldly things, Rev. 12.1.

The worldling knows no better things and therefore he rests content with
his swill; as the bruit beast knows not the excellency of a man's life, and
therefore delights it self in Hay and Provinder seeking no better, because it
knows no better: So the natural man knows not the excellency of a believers
life, and therefore disdains it as folly and madness, resting content with the
draffe and dung of the world for his portion, let him have Corn and Wine he
cares for no more, Psalm 4.6. The curse of the Serpent is upon such, they
creep on their bellies, and lick the dust.

As for our selves, let us not descend, but ascend out of the Wilderness of
this World, Canticles 3.6. and 8.5. Nihil in Mundo gloriosum praeter animum
gloriam mundi aspernantem, and ad eam quae Coelestis est remis velisque, votis
and factis contendentem, Doctor Arrowsmith, Tactica, S. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. S. 6.
In our Affections, Meditations, Prayers, Endeavors and Conversations; though
our bodies be on Earth, yet let our souls be in Heaven, Philippians 3.20. Make
God thy Riches, thy Rest, thy Portion, and then thou may say with David,
Return to thy Inveni partum, spes and fortuna Valete, Nil mihi nobiscum, ludite
nunc alios.
rest O my soul, Psalm 116.7. He shall never be Nunquam erit magnus cui mundus
est magnus.

Cui Christus incipit dulcescere, huic necesse est amarescere mundum. Bern.


great in whose eye the World is great, neither will Christ be sweet till the
world is bitter to us. Hence it is that the Lord lays Worme-wood on the
breasts of the World to weane us from its profits and pleasures, and much ado
God has even by them to mortify our love to it: How then should we doat on
it if we had no crosses? Ecce turbatur mundus and amatur, quid si tranquillus
esset? Formoso quomodo haere^es qui sic amplecteris foedum? Flores ejus quom^do
Colligeres qui a spinis non revocas animum? Aug. Sermon. 245.


5. Observation.
5. This world shall have an end and all things in it, it is not an everlasting
world, it is but this Vide Buroughs, Moses Choice, Chapter 25.26, 27.
Present World, whose pomp and pleasures soon vanish away, 1 Corinthians 7:29,
30, 31. Solomon who had made trial of them all has written Vanity on them all,
Eccles. 1.2. which may serve to cool our Affections to them.

6. Observation.
6. Sin blotteth a man's name, and blemisheth his Reputation. Demas for his
worldlyness had a brand set on his name to the end of the World: See Doctor
Preston, Judas Repentance,: p. 3. to 8.
Judas that sold his Master for money is branded for a Traitor, and a Devil to
Posterity: Which blots and buts are upon the names of Rehoboham, Jeroboam and
Ahab, who made Israel to sin with them. The worldling has an eye of
detestation put on him, Psalm. 52.7. Lo, this is the man that trusted in his
riches: Yea, Gods own people when for want of keeping the watch of the Lord
they fell into sin, (though they repented) yet some scars remained, though the
wound were healed, Piety is the best Mandavit moriens Agesilaus, ne ullam sui
corporis fingendi, aut alia imitatione pararent imaginem; si quid enim a me
praeclare factum id monumentum mihi erit: Sin minus, ne omnes quidem statua
opera Hominum illiberialium. Plutarch.
Monument and the most lasting. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, Psalm 112.6. Proverbs 11.7. The memorial of the just shall be
blessed, it is their name only that shall be kept green and flourishing like
the rod of Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle.

7. Observations.
7. It Is an aggravation of a man's sin to sin deliberately against light,
and conviction. Demas does not sin here through passion or fear but
deliberately and in cold blood (as we say) he deserteth Christ's Cause, and
embraces the world.

Physicians say, that complicated diseases are very dangerous. Morbi complicati
sunt perioulosissimi.
In this sin of Demas almost all the Aggravations of sin may be found.

1. He sinned against great Light, he being a Professor, yea, a Preacher of
the Gospel could not offend (in this kind especially) through ignorance.

To sin for want of Light may excuse a tanto, though not a toto; it may
extenuate, though it cannot excuse, 1 Timothy 1.13. Nothing aggravateth sin
like this sinning against Light. He that knew his Masters will and did it not,
was beaten with many stripes. When a man sins for want of Light, God usually
bears and forbeareth; But when Light is come and men are convinced of their
sin, and yet will go on, this is presumptuous sinning, this is Rebellion
which is as the sin of Witchcraft, it makes sin exceeding sinful.

1. To sin against the Light of Nature aggravated the Heathens sin, and
they were punished for it, Romans 1. When they knew God in his Works, and yet
did not gloryfie him by walking up to that light, God gave them up to a
Reprobate sense.

2. To sin against the Light of the Law is worse, the Jews that knew the
Law, yet sinning against the Law were sorer punished then the Gentiles that
were ignorant of it, Romans 2.9.

3. But we have the Light of the Gospel, and so sin against both the former
Lights and this too, which makes our sin in some respects greater then the
Devils sin, for he never sinned against the patience of God, as we do, nor
against the Tenders of a Redeemer and the offers of grace in the Gospel, Heb.
10.26, 27, 28, 29.

2. Demas sinned against great Love. God had enlightened him, made him a
Preacher of the Gospel, gave him a room in the affections of his chosen Vessel
Paul, who had made him his Coadjutor, and commended him in his Epistles to the
Churches, yet see his Ingratefulnesse, Demas has forsaken me.

To desert an ordinary Professor of the Gospel when he is in bonds for the
Truth, is ill; but to forsake a Paul his approved friend, an Apostle of Christ,
and that in bonds for the Gospel (when the sincerity of a Friend is tried who
should love at all times, Proverbs 17.17.) when it was honorable to live and
die with him; yet now to forsake him was both inhumane and unchristian. And
this aggravates Englands sin. We cannot sin now at such cheap rates as
formerly; Our sins (especially in this latter age of the World) are committed
against greater Light, and greater love then ordinary; against greater
Privileges, Experiences, Victories and Deliverances, then ever our
forefathers saw.

We have been exalted to Heaven in mercies, God has made us his Darling
Nation, and therefore we may justly look to be thrown to the lowest Hell for
our abuse of them. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia vitias, ingentia supplicia.
If ever any Nation deserved a Bill of Divorce it is England. We have forsaken
the Lord and therefore he might justly forsake us and say Loammi, ye are not my
people, neither will I be your God, Hosea 1.9. God was angry with Solomon for
sinning against him who had appeared twice unto him, 1 Kings 11.9. But how
often has the Lord appeared in the Tokens of his love to England, and yet we
rebel against him. He takes it ill to be thus wounded in the house of his
friends, Zach. 13.6. As Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy
friend? So may we say to sinners, Is this your kindness to your Savior for all
his sorrow and sufferings? Do ye thus requite the Lord o foolish and unwise?
Deuteronomy. 32.6. God keeps a Catalogue of all his favors to us, and when we sin
against them he is much displeased at it; as we see in David's case, where the
love aggravates his sins by the mercies which he had showed him, 2 Samuel
12.7, 8. Fire mingled with Oil or Wine burns more fiercely, so sins
against great mercies are great provocations,

The injuries of a friend go nearer to us then the injuries of a professed enemy
when God shall nourish and bring up children, and they shall rebel against him,
he calls upon the very inanimate creatures to be astonished at this, Isay 1.2.

3. He sinned against the light of good Example. Paul went before him in doing
and suffering and glories in all as comfortable and Honorable, yet Demas
deserts him, and is not this our sin? How many examples of Zeal, Piety,
Chastity, Temperance, constancy has God set before us in the Old and New
Testament, and in our own days, and yet men will not follow? Such must know
that they must one day answer not only for sinning against the light of the
Word, but also for sinning against the Light and good Example of those who
walked according to the Word, Hebrews 11.7. Noah's Faith condemned the Old
Worlds unbelief, etc.

4. To sin upon a light Temptation aggravateth a sin. Now Demas had no just
ground for flinching. If he feared suffering for Christ, he knew the promise,
That he who forsakes Father or Mother, or Lands, or Life for Christ, shall
have a hundredfold in this present world, and could he have brought his Life
and Estate to a better market?

2 If he loved the World and found sweetness in that, Is there not more
sweetness in him that made the World? Is not that which makes a thing so,
Quod efficit tale illud est magis tale.
much more so it self? And is not all the excellency that is in the Creature,
in the Creator by way of Eminency, transcendency, and Causality?

And is not this our Case? upon with small and light Temptations do we sin.
What a slight matter makes many men to curse, lie, swear, profane the
Sabbath, etc. How many do not stay for a Temptation, but do even tempt the
Tempter, and willingly choose sin rather then affliction; they are not
Passively sold under sin as Paul was against his will, Romans 7. But they
Actively sell themselves as Ahab did to do wickedly.

Quanto major facilitas non peccandi, tanto majus peccatum
They make provision for the flesh, they seek occasion and company to sin
withal: This Elective, deliberate sinning is very dangerous, and comes near
the Devils sin, he rebelled against God of his own accord, and sinned without
a Tempter, and therefore perishes without a Mediator.

5. To draw others into sin, aggravateth sin. Demas by his evil Example,
brought an evil report on the Gospel, and did tacitly and interpretatively say
there is much more sweetness in the world then in Christ and so drew others
from the truth. This hightned Manasses sin that he made Judah sin with him. 2
King. 21.16. So Ier. 2.33. We have too many sins of our own we need not make
our selves guilty of the sins of others. When conscience shall be awakned and
fly in thy face it will tell thee that thou have not only undone thy self, but
thy children, thy servants, thy neighbors have been the worse for thee, yea,
and that many are now in Hell whom thy wickedness has been a means to bring
thither. This helped to humble Paul and therefore he often tells us how he
persecuted others and compelled them to blaspheme, Acts 26.10, 11. Many by
their loose walking put a stumbling block in the way of their brother to the
breaking of his bones. If a man should be the cause of the breaking a leg an
arm or bone of another it could not but afflict him if he had any humanity
left; but to destroy the Soul of thy brother, the most noble and precious part
and so ruin him for ever; this may humble thee to the dust and afflict thee
all thy days and make thee go with sorrow to thy grave.

6. The greater the person that sins the greater is his sin. Vbi sublimior est
praerogativa, ibi major est culpa. Salvian de Gub. Dei. l. 4. per totum.
Theft in a Judge is worse then in an Inferior person; for Demas a Teacher of
others to teach Apostasy Magnates sunt magne^es.
draws many into sin. Such Cedars fall not alone but crush the shrubs that be
under them.

7. To sin against the Motions of Gods Spirit and against checks of conscience,
When they shall cry to thee, Oh do not this abominable thing which I hate! Ier.
44.4. Yet thou will strangle these motions, and drive and drink away these
pangs of the New birth, this aggravates sin, Ier. 3.7.

8. To be Incorrigible and sin against corrections and under the rod, heightens
sin, Ier. 2.30. and 5.3. Amos 4.6. to 12.

9. To continue long in sin increases sin, When a man shall have been a Trader
of sin from his youth, Ier. 3.25. As it is a glory to be an old Mnason, an old
disciple whom no storms could drive from Christ, so it is a great dishonor to
be an old sinner whom no admonitions, no corrections could bring in to Christ.

10. Consider that Infinite and glorious Majesty against whom all thy sins are
committed. The greater the person we offend the greater is the offense. It is a
more dangerous thing to strike a Prince then to strike an Inferior man. This
makes all our sins Objectively infinite, there is no sin in it self small
because there is no small God that we sin against. Sin is a despising and
despighting of God and his Law, 2 Samuel 12.9. It does what in it lies to Omne
peccatum est Deicidium. See Mr. Buroughs, Sin the Evil of Evils.
Murder God, the sinner wishes that there were no God to punish him, no Judge
to sentence him. Atheism lies at the bottom of every sin. To abuse some eminent
good man that never did us wrong but every day should be showing us favor and
kindness, is great baseness: but for base sinful dust and ashes to Rebel and
lift up himself against his Maker whom all the Angels adore, to abuse the God
of Goodness who renews his mercies to us every morning, is the highth of
villainy.

11. Consider the Multitude of thy sins how they are for number numberless and
our backslidings have been increased, Ier. 5.6. It was an aggravation of
Isreal's sin that they often provoked him in the wilderness, Psalm. 74.40. The
Angels sinned but once and they were cast out of Heaven, Adam sinned but once
and he was cast out of Paradise, but to multiply transgressions and relapse
again and again and again into sin, argues an habit and custom of sin which is
very dangerous.

12. It aggravates sin, when it is committed against Vows and Resolutions of
better obedience. The Schoolmen make 15. Aggravations of sin. Aggravat ordo,
locus, mora, causa, scientia, tempus, Lucta pusilla, modus culpae, genus and
status altus; Conditio, numerus, aetas and scandala, sexus.
The more bonds are broken in sin the greater is the sin. To sin after a Vow
against sin increases sin, though the Act may be the same for Matter yet this
Circumstance heightens it, and puts an accent upon it, it makes it cry louder
and gives Satan a stronger Plea against the Soul, Lord here is a man whom
nothing can restrain no bonds nor Vows Sacramental, Personal, National can
keep him from sin, Lord let him be mine by Justice since he will not be thine
by grace.

13. When sins are Spiritual sins, it aggravates sin. Spiritual sins in their
own nature (Et caeteris paribus) are greater and more displeasing unto God (who
is a Spirit and pondereth our Spirits) then carnal and bodily sins. Fleshly
sins make men like beasts, Drunkenness, Fornication, Gluttony, Murder, make a
greater noise and bring more reproach on men from the world, but spiritual sins
(all things considered) are most dangerous, for these make men like Devils. The
Devils sins are not fleshly sins for he has no body, but they are spiritual
sins, hence they are called spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.12.
They are full of Pride, Envy, Blasphemy, Heresy, Hypocrisy. Many bless
themselves that they are no Thieves, Whores, Drunkards; when they are drunk
with Pride, and full of Atheism, Unbelief, Hypocrisy and Heart-Idolatry. These
are invisible sins, the world takes no notice of them, so much the more
dangerous, inward diseases are most dangerous, and hardest to be cured.
Publicanes and Harlots that are given to carnal sins, are sooner converted,
then spiritually proud self-conceited Pharisees, Matthew. 21.31. 2. They are
Radical, fundamental sins, they are the root and cause of all carnal sins. They
are the Quintissence of wickedness, the wickedness of wickedness, Hos. 10.15.
the very spirits (as I may say) of sin, the evil of evils, and the foolishness
of madness, Eccles. 7.25. As Sampsons strength lay in his locks, so the
strength of outward sins lies in the heart; cleanse that and cleanse all. It is
these inward lusts which war not only against the Peace, but against the
Salvation of the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Remove the cause and the effect well cease,
lay the Ax to this root and the fruit will wither. This makes the Saints so
much to lament that sin and corruption within them, Job 25.4. Psalm. 51.5. Isay
6.5. Romans 7. And God calls on his people to wash not only their hands, but
their hearts from wickedness, and though vain thoughts will be creeping in yet
they must not suffer them to lodge there, Ier. 4.14. Rooks (says Luther) may
fly over my house, but I will not suffer them to roost there. The great work of
Regeneration lies within, it is not sufficient that a wicked man forsake his
wicked ways and words, but he must also forsake his Thoughts, Isay 55.7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his Thoughts. A moral man
may shun evil acts, but a gracious man hates even vain thoughts, Psalm 119.113.
A man may be Sunt minoris scandali, sed majoris culpae.
far more wicked in his thought then he can in his Acts; men may act that
wickedness in their thoughts which either through want of opportunity, or want
of strength, or for shame they dare not do. They are the buds and blossoms, the
seeds and principles of all sin, and what they want in weight they make up in
number, Genesis 6.5. Acts 8.22.

Let us now according to these thirteen considerations aggravate our sins, sin
separately and singly considered is odious, but sin circumstantiated will
appear exceeding sinful. A sore may be loathsome in it self, but when it comes
to be searched then the filth and rotteness appears. That which keeps men from
Repentance is their lightning and lessening of sin, they say of it as Lot did
of Zoar, Is it not a little one? Or else they lay it upon the weakness of
youth, or the bad counsel of Dyke Deceit of the Heart. chap. 13.
others, Adam lays his sin on Eve, Saul on the people, others lay it on the
Devil, some way or another they hide their sins which hinders the prosperity of
the sinner, Prove. 28.13. And therefore when the Spirit of God would effectually
convince men of sin, and set an edge upon it that it might wound and humble us
to purpose, he sets it before our eyes in its proper colors with all its
aggravating circumstances. So all the servants of God in their Humiliations for
sin to show their hatred and Holy indignation against it, they have heightened
their sins by all its heinous Circumstances and Heart-humbling Aggravations.
Their bitterest enemies could not speak so much against them as they have
against themselves. Job (40.4.) cries out I am Vile, Isay (6.5.) I am undone.
David cries out of his folly and beastliness, 2 Samuel 24.10. Psalm. 73.2. Agur in
his own apprehension was more brutish then any man, Prove. 30.2, 3. See what
Heartbreaking expressions Ezra 9. Neh. 9. Dan. 9.5, 6. have used.

1. We have sinned and committed iniquity. 2. We have done wickedly. 3. We have
rebelled against thee. 4. We have departed from thy Precepts. 5. We have not
harkned to thy Servants. 6. We have not only sinned our selves, but even our
Princes and Superiors have rebelled against thee.
But especially Paul puts up many Bills of Indictment against himself, and
cries out I am the Chief of sinners (and in his own apprehension he esteemed
himself so) the least of Saints, not worthy to be called an Apostle, and as if
this were not sufficient, he goes on, I was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, and
injurious to Christ and the Saints, 1 Cor. 15.9. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Timothy 3.13, 15.
But especially Acts 26.10, 11. the better to humble himself, and to magnify
free grace he sets down eight Aggravations of his sin. Many of the Saints did I
shut up in Prison, etc.

1. They were not lewd men that he imprisoned, but they were Saints. 2. It was
not for any wickedness that they had done that he thus used them, but for
professing the Name of Christ. 3. He did not cast a few, but many Saints in
Prison. 4. He kept them close Prisoners, he shut them up and gave them no
liberty. 5. He stays not here, but he helped to put them to death. 6. As if
this had not been enough he does not only kill their bodies but he hurts their
Souls also. He compelled them to Blaspeme. With Torments and Threatenings he
compelled them to deny Christ, yea, even to curse him, as was the manner of the
Heathen in persecuting the Christians. Dutch Annot.
Not much unlike an Italian which I have read off, who set upon a man to kill
him, the poor man begged for his life, the Italian told him if he would
renounce his God he should have his life, which when he had done he killed him,
saying, now he was fully revenged on him, for he had killed both body and Soul.
7. Yet he stays not here but he was mad, exceeding mad with rage and fury
against the poor Saints of Christ. Insanissimus fui Papista* Luth.
So Luther confesses that in the days of his ignorance he was a mad Papist.
8. Such as he could not catch and kill them he persecutes to strange cities, he
made them outrun their houses, wives, children, etc. and shift for themselves.
Thus Paul like an hungry Wolf worries the poor Lambs of Christ, till Christ
meets him in his Ruff, unhorses him, humbles him, and makes him of a Persecutor
to become a Preacher of the Gospel. St. Austin after his conversion how does he
lament the robbing of an Orchard in his youth, August. Confess. l. 2. c. 4.6,
7. V. Boltons little Treatise of Humil. page 28.
and aggravates it by five Circumstances. Let us imitate these Saints, and
beseech the Lord to convince us of the Vileness of sin and then of the
excellency of Christ, John 16.9. First that he would give us the Sea Mr. Fords
Treatise of the Spirit of Bondage.
Spirit of bondage to fear and tremble under the sight and sense of our sins,
See more Aggravations of sin, in D. Bolton on 2 Samuel 24.10. folio. Ser. 1. p.
27. to 31. Mr. Ant. Burgess Sp^. Refining 2 Part. on Psalm. 19.13. Ser. 7.25.30.
D. Goodwins Aggravations of sin. Mr. Strong 31. Sermon. p. 434. etc.
and then the Spirit of Adoption whereby we may cry Abba, Father. A pardon is
not prized till the Prisoner is cast and condemned. Never will Christ be
wonderful Christ nor Pardoning-grace be prized till sin be wonderful sin and
experimentally felt out of measure sinful, till sin be seen and sorrowed for as
the greatest evil, Christ can never be rejoiced in as the greatest good.

Crescens is gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. Observation 8.
8. Good men will be doing good where ever they are. Paul was now a Prisoner,
yet he preached constantly in Prison, and there converted Onesimus. Philemon 9.
Though he were bound yet the Word of the Lord should not be bound, though he
cannot go abroad himself, yet he will send others; Crescens he sends to
Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia, and Tychicus to Ephesus. Thus like a Spirtual
Hannibal, Aut viam inveniet, aut faciet; He will either find a way or make one
to promote the Gospel. Good men have public spirits, and though they be
confined to Prisons yet are they not idle there. Though the Apostle was now
near his end and ready to be Martyred, Quantum terrae sol percurrit proprios
emittens radios, tantum and hic beatus solicitudinem and curam habebat.
Chrysostom.
yet does he not neglect his duty, but labors still (what in him lay) to
spread the Gospel, and had a care not of one or two but of all the Churches. As
in nature the nearer things come to the center the swifter is their motion, so
Paul the nearer his end the more active is he. M^^us naturalis velocior est in
fine quam in principio. Aristot. l. 2. de coelo.
We Ministers especially should write after this Copy, and quicken our selves
thereby in the work of the Lord.

Observation 9.
Though some may forsake us and the truth, yet God has others that are
faithful. What if Demas be gone, yet Crescens, Titus, Timothy, Mark and Luke
abide constant, no storms nor tempest can beat them off; if Saul oppose David,
yet Jonathan will stick to him. Though Israel play the Harlot yet Judah is
faithful with her God, Hos. 4.15. and 11, 12. Defections in the Church are not
so Universal but some remain faithful, See Attersol. on Philemon 24. p. 467.
Rev. 17.14. God has a Joseph in Pharaohs Court. An Obadiah in the Court of
wicked Ahab. A Nehemiah in the Court of Heathenish Artaxerxes. Some Saints
there were in that bloody Tyrant Nero's house, Philip. 4.22. And some in
Babylon, else God would not call them to Come out of her, Revelat. 18.4. Where
the Devil has his throne and raigns in all manner of wickedness, yet even
there has God some names, Rev. 2.13.

VERSE. 11. Only Luke is with me.
HE only of all my ordinary Associates continues with me. Many unworthily
deserted him, others were dispersed abroad by him, so that he wanted assistance
to carry on the work of Christ. This Luke was the Evangelist who wrote the
Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles, he was a Physician ( Colos. 4.14.) an
excellent Grecian, Paul's choice and sole Companion at this time, no
persecutions nor troubles could separate them. He was Paul's Register, (as
appears by his recording Paul's course of life in the Acts) his counselor and
his comforter, whose praise is in the Gospel through all the Churches, 2 Cor.
7.18. He lead a single life, was 84 years old when he died, and was buried at
Constantinople, says St. Ierom. Now if Luke only were with Paul at Rome where
then was Peter? And why is there no mention made of him? A Lapide and others
fly to the Tradition for want of Scripture and tell us that Peter was Prisoner
with Paul nine Months, and both martyred in one day. This is said, but not
proved; and his evasion is as vain, when he says Luke only is with me, viz.
at freedom to help me in my affairs. We may not thus distinguish where the
Scripture does not distinguish. It is sad to see what silly evasions learned
men will invent to please a party. It appears by this Text that Simon Peter was
not yet at Rome, An Prtrus fuerit Romae sub judice lis est; Simonem Romae nemo
fuisse negat.
and whether ever he was there is doubtful, but that Simon Magus was and is
still there is past questioning. Besides Paul sending Salutations to many men
and women at Rome yet never mentions Peter, and receiving many from thence yet
not a word of him.

3. The Ignorance which Paul found at Rome when he came thither cannot stand
with Peter's being so long Bishop there, Acts 28.22.

4. To be an Apostle and a Bishop in their See are not coincident, because to
be an Apostle is to be unlimited as to people and place; but a Bishop is
limited to both.

Take Mark and bring him with thee for he is profitable to me for the
Ministry. Now he tells Timothy, 1. Whom. 2. What he must bring with him.

1. He must bring Mark, not Mark the Evangelist, but John Mark of whom we read
Acts 12.12. and 15.37. and Colos. 4.10. He was Nephew to Barnabas. Mark was his
Surname and John was his Christen-name.

2. Here is the Reason why he sends for him, not for rest or recreation but to
assist him in the Ministry that he might instruct the Churches; and that he
might be helpful to the Apostle in writing and other offices of love. But the
former sense seems most genuine, for the Apostles care was more for the
Churches then for himself.

OBSERVATIONS.
Observation 1.
1. A faithful friend will not forsake us in our deepest distress. A faithful
friend (and such a one was Luke) loves at all times, Prove. 17.17. Hence it is
that Christ sent not his Messengers single but by pairs, and that for eight
Reasons. V. Adams on 2 Pet. 3.15. p. 1441.
Though Paul be a Prisoner and ready to be martyred yet Luke keeps with him
still, though all forsake him yet he will stick to him, Only Luke is with me.
It was an high commendation of Aquila and Priscilla that to save Paul's life
(when he was in danger by tumults, Acts 18.12. and 19.24.) they ventured their
own, Romans 16.3, 4. As Christ laid down his life for us so must we be ready
(when occasion requires) to lay down our lives for our Brethren, 1 John 3.16.
Ollae amicitia. Proverb.
Pot-friendship will vanish, especially in adversity. Job (6.15.) complains of
his friends that they had deceived him like a brook, they were not like a river
which is fed by a sping and has a perennity of flowing; but like a brook which
runs in moist times when there is least need of it, but in a drought it fails.
Like Swallows which fly about us in Summer, but in Winter they leave us and
hide themselves in hollow trees or the like. Such vermin abound which run to
full barnes, but outrun them when empty. Most worship the rising, few the
setting Sun.

Bring Mark with thee. 2. Observation.
2. Good men are easily reconciled to good men. There was formerly a sharp
contention between Paul and Barnabas about this Mark who for Observe. Such as
are fearful and faint-hearted at first, may after become Valiant and Courageous
for the truth, as Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, etc.
fear forsook Paul and left him in Pamphilia, (Acts 13.13. and 15.37, 38.39.)
which made Paul that he would not suffer him to visit the Brethren. The Apostle
shows himself strange unto him the better to humble him who had put his hand
to Gods Plow and was now looking back; yet since this Mark fell through
weakness and now repented laboring faithfully in the Preaching of the Gospel,
the Apostle taking notice of this his industry and usefulness sends for him,
reckons him amongst his Coadjutors, receives him into favor and commends him
to the Colossians 4.10. Philemon 24. The Godly are men of wisdom and so have
cool Spirits, as the Original renders it, Prove. 17.27. Their discretion
teaches them to moderate their anger, and they count it their glory to pass by
an offense, Prove. 19.11. Anger in the Godly is like fire amongst thorns, it is
soon extinct, but anger in the wicked is like fire in iron it abides long.
Jacob was angry with Laban, but ere the Chapter ends it was gone, Genesis 31.36.
David was offended with Nabal but a wise Abigail easily appeaseth him. It is
ill in any to be hard to be reconciled, as God forgets and forgives the wrongs
we have done to him, so must we the trespasses of our repentant Brethren,
Colos. 3.13. To up-braid a man with his sins after he has repented of them is
to be like the Devils in Hell, See more Attersol on Philemon 14 P 478. to 484.
Byfield on Colos. 4.10.
not the Angels in Heaven.

3. Observation.
3. It is a great mercy to have good Parents. This Mark whom Paul commends was
the son of good Parents, which were well acquainted with the Apostles whom they
received into their house, by which means Mark was converted to the faith and
chosen for a fellow-helper to them, and travailed with them; their house was as
an Inn to lodge the Saints, and as a Church for the people of God to pray
there, Acts 12.12. and they were no loosers by it, for God blessed them with a
son that proved a zealous Preacher of the Gospel. It is true a wicked man may
have a good child, wicked Ahaz may have a good Hezekiah; and Idolatrous Amon, a
pious Josiah, but he has no promise for it: the promise runs to the godly and
their seed; and therefore usually (though not always) good men have good
children, a godly Abraham has a godly Isaac, a gracious Hannah has a gracious
Samuel, a pious Zachary and Elizabeth have a gracious John. And wicked men
usually have children like themselves. God punishes the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children to many generations. Malus corvus malum ovum; niger
corvus niger pullus. Prove.
Most men labor to make their children great men rather then good men, and
learned rather then religious; whereas we should strive rather to have them
gracious that so they may improve their Riches and their Parts to right ends,
else their children will complain at them as St. Cum interea non satageret idem
pater qualis crescerem tibi, aut quam castus essem; dummodo essem disertus vel
potius desertus a cultura tua Deus. Aug. Confess. l. 2* c. 3.
Austin did sometimes of his father that he was at great cost to make him a
Scholar, but never cared to have him gracious.

4. Observation.
4. Superiors in gifts and grace may sometimes have need of the help of
Inferiors. A Paul may send for a Mark to help him. An Aquila and Priscilla poor
tent-makers may sotimes instruct an eloquent Apollos, Acts 18.26. One man is no
man, God dispenses his gifts severally and has ordained the strong to help
the weak, and the Sea Child's Portion, Preface.
weak (according to their measure and in their places) to assist the strong.
Some are Eyes in the Church, some are hands, some Feet, some little Toes in the
feet, yet all useful in their place and serve for ornament to the body. The
weakest may be helpful to the strongest by their Prayers especially; which made
Paul that man of men and great Apostle so earnestly to beg for the Prayers of
the Brethren, not only for some strong and eminent ones, but of the Brethren
indefinitly, even the weakest widow and poorest Saint that can help us no other
way yet may help us by their Prayers; and therefore no starved beggar could beg
more importunately for an Alms, then the Apostle does for a Collection of
Prayers, Romans 15.30. Now I beseech you Brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ his
sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your
Prayers unto God for me. Let no man then despise the day of small things.

VERSE. 12. Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.
THE Apostle here by prolepsis prevents an Objection which Timothy might make.
But who (who might he say) shall supply my place in my absence? why Tychicus
(says the Apostle) have I sent to Ephesus. Tychicus is a Greek name and
signifies Fortunate or Happy, Bonum nomen, bonum omen.
and as his name is, so was he. Paul gives him many high Encomiums. He calls
him a faithful Minister of Christ, Epes. 6.21. Colos. 4.7. His Companion, Acts
20.4. His dear Brother, Ephesians. 6.21, 22. Whom he sent to the Colossians (4.8.)
To Titus (3.12.) and now from Rome to Ephesus.

Observation. 1.
1. Good men are careful that the Church be not left destitute of Pastors; If
Timothy come from Epesus to Rome, Paul will send Tychicus to his place. Good
men know the Subtilty of Satan and the activity of his Instruments to destroy
the Church especially in the absence of their faithful and vigilant Pastors.
See more Tailor on Tit. 3.12. p. 726.
If Moses be absent but forty days in the Mount the Israelites will presently
fall to Idolatry, Exodus 32.1. If these Shepherds be wanting the Sheep will
straggle, and the Wolves will soon devour them. Non datur vacuum, there is no
vacuity nor emptiness in a Spiritual as well as in a Philosophical sense.
Deficiente lumine oriuntur tenebrae. Arist.
Where good Ministers are wanting, there by sad experience we find that
Anabastick-Quaking-Libertines-and-other-instruments-of-the-Devil are presently
at hand. When it is night then look for the beasts of the Forest to come
forth, but when the sun of the Gospel arises then they fly to their Dens,
Psalm. 104.20, 22.

Sad then is the condition of these Ministers that leave their Churches at six
and sevens, so they can have the fleece they care not what becomes of the
flock, nor who comes there. Let such read, Ezeks 34.2. to 11. and if they be
not past feeling it will awaken them.

VERSE 13. The cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou come bring
with thee, and the Books, but especially, the Parchments.
HE comes now in the second place to tell Timothy what he should bring with
him from Troas, viz. his cloak which he left there, with his Book and
Parchments. About this cloak there is much tugging amongst Interpreters.

1. Some would have the word to signify a Book.

2. Others would have it to be a Coffer of Books; both these would make the
Apostle guilty of a gross Tantology. q. d. Bring the Books, or the Coffer of
Books and the Book and Parchments.

3. Others would have it to be a Senatorian garment which his Father left him.
But what should a poor prisoner and Ecclesiastical person now ready to die do
with such a Vestment? the word will not bear it, nor the person of the Apostle.

4. Others think it was some Sacerdotal Garment, as a Palle, a Coape, or
Surplice, but this is an odd Popish crotchet. The word is (...), penula, it is
not (...) thecalignea, nor (...) indumentum Sacerdotis.
What should a poor prisoner do with such gawds? which shows the vanity of
the Popish Painters who picture the Apostles in long Gowns, This variety of
Opinions came from the mistaking and false Printing of the Original word, as
you may see in Beza in locum, and Master Leighs Crit. 5.
when their ordinary guise was Cloakes. But the word properly and genuinely
signifies a Cloak to defend one from the cold; the Apostle was like to spend
the Winter in prison, and therefore he sends for such a Garment to keep him
warm. So poor was the Apostle that he was fain to send for a garment which he
left at such a distance, Penula idem quod Pallium ad frigus and pluviam
arcendam. a Lap.
for Troas was a City in lesser Asia far distant from Rome; to which place Paul
went thrice, Pallium quo multum usi sunt (tan. quam simplici ac^facili)
Christiani olim. Scultet.
Acts 16.8. and 2 Cor. 2.12. and Acts 20.5, 6. in which last voyage he is said
to have left his Cloak there, with Carpus his beloved Disciple and careful
Host, whom Paul entrusted with his Books and clothes.

Question, Why does the Apostle send for so mean a Garment as a cloak?

Answer, The Apostle was of an ingenuous disposition and loved not to be
craving or burdensome to any, but made his own hands minister to his
necessities.

2. Winter was now approaching as appears, Verse 21. Besides he was
accustomed to this Garment, it fitted him best, and therefore he desires it
may now be sent him.

And the Books.
These Books were no profane Books, but they are conceived to be the Books
of the Litera sacrae sunt liber sacerdotalis, Ambrose.
Old Testament with interpreters on it, wherewith he might comfort himself and
others. He had but a little time to live, yet he desires to improve every Inch
of it in reading, study, Prayer and spreading the Gospel.

But specially the Parchments.
These were either Note-bookes of his own making and collecting which are
highly prized by students as being the cream and Quintessence of their studies.
Julius Caesar being forced to swim for his life, held his Commentarys in one
hand above water, Major fuit cura Caesari libellorum quam purpurae.
and swam to Land with the other. In these Parchments he had written many
things for the help of his memory, and the good of the Church, and therefore he
mentions these with a (...) but specially the Parchments. Per (...)
intelliguntur schedae pelliceae in quibus Paulus quae dam seitu dignae ad
juvandam memoriam annotaverat, umde de iis singulariter solicitus dicit, and
maxim membranas. Gerhard in Locum.


Question, But what does the Apostle mean to send for Books and Notes now he
is dying?

Answer, To show his love to learning and study, that he might quicken others
to be industrious to the last.

2. There might be that in his Parchments which might be of great use to the
Church of God after his departure. That they might not be lost or falsified, he
sends for them that he might commit them to faithful hands to be kept as a
pledge of his Love to the Church when he was gone.

Observations.
1. Observation.
1. Wearing of Cloaks, or Long-Robes for Gardement or Ornament is lawful. I
observe this the rather because of the Quakers, who call the Ministers of
Christ Antichristian, because they wear Cloakes and Gowns. If this were a
true and full definition of an Antichristian Minister, then Saint Paul was one,
Penula quasi pendula, a long hanging cloak says Minshaw
for he wore a Cloak, a long Cloak (it is vere probable) for it was a winter
Garment. As for that place in Luke 20.46. which they urge against us, where our
Savior condemns the Scribes and Pharisees for wearing long Robes: It makes
nothing against us; For first onr Savior does not there condemn long Robes,
but the Vainglorious desire to walk in such Robes out of Pride and
Ostentation. Christ does not Simply and Absolutely condemn the use of such
Garments, but the abuse of them.

As he does not simply condemn the being called Father, but the ambitious
seeking of that Title; so it is here. The Eastern people did use, and still
do use long Robes, and the Prophets had a kind of Mantle or proper Garment
distinguishing them from other men, and it was meet for the Teachers to be so
clothed, that in their habit there might appear more then vulgar gravity: but
the Scribes abusing this to Pride and self praise, placing Religion chiefly in
the outward appearance wherewith they veiled their detestable impieties, upon
this account it is that our Savior condemns them, and bids us beware of
them.

Now see what Quakers Logic here is, because some abuse long Robes to pride
and ostentation, Ergo, none must use them. By this Argument we must neither
eat, nor drink, nor pray, nor Preach, etc. For all these are abused. But what
do I spend time in answering such foolish Saints?

2. Observation.
2. If the Apostle do give Timothy an injunction to bring his Cloak, surely he
would not forget to give him in Precept how he should behave himself in the
Church of God. He that mentions so mean a thing as an old Cloak, would not
be wanting to direct him in Doctrine and Discipline, in Substantials and
Circumstantials. I mention this the rather, because there are some which give
out that we have no platform of Discipline set forth to us in the New
Testament. That is strange that matters of so small moment (comparatively) be
so often mentioned there, and matters of such great consequence should be
neglected. It is therefore a mere fancy which the Amat Deus disciplinam,
perversae autem and falsa innocentia est laxare habenas peccatis. Valde
pernitiose filium sentiet patris lenitatem, ut just postea Dei sentiat
severitatem; idque non solus, sed cum dissoluto patre suo.
Libertines of our time have invented (as they have done many more) that they
might have the more freedom to play their game at pleasure. That Christ has
laid down a perfect and a sufficient Rule for the Government of his visible
Church under the New Testament, which all the Members of the Church ought to
observe and submit to till the end of the World: Ob. forte negligit malus
filius monitae patris
this is so clearly and satisfactorily proved by the London Ministers in their
Ius Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiae (Cap. 4, 5.) that I cannot see what malice it
self can justly except against it. Sol. Tu imple per^onam tuam, Deus deie and
de illo exiget fuam. Aug. in Psalm 50.


This may fitly be applied to Spiritual Fathers.
3. Observation.
3. Good men love not to be burdensome to any. Paul might have begged or
borrowed a Cloak, but he had rather send for his own. Good men are ingenuous
men, and love not to be craving, Grace raises and enobles their Spirits, so
that they count it a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Acts 20.35.

Seducers and false Teachers are always craving, they are all for their
bellies, Philippians 3.19. but Paul could never endure to be chargeable unto
any, but kept two Callings (in these times of the Churches necessity) and made
his own hands minister to his necessities, that so he might not be burdensome
to the then poor and distressed Churches, but might be an Example of Industry
and heavenly mindedness to all. Acts 20.34.35. 2 Corinthians 12.13, 14. 1
These. 2.6.9. and 2.3.8.

4. Observation.
4. Good men are frugal men. As they are not sordid on the one hand, so they
are not prodigal on the other, but they keep the golden mean. Paul contenteth
himself with ordinary apparel, Bring my Cloak; It is not, Bring my Silks,
Satins, Plush, Velvets, Copes, Rochets, Palls, etc. and other furniture enough
to load a Cart; but bring my Cloak and Books, this is all the Apostles
House-holdry. If good men have food, (though it be but bread and water) and
raiment, though it be never so course, yet they rest contented with it. Our
happiness does not lie in the Pomp and pleasures of this World.

It is said of John the Baptist that he was Tota Vox, All voice: His Diet, his
Dwelling, his Apparel, his doing and his suffering all preached mortification
and selfe-denial: So this our Apostle was All Voice. Though a great part of the
World was his Diocese, yet he never affected nor once sought great things for
himself. He was Vide paupertatem tanti Apostoli, qui rem tantillam tam long
relictam inter damna censuerit. Grotius.
poor in Temporals, though rich in Spirituals, 2 Corinthians 6.10. Silver and
Gold he had none, All his riches were a few Books and writings, and a few old
Clothes to keep him warm. It Is said of that laborious and judicious Calvin, O
supellectilem Apostolicam! Penulam non purpuram, and Libellos non cabellos
quaerit. Espencaeus.
that all the goods which he left behind him (his Library being sold very dear)
came scarce to three hundredth Florens which is about ninety pound of our money.
It becomes not Gods People who are strangers and Pilgrims here to seek great
things for themselves, Jeremiah. 45.5. How unlike then is Pope Paul and his
successors to Saint Paul here, and Saint Peter who cried Silver and Gold, I
have none, Acts 3.6. when Pope John the two and twentieth had two hundred and
fifty Tons of Gold found in his Treasury. What Palaces, Revenewes,
Attendance, charge of costly Rayments have these men of sin had, Si
transeuntes videas, Dominos esse castrorum, non Patres Monasteriorum,
Provinciarum Principes, non animorum Rectores. Bern. ad Guliel. Abbatem.
which plainly shows that they are the Devils Vicars, and not Christ's.

5. Observation.
5. Whilst we live in this World we must have a moderate care of our health.
When winter approaches Paul sends for his winter Garment to keep him warm.

The body is the souls Organe and Instrument by which it acts, and therefore
it must be kept (what in us lies) in tune for the service of the soul. He that
forbids us to kill our selves commands us inclusively to preserve our
lives by all good and lawful means, Fateor insitam esse in nobis Corporis
nostri Charitatem, fateor nos hujus gerere tutelam, non nego indulgendum illi,
serviendum nego. Hujus nos nimius amor timoribus inquietat, sollicitudinibus
onerat, contumeliis objicit; Honestum ei vile est cui corpus nimium, etc. est
Charum. Seneca Epist. 14.2 6. to 6.6. Ubi Plura.
such as necessary Clothing, wholesome Diet, and convenient Lodgeing: and
therefore those Quakers, that attempt to fast forty days as our Savior did,
and thereby starve and famish themselves, (as some of them have done) are no
better then self-murderers.

Caution.

Only, we must beware of excessive carking and caring for the body,
remembering it is but the outside and the carcass, the soul is the man, that
is the Jewel which calls for our special care, Deuteronomy, 4.9. John 6.27.

6. Observation.
6. Good men are humble men. They disdain not to stoop to the meanest services,
for the good of others. If Timothy were a Diocesan Bishop (as some
Bishop-Would-bee would fain have it) surely he was a very humble one, since
here he disdaineth not to bring Paul's old cloak with his Books and his
Parchments after him; Pride can stoop to nothing but Humility makes a man
become all things to all men (so far as he can with a good Conscience) that he
may win some.

Bring the Books with thee, Paul was now old, in prison, and ready to dye, yet
he calls for Books.

7. Observation.
7. The Ministers of Christ must be studious men. They must be much in Reading,
Writing and collecting even in their old Age and to their dying day.

Though a man have made a good proficiency in Learning, and have extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit; so had Paul who was taught the mysteries of salvation more
immediately by God himself, and was wrapped up into the third Heaven, and had
been an Apostle so long, yet still he calls for Books and Note-Bookes. His
dead Counselors were his O dulce otium honestumque ac omni pene negotio
pulchrius, secum tantum and cum libellis loqui. Pliny Epist. Lib. 1.
best Companions. And if the Apostle who had such extraordinary gifts used
Books and Notes: it is no dishonor to the best man in the World now to use
them, especially since we are commanded to give our selves to Reading, 1
Timothy 4.13. and we amongst the rest must more especially search into the
Scriptures, John 5.39.

Away then with that Pride and folly of the Anabaptists and Enthusiasts who cry
down Books and reading, boasting that they have attained to such extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit that they can Preach (Prate they should say, Nonsense and
blasphemy) without Books.

To these I briefly answer, (for I love not to spend much time about these
Bruits.)

1. Let us see those extraordinary gifts you speak off. I must profess
seriously, I could never yet find ordinary gifts, in these extraordinary
Braggadoco's. I have diverse of their Letters by me, wherein there is neither
good matter, good Language, good Sense, nor true English.

2. Admit these men had these extraordinary gifts which they so boast off; yet
are they better then Paul, Timothy or Daniel (9.2.) for all these used Books?
Who knows not that the Spirit of God works by means, and as he that will be
rich must work for it, so he that will be rich in knowledge must read and
study for it? Solon a wise Heathen, when he was old, yet gloried that he still
learned something; and shall we that are Christians come short of Heathens?

Let these young men then that think themselves so full that they need no
more, remember old Paul who still was learning and studying the Scriptures even
to his dying day.

The Word of God is a great deep, and we know but in part, being clogged with
our corrupt Nature, and the mists of the flesh that hinder us from seeing the
wondrous things which are in Gods Law.

Especially the Parchments. 8. Observation.
8. We should extract semething out of that we read and treasure it up for our
own use and the good of the Church. Our memories are weak, and since the fall
they are woefully crazed, and become very deceitful to us, and therefore we had
need to use all good means to help them; if Paul used Parchments for such a use
(as the learned conceive he did) it is then no disparagement to the best to do
it.

VERSES 14, 15. Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much evil, the Lord reward
him according to his works.
VERSE 15. Of whom be thou ware also, for he has greatly withstood our words.
IN these words we have a relation of the injuries and oppositions which Paul
met withal from Alexander an open and professed enemy to Paul and his Doctrine,
where we have.

1. A Narration or Complaint set forth in an entire proposition, Alexander the
Copper-smith has done me much evil. 2. An Imprecation, The Lord reward him
according to his works. Alexanders Opposition springing from the extremity of
malice to the power of Godliness, he curses him in the Name of the Lord, and
not out of any private revenge, but in a holy zeal to Gods glory. 3. Here is a
Caution to Timothy to shun him, of whom be thou ware also. q. d. Thou see
what an enemy he is to me thy Father, trust him not for he will betray the son
too. 4. Here is the Reason of this Caution, why he should shun the society of
Alexander, viz. because of his desperate condition, he being one that openly
and maliciously opposed the Truth of God, and greatly withstood Paul's words.
Alexander the Copper-smith, etc.
There is a great Controversy amongst Interpreters who this Alexander should
be, and it is conceived by the most judicious that it was that Alexander
mentioned, Acts 19.33.

Who was a Jew, and dwelt at Ephesus, who was on Paul's side at the first, and
sought to appease the tumult stirred up at Ephesus against him, where he had
like to have lost his life for appearing on his side; yet now he makes
shipwreck of the Faith, and opposes the People of God, revileing and traducing
them, which the Apostle calls blasphemeing, 1 Timothy 2.20.

The Copper-smith.
A man of a mean Condition, one that got his living by his hammer, and hard
labor in an inferior Calling. (...), faber ararius. ^
He was sometime Paul's Disciple and professed the Truth, but now the scales are
turned, and of a Professor, he is become a persecutor.

Has done me much evil.
The word which we render has done, in the Original signifies to show. (...).
Mala multa mihi ostendit. Vulg.
It is an Hebraism, they put showing for doing, Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any
good (.i.) who will effect our desires in that kind, (...), ostendo, demonstro.
so Psalm. 60.3. thou have showed thy people hard things (.i.) thou have caused
them to see and endure hard things probably he might by his agents and friends
stir up Nero against him as a seditious person, a broacher of strange doctrine,
and and enemy to the Jewish religion which was then tolerated at Rome. What
this evil was he shows in the next Verse, He resisted our words and opposed
the truth which Paul delivered.

The Lord reward him according to his works which he has done and still
endeavors to do against me and the truth of God which I profess. He now
delivers him up to the Justice of God who is a righteous Judge, and will reward
every man according to his works. The Vulgar to mollify this Imprecation have
put the word in the future Tense, and so would make it a Est Votum non
Vaticinium.
Prediction and not an Imprecation. The Lord shall reward him, but the It is
not (...) read, sed (...) reddat.
word is Optative in the Original, and implies a heavy Imprecation. The Apostle
by a prophetical Spirit saw manifest signs of reprobation in this man and
thereupon denounces this curse against him. Optat non affectu vindictae, sed
zelo justitiae impium Alexandrum puni^i a Deo. a Lap.


Quest. But how does this Imprecation agree with that Apostolical sweetness and
mildness which was in the Apostle?

Answ. The Apostle spoke not these words out of any private spleen, but o^t of
Prophetical zeal he desires the Lord to execute his justice on this incurable
Apostate. So that it was an Imprecation darted by a particular motion of the
Holy Ghost, and so not to be imitated by us who have not that extraordinary
measure of the Spirit as Paul had.

Of whom be thou ware also.
Observe him and take heed of him (...), significat observare, devitare,
cavere. Acts 21.25. 2 Pet. 3.17. 1 John 5. ult.
for he goes up and down stirring up the Jews against the Gospel. q. d. The
reason why I mention him at this time is that thou may shun him as an
excommunicate person and one delivered up to Satan. Since then he is an
incurable Apostate, avoid him as the Pest and Poysener of humane Society.

For he has greatly withstood our words, much more will he withstand thine. q.
d. He has not only resisted us, but which is worse he has Violently and
(...). Vehementer obstitit. Beza.
Vehemently resisted the truth which I have preached to the world. The one is
but a personal persecution against charity, the other is a doctrinal offense
against piety and so far more heinous.

Observations.
1. Great Professors may become grievous Persecutors. This Alexander was a
noted Professor and within the pale of the Church else the Apostle could not
have excommunicated him and cast him out of the Church if he had never been in;
and if he had not professed the faith, he could not have made shipwreck of it, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Yea, this man was near to Martyrdom (as Calvin Comment on Acts
19.33.

Corruption optimi est pessima.


Calvin conceives) yet now he turns a desperate opposer of the truth. The best
things when corrupted become the worst. The most generous wine makes the
sharpest vinegar, and the finest flesh when putrified becomes most fulsom.
These Apostates know the state of the Church better then others, and so are
able to do it more mischief; besides God in judgment gives them up to a
reprobate sense, and the Devil comes with seven worse spirits and reenters,
which makes the latter end of these men worse then their beginning. Nicholas a
great professor and one of the seven Deacons yet at last fell into foul
errors, pleading for community of wives, V. Mr. Ant. Burgess on I^h. 17.12.
Ser. 70, 71, 72.
and the lawfulness of adultery; hence came the Sect of the Nicolaitans, Rev.
2.6. Judas went far yet at last sells his Master.

Be not then offended when you see Professors turn Blaspemers, and Preachers
Persecutors, it should grieve us, but not discourage us. It was so in the
Apostles time, it is so now, and it will be so to the end of the world. There
will be some such Tares mixed with Gods wheat, and a Judas amongst the very
Apostles. We must look to be hooted at as signs and wonders, as madmen and
Monsters and that in Israel, Isay 8.18.

Quest. But does not this prove the Apostasy of the Saints since Alexander is
said to make shipwreck of the faith?

Answ. Not at all. There is no arguing from the shadow to the substance, from
the Meteor to the fixed Star; because Hypocrites, temporary believers and
carnal professors fall away, therefore real Saints and such as are effectually
called may fall away, is a manifest Non Sequitur. But of this more fully in my
Thesis de perseverantia Sanctorum.


2. Observation.
2. It is lawful sometimes and in some cases to name men. Alexander a
malicious, incorrigible enemy is named that every one may shun him. But of this
before in Verse 10.

3. Observation.
3. The enemies of Gods people many times are sordid men. Alexander a Smith, a
man of no learning, of mean education, by professing not a Goldsmiths nor a
Silver-Smith but a Copper-Smith, and by disposition an open enemy to the truth:
This contemptible man opposes the Preaching and Practice of chosen vessels an
eminently learned Paul. Thus it pleases God to exercise and humble his
choicest servants by vile and worthless men. Job complains of such, Job 19.10.
and 30.1. David complains that the abjects and dregs of the people made head
against him, Psalm. 35.15, 16. So Acts 17.5. And this was prophesied long since
by Isay (3.5.) that such disordered times should come that every boy should
behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base against the Honorable
and men of worth. It is a trouble to ingenious natures to be molested by such
disingenuous ones who want common humanity. Aeneae magni dextra cadis. Virg.
To fall by the hand of an Achilles or some eminent person for Learning and
Valor, is some honor. But to be vexed by such Hows and Haggards, such
Coppingars and Colliars, as are famous for nothing, but Ignorance and
Impudence, but malice and wickedness, is a great burden. But it may comfort us
that Christ himself was thus exercised before us, He endured the V. Bohemus
Medit. 27. p. 71.
contradiction of sinners. (Heb. 12.3.) If we be contradicted by wise men we
can the better bear it, but to be contradicted by foolish rebellious sinners,
goes hard; yet such is the vanity of the Vulgar, that one such an ignorant and
brazen faced sot (especially if he have liberty and a little success) is cried
up by them as the only man, and one such a Demetrius though but a Smith
pleading for gain, shall be heard before a Paul pleading for Christ and Heaven,
Talium hominum improbitas semper fidem in mundo invenit, ut interdum plus
difficultatis and negotii exhibeat maligna and impudens inscitia, quam summum
acumen cum doctrina conjunctum. Calvin.
Acts 19.24, 25.

Has showed me much evil. 4. Observation.
4. Wicked men that oppose Gods truth and people do but labor in vain, They do
but Ostendit, dixit, non fecit, quod impii adversus pios animum magis
ostendere, quam explere possint. Aquinas in locum.
Show what they would do, they cannot bring their wicked desires into acts
according to their intents. Their intent is to root up the Name of Israel, and
to destroy the Gospel, and by opposing them they increase the one and spread
the other, Acts 8.1. Plures efficimur quoties metimur. Tertul.
Wicked men serve Gods will though against their own wills. Their designs
Accidentally, though not Intentionally fulfill Gods will. Joseph's brethren
little thought to have advanced him by selling him, yet God had so decreed it
and their selling him furthers it. Pharaohs daughter thought little to Nurse up
one that should be so signal an opposite to her father. Thus God catches the
wise in their own craft, he makes their V. M. Marshalls Ser. on Isay 8.9.
preached 1668.
Plots to become their plagues, and their own doings to become their undoings,
he snares them in the work of their own hands, Job 5.12, 13. Psalm. 9.16.

The Lord reward him according to his works. 5. Observation.
5. Imprecations against the malicious and incurable enemies of the Church are
lawful. David a man of Prophetical Spirit frequently used them against such
men, Psalm. 69.22. to 29. and 10.9, 6. to 22. So did Moses and others, Deuteronomy. 27.
Judge. 5.23. Ier. 17.18. Lam. 3.64, 65, 66. So did Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22. Gal.
5.12. These men had a Prophetical Spirit and saw into the final estate of those
whom they cursed and so might better do it then we who want that extraordinary
gift of the Spirit.

Object. Christ commands us to bless our enemies and not to curse them, Matthew.
5.44. and so does Paul, Romans 12.14.

Answ. We must distinguish of enemies. 1. Some are Private enemies and only
wrong us. 2. Others are Public enemies and such as oppose the truth of God, of
these also there are two sorts: 1. Some are Curable, and they are such as
persecute the truth and people of God out of Ignorance and blind superstition;
for such we must pray, so did Christ, Luke 23.34. and Steven, Acts 7.60. Many
have been converted by such Prayers, as those Jews, Acts 2. and Paul by Stevens
Prayers. 2. There are malicious and incurable enemies who wittingly and
wilfully oppose the truth of God out of malice, so did Alexander here and
therefore the Apostle curses him; and such we may pray against. Yet least any
should offend in Imitating the Saints in their Imprecations, these Rules must
be observed.


1. Imprecations against particular persons must be rarely used. We must not
with the Prima semper irarum ^ela sunt maledicta, and quae non poss^mus
imbecilles, optam^s irati. Votis malis pro armis utimur. Salvian.
men of the world fly presently to curses.

1. Because we now want that Spirit of Prophesy to discern who are incurable
enemies, which the Saints then had.

2. It is very hard to keep a right measure in these Imprecations, and not to
mingle our own private affections with them.

3. It is safer to pray Indefinitely against the enemies of truth in general,
as against Antichrist, the Turk, and those professed enemies of Gods truth and
people.

4. It is safer praying against the Plots of wicked men then against their
persons. So did David (2 Samuel 15.31.) he prays against the plots and counsel
of Achitophel so Peter and John pray against the threatenings of wicked men,
Acts 4.29. Now Lord behold their Threatenings.

5. Pray not absolutely but conditionally. 1. That if they belong to Gods
Election he would be pleased to call them. 2. If this will not do but they
persevere in their persecuting the people of God, then beseech him to This may
stand well with Charity because it is no more then what we may desire for our
selves. viz. That God would rather correct us then suffer us to go on in sin.
correct them, and to lay some temporal chastisement on them for their
amendment; so David, Psalm. 83.17. Fill their faces with shame that they may
seek thy Name. 3. If it appear to us that they are incorrigible and incurable
enemies to God and his truth, Simpliciter li^et imprecari alteri malum, non sub
ratione malt, sed justi. Aquinas 22. Q ^5.
then we may desire as Paul does here that God would glorify his Justice in
their destruction. It is not for us by open force and violence to resist them,
Prayers and Tears are our best Weapons; and therefore Paul goes to God by
Prayer for aid. Si apud Deum deposueris injuri^s ipse est ultor; si damnum
restitutor, si dolorem medicus est, si mortem resus^itatur. Tertul.
The Lord render to him according to his works: This is the best revenge when
we call on God, and bring him in to our help, committing our cause to him who
judges Righteously.

6. Observation.
9. God observes all the ways of wicked men, and first or last he will reward
them according to their works. So much is employed in this Apostolical
Imprecation. He eyes all the ways of men, and they shall have according to
their doing, Psalm. 28.4, 5. Ier. 32.19. 2 Cor. 11.25. Rev. 18.6. Be not then
offended at the prosperity of wicked men, for though a sinner do evil an
hundred times and his days be prolonged, yet in the end it shall not be well
with him, Eccles. 8.12, 13.

VERSE. 15. Of whom be thou ware.
1. Observe,
WE must shun the society of incurable sinners. Whilst men are hopeful and
curable we must try all means to win them. But when we perceive that men are
obstinate and incurable we must leave them least we be infected by them, Romans
16.17. Tit. 3.10. 2 John 10. But of this at large on 2 Timothy 3.5.

For he has greatly withstood our words. 2. Observation.
2. Opposing of the truth is very grievous to a gracions Soul. Paul does not
complain of any personal trouble (though he were now in Prison) but that which
afflicted him was that Alexander should thus maliciously resist the truth and
hinder the Gospel. God has but two things which are dear to him in this world.
viz. His Truth and his People and these should be dear to us. Our Zeal for them
should consume us, as it did Christ, John 2.17. Gods people are baptized with
fire as well as with water, and must be hot and not lukewarm or indifferent in
the things of God.

3. Observation.
3. Wicked men do not so much oppose our persons as our Preaching, They hate us
not as men, but as Ministers, because we publish the truth that condemns their
wicked practices. The truth has many opposers. 1. Sometimes Learned men oppose
it by their wit, disputing and writing against it. 2. Tyrants labor to
suppress it by cruelty, and great men by their authority. Never was power yet
in the hands of men, but for the most part it has been turned against the best
men, for whose sake Government was principally ordained. 3. Inferior persons
by railing on the Preachers and Publishers of it. Truth has a searching,
discovering, condemning power which makes the wicked so to hate it.

VERSE. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me, (or no man assisted me) but
all men forsook me, I pray God that it be not laid to their charge. V. 17.
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me (or assisted me) and strengthened me
that by me the Preaching might be fully known, etc.
WE are now come to the Third Part of this Chapter wherein the Apostle
complains of the timerousness of weak Christians; before he complained of
Alexander and open enemies, now he complains of a desertion by faint-heartd
friends. Where we have: 1. The carriage of weak Christianss toward Paul. viz.
They desert him in his distress, and dare not own him before Nero's tribunal.
2. We have the Number of these Desertors, it is not two or three, but all men,
all forsake him, not a man durst stick to him or stand by him, (.i.) very few
if any. 3. Here is the Time when they forsake him, it was at his first answer
before Nero. 4. Here is Paul's Carriage toward them, He prays for them, that
since they did not sin as Alexander did maliciously, but of infirmity, that he
would not lay this sin to their charge.


At my first answer. Or, at my first Apology and defense of my self and the
truth before Nero (or before some of his Officers which he had appointed)
against the malicious accusations of the Jews.

This his first defense was not the first which he made when he was first
Prisoner at Rome about nine years before; but he speaks of his first defense
which he made before Nero when he was Prisoner the second time at Rome. This
defense he made about nine months before his death, near the end of Nero's
reign when he wrote this second Epistle to Timothy.

No man stood by me, or was (...). In prima meae defensione. It is not (...)
responsio, but (...); an answer with a defense whereby he defends his
innocence. (...), simul ad sum.
present with me. To assist or aid me, to comfort or counsel me.

But all men forsook me. Even my dearest friends who might have helped me by
their power and pleading left me in the brias as a forlorn man. Those that
formerly came to visit him in Prison, now durst not show their heads for fear
of suffering with him, such was Nero's outrage now in his last days against
the Saints. Chrysostom makes this the ground of Nero's rage against Paul, viz.
because he had confounded Simon Magus whom Nero highly prized, and had
converted his Butler and some of his Concubines, whereat he being enraged,
caused him to be beheaded; for fear of Nero his friends, out of weakness
generally forsake him. Yet the Universal Particle would seem to admit of some
restriction. All (.i.) all most all, very few excepted; for Luke did not leave
him. V. 11. So the word All is taken in Scripture, Philip. 2.21. All men seek
their own. (.i.) The most and greatest part are self-seekers.

I pray God it be not laid to their charge. (...), non iis imputetur scilicet
in culpam (.i.) ignose^tur, remittatur. Meiosis.
q. d. I pray God forgive them this great sin of forsaking me in my necessity,
I wish it be not imputed to them for sin. Alexander that sinned maliciously him
he names and curses; but these weak Christians who failed for want of some
measure of Spirit and courage retaining still a hidden love to the cause of
Christ; their names he conceals, with prayer that God would not lay this sin to
their charge.

Observations.
1. Christians must be able in some measure to Apologize for the truth. They
must be ready not only (...), to give a bare answer, but they must be ready
(...)* to make an Answer with a defense of the truth, (...) non simplicem
responsionem deno^at, sed desensionem and consistit ea vel in verbis, vel in
scriptis quibus respondetur adversariorum calumniis. Laurent. in Pet.
1 Pet. 3.15. Thus Job often Apologized for himself against the false accusations
of his friends. So does Peter, Acts 2.14. etc. and Steven, Act. 7. and Paul
often, Acts 22.1. and 23.1. and 24.10. and 25.8. and 26.1. Philip. 1.7. Thus
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Athenagoras, Lactantius and Minutius Felix apologize
for the Christians against their slanderous enemies. And B. Jewel Apologizeth
for the Reformers against the Papists. As wicked men are subtle to destroy the
truth, so we should be wise as serpents to defend it.

2. Observation.
See more Paraeus in Romans 16. Dub. 2. Baldwin in 2 Timothy 4.16. Brothman. CC. de
Pontif. Romans T. 2. Sect. 3. p. 814. etc.
2. All men forsook me.] Peter was not then surely Bishop of Rome. Had he been
there in such high authority he would have said somewhat doubtless for Paul.
Paul lived in Rome two years in his hired house, Acts 28.30. And when he writes
to the Romans he saluted many, yet not one word of Peter there. Romans 16. It is
not probable then that Peter was Bishop of Rome seven years as the Papists
without any Scripture-grounds affirm. But on this see more before. V. 11.

3. Observation.
3. Gods dearest Servants must expect many times to be left alone. They are often
hopeless and helpless in respect of worldly help and creature-supplies. It is
no strange thing to see a good man forsaken of all his friends. V. Bohomus
Meditat. 14.
Job complains of some such dealing from his friends, Job 6.15, 16, 17. and 12.
4. and 19.2, 3. And so does the Church, Lam. 1.2, 19, 21. David often complains
that his acquaintance stood aloof when he was in trouble, Psalm. 31.11. When
Christ was apprehended all the disciples fled and forsook him. Good men are men
still, and so are subject to Passions, fear and faint-heartedness, and have not
the same courage at all times, even in their own trials much less in others, as
we see in Elijah that now tells Ahab to his face of his abominations, yet anon
flies from Iesabel and is in a Pet. So David one while he will not fear though
ten thousand compass him about; yet another while he cries, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul. This is a very hard lesson (for man is a sociable
creature) to be content to go alone in duty, and though all men forsake Christ
yet not to forsake him then, this is Heroic and noble indeed. Thus did Elijah,
Athanasius and Luther when they had all the world against them. God has so
ordained it in his wisdom to wean us from the world and to make us see the
Vanity of creature comforts, that we may not confide in them, but may say with
repen^ing Ephraim, Ashur shall not save us, for with thee the fatherless find
mercy, Hos. 14.3. and with David, Help Lord, for vain is the help of man, Psalm.
60.11. By this means he drives us out of the creature to himself; hence Job
complains that God himself had yet his brethren far from him, Job 19.13, 14.
The like complaint makes Heman, Psalm. 88.8. Thou have put mine acquaintance far
from me, Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris. Ovid.
Thou have made me an abomination to them. Prosperous rich men have many
friends, but the poor and distressed is scarcely owned by his own Parents, John
19.21, 22. The blind man's Parents were afraid to own their son for fear lest
the Jews should do them a mischief. See more before on V. 10. Obs. 1.
Be not then offended when it is thus with you Christ was so served and the
disciple is not above his Master, we must be made comformable to him if we will
reign with him. Trust not in Humane helps, they are mutable and will fail you.
V. Bohemus Medit. p. 40.
Micah 7.5. Trust not in a friend. But trust in God and make him your friend,
he is an Almighty everlasting friend. Be your condition what it will (whilst
you walk in ways of obedience) he will never leave you nor forsake you, Heb.
13.5. As you may see in the next Verse. As Elkanah said to Hannah, Habent
omnia, quia habent habentem omnia. Aug.
Am not I better to thee then ten sons? So the Lord is better to us then ten
thousand friends, he is the fountain, get him and you get all, even when you
have lost all, yet you have it still in the living God. When those Cisterns are
broken, yet this Spring abides, and when thy friends are dead, yet this friend
lives for ever, Psalm. 18.46.

I pray God it be not laid to their charge. 4. Observation.
4. We must pity and Pray for such as offend through weakness. Demas and
Alexander sinned wilfully and therefore the Apostle brands the one, and curses
the other. But these that sinned through fear and infirmity he conceals their
names, and prays for them; so did Christ and Steven they praid for such as
persecuted them Ignorantly, and were heard. It is a great part of a Ministers
wisdom to distinguish between sinners, and to observe who sin through infirmity
and with the Spirit of Meekness to restore such, Luke 22.32. Gal. 6.1. Romans
15.1. James 3.1, 2. And who sin obstinately, and to be sharper with them. A
hard knot must have a hard wedge; and tough humors sharper Physic. It is Jude
his advise, Jude 22, 23. Of some have compassion making a difference, and
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

5. Observation.
5. Sins of Omission may destroy us as well as sins of Commission. These weak
brethren did not hurt Paul, yet because they did not help him they were liable
to guilt, Turpissime fecit Ecclesia Romana quae Apostolum suum sic deseruit,
Mirum itaque non est si hoc Paulo dolu^t pl^rimum, sique oravit ne illis
imputetur. Pet. Martyr.
for in defer^ing him they did in a manner desert the truth which he
maintained, therefore the Apostle prays that this sin may not be laid to their
charge. So Moroz is cursed not for hindering, but for not helping the people of
God against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. Dives is sent to Hell not for robbing but
for not relieving Lazarus in his misery. Occidisti si non pavisti. August.
See what a large bill of Indictment is put up against sins of omission, Matthew.
25.42, 43. And if their condition be so sad that only through fear forsake
Gods people, See the danger of sins of Omission, Gataker ^erm* on Amos 6.6.
page 51. 2 Part. folio. and Scudder Daily Walking. c. 16. Sect. 3. p. 551.
how sad is their condition that oppose them, and imprison and persecute them.

2. See here the tenderness of God to his people, he knows that two are better
then one, and that a solitary man which is alone is left to a Temptation, and
therefore he has provided the counsel and company of friends to refresh us in
our straits, and by their words spoken in season to encourage us in the paths
of Piety against those discouragements which will meet us in that way.

6. Observation.
6. It would be sad with us if God should lay but one sin to our charge. The
Apostle prays that God would not impute this one sin (which yet the world
accounts no sin) to them. God charged Cain with this Murder, and Judas with his
Treason, and it sunk them, they were not able to bear it, indeed a wounded
spirit who can bear? no man by his own strength, Prove. 18.14. A man may sooner
bear the weight of the whole world on his back, See the Burden of sin. ^udworth
on Gal. 6.5. page 375.
then the weight of one sin; for that is but the weight of creatures, but this
of an infinite Creator; and if one sin be a burden unsupportable, oh! how sad
would it be with us if God should charge all our sins upon us? If sins of
Infirmity lie so heavy, what are enormities? If sins of weakness be thus
grievous what are sins of wilfulness? Great then is the folly and madness of
those that make a mock at sins that make it their Recreation and pastime to do
wickedly, Prove. 10. 23. That make it their meat and drink, Prove. 4.27. They eat
the bread of Wickedness and drink the wine of Violence that make it their
clothing, Psalm. 73.6. Pride compasses them like a chain, and Violence covers
them as a garment. Can the hands of these men be strong, or their hearts endure
when God shall visit their sin ppon them, Ezekiel. 22.14. This will certainly be
bitterness in the latter end.

VERSE. 17. Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, that by
me the Preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear;
and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. VERSE. 18. And the Lord shall
deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to his Heavenly
Kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
HEre we have. 1. Paul's Commemoration of that experience which he had of Gods
love to him in his deliverance past: But the Lord assisted me; though I had but
cold comfort on Earth, yet I had comfort enough from Heaven.

2. Here is the end for which the Lord assisted and delivered him, viz. That he
might preach the Gospel to the Nations.

3. Here is the greatness of the danger from which he was delivered, viz. From
the mouth of the Lion, (i.) from the hands of Nero that cruel Tyrant.

4. Here is Paul's confidence and full assurance built upon this Experience for
time to come, v. 18.

1. That the Lord will deliver him from every evil work. 2. That he will
preserve him to his Heavenly Kingdom. Q. d. Though the Lord will not deliver
me from suffering, yet I know he will deliver me from sin, and that not from
some few, but from every evil work: and though he will not preserve me from
death and danger, yet I am sure he will preserve me beyond them to a state of
everlasting glory, even to his Heavenly Kingdom.
5. He concludes with a sweet Doxology, his heart being inflamed with the sense
of Gods Love to him in his deliverance past, and mercies to come, he takes
nothing to himself, but ascribes all to God. To him be Glory, and that for
ever. And this he seals up and confirms with the usual Particle of
Asseveration and Ratification. Amen, so be it.

The Explication.
But the Lord stood with me, or (...) adfuit im^ astitit, ut Act. 27.22, (...)
astitit mihi hac nocte Angel^s Dei. Gerhard.
by me, and assisted me. Against the desertion of men he opposes the aid and
assistance of Christ, though he was forsaken of all and had no comfort nor help
from man, yet Christ assisted him by the gracious presence of his Spirit, and
strengthened him (that he might not faint in his trials) according to that
promise, Luke 21.14, 15.

Question, Who is the Lord here?

Answer, By Lord here is meant the Lord Jesus appears plainly if we compare
this Text with Acts 23.11.

Question, But what does Christ do for his?

Answer, He does not stand by as a mere Spectator of their conflicts, but he
is with them to assist them with wisdom, Prudence, and Courage, and to (...),
Corroboro, confirmo, conforto.
strengthen them under all their burdens that they be not despondent, nor sink
under them. That by me the To (...), praeconium, (...) vocat Evangelii
praedicationem, Beza.
Preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear.] Q. d. I
was strengthened by God, for this end that the Gospel preached by me might be
more fully and freely known to the world. De V. (...). V. V. 5.
Rome at that time was the Queen of the world, and in its most flourishing
condition; people flockt thither from all parts, and when they heard and saw
Paul's Erat non vulgaris Ministerii ejus confirmatio. quod cum totus mundus
furiose in eum insaniret, and humana omnia praesidia ipsum deficerent, invictus
tamen steterat. Calvin. in locum.
constancy and boldness in confessing and professing the Gospel before the
Tyrant, it must needs work on them, and the fame of the Gospel thereby be
spread over all the world.

And I was delivered from the mouth of the Lion.
Some conceive these words to be a Proverbial speech, noting some eminent,
present, devouring danger. Q. d. I was delivered from the extremeest hazard of
death, even as a man that is rescued out of a Lions mouth, and pulled from
between his teeth. This is true, but most genumely and properly by the mouth of
the Lion, is meant Nero's rage and cruelty, who for his Potency in preying on
the flock of Christ, is here fitly compared to a Lion which devoured and
destroyed the sheep of Christ's Pasture. Tyrants and potent enemies of the
Church are frequently so called in Scripture, Psalm 35.17. and 91.13. Ier.
2.15. Ezekiel 19.2.

Question. How dares Paul call Nero a Lion, when the Scripture condem^s
speaking evil of dignities, Jude 8. and forbids us reproaching them, Exodus
22.28. it tells us that all Power is ordained of God, Romans 13.2. and that
even Tyrannical Magistrates and Hypocritical Rulers are sent in wrath by him
for the sins of a people, Qui dedit regnum Mario, ipse and Caesari; qui
Augusto, ipse and Neroni, qui Constantino ipse and Apostatae. Juliano. Aug. De
Civitate Dei, Lib. 5 Cap. 21.
Job. 34.30. and Christ tells Pilate that he had no power but that which was
given him from above, John, 19.11. How then dares Paul give Nero so harsh a
Title.

Answer, 1. Paul was a Minister of Christ, and Ministers by virtue of their
Office may and must do that which a private person who wants that call may not
do.

2. Paul had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit, he knew the haunts and
courses of men and so might the more boldly reprove them. Thus Christ calls
Herod a Fox. David calls cruel men Dogs and Lions, Psalm 22.13.21.22, Solomon
calls a wicked Prince, a hungry Bear, Prove. 28.15.

Observations.
1. All men forsook me, But the Lord stood by me. Hence, Observe, That man's
extremity is Gods opportunity, or when man's help fails then God appears. He
then comes in as an Auxiliary. So he did to Paul when he was in prison, Acts
23.11. and so he has promised to be with his Ministers especially to the end
of the world, Matthew 28.20. Christ is a friend ^ha^ sticks closer then a
Brother. He goes with Paul to the Bar, and stands by him and strengthens him
there. God does never totally and finally forsake his people, leave them he may
for a time to try them, but never so as to forsake them.

He may delay to help them, Deserit ne deseratur.
but it is for their good to bring them into nearer communion with himself,
Hos. 5.15. Call over the Catalogue of the Saints, and they will all tell you
that God never failed them in their distre^^^. Ask Noah, Lot, Abraham, Job,
Daniel, Paul, and they will all tell you that nothing has failed of all the
good which God has promised, Joshua 23.14. Creature Comforts indeed are vain,
and will fail and forsake us in our troubles.

In time of War Riches will leave us, in time of sickness health will leave
us, in time of Famine bread will fail, and in time trouble Friends will fail.
The Lord only is immutable, he never fails his at their need.

Gods people are never less alone then when they are most alone; Solus non est
cut Christus*
never less forsaken then when then are forsaken of all. When Jacob has
nothing but stones for his pillow, then has he the sweetest Visions of God,
Genesis 28.11, 12.13. when the Prie^^ and the Levite past by us, then comes the
good Samaritan with his Oil and Wine to comfort us; when Father and Mother
forsake us, then is Gods time to take us up, Psalm 27.10. when the Pharisees
excommunitate and cast out the blind man, then Christ receives him, John 9.34,
35. when the Disciples could not do the cure then comes Christ and does it,
Matthew 17.17.

God could deliver his people without this deserting of them, but he is pleased
to let things come to extremity that he may have more prayers and praises from
us. He could have delivered Israel as soon as ever they came into Egypt, but he
lets them lie some hundreds of years in deep distress, tha^ so his Glory might
be the more perspicuous in their deliverance, Exodus 14.13, 14. When Gods
people lie in captivity so long till they are as so many d^y bones without
l^fe, then God comes and breaths upon them, Ezekiel 37.11. to 15. When it is
Evening with Gods people, and we can expect nothing but night to follow, then
God causes light to appear, Zach. 14.7. At Evenining it shall be light.

When Creatures fail in point of Prudence, Cum duplicantur lateres venit Moses.
and cannot advise and in point Power and cannot help, then is a time for God
to help, Psalm 60.11. All the fenced Cities must be taken, and the enemy come
even to the walls of Jerusalem, then and not till then does God appear, 2 Kings
18. 13.17. so Micah 5.5. when the Assyrian is entered the Land, and is ready to
destroy all, then Christ brings Peace to his People. When Ishbibonob the Giant
is ready to seize on weary, fainting David, then God sends Ahishai to his
succor, 2 Samuel 21.16, 17. Jonah must lie three days and three nights in the
Whales belly (till in all humane probability he was drowned) and then he is
saved, Lazarus must lie till he stink before Christ will raise him.

Pine not then away ye seed of Jacob, there is yet corn in Egypt, there is help
enough in God, only do him the honor now to trust him. Blessed is he that
believes, and has not seen, Si vides, ubi Fides?
John 20.29. What ever then the distress be, whether it be Personal,
Domestical, or National, yet command thy soul to wait on the Lord, who though
he come not at thy time, yet he will never fail his own; Raah is not simply to
see or look as Nabal, but it signifies to see plainly and wonderfully even to
ravishment and admiration.
In the mount will the Lord be clearly and wonderfully seen, Genesis 22.14.

[See more Doctor Preston, and Master Mocket, on Genesis, 22.14. Mason his Cure
of Cares, c. 4. p. 41. Dyke on John 4.46. p. 341. Brinsly on Exodus 14.13. p.
100. Hicks fast Sermon on Isay 28 5. p. 5. etc. Preached 1644. June 26.
Burroguhes on Contentment, p. 311. Master Bridge his Sermon, 2 Vol. page
154.174.192. Door Reynolds, on Hos. 14.2, 3. 2 P. p. 62.63.

The Lord assisted me. 2. Observation.
2. Christ is the Lord. He is the Lord, the Jehovah, the true and the living
God, coessential and coequal with his Father. Neither is the Title of God and
Lord given to Christ Secundarily, Improperly and Metaphorically as they are
given to Angels and Magistrates as the Socinians affirm,: ^ yea
Catachristically and abusively, Idols, Devils and men's bellies are called their
gods. But the Title is given to Christ Primarily and properly as the Creator
and Preserver of all things, the Lord Paramount of all the World, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. But of this at large before. V. 1.

And strengthened me. 3. Observation.
3. Strengthening grace is the gift of God. He does not only give us Renewing
grace and then leave us to our own free will, but he gives us persevering
grace also. As he is the Author of our grace by Vocation, so he is the finisher
of it by preservation. He confirms and establishes us unto the end, 2 Cor.
1.21. Hence David calls God his Rock, Psalm 18.2. and we are commanded to be
strong in the Lord and the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. It is he that does
enable us and strengthen us with all might in our inward man, 1 Coloss 1.11. 1
Timothy 1.12. A little strength will not do, because we have no little enemies
to encounter, but we must be strengthened with all might, and with all Patience,
that we may do all the good we can, withstand all the evil we can, and
patiently suffer when we can withstand no longer. Rest not content that you are
Babes in Christ and have grace begun, but grow till you become strong men in
Christ. To this end we must be Multos impedit a firmitate praesumptio
firmitatis, nemo erit a Deo firmus nisi qui a seipso se sentit infir^um.
August. See the Excellency of Spiritual strength. Doctor Preston on Ephesians,
3.16. and Doctor Hill.
sensible of our own exceeding weakness, nothing stronger then Humility that
goes out of it self, nothing weaker then Pride that rests on its own bottom.

That by me the Preaching might be fully known. 4. Observation.
4. Whilst God has any work for his servants to do, he will assist and
uphold them in despite of all oppositions. Though Nero rage against Paul, and
all men forsake him, yet God will assist him that he may preach the Gospel to
the world. We need not fear the Foxes and Furies of the times; we have our day
and to morrow to work in, and till that time which God has allotted us be
expired all the Devils in Hell, and all the Dogs in the world, cannot remove
us, Luke 13.32. How long was David vexed with ungodly men yet he slept not till
he had served his generation, Acts 13.36. Herod sought to kill Peter, but at
the Prayers of the Church the prisoner is rescued out of his hands, yet when he
had finished his work and was ripe for Martyrdom then he falls with ease, Ahab
and Iezabel seek the life of Elijah, yet was he preserved till he had finished
his work, and then was he translated.

Luther, was often cursed by many Popes, yet he finished his course and died in
Peace. Queen Elizabeth was also cursed by many Popes, but God turned the curses
of those Romish Balaams into blessings, for she outlived nine or ten of them,
and at last died in her bed full of days, riches and honor.

Our comfort is, that our times are not in our enemies hands but in the hands
of a gracious God, who best knows how long it is good for us to live, and when
to die, Psalm 31.15. when we have finished our course he will take us to himself
in glory, John 17.4, 5. Let us then faithfully discharge the duties of our
several places, and commit the success to God, in whose hand is our life, and
all that we possess.

And that all the Gentiles might hear. 5. Observation.
5. God would have his Truth revealed to the sons of men. He would have the
Gospel known, Bonum quo communius eo melius.
fully known to the Gentiles, to all the Gentiles, yea to all Nations whether
Jews or Gentiles, Mat. 28.19. Truth is good, and the more common it is, the
better; where it gets ground, Satan's Kingdom falls like lightning from
Heaven suddenly and irresistably, Luke 10.18.

Let none then hide their Talents, Mr. Anthony Burgess, on John 7.17. Lect. 93.
but as the Sun freely communicates its light and heat to us, so let us freely
impart our gifts unto others. See eight quickening considerations to this duty.

And I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. 6. Observation.
6. The Churches enemies often times are Lions. Lions for Potency, Lions for
Astuta ingenuum vulpes imitata Leonem. Horat. Sermon 2. See eight excellent
resemblances between a Lion and a Tyrant in Master Caryll on Job 4.9. p 62.3,
etc. and Franzius De Animalib. l. 1. c. 6. It Is an excellent little Tract of the
Nature of most Creatures.
Policy, Psalm. 17.12. Lions for cruelty, Lions for Terror. Hence they are so
often in Scripture called Lions, Psalm 10.9. and 22.13. and 35.17. Prove. 28.15.
Ier. 2, 15. Ezekiel. 19.2. Such we are all by Nature (in our places and degrees)
till grace change us, Isay 10.7. and then we shall be Lions for Christ (i.)
magnanimous and courageous in his cause, Prove. 28.1. the righteous are bold as
Lions, which good in the Creature we should imitate, which evil shun. Be
Serpents for Policy and not for poison, Lions for prowess and not for rapine.

2. Be not familiar with these Lious, come not near their dens lest they make a
prey of you, have no fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness, but
reprove them rather.

7. Observation.
7. God many times suffers his dearest children to fall into the mouths of
these Lions, so that to a carnal eye they seem hopeless and helpless, even as a
Lamb that is in the paws and jaws of a hungry Lion is given up for lost.
Consule Tacitum l. 15. Vbi plura Neronis flagitia reperias. Et Pezelii Mellif.
Hist. p. 2. De Nerone. p. 335. etc.
This was Paul's case, he was not only in the den, but in the vere jaws of
Nero that proud Potent, furious Lion, who killed his Master, slew his Mother,
crucified Peter, made foul havoc of the Church, and at last to save himself
from the fury of the people, he slew himself saying, Dedecorose vixi, turpius
peream. My life was base, and my death shall be answ^rable.

This was the case of Israel in Egypt, the Jews in Babylon, the Primitive
Christians in the days of the persecuting Emperors, and ever since by
Antichrist, yea since the days of Abel to this day the people of God have been
as so many Lambs encompassed with rageing Lions, who on all occasions have
labored to make a prey of them, yet the Lord makes a Treacle of this Viper,
by this means he purges his people from their dross, V. Irenaeum adversus.
Haeres. l. 5. c. 28.
and fits them for his Kingdom, as Ignatius said sometimes, Dei frumentum sum,
etc. I am Gods corn, and I must be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that I
may be pure Manchet for my Lord and Master. Gods ways to his Church are
mysterious ways, Isay 45.25. He has a wheel in the wheels, and when we think
they go backward and all makes against the Church, See Master Strong 31. Ser.
p, 657.
yet he makes them go forward and promote their interest, Ezckiel 1.16.21.

8. Observation.
8. That God will deliver his from this great danger. He that brought thee into
the mouth of the Lion will bring thee out again, Dan. 6.22. God is omnipotent
and omniscient, he has both skill and will to deliver his people, though we
know not which way, yet it is sufficient that he does, 2 Peter 2.9. to him
belong the issues from death, Psa. 68.20. when we be in extreme danger and in
the jaws of death, yet he has many secret passages and back doors to
conveigh us out at.

He has a thousand ways to deliver us, by Means, without means, by weak
means, by contrary means. Sometimes he changes a Lion into a Lamb, as Saul
into Paul, or else he stops the mouths of these Lions by restraining their
cruelty: Or by setting one Lion against another, as the Philistines against
Saul, 1 Samuel 23.27. The Turks against the Papists, he divided the Pharisees
and Saduces amongst themselves whilst Paul escaped, Acts 23.6, 7. Or else he
makes his children Lions to their enemies. So that the dread of them falls upon
them, Hester 9.23. or else he breaks the teeth of these Lions, So that they
cannot do the mischief they intended, Ps. 3.7. This may comfort Gods people in
their deepest distress, [though these Lions may be too strong for us, yet there
is a stronger then they, Isa. 31.43. There is no Protector like this great
Protector of us all. He is El-shaddai, God Almighty and Alsufficient to supply
our wants, and help us in our straits: though others may forsake us, yet he
has promised that he will never do it, Heb. 13.5. There are five Negatives to
assure us of the truth of that promise. (...). Nequaquam te deseram.

It Is as if God had repeated the same promise five times over, I will not leave
thee, and again and again I tell thee over and over for thy comfort, that I
will not forsake thee. Bohemus Medit, 16. p. 46. Vbi plura.


q. d. I will not, no I will not, I will in no wise leave thee, no^ forsake
thee. And it is worth observing, that in Scripture there is some Title or other
of Gods that answers to all our necessities. Ergo are our enemies fierce as
Lions, why God will come as a Lion against them, Isay 31.4. Do they come upon
thee as a mighty storm? why he will be a covert to thee? are they as a
schorching heat? he will be a shadow. Isay 4.5, 6. and 25.4. Art thou a poor
shiftless sheep? why, he will be a sheepherd to defend thee, Psalm 23.1. Art
thou a Dove and in danger of Birds of prey? Why God will be a Rock to hide
thee from them, Cant. 2.14. Isay 33, 16. The Church is Gods Vineyard, and he
will keep it night and day, Isay 27.3. It Is his City and he will be for walls
and bulwarks to it, Isay 26.2. His Household, and he will provide for it. His
children and nature teaches us to defend them, and will the God of Nature
think you leave his? The Members of Christ's mystical body, and never any yet
hated his own flesh. The Apple of his Eye which is guarded with a five-fold
covering, Zach. 2.8. Psalm 17.8. Christ is King over his Church, Ad domandum
and dominandum, to subdue his enemies, and make them his footstools Psalm 110.1.

Let the wicked plow long furrows on our backs, yet God will cut their Treaces
that they shall plow in vain, Psalm 129.3, 4. The rod of the wicked may be on
the back of the Righteous but it shall not rest there; sufferings may be their
condition, but See Doctor Boltons Ser. on Lament. 3.26. Preached 1646. Barlows
Sermon on Psalm. 40.17. at the end of his Comment, on Timothy, p. 38.
deliverance is their Portion; Jehovah jirel the Lord sees and is seen in the
Mount both Actively and Passively for the help of his people, Genesis 22.14.

VERSE. 18: And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
q. d. THat God which has been with me hitherto, will not now forsake me, but
will keep me by his assisting grace, so that I shall not for fear of suffering
run into sin, nor do any thing unworthy of my holy Profession. He will preserve
me from all sinful revolts till he have wrought me to his heavenly Kingdom.

2. Others give this sense of the words, The Lord will deliver me from the
Violent practices of evil men, and will not suffer them to hurt me. But the
Text says not, The Lord will deliver me from every evil worker, but which is
more comfortable and fully. He will deliver me from every evil work. So that
the former sense is most genuine and agreeable to the Context. God will keep me
pure from all wickedness and so preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. As he
has delivered me from the jaws of Metaphorical Lions, so I am assured that he
will deliver me from Spiritual Lions ( i.) from the Tyranny of sin and Satan,
(...) servo, a (...) sanus.
till he has brought me safe and sound unto his heavenly Kingdom.

To whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
B^ing assured by Gods Spirit of his Divine manu-tenency till he came to glory,
he concludes with a sweet Doxology and Thankesgiving to the Lord Christ his
Savior and Preserver, where we have, 1. The person to whom praise is given, it
is to him ( id est,) to the Lord Jesus, V. 17. 2. What the praise is that is
given to him, viz. the praise of his Glory. To him be Glory, (i.) let him only
have Honor, Worship, Praise. (...) here signifies Praise increased and
abundantly published. So Luke 2.14. Glory be to God on High, (i.) Let the
praise of his Wisdom, Power, and goodness be abundantly spread abroad, who
of his Transcendent love has redeemed the sons of men. Hence the Geneva
Translation renders it praise: To him be praise for ever.

This Doxology was frequently used by the Apostle, as you may see, Romans
11.36. and 16.26. Philippians 4.20. 1 Timothy 1.16. Heb. 13.21. 1 Peter 5.11.
Jude 25.

3. Here is the duration of this praise, it must not be for a day or two, but
for ever and ever. (...). (i.) in secula seculorum.
By which phrase the Scripture sets forth Eternity. The doubling of the
word has an Emphasis and always signifies an everlastiug continuance without
any date or end at all. 4. Here is the fervor of Paul's affection in this duty
of glorifying Christ, testified by the word Amen, (id est,) So be it, or so it
shall be, q. d. I heartily wish it may be so.


I find a threefold Amen in Scripture 1. Assevering. 2. Assenting. 3. Assuring.


Sometimes it is prefixed, sometimes it is affixt; when it is prefixed, it is an
Amen of Vehement Asseveration, John 6.26. But the Amen in the Text is both
Assenting and Assuriug, Amen deducitur ab Hebraico vocabulo, Aman, quod in
Hiphil significat credere, in Niphal significat firmam and fidelem esse. Est
itaque confirmantis and certificantis particula. Davenant in Colos. 4.18.
and is usually affixt and added at the end of Prayer, as Matthew. 6.13. Romans
15.33. Gal. ult. ult.

Observations.
1. The Experience of Gods ^ormer deliverances must make us rest upon him for
future. He has delivered me formerly (says the Apostle) and therefore I am
confident that he will still deliver me till he have brought me safe to his
Kingdom. This is Scripture Logic, and God loves to have us argue thus, Psalm.
4.1. and 86.13, 16. and 77.10. When David was delivered from the Lion and the
Bear, he thence concludes that God would also deliver him from that
Uncircumcised Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.36, 37. So Paul argued, 2 Cor. 1.10. Who
delivered us from so great a death and does deliver, in whom we trust that he
will yet deliver. He has delivered us that we know, he does deliver that we
experimentally see, and therefore we confidently conclude that he will still
deliver. So Isay 51.2, 3. One V. D. Tailor on Psalm. 32. p. 255 Mr, Strong 31
Ser. p. 375, 376 and Mr ^urroughs his Gospel Reconciliation. page 378. etc.
Blessing is a pledge of another, he that has subdued such a lust for me, will
do it still; he that helped me in such a strait will do so still he that has
been with us in six troubles in the seventh he will not leave us, Job 5.19, 20.
We should therefore treasure up our deliverances and record and file up our
former experiences that they may be as Mannah for us to seed upon when we come
into the Wilderness of New troubles, Psalm. 74.14. He smote the head of the
Leviathan, (.i.) He broke the power and policy of Pharaoh and his army and
drowned them in the Sea; and why so? That he might be meat for his people in
the Wilderness. (.i.) That he might be food for their Faith to feed upon, they
were to pass through many difficulties in the Wilderness, but God gave them
this mercy as a pledge to assure them that he would also cast out the Canaanite
and bring them to the possession of that good Land. How quietly and comfortably
might we live did we but take this course. The Victories of old Soldiers
encourages them for a new conquest. By this resting on God we engage him to
help us still; if a man will not ^^ceive his trust much less will the God of
Heaven; hence David uses this as an Argument to move the Lord, Our fathers
trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, we also trust in thee and
therefore deliver us also, Psalm. 22.4, 5. hereby we bring much honor to God,
then indeed we make him our God when we make him our only stay and trust. God
knows and acknowledges such for his, Nahum 1.7.

From every evil work. 2. Observation.
2. Though God does not save his people from suffering, yet he will save them
from sin; and though he leave in them infirmities, yet he will free them from
enormities, and from total Apostasy. He will keep them from evil, from every
evil work that may any way be scandalous or a reproach to their profession. He
convinces them of the Vileness of sin, and discovers to them the snares of
Satan, he plants his fear in their hearts that they may not sin against him,
and inclines their hearts to an Holy Observation of all his Precepts.

And he will preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. 3. Observation.
3. God is the Preserver of his people. He does not only preserve their lives
and estates with a general preservation and so is styled the Preserver of men,
Job 7.20. But especially he keeps their Souls in an Holy Frame till he bring
them to glory. All Believers are preserved and kept as in a Garrison by the
mighty power of God through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And this is
called special preservation, peculiar to the Godly, 1 Samuel 2.9. Psalm. 41.12.
Jude 1. It is not sufficient that we light a Lamp, but there must be a
continual supply of Oil else the light will go out: So it is not sufficient
that we have Preventing, Preparing, Renewing grace, but we must also have
Subsequent, Conserving, Perfecting, Persevering grace daily given in to
preserve us from Apostasy. We have always need of a Divine manu-tenency till
we have finished our course, Psalm. 73.23. As he calls us out of sin, so he must
keep us from sin and confirm us to the end. 1 Cor. 1.8. And this he will do in
despite of all our enemies; if any thing destroy us it is sin, and for that we
have Gods hand here that he will deliver us from every evil work that might any
way ruin us, and so preserve us till he have brought us to Heaven. See this
point more ful^y cleared by M. Ant. Burgess on John 17.11. Lect. 55. Mr. Caryll
on Job 29.2. page 430. etc.
He keeps Heaven for the Saints, and the Saints for Heaven.

4. Observation.
Gods Goodness to his people is wholly free. All his dispensations to his are
free grace and pure mercy.

1. By his Preventing Grace he keeps us from evil works. 2. By his subsequent
grace he preserves us to his Kingdom. Where then is our Merit if all be grace?
But of this before on V. 8.
4. Observation.
5. God is a good and bountiful Master to his people. None like him, for 1. He
delivers them from sin which is the greatest evil. 2. He preserves them (maugre
the malice of all their enemies) till he have brought them home to himself who
is the chiefest good. Who would not serve such a Master who first enables us to
do our work and then pays us for it. Can the son of Iesse give you Olive-yards
and Vineyard? (said Sa^l to the followers of David) So say I, can the World,
the Devil and Sin give you grace and glory? They cannot do it, they can bewitch
you and deceive you in promising pleasure and giving pain, in promising liberty
and bringing you into bondage, in promising you life, yet bringing you to
death. Come away then from the Garlic and Onions of this Egypt, ascend out of
the wilderness of this world, and like spiritual Aquila non capit muscas.
Eagles soar aloft in your Meditations and desires after things above (.i.)
Grace and glory, Colos. 3.2.

6. Observation.
6. In our deepest distress we should have an eye to this Heavenly Kingdom. Our
glory to come is so glorious that the worst we can suffer here ^s but as a
flea-biting in comparison of it.
So does Paul here. What ever thy sorrows or sufferings be here, yet remember
there is a Heavenly Kingdom will pay for all. This will raise our spirit and
uphold our heart in the midst of the greatest troubles, Quid sentit crus in
nervo quando animus in coelo? Tertul.
Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 10.34. and 11.35. But of this see more on V. 8.
Obs. 3.

7. Observation.
7. God will bring his people to a Kingdom, to an Heavenly Kingdom. It is not a
Against the Millena^. See my Homesius enervatus.
Millenarian earthly kingdom (that fancy was not heard of in St. Paul's time)
yet Paul was an eminent Martyr, and Piscator and Alsteed make this Millenarian
reign most proper (if not peculiar) to the Martyrs. But the Scripture generally
makes the Reward of the Saints and Martyrs to be in It is not (...) but (...),
non terrestre, sed supercoeleste regnum.
Heaven and not on earth, Psalm. 73.24. Matthew. 5.12. Philip. 3.20. 1 Pet. 1.4.
The Godly long to be with Christ in Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. Philip. 1.23. In this
heavenly Kingdom we shall enjoy everlasting Communion with God, and shall be
for ever with the Lord, which is the heaven of Heaven, 1 These. 4.17. God
himself will there be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Rev. 21.3. There we shall keep
an Everlasting Sabbath, Heb. 4.9. and shall be for ever free from sin and from
the very possibility of sinning. There we shall have light without darkness,
health without sickness, peace without war, joy without sorrow, strength
without weakness, and life without death. This should set our Souls a longing
to be there. As S. Austins Mother said when she heard of the Joys of Heaven;
What then make ^ here? Only we should labor to be fitted and Non est via ad
regnum sine primitiis regni, nec sperare potest coeleste regnum, cui neque
super propriam regnare concupiscentiam adhuc datur. Bernard.

See more Buroughs Moses Choice, c. 44. to 53. Baxter Saints Rest. Nortons
Orthodox Evangelist.


qualified for this heavenly Kingdom. Heaven is a Pure place and none but pure
ones can come there, all unclean dogs are shut out, 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21. ult.
there is no room for the workers of iniquity, Matthew. 25.41. He must walk in the
way of Holiness who desires happiness. Without it there is no seeing God to our
comfort, Heb. 12.24. Grace is the suburbs of glory, 2 Pet. 1.10. We must begin
our heaven here before we come to Heaven, Phil. 3.20. he that hopes to come
there must purify himself here, 1 John 3.2, 3. We must deny our selves
Universally and sell all for this heavenly Inheritance, you may buy gold too
dear, but you cannot buy Heaven too dear, what ever you part withal for it, you
have made a good bargain, and with the wise Merchant you may go away Rejoicing,
Matthew. 13.44.

To whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. 8. Observation.
8. Christ is God. He to whom Divine Glory, Worship and Praise is due, he is
God. But to Christ Divine Glory, Worship and Praise is due, as appears by this
and other places, To whom be Glory. But of this largely before on V. 1.

9. Observation.
9. The praise and glory of all our mercies must be given to God whether the
blessings be corporal or spritual, temporal or eternal, Paul had all these, and
here he ascribes the praise of them only to Christ. As Christ had assured him
of an heavenly Kingdom, so now he begins his heavenly Employment. This
Sacrifice of praise coming from a gracious heart is more pleasing to God then
any legal sacrifice, Psalm. 50.14, 15. ult. It is not thousands of Rams nor
rivers of Oil that he delights in, but the praise of an Holy heart is that
which he requires, Psalm. 33.1. Colos. 4.2. Philip. 4.7. 1 These. 5.18. Heb.
13.15. As all we have comes from him, so there is all the Reason in the world
that all the praise should be given to him, Romans 11. ult. It is God in Christ
that does all, of him as the Efficient Cause; through him as the Administering
Cause, and to him as the Final Cause are all things. His glory must be the
Terminus reductivus to which all our actions are to be reduced, 1 Cor. 10 31.

Do not then rob God of that which is so near and dear to him. His grace and
mercy he lets others share it, but his glory he will not give to another, Isay
42.8. Say therefore as Joseph did in another case, God has kept nothing from
me but this, how then can I do this great wickedness and sin against him? See
more in Dr. Gouge on the Lords Prayer. ^ect. 215. page 295. etc.
Herod paid dear for assuming Gods glory to himself, Acts 12. We never loose
our selves more then we seek our selves most in this kind, which has made the
Saints and Angels so sharply to rebuke those that have gone about to give Gods
honor to them, Acts 3.12. Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.

For Ever and Ever. 10. Observation.
10. Gracious men desire that God may have glory from generation to generation,
even to Eternity. They think it not sufficient that they praise him
themselves, but they desire he may be praised in the Churches throughout all
ages for ever, Ephesians. 3.21. Jude 25. Grace enlarges the heart toward God, as
his thoughts are thoughts of love to his people, and his purpose is to do them
good for ever; so they desire that God may have glory for ever, not only
whilst this world stands, but after this world is ended even to Eternity for
ever and for ever, Psalm. 106.18. Let us then be careful to glorify God in our
generations, and do what in us lies to Eternize his praise. Let us teach our
childrens children his ways, promote his Gospel with all our might, and like
living coals set all on a flame about us. If we be thus careful to glorify God
here, it is a good Evidence that he intends to glorify us with himself for
ever.

Amen. 11. Observation.
11. We should earnestly desire and heartily consent to what we pray for. When
we pray we should not be like those that draw nigh to God with their lips when
their hearts are far from him, Isay 29.13. Our hearts and our tongues must
agree in Prayer. Many in our days have got a gift of Prayer and beg an hundred
things which their hearts never affect, as appears by the looseness and
Unrighteousness of their lives. Oh! that such would get the Grace and
Affections of Prayer. That their hearts, words and works might be once
harmonious. If we pray for Gods glory, let us study how we may actually advance
it. If we pray for his Church, let us study the good of it every way; that when
we say, Let thy Name be sanctified, See this word Amen, Largely opened by
Doctor Gouge on the Lords Prayer. S S. 245. Page 330. and Acutely by Master
Ienkins, on Jude 25.
and thy Kingdom be enlarged, we may cordially and sincerely say, Amen, Amen.

VERSE. 19. Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
WE are now come to the fourth and last part of this Chapter, which consists of
particular Salutations, he concludes this Epistle with them according to his
custom, where we have, 1. The persons whom Paul would have Saluted in his
Name. These are Prisca and Aquila, with the house of Onesiphorus, V. 19. 2.
Here is a Prolepsis or prevention of a Quere, if Timothy should ask what is
become of Erastus and Trophimus, why Eraestus abides at Corinth and Trophimus
is sick at Miletum, V. 20. 3. Here is the Apostles inference, since some are
absent and others are sick, therefore Timothy must be careful to come before
Winter to him. Verse 21. 4. He names those that salute Timothy. First
Particularly, viz. Pudens, Linus, Claudia. Secondly, Generally, Not only they,
but all the brethren at Rome. 5. He concludes with Prayer. 1. For Timothy in
particular, Verse 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit. 2. For the
Church in General Grace be with you. 3. This he seals with that usual
concluding Particle, Amen.



Salute Prisca and Aquilae.
1. Here is a duty enjoined, Salute.

2. The Persons to be saluted, Prisca and Aquilae.

Salute.] This is done many ways. Sometimes by Letters, sometimes by Gestures,
sometimes by Words. Those that we meet we salute with good words, as God be
with you, Ruth. 2.4. or, God bless you, Genesis 43.29.

2. Those that are absent we salute by Letters, wishing them all happiness
from the Fountains of Happiness. So that the Apostle often saluteth the Churches
with Grace and Peace be to them, Colossians, 1, 2. Jude 2.

Observations.
1. Salutatious are lawful. The Apostle would never have enjoined them if there
had been any thing of sin or folly in them; as the foolish Quakers imagine.
That they are not sinful I prove.

1. In that Christ himself in whom was no sin, commanded them, Matthew. 10.12,
13. When you come into an house (be they good or bad that dwell in it) yet
Salute it. So Luke 10.5. Into whatsoever house ye come, Salute it. Which serves
to take off that Cavil, that Saints may salute Saints, but they may not salute
profane men. Whereas our Savior commands his disciples to salute even such as
be wicked and unworthy against whom they must shake off the dust of their feet.
Yea, Christ would have us not only to salute our Friends anst Brethren, but
our foes also, that we may excel Publicans, Matthew. 5.47.

2. We have the Example of Christ using them; he often used this Salutation,
Peace be to you, Luke 24.36. John 20.19.

3. The Angels have used them; an Angel salutes Gedeon, Judge. 6.12. and the
blessed Virgin, Luke 1.28.

3. The Saints have used them; the Apostle in the beginning and ending of his
Epistles, salutes the Churches, Romans 16. Colos. 4.10. etc. Moses made obeisance
to Iethro and kissed him and asked him of his welfare, Exodus 18.7. and this
they used not only to Saints, but even to wicked men. Jacob salutes Pharaoh,
Genesis 47.7. David sends greeting even to a profane Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.5.

5. Not only Saints but even Heathens by the light of nature used them.
Credebant hoe grande nefas and morte piandum. Si juvents vetulo non
assurrexerat. Juven. Sat. 13.
They had their (...) and their Ave, God save you and God speed you.

And there is great Reason for them, for they do not only express, but they
help to increase that mutual Officium salutandi est amicitia Symbolum. Musculus.

Mos salutandi non solum vetussimus est, sed and utilissimus ad conciliandam
and confirmandam charitatem. Lavater.


love which ought to be amongst Christians; and as they are fruits of faith and
love so they are very pleasing to God and to our Brethren, and are Testimonies
of our love and respect to them, and the omission of them argues either that
there is some grudge in our hearts against our Brother, or that our love is but
cold and little toward him. By our amiable, affable walking, we may win men,
when by a sour surly self-conceited carriage, we bring a reproach upon
Religion and discourage men.

Objection, Christ forbids his Disciples to salute any man by the way, Luke
10.4.

Answer, 1. If you stick to the Letter of the Text, you must not salute Saints,
for the words are general. Salute no man; nor must you take shoes or purses
with you when you travel.

2. It Is an Hyperbolical speech, and such as the Hebrews use when they would
have a man do any thing speedily, and without delay, as 2 Kings 4.29. Fuit
personale aut speciale praeceptum* non generale. Later.


3. 'Twas a Temporary command which Christ gave to the seventy at that time
only, he does not simply and absolutely forbid them (for then Christ should
contradict himself, Luke 10.4.) but comparatively, viz. so for as they might
hinder them in the speedy dispatch of their weighty affairs they must omit
them, Christ blamed the Pharisees Affectation, not their Affection; he tax't
their Ambition, not their Gratulation. Matthew 23.7. Adamson 2 Peter 1.2.
else when they came to remain at a place Christ bids them then salute, Luke
10.5]

Object. We know not the man nor what he is going about.

Answ. Nor does he know thee nor what thou go about; and yet thou look to
be saluted, why then wilt not thou salute thy Brother?

Object. Mordecai is commended for not bowing the knee nor showing any respect
to Haman.

Answ. The Answer is easy.

1. The Persian Princes exacted more then Civil reverence, they had a kind of
divine honor given them; now Mordecai seeing more honor was required then was
fit for a man, bowed not.

2. He knew that Haman was an Amalekite and one of that race which was exposed
to the hatred and revenge of Israel, See more fully Mr. Iacksons Annot. on
H^st. 3.2.
they must have no Peace with Amalek for ever. It is true, if we meet an
obstinate Heretic or one that we know is a blasphemer and a broacher of false
doctrine, we must shun him and not bid him God speed, Romans 16.17. 2 John 10.
(.i.) we must not be familiar with him, Simus ab illis tam seperati, quam illi
sunt ab Ecclesia profugi. Cyprian.

V. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14.

A particulari ad Universal non valet argumentum.


so as to give the least approbation to his wicked opinions. We may salute our
own private enemies, but not the professed enemies of God. Polycarp meeting
Marcion the Heretic refused to salute him, Marcion asked him whether he knew
him, I (says he) I know thee to be the Devils first born; yet this does not
follow that therefore we may salute no man; for till we know them to be such
open offenders: we may salute them, ( Matthew. 10.13.) for there is a common
salutation and civil respect which is due from every man to every man. Piety is
no enemy to courtesy, Religion does not abolish but rectify civil behavior. It
does not make men rude and clownish, inhumane and hoggish, but teaches men to
give honor to whom honor is due, and to salute heartily not hollowly, knowing
that an hand full of love is better then an arm full of flattery. The wisdom
that is from above is gentle, See more A^tersol on Philemon 23* p. 472. and
Clapham against the Quakers Sect. 12. p. 66.
peaceable and full of good fruits, ( James 3.13.) teaching us to practice the
things which are of good report and tend to love ( Phil. 4.8.) and to make
conscience of small duties as well as great ones. Good conscience and good
manners go together, Acts 23.5.

2. Observation.
2. Good men forget not their absent friends. The Proverb is, Out of sight and
out of mind, it is not so with Paul, though himself were in Prison and far
distant from many of the Saints, yet was he present in Spirit with them, and
shows that he has not forgotten them, by sending Salutations of health and
happiness to them.

Prisca and Aquila.
This Prisca in other places is called Priscilla (which is a diminutive of
Prisca) Acts 18.2. she was wife to Aquila, they were both Jews very tender and
hospitable to Paul, they ventured their lives for him (probably in rescuing him
out of some tumults as Acts 19.22.) besides such was their zeal for Christ that
they assisted Paul (in their own Sphere) in spreading the Gospel, and
instructed Apollos in the way of God more perfectly. This makes the Apostle so
often to salute them, and to mention their names with some additional Encomiums,
Romans 16.3. 1 Cor. 16.19. And to take them with him as his bosom companions when
he sailed into Syria, Acts 18.18. Though they were Tent-makers by profession,
yet having so good an household guest as Saint Paul (for he sojourned with them
at Corinth and probably at Rome and Ephesus, Acts 18.2, 3.18, 19. they profited
very much in the Christian Religion.

3. Observation.
3. It is a singular mercy to enjoy good company. By their Prayers, counsel and
good example they will exceedingly quicken us in the way of the Lord. Aquila
and Priscilla by familiarity with Paul come at last to instruct an eloquent
Apollos and show him somewhat that he had not seen before, Acts 18.26. They had
a Family so well ordered and taught that the Apostle calls it a Church, Romans
16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. and Paul honors them with the Title of his Coadjutors and
Helpers (in their places) in the work of the Lord; and for such as the whole
Church was bound to bless God for them in making them the Instruments of his
preservation, Romans 16.4. Thus we see to what a height of Piety, Knowledge, Fame
and Excellency inferior persons may come by being acquainted with some Holy
and Zealous Paul.

Quest. But why is the wife set before her husband both here, and Romans 16.3.

Id factum propter egregium studium Evangelii promovendi quod fuit in Prisca.
Chrysostom.
Answ. The Reason is uncertain, but it is conceived to be this, because the
wife excelled the husband in Piety and Zeal.

2. Lyranus gives this Reason, viz. because she was first converted, and the
order of Grace is to be preferred before the order of nature.

3. Others say it was because she was better known to Believers. But there is
no great matter in this placing of their names, for in other places the husband
is named before the wife, as Acts 18.2, 26. 1 Cor. 16.19.

And the Household of Onesiphorus.
Onesiphorus (.i.) utilitatem afferens.
This Onesiphorus was a good man and answered to his good name. He was very
loving and constant to Paul even in his bonds at Rome. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. As
the Apostle before Chap. 1.16. prayed for the house of Onesiphorus, so here he
salutes them. By house here is meant (by a Metonimy of the subject very
frequent in Scripture) the people in the house, as wife, children, servants;
which may serve as an answer to that Cavil of the sottish illiterate Quakers
who revile us for calling the place where the Church meets, The Church; when
this Metonimy is so frequent in Scripture, The house for the people in the
house, and the Church for the people that meet in the Church. The Apostle uses
the very word Church in this very sense, 1 Cor. 14.28, 35. It is a shame for a
woman to speak in the Church.

4. Observation.
4. Good Governors bring a blessing on their Families. Onesiphorus is not
only prayed for himself and saluted singly, but all his household also. When
Zacheus was converted he was not only blessed himself, but Salvation came to his
house also, Luke 19.8. When Lydia and the Iaylor were converted themselves,
their Families were brought into Covenant with them, Acts 16.14, 15, 33, 34.
Rahab the harlot by believing preserved her family alive; Yea, Lot was a
blessing to all Sodom, the Angel could not destroy it till he was gone out,
Genesis 19. The Reasons are these: 1. The Covenant of Grace is made to the godly
and their seed, Genesis 17.7. So bountiful a Master do we serve that he will not
only show mercy to the godly themselves, but also to thousands of Generations
of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Psalm 112.2. 2. God loves
such as resemble him in the beauty of Holiness; now love is of a diffusive
Nature, it extends it self not only to the party beloved, but to all about
him; If we love a man, we will love his Children, Servant, Beast, yea his dog
for his Masters sake. If this be in the drop what is in the Ocean? If this be
in the Creature whose love is imperfect, finite, mixed, what is in the Creator
who is love it self? 1 John 4.8. 3. In respect of the near Union that is
between Master and Servants, Parents and children. They all make as it were but
one body, so that if it go well with the Head, it must needs be the better for
the Members.

As the Dew that falls on the mountains runs down to the Valleys, and the
precions Ointment that was poured upon the head of Aaron, ran down to the
skirts of his clothing, Psalm 133. So the blessing which God powers on
Governors, extends it self to such as are under them.

4. They will endeavor the conversion of such as belong to them. It is
promised as a blessing to such as live under the good man's shadow that they
shall return, ( Hosea 14.7.) and grow up fruitfully as the corn in a well
tilled field, and flourish in the ways of God like the most generous Vine, to
the great joy and contentment of themselves and others. 5. As an evil man is a
public evil, Vir malut comm^ne malum, fundi nostri calamitas.
the Family, the City, the Nation, the World, yea even his beasts fare the
worse for him. The wicked Egyptians bring a curse on their cattle, Exodus 9.3.
when Achan had sinned, his sons and Daughters, his Oxen, Asses, sheep and all
he had perished and fell with him, Joshua 7.24, 25.


But it is good being a good man's Child, servant, yea beast, Exodus 9.4. But
the Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt,
there shall nothing die of all that is the children of Israel's. God blesses
their very cattle for their sake; and if the creatures could speak, they would
desire to be servants to those that are servants to God.

Let all Superiors then labor for grace, Bonum est sui diffufivum.
that they may be a means to diffuse it to those about them, for true grace is
communicative, Paul that was converted himself, desires that others were like
himself, Acts 26.29.

When the woman of Samaria had found Christ, she brings her neighbors to
him, John 4.28. when Andrew had found Christ, he brings Peter with him, and
Philip brings Nathaniel, John 1.41, 45. They are like a sweet perfume, or
like Carbuncles and stones of fire which sweeten and enlighten all that are
about them, Ezekiel 28.16. The prosperity and welfare of the Church lies much
in the well-ordering of Families, they are the Nurseries and Seminaries of the
Church, and therefore Governors of Families should walk before God in their
own houses, (as well as in Gods house) with upright hearts, Psalm 101.2. 2
Samuel 6.20. he returned to bless his household ( i.) to pray and praise God
with them, See Psalm 30. the Title, and Acts 10.1.2. Job 1.5. To this end
therefore must be the morning and the evening sacrifice there, Numbers 28.4.

Our Prayers are our sacrifices. Orationem ^ugem, jugis postulat necessitat.
Drexel. See the Excellency of Family duties, Master Philip Godwin Domestic
duties Page 57, etc. Cobber on Prayer, lib. 1. Cap. 4. Page 88. Fenners
Catech. page 76.
This blesses all, as the Arc when it came to the house of Obed Edom, brought
a blessing with it; so where duties be set up in their power; they are a means
to bless our labor, rest, and children.

2. The Word must be Read there Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. it must dwell in us not only
sufficiently, but Abundantly, Col. 3.16.

3. Thou must Catechize and teach thy children the way of the Lord betimes,
Proverbs 22.6. and if David and Bathsheba a King and a Queen taught Solomon
when young ( Proverbs 4.21.4. and 31.1.) who shall think himself too good for
this duty?

See Mr. Philip Goodwin. Domest. Duties. p. 272, etc.
4. There must be singing of Psalms in our houses, it is not only our Duty,
but our Glory thus to glorify God.

5. Let none be idle in thy family, but see that every one have some employment
wherein to serve God, for of idleness comes no goodness as I have showed before
on v. 7.

6. Be well advised whom you receive into your Family. If a man be to plant an
Orchard, he will get the chiefest grafts, else as one scabbed sheep infecteth
the Flock, so one disordered person may disorder a whole Family.

7. There must be a Grave yet amiable carriage toward inferiors, remembering
that we also have a master in Heaven. Many Masters are so high and lordly, so
pettish and perverse that no servant can please them, no service content them.

They use their servants like dogs rather then Christians, such should remember
the meekness of Job 31.13. and how Superiors are called Fathers in Scripture
because they should carry a fatherly affection toward their Inferiors, Exodus
20.12.

8. There must be Discipline. As in the Arc there was the Rod of Manna, Many
prune their Plants, break their Horses, train their Hawks, yea teach their
dogs, yet never instruct their children.
so in every well ordered Family there must be the Manna of Instruction, and
the Rod of Correction. There must be no Toleration of sin, it must be put far
from our Tabernacles, I^b 22.23. least it bring a curse upon all, Zach. 5.4, 5.
Proverbs 12.7. God will protect no Families but such as glorify him, Isay 4.5.

9. There must be Repetition and godly conferring on the Word in our particular
Families. We Ministers must plant in public, but unless you that are
Governors water in private, we can expect but small increase. Hence the Lord
commands us to whet the Word (as the mower does his sith) by going over it
again and again, and often inculcating it to our children ( Deuteronomy 6.7.)
at our own houses by a parsonal and particular examination of them, and
harrowing in of that good seed which has been publicly sown, that it be not
lost.

I cannot therefore so well approve of that confused kind of Repetition (which
is used in many places) when immediately after the Evening Sermon, the
Governors of Families with others get all into one house to Repetition. Though
the duty suits well with my Principles and pactice, yet (with submission to
better judgments and men of more experience) I conceive the duty is not
rightly circumstantiated; for, 1. If the Minister be put upon this duty (as he
is in most places) to pray and repeat both his Sermons and that immediately
after his public pains, though some may commend his zeal, yet I question his
discretion.

I hold it no point of wisdom for a man to tire out himself and his
Auditors, and make the Ordinances nauseous, which rightly timed and performed
would be very profitable and delightful; for God in his Wisdom has so
ordered the variety of holy Duties on the Sabbath, that if we be wise to
observe the due timing of them they be not tedious: But this kind of Repetition
must needs be tiresome, both to Pastors and People.

2. Pastor and People (spending so much time as many do in these public
Duties) are deprived of that time which should be spent in a private digesting
and meditating of what they have heard. For I conceive (still with submission
to better judgments) that the time immediately after the Evening Sermon, is
most proper for private meditation, and applying what we have heard to our
selves.


I should advise every Governor of a Family to go home immedirtely from the
public Ordinances, and to set his Family in order, and set every one
(according to his ability) some task either in the Catechize, or to learn a
Psalm, or a Chapter, and such as can write to review and digest their notes.
Else whilst the master of the Family is at the Public repetition the children
and servants will be in disorder at home.

It is this private Meditation, self-examination and application of the word to
our selves which is the duty of duties, and all the Repetitions in the world
without this will do us no good. One Sermon eaten and digested, and made our
own will bring more solid joy then a thousand Repetitions, Ier. 15.16. This
private retiring and refreshing on our ways comparing our hearts with the Rule
is the principal duty, and what ever be neglected this must not be neglected if
we look to be saved. If ever we would get sound wisdom, we must separate and
sequester our selves from crowds, Proverbs 18.7. Other things must be done in
their proper time. but this of all duties must not be left undone.

It is true, this public repeating makes a greater noise and show in the
World, but it runs up into straw, into formality, censoriousnesse, spiritual
Pride (as is experimentally seen in the most) for want of this secret,
Soul-humbling, Soul-affecting work.

This is indeed hard work, it is plowing, self-denying work which our formal
Ephraims like not, Hosea 10.11. It brings not that popular applause with it
as the public meetings do where their gifts may be more taken notice off.

The Devil can be content we should hear a thousand Sermons, yea, and repeat
them too, when we have done, so he can but keep us from this private work of
making them our own by serious Meditation and Prayer, Repeating our Sermons in
our lives (which is the best Repetition of Sermons) the Devil has his desire,
and I appeal to the Consciences of those who spend so much time in public
and private Repetitions.

For, I suppose these persons Repeat in their We should bring the Word
publickely taught home to our children by repeating it to them, and requiring
it of them. Philip Goodwins Family. Relig. p. 401.
Families when they come home, (else I am sure they trangresse against the
Rule, Deuteronomy 6.6, 7.) Whether they do not omit this private duty which I
speak of, the ways and walking of too many Professors shows it.

Question. Would you have the duty of repeating wholly omitted?

Answer. By no means, for it is a duty which God commands Parents to
practice in their particular Families; But I would have it rightly
Circumstantiated for Time and Place, and so performed as may be most for Gods
Glory and the benefit of us and ours. Were I worthy to counsel Christians, I
should advise them.

1. To retire in private (as before) having set their Families in Order, till
the Evening repast.

2. After that, to call all the Family together, examining every one what they
have learned that day, and putting an edge upon it by applying it to them.

Objection.
But some people cannot pray nor Repeat themselves.

Answer.
That is their sin and negligence, especially if they be Governors of
Families. Yet I should advise such persons to do in this case as they do by
their meat, if they cannot dress it themselves, they will desire their
neighbors to help them. So go to thy Ministers house (if he be nigh thee) or
else to thy Godly neighbor, join with him till thou can do it thy self.

For still I say, it is most proper, profitable and convenient to have this
duty performed in every particular Family where there is any number especially.

Now this keeps Duties in their order; Here is time for private preparation,
then for public duties, then for works of necessity, then for private
Meditation, and lastly, for Family duties.

Thus you have my judgment, I shall not confine any one to it, I give you in
only what I find Experimentallie most beneficial to my self and others: and
if any can experimentally find out a more profitable way to promote Godliness
in its power, I can well permit every one to abound in his own sense, and to
take his own way. My Record is on High that I have no design against the
persons, parts or performances of any, I rejoice to see Gods work go forward
in any place; my only desire is, that the power of Religion may prosper in the
Land, and the efficacy of it may appear in holy and mortified conversations.

5. Observation.
5. We must not despise any in whom we can see any thing of Christ. Be they
poor Artificers and Tradesmen, and such as are contemptible in the Worlds eye,
yet if they be precious in Christ's eye they must be so in ours too; yea, be
they weak women, yet if they be good women, we must honor them. So does this
great Apostle, here, he sends his salutations and best respects to Aquila a
Tent-maker, En Pauli modestia qui se multo inferiores pro adjutoribus suis and
symmistis agnoscit. Gualter in Romans 16.3.
and his wife Priscilla, and is not ashamed to own them as his coadjutors,
Romans 16.3. The Church of Christ in this world for the most part consists of
mean and obscure persons, as appears by those men and women whom the Apostle
saluteth, Romans 16.1. to 16. not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty, but
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the
weak to confound the mighty, See Master Robert Bolton, and Master Francis
Tailor on that Text.
1 Cor. 1.26, 27.

Salute Aquila, Salute Priscilla, Salute Onesiphorus.
And why so? because of their Piety and Zeal for Gods glory. We had doubtless
never heard of these persons, but for that.

6. Observation.
Hence Observe, Piety brings praise. It begets a good name, and makes a
man famous to posterity. Such honor God, and therefore he honors them, and
sets an Ecce of Admiration on them, John 1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed.
What has made Job, Nehemiah, David, and all the good Kings of Israel so famous
to all Generations but their Piety? Wicked men by fine fare, fine clothes, etc.
may beg a little praise; but Piety commands Esteem even from those that
cannot practice it themselves.

The intemperate man cannot but commend the Temperate, though he cannot imitate
him; and the time-serving Politician cannot but commend the sincere and
constant man that sticks to his Principles, though himself like a Wethercock
cannot but turn with every wind.

VERSE. 20. Erastus abode at Corinth, but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.
ERastus is a Greek name, and signifies Amiable and lovely. He was Chamberlain
of the City of Corinth, Romans 16.23. he was one that attended on Paul, when he
sent with Timothy into Macedonia, Acts 19.22. Whilst Paul was prisoner at
Rome he did abide at Corinth (as appears by the Text) waiting on his public
Office, it seems he was a great man, the Treasurer of the City, yet neither
his riches nor his great place could keep him from loving the Apostle and the
people of God.

1. Observation.
Hence Observe, There are some great men that are good men: not many, yet some,
1 Corinthians 1.26. Lot and Abraham, two great men and yet good men, Pauci, non
quod Evangelium ullius sortis homines a se abjiciat, sed quod arctam viam
facilius ingrediamur minus sarcinati. Grotius.
Genesis 13.2, 5, 6. and 24.35. So was Job (1.3.) and Zaccheus, Luke 19.2.
David died full of riches and honor, 1 Chronicles, 29.28. Nehemiah a Courtier
and Cupbearer to a King, yet one that fears the God of Heaven. Neh. 1. ult.
So in the New Testament we read of a noble Theophilus, (...), matrona dives and
honorata.
Luk 1.3. and of an Elect Lady that loved the Truth, 2 John 1.2. and of a
Joseph of Arimathea and Sergius that embraced the Gospel.

1. The Lord has so ordered it to stop the mouths of wicked men who are ready
to say as the Pharisees ( John 7.48.) do any of the Rulers or great ones
believe in him? q. d. there are none that follow Christ but a few simple
people, and illiterate fishermen, etc. Yet God has some Kings and Queens, some
Lords and Ladies, some of the great ones, and some of the fat of the earth that
worship him, Psalm 22.29. He has a learned Nicodemus and Paul with an eloquent
Apollos to defend his truth.

2. The Lord calls some such that they may draw on others, who are apt to be
led by great ones. They are the Looking-glasses of the Country by which many
dress themselves.

3. For the greater conviction of wicked men, when they shall have the light of
such and such great men who have broke through great temptations, and denied
themselves many lawful liberties that they might be the fitter for Gods
service, when many that had not the Tithe of these Tentations and hindrances,
yet would not serve him.

4. For the greater manifestation of Gods Almighty Power, though it be a very
hard thing for a rich man to be saved, and with men it is impossible, by reason
of the many snares and impediments which lie in their way, hence the Apostle
tells us that none of the Princes of this world have known Christ, ( id est,)
almost none, very few, 1 Corinthians 1.8. yet Christ can pare off this Camels
bunch, and so untwist this cable rope that it shall go through the eye of a
needle.

Trophimus have I left sick at Miletum.
This Trophimus was a Citizen of Ephesus, a Disciple of Paul's, and his
companion in his travels, Acts 20.4. and 21.29. Paul traveling through many
places after his first imprisonment at Rome, leaves this Trophimus sick at
Miletum, a City in Asia not far from Ephesus, famous for its wool and
clothing.

Question, But would not the Apostle work a miracle, and so heal him as he had
done other sick persons:

Answer, It was not in the Apostles power to work Miracles when they pleased,
but only when there was a necessity for the conviction or conversion of
unbelievers, then the Holy Ghost enabled and excited them to it, Acts 3.12.

2. Observation.
2. Sickness may seize even on good men. As they are subject to death, so to
sickness also which is the forerunner of death. Epiphraditus a good man (whose
recovery Paul so greatly rejoiced in) yet was very sick and nigh unto death,
Phil. 2.27. and so was Paul himself, 2 Cor. 1.8. Hezekiah and David two holy
men, yet sick of the Plague (as it is conceived) the Corinthians were chastned
by the Lord with the same violent disease (as it is conceived) that they might
not be condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11.30. But this needs no proof, for we
experimentally see that all things come alike to all, and sickness is the
portion of good men as well as bad; only the wicked are punished in wrath,
their sickness and pains here are but praeludia futuri judicii, forerunners of
greater pains, besides they are hardened and made worse by them, as Pharaoh and
Ahaz 2 Chronicles. 28.22. God rains snares on wicked men, if they be in health, it is
a snare to them, Psalm. 69.22. Prove. 1.32.) if sick it is a snare to them, their
sin is drawn out, discovered and ripened by it.

It Is Luthers Observation, that after long journeyes, and long sicknesses few
were better: Cast a stinking weed into the fire, and it smells worse; but
cast a sweet Herb into the fire, and it smells the better. God punishes the
wicked as a Judge, but he corrects his children as a Father? For their good
to bring them nearer to himself, and to fetch home his Prodigalls which wander
after the creature; and to bring their sins to remembrance.

In prosperity men cannot awhile to think of their sins, but when sickness
comes they shall have time enough, night and day they shall have no rest by
reason of their sin. We read of some Psalms whose Titles are, A Psalm to
bring to remembrance. So we must say of many diseases, A Fever to bring our
sins to remembrance, a Consumption to bring our sins to remembrance. As
Pharaohs Butler said sometimes, I remember my sins this day, Genesis 41.9. So
those sins which lay long forgotten, a sickness may bring them to your
remembrance; God could remove all sickness and all infirmities from his
people, but he is pleased for good Ends to exercise them therewith, that the
Saints might be kept humble in themselves, and we might not Idolize them,
giving the Honor which is due to the Creator to the Creature.

Hence Moses has a stammering speech, Paul a Messenger of Satan to buffet him,
and Luther some dreggs of Popery abiding in him.

VERSE. 21. Do thy diligence (or make haste) to come before Winter: Eubelus
greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the Brethren.
PAul being very desirous to see Timothy before he dies, renews his suit to
him, desiring him to make haste, and to come before winter, when it is
dangerous sailing, and the Seas (in many parts) are shut up by the extremity of
cold, so that there is no sailing. Besides, Timothy was but sickly and weak,
and therefore the Apostle would have him come in Autumn, that the winter
season might not prejudice his health.

Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, and Claudia do greet thee.
The Apostle to quicken Timothy to come the more speedily to him, having told
him how some had forsaken him, others were sick, and the rest scattered abroad;
now he tells him what friends he should yet find at Rome, who do send
salutations to him.

1. Eubulus, by his name he seems to be a Greek, he was one of Paul's
familiar friends at Rome, We find no mention of him but only in this place.
2. Pudens was a noble Senator in Rome, who embraced the Faith, and the
Christians had frequent meetings in his house. 3. Linus was one of Paul's
acquaintance, his first Disciple (say some) and afterward Bishop of Rome say
others, Anno Christi, 70. Vide Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 2. Platina de Vitis
Pontif. Pap. 2. p. 18. Niceph, Lib. 3. cap. 2. Baron. Annal. T. 1. p. 636.
4. Claudia, she was a noble Matron, a British woman (say our Chronologers)
who went to Rome, was converted by Paul, married a Roman Senator called Pudens.
It Is thought that she sent the Gospel first into England.
And all the Brethren.
Having named some of the choysest Christians in particular, and many of them
Greeks, and so the better known to Timothy; he names the rest in general, and
under the name of Brethren comprehends all the faithful who were at Rome,
which it seems were many, and therefore he would not stand to name them all.
This also he might mention to encourage Timothy to come the sooner to Rome
since he had so many friends there.

Now strange it is that amongst so many and they of such note that they should
all forsake Paul at his first answer. Here we see what fear and frailty may be
in persons of choice note for grace in the Church of God. See more on V. 16.

Observations.
1. God has some in all places that serve him. At Rome, yea, in Nero's Court
God had his Saints, Philippians 4.22. The Saints in C^^^ars house salute thee.
This Caesar was Nero in whose Palace Paul's bonds were made manifest, and God so
blessed his preaching and suffering that he had many converts there.

Exeat aula qui vul^ esse pius.
Piety is rare in Princes Courts, yet in this Tyrants Court are some Saints.
God has his two witnesses in the worst of times, Revelations 11.2, 3. Yea, he
has his thousands which lie hid in the Papacy which shall shortly come out
both in person and affection, Revelations 18.4. He has a faithful Abraham in
the midst of faithless Cananites, and a zealous Jonathan and David in the
Court of a persecuting Saul. God will have a Church in all Ages to glorify
him, Ephesians 3.21. and therefore we should not be discouraged when we come to
places where we think we are alone, yet God has his hidden ones there which
have not bowed their knee to Baal. Palaces and Prisons are often times the worst
places in the world, yet God has some there. Onesimus was converted in prison,
and the Iayler and his household receive the Gospel.

2. Observation.
2. There are some good women in the world: here is a Claudia and Priscilla
that own the Apostle and believe the Gospel, when Nero and the most of his
Courtiers persecute him.

We read of many good women that supported Christ with their substance, when
Herod and the great ones crucified him, See more in To^sh^ls, Women's Glory.
Luke 8 2, 3. Lydi^ entertained the Apostles when others cast them out of all.
Of those 277. Martyrs that died in Queen Mary's days, 55. were women.

3. Observation.
3. God does great things usually by weak means. He can make weak women
instrumental to spread the Gospel: The Apostle at first had no other Hearers
but a few women at Philippi, yet after it became a flourishing Church, Acts
16.12, 13. Philip. 4.3. God usually hangs the greatest weight on the weakest
wires that so his Name may have all the glory. What more violent then the Sea,
and what weaker then sand, yet ^e has made the sand to bound the Sea, Jeremiah
5.22. It is a little David and that with a sling that overcomes a great
Goliath. Gideons three hundred, overcome a great host of Midianites. It is by
the mouths of babes and sucklings that God confounds his enemies, Psalm. 8.2. It
is the Worm Jacob that shall thresh mountains. (Isay 41.14, 15.) It is impar
congress^s, an unequal match, there is no proportion between a mountain and a
worm, one bit of a mountain will crush in pieces ten thousand worms; I, but if
these worms have God on their side they shall arise and thresh mountains. God
creates strong things in the earth, he makes a woman to compass a man, (.i.)
though the enemies of the Church be many and mighty and Gods people be low and
contemptible, being esteemed as weak women in comparison of their manly
adversaries, yet this weak effeminate one shall prevail against those stout and
manly Caldeans, Ier. 31.22. Let none then despise the day of small things,
where we see any sparks of grace let us love it and encourage it, Romans 14.1. and
15.1. If Christ would not break the bruised reed, much less may we. True grace
is little at first, it is like a grain of Mustard Seed which is parvum and
humile, yet acre and fervidum, little but full of life and spirit. Let not men
then be discouraged because of their weak beginnings, the greatest Giant was at
first an Infant, the tallest Oak was once an Acorn, and the greatest Scholar
at first in his battle-dor. Only rest not in beginning, but improve the means
of grace and God will increase thy stock and make thy little strength hold out
( Rev. 3.8, 9.) when the strong in their own conceits shall fall.

2. In the Churches Reformation we should not be despondent though it meet with
much opposition; what though mountains of difficulties lie in the way, yet they
shall all become a plain before Gods Zerubbabels, Zach. 4.6, See how the Lord
has subdued Rome Pagan, and Rome Arrian, and he daily does, and will not rest
till he have destroyed Rome Antichristian. Wicked men gather themselves
together against the Church of God with an intent to ruin and raze it even to
the foundation, these are their thoughts, I but they know not my thoughts
(says God) why what were Gods thoughts? Why his thoughts were to make their
rising against his people to be their ruin, and their own counsels to be their
own confusion, Micah 4.11, 12, 13. They shall be gathered together as sheaves
in the floor, arise and thresh O daughter of Zion. q. d. Thy enemies thought to
come to thresh thee, but thou shall thresh them. The work of God in all ages
has been carried on by weak means. See more in Mr Marshalls Sermon. on Psalm.
8.2. preached 1646. Babington on Exodus 8.4. Mr. Fan. Tailor on 1 Cor. 1.26.
The Apostles many of them Illiterate fishermen. Luther a Monk, King Edward
the sixth a Child, Queen Elizabeth a Woman; no matter how weak the Instrument
be if God be the Agent.

The Brethren. 4. Observation.
4. All the faithful are Brethren in Christ.

In Scripture we read of three sorts of Brethren.

1. By Race. 2. By Place. 3. By Grace.
1. By Race such as descend from the same father and mother, so Jacob and Esau
were brethren and sometimes kinsmen called Brethren, as Lot and Abraham.

2. By Place, such as are of the same Nation, thus the Jews called one another
Brethren, Deuteronomy. 23.20.

3. By Grace, and that Common or Special.

1. Common in respect of Creation, and so all men are Brethren, Genesis 9.5.

2. Special, See more in Mr. Fran. Tailor on 1 Cor. 1.26. page 22. and
Espencaus in 2 Timothy 4. Digres. 26.
in respect of Adoption and so all Believers are Brethren, Romans 1.13. and 8.12.
and 12.1. Phil. 1.14. and 4.21. 1 These. 1.4. and 2.2, 1. James 1.2. This must
needs be so, for they have the same God for their Father, the same Church for
their Mother, the same House for their dwelling, the same Inheritance for their
portion; They speak like one another, and are clothed like one another. They
fight against one common enemy, they walk in one path, and eye the same
Objects. Let us then love like Brethren, let it not be Verbal, but an Affective
and Effective love, both in heart and deed, Romans 12.10. Heb. 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.17.
We should part with some of our right for Peace, and there should be no
contention between us for we are Brethren, Genesis 13.8. 1 Cor. 6.5, 6. We should
Sympathize like Brethren, a Brother is or should be a second-self. We should
bear each others sin and sufferings; Fratep quasi fere alter.
if children of the same Family see one of their fellows beaten, all the rest
of the little ones fall a crying about him; So should we weep with them that
weep, and remember those that are in bonds, since we our selves are subject to
the same afflictions, Heb. 13.3.

VERSE. 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit. Grace be with you, Amen.
THE Apostle having finished his Salutations comes now to conclude his Epistle
with a Comprecation and an Apostolical benediction: 1. Of Timothy in
particular. He prays that the Lord may be with his Spirit. q. d. Be not sad at
my departure, for though I must leave thee, yet the Lord shall be with thee,
and uphold thee with his Grace. 2. He prays for the rest of the Brethren with
him and commends them to Gods grace. Grace (...), Vobiscum.
be with you (.i.) with you all as it is Heb. 13.25. This is Paul's conclusion
written with his own hand in all his Epistles (to prevent false Coppies,) 2
These. 3.17. 3. He ratifies and seals up all with that concluding Particle, See
this Verse more fully explained in Mr. Dyke on Philemon 25.
Amen. Of which see more V. 17.


Observations.
1. Our special desire should be that God would be with the Spirits of his
people. By Spirit here is meant that noble faculty of man's Soul called the
Understanding or the Mind with the most inward cogitations thereof, Luke 1.47.
My Spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior. (.i.) My Understanding in the
apprehension of this great mercy stirs up all the rest of the powers of my Soul
to glorify God. We should pray that God would direct our Spirits in thinking,
devising, judging, choosing, refusing, loving, hating. Generally that the Lord
would lead us by his Spirit as his children, inclining our hearts to that which
is pleasing in his sight. So praid David, Psalm. 143.10. and Paul, Ephesians. 3.16,
17. This inward presence of Christ with the Spirits of his people is one great
part of the reward of their love and obedience to him, John 14.21, 23. This
comforts them under the cross, and assures them of their Salvation. We should
therefore always pray that Christ by his Spirit would be present with our
Spirits, and that we may so live that he may delight to dwell in us: for if he
be not with us sin and Satan will soon prevail against us. We should therefore
labor to find and feel this special presence of Christ in our hearts, that we
may rejoice in it, and lament its absence, without it we can do nothing, nor
understand any thing in the mysteries of Religion, for the wisdom of the flesh
is not only an enemy but enmity it self against God, Romans 8.7. The natural man
for want of the Spirit of God perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 2.14.

Grace be with you.
Thus he begins and thus he ends with Prayer for Vnico hoc vocabulo Continetur
ingens ille ace^vas beneficiorum quae fidelibus permittuntur in Evangelio.
Davenant.
Grace (.i.) for the free favor and love of God and all other spiritual
blessings which accompany it, as Pardon of sin, Sanctification and Glory.

2. Observation.
Socrates desired to see the Kings countenance rather then his coin. Aquinas
could say Non Tua sed Te Domine.
2. Gods favor and grace is principally to be sought, even above and before all
other things. The Apostle does not say, Riches be with you, Honors be with you
or the favor of men be with you. But Grace and Gods favor be with you. So in
all his Epistles he puts Grace first, See more, Perkins CC. l. 1. c. 5. Hicks
Fast Sermon. on Isay 28.5, 6. p. 10. preached 1644. June 26. Church his Treasury
p. 173 etc. and his Miscellanies p. 137. etc.
and Peace which denotes Temporal blessings last, Romans 1.7. Colos. 1.2. Rev.
1.4. Numb. 6.25. Psalm. 4.6, 7. Matthew. 6.33. In the Lords Prayer we first beg
for spirituals and have six Petitions for that, and then for temporals.

Amen.
(.i.) So it is, or so let it be, or so it shall be.

3. Observation.
3. What is prayed for must be believed and earnestly desired. So much this
word Amen implies. They sin then that pray without any understanding, fervent
desire, or belief of what they pray for.

POSTSCRIPT. The second Epistle unto Timothy ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome when Paul was brought before
Nero the second time.
See the falsehood of these Post-scripts in Cudworth on Gal. 6. in the end. p.
429. and Glassii Philolog. l. 1. Tract. 4. Sect. 4. mihi. p. 245.
THese Post-scripts are no part of the Text, neither was this added by the
Apostle, for it contradicts the Text. The Apostle calls Timothy an Evangelist,
2 Timothy 4.5. and the Postscript makes him a Bishop; The Evangelists were not
tied to personal residence in one place, as Bishops and Pastors were: but they
were to go from place to place to confirm the Churches planted by the Apostles.
Beza observes that this first clause doubtless is spurious, it is not extant in
diverse old coppies, and, which is much, the Vulgar Latin omits it. So do the
Syriack and Aethiopick Versions. So that this is but a very sorry foundation to
build the Divine Right of Episcopacy upon.

FINIS.
QUESTIONS Discussed in this COMMENTARY.
Question I. WHether the Covetous man be worse then the Prodigal? Page 25
Question 2. Whether Blasphemers may be put to death? p. 64 Question 3. Whether
servants must obey their carnal Masters, and whether Master and servant be
equal? p. 68.141. Question 4. Whether drinking of Healths be lawful? p. 94, 95
Question 5. Whether that Excessive taking of Tobaccho which is used in our
days be lawful? p. 99.101 Question 6. Whether mixed Dancing be lawful? p. 106,
107 Question 7. Whether Duels be lawful? p. 109 Question 8. Whether we may fly
in time of persecution? p. 201, 202 Question 9. Whether it be lawful to put men
to death for theft? p. 227, 228 Question 10. Whether the Old Testament be
Canonical? p. 267 Question 11. Whether Oaths be lawful? p. 304, and 385
Question 12. Whether Christ be God? p. 306. Question 13. Whether Imprecations
be lawful? cap. 4. v. 14. Question 14. Many necessary Queries about the day of
Judgment. p. 311, 312 Question 15. Whether salutations be lawful? p. Question
16. Whether the Soul be immortal p. 371, 383 Question 17. Whether we may give
Titles of Honor to men? p. 296 Question 18. Whether it be lawful to gather
Churches out of Churches? V. Epist. Dedicat. and p. 166, 167 Question 19.
Whether the Presbyterian Government be the best kind of Government? p. 173,
174, etc. Question 20. Which is the fittest time for young people to marry? p.
250 Question 21. Whether the Scriptures be the Word of God? p. 276 Question 22.
Whether the Apocrypha be Authentic? page 288 Question 23. When is it lawful
to take gifts? p. 26 Question 24. Whether separation from a true Church be
lawful? p. 11.12, 141 Question 25. Whether compounded Heretics may be put to
death? p. 169 Question 26. Whether all Sects may be Tolerated? Page 168,
169.103, 233, 340 Question 27. Whether the light within us be a sufficient
guide? p. 278, etc. Question 28. Whether we may hear Lectures on week days? p.
326 Question 29. Whether the Law may be Preached? page 329 Question 30. Whether
Christ shall reign a thousand years yet before the day of Judgment? page 12
Question 31. Whether Ministers ought to have liberal maintenance? p. 296
Question 32. Whether we can merit any thing at Gods hand? p. 387 Question 33.
Whether the new Light that is abroad be not old darkness? p. 165 Question 34.
Whether Ordinances be still in force? page 138 Question 35. Whether Poverty be
better then Riches? page 44, 234 Question 36. Whether there be an Absolute
Perfection in this life? p. 299 Question 37. Whether all gifted men may Preach?
page 328 Question 38. Whether Preaching be adding? page 280, 281 Question 39.
Whether Quakers be Saints or sots? page 128.269.296 Question 40. Whether we may
build on Revelations? page 165 Question 41. Whether Scepticisme be good: p. 149
166.241 Question 42. Whether we may build on the Schoolmen? p. 259 Question
43. Whether the Affections perse, are evil? p. 76 Question 44. Whether the
Scriptures may be read by all persons? p. 260 Question 45. Whether Stratagems
are lawful? page 116 Question 46. Whether Temporal Felicity be a mark of the
true Church? p. 215 Question 47. Whether Tithes be lawful in Gospel Times? p.
369 Question 48. Whether Traditions be Authenticke? page 298 Question 49.
Whether there be a Concatenation of Virtues? p. 21. Question 50. Whether many
seducing Quakers be not Witches? page 225, 226 Question 51. Whether we may have
an eye so the recompense of Reward? p. 399 Qu^stion 52. Whether there be
degrees of Glory. p. 405 Question 53. Whether Demas were an Hypocrite. Page 411
Question 54. Whether Salutations are lawful. Page 584 Question 55. Whether we
may call the Meeting Place a Church. p. 460 Question. 56. When is the fittest
time for Repetition. Page 462, 463.
The Texts explained in this COMMENTARY.
Chap. Verse. Page Genesis. 5 22 391 for 493 9 21 97 22 23 265 32 10 43 43 34 97
Exodus. 18 21 26 Leviticus. 10 9, 10 92 18 24 103 19 17 62 24 10, 11 63
Numbers. 12 8 84 15 30 93 16 31 12 23 21 132 1 Samuel. 1 16 96 1 22 146 30 6
220 223 2 Samuel. 12 7, 8 235 15 22 359 2 Kings. 4 1, 2 45 1 Chronicles. 22 14
332 29 23 332 2 Chronicles. 15 14 81 19 5 213 Ezra. 9 10, 13 70 Nehemiah. 3 20
332 6 11 339 9 11 24 13 25 332 Job. 1 5 63 5 13 117 6 15 426 14 7, 10 372 14 14
388 15 34 27 23 12 288, 289 31 35, 39, 86 36 13 117 Psalms. 2 9 183 2 12 316 9
20 57 15 2 82 15 5 27 34 2 47 34 19 204 36 1, etc. 230 46 1 207 208 49 18 16 62
5 45 62 9 205 68 13 25 68 19, 20 206 97 1 187 109 4 88 132 2 79 335 106 8 403
Proverbs. 1 19 23 2 18 04 15 15 385 15 17 25 16 31 389 21 17 97 22 1 84 22 14
102 23 29 to 35 95, 96 23 5 40 25 18 84 29 1 359 30 17 66 Ecclesiastes. 1 2 121
3 19 372 5 3 24 7 26 102 9 4 386 12 1 249 12 2 9 Canticles. 1 5 215 Isay. 1 3
70 4 5 344 5 18, 19 230 8 18 87 8 20 286 26 10 223 27 5 340 41 14 215 4^ 11 204
44 20 9, 39 54 17 87 55 3 282 55 6 422 58 2 323 58 13 129 64 5 400 66 2 55, 56
Jeremy. 4 2 80 13 18 83 13 ult 257 17 9 19, and 366 22 29 28 31 22 205 Ezekiel.
22 13, 14 25 Hosea. 2 19, 20 81 4 2 103 4 11 104 6 7 78 7 9 9 9 7 185 10 11 415
Micah. 2 12 335 3 2, 3 30 Habakkuk. 2 5 25 2 9 28 3 17 220 Malach. 1 6 19
Matthew. 5 38 109 7 15 161 7 16 193 11 29 56 12 43 101 10 34 201 10 41 404 16
18 397 16 24 210 17 24 44 17 29 32 24 12 9 26 72, 74 21 Luke. 15 6, 7 241 1 46,
47 72 10 41 40 12 16 34 13 14 386 392 14 13, 14 90 15 17 185 15 24 119 15 7 258
16 9 39 16 14 24 19 26 83 19 ult 357 20 25 31 21 17 211 22 15 340 24 13 64
John. 2 10 97 2 17 335 5 39 291 6 67 239 8 5 103 Acts. 5 41 87 8 9 47 8 28, 29
292 12 22 52 15 20 104 16 11 60 17 30, 31 223 26 10 423 Romans. 2 5 88 3 4 414
5 7 20 8 3 21 8 35 396 15 30 388 10 7 300 16 18 160 162 1 Corinthians. 1 5 83 1
9, 24 391 1 27, 28 205 4 3 45, 46 6 2 312 6 10 95 6 14 to 20 102 7 23 68 8 4
206 9 27 153 13 5 19 46.85 15 20 402 15 32 376 2 Cor. 4 17 217 10 10 163
Galathians. 3 26 68 Ephesians. 2 15 401 4 14 166 225 4 18 345 5 18 97 6 12 422
Philippians. 1 23 364 2 3 85 2 6, 7 57 2 12 340 2 17 364 4 6, 7 41 4 11. 43 12
Colossians. 1 11 448 3 16 291 1 Thessalonians. 5 14 386 2 Thessalonians. 2 5 28
1 Timothy. 1 17 37 4 10 209 5 4 66 5 6 119 6 1, 2 68 6 4 185 6 6 41. 42 6 8 42
6 10 23. 25 2 Timothy. 2 22 250 Titus. 3 2 58 3 4 401 Hebrews. 3 12.13 230 10
38 102 415 13 5 42 James. 1 2 220 2 10 21 5 11 86 1 Peter. 2 5 344. 345 2 11
104 2 21 190 191 4 3 43 4 14 87 5 5 51. 54 5 8 366 2 Peter. 1 5, 6 21 1 5, 10
497 2 2 59 2 10 59 2 14 29 2 8 333 2 9 209 1 John. 4 1 171 5 18 397 Jude. 3 243
343 3 388 Revelations. 12 10 82.83 12 12 9.335 21 8 102

A TABLE, Of the Principal things contained in this VOLUME.
A.
ADjuration, when lawful. Page 304 Affections, good in themselves. p. 76
Anti-scripturists confuted. p. 276, 277 Apocrypha, false. p. 288. Apostates,
their miserable ends. page 240 Application, Useful. p. 339 Armies cannot save.
p. 207. Armor spiritual must be put on. page 389 Atheism, the root of all
sin. p. 306. Adam in the state of Innocence not so safe as believers. p. 403
Aggravations of sin. p. 419, 420 Alone we must often go. p. 442 Anger vanishes
in good men. p. 426 Apologies, when to be used. p. 442 Apostate, how dangerous.
p. 415 Application necessary. p. 413 Assurance attainable. p. 395
B.
BAd times must make us better. Page 10 Beginnings of sin dangerous. Page 165
Blasphemy, how many ways committed. p. 58. Aggravations, of Englands
blasphemy. P. 60.61. We must mourn for it. p. 62. Eight Considerations against
it. p. 63. Blasphemers must die for it. p. 64.169. Gods Judgments on them. p.
65. Boasting, four sorts of it. p. 46.47. Considerations against it. p. 48
Bribes base. p. 26, 27 Butts are blemishes. p. 290 Body, have a moderate care
of it. p. 432 Books needful. p. 433 Burden of sin. p. 444 Burdensome, good men
are not. p. 431
C.
CAll extraordinary, what it is. Page 202 Carnal Policy, folly. p. 207 Children
must be taught Goodness betimes. p. 246. Christ is the Lord. p. 306, 307.
Christ is All in All to a Believer Page 270 Church mixed here. p. 11 Constancy
commended. p. 239 Conscience good, a Feast. p. 385, 386 an erroneous Conscience
binds not. p. 287. Consideration its excellencies. p. 118 Contentment how
necessary. p. 42 A Corrupt Head breeds a corrup^ Heart. p. 155.
Covenant Breaking Englands great sin. page 77, 78. How punished. page 78.
Covenant-keeping the way to blessedness. page 79. Rules for it. p. 80
Covetousness how base. p. 22. Breaks all the Commandments. p. 23. Saints most
free from it. p. 24. Cavils for it answered. p. 33. Odious in a Minister. p.
27, 28. Rules against it. Page 35, etc. Such unfit for employment, p. 25. Worse
then a Prodigal. p. 25.
D.
DAncing, mixed condemned. Page 106, 107 Day of Judgment comfortable to the the
Godly. Page 317. Terrible to the wicked. p. 309.310. Prepare for it. p. 314
Death comfortable to the godly. p. 370 Saints sing most sweetly then. page 385
Delay in Repenting dangerous. Page 222 Deliverance from trouble comes from God.
p. 204. Devils subtle. p. 166. Chained. page 187 Discipline how necessary. p.
172 Discontent dangerous. p. 35. Reasons against it. p. 35, 36 Disputations
Vain condemned. p. 149 Dogs, seducers like them in fourteen Particulars. p. 157
Drunkenness a great sin. p. 92. Especially in Ministers. p. 92. Signs of it. p.
93. Directions against it. Page 99 Duels unlawful. p. 109 Day of Judgment
desired by the godly. Page 406 Degrees of Glory. p. 405 Discipline set forth in
the word. p. 431
E.
EArth the wicked man's Hell. Page 28 Man's Extremity is Gods Opportunity. p.
447 Ear to be watched. p. 356 Envy evil. p. 85 Error begets error. p. 230.
It is punished by giving up to false Teachers. p. 353.357 Error in judgment
worse (in some rerespects) then Error in Practice. Page 153, 154. Six Reasons
why we are so easily drawn to Error. p. 232 Examples of good men how far to
be followed. p. 190, 191.192 Man's Extremity, Gods Opportunity. p. 182. Eye to
be watched. p. 106
F.
FAith, its Excellency. Page 270 Faith, Motives to keep it. p. 139 Faithful,
few in all Ages. p. 424 Falls of the Saints, what use to be made of them. p.
191 False Prophets have been in all Ages. Page 154.352. God has ever had some
to oppose them. p. 155. its very dangerous to follow them, page 156.120. Marks
of false Prophets. p. 161, 162 Fam^ly-duties commended. V. Epist. Dedic.
Familiarity with wicked men to be avoided. p. 138, 139 Fathers how to be
esteemed. p. 259 Fierceness how vile. p. 108. Helps against it. p. 108 Feasting
when lawful. p. 58. Rules for it. p. 61 Formality dangerous. page 340. many
Reasons against it. p. 123.125. Helps against it. p. 1^3. Fornication a great
sin. p. 101. Reasons against it. page 123, 125. Helps against it. p. 133
Forerunners of Gods leaving England, Page 135, 136 Foxes, seducers like to
Foxes in 10. particulars. p. 139 Friends cannot help. p. 207 Fighters, many
wicked ones. p. 387. Three Reasons why all must fight. p. 387. Christ fights
for his people. p. 387. A Christian fight is a good fight. p. 388 Free Grace
the foundation of all our mercies. p. 400 Friends, we may love one more then
another. p. 410 Friends will forsake us. Page 414
G.
GAthering of Churches out of Churches unlawful. Epist. Ded. and p. 166, 167
Gifts, when lawful to take them. page 27 God knows all things. p. 350. A
sixfold comfort from it. p. 351 God brings light out of darkness. Page 188
God is an Omnipotent, Omniscient, Omnipresent Help. p. 208. Four Reasons why
God does not presently help his people. Page 208. Gods eye must quicken us. p.
306 Godliness is great gain. p. 41 Good men hated, and why. Page 111, 112
Goodness of others to be observed. Page 86 Gold, thy Word is better then Gold.
Page 284 Gospel must be Preached. p. 330
H.
HEaring, ten Rules for right hearing. Page 356 Heady, who. p. 117 Healths
unhealthful. p. 94 Heretics compounded must die. p. 169 Preservatives against
their poison. p. 170.171. They are limited. Page 180, 181. See Gods judgments
on them. p. 168 High-minded, who. p. 118 House-creepers condemned. p. 146, 147
Humility 11. Motives to it p. 54. with means. p. 57
I.
IDleness breeds sin. p. 98 Idleness how dangerous. P. 385, 393 Idols cannot
help. p. 206 Ignorance breeds Pride. p. 53 Imprecations when lawful. p. 439
Infirmities how they differ from enormities. p. 131, 132 Ingratitude, eight
Reasons against it. Page 69, 70 Interpret doubtful things in the best sense.
p. 85 Joy in tribulation. p. 220 Judge, Christ is a righteous Judge. Page 399.
Judges must be just. p. 313. Christ is Judge of all the world. p. 311 Itch
sevenfold. p 353
K.
KIngs, believers are such Page 398
L.
LAst days perilous. p. 3, 4 Law must be Preached. p. 329 Lectures on week
days lawful. p. 326 Liberty sinful not to be suffered. p. 103 Life short.
p. 37 Light within darkness. p. 278. Eight Reasons against resting in it. page
278 Love to Christ, properties of it. p. 309. Reasons for it. p. 309, 310 Love
strong. p. 81. Its Excellency. Page 196 Love must extend to All the Saints.
Page 113 Long-suffering how needful. p. 195 Luke-warmness condemned. p. 334,
342
M.
Madmen who. p. 183, 184 Magistrates useful. p. 33. to be honored. p. 67.
they must be zealous. p. 340 Maintenance due to Ministers. Page 296 Marriage,
when young people should marry. p. 250 Memory helps for it. p. 292 Masters,
though carnal, to be respected. Page 67, 68 Meditation how needful. p. 293
Meekness, its Excellency. p. 110. Seven motives to it. p. 110 Men, we must not
build on them. page 161 Mercies must be carefully marked. p. 203, 204. No
merit. p. 381, 382 Ministers must Preach Gods Word only. p. 329. They must be
frequent in Preaching. p. 338. They must be hardy men. p. 366, 367. Pray for
them. p. 388 Ministers must see to their flock. p. 468. They must be studious.
Page 433 The Ministry is a work. p. 368 The Millenarian fancy condemned. Page
12 Mourn for the sins of others. Page 13, 14 Music when lawful. p 90
Millenarian reign a fancy. p. 455
N.
WAnt of Naturall-Affection condemned. p. 75 Now-light condemned. p. 165
O.
OBedience commanded. p. 359 Old Testament Authentic. p. 261. Cavils against
it answered. Page 263 Oppressors, woe to them, p. 31 Ordinances to continue to
the end. page 138, 139 Order, its excellency. p. 171, 172 Our spirits to be
carefully looked to. Page 471
P.
PArents to be obeyed. page 65, 66. they must teach their children betimes. Six
Reasons for it. Page 247, 248 Parliaments their Excellency. p. 32 Patience how
needful. p. 191 Perfection, what. p. 299 Persecutors have misenable ends. page
218 Persecution spreads the Gospel. p. 201 Whether we may fly from it. p. 201
Its the lot of all the godly. p. 210, 211. Comforts against it. p. 217. Rules
how to bear it rightly. Page 219 Pilgrims we are in this World. Page 392 Piety
brings Praise. Page 465 Pleasures carnal how dangerous. Page 119, 120. Seven
disswasives from them. p. 121 Pleasures spiritual most excellent* Page 120
Poor, show mercy to them. p. 129 Popery its vileness. p. 14, 15 Poverty (in
some respect,) better then riches. p. 44, 45 Practice of Piety excellent. Page
289, 290 Prayer must be sincere. p. 456 Precipitation dangerous. p. 117
Preparation required before Hearing. Page 356 Preaching belongs to men
Ordained. Page 328 Preaching is no adding. Page 280, 281 Presbyterial
Government its excellency. Page 173, 174. it excells Episcopacie, and
Independencie in many Particulars. Page 176 177, 178 Pride dangerous. p. 49.
its the root of Heresy. Page 50. Remedies against it. p. 51, 52 Profane, whom?
p. 74 Prosperity more dangerous then adversity. p. 234 Prophesies to be
observed. p. 51 Providence and success no Rules to go by. p. 287 Parents good,
a mercy. p. 427 Peter not at Rome. p. 425 Professors may become Apostates. p.
417 and Persecutors. p. 437 Public spirits in good men. p. 424
Q.
QVakers exceeding profane p. 128, 296. They deny the Scripture. Page 269
Quakers their blasphemy. p. 392. and folly. 410
R.
RAke-hels, who? Page 83 Reason must keep its due place Page 279 Reward we may
have an eye to it. p. 399. Full reward of the Godly-is at the last day. p. 404
Relations must not be forsaken. Page 141 Remember what we hear. Page 357, 358
Repetition when and how to be practiced. p. 462, etc. Repentance must be
speedy. p. 223. Twenty Reasons for it. Page 224, etc. Reprobates how far
they may go. Page 128 Reproves not to be slighted. Page 359 Riches, Vanity,
p. 41. False Notions about them. p. 38. They cannot help in trouble. p. 206
Resolution how necessary. p. 242 Revelations dangerous. p. 165
S.
SAints, God loves them dearly. p. 113 Sacramental Oath, what. p. 378 Schoolmen
how vain. p. 259. Salutations lawful. p 458 Scepticks in Religion odious to
God. p. 149, 166, 241 Scriptures are the Word of God. p. 276. They are to be
read of all. p. 260 They are Holy. p. 267. See 16. Royalties of them. p. 280.
They are a perfect Rule. p. 286.297. Nine false Rules. p. 287. They are the
Judge of Controversies. p. 287. We must read them. p. 291. Love them. p. 288.
Remember them. p. 292. Be thankeful for them. p. 294. Their Excellency. p. 294.
Self-denial how necessary. p. 20 Self-love dangerous. P. 16.17, 20. Separation
condemned. P. 11, 12.141, 142 Sincerity our Glory. P. 194. Its Excellencies. P.
134, 135 Singularity that is Holy, commended. Page 239 Sins seldom go alone.
P. 21. Sin how heinous. P. 308 Slandering vile. P. 82, 83. comforts against
it. P. 86, 87 Soldiers must be free from Covetousness. P. 23. All Christians
are soldiers. Page 387 Soul Immortal. P. 371, 383. The Cavils of the
Mortalists answered. P. 372. Have a special care of your Souls. P. 373
Spiritual-Pride dangerous. P. 49, 50 Spirit and Word go together. p. 279.
Seducers boast much of the Spirit. Page 165. Try them. p. 171 Stoics
condemned. p. 76 Stratagem. lawful p. 116 Swearing, when lawful. p. 305
Speaking more powerful then writing. Page 403 Sin blots men's names. p. 418
Society of good men helpful. Page 409 Sordid Mechannicks often oppose Gods
Ministers. p. 437 Strengthening grace needful. Page 448 Sickness may befall good
men. Page 446 Our Spirits to be carefully looked to. Page 471
T.
TAxes and Dues to be paid cheer-cheerfully. p. 31 Temporal felicity no mark of
a true Church. p. 215 Thankesgiving, Motives to it. p. 71. Rules for it. p. 72
Theft, in some cases it may be punished with death. p. 227 Thorns, Riches are
Thorns. p. 39 Thoughts to be specially watched. page 28, 29 Titles of Honor
may be given to men. Page 296 Tithes convenient in Gospel times. Page 369
Tobocco much abused. Page ^9, 102. Toleration when unlawful. page 168, 169,
233.340 Tongue our Glory. p. 63 Thoughts how dangerous. p. 422 Truth has many
Opposers. Page 440 Traditions vain. p. 298 Traitors of three sorts. Page 115
Truth abides. p. 187
V.
Virtues are concatenated. Page 21 Unholy who? P. 73, 74 Unrighteous dealing
dangerous. Page 81, 82. Unthankfulness, How Vile. Page 68, 69 Unity, its
Excellency. Page 392
W.
WAlk with God. Page 361 The weakest may be helpful. Page 427 The World
inordinately loved breeds Apostates, p. 417 Weak things must not be despised.
Page 464.469 Women, some good ones. p. 469 Wicked men grow worse and worse. p.
229, 230. They draw others to wickedness. p. 232 Witches must be put to death.
p. 228. Many seducing Quakers Witches. Page 225, 226 The Word to be Preached on
all occasions. p. 326
Y.
YOuth must be given to God. Page 247
Z.
ZEal becomes the Ministers of the Gospel. p. 223.333. What zeal is. p. 337,
338. Signs of it. p. 336. Cavils against it answered. p. 341. Motives to it.
p. 343. Zealous men must expect opposition. p. 203. The godly are zealous. p.
332. They are the Pillars of a Land. Page 336.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by John Starkey, at the Miter at the North-door of
the middle Exchange in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Martyrology containing a Collection of all the Persecutions that have
befallen the Church of England, with the lives of ten of our late famous
English Divines, by Samuel Clark, in Folio. Justification justified, or a
Treatise of Justification by Faith, by a learned Divine in the West of England,
in Quarto. Master Thomas Gataker, Gods eye on his Israel; being an Exposition
on Numb. 23, 21. and two Sermons on the same Authors, in Quarto. The life of
Christina Queen of Sweden translated out of French by I. H. Letters of affairs,
Love and Courtship written in French by the Exquisite pen of Mounsieur de
Voiture, and Englished by I. D. Master Thomas Halls Beauty of Holiness, or a
description of the Excellency, Amiableness, Comfort, and content which is to be
found in ways of Purity and Holiness, in Octavo. Master Thomas Halls Homesius
Enervatus, or a Confutation of the Millenarian Opinion. Plainly showing that
Christ will not reign with the Saints for 1000. years on earth, with a word to
our fifth Monarchy men 8^. Masters Thomas Halls Phaetons folly, or the Downfall
of Pride, being a Translation of the second Book of Ovids Metamorphosis
Paraphrastically and Grammatically, with an Essay of Ovid de Tristibus, in
Octavo. A Sermon of the Passion of Christ by William Cartwright in Octavo. The
Mystery of the two Witnesses unveiled by John Robotham Minister at Dover, in
Octavo. A Silver Watch-bell to awake to repentance, with a Treatise on the
Sacrament, by Tho. Tymme, in Octavo. The Art of Giving, or a guide to Charity,
by Thomas Cooper in Octavo. A Magical description of the Soul by Agricola
Carpentar in Octavo. The Synopsis of Christianity in an Exposition of the
Commandments, Lords Prayer, and Creed, by Richard Sedgwick, in Octavo. Master
Tho. Hooker of N. England his pattern of Perfection with other Treatises in
twelves. Tho. Gataker, De Iustificatione in twelves, De Dipthongis in twelves.
A Christian Alphabet, containing grounds of Knowledge unto salvation, by John
Phillips. Gildas his Description of the State of great Britain, written 110.
years since, in twelves* Mr. Adam Harsnets Gods summons unto a general
Repentance in 12^. Mr. Henry Beachams Truth of times revaled, in twelves.
Becons display of the Popish Mass, in twelves. The Complete Tradesman, or a
Guide for the true stating of any question touching Interest of six per Cent.
per Annum with other useful Tables by I.H. in twelves. Tertullians Apology or
Defense of the Christians in quarto. An Abrid^ement of the New Testament in
Welsh in octavo. Mr. Shepherds Catechism in octavo. Mr. Crawshers Catechism,
octavo.

