THREE TRACTATES, The Devout Soul. The Free-Prisoner. The Remedy of
Coffeehouse.


To which may be added The Peacemaker.

BY JOS. HALL, D. D. and B. N.

LONDON.

Printed by M. Flesher, for NOT: BUTTER.

M. DC. XLVI.

TO ALL CHRISTIAN READERS, Grace and Peace.
THat in a time when we hear no noise but of drums and Trumpets, and talk of
nothing but arms, and sieges, and battles, I should write of Devotion, may seem
to some of you strange and unseasonable; to me, contrarily, it seems most fit
and opportune: For when can it be more proper to direct our address to the
Throne of Grace, then when we are in the very jaws of Death? Or when should we
go to seek the face of our God, rather, then in the needful time of trouble?

Blessed be my God, who in the midst of these woeful tumults, has vouchsafed
to give me these calm, and holy thoughts; which I justly suppose, he meant not
to suggest, that they should be smoothered in the breast wherein they were
conceived, but with a purpose to have the benefit communicated unto many; Who
is there that needs not vehement excitations, and helps to Devotion? and when
more then now? In a tempest the Mariners themselves do not only cry every man
to his God, but awaken Jonah, that is fast asleep under the hatches, and chide
him to his prayers. Surely, had we not been failing in our Devotions, we could
not have been thus universally miserable; That duyy, the neglect whereof is
guilty of our calamity, must in the effectual performance of it, be the means
of our recovery. Be but devout, and we cannot miscarry under judgments; Woe is
me, the tears of penitence, were more fit to quench the public flame, then
blood. How soon would it clear up above head, if we were but holily affected
within? Could we send our zealous Ambassadors up to heaven, we could not fail
of an happy peace. I direct the way; God bring us to the end; For my own
particular practice; God is witness to my soul, that (as one, the sense of
whose private affliction is swallowed up of the public) I cease not daily to
ply the Father of mercies with my fervent prayers, that he would, at last, be
pleased, after so many streams of blood, to pass an act of Pacification in
heaven: And what good heart can do otherwise? Brethren, all ye that love God,
and his Church, and his Truth, and his Anointed, and your Country, and your
selves, and yours, join your forces with mine, and let us by an holy violence
make way to the gates of heaven with our Petition, for mercy and peace; and not
suffer our selves to be beaten off from the threshold of Grace, till we be
answered with a condescent. He, whose goodness is wont to prevent our desires,
will not give denials to our importunities.

Pray, and Farewell. Norwich. March 20. 1643.
THE DEVOVT SOUL.
SECT. I.
DEvotion is the life of Religion, the very soul of Piety, the highest
imploiment of grace; and no other then the prepossession of heaven by the
Saints of God here upon earth; every improvement whereof is of more advantage
and value to the Christian soul, then all the profits and contentments which
this world can afford it.

There is a kind of Art of Devotion (if we can attain unto it) whereby the
practice thereof may be much advanced: We have known indeed some holy souls,
which out of the general precepts of piety, and their own happy experiments of
Gods mercy, have, through the grace of God, grown to a great measure of
perfection this way; which yet might have been much expedited, and completed,
by those helps, which the greater illumination and experience of others might
have afforded them: Like as we see it in other faculties; there are those, who
out of a natural dexterity, and their own frequent practice, have got into a
safe posture of defense, and have handled their weapon with commendable skill,
whom yet the Fence-schoole might have raised to an higher pitch of cunning: As
nature is perfited, so grace is not a little furthered, by Art; since it
pleases the wisdom of God, to work ordinarily upon the soul, not by the
immediate power of miracle, but in such methods, and by such means, as may most
conduce to his blessed ends. It is true, that our good motions come from the
Spirit of God; neither is it less true, that all the good counsails of others
proceed from the same Spirit; and that good Spirit cannot be cross to itself;
he therefore that infuses good thoughts into us, suggests also such directions,
as may render us apt both to receive and improve them: If God be bounteous, we
may not be idle, and neglective of our spiritual aids.

SECT. II.
II you tell me (by way of instance in a particular act of Devotion) that there
is a gift of prayer, and that the Spirit of God is not tied to rules; I yield
both these; but withal, I must say there are also helps of prayer, and that we
must not expect immediate inspirations: I find the world much mistaken in
both; They think that man has the gift of prayer, that can utter the thoughts
of his heart roundly unto God, that can express himself smoothly in the
phrase of the holy Ghost, and press God with most proper words, and passionate
vehemence: And surely this is a commendable faculty, wheresoever it is: but
this is not the gift of prayer; you may call it, if you will, the gift of
Elocution. Do we say that man has the gift of pleading, that can talk
eloquently at the Bar, that can in good terms loud and earnestly importune
the Judge for his Client; and not rather he that brings the strongest reason,
and quotes his books, and precedents with most truth, and clearest evidence, so
as may convince the Jury, and persuade the Judge? Do we say he has the gift
of preaching, that can deliver himself in a flowing manner of speech, to his
hearers, that can cite Scriptures, or Fathers, that can please his auditory
with the flowers of Rhetoric; or rather, he, that can divide the Word aright,
interpret it soundly, apply it judiciously, put it home to the conscience,
speaking in the evidence of the Spirit, powerfully convincing the gainsayers,
comforting the dejected, and drawing every soul nearer to heaven? The like must
we say for prayer; the gift whereof he may be truly said to have, not that has
the most rennible tongue, (for prayer is not so much a matter of the lips, as
of the heart) but he that has the most illuminated apprehension of the God to
whom he speaks, the deepest sense of his own wants, the most eager longings
after grace, the ferventest desires of supplies from heaven; and in a word,
whose heart sends up the strongest groans and cries to the Father of mercies.

Neither may we look for Enthusiasmes, and immediate inspirations; putting our
selves upon Gods Spirit, in the solemn exercises of our invocation, without
heed, or meditation; the dangerous inconvenience whereof has been too often
found in the rash, and unwarrantable expressions, that have fallen from the
mouths of unwary suppliants; but we must address our selves with due
preparation, to that holy work; we must digest our suits; and fore-order our
supplications to the Almighty; so that there may be excellent and necessary use
of meet rules of our Devotion.

He, whose Spirit helps us to pray, and whose lips taught us how to pray, is an
alsufficient example for us: all the skill of men, and Angels, cannot afford a
more exquisite model of supplicatory Devotion, then that blesser Savior of
ours gave us in the mount; led in by a divine, and heart-raising preface,
carried out with a strong and heavenly enforcement; wherein an awful
compellation makes way for petition; and petition makes way for thanksgiving;
the petitions marshalled in a most exact order, for spiritual blessings, which
have an immediate concernment of God, in the first place; then for temporal
favors, which concern ourselves, in the second; so punctual a method had not
been observed by him that hears prayers, if it had been all one to him, to
have had our Devotions confused, and tumultuary.

SECT. III.
THere is commonly much mistaking of Devotion as if it were nothing but an act
of vocal prayer, expiring with that holy breath, and revived with the next
task of our invocation; which is usually measured of many, by frequence,
length, smoothness of expression, lowdnesse, vehemence; Whereas, indeed, it is
rather an habitual disposition of an holy soul, sweetly conversing with God,
in all the forms of an heavenly (yet awful) familiarity; and a constant
intertainment of ourselves here below with the God of spirits, in our
sanctified thoughts, and affections; One of the noble exercises whereof, is our
access to the throne of grace in our prayers; whereto may be added, the
ordering of our holy attendance upon the blessed word and sacraments of the
Almighty: Nothing hinders therefore, but that a stammering suppliant may reach
to a more eminent devotion, then he that can deliver himself in the most
fluent and pathetical forms of Elocution; and that our silence may be more
devout then our noise. We shall not need to send you to the Cells or cloisters
for this skill; although it will hardly be believed, how far some of their
contemplative men have gone in the Theory hereof; Perhaps, like as Chemists
give rules for the attaining of that Elixir, which they never found; for sure
they must needs fail of that perfection they pretend, who err commonly in the
object of it, always in the ground of it, which is faith; stripped, by their
opinion, of the comfortablest use of it, certainty of application.

SECT. IV.
AS there may be many resemblances betwixt Light and Devotion, so this one
especially, that as there is a light universally diffused through the air, and
there is a particular recollection of light into the body of the sun, and
stars; so it is in Devotion; There is a general kind of Devotion that goes
through the renewed heart and life of a Christian, which we may term Habitual,
and Virtuall; and there is a special, and fixed exercise of Devotion, which
we name Actual.

The soul that is rightly affected to God, is never void of an holy Devotion;
where ever it is, what ever it does, it is still lifted up to God, and fastened
upon him, and converses with him; ever serving the Lord in fear, and rejoicing
in him with trembling.

For the effectual performance whereof, it is requisite first, that the heart
be settled in a right apprehension of our God; without which, our Devotion is
not thanklesse only, but sinful: With much labor therefore, and agitation of
a mind illuminated from above, we must find our selves wrought to an high,
awful, adorative, and constant conceit of that incomprehensible Majesty, in
whom we live, and move, and are; One God, in three most glorious Persons,
infinite in wisdom, in power, in justice, in mercy, in providence, in all that
he is, in all that he has, in all that he does; dwelling in light inaccessible,
attended with thousand thousands of Angels; whom yet we neither can know,
(neither would it avail us if we could) but in the face of the eternal Son of
his Love, our blessed Mediator God and Man; who sits at the right hand of
Majesty in the highest heavens; from the sight of whose glorious humanity, we
comfortably rise to the contemplation of that infinite Deity, whereto it is
inseparably united; in and by him, (made ours by a lively Faith) finding our
persons, and obedience accepted, expecting our full redemption, and
blessedness. Here, here must our hearts be unremoveably fixed; In his light
must we see light: no cloudy occurrences of this world, no busy employments,
no painful sufferings must hinder us from thus seeing him that is invisible.

SECT. V.
NEither does the devout heart see his God aloof off, as dwelling above, in the
circle of heaven, but beholds that infinite Spirit really present with him; The
Lord is upon thy right hand, says the Psalmist; Our bodily eye does not more
certainly see our own flesh, then the spiritual eye sees God close by us; Yea,
in us; A man's own soul is not so intimate to himself, as God is to his soul;
neither do we move by him only, but in him: What a sweet conversation
therefore, has the holy soul with his God? What heavenly conferences have
they two, which the world is not privy to; whiles God entertaines the soul
with the divine motions of his Spirit; the soul entertains God with gracious
compliances? Is the heart heavy with the grievous pressures of affliction? the
soul goes in to his God, and pours out it self before him in earnest
bemoanings, and supplications; the God of mercy ansers the soul again, with
seasonable refreshings of comfort: Is the heart secretly wounded and bleeding
with the conscience of some sin? it speedily betakes it self to the great
Physician of the soul, who forthwith applies the balm of Gilead for an
unfailing and present cure: Is the heart distracted with doubts? the soul
retires to that inward Oracle of God for counsel, he returns to the soul an
happy setlement of just resolution: Is the heart deeply affected with the sense
of some special favor from his God? the soul breaks forth into the passionate
voice of praise and thanksgiving; God returns the pleasing testimony of a
cheerful acceptance: Oh blessed soul, that has a God to go unto upon all
occasions; Oh infinite mercy of a God, that vouchsafes to stoop to such
entireness with dust and ashes. It was a gracious speech of a Dr. Preston.
worthy Divine upon his deathbed, now breathing toward heaven, that he should
change his place, not his company: His conversation was now beforehand with
his God, and his holy Angels; the only difference was, that he was now going to
a more free and full fruition of the Lord of life, in that region of glory
above, whom he had truly (though with weakness and imperfection) enjoyed in
this vale of tears.

SECT. VI.
NOw, that these mutual respects may be sure not to cool with intermission,
the devout heart takes all occasions both to think of God, and to speak to him.
There is nothing that he sees, which does not bring God to his thoughts. Indeed
there is no creature, wherein there are not manifest footsteps of omnipotence;
Yea, which has not a tongue to tell us of its Maker. The heavens declare Ps.
19. 1, 2.
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handywork; One day tells
another, and one night certifieth another: Yea, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou Ps. 104. 24.
made them all: The earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and wide sea,
where are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts: Every
herb, flower, spire of grass, every twigge and leaf; every worm and fly;
every scale and feather; every billow and meteor, speaks the power and wisdom
of their infinite Creator; Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant; Esaias sends
the Jews to the Ox and the Ass; Our Savior sends his Disciples to the
Ravens, and to the Lillies of the field; There is no creature of whom we may
not learn something; we shall have spent our time ill in this great school of
the world, if in such store of Lessons, we be nonproficients in devotion. Vain
Idolaters make to themselves images of God, whereby they sinfully represent him
to their thoughts and adoration; could they have the wit and grace to see it,
God has taken order to spare them this labor, in that he has stamped in
every creature such impressions of his infinite power, wisdom, goodness, as may
give us just occasion to worship and praise him with a safe and holy advantage
to our souls: For the invisible things of God from the Creation of the world,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead. And indeed, wherefore serve all the volumes of
Natural history, but to be so many Commentaries upon the several creatures,
wherein we may read God; and even those men who have not the skill, or leisure
to peruse them, may yet out of their own thoughts, and observation, raise from
the sight of all the works of God sufficient matter to glorify him. Who can be
so stupide as not to take notice of the industry of the Be, the providence of
the Ant, the cunning of the Spider, the reviving of the Fly, the worms
endeavor of revenge, the subtilty of the Fox, the sagacity of the hedgehog;
the innocence and profitablenesse of the sheep, the laboriousnesse of the Ox,
the obsequiousness of the Dog, the timorous shifts of the Hare, the
nimblenesse of the Dear, the generosity of the Lion, the courage of the Horse,
the fierceness of the Tiger; the cheerful music of Birds, the harmlesnesse
of the Dove, the true love of the Turtle, the Cocks observation of time, the
Swallows architecture; shortly, (for it were easy here to be endless) of the
several qualities, and dispositions of every of those our fellowcreatures,
with whom we converse on the face of the earth; and who that takes notice of
them, cannot fetch from every act, and motion of theirs, some monition of duty,
and occasion of devout thoughts? Surely, I fear many of us Christians, may
justly accuse our selves as too neglective of our duty this way; that having
thus long spent our time in this great Academy of the world, we have not, by so
many silent documents, learned to ascribe more glory to our Creator; I doubt
those creatures, if they could exchangetheir brutality with our reason, being
now so docible as to learn of us so far as their sense can reach, would approve
themselves better scholars to us, then we have been unto them.

Withal, I must add that the devout soul stands not always in need of such
outward monitors, but finds within it self, sufficient incitements to raise up
it self to a continual minding of God; and makes use of them accordingly; and,
if at any time, being taken up with importunate occasions of the world, it
finds God missing but an hour, it chides it self for such neglect, and sets it
self to recover him with so much more eager affection: as the faithful Spouse
in the Canticles, when she finds him Cant. 5. 6.
whom her soul loved, withdrawn from her for a season, puts her self into a
speedy search after him, and gives not over till she have attained his presence.

SECT. VII.
NOw as these many monitors both outward and inward, must elevate our hearts
very frequently, to God; so those raised hearts must not entertain him with a
dumb contemplation, but must speak to him in the language of spirits: All
occasions therefore must be taken of sending forth pious and heavenly
ejaculations to God; The devout soul may do this more then an hundred times a
day, without any hinderance to his special vocation: The Huswife at her Wheel,
the Weaver at his Loom, the Husbandman at his Plough, the Artificer in his
Shop, the Traveller in his way, the Merchant in his Warehouse may thus enjoy
God in his bufiest employment; For, the soul of man is a nimble spirit; and the
language of thoughts needs not take up time; and though we now, for examples
sake, cloth them in words, yet in our practice we need not. Now these
Ejaculations may be either at large, or Occasional: At large, such as those of
old Jacob, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation; or that of David, O save me
for thy mercies sake: And these, either in matter of Humiliation, or of
Imploration, or of Thanksgiving. In all which, we cannot follow a better
pattern then the sweet singer of Israel, whose heavenly conceptions we may
either borrow, or imitate.

In way of Humiliation, such as these. Heal my soul, O Lord, for I have sinned
against thee. Oh remember Ps. 41. 4.
not my old sins, but have mercy upon me. If thou will be extreme to 79. 8.
mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? Lord thou know the
thoughts of man that 130. 3.
they are but vain; O God, why 94. 11.
abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me?

In way of Imploration. Up 3. 7.
Lord, and help me O God; Oh let my heart be sound in thy statutes, 89. 48.
that I be not ashamed. Lord, 109. 21.
where are thy old loving mercies? Oh deliver me, for I am helpless, and my
heart is wounded within me. Comfort the soul of thy servant, 86. 4.
for unto thee, O Lord, due I lift up my soul. Go not far from 71. 10. 86. 11.
me O God. O knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy Name. Thou art my
helper and redeemer, Ps. 70. 6.
O Lord make no long tarrying. Oh be thou my help in trouble, for 60. 11.
vain is the help of man. Oh guide 71. 23.
me with thy counsel, and after that receive me to thy glory. My 31. 17.
time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hands of mine enemies. Oh withdraw
not thy mercy from 40. 14.
me, O Lord. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of 5. 8.
mine enemies. O let my soul live, 119. penul.
and it shall praise thee.

In way of Thankesgiving: Oh 68. 35.
God, wonderful art thou in thine holy places. Oh Lord, how glorious 92. 5.
are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep. Oh God, who is like 71. 17.
unto thee! The Lord lives, and 18. 47. 63. 4.
blessed be my strong helper. Lord, thy loving kindness is better then life it
self. All thy works praise 145. 10.
thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee. Oh how manifold 104. 25.
are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. Who is 18. 31.
God but the Lord, and who has any strength except our God? We Ps. 20. 5.
will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in thy Name, O Lord. Oh that men
would praise the 107. 8: 31. 21.
Lord for his goodness. Oh how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee! Thou Lord have never 9. 10.
failed them that seek thee. In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and 16. 12.
at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. Lord, what is man that thou
art mindful of him? Not 8. 4.
unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto 115. 1.
thy Name give the praise.

SECT. VIII.
Occasional Ejaculations are such, as are moved upon the presence of some such
object as carries a kind of relation or analogy to that holy thought which we
have entertained. Of this nature I find that, which was practiced in S. Basils
time; that, upon the lighting of candles, the manner was to bless God in these
words, Praise be to God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; which that
Father says was anciently used; but who was the Author of it he professes to
be unknown: to the same purpose was the Lucernarium, which was a part of the
evening office of old; For which there may seem to be more color of reason,
then for the ordinary fashion of apprecation, upon occasion of our sneesing;
which is expected, and practiced by many, out of civility: Old and reverend
Beza was wont to move his hat with the rest of the company, but to say withal,
Gramercy Madame la Superstition; Now, howsoever in this, or any other practice,
which may seem to carry with it a smack of superstition, our devotion may be
groundless and unseasonable, yet nothing hinders but that we may take just and
holy hints of raising up our hearts to our God. As when we do first look
forth, and see the heavens over our heads, to think, the Heavens declare thy
Ps. 19. 1.
glory, O God. When we see the day breaking, or the Sun rising, The day is
thine, and the night is 74. 17.
thine, thou have prepared the light and the Sun. When the light shines in our
faces, Thou deckest 97. 11.
thy self with light as with a garment; or, Light is sprung up for 36. 9.
the righteous. When we see our Garden imbellisht with flowers, The earth is
full of the goodness 39. 5.
of the Lord. When we see a rough sea, The waves of the sea rage horribly, and
are mighty; but 93. 5.
the Lord that dwells on high, is mightier then they. When we see the
darkness of the night, The 139. 11.
darkness is no darkness with thee. When we rise up from our bed, or our
seat, Lord thou know my down-sitting, and my uprising; Ps. 139. 2.
thou understandest my thoughts afar off. When we wash our hands, Wash thou me,
O Lord, and 51. 7.
I shall be whiter then snow. When we are walking forth, Oh hold thou up my
goings in thy paths, 17. 5.
that my footsteps slip not. When we hear a passing bell: Oh teach 90. 12.
me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom: or, Lord, let me
know my end, and 39. 5.
the number of my days.

Thus may we dart out our holy desires to God, upon all occasions; Wherein,
heed must be taken that our Ejaculations be not, on the one side, so rare, that
our hearts grow to be hard and strange to God, but that they may be held on in
continual acknowledgement of him, and acquaintance with him; and, on the other
side, that they be not so over-frequent in their perpetual reiteration, as
that they grow to be (like that of the Romish votaries) fashionable; which if
great care be not taken, will fall out, to the utter frustrating of our
Devotion. Shortly, let the measure of these devout glances be, the preserving
our hearts in a constant tenderness, and godly disposition; which shall be
further actuated upon all opportunities, by the exercises of our more enlarged,
and fixed Devotion: Whereof there is the same variety that there is in Gods
services, about which it is conversant.

There are three main businesses wherein God accounts his service, here below,
to consist; The first is, our address to the throne of Grace, and the pouring
out of our souls before him in our prayers: The second is, the reading and
hearing his most holy Word; The third is, the receipt of his blessed Sacraments;
In all which there is place and use for a settled Devotion.

SECT. IX.
TO begin with the first work of our actual, and enlarged Devotion: Some
things are pre-required of us, to make us capable of the comfortable
performance of so holy and heavenly a duty; namely, that the heart be clean
first, and then that it be clear: clean from the defilement of any known sin;
clear from all intanglements and distractions: What do we in our prayers, but
converse with the Almighty? and either carry our souls up to him, or bring him
down to us? now, it is no hoping, that we can entertain God in an impure heart:
Even we men loath a nasty and sluttish lodging; how much more will the floly
God abhor an habitation spiritually filthy? I find that even the unclean
spirit made that a motive of his repossession, that he found the house swept
and garnished: Satan's Luc. 11. 25.
cleanliness is pollution; and his garnishment, disorder and wickedness;
without this he finds no welcome; Each spirit looks for an entertainment
answerable to his nature; How much more will that God of spirits, who is purity
it self, look to be harbored in a cleanly room? Into a malicious soul Wisd. 1.
4.
wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin; What
friend would be pleased that we should lodge him in a Lazar-house? or who would
abide to have a toad lie in his bosom? Surely, it is not in the verge of
created nature to yield any thing that can be so noisome and odious to the
sense of man, as sin is to that absolute, and essential Goodness: His pure
eyes cannot endure the sight of sin; neither can he endure that the sinner
should come within the sight of him; Away from me, ye wicked, is his charge,
both here, and hereafter. It is the privilege and happiness of the pure in
heart, that they shall see God; see him both in the end, and in the way;
enjoying the vision of him, both in grace, and in glory: this is no object for
impure eyes: Descend into thy self therefore, and ransack thy heart, who ever
would be a true Client of Devotion; search all the close windings of it, with
the torches of the law of God; and if there be any iniquity found lurking in
the secret corners thereof, drag it out and abandon it; and when thou have
done, that thy fingers may retain no pollution, say with the holy Psalmist; I
will wash my hands Psalm. 26. 6.
in innocence, so will I go to thine Altar. Presume not to approach the Altar
of God, there to offer the sacrifice of thy Devotion, with unclean hands: Else
thine offering shall be so far from winning an acceptance for thee, from the
hands of God; as that thou shall make thine offering abominable. And if a beast
touch the Mount, it shall die.

SECT. X.
AS the soul must be clean from sin, so it must be clear and free from
distractions. The intent of our devotion is to welcome God to our hearts; now
where shall we entertain him, if the rooms be full thronged with cares, and
turbulent passions? The Spirit of God will not endure to be crowded up together
with the world in our strait lodgings; An holy vacuity must make way for him
in our bosoms. The divine pattern of Devotion, in whom the Godhead dwelt
bodily, retires into the Mount to pray; he that carried heaven with him, would
even thus leave the world below him. Alas, how can we hope to mount up to
heaven in our thoughts, if we have the clogges of earthly cares hanging at our
heels! Yea, not only must there be a shutting out of all distractive cares,
and passions, which are professed enemies to our quiet conversing with God in
our Devotion, but there must be also a denudation of the mind from all those
images of our fantasy (how pleasing soever) that may carry our thoughts aside
from those better objects: We are like to foolish children, who when they
should be steadfastly looking on their books, are apt to gaze after every
butterfly, that passes by them; here must be therefore a careful intention of
our thoughts, a restraint from all vain, and idle rovings, and an holding our
selves close to our divine task: Whiles Martha is troubled about many things,
her devouter sister, having chosen the better part, plies the one thing
necessary, which shall never be taken from her; and whiles Martha would feast
Christ with bodily fare, she is feasted of Christ with heavenly delicacies.

SECT. XI.
AFter the heart is thus cleansed, and thus cleared, it must be in the next
place decked with true humility, the cheapest, yet best ornament of the soul.
If the wise man tell us, that pride is the Eccles. 10.
beginning of sin; surely, all gracious dispositions must begin in humility.
The foundation of all high and stately buildings must be laid low: They are the
lowly valleys that soak in the showers of heaven, which the steep hills shelve
off, and prove dry and fruitless. To that man will I look Esa. 66. 2.
(says God) that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word:
Hence it is, that the more eminent any man is in grace, the more he is dejected
in the sight of God; The father of Genesis 18. 27.
the faithful comes to God under the style of dust and ashes: David under the
style of a worm and no man: Agur the son of Jakeh, under Pro. 30. 2.
the title of more brutish then any man; and one that has not the
understanding of a man: John Baptist, Mat. 3. 11.
as not worthy to carry the shoes of Christ after him; Paul, Ephesians. 3. 1.
as the least of Saints, and chief of sinners: On the contrary, the more vile
any man is in his own eyes, and the more dejected in the sight of God, the
higher he is exalted in Gods favor: Like as the Conduict-water, by how much
lower it falls, the higher it rises. When therefore we would appear before God,
in our solemn devotions, we must see that we empty our selves of all proud
conceits, and find our hearts fully convinced of our own vileness, yea
nothingnesse in his sight. Down, down with all our high thoughts; fall we low
before our great and holy God; not to the earth only, but to the very brim of
hell, in the conscience of our own guiltiness; for though the miserable
wretchedness of our nature may be a sufficient cause of our humiliation, yet
the consideration of our detestable sinfulnes is that which will depresse us
lowest in the sight of God.

SECT. XII.
IT is fit the exercise of our Devotion should begin in an humble confession of
our unworthiness. Now for the effectual furtherance of this our
self-dejection, it will be requisite to bend our eyes upon a threefold object;
To look inward into our selves, upward to heaven, downwards to hell. First, to
turn our eyes into our bosoms, and to take a view (not without a secret
self-loathing) of that world of corruption that has lain hidden there; and
thereupon to accuse, arraign, and condemn our selves before that awful
Tribunal of the Judge of heaven, and earth; both of that original pollution,
which we have drawn from the tainted loins of our first parents; and those
innumerable actual wickednesses derived therefrom; which have stained our
persons and lives. How can we be but thoroughly humbled, to see our souls
utterly overspread with the odious and abominable leprosy of sin: We find
that Vzziah bore up stoutly a while, against the Priests of the Lord, in the
maintenance of his sacrilegious presumption, but when he saw himself turned
Lazar, on the sudden, he is confounded in himself, and in a depth of shame
hastens away from the presence of God to a sad, and penitential retiredness.
We should need no other arguments to loath ourselves, then the sight of our
own faces, so miserably deformed with the nasty and hateful scurfe of our
iniquity: Neither only must we be content to shame, and grieve our eyes with
the foul nature and condition of our sins, but we must represent them to our
selves in all the circumstances that may aggravate their heinousness. Alas,
Lord, any one sin is able to damn a soul; I have committed many, yea
numberless: they have not possessed me single, but, as that evil spirit said,
their name is Legion; neither have I committed these sins once, but often;
Thine Angels (that were) sinned but once, and are damned for ever; I have
frequently reiterated the same offenses, where then (were it not for thy mercy)
shall I appear? neither have I only done them in the time of my ignorance, but
since I received sufficient illumination from thee; It is not in the dark that
I have stumbled, and fallen, but in the midst of the clear light and sunshine of
thy Gospel, and in the very face of thee my God; neither have these been the
ships of my weakness, but the bold miscarriages of my presumption; neither
have I offended out of inconsideration, and inadvertency, but after and against
the checks of a remurmuring conscience; after so many gracious warnings, and
fatherly admonitions, after so many fearful examples of thy judgments, after
so infinite obligations of thy favors.

And thus having looked inward into ourselves, and taken an impartial view of
our own vileness, it will be requisite to cast our eyes upward unto heaven,
and there to see against whom we have offended; even against an infinite
Majesty, and power, an infinite mercy, an infinite justice; That power and
Majesty which has spread out the heavens as a Curtain, and has laid the
foundations of the earth so sure that it cannot be moved; who has shut up the
sea with bars and doors, and said, Job 38.
Hitherto shall thou come and no further, and here shall thou stay thy proud
waves; who does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth; who commands the
Devils to their chains, able therefore to take infinite vengeance on sinners.
That mercy of God the Father, who gave his own Son out of his bosom for our
redemption; That mercy of God the Son, who, thinking it Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, etc.
no robbery to be equal unto God, for our sakes made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant; and being found in fashion as a man,
humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the accursed death of
the cross; That mercy of God the holy Ghost, who has made that Christ mine,
and has sealed to my soul the benefit of that blessed redemption; Lastly, that
justice of God, which as it is infinitely displeased with every sin, so will be
sure to take infinite vengeance on every impenitent sinner.

And from hence it will be fit and seasonable for the devout soul, to look
downward into that horrible pit of eternal confusion; and there to see the
dreadful, unspeakable, unimaginable torments of the damned; to represent unto
it self the terrors of those everlasting burnings; the fire and brimstone of
that infernal Tophet; the merciless and unweariable tyranny of those hellish
executioners; the shrieks, and howlings, and gnashings of the tormented; the
unpitiable, interminable, unmitigable tortures of those ever-dying, and yet
never-dying souls. By all which, we shall justly affright our selves into a
deep sense of the dangerous and woeful condition wherein we lie in the state of
nature and impenitence, and shall be driven with an holy eagerness to seek for
Christ, the Son of the ever-living God, our blessed Mediator; in and by whom
only, we can look for the remission of all these our sins, a reconcilement
with this most powerful, merciful, just God, and a deliverance of our souls
from the hand of the nethermost hell.

SECT. XIII.
IT shall not now need, or boot to bid the soul which is truly apprehensive of
all these, to sue importunately to the Lord of life for a freedom, and rescue
from these infinite pains of eternal death, to which our sins have forfaited
it; and for a present happy recovery of that favor, which is better then life.
Have we heard, or can we imagine some heinous Malefactor, that has received
the sentence of death, and is now bound hand, and foot, ready to be cast into a
den of Lions, or a burning furnace, with what strong cries, and passionate
obsecrations he plies the Judge for mercy? we may then conceive some little
image of the vehement suit, and strong cries of a soul truly sensible of the
danger of Gods wrath deserved by his sin, and the dreadfu^ consequents of
deserved imminent damnation; Although wha^ proportion is there betwixt ^ weak
creature, and the Almighty; betwixt a moment, and eternity?

Hereupon therefore followe^ a vehement longing (uncapabl^ of a denial) after
Christ; an^ fervent aspirations to that Savior, by whom only we receive a full
and gracious deliverance from death and hell; and a full pardon and remission
of all ou^ sins; and, if this come not the sooner, strong knockings at the
gates of heaven, even so lou^ that the Father of mercies cannot but hear and
open: Never did any contrite soul beg of God, that was not prevented by his
mercy; much more does he condescend when he is strongly entreated; our very
entreaties are from him, he puts into us those desires which he graciously
answers; now therefore does the devout soul see the God of all comfort to bow
the heavens, and come down with healing in his wings; and hear him speak peace
unto the heart thus thoroughly humbled; Fear not, thou shall not dye but live.
Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Here therefore comes in that
divine grace of Faith, effectually apprehending Christ the Savior, and his
infinite satisfaction and merits; comfortably applying all the sweet promises
of the Gospel; clinging close to that all-sufficient Redeemer; and in his most
perfect obedience emboldning it self, to challenge a freedom of access to
God, and confidence of appearance before the Tribunal of heaven; and now the
soul clad with Christ's righteousness, dares look God in the face, and can both
challenge and triumph over all the powers of darkness: For, being justified by
faith, we have peace Romans 5. 1.
with God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. XIV.
BY how much deeper the sense of our misery and danger is, so much more welcome
and joyful is the apprehension of our deliverance; and so much more thankful
is our acknowledgement of that unspeakable mercy: The soul therefore that is
truly sensible of this wonderful goodness of it is God; as it feels a
mavelous joy in it self, so it cannot but break forth into cheerful and holy
(though secret) gratulations: The Lord is full of Ps. 103. 8.
compassion, and mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness; he keeps not
his anger for ever; he has not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me
after mine Ps. 116. 12, 13.
iniquities: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will
thank thee, for Ps. 119. 18. 21, etc.
thou have heard me, and have not given me over to death, but art become my
salvation. O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his; Praise thou the Lord,
O my soul.

SECT. XV.
THe more feelingly the soul apprehends, and the more thankfully it digests the
favors of God in it is pardon, and deliverance, the more freely does the God of
mercy impart himself to it; and the more God imparts himself to it, the more it
loves him, and the more heavenly acquaintance and entirenesse grows betwixt
God, and it; and now that love which was but a spark at first, grows into a
flame, and wholly takes up the soul. This fire of heavenly love in the devout
soul, is, and must be heightened more and more, by the addition of the holy
incentives of divine thoughts, concerning the means of our freedom and
deliverance. And here, offers it self to us that bottomless abyss of mercy in
our Redemption, wrought by the eternal Son of God, Jesus Christ the just, by
whose stripes we are healed; by whose blood we are ransomed; where none will
befit us but admiring and adoring notions. We shall not disparage you, O ye
blessed Angels, and Archangels of heaven, if we shall say, ye are not able to
look into the bottom of this divine love, wherewith God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: None, oh, none can comprehend this mercy,
but he that wrought it. Lord! what a transcendent, what an infinite love is
this? what an object was this for thee to love? A world of sinners? Impotent,
wretched creatures, that had despighted thee, that had no motive for thy favor
but deformity, misery, professed enmity? It had been mercy enough in thee, that
thou did not damn the world, but that thou should love it, is more then
mercy. It was thy great goodness to forbear the acts of just vengeance to the
sinful world of man, but to give unto it tokens of thy love, is a favor
beyond all expression: The least gift from thee had been more then the world
could hope for; but that thou should not stick to give thine only begotten
Son, the Son of thy love, the Son of thine essence, thy coequall, coeternall
Son, who was more then ten thousand worlds, to redeem this one forlorn world of
sinners, is love above all comprehension of men and Angels. What diminution had
it been to thee and thine essential glory, O thou great God of heaven, that
the souls that sinned should have died and perished everlastingly? yet so
infinite was thy loving mercy, that thou would rather give thy only Son out
of thy bosom, then that there should not be a redemption for believers.

Yet, O God, had thou sent down thy Son to this lower region of earth, upon
such terms, as that he might have brought down heaven with him, that he might
have come in the port and Majesty of a God, clothed with celestial glory, to
have dazeled our eyes, and to have drawn all hearts unto him; this might have
seemed, in some measure, to have sorted with his divine magnificence; But thou
would have him to appear in the wretched condition of our humanity: Yet, even
thus, had thou sent him into the world, in the highest estate, and pomp of
royalty, that earth could afford, that all the Kings and Monarchs of the world
should have been commanded to follow his train, and to glitter in his Court;
and that the knees of all the Potentates of the earth should have bowed to his
Sovereign Majesty, and their lips have kissed his dust, this might have carried
some kind of appearance of a state next to divine greatness; but thou would
have him come in the despised form of a servant: And thou, O blessed Jesu, wast
accordingly willing, for our sakes, to submit thy self to nakedness, hunger,
thirst, weariness, temptation, contempt, betraying, agonies, scorn, buffeting,
scourgings, distention, crucifixion, death: O love above measure, without
example, beyond admiration! Greater love (thou say) has no man, then this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends; But, oh, what is it then, that
thou, who were God and man, should lay down thy life, (more precious then
many worlds) for thine enemies! Yet, had it been but the laying down of a life,
in a fair and gentle way, there might have been some mitigatio^ of the sorrow
of a dissolution; there is not more difference betwixt life and death, then
there may be betwixt some one kind of death, and another; Thine, O dear
Savior, was the painful, shameful, cursed death of the cross; wherein yet,
all that man could do unto thee was nothing to that inward torment, which in
our stead, thou enduredst from thy Fathers wrath; when in the bitterness of
thine anguished soul, thou cryedst out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Even thus, wast thou content to be forsaken, that we wretched sinners might
be received to mercy; O love stronger then death, which thou vanquishedst! more
high, then that hell is deep, from which thou have rescued us!

SECT. XVI.
THe sense of this infinite love of God cannot choose but ravish the soul, and
cause it to go out of it self, into that Savior who has wrought so
mercifully for it; so as it may be nothing in it self, but what it has, or is,
may be Christ's. By the sweet powers therefore of Faith and Love the soul finds
it self united unto Christ, feelingly, effectually, indivisibly: so as that it
is not to be distinguished betwixt the acts of both: To me Phil. 1. 21.
to live is Christ, says the blessed Apostle; and elsewhere, I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20.
and the life which now I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me; My beloved is Cant. 2. 16.
mine, and I am his, says the Spouse of Christ in her Bridal song. O blessed
union, next to the hypostaticall, whereby the humane nature of the Son of God
is taken into the participation of the eternal Godhead.

SECT. XVII.
OUt of the sense of this happy union arises an unspeakable complacency and
delight of the soul in that God and Savior, who is thus inseparably ours, and
by whose union we are blessed; and an high appreciation of him above all the
world; and a contemptuous under -- valuation of all earthly things, in
comparison of him; And this is no other then an heavenly reflection of that
sweet contentment, which the God of mercies takes in the faithful soul; Thou
have ravished Cant. 4. 9. 6. 4, 5.
my heart, my sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of mine
eyes. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem; Turn
away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. How fair is thy love, my
sister, my Spouse? How much better is thy love then wine, and the smell of
thine ointments better then all spices. And the soul answers him again in the
same language of spiritual dearnesse; My beloved is Can. 5. 10.
white and ruddy; the chiefest among ten thousand. Set me as a seal upon thine
heart, as a seal upon 8. 6.
thine arm, for love is as strong as death: And as in an ecstaticall qualm of
passionate affection; Stay me with flaggons, and comfort 2. 5.
me with apples, for I am sick of love.

SECT. XVIII.
Upon this gracious complacency will follow an absolute self-resignation, or
giving up our selves to the hands of that good God, whose we are, and who is
ours; and an humble contentedness with his good pleasure in all things;
looking upon God with the same face, whether he smile upon us in his favors,
or chastise us with his loving corrections; If he speak good unto us; Behold
the servant of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word; If evil, It is
the Lord, let him do whatsoever he will: Here is therefore a cheerful
acquiescence in God; and an hearty reliance, and casting our selves upon the
mercy of so bountiful a God; who having given us his Son, can in and with him
deny us nothing.

SECT. XIX.
Upon this subacted disposition of heart will follow a familiar (yet awful)
compellation of God; and an emptying of our souls before him in all our
necessities. For that God, who is infinitely merciful, yet will not have his
favors otherwise conveyed to us then by our supplications: the style of his
dear ones is, His people that prays, and his own style is, The God that
hears prayers: To him therefore does the devout heart pour out all his
requests with all true humility, with all fervor of spirit, as knowing, that
God will hear neither proud prayers, nor heartlesse: wherein his holy desires
are regulated by a just method; First, suing for spiritual favors, as most
worthy; then for temporal, as the appendences of better; and in both, aiming
at the glory of our good God, more then our own advantage: And in the order of
spiritual things, first and most for those that are most necessary, and
essential for our souls health, then for secondary graces, that concern the
prosperity and comfort of our spiritual life: Absolutely craving those graces
that accompany salvation, all others, conditionally, and with reference to the
good pleasure of the munificent Giver; Wherein, heed must be taken, that our
thoughts be not so much taken up with our expressions, as with our desires; and
that we do not suffer our selves to languish into an unfeeling length, and
repetition of our suits: Even the hands of a Moses, may in time grow heavy; so
therefore must we husband our spiritual strength, that our devotion may not
flagge with overtyring, but may be most vigorous at the last. And as we must
enter into our prayers, not without preparatory elevations, so must we be
careful to take a meet leave of God, at their shutting up: following our
supplications, with the pause of a faithful, and most lowly adoration; and as
it were sending up our hearts into heaven, to see how our prayers are taken;
and raising them to a joyful expectation of a gracious and successful answer
from the father of mercies.

SECT. XX.
Upon the comfortable feeling of a gracious condescent, follows an happy
fruition of God in all his favors; so as we have not them so much, as God in
them; which advances their worth a thousand fold, and as it were brings down
heaven unto us; whereas, therefore, the sensual man rests only in the mere
use of any blessing, as health, peace, prosperity, knowledge, and reaches no
higher; the devout soul, in, and through all these, sees, and feels a God that
sanctifies them to him, and enjoys therein his favor, that is better then
life; Even we men are wont, out of our good nature, to esteem a benefit, not so
much for its own worth, as for the love, and respect of the giver: Small
legacies for this cause find dear acceptance; how much more is it so betwixt
God and the devout soul? It is the sweet apprehension of this love that makes
all his gifts, blessings. Do we not see some vain churl, though cried down by
the multitude, herein secretly applauding himself, that he has bags at home?
how much more shall the godly man find comfort against all the crosses of the
world, that he is possessed of him that possesses all things; even God
All-sufficient; the pledges of whose infinite love he feels in all the whole
course of Gods dealing with him.

SECT. XXI.
OUt of the true sense of this inward fruition of God, the devout soul breaks
forth into cheerful thanksgivings to the God of all comfort, praising him for
every evil that it is free from; for every good thing it enjoys: For, as it
keeps a just Inventory of all Gods favors, so it often spreads them thankfully
before him, and lays them forth (so near as it may) in the full dimensions;
that so, God may be no loser by him in any act of his beneficence. Here
therefore every of Gods benefits must come into account; whether eternal, or
temporal, spiritual or bodily, outward or inward, public or private,
positive or privative, past or present, upon our selves or others. In all
which, he shall humbly acknowledge both Gods free mercy, and his own shameful
unworthiness; setting off the favors of his good God the more, with the foil
of his own confessed wretchedness, and unanswerablenesse to the least of his
mercies.

Now as there is infinite variety of blessings from the liberal hand of the
Almighty, so there is great difference in their degrees; For, whereas there are
three subjects of all the good we are capable of; The Estate, Body, Soul; and
each of these do far surpass other in value, (the soul being infinitely more
worth then the body, and the body far more precious then the outward estate) so
the blessings that appertain to them, in several, differ in their true
estimation accordingly. If either we do not highly magnify Gods mercy for the
least, or shall set as high a price upon the blessings that concern our estate,
as those that pertain to the body, or upon bodily favors, as upon those that
belong to the soul, we shall show our selves very unworthy, and unequal
partakers of the Divine bounty. But it will savor too much of earth, if we be
more affected with temporal blessings, then with spiritual and eternal. By
how much nearer relation then, any favor has to the Fountain of goodness, and
by how much more it conduces to the glory of God, and ours in him; so much
higher place should it possess in our affection and gratitude. No marvel
therefore if the Devout Heart be raised above it self and transported with
heavenly raptures, when, with Stephens eyes, it beholds the Lord Jesus standing
at the right hand of God, fixing it self upon the consideration of the infinite
Merits of his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, and finding
it self swallowed up in the depth of that Divine Love, from whence all mercies
flow into the Soul; so as that it runs over with passionate thankfulness, and
is therefore deeply affected with all other his mercies, because they are
derived from that boundless Ocean of Divine goodness. Unspeakable is the
advantage that the soul raises to it self by this continual exercise of
thanksgiving; for the grateful acknowledgement of favors, is the way to more;
even amongst men (whose hands are short and strait) this is the means to pull
on further beneficence; how much more from the God of all Consolation, whose
largest bounty diminishes nothing of his store? And herein the Devout Soul
enters into its Heavenly Task; beginning upon earth those Hallelujahs, which it
shall perfect above in the blessed Chore of Saints and Angels, ever praising
God, and saying; Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thankesgiving, and
Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God for ever and ever.

Amen.
SECT. XXII.
NOne of all the services of God can be acceptably, no not unsinfully performed
without due devotion; as therefore in our prayers and thanksgivings, so in the
other exercises of Divine Worship, (especially, in the reading and hearing of
Gods Word, and in our receipt of the blessed Sacrament) it is so necessary,
that without it, we offer to God a mere carcass of religious duty, and profane
that Sacred Name we would pretend to honor. First then, we must come to Gods
Book, not without an holy Reverence, as duly considering both what and whose it
is; Even no other, then the Word of the ever-living God, by which we shall once
be judged. Great reason have we therefore, to make a difference betwixt it, and
the writings of the holiest men, even no less then betwixt the Authors of
both: God is true, yea, truth it self: and that which David said in his haste,
S. Paul says in full deliberation, Ps. 116. Romans 3. 4.
Every man is a Liar. Before we put our hand to this Sacred Volume, it will be
requisite to elevate our hearts to that God whose it is, for both his leave and
his blessing: Open mine eyes, says the sweet Singer of Ps. 119. 8.
Israel, that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Lan. Lo, David's eyes were
open before to other objects; but when he comes to Gods Book, he can see
nothing, without a new act of apertion: Letters he might see, but Wonders he
could not see, till God did unclose his eyes, and enlighten them. It is not
therefore for us, presumptuously to break in upon God, and to think by our
natural abilities to wrest open the precious Caskets of the Almighty; and to
fetch out al his hidden treasure thence, at pleasure; but we must come
tremblingly before him, and in all humility crave his gracious admission. I
confess I find some kind of envy in my self, when I read of those
scrupulous observances of high respects given by the Jews to the Book of Gods
Law: and when I read of a Romish Saint, that never read the Scripture but upon
his knees, Carolus Borromaeus
and compare it with the careless neglect whereof I can accuse my self, and
perhaps some others: Not that we would rest in the formality of outward
Ceremonies of reverence, wherein it were more easy to be superstitious then
devout; but that our outward deportment may testify, and answer the awefull
disposition of our hearts: whereto we shall not need to be excited, if we be
thoroughly persuaded of the Divine Original, and authority of that Sacred Word.
It was motive enough to the Ephesians zealously to plead for, and religiously
to adore the Image of their Diana, that it was the Image that fell down from
Jupiter. Acts 19. 35
Believe we, and know, that the Scripture is inspired by God; and we can
entertain it with no other then an awefull address, and we cannot be
Christians if we do not so believe.

Every clause therefore of that God-inspired Volume, must be, as reverently
received by us, so seriously weighed, and carefully laid up; as knowing, that
there is no tittle therein without his use. What we read, we must labor to
understand; what we cannot understand, we must admire silently, and modestly
inquire of. There are plain Truths, and there are deep Mysteries. The bounty of
God has left this Well of Living-water open for all: what runs over is for
all comers; but every one has not wherewith to draw. There is no Christian
that may not enjoy Gods Book, but every Christian may not interpret it; those
shallow Fords that are in it, may be waded by every Passenger, but there are
deeps wherein he that cannot swim, may drown. How can I without a Guide? said
that Ethiopian Eunuch: Wherefore serves the tongue of the Learned, but to
direct the Ignorant? Their modesty is of no less use then the others skill. It
is a woeful condition of a Church when no man will be ignorant.

What service can our eyes do us in the ways of God without our thoughts? our
diligent and frequent reading, therefore, must be attended with our holy
meditation: we feed on what we read, but we digest only what we meditate of:
What is in our Bible, is Gods; but that which is in our hearts, is our own: By
all which our care must be, not so much to become vviser, as to become better,
laboring still to reduce all things to godly practice.

Finally, as we enter into this task with the lifting up of our hearts for a
blessing, so we shut it up in the ejaculations of our thanksgiving to that God,
who has blessed us with the free use of his Word.

SECT. XXIII.
OUr eye is our best guide to God our Creator, but our ear is it that leads us
to God our Redeemer. How shall they believe except they hear? Which that we may
effectually do, our devotion suggests unto us some duties before the act, some
in the act, some after the act.

It is the Apostles charge, that we should be swift to hear, but heed must be
taken, that we make not more haste then good speed: we may not be so forward as
not to look to our foot Eccles. 5. 1.
when we go to the House of God, lest if we be too ready to hear, we offer the
sacrifice of Fools. What are the foot of the soul, but our affections? If these
be not set right, we may easily stumble, and wrench at Gods threshold. Rash
actions can never hope to prosper; as therefore to every great Work, so to
this, there is a due preparation required; and this must be done by meditation
first, then by prayer. Our meditation first sequesters the heart from the
world, and shakes off those distractive thoughts, which may carry us away from
these better things: for what room is there for God, where the world has taken
up the lodging? We cannot serve God and Mammon. Then secondly, it seizes upon
the heart for God, fixing our thoughts upon the great business we go about;
recalling the greatness of that Majesty into whose presence we enter, and the
main importance of the service we are undertaking; and examining our intentions
wherewith we address our selves to the work intended; I am now going to Gods
House; Wherefore do I go thither? Is it to see, or to be seen? Is it to
satisfy my own curiosity in hearing what the Preacher will say? Is it to
satisfy the law, that requires my presence? Is it to please others eyes, or to
avoid their censures? is it for fashion? is it for recreation? or is it with a
sincere desire to do my soul good, in gaining more knowledge, in quickening my
affections? Is it in a desire to approve my self to my God, in the conscience
of my humble obedience to his command, and my holy attendance upon his
Ordinance? And where we find our ends amiss, chiding and rectifying our
obliquities; where just and right, prosecuting them toward a further
perfection.

Which that it may be done, our meditation must be seconded by our prayers. It
is an unholy rudeness to press into the presence of that God whom we have not
invoked: Our prayer must be, that God would yet more prepare us for the work,
and sanctify us to it, and bless us in it; that he would remove our sins,
that he would send down his Spirit into our hearts, which may enable us to this
great service; that he would bless the Preacher in the delivery of his sacred
message, that he would be pleased to direct his messengers tongue to the
meeting with our necessities; that he would free our hearts from all prejudices
and distractions; that he would keep off all temptations, which might hinder
the good entertainment, and success of his blessed Word: Finally, that he would
make us truly teachable, and his ordinance the power of God to our salvation.

In the act of hearing, Devotion calls us to Reverence, Attention, Application.
Reverence to that great God, who speaks to us, by the mouth of a weak man; for,
in what is spoken from Gods Chair, agreeable to the Scriptures, the sound is
man's, the substance of the message is Gods. Even an Eglon, when he hears Jud.
3. 20.
of a message from God, rises out of his seat. It was not Saint Paul's
condition only, but of all his faithful servants, to whom he has committed
the word of reconciliation; They are Ambassadors for Christ; as 2 Cor. 5. 20
if God did beseech us by them, they pray us in Christ's stead to be reconciled
to God: The Ambassy is not the bearers, but the kings; and if we do not
acknowledge the great King of heaven in the voice of the Gospel, we cannot but
incur a contempt.

When therefore we see Gods messenger in his Pulpit, our eye looks at him, as
if it said with Cornelius, We are all here present before God to hear all
things that Act. 10. 33
are commanded thee of God; whence cannot but follow together with an awful
disposition of mind, a reverent deportment of the body; which admits not a wild
and roving eye, a drouzy head, a chatting tongue, a rude and indecent posture;
but composes it self to such a site as may befit a pious soul in so religious
an employment. Neither do we come as authorized Judges to sit upon the
preacher, but as humble Disciples to sit at his feet.

SECT. XXIV.
REverence cannot but draw on Attention; We need not be bidden to hang on the
lips of him whom we honor. It is the charge of the Spirit, Let him that has
an ear hear; Every one has not an ear, and of those that have an ear, every
one hears not; The soul has an ear as well as the body; if both these ears
do not meet together in one act, there is no hearing: Common experience tells
us that when the mind is otherwise taken up, we do no more hear what a man
says, then if we had been deaf, or he silent. Hence is that first request of
Abig^il to David; Let thine 1 Samuel 25. 24.
handmaid speak to thine ears, and hear the words of thine handmaid; and Job so
importunately urges his friends: Hear diligently Job 13. 17.
my speech and my declaration with your ears. The outward ear may be open, and
the inward shut; if way be not made through both, we are deaf to spiritual
things. Mine ear have thou boared, Psalm. 40. 6.
or dug, says the Psalmist; the vulgar reads it, my ears have thou
perfected: Surely our ears are grown up with flesh; there is no passage for a
perfect hearing of the voice of God, till he have made it by a spiritual
perforation.

And now that the ear is made capable of good counsel, it does as gladly
receive it; taking in every good lesson, and longing for the next: Like unto
the dry and chopped earth, which soaks in every silver drop, that falls from
the clouds, and thirsts for more, not suffering any of that precious liquor
to fall beside it.

SECT. XXV.
NEither does the devout man care to satisfy his curiosity, as hearing only
that he might hear; but reducts all things to a saving use; bringing all he
hears, home to his heart, by a self-reflecting application; like a practiser of
the art of memory, referring every thing to it is proper place; If it be matter
of comfort, There is for my sick bed, There is for my outward losses, There for
my drouping under afflictions, There for the sense of my spiritual desertions;
If matter of doctrine, There is for my settlement in such a truth, There for
the conviction of such an error, There for my direction in such a practice; If
matter of reproof, he does not point at his neighbor, but deeply charge
himself; This meets with my dead-heartednesse and security, This with my
worldly mindedness, This with my self-love and flattery of mine own estate,
This with my uncharitable censoriousnesse, This with my foolish pride of heart,
This with my hypocrisy, This with my neglect of Gods services, and my duty;
Thus in all the variety of the holy passages of the Sermon, the devout mind is
taken up with digesting what it hears; and working it self to a secret
improvement of all the good counsel that is delivered, neither is ever more
busy, then when it sits still at the feet of Christ. I cannot therefore
approve the practice (which yet I see commonly received) of those, who think it
no small argument of their Devotion, to spend their time of hearing, in writing
large notes from the mouth of the Preacher; which however it may be an help for
memory in the future, yet cannot (as I conceive) but be some prejudice to our
present edification; neither can the brain get so much hereby, as the heart
loses. If it be said, that by this means, an opportunity is given for a full
rumination of wholesome Doctrines afterward: I yield it, but withal, I must
say that our after-thoughts can never do the work so effectually, as when the
lively voice sounds in our ears, and beats upon our heart; but herein I submit
my opinion to better judgments.

SECT. XXVI.
THe food that is received into the soul by the ear, is afterward chewed in
the mouth thereof by memory, concocted in the stomach by meditation, and
dispersed into the parts by conference and practice; True Devotion finds the
greatest part of the work behind; It was a just answer that John Gerson Sermon.
ad Eccles. cautelam.
reports, given by a Frenchman, who being asked by one of his neighbors if the
Sermon were done; no says he, it is said, but it is not done, neither will be,
I fear, in have. What are we the better if we hear and remember not? if we be
such auditors as the Jews were wont to call sieves, that retain no moisture
that is poured into them? What the better if we remember, but think not
seriously of what we hear; or if we practice not carefully what we think of?
Not that which we hear is our own, but that which we carry away: although all
memories are not alike, one receives more easily, another retains longer; It is
not for every one to hope to attain to that ability, that he can go away with
the whole fabric of a Sermon, and readily recount it unto others; neither does
God require that of any man, which he has not given him; Our desires and
endeavors may not be wanting where our powers fail; It will be enough for weak
memories if they can so lay up those wholesome counsels which they receive, as
that they may fetch them forth when they have occasion to use them; and that
what they want in the extent of memory, they supply in the care of their
practice; Indeed that is it, wherein lies the life of all religious duties, and
without which (...) the Philosopher (...) virtue, I must say of true godliness,
that it consists in action; Our Savior did not say, Blessed are ye if ye know
these things; But, If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. The
end of our desire of the sincere milk of the Gospel, is, that we may grow
thereby in the stature of all Grace, unto the 1 Pet. 2. 2 Ephesians. 3. 9.
fullness of God.

SECT. XXVII.
THe highest of all Gods services are his Sacraments; which therefore require
the most eminent acts of our Devotion. The Sacrament of initiation, which in
the first planting of a Church is administered only to those of riper age and
understanding, calls for all possible reverence, and religious addresses of the
receivers; wherein the Primitive times were punctually observant, both for
substance, and ceremony; now, in a settled and perpetuated Church, in which the
virtue of the Covenant descends from the parent to the child, there seems to be
no use of our preparatory directions: Only, it is fit that our Devotion should
call our eyes back, to what we have done in our infancy, and whereto we are
ever obliged; that our full age may carefully endeavor to make our word good,
and may put us in mind of our sinful failings. That other Sacrament of our
spiritual nourishment, which our Savior (as his farewell) left us for a
blessed memorial of his death and passion, can never be celebrated with enough
Devotion. Far be it from us to come to this feast of our God, in our common
garments; the soul must be trimmed up, if we would be meet guests for the
Almighty. The great Master of the feast will neither abide us to come naked,
nor ill clad: Away therefore, first with the old beastly rags of our wonted
corruptions: Due examination comes in first, and thoroughly searches the soul,
and finds out all the secret nastiness, and defilements that it hides within
it; and by the aid of true penitence, strips it of all those loathsome clouts,
wherewith it was polluted; Sin may not be clothed upon with grace; Joshuahs
Zachar. 3. ^
filthy garments must be plucked off, ere he can be capable of precious robes:
Here may be no place for our sinful lusts, for our covetous desires, for our
natural infidelity, for our malicious purposes, for any of our unhallowed
thoughts; The soul clearly divested of these and all other known corruptions,
must in the next placae in stead thereof, be furnished with such graces and
holy predispositions, as may fit it for so heavenly a work. Amongst the graces
requisite, Faith justly challenges the first place, as that which is both most
eminent, and most necessarily presupposed to the profitable receipt of this
Sacrament; for whereas the main end of this blessed banquet is the
strengthening of our faith, how should that receive strength, which has not
being? to deliver these sacred viands to an unbeleever, is to put meat into
the mouth of a dead man: Now therefore must the heart raise up it self to new
acts of believing, and must lay faster hold on Christ, and bring him closer to
the soul; more strongly applying to it self, the infinite merits of his most
perfect obedience, and of his bitter death and passion; and erecting it self to
a desire and expectation of a more vigorous: and lively apprehension of it is
omnipotent Redeemer. Neither can this faith be either dead, or solitary; but is
still really operative, and attended (as with other graces, so) especially with
a serious repentance; whose wonderful power is, to undo our former sins, and
to mold the heart and life to a better obedience: A grace so necessary, that
the want of it (as in extreme corruption of the stomach) turns the wholesome
food of the soul into poison; An impenitent man therefore coming to Gods
board, is so far from benefiting himself, as that he eats his own judgment:
Stand off from this holy table, all ye that have not made your peace with your
God; or that harbor any known sin in your bosom; not to eat is uncomfortable,
but to eat in such a state is deadly; yet rest not in this plea, that ye cannot
come because ye are unreconciled; but (as ye love your souls) be reconciled
that you may come.

Another Grace necessarily pre-required is charity to our brethren, and
readiness to forgive; For this is a communion, as with Christ the head, so
with all the members of his mystical body: This is the true Lovefeast of God
our Savior, wherein we profess our selves inseparably united both to him and
his; If there be more hearts then one at Gods table, he will not own them;
These holy elements give us an Emblem of our selves: This bread is made up of
many grains, incorporated into one mass; and this wine is the confluent juice
of many clusters; neither do we partake of several loaves, or variety of
liquors, but all eat of one bread, and drink of one cup. Here is then no place
for rancour and malice; none for secret grudgings and heart-burnings;
Therefore, if thou bring thy Mat. 5. 23.
gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

Neither may we do as those two emulous Commanders of Greece did, who resolved
to leave their spite behind them at mount Athos, and to take it up again in
their return; here must be an absolute, and free acquitting of all the
back-reckonings of our unkindnesse, that we may receive the God of peace into a
clear bosom.

SECT. XXVIII.
BEsides these graces there are certain holy pre-dispositions so necessary that
without them our souls can never hope to receive true comfort in this blessed
Sacrament; whereof the first is an hungring and thirsting desire after these
gracious means of our salvation: What good will our meat do us without an
appetite? surely without it, there is no expectation of either relish, or
digestion; as therefore those that are invited to some great feast, care first
to feed their hunger ere they feed their body; laboring by exercise to get a
stomach, ere they employ it; so it concerns us to do here: and, as those those
that are listlesse, and weak stomached, are wont to whet their appetite with
sharp sawces, so must we by the tart applications of the law, quicken our
desires of our Savior here exhibited.

Could we but see our sins, and our miseries by sin; Could we see God frowning,
and hell gaping wide to swallow us, we should not need to be bidden to long for
our deliverer; and every pledge of his favor would be precious to us.

Upon the apprehension of our need of a Savior and so happy a supply thereof
presented unto us, must needs follow a renewed act of true thankfulness of
heart to our good God, that has both given us his dear Son to work our
redemption, and his blessed Sacrament to seal up unto us our redemption thus
wrought and purchased; And with souls thus thankfully elevated unto God, we
approach with all reverence, to that heavenly table, where God is both the
Feast-master, and the Feast. What intention of holy thoughts, what fervor of
spirit, what depth of Devotion must we now find in our selves? Doubtless, out
of heaven no object can be so worthy to take up our hearts. What a clear
representation is here of the great work of our Redemption? How is my Savior
by all my senses here brought home to my soul? How is his passion lively acted
before mine eyes? For lo, my bodily eye does not more truly see bread and wine,
then the eye of my faith sees the body and blood of my dear Redeemer; Thus was
his sacred body torn and broken; Thus was his precious blood poured out for me;
My sins (wretched man that I am) helped thus to crucify my Savior; and for
the discharge of my sins would he be thus crucified: Neither did he only give
himself for me, upon the cross, but lo, he both offers and gives himself to me
in this his blessed institution; what had his general gift been without this
application? now my hand does not more sensibly take, nor my mouth more really
eat this bread, then my soul does spiritually receive, and feed on the bread of
life; O Savior, thou art the living bread that came down from heaven; Thy
flesh is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink indeed: Oh that I may so eat of
this bread, that I may live for ever; He that comes to thee, shall never
hunger, he that believes in thee, shall never thirst: Oh that I could now so
hunger, and so thirst for thee, that my soul could be for ever satisfied with
thee; Thy people of old, were fed with Manna in the wilderness, yet they died;
that food of Angels could not keep them from perishing; but oh, for the hidden
Manna, which gives life to the world, even thy blessed self, give me ever of
this bread, and my soul shall not die but live: Oh the precious juice of the
fruit of the Vine, wherewith thou refreshest my soul* Is this the blood of the
grape? Is it not rather thy blood of the New testament, that is poured out for
me? Thou speak, O Savior, of new wine that thou would drink with thy
Disciples, in thy Fathers kingdom, can there be any more precious and
pleasant, then this, wherewith thou chearest the believing soul? our palate is
now dull and earthly, which shall then be exquisite and celestial; but surely
no liquor can be of equal price or sovereignty with thy blood; Oh how
unsavory are all earthly delicacies to this heavenly draught* O God, let not
the sweet taste of this spiritual Nectar ever go out of the mouth of my soul;
Let the comfortable warmth of this blessed Cordial ever work upon my soul,
even till, and in, the last moment of my dissolution. Do thou bid me, O
Savior, do this in remembrance of thee? Oh, how can I forget thee? How can I
enough celebrate thee for this thy unspeakable mercy? Can I see thee thus
crucified before my eyes, and for my sake thus crucified, and not remember
thee? Can I find my sins accessory to this thy death, and thy death
meritoriously expiating all these my grievous sins, and not remember thee? Can
I hear thee freely offering thy self to me, and feel thee graciously
conveighing thy self into my soul, and not remember thee? I do remember thee O
Savior; but oh that I could yet more effectually remember thee; with all the
passionate affections of a soul sick of thy love; with all zealous desires to
glorify thee, with all fervent longings after thee, and thy salvation; I
remember thee in thy sufferings, Oh do thou remember me in thy glory.

SECT. XXIX.
HAving thus busied it self with holy thoughts in the time of the celebration,
the devout soul breaks not off in an abrupt unmannerlinesse, without taking
leave of the great Master of this heavenly feast, but with a secret adoration,
humbly blesses God for so great a mercy, and heartily resolves and desires to
walk worthy of the Lord Jesus, whom it has received, and to consecreate it
self wholly to the service of him that has so dearly bought it, and has given
it these pledges of it is eternal union with him.

The devout soul has thus sup't in heaven, and returns home, yet the work is
not thus done: after the elements are out of eye and use, there remains a
digestion of this celestial food, by holy meditation; and now it thinks, Oh
what a blessing have I received to day! no less then my Lord Jesus, with all
his merits; and in and with him, the assurance of the remission of all my sins,
and everlasting salvation: How happy am I, if I be not wanting to God and my
self? How unworthy shall I be, if I do not strive to answer this love of my
God and Savior, in all hearty affection, and in all holy obedience?

And now after this heavenly repast, how do I feel my self? what strength,
what advantage has my faith gotten? how much am I nearer to heaven then
before? how much faster hold have I taken of my blessed Redeemer? how much more
firm and sensible is my interest in him?

Neither are these thoughts, and this examination the work of the next instant
only, but they are such, as must dwell upon the heart; and must often solicit
our memory, and excite our practice, that by this means we may frequently renew
the efficacy of this blessed Sacrament, and our souls may batten more and more,
with this spiritual nourishment, and may be fed up to eternal life.

SECT. XXX.
THese are the generalities of our Devotion, which are of common use to all
Christians; There are besides these certain specialties of it, appliable to
several occasions, times, places, persons; For there are morning, and evening
Devotions; Devotions proper to our board, to our closet, to our bed, to Gods
day, to our own; to health, to sickness, to several callings, to recreations;
to the way, to the field, to the Church, to our home, to the student, to the
soldier, to the Magistrate, to the Minister, to the husband, wife, child,
servant; to our own persons, to our families; The severalties whereof, as they
are scarce finite for number, so are most fit to be left to the judgment, and
holy managing of every Christian; neither is it to be imagined, that any soul
which is taught of God, and has any acquaintance with heaven, can be to seek
in the particular application of common rules to his own necessity or
expedience.

The result of all, is,

A devout man is he that ever sees the invisible, and ever trembles before
that God he sees; that walks ever, here on earth, with the God of heaven; and
still adores that Majesty with whom he converses; that confers hourly with the
God of spirits in his own language; yet so, as no familiarity can abate of his
aw, nor fear abate ought of his love. To whom the gates of heaven are ever
open, that he may go in at pleasure to the throne of grace, and none of the
Angelical spirits can offer to challenge him of too much boldness: Whose eyes
are well acquainted with those heavenly guardians, the presence of whom he does
as truly acknowledge, as if they were his sensible companions. He is well known
of the King of glory, for a daily suitor in the Court of heaven, and none so
welcome there, as he: He accounts all his time lost that falls beside his God;
and can be no more weary of good thoughts, then of happiness.

His bosom is no harbor for any known evil; and it is a question whether he
more abhorres sin, or hell; His care is to entertain God in a clear, and free
heart, and therefore he thrusts the world out of doors, and humbly beseeches
God to welcome himself to his own: He is truly dejected, and vile in his own
eyes: Nothing but hell is lower then he; every of his slips are heinous, every
trespass is aggravated to rebellion; The glory and favors of God heighten his
humiliation; He has looked down to the bottomless deep, and seen with horror
what he deserved to feel everlastingly; His cries have been as strong, as his
fears just; and he has found mercy more ready to rescue him, then he could be
importunate: His hand could not be so soon put forth as his Saviors, for
deliverance. The sense of this mercy has raised him to an unspeakable joy to a
most fervent love of so dear a Redeemer; that love has knit his heart to so
meritorious a deliverer, and wrought a blessed union betwixt God and his soul.
That union can no more be severed from an infinite delight, then that delight
can be severed from an humble, and cheerful acquiescence in his munificent
God; And now, as in an heavenly freedom, he pours out his soul into the bosom
of the Almighty, in all faithful suits for himself and others; so, he enjoys
God in the blessings received, and returns all zealous praises to the giver.

He comes reverently to the Oracles of God, and brings not his eye, but his
heart with him, not carelessly negligent in seeking to know the revealed will of
his maker, nor too busily inquisitive into his deep counsels; not too remiss
in the letter, nor too peremptory in the sense: gladly comprehending what he
may, and admiring what he cannot comprehend. Does God call for his ear? He goes
awfully into the holy presence and so hears, as if he should now hear his last:
Latching every word that drops from the Preachers lips, ere it fall to the
ground, and laying it up carefully where he may be sure to fetch it. He sits
not to censure, but to learn, yet speculation and knowledge is the least drift
of his labor; Nothing is his own but what he practices. Is he invited to Gods
feast? he hates to come in a foul and slovenly dress; but trims up his soul,
so, as may be fit for an heavenly guest: Neither does he leave his stomach at
home cloyed with the world, but brings a sharp appetite with him; and so s^eds
as if he meant to live for ever. All earthly delicates are unfavoury to him, in
respect of that celestial Manna: Shortly, he so eats and drinks, as one that
sees himself set at Table with God, and his Angels; and rises and departs full
of his Savior; and in the strength of that meal walks vigorously and
cheerfully on toward his glory. Finally, as he well knows that he lives, and
moves, and has his being in God, so he referres his life, motions, and being
wholly to God; so acting all things as if God did them by him, so using all
things, as one that enjoyes God in them; and in the mean time so walking on
earth, that he does in a sort carry his heaven with him.

THE FREE PRISONER: OR, The COMFORT of RESTRAINT.

Written Some while since in the Tower, BY I. H. B. N.

The Free Prisoner: OR The Comfort of Restraint.
SECT. I.
SIR:
WHiles you pity my affliction, take heed lest you aggravate it, and in your
thoughts make it greater then it is in my own; It is true, I am under
restraint; What is that to a man, that can be free in the Tower, and cannot but
be a prisoner abroad? Such is my condition, and every Divine Philosophers with
me. Were my walls much straiter then they are, they cannot hold me in; It is a
bold word to say, I cannot, I will not be a prisoner: It is my Soul that is I:
my flesh is my partner, (if not my servant) not my self: However my body may be
immured, that agile spirit shall fly abroad, and visit both earth, and heaven
at pleasure. Who shall hinder it from mounting up (in an instant) to that
supreme region of bliss, and from seeing that, by the eye of faith, which S.
Paul saw in ecstasy; and when it has viewed that blessed Hierarchy of heaven
to glance down through the innumerable, and unmeasurable globes of light (which
move in the firmament, and below it) into this elementary world; and there to
compass seas and lands, without shipwreck, in a trice, which a Drake, or
Cavendish cannot do, but with danger, and in some years navigation; And if my
thoughts list to stay themselves in the passage; with what variety can my soul
be taken up of several objects; Here, turning in to the dark vaults, and
dungeons of penal restraint, to visit the disconsolate prisoners, and to fetch
from their greater misery, a just mitigation of mine own; There, looking in to
the houses of vain jollity, and pitying that which the sensual fools call
happiness; Here stepping in to the Courts of great Princes, and in them
observing the fawning compliances of some, the treacherous underworking of
others; hollow friendships, faithless engagements, fair faces, smooth tongues,
rich suits, viewing all save their hearts, and censuring nothing that it sees
not; There calling in at the low cottages of the poor, and out of their empty
cupboard furnishing it self with thankfulness; Here so over-looking the Courts
of Justice, as not willing to seerigour or partiality; There listing what they
say in those meetings which would pass for sacred, and wondering at what it
hears. Thus can, and shall, and does my nimble spirit bestir it self in a
restless flight, making only the Empyreall heaven, the bounds of it is motion;
not being more able to stand still, then the heavens themselves, whence it
descended: Should the iron enter into my soul, as it did into that good
Patriarchs, yet it cannot fetter me: No more can my spirit be confined to one
place, then my body can be diffused to many. Perhaps therefore you are mistaken
in my condition; for what is it I beseech you that makes a prisoner? Is it an
allotment to the same room without change, without remove? What is that still
to a mind that is free?

And why is my body then more a prisoner then the best man's soul; that, you
know, is peremptorily assigned, for inhabitation to this house of clay till the
day of dissolution: Why more then the stars of Heaven, which have remained
fixed in their first stations ever since they were first created? Why more then
those great persons which keep up for state; or Dames for beauty? Why more then
those Anachorites whom we have seen willingly cooped up for merit? How much
more scope have we then they? We breathe fresh air, we see the same heavens
with the freest travelers.

SECT. II.
BUt we have (you will say) bounds for our restraint, which the free spirit
hates; as never being pleased, but with a full liberty both of prospect and
passage; Any bar, whether to the foot, or to the eye, is a death: Oh vain
affectation of wild, and roving curiosity! if their desires cannot be bounded,
yet their motions must; When they have the full sight of heaven above them,
they cannot clime up into it; they cannot possibly see that whole glorious
contignation; and when the whole earth lies open before them, they can measure
but some small pieces of it. How can they be quiet till they have purchased
Tycho Brahe his prospective Trunk of thirty two foot long, whereby they may
discover a better face of Heaven; some lesser Planets moving round about the
Sun, and the Moonets about Saturn and Jupiter, and the Mountains, Seas, and
Valleys in the Moon? How can they rest till having acquainted themselves with
the constellations of our Hemisphere, they have passed the Equinoctial, and
seen the triangle, the cross, and the clouds, and the rest of the unknown
Stars that move above the other Pole? And when all this is done they are but
who they were, no whit better, no whit wiser, and perhaps far less happy then
those, who never smelt any but their own smoke; never knew any star, but
Charleswayn, the Morning Star, and the Seven. For me, I do not envy, but
wonder at the licentious freedom, which these men think themselves happy to
enjoy; and hold it a weakness in those minds, which cannot find more
advantage and pleasure in confinement, and retiredness; Is it a small benefit,
that I am placed there, where no oaths, no blasphemies beat my ears? where my
eyes are in no peril of wounding objects; where I hear no invectives, no false
doctrines, no sermocinations of Ironmongers, Felt-makers, Cobblers, Broom-men,
Grooms, or any other of those inspired ignorants; no curses, no ribaldries:
where I see no drunken comeslations, no rebellious routs, no violent
oppressions, no obscene rejoycings, nor ought else that might either vex, or
afright my soul. This, this is my liberty: who whiles I sit here quietly locked
up by my Keeper, can pity the turmoiles and distempers abroad, and bless my
own immunity from those too common evils.

SECT. III.
IS it the necessity and force of the restraint; since those things which we do
voluntarily, are wont to pass from us with delight, which being imposed seem
grievous to us? Why should not I have so much power over my will as to make
that voluntary in me, to undergo, which another wills forcibly to inflict? the
mind that is truly subacted to Grace, can so frame it self to what it must
suffer, as that it finds a kind of contentment in patience; Thus we daily do
to the Almighty, whose will, by our humble submission, we make ours; and pray
that we may do so: And who can restrain us without him? If therefore my wise
and holy God think it best to cage me up, by the command of authority (upon
what cause soever) why should not I think this enclosure a better liberty: who
know there is perfect freedom in his obedience? So then, if constraint make a
prisoner, I am none; who am most willingly, where my God will have me: And, if
my will did not often carry me out of my own walks at home, why cannot it as
well confine me to a larger compass of the Tower?

SECT. IV.
IS it solitude and infrequence of visitation? This may perhaps be troublesome
to a man that knows not to entertain himself; but, to him that can hold
continual discourse with his own heart, no favor can be greater; For of all
other, these self-conferences are most beneficial to the soul; Other men's
communication may spend the time with more advantage of learning or mirth; but
none can yield us so much spiritual profit, as our own soliloquies: And when
all is done, the Greeks said well; It is not much, but useful (...).
that makes truly wise. Besides this, we can never have the opportunity of so
good company, as when we are alone: Now, we enjoy the society of God, and his
Angels, which we cannot so freely do in a throng of visitants: When God would
express his greatest entireness with his Church, Ducam eam in solitudinem,
says he: I will bring her into Hos. 2. 14.
the wilderness, and there speak comfortably to her. We cannot expect so sweet
conversation with God, in the presence of others, as apart. Oh the divine
benefit of an holy solitariness, which no worldly heart can either know, or
value! What care I for seeing of men, when I may see him that is invisible?
What care I for chatting with friends, when I may talk familiarly with the God
of heaven? What care I for entertaining mortal guests, when I may with Abraham
and his nephew Lot feast the Angels of God: and (which were too great a word,
if God himself had not spoken it) be attended by them?

SECT. V.
IS it the reproach and ignominy that commonly attends the very name of an
imprisonment? weak minds may be affected with every thing: but, with solid
judgments, it is not the punishment, but the cause that makes either the
Martyr, or the malefactor. S. Paul's bonds were famous: and Petrus ad vincula is
not without a note of yearly celebrity: and it were hard, if so many blessed
Martyrs, and Confessors, who have lived, and died in Jayls, for the truths
sake; should not have brought prisons (such as they may be) into some credit.
Shortly, as notorious crimes may be at liberty, so even innocence may be under
restraint; yet those crimes no whit the better, nor this innocence the worse.

Besides (that which perhaps came not within your freer thoughts) every
restraint is not for punishment; there is a restraint for safety, a salva
custodia, as well as arcta, such is this of ours: This strong Tower serves not
so much for our prison, as for our defense; what horror soever the name may
carry in it: I bless God for these walls, out of which I know not where we
could (for the time) have been safe from the rage of the misincensed multitude:
Poor seduced souls, they were taught it was piety to be cruel; and were
misperswaded to hate and condemn us for that, (which should have procured their
reverence, and honor) even that holy station which we hold in Gods Church; and
to curse those of us, who had deserved nothing but their thanks and prayers:
railing on our very profession in the streets; and rejoicing in our supposed
ruin: Father, forgive them, for they knew not what they did: Here we were out
of the danger of this mis-raised fury, and had leisure to pray for the
quenching of those wild fires of contention, 'and causlesse malice, which (to
our great grief) we saw wicked incendiaries daily to cast amongst Gods dear and
well-minded people. Here we have well and happily approved with the blessed
Apostle, that (what ever our restraint be) the Word of God is not bound; With
what liberty, with what zeal, with what success has that been preached by us
to all comers? Let them say, whether the Tower had ever so many, such guests,
or such benedictions; so as if the place have rendered us safe, we have
endeavored to make it happy; Wherein our performances have seemed to confute
that which Non enim potest men's attrita and oneribus and importunitatibus
gravata, tanium boni peragere, quantum delectata and oppressionibus soluta
Cornel. ep. 2. Rufo Coepiscopo.
Cornelius Bishop of Rome long since observed, that the mind laden with heavy
burdens of affliction, is not able to do that service, which it can do when
it is free and at ease; Our troubles through Gods mercy made us more active,
and our labors more effectual.

SECT. VI.
Add unto these (if you please) the eminent dignity of the place, such, as is
able to give a kind of honor to captivity, the ancient seat of Kings, chosen
by them, as for the safe residence of their royal persons, so for their
treasury, their wardrobe, their Magazine; all these precious things are under
the same custody with our selves; sent hither, not as to a prison, but a
repository; and why should we think our selves in any other condition? How many
worthy inhabitants make choice to fix their abode within these walls, as not
knowing where to be happier? the place is the same to us, if our will maybe the
same with theirs; they dearly purchase that, which cost us nothing but our
fees; nothing makes the difference, but the mere conceit of Liberty, which
whiles I can give to my self, in my thoughts, why am I pityed as miserable,
whiles their happiness is applauded?

You see then how free I am in that which you mis-call my prison; see now, how
little cause I have to affect this liberty, which you imagine me to want; since
I shall be, I can be no other then a prisoner abroad: There is much difference
of prisons; One is strait and close locked, so far from admitting visitants,
that it scarce allows the sun to look in at those crosse-barred grates;
another, is more large and spacious, yielding both walks, and access; Even
after my discharge from these walls, I shall be yet sure to be a prisoner, both
these ways; For, what is my body but my prison in the one? and what is the
world, but my prison in the other kind?

SECT. VII.
TO begin with the former, never was there a more close prisoner then my soul
is for the time to my body; Close in respect of the essence of that spirit,
which since it is first Mittimus, never stirred out from this strait room; never
can do, till my gaole-delivery.

If you respect the improvement of the operatio^s of that busy soul, it is any
where, it is successively every where; no place can hold it, none can limit it;
but if you regard the immortal, and immateriall substance of it, it is fast
locked up within these walls of clay, till the day of my changing come; even as
the closest captive may write letters to his remotest friends, whilst his
person is in durance; I have too much reason to acknowledge my native Jayle,
and feel the true Symptoms of it to my pain; what darkness of sorrow have I
here found? what little-ease of melancholic lodgings? what manacles and
shakles of cramps? yea what racks of torturing convulsions?

And if there be others, that find less misery in their prison, yet there is
no good soul, but finds equal restraint: That spiritual substance, which is
imprisoned within us, would fain be flying up to that heaven whence it
descended; these walls of flesh forbid that evolation, (as Socrates called it of
old) and will not let it out, till the God of spirits (who placed it there)
shall unlock the doors, and free the prisoner by death; He that insused life
into Lazarus, that he might call him from the prison of the grave, must take
life from us, when he calls us out of this prison of flesh; I desire to be
loosed, and to be with Christ, (says the Apostle) as some versions express
it; whiles we are chained to this flesh, we can have no passage to heaven, no
free conversation with our Savior: Although it was the singular privilege of
that great Doctor of the Gentiles, that he was in heaven before his
dissolution: whether in the body, or out of the body, he knew not: How far that
rapture extended, whether to both soul and body, if he knew not, how should we?
But this we know, that such ecstasy and vision was in him, without separation
of the soul from the body; which another should hope for in vain: And for him,
so he saw this glory of Paradise, that he could not yet enjoy it: Before he, or
we, can be blessed with the fruition of Christ, we must be loosed: that is,
freed from our clog, and our chain of this mortal body.

What but our prison walls can hinder us here, from a free prospect? What but
these walls of flesh can hinder me from a clear vision of God? I must now, for
the time, see as I may: Nothing can enter into my soul, but what passes through
my senses, and partakes, in some sort, of their earthlinesse; when I am freed
from them, I shall see as I am seen; in an abstracted and heavenly way; so as
one spirit apprehends another: I do now, at the best, see those spiritual
objects darkly, by the eye of faith, as in a glass; and that not one of the
clearest neither: (Alas, what dim representations are these, that I can attain
to here, of that Majesty, whose sight shall make me blessed?) I shall once see
as I am seen, face to face; the face of my glorified soul shall see the face of
that all-glorious Deity, and in that sight be eternally happy; It is enough for
a prisoner in this dungeon of clay, to know of, and fore-expect such felicity,
whereof these earthly gieves render him as yet incapable.

SECT. VIII.
WOE is me! how many prisons do we pass? so soon as ever this divine soul is
insused into this flesh, it is a prisoner: neither can any more pass out of
this skin, till this frame of nature be demolished: And now, as the soul of
this Embryon is instantly a prisoner to the body, so the body is also a
prisoner in the womb, wherein it is formed: what darkness, what closeness,
what uneasinesse, what nuisance is there in this dungeon of nature? There he
must lie in an uncouth posture, for his appointed month, till the native bonds
being loosed, and the doors forced open, he shall be by an helpful
obstetrication drawn forth into the larger prison of the world; there indeed
he has elbow-room enough: but all that wide scope cannot free him from a true
incarceratio^: Who knows not that there are many differences, and latitudes of
restraint? A Simeon may imprison and enchain himself in the compass of a
pillar, not allowing himself the ease of his whole dimensio^s; Peter may be
locked up in a larger Jayle, betwixt his two Leopards (as that father terms
the^;) S. Paul may be two years allowed to be a prisoner in his own Acts ult.
hired house, but under the guard of his keeper, and not without his chain:
There are those who upon heinous, and dangerous occasions, may be kept close
under many locks; there are prisoners at large, who have the liberty of the
Tower; yet even these last, notwithstanding the allowance of spacious walks,
and fresh gardens, are no other then acknowledged prisoners: Such is my
condition to the world, when I am at my fullest liberty: It is true, that when
I look back to the straitness of my first, and native prison, and compare it
with the large extent of that wide world, into which I am brought, I may well
with Isaacs Herds-men, say, Rehoboth, For Genesis 26. 22.
now, the Lord has made me room: but when I compare that world, wherein I am,
with that whereto I aspire, and which I know to be above, and look to enjoy; I
can see nothing here, but mere prison-vvals, and profess my life to be no
other then a perpetual durance.

SECT. IX.
IF Varro said of old, that the Magna domus homuli.
world was no other then the great house of little man, I shall be bold to add
what kind of house it is; It is no other then his prison, yea, his dungeon.

Far be it from me to disparage the glorious work of my omnipotent Creator: I
were not worthy to look upon this large, and glittering roof of heaven, nor to
see the pleasant varieties of these earthly landskips, if I did not adore that
infinite power, and wisdom which appears in this goodly, and immense fabric;
and confess the mavelous beauty of that majestic, and transcendent
workmanship; Rather when I see the Moon and the Stars, which thou have
ordained, Psalm. 8. 3, 4.
I say with the Psalmist, Lord what is man?

But, O God, it is no dishonor to thee, that though this be a fair house, yet
thou have one so much better then it, as a Palace is beyond a Jayle.

This beauty may please, but that ravisheth my soul: Here is light, but dim,
and dusky, in respect of that inaccessible light, wherein thou dwell: Here
is a glorious sun, that illumineth this inferior world, but thou art the sun
who enlightenest that world above: Thou, to whom thy created Sun is but a
shadow.

Here we converse with beasts, or at the best, with men; there with blessed
souls, and heavenly Angels: Here some frivolous delights are intermixed with a
thousand vexations; There in thy presence is the fullness of joy: So then, let
the sensual heart mis-place his paradise here in the world, it shall not pass
for other with me, then my prison: How can it? Why should it? for what other
terms do I find here?

What blind light looks in here at these scant loopeholes of my soul? Yea, what
darkness of ignorance rather possesses me? what bolts and shackles of heavy
crosses do I bear about me? how am I fed here with the bread of afdiction?
how am I watched and beset with evil spirits? how contumeliously traduced? how
disdainefully looked upon? how dragging the same chain with the worst
malefactors? how disabled to all spiritual motions? how restrained from that
full liberty of enjoying my home, and my God in it, which I daily expect in my
dissolution? when therefore, I am released from these walls, I am still
imprisoned in larger, and so shall be till the Lord of the spirits of al flesh
(who put me here) shall set me free; and all the days of my appointed time will
I wait, til this my changing come.

SECT. X.
YOu see then by this time, how little reason I have to be too much troubled
with this imprisonment, or my friends for me; But indeed, there are some sorts
of Prisoners, which neither you nor I can have tears enough to bewail: and those
especially of two kinds.

The one, those that are too much affected with an outward bondage: The other,
those that are no whit affected with a spiritual.

In the first rank are they that sink under the weight of their Irons; Poor
impotent souls, that groaning under the cruelty of a Turkish thraldom, or a
Spanish Inquisition, want Faith to bear them out, against the impetuous
violences of their tormentors: I sorrow for their suffering; but for their
fai^^^^ more: could they see the Gro^^^ of glory, which the right^ (...) Judge
holds ready for their ^^ctorious Patience, they (...) not but contemn pain,
(...) all the pomp of Death, and ^^^fesse that their Light affliction (which is
but for (...)) works for them a far more ^^^ceeding and eternal weight of
glory: But alas, it is the weakness of their eyes, that they only look at the
things that are seen, close walls, heavy (...) sharp scourges, merciless racks,
and other dreadful engines of torture, and see not the things that are not
seen, the glorious reward of their victory, blessedness. Had they had Stephens
eyes, they would have emulated his martyrdom; Surely whosoever shall but read
the story of the Mother and the seven Brothers in the Maccabees, and that of
the forty Armenian Martyrs frozen to death, reported by Gaudentius, and shall
there see the fainting revolter dying uncomfortably in the Bath, whiles the
other thirty and nine (together with their new converted Keeper) are crowned by
an Angel from heaven, cannot choose (except he have nothing but Ice in his
bosom) but find in himself a disposition emulous of their courage, and
ambitious of their honor; But alas, what ever our desires; and purposes may
be, it is not for every one to attain to the glory of Martyrdom; this is the
highest pitch, that earthly Saints are capable of: He must be more then a man,
whom pain and death cannot remove from his holy resolutions, and especially,
the lingering execution of both. It is well if an age can yield one, Mole: In
what terms shall I commemorate thee, O thou blessed Confessor, the great example
of invincible constancy, in these backsliding times, (if at least thy rare
perseverance be not more for wonder then imitation) whom thirty years tedious
durance in the Inquisitory at Rome, could not weary out of thy sincere
profession of the Evangelical truth? All this while thou were not allowed the
speech, the sight of any, but thy persecutors: Here was none to pity thee, none
to exhort thee: If either force of persuasion, or proffers of favor, or
threats of extremity, could have wrought thee for thy perversion, thou had
not at last dyed ours. Blessed be the God of all comfort, who having stood by
thee, and made thee faithful to the death, has now given thee a crown of life
and immortality; and left thee a noble pattern of Christian fortitude, so much
more remarkable, as less frequently followed.

Whether I look into the former, or the present times I find the world full of
shrinking professors.

Amongst the first Christians, persecution easily discovered four sorts of
cowardly Renegadoes; The first, and worst, whom they justly styled Idolaters,
that yielded to all the public forms of worship to those false Gods: The
second, Sacrificers, who condescended so far, as to some kind of immolation
unto those fained deities, or, at least, to a tasting of those things which
were thus offered: The third, Incensers, such as (with Marcellinus himself)
came on so far, as to cast some grains of incense into the Idols fire: The last
were their Libellaticks, such as privately by themselves, or by some allowed
proxey, denied the faith, yet with their money bought out this ignominy, and sin
of any public Act of Idolatry.

Not to speak of those many thousands which fell down before Solomon the
second, and held up their finger to fignifie their conversion to his
Mahometisme, for ease of their taxations; how many do we hear of daily of all
nations, and some (which I shame and grieve to say) of our own, who yield to
receive circumcision, and to renounce their Savior? Oh the lamentable
condition of those distressed Christians* If constant to their professio they
live in a perpetual purgatory of torment; If revolting, they run into the
danger of an everlasting damnation in hell; Even this gentle restraint puts me
into the meditation of their insupportable durance; Why do not all Christian
hearts bleed with the sense of their deplorable estate? why is not our
compassion heightened, according to the depth of their peril, and misery?

What are our bowels made of, if they yearn not at their unexpressible
calamity? Ye rich Merchants, under whose employment many of these poor souls
have thus unhappily miscarried, how can you bless your selves in your bags,
whiles you see the members of Christ your Savior, thus torn from him, for want
of a petty ransom? Ye eminent persons whom God has advanced to power and
greatness, how can you sleep quietly upon your pillows, whiles you think of the
cold and hard lodgings, the hungry bellies, the naked and waled backs of
miserable Christians? Lastly, what fervent prayers should we all, that profess
the dear name of Christ, power out unto the God of heaven for the strengthening
of the faith and patience of these afflicted souls against the assaults of
violence? and for their happy and speedy deliverance out of their woeful
captivity?

SECT. XI.
THese prisoners are worthy of our deep compassion; as those, who are too
sensible of their own misery; Others there are, who are so much more worthy of
greater pity, by how much they are less apprehensive of their need of it;
plausible prisoners under a spiritual tyranny; whose very wills are so captived
to the powers of darkness, that to choose they would be no other then bondmen;
pleasing themselves in those chains, whose weight is enough to sink their souls
into hell; such are they, who have yielded themselves over to be enthralled by
any known sin; No men under heaven do so much applaud themselves in the
conceit of their liberty; none so great slaves as they; If the very Stoic
Philosophers had not enough evinced this truth, Divinity should: Indeed, the
world is a worse kind of Algier, full of miserable captives; Here lies one so
fettered in lust, that he rots again; there another, so laden with drunken
excess, that he can neither go norstand, and in very deed is not his own man:
Here one so pinched with golden fetters, that he can neither eat, nor sleep;
nor at all enjoy himself: there, another so pined with envy, that he is forced
to feed on his own heart: Here, one so tormented with anger, that he is stark
mad for the time; and cares not how he mischieves himself in a furious desire
to hurt others; there, another, so racked with ambition, that he is stretched
beyond his own length, and lives in the pain of a perpetual self-extention.

These, and all others of this kind are most miserable prisoners, chained up
for everlasting darkness: So much more worthy of our pity, as they are less
capable of their own: Spend your compassion (if you please) upon these
deplorable subjects; But for me, wish me (if you will) as free from any
imputation of evil, as I was, and am from the thought of it; wish me in your
free champian, where I may have no hedge so much as to confine my eye: wish me
happy in the society of so dear and and noble a Friend; but in the mean while,
think of me no otherwise, then as a Free prisoner, And

Yours thankfully devoted, in all faithful observance, I. N.

THE REMEDY OF COFFEEHOUSE.

OR, A TREATISE OF CONTENTATION in whatsoever condition: Fit for these sad and
troubled Times.

By Jos. HALL D. D. and B. of N.

Phil. 4. 1^ (...) have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be
content.

12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; Every where, and
in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound
and to want.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Not. Butter. 1646.

I Have perused this Treatise entitled [The Remedy of Coffeehouse,] and
judging it to be very pious, profitable, and necessary for these sad and
distracted times, I license it to be printed and published, and should much
commend it to the Christian Reader, if the very name of the Author were not in
it self sufficient without any further testimony.

JOHN DOVV^AM^.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Grace and Peace.
WHat can be more seasonable, then when all the world is sick of
Coffeehouse, to give counsels and Receipts of Contentation? Perhaps the
Patient will think it a time is chosen for physic, in the midst of a Fit: But
in this case we must do as we may. I confess, I had rather have stayed till
the Paroxys me were happily over, that so the humors being somewhat settled, I
might hope for the more kindly operation of this wholesome medicine. But, partly
my age and weakness, despairing to outlive the public distemper; and partly
my judgment (crossing the vulgar opinion for the season of some kind of
Receipts) have ^^w (...) upon this safe, and (...) ^nscription: God is (...)
that I wrote this (...) of mine own afflictions, (the particulars whereof, it
were unseasonable to trouble the world withal) as one that meant to make my
self my own Patient, by enjoining my self that course of remedies, that I
prescribe to others; and, as one, who by the powerful working of Gods Spirit
within me, labor to find my heart framed to those holy dispositions which I
wish and recommend to every Christian soul: If there be no remedy but the worst
of outward troubles must afflict us; it shall be happy yet, if we may find
inward peace in our bosoms: which shall be, if we can reconcile our selves to
our offended God; and calm our spirits to a meek undergoing of those
sufferings, which the divine Providence has thought fit to measure forth unto
us: This is the main drift of this ensuing labor. Now the same God, who has,
in these blustering times, put into my heart these quiet thoughts of holy
Contentation, bless them in every hand that shall receive them; and make them
effectual to the good of every soul, that shall now, and hereafter entertain
them; that so their gracious proficiency may, in the day of the appearance of
our Lord Jesus, add to the joy of my account; Who am the unworthiest of the
servants of God, and his Church,

J. N.

THE CONTENTS OF the several Sections following.
Sect. I. THe excellency of Contentation; and how it is to be had. page 171 II.
The contrariety of estates wherein it is to be exercised. 172 III. Who they are
that know not how to want, and be abused. 176 IV. Who they are that know how to
want. 182 V. Considerations leading to Contentation; and first the
consideration of the fickleness of life, and of all earthly commodities;
Honor, Beauty, Strength, etc. 183 VI. Consideration of the unsatisfying
condition of these worldly things. 192 VII. The danger of the too much
estimation of these earthly comforts. 196 VIII. The consideration of the divine
Providence, ordering, and overruling all events. 198 IX. The consideration of
the worse condition of others. 200 X. The consideration of the inconveniences
of great estates; and therein first their cares. 206 XI. The danger of the
distempers, both bodily, and spiritual, that follow great means, and the
torment in parting with them. 211 XII. Consideration of the benefits of
Poverty. 216 XIII. Consideration of how little will suffice Nature. 221 XIV.
Consideration of the inconveniences and miseries of coffeehouse. 225 XV. The
gracious vicissitudes of Gods favors and afflictions. 230 XVI. Consid. of the
great examples of Contentation, both without, and within the Church of God. 236
XVII. Contentment in death it self. 244 XVIII. The miseries and inconveniences
of the continued conjunction of the soul and body. 250 XIX. Holy dispositions
for contentment; the first whereof, Humility. 256 XX. 2. Selfe-resignation. 262
XXI. 3. The true inward riches. 268 XXII. Holy resolutions: and 1. That the
present estate is best for us. 272 XXIII. 2. Resolution to abate of our
desires. 279 XXIV. 3. Resolution, to inure our selves to digest smaller
discontentments. 284 XXV. 4. Resolution, to be frequent and fervent in prayer.
291 XXVI. The difficulty of knowing how to abound; and the ill consequences of
the not knowing it. 294
CONTENTATION, in knowing How to want: where is set forth What it is to know
how to want, and to be abased. How to be attained in respect Of the adversities
of life, where must be certain 1 Considerations, 1 Of the valuation of earthly
things; the Transitoriness of Life, Honor, Beauty, Strength, Pleasure.
Unsatisfying condition of them. Danger of over-esteeming them.
2 Of divine providence overruling all events. 3 Of the worse condition of
others. 4 Of the inconvenience of great estates. Cares. Danger of distemper
bodily. spiritual.
Torment in parting. Account.
5 Of the benefits of poverty. freedom from Cares. Fears of keeping. losing.

6 Of how little will suffice Nature. 7 Of the miseries of Disco^tentment. 8 Of
the Vicissitude of Favors and Crosses. 9 Examples of Co^tentation without within
the Church of God.
2 Dispositions. 1 Humility. 2 Self-resignation. 3 True inward riches.
3 Resolutions. 1 That our present condition is best for us. 2 Resol. to abate
of our desires. 3 Resol. to digest smaller inconveniences. 4 Resol. to be
frequent and fervent in prayer.

Of death itself. Remedies against the terror of death. Necessity and benefit
of death. Conscience of a well-led life. Final peace with God. Efficacy of
Christ's death applied. Comfortable expectation of certain Resurrection; and an
immediate vision of God.
Miseries and inco^veniences of the continued co^junction of soul and body.
Defilement of sin Original. Pronenesse to sin. Difficulty of doing well.
Dullness of understa^ding. Perpetual conflicts. Solicitude of cares.
Multiplicity of passions: Retardation of glory.



How to abound.

THE REMEDY OF Coffeehouse.
SECT. I.
The excellency of Contentation; and how it is to be had.

IF there be any happiness to be found upon earth, it is in that which we call
Contentation: This is a flower that grows not in every Garden: The great
Doctor of the Phil. 4. 11.
Gentiles tells us that he had it; I have learned (says he) in what estate
soever I am, therewith (...) v. 12. (...).
to be content; I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound: Lo, he could
not have taken out this lesson if he had not learned it; and he could not have
learnt it of any other then his Master in Heaven: What face soever Philosophy
may set upon it, all Morality cannot reach it; neither could his learned
Gamaliel, at whose feet he sat, have put this skill into him; no, he learned
it since he was a Christian; and now professes it; So as it appears, there is
a divine art of Contentation to be attained in the school of Christ; which
whosoeeer has learnt, has taken a degree in heaven, and now knows how to be
happy both in want, and abundance.

SECT. II.
The contrariety of estates wherein Contentation is to be exercised.

THe nature of man is extremely querulous; we know not what we would have, and
when we have it, we know not how to like it: we would be happy, yet we would
not dye; we would live long, yet we would not be old; we would be kept in
order, yet we would not be chastised with affliction; we are loath to work, yet
are weary of doing nothing; we have no list to stir, yet find long sitting
painful; we have Si sedeas requies est magna laboris; Si multum sedeas, labor
est. Tert. Car.
no mind to leave our bed, yet find it a kind of sickness to lie long; we
would marry, but would not be troubled with household cares; when once we are
married, we wish we had kept single; If therefore grace have so mastered nature
in us, as to render us content with what ever condition, we have attained to no
small measure of perfection Which way soever the wind blows, the skillful
Mariner knows how to turn his sails to meet it; the contrariety of estates to
which we lie open here, gives us different occasions for the exercise of
Contentation: I cannot blame their choice who desire a middle estate betwixt
want and abundance, and to be free from those inconveniences which attend both
extremes: Wise Solomon was Pro. 30. 8.
of this diet; Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the food of my
meet allowance; Lo, he that had all, desired rather to have but enough: and if
any estate can afford contentment in this life, surely this is it, in the
judgment and experience of the wisest Heathen. But forasmuch as Senec. de
Tranquil.
this equal poise is hardly attainable by any man, and is more proper for our
wishes, and speculation, then for our hopes, true wisdom must teach us so to
compose our selves that we may be fit to entertain the discontentments, and
dangers of those excesses, and effects, which we cannot but meet with in the
course of our mortal life: And surely we shall find that both extremes are
enemies to this good temper of the soul: prosperity may discompose us, as well
as an adverse condition; The Sunshine may be as troublesome to the Traveller as
the wind or rain; neither know I whether is more hard to manage of the two; a
dejected estate, or a prosperous; whether we may be more incommodated with a
resty horse, or with a tired one: Let us begin with that which nature is wont
to think most difficult; that contrary to the practice of learners, we may try
to take out the hardest lesson first. Let us therefore learn in the first
place how to want.

SECT. III.
How many do not know how to want.

COld we teach men how not to want, we should have Disciples enough; every man
seeks to have, and hates to lack: could we give an Antidote against poverty, it
would be too precious: And why can we not teach men even this lesson too? The
Lord Psalm. 23. 1.
is my shepherd, says David, therefore can I lack nothing; and most sweetly
elsewhere, O fear Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
the Lord ye that be his Saints; for they that fear him, lack nothing; The
Lions do lack and suffer hunger; but they which seek the Lord shall want no
manner of thing that is good: Let God be true, and every man a liar; Certainly,
if we were not wanting to God in our fear of him, in our faithful reliance
upon him; in our conscionable seeking of him, he whose the earth is, and the
fullness of it, would not suffer our careful endeavors to go weeping away:
But if it so fall out that his most wise providence finds it better for us to
be held short in our worldly estate, (as it may be the great Physician sees it
most for our health to be kept fasting) it is no less worth our learning to
know how to want; For there is many an one that wants, but knows not how to
want, and therefore his need makes him both offensive and miserable.

There are those that are poor Ecclus. 25. 22.
and proud; one of the wise man's three abominations; foolish Laodiceans that
bear themselves Rev. 3. 17.
for rich, increased with goods, and lacking nothing; when they are no other
then wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; These men know
not how to want, their heart is too big for their purse; and surely pride,
though every where odious, yet does no where so ill as in rags.

There are those that are poor and envious; looking with an evil eye upon the
better fare of others; as surely this vice dwells more commonly in Cottages then
in Palaces. How displeasedly does the beggar look upon the larger alms of his
neighbor? grudging to another what ever falls besides himself, and misliking
his own dole, because the next has more; whose eye with the discontented
Laborers is Mat. 20. 15
evil, because his Master is good; Neither do these men know how to want.

There are those that want distrustfully; measuring the merciful provision of
the Almighty by the line of their own sense; as the Samaritan Peer, when in the
extremity of a present famine he heard the Prophet foretell a sudden plenty;
Behold, if 2 King. 7. 2
the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?

There are those that want impatiently; repining at Gods dealing with them, and
making their own impotent anger guilty of a further addition to their misery;
as the distressed King of Israel, in a desperate sense 2 King. 6. 33.
of that grievous dearth; Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait
on the Lord any longer? And those wretched ones, who when the fourth Angel had
poured out his phiall upon the Sun, being Rev. 16. 9. 11.
scorched with the extremity of the heat, blasphemed the God of heaven: In this
kind was that sinful techinesse of Jonah: when I see a poor worm that has
put it self out of the cool cell of the earth wherein it was lodged, and now
being beaten upon by the Sunbeams, lies wrigling upon the bare path, turning
it self every way in vain, and not finding so much as the shade of a leaf to
cover it; I cannot but think of that fretting Prophet; when wanting the
protection of his gourd he found himself scalded with that strong reflection;
and looking up wrathfully toward that Sun from whom he smarted, could say to
the God that made it, I do well to be angry, even to the Jonah 4. 9.
death.

Lastly, there are those that are poor and dishonest even out of the very
suggestion of their want; It was the danger hereof that made Agur the son of
Jakeh pray against penury; Lest I be poor, and steal; and (by forswearing it)
take the Name Prove. 30. 9
of God in vain.

SECT. IV.
Who they are that know how to want.

THese and perhaps others do and must want, but in the mean time they do that
which they know not how to do; there is a skill in wanting which they have not;
Those only know how to want, that have learnt to frame their mind to their
estate; like to a skillful Musician, that can let down his strings a peg lower
when the tune requires it; Or like to some cunning Spagirick, that can intend
or remit the heat of his furnace according to occasion. Those, who when they
must be abased, can stoop submissely, like to a gentle reed, which when the
wind blows stiff, yields every way; those that in an humble obeisance can
lay themselves low at the foot of the Almighty, and put their mouth in the
dust; that can patiently put their necks under the yoke of the Highest; and can
say with the Prophet, Truly this is my sorrow, and I must bear it; Those that
can smile upon their afflictions, rejoicing in tribulation, singing in the
Jail with Paul and Silas at midnight; Lastly, those that can improve misery to
an advantage, being the richer for their want, bettered with evils,
strengthened with infirmities; and can truly say to the Almighty, I know that
of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me; Never could they have come out so
pure metal, if they had not passed under the hand of the Refiner; never had
they proved so toward children, if they had not been beholden to the rod: These
are they that know how to want, and to be abased; and have effectually learned
to be content with the meanest condition: to which happy temper that we may
attain, there will be use of, 1. Certain Considerations; 2. Certain
Dispositions; and 3. Certain Resolutions; These three shall be as the grounds,
and rules of this our Divine Art of Contentation.

SECT. V.
The Consideration of the fickleness of life, and all earthly commodities.

THE first Consideration shall be of the just valuation of all these earthly
things; which doubtless is such, as that the wise Christian cannot but set a
low price upon them, in respect, first, of their transitorinesse; secondly, of
their insufficiency of satisfaction; thirdly, the danger of their fruition.

At the best, they are but glassie stuff, which the finer it is, is so much
more brittle; yea, what other then those gay bubbles, which children are wont
to raise from the mixed soap and spittle of their Walnut-shell; which seem to
represent pleasing colors, but in their flying up instantly vanish? There is no
remedy; either they must leave us, or we must leave them. Well may we say that
of the Psalmist, which Campian was reported to have often in his mouth; My
soul is continually in my hands; and who knows whether it will not expire in
our next breathing? How many have shut their eyes in an healthful sleep, who
have waked in another world? We give too large scope to our account, vvhiles
we reckon seven years for a Life; a shorter time will serve; vvhiles we find
the revolution of less then half those years to have dispatched Galba Otho
Vitellius Ael. Pertinax Didius. Anno D. 1275. 1276. Gregor. 10 Innocent 5
Hadrian 5 Johan. 20 vel 21 Nicolaus 3
five Caesar's, and five Popes; nay, who can assure himself of the next moment?
It is our great weakness, if we do not look upon every day, as our last; why
should we think our selves in a better condition, then the chosen vessel, 1
Cor. 15. 31.
who deeply protested to dye daily? What a poor complaint was that of the great
Conqueror of the Jews, Titus Vespasian, who putting his head out of his sick
litter, querulously accused Heaven, that he must dye, and had not deserved it;
when he might have found it guilt enough that he was a man; and therefore by
the very sentence of nature condemned, I know not whether to live, or dye.

Indeed, what can we cast our eyes upon, that does not put us in mind of our
frailty? All our fellow creatures dye for us, and by us: The day dies into
night; the trees and all other plants of the earth suffer a kind of Autumnall
mortality; the face of that common Mother of us all, does at the least in
Winter, resemble Death; But if the Angel of Death (as the Jews term him) shall
respite, and reprieve us for the time; alas! how easily may we have over-lived
our comforts? If Death do not snatch us away from them, how many thousand
means of casualties, of enemies, may snatch them away from us? He that was the
greatest man of all the Sons of the East, within a few days became a
spectacle and proverb of penury, which still sticks by him, and so shall do to
the worlds end, As poor as Job.

The rich Plain of Jordan, Genesis 15. 10
which overnight was as the Garden of the Lord, is in the morning covered over
with Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
brimstone, and salt, and burning; Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that
which is not? says wise Solomon: For riches Prove. 23. 5.
certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven: if
we have wings of desire to fly after them, they are nimbler of flight to
outstrip us, and leave us no less miserable in their loss, then we were eager
in their pursuit.

As for Honor, what a mere shadow it is? upon the least cloud interposed, it
is gone, and leaves no mention where it was: The same Sun sees Haman adored in
the Persian Court, like some earthly Deity; and like some base vermin waving
upon his Gibbet: Do we see the great, and glorious Cleopatra, shining in the
pompous Majesty of Egypt? stay but a while, and ye shall see her in the dust,
and her two children, whom she proudly styled the Sun, and the Moon, driven
like miserable Captives before the Chariot of their Conqueror: Man being in
honor abides not, says Ps. 49. 12.
the Psalmist, he perishes, but his greatness (as more frail then he) is
oftentimes dead and buried before him, and leaves him the surviving executor of
his own shame.

It was easy for the captive Prince, to observe in the Charetwheel of his
Victor, that when one spoak rose up, another went down, and both these in so
quick a motion, that it was scarce distinguished by the eye.

Well therefore may we say of Honor, as Ludovicus Vives Ludo. Vives in 3. de
Civilcensura^ notatus Vellosillo.
said of Scholasticall Divinity: Cui fumus est pro fundamento: It is built upon
smoke, how can it be kept from vanishing?

As for Beauty, what is it, but a dash of Natures tincture laid upon the
skin, which is soon washed off with a little sickness? what but a fair
blossom, that drops off, so soon as the fruit offers to succeed it? what but a
flower, which with one hot Sun gleam weltreth and falls? He that had the
choice of a thousand Faces, could say, Favor Prove. ult. penult.
is deceitful, and Beauty is Vanity.

Lastly, for Strength, and vigor of Body, if it could be maintained till our
old age, alas, how soon is that upon us, ere we be aware! how does it then
shrivell our flesh and loosen our sinews, and cripple our joints! Milo, when he
looked upon his late brawny arms, and saw them now grow lanck and writhled, lets
fall tears, and bewraies more weakness of mind, then he had before bodily
strength: but how often does sickness prevent the debilitations of age;
pulling the strongest man upon his knees, and making him confess, that youth,
as well as childe-hood, is Vanity?

As for Pleasure, it dies in Eccles: 11. 10.
the birth, and is not therefore worthy to come into this bill of Mortality.

Do we then upon sad consideration see and feel the manifest transitorinesse
of Life, Riches, Honor, Beauty, Strength, Pleasure, and whatever else can be
dear and precious to us in this world, and can we dote upon them so, as to
be too much dejected with our parting from them? Our Savior bids us consider
the Lillies of the field; And he that made both, tells Mat. 6. 28.
us, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these: Surely,
full well are they worth our considering. But if those Beauties could be as
permanent, as they are glorious, how would they carry away our hearts with
them? Now, their fading condition justly abates of their value; Would we not
smile at the weakness of that man, that should weep and howl, for the falling
of this Tulip, or that Rose, abandoning all comfort for the loss of that,
which he knows must flourish but his month? It is for children to cry for the
falling of their house of Cards, or the miscarriage of that painted gew-gaw,
which the next shower would have defaced. Wise Christians know how to
apprize good things according to their continuance, and can therefore set their
hearts only upon the invisible Comforts of a better Life, as knowing that the
things which are not seen, are Eternal.

SECT. VI.
Consideration of the unsatisfying condition of all worldly things.

BUt were these earthly things exempted from that fickleness, which the God
of Nature has condemned them unto, were they (the very memory whereof
perishes with their satiety) as lasting, as they are brittle, yet what
comfort could they yield for the soul to rest in? Alas! their efficacy is too
short to reach unto a true Contentation; yea, if the best of them were
perpetuated unto us, upon the fairest conditions, that this Earth can allow,
how intolerable tedious would it prove in the fruition? Say that God were
pleased to protract my life to the length of the age of the first founders of
Mankind, and should (in this state of body) add hundreds of years to the days
of my pilgrimage: Woe is me, how weary should I be of my self, and of the
World? I, that now complain of the load of seventy one years, how should I be
tired out, ere I could arrive at the age of Parre? but before I could climb up
to the third Century of Johannes de Temporibus, how often should I call for
death, not to take up, but to take off my burden, and with it my self? But if
any, or all these earthly blessings could be freed from those grievances,
wherewith they are commonly tempered, yet how little satisfaction could the
soul find in them? What are these outward things, but very luggage, which may
load our backs, but cannot lighten our hearts? Great, and wise Solomon, that
had the full command of them all, cries out, Vanity of Vanities; and a greater
Monarch then he, shuts up the Scene with, I have been all things, and am never
the better: All these are of too narrow an extent, to fill the capacious soul
of Man; the desires whereof are enlarged with enjoying, so as the more it
has, the less it is satisfied, neither indeed can it be otherwise; The Eye,
and the Ear, are but the Purveyours for the Heart, if therefore the eye be not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, Eccle. 1. 8.
how shall the heart say, It is enough? Now, who would suffer himself to be
too much disquieted with the loss of that, which may vex him, but cannot
content him? We do justly smile at the folly of that vain Lord, of whom
Petrarch speaks, who when an Horse which he dearly loved, was sick, laid
that Steed of his, on a silken bed, with a wrought pillovv under his head,
and caused himself (then afflicted with the Gout) to be carried on his
servants shoulders to visit that dear patient; and upon his decease, mourned
solemnly for him, as if it had been his Son. We have laughed at the fashion of
the Girls of Holland, who having made to themselves gay and large Babies, and
laid them in a curious cradle, fain them to sicken and dye, and celebrate their
funeral with much passion: So fond are we, if having framed to our selves
imaginary contentments here, in the World, we give way to immoderate grief in
their miscarriage.

SECT. VII.
The danger of the love of these earthly comforts.

NEither are these earthly comforts more defective in yielding full
satisfaction to the soul, then dangerous in their over-dear fruition: For too
much delight in them, robs us of more solid contentments: The World is a
cheating gamester, suffering us to win at the first, that at last he may go
away with all. Our very Table Ps. 69. 22.
may be made our snare; and those things which should have been for our
wealth, may be unto us an occasion of falling: Leo the fourth Emperor of
Constantinople, delighted extremely in precious stones, with these he
embellishes his Crown, which being worn close to his Temples, strikes such a
cold into his head, that causes his bane: yea, how many with the too much
love of these outward things, have lost, not their lives only, but their
souls? No man can be at once the Favorite of God and the World; as that Father
said truly: or as our Savior in fuller terms, No man can serve two Masters,
GOD and Mammon: Shortly, the World may be a dangerous enemy, a sure friend it
cannot be.

If therefore we shall like wise men, value things at their due prices, since
we are convinced in our selves, that all these earthly comforts are so
transitory in their nature, so unsatisfying in their use, and so dangerous in
their enjoying, how little reason have we to be too much affected with
forgoing them? Our blood is dear to us, as that wherein our life is, yet if we
find that it is either infected, or distempered, we do willingly part with
it in hope of better health: How much more, with those things, which are
farther from us, and less concerning us?

SECT. VIII.
Consideration of the Divine Providence ordering all events.

THe second Consideration is of that All-wise Providence which orders all
events both in Heaven and Earth, allotting to every Creature his due
proportion, so overruling all things to the best, that we could not want, if
he knew it better for us to abound: This Station he has set us in, this
measure he has shared out to us, whose will is the rule of good; what we have
therefore, cannot but be best for us. The World is a large Chesseboard, every
man has his place assigned him: one is a King, another a Knight, another a
Pawn, and each has his several motion; without this variety, there could be
no game played; A skillful Player will not stir one of these Chips, but with
intention of an advantage; neither should any of his men either stand, or move,
if in any other part of that Checker, it might be in more hope to win.

There is no estate in this World which can be universally good for all, one
man's meat may be another man's medicine, and a third man's poison; A Turk finds
health and temper in that Opium, which would put one of us into our last
sleep. Should the Plowman be set to the Gentleman's fare, this Chicken, that
Partridge, or Phesant, would (as over-slight food) be too soon turned over,
and leave his empty stomach to quarrel for stronger provision: Beef is for his
diet; and if any sauce needs besides his hunger, Garlic: Every man has, as a
body, so a mind of his own; what one loves is abhorred of another; the great
Housekeeper of the world knows how to fit every palate with that which either
is, or should be agreeable to it, for salubrity, if not for pleasure: Lay
before a Child a Knife, and a Rod, and bid him take his choice, his hand will
be straight upon that edge tool, especially, if it be a little gilded, and
glittering; but the Parent knows the Rod to be more safe for him, and more
beneficial: We are ill carvers for our selves, he that made us, knows what is
fit for us, either for time, or measure; without his Providence not an hair can
fall from our heads; We would have bodily health, I cannot blame us; what is
the world to us without it? He whose we are, knows sickness to be for the
health of the soul; whether should we in true judgment desire? We vvish to
live, who can blame us? life is sweet, but if our Maker have ordained, that
nothing but Death can render us glorious, what madness is it to stick at the
condition? Oh our gross infidelity, if we do not believe that great Arbiter
of the World, infinitely wise to know what is best for us, infinitely merciful
to will what he knows best, infinitely powerful to do what he will! And if
we be thus persuaded, how can we, but in matter of good, say with blessed
Mary: Behold thy Servant, be it unto me according to thy Word; And in matter of
evil, with good Eli: It is the Lord, let him do what he will?

SECT. IX.
Consideration of the worse condition of others.

IN the third place, it will be requisite for us to cast our eyes upon the
worse condition of others, perhaps better deserving then our selves; for if we
shall vvhine and complain of that weight, which others do run away cheerfully
withal, the fault will appear to be not in the heaviness of the load, but in
the weakness of the bearer: If I be discontented with a mean dwelling,
another man lives merrily in a low thatched Cottage; If I dislike my plain
fare, the four captive children Dan. 1. 12, 13.
feed fair and fat with pulse and water: If I be plundered of my rich suits, I
see a more cheerful heart under a russet Coat, then great Princes have under
purple Robes: If I do gently languish upon my sick bed, I see others patient
under the torments of the Colic, or Stone, or Strangury: If I be clapped up
within four walls, I hear Petronius profess, he had rather be in prison with
Cato, then at liberty with Caesar: I hear Paul and Silas sing like Nightingales
in their cages: Am I sad, because I am childlesse? I hear many a parent wish
himself so: Am I banished from my home? I meet with many of whom the world
Heb. 11. 13
was not worthy, vvandring about in Sheeps-skins, in Goatskins, in deserts,
and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth: What am I that I
should speed better then the miserablest of these patients? What had they done,
that they should fare worse then I? If I have little, others have less; If I
feel pain, some others, torture; If their sufferings be just, my forbearances
are merciful; my provisions, to theirs, liberal: It is no ill counsel
therefore, and not a little conducing to a contented want, that great persons
should sometimes step aside into the homely Cottages of the poor, and see their
mean stuff, course fare, hard lodgings, worthless utensils, miserable shifts;
and to compare it with their own delicate and nauseating superfluities: Our
great and learned King Alfred was the better all his life after, for his hidden
retiredness in a poor Neatheards Cabin, where he was sheltred, and sometimes
also chidden by that homely Dame: Neither was it an ill vvish of that wise
man, that all great Princes might first have had some little taste, what it is
to want, that so their own experience might render them more sensible of the
complaints of others.

Man, though he be absolute in himself, and stand upon his own bottom, yet is
he not a little wrought upon by examples, and comparisons with others; for in
them he sees what he is, or may be, since no events are so confined to some
special subjects, as that they may not be incident to other men.

Merits are a poor plea for any man's exemption, whiles our sinful infirmities
lay us all open to the rod of divine Justice: and if these dispensations be
merely out of favor, why do I rather grudge at a lesser misery, then bless
God for my freedom from a greater judgment? Those therefore that suffer more
then I, have cause of more humbling, and I that suffer less then they, have
cause of more thankfulness; even mitigations of punishment are new mercies, so
as others torments do no other then heighten my obligations; Let me not
therefore repine to be favorably miserable.

SECT. X.
Consideration of the inconveniences of great estates: and first of their
cares, that they expose us to envy, and then macerate us with cares.

THe fourth Consideration shall be of the inconveniences which do oftentimes
attend a fullness of estate; such, and so many as may well make us sit down
content with a little; whereof, let the first be envy: a mischief not to be
avoided of the great; This shadow follows that body inseparably; All the curs
in the street are ready to fall upon that dog that goes away with the bone;
and every man has a Cudgel to fling at a well-loaded Tree; whereas a mean
condition is no eyesore to any beholder; Low shrubs are not wont to be
stricken with Lightning, but tall Oaks and Cedars feel their flames; Whiles
David kept his fathers sheep at home, he might sing sweetly to his Harp in the
fields, without any disturbance: But when he once comes to the Court, and
finds applause, and greatness creep upon him, now emulation, despite and
malice, dog him close at the heels wheresoever he goes: Let him leave the
Court, and flee into the Wilderness, there these bloudhounds follow him in hot
suit; Let him run into the Land of the Philistims, there they find him out,
and chase him to Ziklag; and if at the last, he has climbed up to his just
Throne, and there hopes to breath him after his tedious pursuit, even there he
meets with more unquietness then in his desert, and notwithstanding all his
Royalty, at last cries out, Lord remember Ps. 132. 1.
David, and all his troubles: How many have we known, whom their wealth has
betrayed, and made innocent malefactors? who might have slept securely upon a
hard bolster, and in a poor estate outlived both their Judges, and accusers.
Besides, on even ground a fall may be harmless; but he that falls from on high,
cannot escape bruising: He therefore that can think the benefits of Eminence
can countervail the dangers which haunt greatness, let him affect to overtop
others; for me, let me rather be safely low, then high with peril. After
others envy, the next attendant upon greatness is our own cares; how do these
disquiet the Beds, and sauce the Tables of the wealthy? breaking their sleeps,
galling their sides, embittering their pleasures, shortning their days: How
bitterly do we find the holiest men complaining of those distractions,
which have attended their earthly promotions? Nazianzen cries out of them as
no G. Naz. Carm. de calam. suis.
other then the bane of the soul; and that other Gregory, whom we are wont to
call the last of the best Bishops of Rome, and the first of the bad,
passionately bewails this clogge of his high preferment: I confess, says he,
that whiles I am outwardly advanced, Greg. l. 7. Epi. 12. 7.
I am inwardly fallen lower; this burdensome honor depresses me, and
innumerable cares disquiet me on all sides; my mind (grown almost stupid with
those temporal cares which are ever barking in mine ears) is forced upon
earthly things; thus he: There are indeed cares which as they may be used, may
help us on toward Heaven; such as Melancthon In vita Melanct.
owns to his Camerarius; My cares, says he, send me to my prayers, and my
prayers dispell my cares; but those anxieties which commonly wait upon
greatness, distract the mind, and impair the body.

It is an observation of the Jewish Doctors, that Joseph the Patriarch was of
a shorter life then the rest of his brethren; and they render this reason of
it, for that his cares were as much greater, as his place was higher: It was
not an unfit comparison of him, who resembled a Coronet upon the Shicardus.
Temples, to a pail upon the head; We have seen those, who have carried full
and heavy vessels on the top of their heads, but then they have walked evenly,
and erect under that load; we never saw any that could dance under such a
weight, if either they bend, or move vehemently, all their carriage is spilled:
Earthly greatness is a nice thing, and requires so much chariness in the
managing; as the contentment of it cannot requite; He is worthy of honey, that
desires to lick it off from thorns; for my part, I am of the mind of him who
professed, not to care for those favors, that compelled him to lie waking.

Danger of distemper, both bodily and spiritual, that commonly follows great
means: and torment in parting with them.

IN the next place, I see greatness not more pale, and worn with cares, then
swollen up, and sickly with excess; Too much oil poured in, puts out the Lamp,
Superfluity is guilty of a world of diseases, which the spare diet of poverty
is free from; How have we seen great men's eyes surfeited at that full Table,
whereof their palate could not taste, and they have risen discontentedly
glutted with the sight of that, which their stomach was incapable to receive;
and when, not giving so much law to nature, as to put over their gluttonous
meal, (their vvanton appetite charging them with a new variety of curious
morsels, and lavish cups) they find themselves overtaken with feverous
distempers, the Physician must succeed the Cook; and a second sickness must
cure the first: But alas, these bodily indispositions are nothing to those
spiritual evils, which are incident into secular greatness. It is a true word
of S. Ambrose, seconded by common experience, Ambros. l. 4 Epist. 29.
that an high pitch of honor is seldom held up without sin; And S. Jerome
tells us, it was a Hieron. Ep. ad Hedibium.
common Proverb in his time, That a rich man either is wicked, or a wicked
man's heir: Not, but that rich Abraham may have a bosom for poor Lazarus to
rest in, and many great Kings have been great Saints in Heaven, and there is
still room for many more; but that commonly great temptations follow great
estates, and oftentimes overtake them; neither is it for nothing, that riches
are by our blessed Savior styled the Mammon of iniquity, and wealth is by the
holy Apostle branded 1 Timothy 6.
with deceitfulness; such as cheat many millions of their souls.

Add unto these (if you please) the torment of parting with that pelf, and
honor, which has so grossly bewitched us; such as may well verify that
which Lucius Ep. Lucii ad Episc. Gall. and Hisp.
long since wrote to the Bishops of France, and Spain, that one hours mischief
makes us forget the pleasure of the greatest excess. I marvel not at our
English Jew, of whom our story speaks, that would rather part with his teeth,
then his bags: how many have we known that have poured out their life
together with their gold, as men that would not outlive their earthen god; yea
(woe is me) how many souls have been lost in the sin of getting, and in
the quarrel of leesing this thick clay, as the Prophet terms it? But
lastly, that which is yet the sorest of all the inconveniences, is the sadness
of the reckoning, which must come in after these plentiful entertainments; for
there is none of all our cates here, but must be billed up; and great Accounts
must have long Audits: how hard a thing it is in this case, to have an Omnia
aeque? In the failing whereof, how is the Conscience affected? I know not
whether more tormented, or tormenting the miserable soul; so as the great Owner
is but (as witty Bromiard compares him) like a weary Jade, which all the day
long has been laboring under the load of a great treasure; and at night lies
down with a galled back.

By that time therefore we have summed up all, and find here envy, cares,
sicknesses both of body and soul, torment in parting with, and more torment in
reckoning for, these earthly greatnesses; we shall be convinced of sufficient
reason to be well apaid with their want.

SECT. XII.
Consideration of the benefits of Poverty.

LEt the fifth Consideration be, the benefit of Poverty; such, and so great, as
are enough to make us in love with having nothing.

For first, what an advantage is it, to be free from those gnawing cares,
which (like Tityus his Vulture) feed upon the Heart of the Great? Here is a man
that sleeps (Aethiopian-like) with his doors open; no dangers threaten him, no
fears break his rest; he starts not out of his bed at midnight, and cries
Thieves, he feels no rack of ambitious thoughts, he frets not at the
disappointment of his false hopes, he cracks not his brain with hazardous
plots, he mis-doubts no undermining of emulous rivals, no traps of hollow
friendship, but lives securely in his homely Cottage, quietly enjoying such
provision, as nature, and honest industry furnish him withal; for his drink,
the neighbor Spring saves him the charge of his Excise; and when his better
earnings have fraught his trencher with a warm, and pleasing morsel, and his
cup with a stronger liquor, how cheerfully is he affected with that happy
variety; and in the strength of it digests many of his thinner meals?

Meals usually sawced with an healthful hunger, wherein no uncocted Crudities
oppress Nature, and cherish disease: Here are no Gouts, no Dropsies, no
Hypochondriack passions, no Convulsive fits, no distempers of surfeits, but a
clear, and wholesome vigor of body, and an easy putting over the light tasks
of digestion, to the constant advantage of health.

And as for outward dangers, what an happy immunity does commonly bless the
poor man? how can he fear to fall, that lies flat upon the ground? The great
Pope, Boniface the seventh, when he saw many stately Buildings ruined with
Earthquakes, is glad to raise him a little Cabin of boards in the midst of a
Meadovv, and there finds it safest to shelter his triple Crown. When great men
hoist their Top-sail, and launch forth into the deep, having that large clew
which they spread, exposed to all winds, and weathers, the poor man sails
close by the shore; and when he foresees a storm to threaten him, puts in to
the next Creek; and wears out in a quiet security that Tempest, wherein he sees
prouder Vessels miserably tossed, and at last, fatally wracked.

This man is free from the peril of spightfull machinations; No man whets his
Axe to cut down a shrub, it is the large Timber of the world that has cause to
fear hewing: Neither is he less free inwardly from the galling strokes of a
self-accusing Conscience; here is no remurmuring of the heart for guilty
subornations, no checks for the secret contrivances of public villainies; no
heartbreaking for the failings of bloody designs; or late remorse for their
success; but quiet, and harmless thoughts of seasonable frugality, of honest
recreation, with an un-interrupted freedom of recourse to Heaven.

And if at any time, by either hostile, or casual means, he be berest of his
little, he smiles in the face of a thief; and is no whit astonished to see his
thatch on a flame, as knowing how easy a supply will repair his loss.

And when he shall come to his last close, his heart is not so glewed to the
world, that he should be loath to part; his soul is not tied up in bags, but
flies out freely to her everlasting Rest. Oh the secret virtue and happiness
of Poverty; which none but the right disposed mind knows how to value* It was
not for nothing that so many great Saints have embraced it, rather then the
rich proffers of the world; That so many great Princes have exchanged their
Thrones for quiet Cells; Who so cannot be thankful for a little, upon these
conditions, I wish he may be punished with abundance.

SECT. XIII.
Considering how little will suffice Nature.

NEither will it a little avail to the furtherance of our Contentation, to
consider how little will suffice Nature, and that all the rest is but matter of
Opinion: It is the Apostles charge, Having food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6. 9
let us be therewith content: Indeed what use is there of more, then what may
nourish us within, and cover us without? If that be wholesome, and agreeable to
our bodily disposition, whether it be fine, or course, Nature passes not; it is
merely Will that is guilty of this wanton and fastidious choice; It is fit that
Civilitie should make difference of clothings; and that weakness of body, or
eminence of Estate should make differences of diets; Else, why not Russet as
well as Scarlet? Beef, as Phesant? the Grasshopper feeds on dew, the Chameleon
on air, what care they for other Viands? Our Books tell us, that Paulo primo
Eremitae in spelunca viventi palma and cibum and vestimentum praebebat: quod
cum imp^s^^b^le vidcatur. Jestemm testur and Angelos vidisse me Monacbos, de
quibus unus per 30. annos clausus, bo^deaceo pane and lu^ulenta aqua vixit.
Hieron de vita Pauli. Revelatur Antonio nonagenario de Paulo agente jam 113
annum, esse alium se sanctiorem Monachum, ibid.
those Anachorets of old, that went aside into Wildernesses, and sustained
themselves with the most spare diet, such as those deserts could afford,
outlived the date of other men's lives, in whom Nature is commonly stifled with
a gluttonous variety: How strong, and vigorous above their neighbor Grecians,
were the Lacedaemonians held of old? who by the Ordinance of their Lawgiver,
held themselves to their black broth, which, when Dionysius would needs taste
of, his Cook truly told him, that if he would relish that fare, he must
exercise strongly, as they did, and wash in Eurotas: Who knows not that our
Island does not afford more able Bodies, then they that eat, and drink Oats?
And whom have we seen more healthful and active, then the children of poor
men, trained up hardly in their Cottages with fare as little, as course?

Do I see a poor Indian husbanding one tree to all his household uses; finding
in that one Plant, Timber, Thatch, Meat, Medicine, Wine, Honey, Oil, Sauce,
Drink, Utensils, Ships, Cables, Sails? and do I rove over all the latitude of
Nature for contentment? Our appetite is truly unreasonable, neither will know
any bounds: We begin with necessaries, as Pliny justly observes, and from Plin.
l. 26. c. 6.
thence we rise to excess, punishing our selves with our own wild desires;
whereas, if we were wise, we might find mediocrity an ease.

Either extreme is a like deadly; he that over-afflicts his body, kills a
Subject; he that pampers Hugo. Instit. Mona. Reg. S. Columb.
it, nourishes an Enemy. Too much abstinence turns vice, and too much
ingurgitation is one of the seven, and at once destroys both Nature and Grace.
The best measure of having or Senec. Epist. 38.
desiring, is not what we would, but what we ought: Neither is he rich that
has much; but he that desires not much: A discreet frugality is fittest to
moderate both our wishes, and expenses; which if we want, we prove dangerously
prodigal in both; if we have, we do happily improve our stock to the
advantage of our selves, and others.

SECT. XIV.
Considering the inconveniences, and miseries of coffeehouse.

THe next inducement to Contentation, shall be the serious consideration of the
miserable inconveniences of the contrary disposition; Coffeehouse is a
mixture of anger, and of grief; both which are wont to raise up fearful
tempests in the soul; He teareth himself in his anger, says Bildad,
concerning that mirror of patience; Job 18. 4.
And the sorrow of the world works death, says the chosen Vessel: so as the
Malecontent, whether he be angry or sad, mischieves himself both ways; There
cannot be a truer word then that of wise Solomon, Eccles 7. 9.
Anger rests in the bosom of fools; What can be more foolish then for a man,
because he thinks God has made him miserable by crosses, to make himself more
miserable by his own distempers? If the clay had sense, what a mad thing were
it for it to struggle with the Potter? and if a man will spurn against strong
Iron-pikes, what can he hope to carry away but wounds? How witless a thing it
is for a man to torment himself with the thoughts of those evils, that are past
all remedy? What wise beholder would not have smiled with pity and scorn, to
have seen great Augustus; after the defeat of some choice Troops, to knock his
head against the wall, and to hear him passionately cry out; O Varus, restore
me my lost Legions? Who would not have been angry with that choleric Prophet
to hear him so furiously contest with his Maker for a withered Gourd? What an
affliction was it to good Jacob (more then the sterility of a beloved wife) to
hear Rachel say; Give me Genesis 30. 1.
children, or else I die? yea, how ill did it sound in the mouth of the Father
of the faithful; Lord God, what will thou give me, Genesis 15. 2.
seeing I go childelesse? Yet thus froward and techy is nature in the best; if
we may not have all we would have, all that we have is nothing; if we be not
perfectly humoured, we are wilfully unthankful; All Israel is nothing worth to
Ahab, if he may not have one poor Vineyard: How must this needs irritate a
munificent God, to see his bounty contemned out of a childish pettishnesse? How
can he forbear to take away from us his slighted mercies? How can he hold his
hand from plaguing so ungrateful disrespects of his favors?

As for that other passion of grief, what woeful work does it make in
ungoverned minds? How many have we known, that out of thought for
unrecoverable losses, have lost themselves? how many have run from their
wits? how many from their lives? Yea, how many, that out of an impatience to
stay the leisure of vengeance, have made their own hands, their hasty
executioners? And even where this extremity prevails not; look about, and ye
shall see men that are not able matches to their passions, woefully macerating
themselves with their own thoughts, wearing out their tedious days upon the
rack of their own hearts; and making good that observation of the wise man; By
the sorrow of the heart, the spirit is Pro. 15. 13
broken.

Now all these mischiefs might have been happily prevented by a meek yeeldance
of our selves to the hands of an all-wise, and an all-mercifull God, and by an
humble composure of our affections to a quiet suffering; It is the power of
patience to calm Ps. 37. 7. Jam. 5. 7.
the heart in the most blustering trials; and when the vessel is most tossed,
yet to secure the freight: This, if it do not abate of our burden, yet it
adds to our strength, and wins the Father of Mercies both to pity, and
retribution.

Whereas murmuring Israelites can never be free from judgments; and it is a
dreadful word that God speaks of that chosen Nation; Mine heritage is Jer.
12. 8.
unto me as a Lion in the forest; it, still, yelleth against me, therefore have
I hated it; A Child that struggles under the rod, justly doubles his stripes,
and an unruly Malefactor draws on, besides death, tortures.

SECT. XV.
Consid. the vicissitudes of favors and afflictions.

FUrthermore, it is a main help toward Contentation, to consider the gracious
vicissitudes of Gods dealing with us: how he intermixes favors with his
crosses; tempering our much honey, with some little gall; the best of us are
but shrewd children, yet he chides us not always, says the Psalmist: he
smiles often, for one frown; and Ps. 103. 9.
why should we not take one with another? It was the answer wherewith that
admirable pattern of patience stopped the querulous mouth of his tempting wife;
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, Job 2. 10.
and shall we not receive evil?

It was a memorable example which came lately to my knowledge of a worthy
Christian, who had lived to his middle age in much health, and prosperity, and
was now for his two last years miserably afflicted with the Strangury; who in
the midst of his torments could say, Oh my Lord God, how gracious have thou
been unto me! thou have given me eight and forty years of health, and now but
two years of pain; thou mighte^t have caused me to lie in this torture all the
days of my life; and now thou have carried me comfortably through the rest, and
have mercifully taken up with this last parcel of my torment; blessed be thy
Name for thy mercy in forbearing me, and for thy justice in afflicting me. To
be thankful for present blessings is but ordinary, but to be so thankful for
mercies past, that the memory of them should be able to put over the sense of
present miseries, is an high improvement of grace.

The very Heathens by the light of Nature and their own experience, could
observe this interchange of Gods proceedings; and made some kind of use of
them accordingly: Camillus, after he had upon ten Livius.
years siege, taken the rich City Veios, prayed that some mis-hap might befall
himself and Rome to temper so great an happiness; when one would have thought
the prize would not countervail the labor, and the loss of time and blood;
And Alexander the great, when report was made to him of many notable Victories,
achieved by his Armies, could say; O Jupiter, mix some misfortune with these
happy news: Lo, these men could tell that it is neither fit, nor safe for great
blessings to walk alone, but that they must be attended with their pages,
afflictions; why should not we Christians expect them with patience, and thanks?

They say, Thunder and Lightning hurts not, if it be mixed with Rain. In those
hot Countries, which lie under the sealding Zone, when the first showers fall
after a long drought, it is held dangerous to walk suddenly abroad; for that
the earth so moistened sends up unwholesome steams; but in those parts where the
Rain and Sunshine are usually interchanged, it is most pleasant to take the
air of the earth newly refreshed with kindly showers; Neither is it otherwise
in the course of our lives; this medley of good and evil conduces not a little
to the health of our souls: One of them must serve to temper the other; and
both of them to keep the heart in order.

Were our afflictions long, and our comforts rare and short, we had yet reason
to be thankful; the least is more then God ows us: but now, when if heaviness
endure for a night, joy comes in the morning, and dwells with us, so, that
some fits of sorrow are recompensed with many months of joy; how should our
hearts overflow with thankfulness, and easily digest small grievances, out of
the comfortable sense of larger blessings?

But if we shall cast up our eyes to Heaven, and there behold the glorious
remuneration of our sufferings, how shall we contemn the worst that earth can
do unto us? There, there is glory enough to make us a thousand times more then
amends for all that we are capable to endure; Yea, if this Earth were Hell, and
Men Devils, they could not inflict upon us those torments, which might hold any
equality with the glory which shall be revealed; and even of the worst of them
we must say with the blessed Apostle; Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works 2 Cor. 4. 17.
for us a far more exceeding, eternal weight of glory: When the blessed
Proto-Martyr Stephen had sted fastly fixed his eyes on Heaven, and (that
Curtain being drawn) had seen the Heavens opened, and therein the glory of God,
and Jesus standing Acts 7.
on the right hand of God; do we think he cared ought for the sparkling eyes,
and gnashed teeth, and killing stones of the enraged multitude? Oh poor
impotent Jews, how far was that divine soul above the reach of your malice? how
did he triumph over your cruelty? how did he by his happy evolation make all
those stones precious?

SECT. XVI.
Consid. the examples of Contentation, both without, and within the Church of
God.

LAstly, it cannot but be a powerful motive unto Contentation, that we lay
before us the notable examples of men, whether worse, or better then our
selves, that have been eminent in the practice of this virtue; men, that out of
the mere strength of morality, have run away with loss^s, and poverty as a
light burden; that out of their free choice have fallen upon those condition,
which we are ready to f^ar, and shrink from: What a shame is it for Christians
to be out-stripped herein by very Pagans? If we look upon the ancient
Philosophers; their low valuation of these outward things, and their willing
abdication of those comforts, wherewith others were too much affected, made
them admired of the multitude; Here do Dsee a Cynick housed in his Tub,
scorning all wealth and state; and making still even with his virtuals, and the
(...).
day; who, when he was invited to supper to one of Alexanders great Lords,
could say; I had rather lick salt at Athens, then feast with Craterus: Here I
meet with him, whom their Oracle styled the wisest of men, walking barefoot in
a patcht threadbare cloak, contemning honors, and all earthly things; and when
that garment would hang no longer on his back, I can hear him say, I would have
bought a Cloak, if I had had money; after which word, says Soneca, whosoever
offered to give, came too late; Apollododonus, amongst the rest, sends him a
rich mantle toward his end, and is resused; With what patience does this man
bear the loud scoldings of his Xantippe? making no other of them, then the
creaking of a Cart-wheel: with what brave resolution does he repel the
proffers of Archelaus, telling him how cheap the Market afforded meal at
Athens, and the fountains water? Here I meet with a Zeno, formerly rich in his
traffic for purple, now impoverisht by an ill Sea-voyage, and can hear him
say, I sailed best when I Ship-wrackt: Here I see an Aristippus drowning his
gold in the sea, that it might not drown him: Here I can hear a Democritus, or
Cleanthes, when he was asked how a man should be rich, answer; If he be poor
in desires.

What should I speak of those Indian Sophists, that took their name from their
nakedness; whom we hear to say; The sky is our house, and the Earth our Inter
opera Ambrosii De moribus Brachmannorum.
bed; we care not for gold, we contemn death: One of them can tell Onesicritus;
As the Mother is to the Child, so is the Earth to me; The Mother gives Milk
to her Infant; so does the Earth yield all necessaries to me; And when gold
was offered to him, by that great Conqueror; Persuade (said he) if thou can,
these birds to take thy silver and gold, that they may sing the sweeter; and if
thou can not do that, would thou have me worse then them? Adding moreover
in a strong discourse; Natural hunger, when we have taken food, cease; and
if the mind of man did also naturally desire gold, so soon as he has received
that which he wished, the desire and appetite of it would presently cease; but
so far is it from this society, that the more it has, the more it does,
without any intermission, long for more; because this desire proceeds not from
any motion of nature, but only out of the wantonness of man's own will, to
which no bounds can be set. Blush, O Christian Soul, (whosoever thou art, that
read these lines) to hear such words falling from Heathen lips, when thou
see those that profess godliness, dote upon these worthless metals, and
transported with the affectation and cares of those earthly provisions.

If from these patterns of men that should be below our selves, we look up to
the more noble precedents of Prophets and Apostles; Lo, there we find Elijah
fed by Ravens; Elisha boarding with his poor Sareptan Hostess; An hundred
Prophets fed by fifty in a Cave, with 1 Kings 18. 13. 2 King. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5.
bread and water; The sons of the Prophets for the enlarging of their
over-strait lodgings, hard at work; they are their own Carpenters, but their
tools are borrowed; There we shall find a few barley loaves, and little fishes,
the household provision of our Saviors train: Yea, there we find the most
glorious Apostle, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, employing his hands to feed
his belly; busily stiching of skins for his Tent-work; Yea, what do we look at
any or all of these, when we see the Son of God, the God of all the world, in
the form of a servant? Not a Cratch to cradle him in, not a Grave to bury him
in, was his own; and he that could command Heaven and Earth, can say, The Foxes
have holes, the Mat. 8. 20.
Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Who now can complain of want, when he hears his Lord, and Savior but thus
provided for? He could have brought down with him a celestial house, and have
pitched it here below, too glorious for earthen eyes to have looked upon: He
could have commanded all the precious things that lie shrouded in the bowels of
the Earth, to have made up a Majesticall Palace for him, to the dazzling of the
eyes of all beholders; He could have taken up the stateliest Court that any
earthly Monarch possessed, for his peculiar habitation: But his greatness was
Spiritual and Heavenly; and he that owned all would have nothing, that he
might sanctify want unto us; and that he might teach us by his blessed
example, to sit down contented with any thing, with nothing.

By that time therefore we have laid all these things together, and have
seriously considered of the mean valuation of all these earthly things, for
their transitorinesse, unsatisfaction, danger; of the overruling Providence of
the Almighty, who most wisely, justly, mercifully disposes of us and all
events that befall us; of the worse condition of many thousand others; of the
great inconveniences that attend great and full estates; of the secret benefits
of poverty; of the smalnesse of that pittance that may suffice Nature; of the
miseries that wait upon coffeehouse; of the merciful vicissitudes of
favors, wherewith God pleases to interchange our sufferings; and lastly, the
great examples of those, as well without, as within the bosom of the Church,
that have gone before us, and led us the way to Contentation: our judgment
cannot choose but be sufficiently convinced, that there is abundant reason to
vvin our hearts to a quiet and contented entertainment of want, and all other
outward afflictions.

SECT. XVII.
Of Contentment in death it self.

BUt all these intervenient miseries are slight in comparison of the last, and
utmost of evils, Death; Many a one graples cheerfully with these trivial
afflictions, who yet looks pale, and trembles at the King of fear: His very
Name has terror in it, but his looks more: The courageous Champion of
Christ, the blessed Apostle; and with him, every faithful soul, makes his
challenge universal, to whatsoever estate he is in; to the estate of Death,
therefore, no less then the afflictive incidence of life: When therefore this
ghastly Giant shall stalk forth, and bid defiance to the whole Host of Israel;
and when the timorous unbeleevers shall run away at the sight of him, and
endeavor to hide their heads from his presence; the good soul armed, not with
the unmeet and cumbersome harmnesse of flesh and blood, but with the sure
(though invisible) armor of God, dares come forth to meet him, and in the name
of the Lord of Hosts, both bids him battle and foils him in the Combat; and now
having laid him on the ground, can triumphingly say, O Death, where is thy
sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Five smooth pebles there are, which if we
carry in our scrip, we shall be able to quell, not only the power of death,
but the terror too.

Whereof the first is a sure apprehension of both the unavoidable necessary,
and certain benefit of death: A necessity, grounded upon the just and eternal
Decree of Heaven: It is appointed to all men once to Heb. 9. 27.
die; and what a madness were it for a man to think of an exemption from the
common condition of mankind? Mortality is, as it were, essential to our Nature;
neither could we have had our souls but upon the terms of a re-delivery, when
they shall be called for; If the holiest Saints, or the greatest Monarchs sped
otherwise, we might have some color of repining: Now, grieve if thou will,
that thou art a man; grieve not, that being man thou must die.

Neither is the benefit inferior to the necessity; Lo here the remedy of all
our cares, the physic for all our maladies, the rescue from all our fears and
dangers, earnestly sued for by the painful, dearly welcome to the distressed:
Yea, lo here the Cherub that keeps the gate of Paradise; there is no entrance
but under his hand; In vain do we hope to pass to the glory of Heaven, any
other way then through the gates of Death.

The second is the Conscience of a well-led life; Guiltiness will make any
man fowardly, unable to look danger in the face, much more Death; whereas the
innocent is bold as a Lion: What a difference therefore there is betwixt a
Martyr, and a Malefactor? this latter knows he has done ill, and therefore if
he can take his death but patiently, it is well; the former knows he has done
well, and therefore takes his death not patiently only, but cheerfully.

But because no mortal man can have so innocently led his life, but that he
shall have passed many offenses against his most holy, and righteous God; here
must be, Thirdly, a final peace firmly made betwixt God and the soul. Two
powerful agents must mediate in it; a lively Faith, and a serious Repentance;
for those sins can never appear against us, that are washed off with our tears;
and being justified by faith we have Romans 5. 1.
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, if we have made the Judge
our friend, what can the Sergeant do?

The fourth is the power, and efficacy of Christ's death applied to the soul:
Wherefore dyed he, but that we might live? Wherefore would he, who is the Lord
of life, die, but to sanctify, season, and sweeten death to us? Who would go
any other way then his Savior went before him? who can fear that enemy, whom
his Redeemer has conquered for him? who can run away from that Serpent, whose
sting is pulled out? Oh Death, my Savior has been thy death, and therefore
thou can not be mine.

The fifth is, the comfortable expectation, and assurance of a certain
resurrection, and an immediate glory: I do but lay me down to my rest, I shall
sleep quietly, and rise gloriously: My soul, in the mean time, no sooner leaves
my body, then it enjoys God; It did lately through my bodily eyes see my sad
friends, that bade me farewell with their tears; now it has the blisse-making
vision of God: I am no sooner lanched forth, then I am at the haven, where I
would be; Here is that which were able to make amends for a thousand deaths; a
glory, infinite, eternal, incomprehensible.

This spiritual Ammunition shall sufficiently furnish the soul for her
encounter with her last enemy; so as she shall not only endure, but long for
this Combat; and say with the chosen Vessel, I desire to depart, and Phil. 1.
23.
to be with Christ.

SECT. XVIII.
The miseries and inconveniences of the continued conjunction of the soul and
body.

NOw for that long conversation causes entirenesse, and the parting of old
friends and partners (such the soul and body are) cannot but be grievous,
although there were no actual pain in the dissolution: It will be requisite
for us, seriously to consider the state of this conjunction; and to enquire
what good offices the one of them does to the other, in their continued union,
for which they should be so loath to part: And here we shall find that those
two, however united to make up one person, yet (as it falls out in cross
matches) they are in continual domestique jars one with the other, and
entertain a secret familiar kind of hostility betwixt themselves; For the flesh
lusts against the Gal. 5. 17.
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other. One says well, that if the body should implead the soul, it might
bring many foul impeachments against it; and sue it for many great injuries
done to that earthly part: And the soul again has no fewer quarrels against
the body: betwixt them both there are many brawls, no agreement. Our Schools
have reckoned up therefore eight main incommodities, which the soul has cause
to complain of in her conjunction with the body: whereof the first is the
defilement of Original sin, wherewith the soul is not tainted as it
proceeds, alone, from the pure hands of its Creator, but as it makes up a part
of a son of Adam, who brought this guilt upon humano nature; so as now this
composition, which we call man, is corrupt: Who can bring a clean thing out of
that which is unclean? Job 14. 4.
says Job.

The second is a pronenesse to sin, which, but by the meeting of these
partners, had never been; the soul, if single, would have been innocent; thus
matched, what evil is it not apt to entertain? An ill consort is enough to
poison the best disposition.

The difficulty of doing well is the third; for how averse are we by this
conjunction from any thing that is good? This clog hinders us from walking
roundly in the ways of God: The good that I would do, I do not, says the
chosen Vessel. Romans 7. 19


The fourth is the dullness of our understanding, and the dimnesse of our
mental eyes, especially in the things pertaining unto God; which now we are
forced to behold through the vail of flesh: if therefore we mis-know, the fault
is in the mean, through which we do imperfectly discover them.

The fifth is a perpetual impugnation, and self-conflict, either part laboring
to oppose and vanquish the other. This field is fought in every man's bosom,
without any possibility of peace, or truce, till the last moment of dissolution.

The sixth is the racking solicitude of cares, which continually distract the
soul, not suffering it to rest at ease, whiles it carries this flesh about it.

The seventh is the multiplicity of passions which daily bluster within us, and
raise up continual tempests in our lives, disquieting our peace, and
threatening our ruin.

The eight is the retardation of our glory; for flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God; we must lay down our load if we would enter into Heaven:
The seed cannot fructify unless it die. I cannot blame nature if it could
wish not to be unclothed, but to be clothed upon: but so has the eternal
wisdom ordered, that we should first lay down, ere we can take up; and be
divested of earth, ere we can partake of Heaven.

Now then, since so many and great discommodities do so unavoidably accompany
this match of soul and body, and all of them cease instantly in the act of
their dissolution; what reason have we to be too deeply affected with their
parting? Yea, how should we rather rejoice that the hour is come, wherein we
shall be quit both of the guilt and temptations of sin; wherein the clogge
shall be taken away from our heels, and the vail from our eyes; wherein no
intestine wars shall threaten us, no cares shall disquiet us, no passions shall
torment us; and lastly, wherein we may take the free possession of that glory,
which we have hitherto looked at only afar off from the top of our Pisgah?

SECT. XIX.
Holy dispositions for Contentment: and first, Humility.

HItherto, we have dwelt in those powerful considerations which may work us to
a quiet contentment with whatsoever adverse estate, whether of life or death;
after which, we address our selves to those meet dispositions, which shall
render us fully capable of this blessed Contentation; and shall make all these
considerations effectual to that happy purpose. Whereof the first is true
Humility, under-valuing our selves, and setting an high rate upon every mercy
that we receive; For, if a man have attained unto this, that he thinks every
thing too good for him, and self less then the least blessing, and worthy of
the heaviest judgment; he cannot but sit down thankful for small favors, and
meekly content with mean afflictions: As contrarily, the proud man stands upon
points with his Maker, makes God his debtor; looks disdainfully at small
blessings; as if he said, What, no more? and looks angerly at the least
crosses; as if he said, Why thus much? The father of the faithful has
practically taught us this Lesson of humility, who comes to God Genesis 18. 27
with dust and ashes in his mouth: And the Jewish Doctors tell us truly, that
in every Disciple of Abraham, there must be three things: a good eye, a meek
spirit, and an humble soul; His Grandchilde P^^k. Avoth.
Jacob, the Father of every true Israelite, had well taken it out; whiles he
can say to his God, I am not worthy of the least Genesis 32. 10
of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant: And indeed, in whomsoever it be, the best measure of Grace is
Humility; for the more Grace still, the greater Humility; and no Humility, no
Grace: Solomon observed of old; and Saint Pro. 3. 34.
James took it from him, That Jam. 4. 6.
God resists the proud, and gives Grace to the humble; so as he that is not
humble, is not so much as capable of Grace; and he that is truly humble, is a
fit subject for all Graces, and amongst the rest, for the Grace of
Contentation: Give me a man therefore, that is vile in his own eyes, that is
sensible of his own wretchedness, that knows what it is to sin, and what
belongs to that sin whereof he is guilty; this man shall think it a mercy that
he is any where out of Hell; shall account all the evils that he is free from,
so many new favors; shall reckon easy corrections amongst his blessings; and
shall esteem any blessing infinitely obliging. Whereas contrarily, the proud
beggar is ready to throw Gods alms at his head, and swells at every lash, that
he receives from the divine hand. Not without great cause, therefore, does the
royal Preacher Eccles. 7. 8
oppose the patient in spirit, to the proud in spirit; for the proud man can no
more be patient, then the patient can be discontent with whatsoever hand of
his God. Every toy puts the proud man beside his patience; If but a fly be
found in Pharaohs cup, he is straight in rage, (as the Jewish tradition lays
the quarrel) and sends his Butler into durance: And if the Emperor do but
mistake the Stirrup of our Countreyman Pope Adrian, he shall dance attendance
for his Crown: If a Mardochee do but fail of a courtesy to Haman, all Jews
must bleed to death; And how unquiet are our vain Dames, if this curle be not
set right, or or that pin mis-placed? But the meek spirit is incurious; and
so thoroughly subacted, that he takes his load from God (as the Camel from his
Master) upon his knees: And for men, if they compel him to go one mile, he
goes twain; if they Mat. 5. 39, 40.
smite him on the right cheek, he turns the other; if they sue away his Coat,
he parts with his Cloak also.

Heraclius the Emperor, when he was about to pass through the golden gate,
and to ride in royal state through the streets of Jerusalem, being put in
mind by Zacharias the Bishop there, of the humble and dejected fashion wherein
his Savior walked through those streets, toward his passion, strips off his
rich robes, lays aside his Crown, and with bare head and bare feet, submissely
paces the same way that his Redeemer had carried his Cross toward his
Golgotha: Every true Christian is ready to tread in the deep steps of his
Savior, as well knowing that if he should descend to the Gates of Death, of
the Grave, of Hell, he cannot be so humbled, as the Son of God was for him:
And indeed, this, and this alone, is the true way to glory; He that is Truth it
self, has told us, that he who humbles himself shall be exalted; And wise
Solomon, Before Pro. 15. 33
honor is humility. The Fuller treads upon that cloth which he means to
whiten: And he that would see the stars by day, must not climb up into some
high Mountain, but must descend to the lower Cells of the earth. Shortly,
whosoever would raise up a firm building of Contentation, must be sure to lay
the foundation in Humility.

SECT. XX.
Of a faithful selfe-resignation.

SEcondly, to make up a true contentment with the most adverse estate, there is
required a faithful selfe-resignation into the hands of that God, whose we
are; who, as he has more right in us, then our selves, so he best knows what
to do with us: How graciously has his mercy invited us to our own ease? Be
careful (says he) for nothing; but in every Phil. 4. 6.
thing by prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be
made known unto God: we are naturally apt in our necessities to have recourse
to greater powers then our own; even where we have no engagement of their help;
how much more should we cast our selves upon the Almighty, when he not only
allows, but solicits our reliance upon him? It was a question that might have
befitted the mouth of the best Christian, which fell from Socrates, Since God
himself is careful for thee, why art thou solicitous for thy self? If evils
were let loose upon us, so as it were possible for us to suffer any thing that
God were not aware of, we might have just cause to sink under adversities; but
now, that we know every dram of our affliction is weighed out to us, by that
all-wise, and all-mercifull Providence; Oh our infidelity, if we do make
scruple of taking in the most bitter dose! Here then is the right use of that
main duty of Christianity, to live by faith: Brute creatures live by sense,
mere men by reason, Christians by faith. Now, faith is the substance of things
Heb. 11. 1.
hoped for; the evidence of things not seen; In our extremities, we hope for
Gods gracious deliverance, faith gives a subsistence to that deliverance,
before it be: The mercies that God has reserved for us, do not yet show
themselves; faith is the evidence of them, though yet unseen: It was the Motto
of the learned and godly Divine Master Perkins, Fidei vita vera vita; The true
life, is the life of faith; a word which that worthy servant of God did both
write and live; neither indeed is any other life truly vital, but this; for
hereby we enjoy God in all whatsoever occurrences: Are we abridged of means? we
feed upon the cordial Promises of our God: Do we sigh and groan under
varieties of grievous persecutions? out of the worst of them we can pick out
comforts; whiles we can hear our Savior say, Blessed are they which are
persecuted Mat. 5. 10.
for righteousness sake; for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: Are we
deserted, and abandoned of friends? we see him by us, who has said, I will
Heb. 13. 5.
never leave thee, nor forsake thee: Do we droop under spiritual desertions?
we hear the God of truth say; For a Esa. 54. 7, 8
small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee; In
a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness will I
have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer: Are we driven from home? If
we take the wings of the Psalm. 139. 8, 9.
morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea; even there also shall
thine hand lead us, and thy right hand shall hold us: Are we dungeon'd up from
the sight of the Sun? Peradventure the darkness shall cover Verse 10, 11.
us; but then shall our night be turned into day; yea, the darkness is no
darkness with thee: Are we cast down upon the bed of sickness? He that is our
God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from
Psalm. 68. 20
death.

It cannot be spoken how injurious those men are to themselves, that will be
managing their own cares, and plotting the prevention of their fears; and
projecting their own, both indemnity, and advantages; for, as they lay an
unnecessary load upon their own shoulders, so they draw upon themselves the
miseries of an unremediable disappointment; Alas, how can their weakness make
good those events which they vainly promise to themselves, or avert those
judgments they would escape, or uphold them in those evils they must undergo?
Whereas if we put all this upon a gracious God, he contrives it with ease;
looking for nothing from us, but our trust, and thankfulness.

SECT. XXI.
Of true inward riches.

IN the third place, it will be most requisite to furnish the foul with true
inward riches; I mean not of mere moral virtues, (which yet are truly precious
when they are found in a good heart) but of a wealth as much above them, as
gold is above dross; Yea, as the thing which is most precious, is above
nothing: And this shall be done, if we bring Christ home to the soul; if we can
possess our selves of him, who is God all-sufficient; For, such infinite
contentment there is in the Son of God made ours, that whosoever has tasted of
the sweetness of this comfort, is indifferent to all earthly things; and
insensible of those extreme differences of events, wherewith others are
perplexed; How can he be dejected with the want of any thing, who is possessed
of him that possesses all things? How can he be over-affected with trivial
profits, or pleasures, who is taken up with the God of all comfort? Is Christ
mine therefore? How can I fail of all contentment? How can he complain to want
light, that dwells in the midst of the Sun? How can he complain of thirst, out
of whose belly flow rivers of living water? Joh. 7. 38.
What can I wish, that my Christ is not to me? Would I have meat and drink? My
flesh Joh. 6. 55.
is meat indeed; and my blood is drink indeed: Would I have clothing? But, put
ye on the Romans 13. 14.
Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle: Would I have medicine? He is the Tree of
life, the leaves Rev. 22. 2.
whereof are for the healing of the Nations: Would I have safety and
protection? He truly is my strength, and my salvation; he is my defense, so as
I shall not fall; In God is my health and my glory; the Rock Ps. 62. 6, 7.
of my might, and in God is my trust: Would I have direction? I am the way, and
the truth: Would I have life? Christ is to Phil. 1. 21
me to live; I am the resurrection Joh. 11. 25
and the life: Would I have all spiritual things? We are in Christ Jesus, who
of God is 1 Cor. 1. 30
made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

Oh the happy condition of the man that is in Christ, and has Christ in him!
Shall I account him rich that has store of Oxen, and Sheep, and Horses, and
Camels; that has heaps of metals, and some spots of ground; and shall I not
account him infinitely more rich, that ownes and enjoyes him whose the earth
is, and the fullness of it; whose Heaven is, and the glory of it? Shall I
justly account that man great, whom the King will honor, and place near to
himself; and shall I not esteem that man more honorable, whom the King of
Heaven is pleased to admit unto such partnership of glory, as to profess; To
him that overcommeth Rev. 3. 23.
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne?

It is a true word of Saint Augustine, that every soul is either Christ's
Spouse, or the Devils Harlot: Now if we be matched to Christ, the Lord of
glory; what a blessed union is here? What can he withhold from us, that has
given us himself? I could envy the devotion of that man (though otherwise
mis-placed) whom Saint Bernard heard to spend the night in no other words,
then, Deus meus and omnia; My God, and all things; Certainly, he who has that
God, has more then all things; he that wants him (what ever else he seems to
possess) has less then nothing.

SECT. XXII.
Holy resolutions: 1. That our present estate is best for us.

AFter these serious considerations, and meet dispositions, shall in the last
follow certain firm resolutions for the full actuating our contentment: And
first, we must resolve (out of the unfailable grounds of divine Providence,
formerly spoken of) that the present estate wherein we are, is certainly the
best for us; and therefore we must herein absolutely captivate our
understanding, and will, to that of the Highest: How unmeet Judges are flesh
and blood of the best fitness of a condition for us? As some palates (which
are none of the wholsomest) like nothing but sweet meats, so our nature would
be fed up with the only delicacies of pleasures and prosperity; according to
the false principle of Aristippus, that he only is happy, which is delighted;
but the all-wise God knows another diet more fit for our health, and therefore
graciously tempers our dishes with the tart sauces of afiliction: The mother of
the two sons of Zebedee, and her ambitious children, are all for the chief
P^^rage in the Temporal kingdom of Christ; but he calls them to a bitter Cup,
and a bloody baptism rather; and this was a far greater honor then that they
sued for: There is no earthly estate absolutely good for all persons; like as
no gale can serve for all passengers. In Africa, they say, the North wind
brings Clouds, and the South wind clears up: That plant which was starved in
one soil, in another prospers; Yea, that which in some climate is poison,
proves wholesome in another: Some one man, if he had another blessings, would
run wild; and if he had some other man's crosses, would be desperate; The
infinite wisdom of the great Governor of the world allots every one his due
proportion; The Fitches are not threshed Esa. 28. 27.
with a threshing instrument; neither is a Cartwheele turned about upon the
Cummin; but the Fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a
rod, says Esaias: And no otherwise in matter of prosperity; Joseph's Coat may be
party-colored, and Benjamins mess may be five times so much as any of his
brethren. It is marvel if Genesis 43. 34.
they who did so much envy Joseph for his dream of superiority, did not also
envy Benjamin for so large a service, and so rich gifts at his parting; this
it seems gave occasion for the good Patriarchs fear, when he charged them, See
that you fall not out Genesis 45. 24.
by the way: But, there had been no reason for so impotent an envy; whiles the
gift is free, and each speeds above his desert, who can have cause to repine?
It is enough that Joseph knew a just reason of so unequal a distribution,
though it were hidden from themselves. The elder brother may grudge the fat
Calfe, and the prime Robe to the returned Unthrift, but the Father knows
reason to make that difference. God is infinitely just and infinitely
merciful, in dispensing both his favors and punishment. In both kinds every
man has that which is fittest for him, because it is that which Gods will has
designed to him; and that will is the most absolute rule of justice: now if we
can so frame our will to his, as to think so too, how can we be other then
contented? Do we suffer? There is more intended to us then our smart: It was a
good speech of Seneca, though an Heathen, (what pity it is that he was so?) I
give thanks to my infirmity, which forces me not to be able to do that, which I
ought not will to do; If we lose without, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
so as we gain within; if in the perishing of the outward man the inward man be
renewed, we have no cause to complain, much to rejoice: Do I live in a mean
estate? If it were better, I should be worse; more proud, more careless; and
what a woeful improvement were this? What a strange creature would man be, if
he were what he would wish himself? Surely, he would be wickedly pleasant,
carelessly profane, vainly proud, proudly oppressive, dissolutely wanton,
impetuously selfe-willed; and shortly, his own Idol, and his own Idolater: His
Maker knows how to frame him better; it is our ignorance and unthankfulness,
if we submit not to his good pleasure: To conclude, we pray every day, Thy will
be done; What hypocrites are we, if we pray one thing, and act another? If we
murmr at what we wish? All is well between Heaven and us, if we can think our
selves happy to be what God will have us.

SECT. XXIII.
2. Resolution, to abate of our desires.

SEcondly, we must resolve to abate of our desires; for it is the
illimitednesse of our ambitious, and covetous thoughts, that is guilty of our
unquietness; Every man would be, and have more then he is; and is therefore
sick of what he is not. It was a true word of Democritus, If we desire not
much, we shall think a little much: and it is suitable to one of the rules of S.
Augustine; it is better to need less, then to have more: Paul, the richest
poor man, (as Ambrose well) could say, As having all things, yet possessing
Ambros. de vitiorum and virtutum conflictus.
nothing: It is not for a Christian to be of the Dragons temper, which they say
is so ever thirsty, that no water will quench his drought; and therefore never
has his mouth shut; nor with the daughters of the Horseleach to cry always,
Give, give; He Pro. 30. 15
must confine his desires; and that, to no overlarge compass; and must say to
them, as God does to the Sea, Hitherto shall Job 38. 11
thou come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

What a cumber it is for a man to have too much? to be in the case of Surena
the Parthian Lord, that could never remove his family with less then a
thousand Camels? What is this, but Tortoise-like to be clogged with a weighty
shell, which we cannot drag after us, but with pain? Or like the Ostrich, to be
so held down with an heavy body that we can have no use of our wings? Whereas
the nimble Lark rises and mounts with ease, and sings cheerfully in her flight.
How many have we known, that have found too much flesh a burden? and when they
have found their blood too rank, have been glad to pay for the letting it out?
It was the word of that old and famous Lord Keeper Bacon, the eminent Head of a
noble and witty family, Mediocria firma: There is neither safety, nor true
pleasure in exces: it was a wise and just answer of Zeno the Philosopher, who
reproving the superstuity of a feast, and hearing by way of defense, that the
Maker of it was a rich man, and might well spare it, said; If thy Cook shall
oversalt thy broth, and when he is chid for it, shall say, I have store enough
of salt lying by me: would thou take this for a fair answer?

My Son, eat thou honey, says Pro. 24. 13
Solomon; because it is good: but, to be sure, for the preveating all
immoderation, he adds soon after; Have thou found Pro. 25. 16
honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith:
if our appetite carry us too far, we may easily surfeit; this (which is the
emblem of pleasure) must be tasted (as Dionysius the Sophist said of old) on
the tip of the finger; not be supt up in the hollow of the hand: It is with our
desires as it is with weak stomachs, the quantity offends, even where the food
is not unwholesome; and if heed be not taken, one bit draws on another, till
nature be overlaid; Both pleasures and profits (if way be given to them) have
too much power to debauch the mind, and to work it to a kind of
insatiablenesse; there is a thirst that is caused with drunkenness; and the
wanton appetite, like as they said of Messalina, may be wearied, but cannot be
satisfied; It is good therefore to give austere repulses to the first overtures
of inordinate desires, and to give strong denials to the first unruly motions
of our hearts; For, S. Chrysostom well; pleasure is like a Dog, which being
coyed, and stroked, follows us at the heels, but if rated, and beaten off, is
driven away from us with ease.

It is for the Christian heart to be taken up with other desires, such as
wherein there can be no danger of immoderatenesse: These are the holy longings
after grace and goodness; This only covetousness, this ambition is pleasing
to God, and infinitely beneficial to the soul. Blessed are they which hunger
Mat. 5. 6.
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled: Spiritual
blessings are the true riches whereof we can never have enough. S. Ambrose said
truly, No man is indeed wealthy, that cannot carry away what he has with him:
What is left behind, Ambros. Epist. 27.
is not ours, but other men's: Contemn thou whiles thou art alive, that which
thou can not enjoy when thou art dead.

As for this earthly trash, and the vain delights of the flesh, which we have
so fondly doted on; we cannot carry them indeed away with us, but the sting of
the guilty mis-enjoying of them will be sure to stick by us; and, to our
sorrow, attend us both in Death and Judgment: In sum therefore, if we would
be truly contented, and happy, our hearts can never be enough enlarged in our
desires of spiritual and heavenly things, never too much contracted in our
desires of earthly.

SECT. XXIV.
3. Resolution, to inure our selves to digest smaller discontentments.

OUr third resolution must be to inure our selves to digest smaller
discontentments; and by the exercise thereof, to enable our selves for greater:
as those that drink medicinal waters, begin first with smaller quantities, and
by degrees arise, at last, to the highest of their prescribed measure; or as
the wise Lacedaemonians, by early scourgings of their boys, inured them in
their riper years to more painful sufferings: A strong Milo takes up his Calf
at first, and by continual practice is now able to carry it when it is grown a
Bull.

Such is our self-love, that we affect ever to be served of the best; and that
we are apt to take great exceptions at small failings: We would walk always in
smooth, and even paths, and would have no hindrances in our passage; but there
is no remedy, we must meet with rubs; and perhaps cross shinnes, and take
falls too in our way: Every one is willing and desirous to enjoy (as they say
the city of Rhodes does) a perpetual Sunshine; but we cannot (if we be wise)
but know, that we must meet with change of weather; with rainy days, and
sometimes storms and tempests; it must be our wisdom to make provision
accordingly: and some whiles to abide a whetting; that, if need be, we may
endure a drenching also. It Genesis 3. 2. 26. and 33. 5, 6. etc.
was the policy of Jacob, when he was to meet with his brother Esau (whom he
feared an enemy, but found a friend) to send the droves first, then his
handmaids, and their children; then Leah, with her children, and at last came
Joseph and Rachel, as one that would adventure the less dear in the first
place, and (if it must be) to prepare himself for his dearest loss. S. Paul's
Acts 27. 18, 19.
companions in his perilous Seavoyage, first lighten the Ship of less
necessaries, then they cast out the tackling, then the wheat, and in the last
place themselves. It is the use that wise Socrates made of the sharp tongues of
his cross and unquiet wives, to prepare his patience for public sufferings.
Surely, he that cannot endure a frown, will hardly take a blow; and he that
doubles under a light cross, will sink under a heavier; and contrarily that
good Martyr prepares his whole body for the Faggot, with burning his hand in the
Candle. I remember Seneca in one of his Epistles rejoices much to tell with
what patient temper he took it, that coming unexpectedly to his Country
house, he found all things so discomposed, that no provision was ready for him;
finding more contentment in his own quiet apprehension of these wants, then
trouble in that unreadines: And thus should we be affected upon all occasions;
Those that promised me help, have disappointed me: that friend on whom I
relied, has failed my trust: the sum that I expected, comes not in at the day:
my servant slackens the business enjoined him: the beast that I esteemed
highly, is lost: the Vessel in which I shipped some commodities, is wrackt: my
diet and attendance must be abated; I must be dislodged of my former
habitation; how do I put over these occurrences? If I can make light work of
these lesser crosses, I am in a good posture to entertain greater.

To this purpose, it will be not a little expedient to thwart our appetite in
those things wherein we placed much delight; and to torture our curiosity in
the delay of those contentments, which we too eagerly affected: It was a noble
and exemplary government of these passions, which we find in King David, who
being extremely thirsty, and longing for a speedy refreshment, could say; Oh
that one would give me drink of the water of the Well 2 Samuel 23. 15, 16, 17.
of Bethlehem! but when he saw that water purchased with the hazard of the
lives of three of his Worthies, when it was brought to him, he would not drink
it, but poured it out unto the Lord.

Have I a mind to some one curious dish above the rest? I will put my knife to
my throat, and not humor my palate so far as to taste of it: Do I receive a
Letter of news from a far Country, over night? It shall keep my pillow warm
till the morning: Do my importunate recreations call me away? they shall,
against the hair, be forcibly adjourned till a further leisure: Out of this
ground it was, that the ancient Votaries observed such austerity, and rigor in
their diet, clothes, lodging; as those that knew how requisite it is that
nature should be held short of her demands; and continually exercised with
denials, lest she grow too wanton, and impetuous in her desires: That which was
of old given as a rule to Monastic persons, is fit to be extended to all
Christians; They may not have a will of their own, but must frame themselves to
such a condition, and carriage, as seems best to their Superior; If therefore
it please my God to send me some little comfort, I shall take that as an
earnest of more; and if he exercise me with lesser crosses, I shall take them
as preparatives to greater; and endeavor to be thankful for the one, and
patient in the other; and contented with Gods hand in both.

SECT. XXV.
4. Resol. to be frequent and fervent in prayer.

OUr last resolution must be, to be frequent and fervent in our prayers to the
Father of all mercies, that he will be pleased to work our hearts by the power
of his Spirit, to this constant state of Contentation; without which we can
neither consider the things that belong to our inward peace, nor dispose our
selves toward it, nor resolve ought for the effecting it; without which, all
our Considerations, all our Dispositions, all our Resolutions, are vain and
fruitless. Justly therefore does Phil. 4. 6.
the blessed Apostle, after his charge of avoiding all carfulness for these
earthly things, enforce the necessity of our Prayers and Supplications, and
making our requests known unto God; who both knows our need, and puts these
requests into our mouths: When we have all done, they are the requests of our
hearts, that must free them from cares, and frame them to a perfect
contentment: There may be a kind of dull and stupid neglect, which possessing
the soul may make it insensible of evil events, in some natural dispositions;
but a true temper of a quiet and peaceable estate of the soul upon good grounds
can never be attained without the inoperation of that holy Spirit, from whom
every good gift, and every perfect giving Jam. 1. 17.
proceeds: It is here contrary to these earthly occasions: with men, he that
is ever craving, is never contented; but with God, he cannot want contentment
that prays always. If we be not unacquainted with our selves, we are so
conscious of our own weakness, that we know every puff of temptation is able
to blow us over; they are only our prayers that must stay us from being carried
away with the violent assaults of coffeehouse; under which, a praying soul
can no more miscary, then an indevout soul can enjoy safety.

SECT. XXVI.
The difficulty of knowing how to abound; and the ill consequences of not
knowing it.

LEt this be enough for the remedy of those distempers which arise from an
adverse condition; As for prosperity, every man thinks himself wise and able
enough to know how to govern it, and himself in it; an happy estate (we
imagine) will easily manage it self, without too much care; Give me but
Sea-room, says the confident Mariner, and let me alone, what ever tempest
arise: Surely, the great Doctor of the Gentiles had never made this holy boast
of his divine skill, [I know how to abound] if it had been so easy a matter as
the world conceives it: Mere ignorance, and want of selfe-experience, is guilty
of this error.

Many a one abounds in wealth and honor, who abounds no less in miseries and
vexation: Many a one is carried away with an unruly greatness, to the
destruction of body, soul, estate; The world abounds every where with men that
do abound, and yet do not know how to abound: and those especially in three
ranks. The proud, the covetous, the prodigal; The proud is thereby transported
to forget God; the covetous, his neighbor; the prodigal, himself.

Both wealth and honor are of a swelling nature; raising a man up not above
others, but above himself; equalling him to the powers immortal; yea, exalting
him above all that is called God; Oh that vile dust and ashes should be raised
to that height of insolence as to hold contestation with its Maker! Who is the
Lord? says Exodus 5. 2.
the King of Egypt: I shall be like to the Highest; I am, and Esa. 14. 14.
there is none besides me, says the King of Babylon; The voice Act. 12. 12.
of God, and not of Man, goes down with Herod; And how will that Spirit
trample upon men, that dare vie with the Almighty? Hence are all the heavy
oppressions, bloody tyrannies, imperious domineerings, scornful insultations,
merciless outrages, that are so rife amongst men, even from hence, that they
know not how to abound.

The covetous man abounds with bags, and no less with sorrows; verifying the
experience of wise Solomon; There is Eccl. 5. 13.
a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, riches kept for the owners
thereof, to their hurt; what he has got with unjustice, he keeps with care,
leaves with grief, and reckons for with torment; I cannot better compare these
Moneymongers then to Bees; they are busy gatherers, but it is for themselves;
their Masters can have no part of their honey till it be taken from them; and
they have a sting ready for every one that approaches their Hive; and their lot
at the last is burning. What maceration is there here with fears, and
jealousies; what cruel extortion, and oppression exercised upon others? and
all from no other ground then this, that they know not how to abound?

The prodigal feasts and sports like an Athenian, spends like an Emperor; and
is ready to say as Heliogabalus did of old, Aelius La^prid.
Those cates are best, that cost dearest; caring more for an empty reputation
of a short gallantry, then for the comforble subsistence of himself, his
family, his family, his posterity: Like Cleopes, the vain Egyptian King, which
was fain to prostitute his daughter for the finishing of his Pyramid: This man
lavisheth out not his own means alone, but his poor neighbors; running upon
the score with all trades that concern back or belly; undoing more with his
debts, then he can pleasure with his entertainments; none of all which should
be done, if he knew how to abound.

Great skill therefore is required to the governing of a plentiful and
prosperous estate, so as it may be safe and comfortable to the owner, and
beneficial unto others; Every Corporal may know how to order some few files,
but to marshall many Troops in a Regiment, many Regiments in a whole body of an
Army, requires the skill of an experienced General. But the rules and limits
of Christian moderation, in the use of our honors, pleasures, profits, I have
at large laid forth in a former Discourse; thither I must crave leave to send
the benevolent Reader; beseeching God to bless unto him these and all other
labors, to the happy furtherance of his Grace and Salvation.

Amen.
FINIS.

