ENGLNADS ALARUM-BELL. To be rung in the ears of all true Christians, to
awaken them out of dead sleep of Sin and Security; that they may arm
themselves by Prayer and Repentance, and seek the Lord while he may be found,
before the evil day comes. Written by Charles Hammond.

Joel 2.1. Blow the Trumpet in Sion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountains;
let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes,
for it is nigh at hand. LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton, at the sign of the
Horse-shooe in Smithfield. 1652.

ENGLANDS Alarum-Bell.
THis Alarum-Bell, I have sent to be rung in the ears of all true Christians,
whereby it may arowse them from the dead sleep of sin and security: and to
beware of Gods Judgments, which he threatens against all obstinate,
presumptuous, and stiff-necked people: behold friends, I would not have you
think, that I will take upon me to Prophecy or Prognosticate any thing in
this Book, but what is warranted me by the Scriptures. That little Talent that
the Lord has lent me, I would not hide it, but willingly so lay it out, that
ye use may redound to the glory of God, and the good of all those that fear
him: my desire is, that this my small Book, called Englands Alarum-Bell, may be
as powerful in your ears, and work so much for your souls, to stop Gods wrath
by Prayer and Repentance, as the Preaching of Jonah to the Ninivites, as the
Lord commanded him; who at the hearing of Jonah, when he said, Yet forty days
and Niniveh shall be overthrown: they fasted and mayed with such earnestnes and
sincerity to ye Lord, that God repented him of ye evil that he said he would
do, and did it not: as you may read in the 3 of Jonah; You have heard lately,
and do hear by the Judgments and Prognostications of many me^ now lately, of
many sad things that are like to befall, not only this Nation, but all
Christendom besides; whether they will prove true or false, none but ye Lord
knows: the stars and planets I must confess are ye Messengers of God, and are
sent as fore runners of many things, which they do dive much into, yet fail in
their judgments many times: and many times I am persuaded that the Lord does
call back ye terror of those signs and tokens that he sends, to make them
know, that they are but men.

There is many I am persuaded, ye did look to see the 29 of March last, to be a
terrible day, as all writers did prognosticate. I must confess the Eclipse was
true, both of the Moon the 15 day, and the Sun the 29, according as they had
written; the Moon indeed a very sad one, and great winds rose upon her eclipse,
according as M. Culpepper writ in his Almanac; For the Sun, 't was eclipsed so
much, as ye appearance of it was like a new Moon; 9 parts of 12 of her were
darkened, or more, but ye splendour of that that did appear of it, was so bright
and glorious, and so clear the air was, that the day was not so terrible to
behold: But the power of the Lord was admirable in this Eclipse: I would desire
all you yt have seen this Eclipse, to consider this thing ye power of God over
man was this, (that I may with Reverence say) He caused light out of darkness:
for the splendour of ye part of the Sun that was not eclipsed was so glorious,
that it gave a luster on earth from the dark heavens; which if the Lord had
suffered the clouds to have covered ye part of the Sun that was not eclipsed,
with such clouds and darkness that was in the morning before she was eclipsed,
it would have bin then (I think) a dismal day to look on indeed; and then
perhaps more glory would have bin given to some men on earth, then to God
above, and afterward would have bin so extolled for their prognostications by
so many silly people in these times, yt they would have took their Almanacks
for Scripture, and have looked more in them, the^ in ye Bible. They writ very
largely of the effects that will follow; what the effects will be the Lord
knows: and if they do know by ye stars and planets, that the Lord does intend
those things that they writ on; yet let this my Alarum-Bell sound so much
comfort in ye ears of all true Christians, that if we will but truly and with a
sincere heart repent us of our sins, and leave them, ye Lord will repent him of
the evil that he pretended, and leave punishing: you shall find in the 13 of
Hosea the 9 and 10 ver. the comfortable words of ye Lord which he spare to his
people after he had aflicted the^; says he, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help; I will be thy King, where is any other that may
save thee in all thy Cities? by this you may see the Lord has no delight to
the destruction of a nation or people. I desire you likewise, yt the brightness
of the Lords mercy in this eclipse of the Sun, may not be a means to harden
your hearts, as I am afraid it does too many in this Land, that makes a
laughing at it, and thinks, because it was not so dismal a day as it was spoke
of by ye Astrologers, yt God sent those signs and tokens in vain: I desire you
to be careful what you do, and scoff not at the wonders of the Lord, for
though he lightened the glory of the Sun, in the eclipse; without repentance,
he will darken the glory of this Nation, and we may feel ye effects. Remember
what the Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet, Isaiah, cap. 5.12 They regard
not the works of the Lord, neither consider the oppression of his hands;
therefore my people are gone to Captivity, because they have no knowledge. I
look upon this eclipse in my opinion in two several ways, that it is a
forerunner both of Mercy and Judgment. First, I take it as the Lords mercy,
that he shows these signs in heaven to forewarn us on earth of his judgments to
come, and that all his people may prepare to meet him by repentance, before the
day of his wrath comes upon us. Next, I look upon it as his judgments, which
he threatens by it; for the Lord may say by us as he did by ye Children of
Israel, Amos 3.2. You only have I known, of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for your iniquities": For truly I think, no Nation
under the Sun has the Lord done more the^ for us, and yet no nation has
provoked him as we have done. Look again in the 4. of Amos, 9, 10, 11. verses I
have sent amongst you the Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt; your young men
have I slain with the Sword, and have taken away your Horses; and I have made
the stink of your Corpse to come up in your nostrills; ye: have you not returned
unto me, says the Lord. I have overthrown some of you, as I overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah, and you were as firebrarnds plucked out of the burning, yet have
you (...) returned unto me, says the Lord: therefore thus will I do with
thee, O Israel; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God,
O Israel.

I think if we rightly understand these words, the Lord may say as much to
England as he did to Israel, and we may apply it to our selves: therefore I
conclude this matter concerning the Eclipses; and desire you to take notice of
this, that when God shows wonders in the heavens above, and signs in ye earth
below, it is high time to look about us, and not to be as they were in the time
of Noah, for, They were eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in
marriage, til the flood came upon the^ all. But if you will take my advice, look
upon the^ as they are men; and though God has endued them with more knowledge
then other men; Yet all the wisdom of this world is but foolishnes, in regard
of the knowledge and wisdom of God above. Now give me leave to ring this my
Alarum-Bell once more to this sinful Nation, and to show you in this Book, by
the help of God and the Scriptures, the reason and cause yt the Lord has to
enter into a controversy with us; and truly I think there is none that hears
or reads this Book, that has ye fear of God before their eyes, but will
acknowledge this Alarum-Bell has just cause to be rung lou^ in the ears of all
this Nation, to tell England of her sins, yt by prayer we may stand in the gap,
to keep out the Judgments of God which is like to be poured out upon this
Land.

I refer the consideration of this Book to any Christian, that has any feeling
of the grace of God in them. Was sin ever at a greater height then it is now at
this time in our Land? and the more God strives to humble us by his judgments
and afflictions, ye more do we presume in sin: what sins is there in ye
Scriptures to be pronounced against, but we are guilty of? what Nation under ye
sun does more abound in iniquity the^ we do, and especially now of late times?
and briefly, these four sins which I shall name, are like four Load-stones, to
draw down ye heavy wrath of God upon us; that is, Pride, Coveteousnes,
Blasphemy, and Dru^ke^nes; and indeed Pride and Coveteousnes are ringleaders
of most sins under ye sun: Pride was one of the chief sins of Sodom. Look in
Ezekiel. 16.49. what ye Lord says to Samaria. Behold, this was the iniquity of
thy sister Sodom; Pride, fulness of Bread, and abundance of idleness was in
her, and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and
needy. And at verse. 50. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before
me; therefore I took the^ away as I saw good. May not the Lord say so to our
Nation? did you ever see or hear, that pride was ever grown to ye height in
Town and City, as it is now? nay, there are some that are so pust up with the
pride of heart, that they will pine the'r Carcass inwardly. What fashio^^ is
there invented every day, to fulfill ye pride of this nation? and we do as
'twere almost tell God to his face, that ye more he seeks to humble us by his
judgme^ts which he has sent amongst us, the more we presu^ptuously seek to
exalt our selves, by our pride and ambition: but remember what the Lord says,
He will pull down the proud and lofty, and exalt the humble and meek.

Covetousness is a sin that is linkt with Pride, for neither of them both has
any Charity in them: ye poor may lie and starve in ye streets, rather the^
pride or covetousnes will either cloth their nakedness, or fill their bellies:
no, no, they will rather eat up the poor (as ye Lord says) rather the^ feed
them. But look to it, thou that have corn, and wine, and riches; you are but
stewards for ye poor, and where ye Lord gives much, much he requires, either
temporal or spiritula: thou must give an account one day, how you have spent
that talent that God has lent thee; without you use it the beteer, he will
say, Depart, I know you not; I was a hungry, and you gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and you took me not in;
naked, and you clothed me not; sick, and in Prison, and you visited me not:
Mat. 25.42, 43. I think you understand, he meant his poor Members on earth;
how many poor souls in these times are ready to starve, and where is the pity
or charity yt is showed unto them? Did not Job say, The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes, blessed be his Name. And know thou, O man, what ere thou be, how
soon the Lord may take thy wealth from thee, or thee from it? do not be fed
with ye fancies of these times; that it is a relic of Popery to give alms or
be charitable; no, if thou have faith and no good works, it is a dead faith:
all thy gold and riches cannot buy thee one dram of Repentance, nor procure one
blast of breath, more then ye Lord (out of his mercy) does bestow upon thee:
thou may covet riches here on earth, but thou can not covet life; thou
may covet, but it is in vain.

The Scriptures are fulfilled in these our times, and indeed look in Mat. 24.
and read it, and you shall find all things fulfilled, only ye calling of the
Jews, and we know not how soon that may be. Our Savior says, And because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall grow cold: and indeed so it does
now, for there is little Love or Charity to be found amongst us; look what ye
Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet Hosea, Chap. 4.1, 2. Hear ye the word of
the Lord, ye Children of Israel; for the Lord has a Controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the Land. By swearing, and lying, killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood: there fore shall the Land
mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall languish. We may apply this to
our selves, if we consider Prophecy: if ye Lord will not hold him guiltle;
that takes his Name in vain; How will he hold him guiltless, yt takes a
glory in swearing, as many do in these times, who boast in their oaths, and
scarce ever think of God but when they swear by his name, whether it be false
or true? look in Zechariah 5.3, 4. you shall see what the Lord sent against yt
Thief and the Swearer, for the Lord join and them both together; for the
Swearer robs God of his honor: and he sent out a Curse to destroy them, and it
shall remain in the midst of their house, till it had destroyed both them and
it. I desire you yt are addicted to that sin beware, for it is such a sin that
you can make no excuse for it; it brings you neither pleasure nor profit,
unless it be the wrath of God, which he threatens against presu^ptuous sins:
it is such a sin in this Nation (the Lord be merciful to us) that you shall
scarce walk the streets but you shall hear little Children, ye scarce knows the
right hand from the left, yet they can learn to swear, and their parents scarce
correct them for it. The Lord may well visit the sins of the father upon ye
Children, when you suffer your Children to take his most sacred Name in vain.

The last sin which I have to name: for indeed it is not for me to number, nor
to reckon all the several sins of this Nation, for I think we exceed Sodom and
Gomorrah in our wickedness; only I have touched these four sins, as namely,
Pride, Covetousnes, Blasphemy, and Drunkenness, which is the four crying sins
of this Nation: my Alarum-Bell rings loud in the ears of all those that loves
ye sin of Drunkenness: see what ye Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet
Joel, 1.5. Awake ye Drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine; for it is out off from your mouth. Read ye Chapter,
and you shall find what the Lord did do for abusing those creatures; for in
time of plenty, they made a wast: therefore ye Lord brought a Famine and
scarcity, because of their Drunkenness and Gluttony.

Again, look in Habakkuk 2.15, 16. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor
drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him drunk also, that thou
may look on his nakedness. The cup of the Lord; right hand shall be turned
unto thee, and shameful spung shall be on thy glory. Let us take heed: we have,
the Lord be thanked, plenty; but by our riotousnes, and drunkenness, it is just
with God to bring a scarcity. How many poor souls, in this nation, would be
glad of a draught of Beer to quench their thrist; when many thousands take so
much, they are fain to disgorge it up again, and worst then beasts, most
shamefully abuse those creatures that God has sent for the nourishment of man?
I desire you to beware of that sin, for a man is not himself when he is in
drink, he is subject to all kind of wickedness. How many dangerous and desperate
sins has many men fallen into when they have bin in ye case, and such great
ones too, that has endangered both soul and body.

Now, I have given you warning by my Alarum-Bell, that you may prepare your
salves by flying from sin, and flying to the Lord by repentance; which if we
undoubtly do, we need not fear what man prognosticates; for the Lord has
promised, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, he will blot out all his iniquities. But we must not
delay our repentance; and take our own time, for we know not how soon the Lord
will come; but let us be like wise Virgins, to be ready at all times to meet
him, that we may enter into glory with him: for thus much assure your selves,
there is like to be great troubles throughout all Christendom: for all nations
are preparing for the destruction of one another. Just as ye Lord speaks
shall be in the latter days: There shall be great Tribulations, such as was not
since the beginning of the world, Mat. 24.21. For Nation shall rise against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be Earthquakes in
diverse places, and there shall be Famines, and great troubles: these are the
beginnings of sorrow, Mark 13.8.

And now to conclude, desiring you to look in Amos 5.14, 16. Seek good, and
not evil, that you may live; and so the Lord, the God of Hosts, shall be with
you, as he has spoken. Hate the evil, and love the go^d, and establish
Judgments in the gate; It may be the Lord of God of Hosts will be gracious to
ye remnant of Joseph: For the Lord has promised he will hide his people in the
day of his wrath. Then let us seek the Lord while he may be found, before the
evil day comes; for if we get under the protection of his Wings, we need not
feer the day of Doom, nor the day of Death: neither Sword, Pestilence, nor
Famine shall hurt us, for the Lord will bring his people out of all their
troubles.

So the last sound of this my AlarumBell, concludes with the sweet harmony of
Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 8. verse. 38, 39. Which I would
desire all Christians in these sad times, to arm themselves with the same
resolution, and then assure your selves you shall be more then Conquerors.
For, I am persuaded, says S. Paul, That neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.

