Samaria's Downfall: OR, A COMMENTARY (By way of Supplement) on the Five last
Verses of the Thirteenth Chapter OF HOSEA Wherein is set forth, Ephraim's
Dignity. Duty Impenitency, And Downfall. Very suitable to, and seasonable for,
these present Times. Where you have the Text explained, sundry Cases of
Conscience cleared, many Practic^ Observations raised (with References to such
Authors as clear a^ Point more fully.) And a Synopsis or brief Character of the
twenty King^ of Israel, with some useful Inferences from them. By THOMAS HALL,
B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton.

Thus will I do to thee, O Israel, and because I will do thus unto thee,
prepare to meet (...) God, O* Israel, Amos 4. 12. A prudent man fore-seeth the
evil, and hides himself, Prove. 22. 3. Etsi Christus and Apostoli minantur
facinorosis, and graviter reprehendunt viti^ (...) phetarum conclones ideo ad
deterrendos malos aptiores, and ad timorem Dei inculca (...) ficaciores sunt,
quia semper certas Paenas slagitiosorum addunt, qu^s. eventus postea (...) dit
non fuisse vanas. Luther. in Praefat. ad Hoseam. (...) for Io. Cranford, at the
Castle and Lion (...)

TO THE Renowned CITY OF LONDON, GRACE, MERCY, and PEACE be multiplied.
A Word spoken in season is much commended by the wisest of men, Prove. 15. 23,
and 25. 11. Yea, it is made one of Christ's excellencies, that he had the
tongue of the Learned, and knew how to speak a word in season. Isa. 50. 4. Such
words are not only profitable, but also powerful, and carry abundance of
convincing strength and force with them, Job 6. 25. This principally has
emboldened me to dedicate this Treatise to you. Had I searched for five verses
through the whole Bible, I could hardly have found five together (all things
considered) more suitable and seasonable for the present times we live in.

In them we have an Alarm for the Drowsy, a Corrasive for the Impenitent, a
Cordial for the Penitent, and many quickening Considerations to move us all to
a speedy preparing to meet our God in a way of unfeigned Humiliation before the
Decree bring forth, and the fierce anger of the Lord ceize upon us.

Here we may see Ephraims Dignity, and Ephraims Downfall, and those sins which
helped to bring him down; and in him we may read Englands condition; the Lord
has made us his Ephraim, he has laid his right hand upon us, he has made
us the head of the Tribes, he has set us above, when for our sins he might
long since have laid us in the dust. Ephraims sins were Ephraims ruin; and if
those sins be found in England, which were found in him, what can we expect
but the like judgments? for God is the same to the same sinners. If Samaria's
sins be found in London, London must look for Samaria's judgments. God will
not spare sin, where ever he finds it, be it in City or Country. Sin has
brought down greater Cities than yours; as they had their times of rising, so
of ruining; as of building, so of burning; witness Nineveh, No, Tyrus, Babylon
and Jerusalem: Sin has made them all a desolation. For my own particular, I
shall never expect that City or State should prosper, till Gods Church prosper;
or that our houses should continue, when Gods house lies waste; all our
buildings will be but Nods and Babels, that is, unsettlement and confusion,
till Gods house be settled and exalted amongst us, Hag. 1. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
It is the sins of England that I fear more than all the enemies in the world.
It is not Spain or Italy, it is not France or Turkey that I fear; though all
Nations should compass us about, yet were we but an obedient people, I should
not doubt, but that in the Name of the Lord we should destroy them. But it is
the Atheism, Heresy, Blasphemy, Security, Impenitency, Apostasy, Profanation
of holy things, Formality, Hypocrisy, Unrighteousness, Division, Witchcraft,
and contempt of the Gospel. These, even these, are the enemies that I fear; and
if any thing destroy us, it is these abominations that reign amongst us. Be
instructed therefore, O England, and thou, O London, the chief City thereof,
lest the Lords soul depart from thee, and thou be made a desolation, Jer. 6.
8. God has bornelong with our provocations, but he will not always bear, but
will at last reconcile his patience with the fierceness of his fury. Let not
therefore Satan delude any, as if these were but some melancholy conceits, some
fearful fancies, or vain prognostications of some lying Astrologers; but know,
that these are certain Assertions, grounded upon the infallible Word of God,
whose Threatenings, as well as Promises, are like unto Silver, that has been
seven times purified, and ^horowly tried, Psalm. 12. 6.

It is true, we have many Privileges that others want, but no Privileges can
preserve an impenitent people from ruin; Jerusalem was highly privileged; and
had the choicest Preaching a little before its downfall. The sins of a City and
Nation may be so great, that though Noah, Job and Daniel (three men that could
do very much with God, Ezekiel. 14. 14.) Should stand before the Lord for them,
yet they shall not prevail for a hardened, Apostatizing people; where such
spiritual judgments go before, there temporal judgments always follow, Isa.
6. 9, 10, 11, 12. Sinning is worse than suffering; better see a people
bleeding, than blaspheming; for by our Sufferings God is glorified, but by our
sins he is dishonored.

We are a people that are much for Liberty; we cannot endure a yoke, no,
though it be Christ's easy yoke, yet we will not have him to reign over us;
we will not serve him with gladness, and singleness of heart in the abundance
of all things; and therefore he may justly make us serve our enemies in the
want of all things, Deuteronomy 28. 47, 48. And as we are all for Liberty, so
he may justly proclaim a Liberty for us to the Sword, Pestilence and Famine,
Ier. 34. 17.

God has humbled many in your great City, by sickness, poverty, and decay of
Trading, etc. But have you been made humble thereby? He has sent the choicest
of his Ministers amongst you, and fed you (in a spiritual sense) with the
finest of the Wheat, but have you answered Gods cost and care? and are you
bettered by all his dispensations to you? Have you heard the voice of the Rod,
and who has appointed it? or have you not rather fallen away more and more,
and grown worse and worse? if so, how can you expect peace, when your
Apostasies, witchcrafts, and spiritual fornications are so many? 2 King. 9. 17,
18.

But it is not for me to counsel you, who have so many living See Mr. Wills
his most seasonable and solid piece, on 2 Timothy 3. 1. newly printed.
and dead Counselors at hand; I shall therefore betake my self to Prayer,
desiring that the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, may dwell amongst
you, that he would be for walls and bulworks to you, and your glory in the
midst of you; that he by the Spirit of fire and of burning would purge out of
you every thing that offends, that your scumme of Blasphemy, Heresy,
Hypocrisy, Unrighteousness, etc. may no longer abide in you, but that the Name
of your great and famous City may forever be, Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is
there. This is, and shall be the Prayer of

Kingsnorton, November. 17. 1659. Your Servant in the Lord, THOMAS HALL.

TO THE READER.
HAving occasion lately to peruse Mr. Buroughs on Hosea 13. 13. I found that
his Commentary was defective, and that Mr. Buroughs (that Prince of Preachers)
died before he had finished the Chapter; whereupon I perused the remainder of
the Chapter, and finding it to be very pat and pertinent to these present
drowsy, dangerous times we live in, and that no man had set upon it this
twelve years (for so long has Mr. Buroughs been dead) I having a little
respite, in the strength of my God I set upon it, and by his assistance have at
last completed it. It is true, it has cost me some pains, the most of these
five Verses being so turned and tortured, so intricate and perplex, admitting
of so many various Lections and Senses, and Interpreters are so divided amongst
themselves, that he had need of a great deal of Prayer and Patience, that
undertakes them. I think there are not many harder Verses in the Bible, than
some of these that I have lighted on, yet by a good hand of providence I have
gone through them, and have not balked any known difficulty, but have made all
as plain, and intelligible as possibly I could.

Many Posthumous works have had Supplements excelling their Predecessors; this
cannot be expected here. All that I can promise thee, is this, that I have as
fully and faithfully explained the Text, as possibly I could: I have raised
thence many useful Observations, and given in References (because I understand
they are very acceptable to many) to such as enlarge upon any point more fully.
Some Common places are succinctly handled, and if any Controversy occur
(according to my custom and calling) they have a lash and a pass.

As for the fourteenth Chapter, it is piously and pithily opened by two very
grave, Dr. Sibbs.
judicious men; So that now you have the whole Prophecy completed; Dr.
Reynolds.
If thou reap any benefit, give God the praise, who is pleased to show light in
the darkness, and strength in the weakness of

Thine in the Lord, THOMAS HALL.
Samarias Downfall: OR, A COMMENTARY (By way of Supplement) on the five last
verses of the thirteenth Chapter of HOSEA.
HOSEA 13. 12.
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up [by God] his sin is hid [with him.]
THis Chapter contains the sum of the eleventh Sermon of Hosea, Inter omnes
Prophetas Hoseas maxim velut summaria concionum suarum ponit. Mercer.
wherein the Propher (like the sweet Singer of Israel) treats both of Judgment
and Mercy; and uses both drawing and driving Motives, (one or both of which
usually work upon all ingenuous dispositions.) to bring them to Repentance. And
since God has ordained the Law to make way for the Gospel, and Humiliation to
go before Consolation; therefore the Prophet, first denounces Judgments
against Israel, and specially that of the Sword, which should cut off his
Kings, destroy his Kingdom take a way all their pleasant things, and make them
a desolation; neither was God to be blamed for all this, for it was their own
sins that had brought those evils upon them, viz. their Idolatry, Pride,
Carnal-confidence, Impenitency, Stupidity, (...) and Forgetfulness of that God,
who had raised them to great glory and dignity.

2. He sets forth the fierceness of Gods wrath against them, ( ver. Deus
comparatur L^oni saevo, quo nulla bestia truculentior. 2. Pardo in via
observanti, quo nulla subtilior. 3. Urso ^atulis orbato, quo nulla saevior. 4.
Cuivis immani b^stiae, siqua alia prio^ ribus immanior, sub genere continetur.
Tarnovius in locum.
7, 8.) Great blessings when abused, bring great judgments. Their sins had
turned God their great Benefactour into a Lion, a Leopard, a Bear; and
imbittered his soul against them. They dreamt they should find him a God all
of mercy, he tells them they are mistaken; for now they should find him a God
full of fury.

3. Whereas they might think to escape because God had so long forborne them;
the Prophet by a Prolepsis prevents this conceit, Ver. 12, 13. The iniquity of
Ephraim is bound up, and his sin is hid, q. d. Ephraim thinks now he may take
his pleasure since his iniquity lies hid, and he has so long escaped; but mark
what follows, ver. 13. The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him.
As the pleasure of conception has the pangs of childbirth attending it; so
this secure and pleasant people shall certainly meet with sorrow in the end,
and therefore Ephraim is but an unwise son, and guilty of great folly, in that
he does not speedily make his peace with God.

4. Lest they should be despondent and despair, he intermixeth comfort with his
threatenings, and allayes the terrors of the Law with the promises of the
Gospel, ver. 14.

5. Yet lest they should grow secure, after a little hyperbaton and
interruption of the order of the words, he returns to denounce judgments, and
tells them, that notwithstanding the promise of deliverance, yet first they
must expect a desolation of the chief City and the Kingdom, ver. 15. 16.

In this twelfth Verse we have briefly set forth the desperate and deplorable
condition of Gods people; Hosea est commaticus, et quas^ per sententias
^^quens. Hieron.
they were come to that height of wickedness, and grown so stupid under Gods
strokes, that now they must expect no more pardon, nor look that God should
bear any longer with them. So that in these words the Lord meets with the vain
conceits of the loose persons of those times, who soothed up themselves in
their evil ways, and because the Lord suspended his judgments for a time,
therefore they never suspected them, but thought that the Lord was such a one
as themselves, that is, no way displeased with their sins, but since he
connived at them, therefore they conclude he slept, and took no notice of them,
but had utterly forgot them. But they are much deceived, says the Lord, for I
have seen all their wickedness, and have sealed up all their sins till the due
time of revealing them (which is now at hand) be come. It Is true, I have borne
long with them (let that offend none) for I have not forgot their provocations,
they are all bound and bundled up so that not one of them shall be lost, but
they shall dearly reckon for them all together. As God has a book of
remembrance wherein he records the good deeds of his people, which shall one
day be published to their everlasting praise, ( Mal. 3. 16.) So he has a book
of remembrance, wherein he records the wickedness of the wicked, which shall
ere long be published to their everlasting shame. As the sin of Judah was
written with a pen of iron, and an adamantine claw, so that it should not
easily be blotted out, ( Ier. 17. 1.) So all the sins of Ephraim, from the time
of Ieroboams reign, to their going into captivity, were bound up and sealed,
that they might not be lost. Papers that lie loose and unbound are scattered
with every wind, but when they are fast bound up and sealed, then they are safe
and sure. Money that lies at random is lost, but that which is locked up in
Coffers is safe, and will be brought forth when need requires. So God had not
forgot Ephraims sin, but had hid and sealed it up till the determined time to
punish him was come, and locked them up in his memory for a day of reckoning.

Yet to leave no clod unbroken that we may find out the golden Oar, I shall
give you the Grammatical reading of the words; for a good foundation is the
strength of the building.

The iniquity. Gnavon, pravitas, praevaricatio, malitia; a Gnaval, ^ucvus,
obliquus fuit.
] Avon, the pravity and perverseness, the prevarication and crookedness of
Ephraims ways is laid up.

Of Ephraim.] Ephraim in the letter was Joseph's second son, here it is put for
the ten Tribes of Israel of which Ephraim was one of the chiefest. So Hos. 4.
17. and 5. 3. and 6. 4. and 7. 8, 11. and their first King after the division
was an Ephraimite.

Is bound up. Signari in sacculo prodi^igen^^ custodia. Proverb. Tsarur, tigat^
est, a Tsarar sigavi^, custodivit, constrinxit qua^i in (...), ita Genesis 42. 35.
1 Samuel 25. 29. Prove. 13. 22. and 30. 4.
] The metaphor implies special care and custody, and is borrowed from the men
of the world, who are careful to lock up their money that it be not lost; the
like expressions you may read, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Job 14. 17. and 22. 19. Lam. 1.
14. So the iniquity of Ephraim was sealed and kept safe to be brought forth in
due time as a charge against him. Though men scatter their sins abroad and
forget them, yet God bundles them up and remembers them, and as pardoning grace
does loose the sinner, so sin unpardoned is said to be bound up and reserved
for punishment, Mat. 16. 19.

His sin.] (i. e.) The punishment of his sin; it is a frequent Metonymical
speech to put sin for the punishment of sin. So Levit. 20. 20. Numb. 12. 11.
Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5, 6. Hattatho, peccatum ejus, from ( hata, to err or wander from
the mark; such is sin, it is a wandering and going astray from the Law of God,
it is an erring from the mark which we should always aim at, viz. the glory of
God and our own salvation.

Is hid] Not from God, Tsephunal abscondita est, a Tsaphan, recondidit,
custodivit. So Job 10. 13.
but with God; it is laid up by him for a day of reckoning, when the Lord shall
pour out the fierceness of his wrath on Israel. So that their sin is hid, not
in mercy, but in judgment; not for protection, but for desolation. Samaria
shall be made desolate. The Metaphor is taken from a treasure where things are
hid and laid up in store, (...). 17. 14.
that when time serves they may be forthcoming. (...). 27. 6.
God lays up the sins of the wicked in store against a day of wrath, (...).
16. 17.
Romans 2. 5. when he intends to punish them for all together.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Lord is very patient and bears long with sinners.

2. Though he do bear long, yet he will not always bear, but first or last he
will certainly bring the punishment due to their sin upon them. I shall only
handle the first, the second will fall in with the Application.

1. God is wondrous patient and bears long with sinners. He Is many years in
bundling up men's sins, and laying them up in his treasury. He does not
presently cut off sinners, nor always destroy wicked men in the act of sin, as
he might do (for so many sins as men commit, so many damnations they deserve)
but with much patience and great-long-suffering he bears with the Vessels of
wrath, Romans 9. 22. He bore with the old world many hundred years, even till the
whole earth was corrupt before him, and his Spirit tired out (as it were with
striving with them, Genesis 6. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 20. He spare^ Sodom so long that their
sins cried to heaven for vengeance against them, Genesis 18. 20, 21. He spared
Israel here three hundred and sixty years ere he sent them into captivity,
Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5, 6. He spared the Gentiles four thousand years, Act. 14. 16. and
bore with Jerusalem till they stoned his Prophets, and would not nee reclaimed,
Matthew. 23. 37. and spare^ Amalech four hundred years, L ^am. 15. 2, 3. His
Vials of wrath are Vessels of large extent, but narrow mouths, they pour our
slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually Gods wrath on the heads of
his enemies, Rev. 16. 1. and 18 19. Though we provoke him daily, yet he is
Patient toward us, not willing that we should perish but come to repentance.
2 Per. 3. 9. Rev. 2. 21. He sends his messengers in great compassion to us,
rifing early to stop us in our sinful courses. and so prevent our destruction,
2 Chronicles. 36. 15. Ier. 25. 4. Yea he is not only Patient, but long suffering,
which is a further degree of Patience, it is Patience length^ed our ( Exodus 34.
6. Psalm 103. 8. Jonah 4. 2.) he waits, and waits long for our returning,
crying, oh when will you be made clean, when shall it once be? Ier. 13. ult.
if some good man should sit but one hour in the Throne of God, and look down
upon the earth, as God does continually, and should see what abominable
Idolatries, Witchcrafts, Blasphemies, Heresies, Homicides, Perjuries,
Adulteries, Persecutions, Oppressions, etc. were committed in that hour, he
would undoubredly in the next set all the world on fire. It Is well (in this
respect) that we have to do with God, and not with man, Hos. 11. 9. I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not destroy Ephraim; why so? for I
am God, most true in my Promises, and of infinite Patience; and not man, who is
mutable and Passionate, and could not bear the daily indignities and
provocations which are committed against me. Great then is the sin of those who
abuse the Patience and long-suffering of the Lord, adding sin (...) drunkenness
to thirst, that draw on iniquity with the (...) Vanity, and so treasure up
wrath against the day of (...) ^unity breeds in them impenitency, because
punishment is not speedily executed; therefore the hearts of the sons of men is
fully se^ in them to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. Every word has its weight; these
indulged sinners do not barely practice sin, but their heart is set on it; the
very bent of their spirit is to evil indefinitely ( i. e.) to all manner of
evil, ^and that with resolution and full purpose of heart, they follow it
fully: as good men cleave to God and his ways with full purpose of heart (
Act. 11. 23.) and are married to him, Cant. 2. 16. So do these to sin and
Satan, they are married to them, Hos. 4. 17. It Is this impunity and prosperous
wickedness which makes men Insolent, Psalm. 73. 8, 9. Impudent, Isay 3. 9. and
Resolute in sin, Jer. 44. 16, 17. Such are apt to think there is no God, or at
least that he regards not things below, or that he is like themselves,
approving of their ways, and that which they do is no sin, Psalm. 50. 16, to
22. Those gross hypocrites that talked so much of Gods Word, but denied him in
their works, being Slanderers, Adulterers, Thieves, thought that because God
was silent and did not presently punish them, that therefore he approved of
their wickedness. But mark what follows, there is a stinging But, But I will
reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. Thou shall know one day how I
hated thy sin by the punishments which I will inflict upon thee for them, and
though now thou hidest them, yet then I will marshal them and set them in rank
and order before thy face. Consider this therefore you that cast Gods counsels
behind your backs, and hate to be reformed, before he awaken your drowsy
consciences, and rouse up that mastiff that lies sleeping in your bosoms; and
before you come to answer for all with flames about your ears. It Is a sad and
sore delusion wherewith Satan deceives millions of men, viz. that because they
are not presently punished, Etsi Deus pae^am differt, non tamen aufert; sed
singula peccata notat in libro, colligat in fasciculo, recondit in sacculo,
idcoque securitas est vitanda, and paenitentia agenda Tarnovius.
therefore they shall never be punished, and since God has forborne so long,
therefore he will always bear, and they shall never hear more of their sins:
hence it is that the wicked flatter themselves in their sins, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
Psalm. 36. 1, 2. Isay 47. 7. To take off this, 1. Consider that Gods forbearance
is no acquittance; though he bear long, yet he will not always bear. We see
he bore long with the Old world, Sodom, Ierus^lem etc. but at last they paid
for all. Mercy abused turns (...) fury, and the Preservations of wicked men,
are but (...) tions to greater wrath. God has leaden heels, but iron hands;
the further he fetches his arm, the heavier will the blow come; the further he
draws his arrow, the deeper will it wound. Sero licet veniat, ^^rte venire
solet.
Gods mill may grind soft and slow, but it grinds sure and small, Nahum 1. 3.
6. and he will recompense his Patience with the fierceness of his fury. Ever
after the sweetmeats of sin, look for a sad and sour reckoning. There was never
any that sinned against the Lord (be it never so secretly or subtly
contrived) but first or last the punishment of their sin did find them out,
Genesis 4. 7. Number. 32. 23. As Parents let their children alone till they have
multiplied faults and have committed some signal one, and then they reckon with
them for all together; so the Lord lets the wicked alone till they be ripe for
ruin ( Genesis 15. 16.) and have filled up the measure of their sin, that wrath
may come upon them to the uttermost, Amos 1. 3, 6, 9, 11, 13. The whore of
Babylon that has so long made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints
shall at last be burnt with fire, yea it is said she is fallen already, to show
the certainty of it, Revel. 14. 8. God will avenge the injuries that be done to
his Church, though it be long first, Luke 18. 6. yea as the longer the mother
goes with the child, the bigger will the child be, and the more pain it puts
the mother to; so the longer God keeps in his wrath and bears with a people,
the bigger will the child of wrath be when it comes forth, and the greater
will our misery be, when God has long held his peace and been still, then
he will cry suddenly like a traveling woman, and will destroy and devoar at
once, Isa. 42. 14.

Now the Lord show mercy unto England and awaken us out of our deep security,
for we have been a people that have exceedingly abused the Patience and
long-suffering of our God; as he has loaded us with mercies, so we h^ve loaded
him with our iniquities; we have made him to wait with our sins, and broken
his heart with our abominations, So long we have enjoyed the Gospel completely
without interruption.
Ezekiel. 6. 9. As we have been increased, so we have sinned against him: the
more victories and success we have had, the more blasphemous and licentious we
have been. Do we thus requite the Lord oh foolish and unwise? Is this the
thanks we give unto God for above an hundred years Preaching? Q Elizabeth
began her reign, 1558.
shall not the Lord visit for such sins as these, and will not his soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? It Is true, the Lord has borne long with us,
but he will not always, bear; but as he said to Ephraim here, so may I ^ay to
England, The iniquity of England is bound up, and her sin is hid till a meet
time of punishment is come, which we have cause to fear is now at hand; and
then God will reckon with us for all together, as we use to do with rebellious
children. Now sirrah, remember your villainy at such a time, and your
stubbornness at such a time. So now, remember your Covenant Breaking, says
God. Item, take this for your blasphemies, and that for your witchcraft; yea,
and take this for your Heresies, aye, and take that for your Atheism and
Apoftacy. Take this for your intolerable Tolerations, and that for your
reviling my Messengers.

Satan has his Methods, Depths and Devices, and amongst the rest this is a
special one, first to tempt men to sin, and then to security in sin. To this
and he persuades them they may do well enough, though they have done thus and
thus, yet they shall hear no more of it. Thus he deluded our first Parents,
first he tempts them to sin, Facit securos quos cupit ^sse captivos. Aug. See
Mr. Brooks his Remedies against Satan's Devices p. 8, 9^ 52. And Dr. Horto^ his
Fast Sermon. on Nu. 32. 23. Preached 1646.
and then goes about to persuade them that they shall not dye nor be punished
for their sin, Genesis 3. 4. He labors to free men from fear, that so they may
be free to sin. In good things, he separates the means from the end, and in
evil, he separates the end from the means. Thus this great deceiver of the
whole world, blinds men and deludes them, persuading them that what they have
done, either it is no sin, or if it be a sin, yet it is but a small one; or if it
be a great one, yet it is not known, or if it be known, yet it shall never be
punished. Thus Seducers and false-Prophers, those Devils incarnte, Devils
clothed with flesh and blood, like their father the Devil, they curse where
God blesses, and bless where God curses. They daw^ over men's sins, and sow
pillows under men's elbows, persuading men that the evils threatened shall never
come, but they shall have Peace, though God has said there is no Peace to the
wicked, 2 Kings 9. 18. Ier. 8. 11. hence the Apostle warn's us thrice to take
heed that no man deceive us with vain words, making us believe that we may be
Idolaters, covetous, fornicators, etc. and never be punished for it, 1 Cor. 6.
9. Gal. 6. 7. Ephesians. 5. 6. (...) not deceived, for God will not be ^^cked, you
may by your (...), distinctions and evasions delude your selves and delude
others; but there is no deluding God, who knows us better than we know our
selves. Carnal hiding of sin hinders the prosperity of the sinner, Prove. 28.
13. the more men hide them in this kind, the more God will reveal them; as we
see in Saul, Achan, and David, what means did he use to cove^ his iniquity, but
all in vain, for God brought it to the public view of all, So^cmus ut san^mur,
aperiamus ut operiantur. Aug.
2 Samuel 12. 12. the only way to have our sins hid indeed, is plainly and
sincerely to confess them, psalm 32. 5.

2. Whereas thou gloriest that thou have escaped so long unpunisht, know, that
it is a sore punishment to go unpunisht for sin. When the Lord was angry with
Ephraim, he bids let him alone; and tells him that he will not punish him for
his sin, Hos. 4. 14, 17. q. d. Since Ephraim will go after Idols, after Idols
he shall go, I will not by any punishment restrain him, but I will let him go
on and prosper in his abominations to his utter confusion; and thus to be given
up to ones own hearts lust is a sign of Gods highest displeasure, Psalm 87.
11, 12. in this sense, not be stricken is the sorest stroke, Isay 1. 5. and for
God not to be angry, is the greatest anger: as to be stopped and corrected for
sin is the greatest mercy, Psalm 89. 32, 33, 34. and 94. 12, 13.

3. Know, that punishment is never nearer than when it is least feared. A great
calm many times is a force-runner of a storm. When men cry Peace, Peace, then
comes sudden and swift destruction, 1 These. 5. 3. When the old world was
eating, drinking, buying, building, marrying and snorting in security, then
comes the flood. When Agag thought the bitterness of death was past, now says
Samuel, hew him in pieces. When men be at ease in Sion, there is a woe hang;
over their heads, Amos 6. 1. to 8. When men look upon judgments as a far off,
then God will defer no longer, Ezekiel. 12. 27, 28. Secure Laish becomes a booty
to its enemies, Judge, 18. 7, 27. The Amalakites when they had taken Ziglag and
were drunken, fearing no danger, they were suddenly surprised and slain, 1 Samuel
30. 16, 17. When the Philistims met to be merry and sport themselves with
Sampson, he brings the house upon their heads, Judge. 16. 25, 29. Darius in the
midst of his cups was ^lain by the Persians, Dan. 5. 30. and Babylon that
boasted she (...) as a Queen and should see no sorrow, had sudden plagues
(...) on her, Rev. 18. 7, 8.

Let no man then delude himself with the thoughts of impunity: for though
conscience may sleep for a time, yet at last it will be awakned, and then the
longer thy sins have been hid, the more will it rage against thee, especially
at the day of judgment, that day of revealing the hidden work of darkness. God
will then bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or evil ( Eccles. 12. ul^.) God will then unlock his Treasury, and those
sins which are now sealed and bundled up, shall then be brought to open light;
and those secret Villainies which men would not have known for all the world,
shall then be written as with a beam of the Sun upon their foreheads to their
everlasting shame. Sinners shall then have no cause to say, where is the God of
Judgment? Mal. 2. 17.

Let us therefore make a right use and improvement of the Patience of God; Nemo
sit deterior quia Deus est melior, toties delinquendo, quo^ies ignoscitur; quid
enim indignius quam ex divina misericordia desumere argumentum ad divinam
justitiam p^ovocandam, and quia Deus libenter excipit paenitentes, data obera
velle fieri peccatores? Tertul de Paenit. c. 7.
let it melt and humble us, and lead us to repentance. Let us in this our day
know the things that belong to our everlasting peace, whilst the Patience of
God yet waits upon us, and he stands knocking at the door of our hearts, (
Rev. 3. 20.) before the door of grace be shut against us: for then 'twill be
too late. To quicken you, know that God in the end will reckon with you for all
his Patience and forbearance; the longer he has borne with you, the greater
will your sin be. He takes an exact account of every day and year that he has
borne with us. Psalm. 95. 10. forty years long was I grieved with this
generation. He takes notice of every provocation. Numb. 14. 22. These ten times
have they provoked me: though you forget your provocations, How we should
improve the Patience of God, see D. Thomas Geodwins Aggravation of sins against
mercy, on Romans 2. 4. 5. And Mr. Church his Miscelan, p. 122.
yet God does not. Yea he records every Sermon that we hear, and the day and
year that it was preached to us. Hag. 1. 1.

Lastly, let us imitate God, and be followers of him as dear children; be
Patient as he is Patient, though we cannot be so by way of Equality, yet by
way of Analogy and resemblance, in our degree and measure we may and must; if
he bear with us, we may well bear with our brethren; if he has forgiven us
Pounds, we may well forgive them Pence. We should forbear one another, and
forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4.
31. Colos. 3. 13. Let your moderation and quietness of mind be made known to
all ( Phil. 4. 5.) and if any man wrong us, let us melt them with our
kindnesses ( Romans 12. 20.) as David ^elted Saul, and made him weep and confess
that he was more righteous than himself. Even Humanis rebus ignoscere aequum
and bonum est, and boni viri est accepta injuria patienter far, non ad
ulciscendum se parare. Aristor. Rhetor. l. 1. c. 14.
Nature could say, it becomes a noble spirit to pass by injuries. When one told
King John that his deadly enemy was buried there, and advised him to deface
his Monument; no, See Motives to Patience. Youngs Victory of Patience, chapter 17.
and a Lapide in Number. 12. 3. and ad Romans 12. 9 Davenant in Col. 3. 12. p. 313.
and my Commentary on 2 Timothy 3. 10. p. 198.
said the King, but I wish all the rest of mine enemies were as honorably
buried. 'Twas an excellent answer of Chrysostom to the Empress Eudoxa, and
savored of a sweet mortified frame of spirit. If the Queen (said he) will
banish me, let her banish me; The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.
If she will saw me asunder, let her do it, the Prophet Isay suffered as much.
If she will, let her cast me into the sea, and there will I remember Jonah.

VERSE 13.
The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an unwise son,
for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children.
IN this Verse the Prophet goes on to denounce judgments against an obstinate
and rebellious people, if by any means he might awaken them out of their
security.

By the sorrows of a woman in travel he sets forth the sudden, sure and sore
destruction which was even now coming upon the heads of those
carnally-confident sinners. They promised themselves Peace and Prosperity, they
had made a league with death, and had put the evil day far from their souls,
and therefore drew near to iniquity, ( Amos 6. 3.) No words nor warnings, no
mercies nor judgments could work upon them, therefore the Lord resolves to
bear no longer with them, but speedily to surprise them with his judgments.
The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon them.

In this Verse we have, 1. A commination, or a judgment threatened, set forth
by the similitude of the sorrows of a Traveling woman, a Metaphor very
frequent in Scripture.

Wherein is set forth
1. Sudden 2. Sharp 3. Inevitable Sorrows.
1. Pangs upon a woman in travel come suddenly and unexpectedly; Sometime
whilst they are eating, drinking, sleeping, playing, and think not of the
pains of travel: So the Lord threatens to bring upon this stupid people such
calamities, which should be like the sorrows of a traveling woman, sudden and
une^pected.

2. Cheblei Ioledah, dolores p^rturientis. Chebte signisicat dolores
accrb^ssimos and int^^ issimos quales sunt parturie^ium.
The pains of a woman in travel are sharp, exquisit and extreme sorrows, the
bitterness whereof that sex can witness.

Such pangs the Scripture often makes the emblems of extreme anguish and
distress, Psalm: 48. 6. Esaias 26. 17, 18. and 37. 3. Ier. 6. 28. and 22. 23. and
49. 24. Micai 4. 9, 10. Gal. 4. 19. So the calamities which were coming upon
this people, were not slight sorrows, but such as brought desolation with them.
2. The longer a dead birth is concealed and carried in the womb, the more
dangerous and difficult is the travel: Ephraim had for a long time concealed
his sin, and therefore now his pangs are like to be so much the more grievous.
3. If the birth be living, the greater the birth, and the longer they go with
it, the sharper are the pangs: so the longer God bears with a people, and the
more his Patience is a bused, the more terrible will his wrath be.

3. Inevitable and irresistible. There Is no escaping when once the time of
traveling is come. Cum adest hora, non datur mora. So the set time of Ephraims
calamities was now at hand, which they should in no wise be able to avert or
avoid.

2. Here is a Reason of this Commination, taken from the folly of Ephraim; he
is, and, for ought I see, for ever will be an unwise son, which appears in his
stupidity and obstinate persisting in his sins without any striving to get out
of them by Repentance. Ben lo bacham, filius non sapiens ( i. e.) valde
insipiens, imo prorsus demons. Hebraei enim quod volunt vehemen^issime
asse^erare, p^aecipue in vitio, per negationem contrarii describunt, ut videre
est Prove. 10. 2. and 18. 3. and 23. 13. and 30. 25. Isa. 42. 3. Meiosis.
Ephraim is an unwise son, for had he been wise he had not staid so long in the
birth.

Object. Lest Ephraim should reply, that a traveling woman is soon delivered,
her pain may be sharp, but it is but short; she has hope not only of an end,
but also of a birth, the joy whereof makes her remember her anguish no more,
John 16. 27.

Answ. The Prophet replies, that it is not so with Ephraim, for he is an unwise
son that sticks long in the birth, Sicut mulieri cum partus dolores v^^erunt,
aut pariendum, aut cum faet^ Pe^eundum est; ila illis p^ena imminet in qua
ipsos ^ut renasci and per paenitentiam eniti ac cluctari, aut male perire
opor^^t. Gualter.
and so will be the death both of himself and mother also. He uses no means to
facilitate the birth, or to help himself by passing through the straight gate
of Repentance. God stands over him, stretching forth his hands all the day long
to do a Midwifes office, and take him from the womb, to cut his navel, and wash
off his filth: ( Ezekiel. 16. 4, 9.) but he had no mind to come out of his filth,
or to be washed from his wickedness. Rather than endure the pangs of
regeneration, Lo jaamod, non staret ( i. e.) non maneret out h^ereret Bemishbar
benim in ruptura filiorum, ita matrix vocatur, q. d. cito erumperet, ne vires
amittente matre enecaretur ( i. e.) non differet paenitentiam quam fingit non
agit, nihil in sui regeneratione in se desiderari pateretur, cum Prophetarum
concionibus seriis est. excitatus ut paenitentiam Dei open moliatur. Tarnovius.
he will venture to stay a while at least in the very mouth of the matrix, though
he be stifled for his pains.

q. d. It Is Ephraims sin and misery, that he sticks so long in the birth, were
Ephraim wise, he would humble himself and make his peace with God, that he
might by his mercy be delivered fully from those miserable straights where in
hoe is: if there were but one drop of true wisdom in him, yea if he were not
utterly stupefied, or rather mad, he would take notice of Gods judgments
impendent over him, and would imitate little infants who coming into the world
do help themselves, and strive to free themselves out of the straights and
dangers of the birth: so would Ephraim have endeavored to free himself out of
those calamities that have be set him, by true repentance. But alas so besotted
and hardened is he in his sins, that he rests content with his carnal
condition, never once striving or desiring to come out of this darkness into
light, or to be brought from under the power of Satan unto God.

So that in these words the Prophet does notably inveigh against the stupidity
and folly of Gods people, in that they had rather stick and be stifled in the
filth of their sins, lie in the mouth of death, and under the pressures of Gods
wrath, to the destruction both of themselves and the Church (which he had
before compared to a mother, Hos. 2. 2) rather than extricate themselves out of
this sin and misery by true repentance.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Where sin goes before, there, sudden, Certain, sharp, inevitable sorrows
always follow. In the former part of the Chapter, we read of Ephraims
Idolatry, Pride, Impenitency, etc. now follows: The sorrows of a traveling
woman shall come upon him; flagitium and flagellum; sin and punishment are
inseparable companions; Genesis 4. 7, 14. and 19. 15. Numb. 32. 23. Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
to 68. hence the word that we render, Iniquity, signifies pain and sorrow,
because the workers of iniquity bring pain and sorrow upon their own heads, Job
21. 19. Psalm 32. 10.

How then should we hare sin with a pure and perfect hatred? not only odio
inimicitiae, but also odio aversationis; hate it so as to turn from it. This is
the cause of all our sorrows, we may thank our sins for all our sickness,
pains, plagues, Lam. 3. 39. we should therefore do by our sins, as the Jews
did by Paul (whom they looked upon as their enemy) Acts 21. 27, 28. when they
saw him, they stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him, saying, Men of
Israel, help, this is he that is against the people, against the Law, and
against this place. So should we encourage each other against sin, and lay
violent hands upon it, saying, Men and Brethren help, this is it that
destroys our people, lays waste our Cities, op^poseth the Law, defiles our
duties, and incenseth the most high against us.

Let us therefore purge it out of our understandings, and mortify it in our
affections. See more of the Vileness of sin in Mr. Rob. Bolton comforting
afflicted consciences, ch 4. p. 110. and Dr. Bolton on 2 Samuel 24. 10. p. 1.
folio. And Bishop ushers Meditations, p. 126.
Considering,

1. What sin is in its own nature, it is poison, dung, vomit, filth, folly,
madness, darkness, sickness, destruction, death. It turned Angels into Devils,
men into beasts, light into darkness, life into death, and order into confusion.

2. Considering what sin is in respect of God, it is a reproach and a contempt
of him, 2 Samuel 12. 9. it is blasphemy, rebellion, In omni peccato voluntario est
contemptus quidam implicitus, virtualis and inte^pretativus.
enmity, Romans 8. 7.

2. Obs. Scripture language is modest. The mouth of the matrix is called the
place of the breaking forth of children. So the vessel wherein nature does ease
it self, is called a vessel wherein there is no pleasure, Jer. 22. 28. Hos. 8.
8. Thus Adam is said to know Eve: and David went in to Bathsheb^: Ehud covered
his feer (i. e.) he eased nature, Judge. 3. 24. I Sam. 24. 3. Deuteronomy. 23. 13.
Adultery is called stolen waters, Prove. 9. 17. and grinding to another, Job
31. 10. See Matthew. 1. 18, 25. and 1 Cor. 7. 3, 5. The holy Ghost knowing the
power of our corruption, and how apt we are to be fired with filthy speeches,
therefore by an Euph^mismus, he puts seemly titles upon unseemly things.
The Scripture does not only command chaste and modest things, but it also
speaks chastely and modestly of those things.

Abominable then is the sin of the Popish Casuists, which speak so grossly of
the secrets of women in their Cases on the seventh Commandment, that they
become foulely guilty of the breach of it. By their obscene words they corrupt
good manners; and rather incite than suppress sin. If men must answer for every
idle word, much more for sinful and immodest ones.

3. Obs. It Is a point of great folly to lie long under convictions, and yet
never proceed to a through conversion. The world is full of such unwise
Ephraims, that are of a Laodicaean temper, neither hot nor cold, that halt
between two, or rather twenty opinions. Their hearts are divided between God
and the world, God and their Idols. ( Hos. 10. 2.) They have their
understandings enlightened, their affections stirred, and they are strongly
convinced of the truth and comfort that is in Gods ways, and yet there they
stick, they never proceed to a through conversion. See Mr. Chishul his
soul-se^ch^ing Sermon on Acts 26. 28. p. 15, 16. Di^e on the Heart, chapter 5. p.
65. How far a Hypocrite may go, See in Shepherd on Sincerity, chapter 5. p. 73, 74,
etc.
They are almost, but not altogether persuaded to be Christians; and so shall
be almost, but not altogether saved, Act. 26. 28. God has brought them to the
birth, and there they stick, refusing to come forth. He would cure them, but
they will not be cured; he would convert them, but they will not be
converted, Ier. 51. 9. Many have a name to live and are not far from the
Kingdom of heaven, they come even to the place of the breaking forth of
children, but there they stick and are stifled. They were never fully brought
off from their vain Principles and Practices, and therefore when a temptation
comes, they return to them again, as the dog to his vomit.

Many go far, very far, so as they hear the Word with some kind of faith and
affection, with sorrow and joy, reforming many things, performing many good
duties, both publicly and privately; being endowed with excellent gifts of
Knowledge, Utterance, Praying and Preaching; and shows of many graces, to the
deceiving of themselves and many others; as Balaam, Saul, Ahab, Iehu, Herod,
Iud^s, Demas, Ananias and Saphira, and those Apostates, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and
yet for want of sincerity lose all. It Is said of King Ioash, that he smote the
ground twice or thrice and then stayed, whereupon the Prophet was angry with
him, saying, thou should have smore the earth five or six times, for then
thou had completed thy victory over the Syrians, 2 King. 13. 18, 19. So many
a man begins well, and subdueth two or three lusts it may be, but for want of
through work in subduing them all, lose^all. A man may go within a mile of some
famous City, and yet for want of going that mile, never come there. A man may
bid within a shilling of some good bargain, and yet for want of that shilling,
lose it. The people of Israel went as far as Kadesh Barnea, and were within
eleven days journey of Canaan, and yet by reason of their sins, many of them
perished in the wilderness and never came there, save only Caleb and Joshua who
followed the Lord fully and sincerely, Numb. 14. 24. and 32. 8, 11, 12, 13.
It Is sad when a man shall come near the Kingdom of heaven, and yet never come
there, ( Mark. 12. 34.) to sink within sight of the harbor, and with Rachel,
to dye within a mile of Ephrath, Genesis 35. 16. and to come within one stride of
the mark, and yet miss it, that torments the soul. Many purpose well, and
promise well, they begin to repent, and begin to reform, but they are ever
beginning, and never bring any thing to perfection; like those silly women that
were always learning, Inter caetera mala hoc habet stultitia, semper incipit
vivere. Seneca.
yet never came to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7. like that
hypocritical son, that said he would go, but never did, Matthew. 22. 30. their
cold velleities and heartless essays come to nothing. These lose heaven many
times for some one lust, as Judas for his covetousness, Esau for a mess of
Pottage, and the young man that had done much, yet one thing was lacking, which
marred all, Mark. 10. 21. if they could but have parted with that, they might
have had Christ and happiness.

Oh then deny your selves universally, sell all for the Pearl of price; you may
buy gold too dear, but you can never buy Christ too dear; what if thou part
with riches, pleasures, friends? thou fhalt have better riches, pleasures and
friends, all shall be made up in a better kind; yea thy friends and riches (if
God see it good for thee) shall be given thee into the bargain, Matthew. 6. 33.

It Is true, conviction is very necessary, and an excellent Preparative to
conversion. As plowing fits the ground for sowing, so does this fit the heart
for grace: and therefore the first work of the Spirit is, See the Excellency
and Necessity of Conviction in Mr. Forde Spirit of Bondage, l. 1. c. 2. to 28,
Shepherds Sound Believer, c. 2. p. 6. to 45. Rogers of Dedham on Faith, p. 71.
etc.
to convince the world of sin, John 16. 8. A man must by the Law be convinced
of his misery, before ever he will beg for mercy: and though all are not
converted, who are convinced, yet all are convinced who are converted. Men will
not come to Christ till they see no other remedy. The Malefactor cries not for
a Psalm of mercy, till he be cast. The Prodigal never cares for coming to his
Father, till he comes to see and say, Here I dye, Luke 15. 17. Men must be
beaten out of their strong holds, like fish out of their holes, or else they
will not come in. We may break hook and line too, to get out a great fish, but
cannot, till he be half-choakt. First, convince a man that his disease is
desperate, and then persuade him to cut off a leg or an arm. First, disarm men
of all shifts and flattering dreams, and then you will bring them upon their
knees. Saul had many shifts, but Samuel refels them all, and at last brings
him, to, I have sinned. If you belong to God, he will effectually convince you
in his due time; he that has begun a good work in you, will finish it; he
that has brought to the birth, will give strength to bring forth; he that
has brought you out of Sodom, Sub (...) perpetuo parturientes nunquam
parturiebant, ibi nihil nisi suffocatio filiorum quia non erant parturienti
vires ad evitendum, ex ^peribus leg is nemo justificatur. Mercer.
will not rest till he has set you safe in Zoar; he perfects all his works
in his people, Psalm. 57. 2.

This then is the first and great work of the Spirit, to convince men thoroughly
of their lost and undone condition. This is virtually and fundamentally all;
till this be done, no good can be done; we shall never be truly humbled,
nor prize a Savior, nor be fit for his service, nor be entrusted by him. Men
must be convinced in themselves, what they are in themselves, before Christ
will reveal himself unto them. Christ will not power the oil of mercy, but into
broken hearts; nor be a Physician to any, till they be sick of sin. Such will
be ductible and tractable to his will. Paul when unhorsed and humbled to the
ground, then is ready to do whatever Christ commands him, Act. 9. 6

Naturally, men have covers, false colors, cavils and excuses for sin; but
when the Spirit comes with convincing power, it stops their mouths, and puts
them to silence, so that they have nothing to say for themselves, Romans 3. 19.
they see themselves to be guilty, and such as cannot plead their own cause
without an Advocate. Whilst men are in their natural condition, they are full
of self-righteousness, and filled with false notions. Like spiders, we are full
of poison, and yet not sick of it, because it is their nature. But when the
Spirit comes, it undeceives men, it rectifies their judgments, and confutes
those vain conceits which before had possessed them. It now clearly convinces
them of the vanity of the creature, of the hatefulness of sin, and the
necessity of a Savior. Conviction, is a clear and infallible demonstration,
which takes away all a man's shifts, and does so nonplus a man, that he has
nothing to say for himself. When Christ had confuted the Pharisees ( John 15.
22.) he took their cloaks from them: now I have spoken to them, they have no
cloak for their sins. Every natural man has some cloak and cover for his sin;
but when the Spirit comes, carnal arguments are confuted, and the devils strong
holds are battered, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. now he confesses he is poor and naked,
lost and undone without a Savior; now he has no Plea, nothing to pretend by
way of excuse for himself: and this is the first Form in Christ's School; he
will never prove a good proficient in the higher form of the Gospel, What
measure of Conviction is necessary to Conversion.
that has not first been convinced and abased by the terrors of the Law. God
will have men know what he has done for them, and his grace prized at a due
rate, See Shepherds Sound Believer, p. 32. And Fords Spirit of Bondage, c. 12.
p. 64.
and respect by them. Christ is not Christ to any till sin be seen; neither
can we bring you to any thing in Christ, till we have brought you to nothing
in your selves. When men are first broken up with the sight and sense of sin,
then they may expect to be sown in righteousness, Hosea 10. 12.

1. Take heed then of resisting the Spirits convictions: Do not drive, drink,
or game them away; it is a sin against the holy Ghost so to do, though not The
sin against the holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. Many stifle the Spirits convictions,
like harlots, who destroy their conceptions that they may avoid the pangs of
childbirth. Put not out Gods light in thy soul, le^t his Spirit strive no more
with you in this kind, Genesis 6. 3. when God sends his Ministers to Preach,
Print, Dispute and convince you, yet if you will not be convinced, take heed
lest he say, you shall not be convinced; and in his wrath he say, means of
grace never better this people, Sacraments never comfort them, Sermons never
stir them; since they will be filthy, let them be for ever filthy, and since
they will not be purged, they shall not be purged till they dye. Thus for God
not to strive is the sorest judgment, and a fore-runne^ of some dreadful
judgment upon a person or nation.

Many love to hear of Privileges, but nor of Duties; of Salvation, but not of
Sanctification; of Heaven, but not of conviction and conversion, which is the
way thi^her. Like the Israelites that liked well of Canaan, but they would not
go through a wilderness to it. But a gracious soul is thankful for humiliation,
as well as for consolation, and blesses God, when by his Word and Spirit he
convinces him of his misery, that so he may be fit for mercy. The sinner
convinced of sin, is nearer heaven than the best natural man in the world
Publicans and Harlots, that have no excuse nor Apology for their gross sins,
are in a more hopeful way of cure, than Pharisees that think themselves
righteous enough; Better (says Austin) be an humble sinner, than a proud
innocent.

2. Take heed of Ignorance and Unbelief, which are two great hindrances of
conviction. When men know not their misery, nor yet believe the curses which
yet are due to them, no wonder if such be unwrought upon.

3. Take heed of quenching the motions of the Spirit in you, for if ever you be
convinced, it is the Spirit must do it, John 16. 8. all the men and Ministers in
the world cannot do it without the Spirit. We may tell you long enough of this
and that sin which you have done, and all to no purpose, till the Spirit sets
in with the work, and make you sensible of sin, then, and never till then it
becomes effectual. Mark therefore when the Spirit moves in thee, and improve
those opportunities for thy souls advantage. For as when children are come to
the natural birth, it is God that must and can give strength to bring forth; so
much more in this supernatural birth, is his Almighty assistance requisite.

Oh then follow on convictions till they come to conversion, be no longer
unwise children, that stick in the place of bringing forth. Be not almost, but
altogether Christians. Rest not content with a name of living, but live indeed.
Beseech the Lord to bring thy soul out of this prison, tell him that Christ
has proclaimed liberty to captives, and thou art one; thou have been long in
captivity to sin and Satan, beseech him now at last to free thee, and thy soul
shall praise him. Be earnest, let God see that thy desires are real, and then
he that has brought to the birth, will give strength to bring forth.

Lastly, consider if a man may attain conviction, and yet miss of conversion
and salvation, what will become of those that were never yet convinced of their
sin, nor had so much as the faith of devils to believe and tremble? if Iehu
that was zealous for God, and Ahab that humbled himself, and Judas that lived
unblameably, and the Pharisees that prayed and fasted, and Herod that reformed
many things, and Ananias and Saphira that gave their goods to pious uses; if
all these came short of heaven; where, oh where will thousands amongst us
appear, that come short of those who come short of heaven? Rest not then in thy
dead and formal condition, but get a sound and through conversion.

To quicken you, consider, 1. In so doing you will be wise children. Naturally
we all desire to be accounted wise, the title of fool is odious to us, but
we are never wise indeed, till convictions go on to a through conversion. The
Prodigal when he returned, then and not till then did he come to himself,
Luke 15. 17.

2. You shall have Gods Spirit to assist you; the work indeed is hard, but such
assistance will make it easy. The Spirit of God loves to be employed in such
noble work, as the destruction of sin, and the exalting of Christ in the soul.
He is the Spirit of comfort and Peace, but he lays the foundation of it, in
convincing us of our sin and misery.

3. 'Twill make you profit more by Sermons, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. When the
soul is thus plowed up with a sense of sin, then it is a fit soil to sow the
seed of Gods Word in.

4. This will prevent abundance of sorrow. If Ephraim had not stuck so long in
the place of bringing forth, it had been better with him, and he had prevented
those desolations that after ceized upon him.

5. By coming off fully to Christ, you will enjoy abundance of Peace and
comfort, which otherwise you will miss of. A through conversion brings joy, as a
woman that is once delivered of her birth, forgets her sorrow for joy that a
child is born into the world. The wise Merchant that sold all, and parted with
every lust for Christ, See more Motives to come off fully in Mr. Buroughs his
Gracious Spirit, p. 245.
went away rejoicing, as having made a wise bargain. The Spirit lays the
foundation of comfort, first, in convincing men of their sin and misery, and
then of an all-sufficient righteousness to free them from that misery, John 16.
8, 9.

4. Obs. Impenitent sinners are unwise men. Impenitent Ephraim is called an
unwise son, though for number, power and riches, he was the chief of the
Tribes: hence impenitent sinners and fools are Synonymaes in Scripture, See
B^sield on 1 Pet. 2. 15. p. 459. etc. Burges on Original sin, p. 3. c. 1, S. 4.
p. 214, 215. And my Comment. on 2 Timothy 3. 9. p. 183, 184.
Prove. 1. 7, 32. Psalm. 14. 1. Romans 1. 22. Titus 3. 3. Though the blind world
may admire such as the only men; yet in Gods esteem, for all their parts and
Power, they are but fools and madmen, 1 Samuel 25. 25. Luke 12. 20. and 15. 17. 1
Cor. 2. 14. It Is a grief to Parents when their children are fools, Prove. 10. 1.
and 19. 13. and it is a trouble to God when his children are stubborn fools that
may, but will not know the things that concern their peace. When men are wise
to do evil, but averse to do good. When men forget the God of their mercies,
and suffer Seducers to mislead them, this speaks men fools, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Gal.
3. 1. when men fear sufferings more than sin, and resist assistance when it is
tendered them, and had rather be strangled in the birth, than have strength to
bring forth, all this proclaims men's folly.

5. Obs. To be stupid under judgments is a sore judgment. To be sick and yet
to be insensible of sickness, is a deadly sign: yet so was Eph^aim here, the
pangs of a traveling woman were upon him, yet he sticks in the place of
bringing forth, (which is mortal both to the mother and the child) like a
child that sticks in the birth, and does not struggle or move for its own
relief. It Is made a note of a wicked man, that he cries not to God for help
and deliverance, when he binds them with the cords of correction, Job 36. 13.
It Is a sign men are stupid indeed, when they are wasted, and yet will not be
warned; plagued, and yet not instructed, Isay 1. 5. and 9. 13. Ier. 5. 3. Amos
4. 6, 11. yet such there have been, and are still, Against stup^dity, see Mr.
Ienkyn his Fast S^r. on Isay 29 10. preached 1646. And Dr. Tho. Tailor Ser. in
folio, p. 212, 213.
that are no whit affected with Gods judgments upon them, nor repent they of
their sins, though scorched with plagues, Isay 42. 25. Rev. 9. 18. and 16. 8,
11. and is not this Englands sin? the pangs of a traveling woman are come upon
us, and we are encompassed with dangers on every side; gray hairs which are a
sign of weakness, old age and death approaching, are here and there upon us,
yet we know it not, so as to make a right use of it, and to repent, (Hos. 7.
9.) but still we remain incorrigible and incurable, growing worse for beating.
The more pains God takes to cure us, the more we revolt both in doctrine and
manners; and therefore since in our filthiness there is leudness and we will
not be purged, we may justly fear that we shall not be purged, but as we
have had our will, so God will have his will too; I will cause my fury to rest
upon you, Ezekiel. 24. 13.

'Twill be our wisdom to foresee the plague and hide our selves, to mourn for
the things we cannot mend, to keep our selves free from the sins of the time,
that so we may be kept free from those plagues which are certainly coming
upon this sinful land; if any thing set us free from the sense of evil, it is
the fear of evil, Prove. 28. 14. Hab. 3. 16.

6. Obs. God owns his people even when they are gu^lty of great folly and
stupidity. Ephraim is a son, though an unwise son. The ten Tribes under
Jeroboam, Ahab and the rest of those wicked Kings of Israel, were sadly
overgrown with Idolatry, Security, Impenitency, etc. and yet God owns them for
his people to the last, and their circumcision as valid still. Jerusalem that
killed the Prophets, yet were owned by Christ for the Church of God; and he
preached unto them, even when he wept over them for their sins, and for the
foreseen calamities which were coming on them. The Church of Corinth, what
carnality, divisions, drunkenness and profanation of holy things were amongst
them? and yet still styled the Church of God. Great then is the
uncharitableness of those people, that cast off Churches and people, whom God
has not cast off; and unchurch those, whom God has not unchurched. The
brother of the Prodigal was angry at his Fathers kind reception of him, and
calls him, This thy son, (by way of proud disdain) and not this my brother,
Luke 15. 28, 29, 30.

How many are angry at us for owning the Church of England for a Mr. Cook the
Font-uncovered, p. 2, 3.
National Church, and her V. Mr. Gage in Defense of Parish Churches.
Parochial Assemblies for true Assemblies, though the Word and Sacraments be
rightly dispensed there? This savours strongly of Pharisaical Pride, and too
high conceits that some have of themselves and of their Church Way; in whose
Assemblies there may be found worse things, than in many of those Churches
which yet they reject. But against separation, see more at large in my
Commentary on 2 Timothy 3. 5. P. 11, 12. and 141, etc.

VERSE 14.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death;
O death I will be thy Plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction, Repentance
shall be hid from mine eyes.
THis Verse is a kind of Parenthesis, and being taken entirely in it self, the
context will run more smoothly. It Is full of knots and difficulties, it has
almost as many interpretations, as there be Interpreters, and as many various
Lections, as words.

Some read the words conditionally, and put in the word, if, and put the Verb
in a different Mood and Tense, thus, if Ephraim were wise and Would but repent,
I would have ransomed him from death, I would have redeemed him from the power
of the grave, ( i. e.) I would either have preserved him from captivity, or
else I would have delivered him thence. This is true, but not from the Text,
for the word is Ephdem in the future Tense, liberabo, I will ransom, I will
redeem: and we may not change Mood and Tense to make a sense of our own,
though never so good. The words therefore are to be taken simply in themselves
for a singular support to Gods people in their deepest distresses; as
containing in them a precious cordial, and a most comfortable Evangelical
promise, of a mighty Redemption and glorious Resurrection to the remnant,
according to the election of grace, whom God would have comforted in times of
distress. It Is usual with the Prophets to intermingle comforts with their
threatenings) to keep Gods people from despair. (So Hos. 1. and 2. and 11. Amos
9. 8 to 15.) Before he had threatened destruction to the wicked, now he comforts
the Penitent.

In the words we have, 1. The deep distress that Gods people were in, they were
in the Mijad Sheol, e manu s^pulchri, ( i e.) e s^mmo periculo, Job 5. 20.
Psalm. 49. 16. See Rivet on the word S^eol, on Psalm. 16. 10.
hand of the grave, and in the jaws of death ( i. e.) they were as 'twere dead
and buried in captivity. The word Sheol signifies, both the grave and hell. 1.
It Is taken for the grave, so Genesis 37. 35. ^rov. 30. 16. 2. For hell
Metaphorical ( i. e.) some deep distress, Psalm. 86. 13. 3. For the local hell,
Prove. 15. 11. We may take in all these, for Christ has Redeemed us from them
all, and triumphed over them on the Cross, Colos. 2. 14.

2. Here is a Promise of their Redemption from this their misery, I will ransom
them from the power of the grave. What is that? why exegetically it is added, I
will redeem them from death, (i. e.) I will bring my Elect out of their
captivity, where they lay for dead as 'twere; and this deliverance shall be to
them a pledge of their Resurrection to eternal life.

3. Here is the manner how this shall be done, set forth by a Prosopopeical
Apostrophe to death and the grave, whom he brings in as some living enemy, and
therefore calls to him, saying; O death I will be thy death, O grave I will
be thy destruction, q. d. O death, thou seem to be mighty and powerful, but
I will disarm thee of it all; I will not only bite thee, but destroy thee; it is
not morsus (as the Vulgar) but exitium, an utter destruction of these enemies
of our salvation.

4. Here is the certainty of this deliverance, drawn from the constancy of God
in keeping his Promise, and from the immutability of his decree. Repentance
shall be hid from mine eyes, q. d. I will never repent of the mercy which I
have promised them, but my goodness to them shall be firm and unalterable. This
sense suits best with the Original and with the context, wherein God promises
a choice mercy to his people. The Vulgar and the seventy render it, Notham,
paenitudo consolatio.
consolation is hid from mine eyes: it is true, the word in the Original
signifies consolation as well as repentance; but to render it as a threatening
here, as if God should say, I am fully determined to destroy my people, for
consolation is hid from mine eyes; This is very improper here, for it confounds
the context, and the scope of the Verse, which is to comfort, and not to
disquiet Gods people. In it the Prophet, the better to strengthen the faith of
Gods people, does highly extol Gods Almighty power; for when we are in
straights, we are very apt to question that, (Number. 11. 13, 21, 22, 23. Psalm.
78. 19.) To an eye of sense, Gods people lying in captiviy, were as dead men,
and past all hope of recovery; I but says the Prophet, though ye were dead,
yet God can raise you again, for he is Lord of death and hell, and has a
sovereign power over them all; though death conquers all, yet he conquers
death; though it be mighty, yet God is Almighty, and there is nothing too hard
for him; he will be the death of death, and if none will redeem you thence, yet
he will.

Quest. The Question is, of what Redemption and deliverance does the Prophet
here speak, whether of a corporal or spiritual Redemption?

Ans. Of both. 1. Literally the Lord promises to free his Elect and penitent
people from the grave of their captivity. Banished men are counted as dead men,
especially in a civil sense, and the place of their banishment is as the grave.
Now many of the remainders of Israel, after the destruction of their Kingdom,
joined themselves to the Jews, and with them came out of Babylon. Though for
their Idolatry and ingratitude, he threatened perpetual banishment to them, yet
for the comfort of his people that then were, and after should arise, he
promises a Redemption for them, (Hos. 1. 10.) which was fulfilled about two
hundred years after that Samaria was taken, when Cyrus proclaimed liberty to
the Jews to go build the Temple, Ezra 1.

2. Typically it alludes to our Spiritual and eternal Redemption by Christ, and
our conquest over death and hell by him. By Adams sin, death came upon all men
(Romans 512.) but Christ by his Resurrection has freed us from the power of
death and has led it captive, which formerly led us captive, Ps. 68. 18. Ephesians.
4. 8. This is the Redemption (says Zanchy) which is principally and properly
here meant: for though the people of Judah, after seventy years captivity in
Babylon, did return again out of it; yet the people of Israel, after that
Samaria was taken, never returned again to their own land, for it was laid
waste, and inhabited by strangers. It Is usual with the Prophets, to use such
Metabases, sudden digressions and passings from their history, to Christ, who
was their scope, delight and love; so that every hint and shadow in the Old
Testament, brought him to their remembrance: and then from Christ, they fell to
the continuance of their history again. Thus it is here; and so Esaias prophesying
of C^rus, who should deliver Israel out of B^bylon, in the same Chapter
prophesies of Christ the Redeemer of his Church, Esaias 45. So Ezekiel having
enveyed against Idle and Idol Shepherds, presently turns his speech to Christ,
who is the true Shepherd of his people, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 16. so Zach. 9. 9. and 13.
^, 7.

In this Verse the Prophet brings in death and the grave, as it were two
tyrannical enemies, S^ptuaginta a verbis and intellect^ Scripturae saep^
alienissima sunt, and vel volenres vel ignorantes transtulerunt quea defendi
non possunt. Hieron.
to whom he speaks in the Name of the Lord Christ (as the Apostle expounds it,
1 Cor. 15. 55.) as a Conqueror, saying, O death I will be thy death. Erotomata
haec insultoria sunt, and sa^casmi speciem habent. Estius.
Or as the Apostle from the Septuagint (though in this Text, the Apostle in
some things varies from the present Septuagint, and so do the allegations in
the New Testament; which shows the folly of those, who do equalize it with the
Original Hebrew) O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? The
first Adam brought death into the world, but the second Adam has abolished it.

There is some difficulty in the words, and therefore I shall open them
particularly, and break every clod, that I may find out the golden Oar.

In these words we have a glorious triumph over death, and a notable Encon^ium
of the Resurrection of the dead. Piscator and others, read the words
Interrogatively, thus, O death where are thy plagues, O grave where is thy
destruction? It Is an insulting and triumphing Interrogation, q. d. They are no
where to be found, for Christ has removed them, and taken them out of the way
of his people; so that now there is no hurt in death.

This various reading comes from the ambiguous signification of the word Ehi,
which is rendered truly, ero, I will be: others render it ubi, Paulus Versionem
Septuagint. imitari videtur, quia ea versio po^issimum nota erat Corinthiis.
Sed in^erim non discedit ab Hebraica Veritate. Pet. Martyr.
where? So the Septuagint render it by (...) ubi; and the Apostle following the
Septuagint, speaking to Greeks, and that in Greece, alleges a Greek text, as
being most familiar and best known to them. The Apostle gives the sense and
meaning, but not the words, which is frequent in Scripture, the Penmen being
intent on the matter, were not curious in the words, but did add and alter
what might explain and clear them: yet the Prophet and the Apostle are easily
reconciled, thus, O death I will be thy Plagues, ( i. e.) I will pull out thy
Pestilent sting; O grave I will be thy destruction, ( i. e.) I will get the
victory over thee, q. d. I the Lord Christ (for to him the Apostle applies this
text) will redeem them from death by paying a valuable price for their
Redemption, Ephdem significat non simpliciter liberare, sed p^etio redemptionis
redimere. It a Gaal significat jure affinitatis redimere, unde Goel assinis, ad
quem pertinebat re^emp^io possessionum. Zanchy.
this none could do but I, yea I will be the death of death, I will be its
plagues and destruction; it shall never prevail against my people, for I will
restore them to life again, 1 Cor. 15. 26, 54, 55. It Is not I am, Ehejch, that
glorious Name of God, which notes his unchangeable eternity, Exodus 3. 14. comes
from Ehi.
or I have been, but it is Ehi, I will be thy destruction. Now in Hebrew, the
Future Tense does often express, both the Present Tense and the Preterperfect
Tense; it implies not only the time to come, but also the time present, and the
time past, q. d. I am, I have been, and shall be for ever deaths destroyer.
Christ was Virtually the Lamb ^lain from the beginning of the world, and so was
deaths destroyer; but actually he conquered death and the grave, by lying dead
in the grave, and by his Almighty power raising himself thence again; so that
death has now no more dominion over him and his, Act. 2. 24.

O death I will be thy plagues, not one or two, but many plagues, even so many
as shall destroy thee. Thou did destroy my people, Pestes ( i. e.) pernities
and prostigatio qua pered^n^ur and absumuntur om^ia. Junius in Parallel.
but now I will destroy thee; thou did triumph over them, but now I will
triumph over thee, and lead thee, and all the enemies of my people in triumph
at my Chariot wheels, ( Psalm. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.) for under death and the
grave is Synecd^chically comprehended the conquest of all the enemies of our
salvation; The word ketc^ not only signifies the Pest lence, but al^o other
terrible sicknesses, wherewith God soon cuts off the life of man with
bitterness. Ainsworth.
as sin, death, he^^, Satan, banishment, prisonment, poverty, sickness,
tribulation, persecution, famine, sword, etc. over all these we are more then
conquerours, even triumphers, through Christ that loved us, Romans 8. 35, 37. He
names only death, because death is the last enemy that shall be destroyed,
Deber, pestis (i. e.) (...) durissima q^a hom^nes p^niebas and peredebas, ubi
es? a Lapide.
1 Cor. 15. 26. yet by an Argument a Majore ad minus, from the greater to the
less, he comforts his people thus, If I can deliver you from death and the
grave, then much more from banishment and captivity.

O grave I will be thy destruction, or i will be thy rooting out and cutting
off. The same word is used, Deuteronomy. 32. 24. Psalm. 91. 6. I say 28. 2. q. d. Thou
did destroy my people, but now I will destroy thee, so that they may now sing
triumphantly, Ehi debare^^ba maveth. cro pestes (...) o mors (i. e) plenissima
pestis and mors tua. The Plural number serves to aggravate the venom of death.
O death where is thy pestilent sting wherewith thou wast wont to torture and
torment us? it is gone, it is destroyed by Christ, who is thy death, O death, and
thy utter destruction. As a man that drinks a cup of poison, drinks that which
will be his ruin; K^t^^cha significat excisionem, ev^lsionem, luem, q^a
Christus ^^ntem o^^ia succidentem succidit, a keteb, aculeus, pl^ga.
so the grave by swallowing and devouring Christ, was conquered and killed by
him. Of old they did celebrate the Victories and Triumphs of Achilles,
Hercules, Alexander, Julius Caesar and the rest of the great conquerours of the
world; but alas al^ those dyed and were conquered by death. Only Christ the
King and Savior of his Church and people, by his death has conquered sin,
Satan, and death; and has made full satisfaction for us to the Law and Justice
of God.

So that what the Prophet speaks here of the restoration of the Jews in
particular; See Dr. Tucknys three Sermon. on 1 Cor. 15. 54. p. 77.
the Apostle applies to the general Resurrection of the dead, when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruptio^, and this mortality shall have put
on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death
is swallowed up in Victory, O death where is thy sting? etc. 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.
Where the Apostle alleges two Texts, and it is usual with the Penmen of the
New Testament, to allege diverse Texts out of the Old Testament, and compose
them into one in the New. So does Peter speaking against Judas, Act. 1. 20.
it is written in the book of the Psalms, let his habitation be desolate, and his
Bishopric let another take: the former part is taken out of Psalm. 69. 26. and
the latter part, out of Psalm. 109. 7. See more in Glassius Philog. Tract. 2. c.
7. p. 1476.etc.
So Mark 1. 2, 3. the former part is taken out of Mal. 3. 1. the latter part
from Esaias 28. 16. So Christ himself, (Mat. 21. 13. alludes to Esaias 56. 7. and
Ier. 7. 11.) So here the Apostle cites one text out of Esaias 25. 8. he will
swallow up death in Victory. The other is Hos. 14. 13. The seventy render it
thus; devorabit mors praevalens. Death devours all, but this is contrary both
to the sense of the Prophet and the Apostle, who speak not of the prevailing
power of death, but of the power of Christ over death. Death is swallowed up in
Victory, and that great devourer of all, is by Christ devoured. This promile is
now fulfilled in the death of Christ, who has already destroyed the power of
death for his people; and shall be completely fulfilled at the Resurrection of
the dead, when all corruption and mortality shall be totally taken away, and
death shall be swallowed up in Victory for ever. In the sense of this mercy
the Apostle breaks forth ravished as it were with the contemplation of this
conquest over death, into a triumphant song, which all the Saints shall sing at
the last day; when they shall be totally freed from the captivity of death and
the grave, then shall they insult over subdued death, and say, O death where is
thy sting, wherewith thou had wont to wound all creatures? O grave where is
thy victory, by which thou have hitherto kept the dead under by force, which
now thou must render again, as not being able any longer to hold them under thy
power? Rev. 20. 13, 14. It is only sin by which death has power over us; and
it is the just rigor of the Law which inflicts death upon us for sin. But
thanks be to God who has given us the victory over sin, which is the cause of
death, and over death which is inflicted for sin, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom we obtain an immortal and incorruptible life. Thus the Apostle
has faithfully given us the sense of the Prophet, though not his very words.

The sum and substance of all is this, Though Ephraim has been an unwise
Son, and has delayed his returning unto me, yet his impenitency and security
shall not retard or disanul my faithfulness and truth unto my people, I will
never repent of those gracious promises which I have made to them, but will
certa^nly fulfill them. Let not therefore my chosen, pen^ent ones despair as if
there were no hope, nor help for them; for I their savior will redeem them
from the power of all their enemies, and cause them to rise from death (which
had power over them through sin) unto the glory of eternal life. So that now
they may begin their Triumphant song, O death where is thy sting? etc.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Though the Lord be terrible to the wicked, yet he is a Tower to the
righteous. Though plagues come suddenly and inevitably upon the wicked, like
pangs upon a woman in travel, yet even then has the Lord a tender respect to
his people, and will ransom them from the power of the grave, Isa. 1. 24, 25,
26, 27 and 3. 10, 11. And though they should go into Captivity with the wicked,
yet God will set a distinguishing mark of mercy upon them, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Rev. 7.
3. In the midst of his Judgments he remembers mercy, and has a tender care
over his people, making them to be pitied of all that lead them captive,
Psalm. 106. 46. where ever they go, they have his more especial presence with
them to uphold and comfort them, Isa. 43. 2, 3. Ier. 16. 13, 14, 15. Micah 4.
10. Dan. 3. and 6. 22. When all forsake them, yet I will not forsake them, but
will be a sanctuary to them in their Captivity, Ezekiel. 11. 16, 17. God is ever
mindful of his Covenant to his people, and in the midst of all confusions, he
has an Ark for Noah, a Zoar for Lot, a Midian for Moses, a Haran for Jacob, a
Cave for David, a Grave for Methusalem, and Josiah, and a Pella for Christians.
Elijah that was zealous, and a man of fire for God in wicked times, See more in
Dr. Reynolds on Hos. 14. 1. ^^ct. 2. obs, 1. p.
was carried in a fiery Chariot to heaven. Jeremiah that witnessed against the
corruptions of the times, how renderly does the king of Babylon deal with him,
when the King and his Nobles lay in misery? Ier. 39. 1, 12, 13, 14.

2 Obs. The Scripture of the Old Testamest is the Word of God.

The Apostle to show the divine Authority of it, even in Gospel Times, refers
us to this Text, and another in Isa. 25. 8. to prove the divine mystery of the
Resurrection. About four hundred places, But of this see more in my Comment on
2 Timothy 3. 15. P. 262. etc.
are cited out of the Old Testament in the New. Both Testaments are the sacred
word of the great God, and serve for the mutual illustration and explanation of
each other.

3. Obs. The Scripture lies not in the bare words and syllables, but in the
sense and meaning.

Hence it is that Christ and his Apostles citing Texts out of the Old
Testament, Perspicuum est Apostolos and Evangelistas in Veterum Scripturarum
interpretatione, sensum quaesisse non verba, nec magn^pere de ordine
ser^^nibusque curasse, dum intelectui res pateret. Hieron. ad Pammach.
give us the sense and meaning of the place, but not the very words; so in a
Text sometimes they omit a word, and sometimes they add something for
explanation sake, as Math. 2. 15, 23. and 26. 31. Romans 10. 15, 18, 19, U^us,
unam, u^i.
20, 21. So Genesis 2. 24. compared with Matthew. 19. 5. Where (...), they two, is
added emphatically, not they twenty, shall be one flesh. So Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
compared with Matthew. 4. 10. where the exclusive particle, Only, which was not
expressed in Deuteronomy, but tacitly and interpretatively understood, is added
by our Savior very significantly. So Isa. 64. 4. collated with I Cor. 2. 9.
And has not entered into the heart of man: These words are added by way of
illustration by the Apostle. So Isa. 22. 13. Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. But the Apostle puts it in the present tense, 1 Cor. 15.
32. To morrow we dye; and this he does for explication sake, to express the
desperate madness of those Epicures, who would eat and drink securely, although
they were to dye presently. This shows the folly of the Quaking
Scripturists(such there are in our days as well as Anti-scripturists) who take
the bare words and syllables, and will not suffer any meaning, or exposition to
be given of them. Thus when they call for a proof of Infant Baptism, you must
show them in so many words, Thou shall baptize Infants, else they will not
believe you. Tell them, that generals include particulars, and that children
are confederates, and in Covenant with their Parents, and therefore have right
to the seal of the Covenant; and that Infant Baptism now, is as lawful as
Infant-circumcision of old: yet this does not satisfe, because they cannot read
it in so many letters, Thou shall baptize Infants. So the Papists they stick to
the bare letter, This is my body. Whereas that bread could not be his natural
body, for Christ was then alive when he said, This is my body, and the Apostle
calls it Bread, Bread, four of five times after con^ecration, 1 Cor. 11. 23, to
28.

The Scripture lies not in the bare and naked words, but in the scope and true
interpretation of the words, No p^temus in verbis S^^iptu(...) ess^ Evang^lium,
sid in (...) sed in ^adice rationis Hieron. Com. (...) Gal. 1 See more Dr.
P^rideau^ fascicu^ controvers. Q. ^ P 23. 24 Glassius Philolog. T^act. 2. c^p.
7. p. 1472 ^^^ems Christ Syn^gog c 4. p. 62. Vol. 1. Schools Guard Rule 20.
which is as it were the soul and life of the Scripture. Hence Christ bids us
not barely read, but search for the sense and meaning of the Scriptures, Ioh.
5. 39. The Lawyers have a saying, Men's leg is est lex, not the bare words, but
the meaning of the Law is the Law.

3. Obs. Christ is the Lord.

He that has power over death and hell is the Lord, but Christ has this
power. Rev. 1. 18. and 20. 13. Death and hell gave up their dead to Christ
their Judge. It is he that by the price of his own blood has redeemed us from
the hand of sin and Satan, V. Com. on 2 ^im. 4. 1. p. 306, etc.
from death and hell; what the Prophet spoke of Jehovah, the Apostle applies to
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. But of this I have spoken at large elsewhere.

4 Obs. There is an holy harmony, and sweet consent in the Scripture.

There is no repugnancy, no real contradiction there. Like stones in an Arch,
they mutually uphold, and strengthen each other. The Doctrine of the Prophets
gives light to the Apostles, and the Apostles again illustrate and explain
them. In both there is one, and the same Spirit of truth, who at sundry times,
and in sundry manners, has published one and the same truth to his people,
Heb. 1. 1, 2. They must not therefore be opposed, but composed; Not made to
contradict, but to confirm each other, Luke 24. 44.

5 Obs. Gods people, whilst they are in this world, may fall into deep
distress and misery.

They may be brought so low, that to a carnal eye they may seem dead and
buried, past hope and help, not only in their own eyes, but also in the eyes
of others. We have a notable instance for this, Ezekiel. 37. 1. to 15. the
desperate condition of Gods people in their Babylonish captivity, is there set
forth, by dead, dried bones, to an eye of sense past all hope or possibility of
recovery; in so much, that Gods own people whose faith should not fail, cry
out, verse. 11. Our bones are dried, our hope is lost, and we are cut off. Yea
the Prophet himself staggered, and was non-plust, verse 3. the Lord asked him,
Son of man, can these bones live? Is it possible that ever such dry bones
should live again? The Prophet answers, Lord thou know, q. d. it passes my
apprehension to conceive how this should be; I know not how it should be
effected, but Lord thou know what thou have to do, and to thee nothing thing
is impossible. This the Lord does in his wisdom, to out us of our selves, and
all creature-confidences; that in an holy desperation we may say with
repenting Israel, Ashur shall Not save us, neither will we ride upon horses,
nor say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods, for with thee the
fatherless find mercy, Hos. 14. 3.

6 Obs. God in his due time will deliver his people out of the deepest distress.

He is Omnipotent, he can, and will redeem Israel, not out of one or two, but
out of all his troubles, Psalm. 25. ult. Art thou weak? He can strengthen thee.
Art thou sick? He can heal thee. Art thou dark? He can insighten thee. Art
thou dead? He can inliven thee. Have thou lain in thy grave till thou stinkest
again? so did Lazarus. Have thou lain till thou art rotten? so did Israel in
their Babylonish Captivity, and yet were restored, Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12. So in
desertions we are apt to be despondent, when we walk in darkness, and can
see no light, neither Sun-light, nor Moonlight, neither Starlight, nor
Candlelight, but are like unto dry bones in a Sepulcher, without life, without
spirit, without strength, without comfort, and see no way of deliverance. Aye,
but now is a time to live by faith, and not by sense, Isa. 40. 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, and 50. 10. Such is our weakness, that we are apt to limit the holy one of
Israel, and to think that he can help us in lesser trials, and bring us out of
petty crosses, but when some fluctus decumanus, some great waves of Tentation
come, then we are apt to question Gods power and promises, and to say with
David, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. We are apt to
say with Martha, If Christ had come a little sooner, he might have raised
Lazarus, but now (says she) he stinks, and is past help, Ioh. 11. 39. Aye but
it is the better for that, for now Christ's power will be the more manifested,
and his Father the more glorified. The more grievous thy disease, the greater
will the praise of thy Physician be in thy cure, and we shall love much, when
we see how much is forgiven; and therefore David makes it an argument to move
the Lord to pity him, because his sins were great, Psalm. 25 11. Remember, it
is Gods usual course to let men be dead and buried (as it were) in misery, and
to bring things to extremity, and then appear; Genesis 22. 14. Psalm. 461. when
trouble comes, then he comes too. We read of three persons that Christ raised
from the dead; V. Bedle his Jou^nal p. 91, 92*
One was dead, but not carried out, Ma^k. 5. 41* A second was dead, and carried
out, Luke 7. 14. A third was dead, carried out, buried, and lay till he stunk
in his grave, and that was Lazarus, Christ speaks but the word, Lazarus come
forth, and he lives. God is never nearer to his people, See more in my Comment
on 2 Timothy 3. 11 and 4 17. p. 204 and p. 456.
than when to a carnal eye he seems furthest off. As we see in the three
young men that were cast into a fiery Furnace, and Daniel into the Lions den.
Sense and carnal reason would have said, God had now forsaken them, and there
was no help, yet even then did they find the greatest help, so good it is to
trust in God.

7 Obs. (...).
Death in it self is a formidable enemy, and considered as a curse due to
impenitent sinners, O mors omnium terribilium terribilisstmum Arist. Ethic. l.
3. c. 6.
it is very terrible; even the terriblest of all terribles, as Aristotle calls
it. It is armed with stings and plagues, and is therefore called an Enemy, 1
Cor. 15. 26. And the King of terrors, even such a terror as is the chiefest
and greatest of terrors, Job 18. 14. Hence dreadful calamities are set forth
by the shadow of death, Job 10. 21, 22. and 16. 16. and 24. 17. Psalm. 23. 4.
Ier. 13. 16. and the messengers of death, Prove. 16. 14. and the snares,
sorrows, and terrors of death, Psalm. 18. 4, 5. and 55. 4. It is this that
snatcheth men (when they least think of it) from their dear Relations,
Pleasures, Riches, Recreations, Mansions, Honors, etc. which they love as
their lives; and this must needs be terrible to a natural man who has no
assurance of better things when he dies. Hence such are said to be in bond age,
and a slavish fear of death all their life long, Heb. 2. 15. whilst wicked men
look upon death at a distance, and think it far off, they fear it not; but when
God shall open their eyes by sickness, and summon them to appear before him,
then like Pashur, they are Magar-missabib, a terror to themselves, and all
that are ^ound about them, Ier. 20. 3, 4. Saul, though a King, and a (...) man,
yet when he heard that death was at the door, and he must dye to morrow, was
so dis-spirited with this dismal news, that he fell into a deadly trance, and
was not able to bear it, the fear of death had well nigh ended him before his
death came, 1 Samuel.? 9. 19, 20. So Bel^hazzar, a mighty Monarch, in the height
of his mirth, is all amort his countenance is changed, his thoughts trouble
him, and his joints are loosed; but whence came all this terror and amazement?
why it is for fear of this King of fears, Death, which suddenly after surprised
him. Dan. 5. 1, 2. etc. This puts an end to all a wicked man's comforts and
hopes, See this Point excellently improved, Caryl on Job 18. 14.
conscience shall now be awakened, and he must give an account of his
Stewardship. This made Lewis the eleventh King of France to command his
servants in his sickness, that they should not once mention that bitter word
Death in his hearing. Yea even the godly in a temptation, for fear of death,
have not acted like themselves at other times, as we see in three of the
greatest-Worthies that we read of in the Scriptures, first Abraham famous for
faith, Genesis 12. 12, 13. and 20. 2. 11. And David, famous for valor, 1 Samuel 22.
12, 13. And Peter for courage, yet to save his life, denied his Lord.

8 Obs. Death is a conquered Enemy.

Christ h^th disarmed him, and taken away his sting. He has redeemed his from
the power of the grave, and swallowed up death in Victory. Christ by his death
has destroyed death, and him that had the power of death, the Devil, Diabolus
dicit^r habere mort is imperium, non qua Rex, sed qu^ Tyrannus, vel qua
carnifex qui habet imperium in eos q^i mo^te propter facinora sua adiudicati
and ipsius potestati t^aditi sunt. Gerhard.
Heb. 2. 14. by suffering of that death which was due to us for our sins, he
has destroyed the power of Satan, and taken away that advantage which he had
against us by reason of sin, whose wages is death. Satan thought by death to
destroy Christ, but Christ by his death destroyed his Kingdom, and became more
glorious by dying; like another Sampson, he slew more at his death, than in
his life. So that now we are more than Conquerers, O beatam illorum mort^m qui
participes facti sunt mortis Christi! Knox.
even Triumphers through Christ that loved us. He has triumphed over death,
and all the enemies of our salvation, and we in him our head triumph, 2 Cor.
2. 14. Col. 2. 14, 15. by lying in the grave he has sweetened our graves for
us, so that now we may sleep in it as in a bed of down, Isa. Non dicit
simpliciter (...), Plusquam viotores sumus, supervincimus, i. e. Eg^egie and
excellenter superamus. Tactica Sacra, 1. 3. c. 3. sect. 1. ubi plura.
57. 2. and our flesh may rest in hope of a glorious Resurrection, Psalm. 16. 9.
Now if ever we may sing that Triumphant song* O death where is thy sting! It
is destroyed, abolished, gone. This strong man armed is overcome by a stronger
than he. It is not the pleasures of life, nor the pains of death, neither the
height of prosperity, nor the depth of adversity, nothing now can separate us
from Christ, Job 5. 20, 21, 22. How Christ's death should support us, see D.
Goodwin on Christ his Death and Resur. sect. 2, 3. p. 22. quarto.
Romans 8. 35, etc. Death may dissolve our corporal marriage, but it is so far
from abolishing, that it perfects our spiritual marriage; killed we may be,
but conquered we can never be; Christ's victory is our victory, and all his
Conquests ours.

Quest. If Christ by his death has destroyed death, why then do the godly dye?

Answ. Christ did not dye to deliver us from sickness and death, but to free us
from the curse that is in these. By his death he has pulled out the sting of
death; the death of the body still remains, but the sting, and that which is
penal, is taken away, Tollitur mors non n^sit, sed ne obsit. Aug.
so that it cannot hurt us; and therefore the Text does not say, I will free
you from death, sed^e manu mortis, but from the destructive power of death, so
as it shall have no dominion over you to hurt you, nor be able to separate you
from Christ. As the Apostle says of sin, it is in us, but it does not reign in
us; so dye we must, but death has no dominion over believers, as it has over
wicked men; it gets the victory over them, they dye, and dye eternally; but a
believers death is neither Total, Penal, nor Perpetual.


1 It is not Total; it seizes only on the body, the carcass, the outside, it
goes to its dust, but the spirit returns to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. 7.

2 It is not Penal, but profitable; in the grave we put off our filth,
deformities, defects, infirmities, and mortality it self. It is our attiring
house to fit us for immortality and glory.

3 It is not perpetual, it is but a sleeping till the general Resurrection,
Romans 8. 10, 11. our conquest over death is inchoate, in fieri, and partly
fulfilled in this life, but it shall be consummate in facto, and fully
completed at the Resurrection. Then shall they awake and sing that dwell in
the dust, See an excellent Tract of Mr. Garbu^ on the Resurrection.
Isa. 26. 19. This upheld Job in the midst of all his sorrows, I know that my
Redeemer lives, my comfort is, though I dye, yet I have one to right me that
lives for ever, Job 19. 25. David comforts himself with this, that God would
redeem him from the power of the grave, and from the hand of hell, though
riches cannot redeem the rich, yet God would redeem him, Psalm. 49. 15.

Object. I must part with Wife, Children, Friends, Pleasures.

Answ. All these losses will be made up in a better kind, as you may see at
large in Mr. Byfields Cure of the fear of death, p. 745. it is in the end of
his Marrow. And B. Halls Balm of Gilead, p. 141.

Use. Fear not death with a slavish fear. Christ dyed to free us from such a
fear of death, Heb. 2. 15. A religious prudential fear does well; fear it so,
as to arm your selves, and prepare for it, but not so as to be dejected under
it. No wise man will fear a conquered enemy; See Mr. Hierons Ser. on Prove. 14
32. p. 464.
if you truly believe in Christ, the Conqueror of death, you need not fear
death. Think on Christ when you think on death, and then you may in a holy
sarcasm and contempt say, O death where is thy sting! Christ has unstinged it,
and as it were disarmed it; Sicut s^rpentes and venenata quaecunque aculeis
praedita, iis ferire and l^thalit^r vulnerare solent, at si iis fo^te
spoli^ntur nullam amplius nocendi vim habent; it a mors per peccatum tanquam
t^lum homines trans^^git and conficit, at sine peccato inermis est. Tactica S.
l. 3. c. 3. sect. 9. p. 329.
so that now we may safely put it in our bosoms; buz it may, about our ears
as a drone Be, but sting it cannot, for Christ has taken away the guilt of
sin, and has made that which was sometimes a curse, to become a blessing; of a
foe he has made it a friend, of a poison a medicine, of a punishment an
advantage, Phil. 1. 21. of the gate of hell a passage to heaven. It is now like
the valley of Achor, a door of hope; that which was sometimes the King of
Terrors, is now become the King of Comforts, as making way for the enjoyment
of the highest comforts. We part with a life of misery, to enjoy a life of
glory. We use to say Change is no Robbery, See the Point excellently enlarged
by Mr. Swinnock on Philip. 1. 22. p. 19 to 54.
but such a change is our great advantage. Hence it is that the Apostle summing
up a Christians privileges and riches, sets down Death as part of it, 1 Cor.
3. 22. not only life, but Death is yours; he that can truly say, I am Christ's
subject and servant, may as truly say, Death will be my preferment and high
advancement. See Mr. Cotton on Eccl^s. 7. 1. See 17. Privileges of a bele^ver
in death. Byfields Marrow, p. 670. etc.
So true is that of Solomon, Eccles. 7. 1. The day of a man's death, is better
(in many respects) than the day of his birth. Then, and never till then shall
we rest from our labors, Job 3. 17. Rev. 14. 13. and be perfectly freed from
sin, and all its concomitants.

Look not therefore on death with Philosophical eyes, as if it were the end of
all our comforts, but look on it with Christian eyes, as the year of Jubilee,
the day of our Coronation, and consummation of the Marriage between Christ and
our souls.

A natural man that looks upon death with an eye of sense, sees nothing but
horror and terror in it; but a gracious soul that looks on it with an eye of
faith, sees life in death, light in darkness, and comfort in discomfort;
though for a time he must lie in the grave, and death seems to have dominion
over him, yet he as certainly sees a Resurrection, as if he were already in
possession of it, and therefore he triumphs already in assurance of a total
conquest through Christ; death is already swallowed up by him in victory, Isa.
25. 8. Christ was his life, Non potest male mo^ qui been vixerit. Aug.
and therefore now death is his gain. He lived holily, and now he dies
happily, he lived unto the Lord, and therefore he now dies unto him, Romans 14.
7, 8. 2 Cor. 5. 15. His care was to keep a good conscience, and now he has
the comfort of it, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Let Atheists then, and worldlings, and wicked men fear death, who know no
better life; but let the righteous, who has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32.
embrace it, and bid it welcome, as the Martyrs did, who went as joyfully to
their stakes, as others do to marriages. Witness all those living speeches of
dying Saints which will shortly be published by an able and industrious hand to
the world. Mr. Trapp.
Cyprian hearing the sentence of death pronounced against him, said, Lord I
thank thee that now thou will free me from the bonds of the body. I shall not
now lose my life, but change it for a better. Excellently Pomponius Algerius in
an Epistle which he writ to his friends from the delectable Hortyard of the
Leonine prison, July 1^. 1555. I shall tell you (said he) str^^ge things, I
have found a honey comb in a Lions belly; In a deep dungeon I have found
pleasantness, in a place of bitterness and the shadow of death I have found
peace and hope of life. In the belly of hell I have found comfort. Where others
weep, there do I sing for joy; and wh^re others fear, there have I support. The
good hand of my God has done all this for me. He that seemed sometime to be
far from me, is now most present with me. He that I had but some glympses of
before, now I see him face to face. He has turned my winter into a glorious
Spring; why should I fear any freezi^g cold, who am thus inflamed with the love
of God? Let Malefactors fear this prison, to me it flows with honey.

[See seven Consolations against Death in Caryl on Job 18. 14. p. 96 97. and in
my Comment on 2 Timothy 4. 6. Obs. 3. p. 370, etc. Byfields Cure of the fear of
Death, p. 653. Perkins Art of Dying well Mr. Gatakers Sermon on Philip. 1. 23.
part 2. p. 222. Hierons Sermon p. 653. Mr. Baxter Saints Rest, p. 25. etc. B.
Halls Balm of Gilead, p. 247. Drexelius Prodromus Aeternitatis p. 33. Vol. 1.
folio. Mr. Sam. Fishers Antidote against the fear of Death, at the end of his
Sermon on Psalm. 39. 9.]

9 Obs. Gods Decrees are infallible and u^changeable.

Repentance is hid from his eyes, he knows not what it means. He is not as
man that he should lie or repent, Nu^b. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 25. He is Jehovah,
he changes not, Mal. 3. 6. His Covenant he will not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89. 34, 35. and 110. 4. Isa. 54. 9,
10. if he has decreed to show mercy to his people, and to redeem them from
the power of hell, all the Devils in hell shall not be able to hinder it. It
is not the counsel of men or Devils, but the counsel of the Lo^d that shall
stand, Psalm. 33. 10. 11. If he has spoken it he will do it, yea and the
contrary plots of wicked men shall help to effect it, Romans 9. 11. Acts 2. 23.

Obj. Is not God said to repent? Genesis 6. 6. Ier. 18. 8. Amos 7* 3, 6.

Answ. It is spoken, not properly, but after the manner of men, See more in our
large Annotat. on Genesis 6. 6.
and according to our capacity, because his work is changed, though himself
continues un^hangeable, for with him is no variableness, nor so much as a
shadow of changeing. He is constant and faithful in performing all his promises
to his people, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. All his ways are mercy and truth to them that
fear him, and keep his Covenant. They are mercy in promising, and truth in
performing; not one thing shall fail of all the good things which God has
promised to his people, Josh. 23. 14. though they be not presently fulfilled,
yet in Gods due time they shall be accomplished, for though God come not at
our time, yet he never fails his own, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Hab. 2. 3.

10 Obs. Believers, in this life, may be assured of their sal^vation.

Repentance is hid from Gods eyes, whom he loves once, he loves for ever. Not
one of those that the Father has given to Christ shall perish, Matthew. 18. 14.
Ioh. 6. 39. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, more sure than the Pillars
of the earth, or the Poles of heaven. 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Decree of Election is
there called a foundation. 2 It is not every foundation, but a firm and sure
foundation. 3 It is not a foundation of man's laying, but it is the foundation
of the Lord. 4 It is not a tottering, but a standing foundation built on a
rock, sealed and confirmed by the Spirit, counsel, and special knowledge of
God. He knows who are his. Hence the Covenant of the Lord made with his
people, is called An everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Hos. 2. 19, 20. And
he has promised to plant his fear in their hearts, that they shall never
depart from him, Jer. 32. 39. if they fall, yet they shall not be utterly cast
down, for the Lord upholds them with his hand, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Psalm. 37. 24. Prove.
2. 7, 8. Ioh. 10. 28. They stand not by their own strength, but are kept and
guarded by his Almighty power through faith unto salvation* 1 Pet. 1. 5. Common
gifts and graces may fade and fail, but his gifts, Comment on 2 Timothy 4. 8. p.
403. etc.
i. e. his peculiar, essential gifts, which appertain to salvation, are without
repentance, Romans 11. 29. But of this I have treated at large elsewhere.

VERSE 15.
Though he be fruitful amongst his brethren, ^n Eastwind shall come, the wind
of the Lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry,
and his fountain shall be dried up; he shall spoil the treasure of all
pleasant Vessels.
THe Prophet having comforted Gods people, returns again to the denouncing of
judgments against the wicked: And because similitudes do make a deeper
impression than plain speeches, therefore he uses similitudes. Verse. 13. he
sets forth their distress by the pains of a woman in travel; and in this 15.
verse he sets forth the spoil and havoc that should be made amongst them by
Salmanser King of Assyria, which he illustrates by a double similitude.

But first he prevents an Objection which Ephraim might make, I am fruitful,
and abound with riches, honors, strength, and therefore I fear no fall.

Answ. Admit it be so, though Ephraim be fruitful amongst his brethren, yet
an East Wind shall blow upon him, and make him wither, etc.

On this Verse there are almost as various Interpretations as there be
Interpreters, so that I may say of it, as Maldonate said sometimes of another
Text, Nescio an hic locus facilior fuisset sinemo eum exposuisset. This Text
had been plainer, if some had not meddled with it.

1 Some make the words a promise of great blessings to Ephraim after all his
sorrows, Yet he shall be fruitful amongst his brethren. After the Assyrian
had spoiled him of all his Treasure, yet by the might of him that ransometh men
from the grave, they shall be raised up. But this is a forcing of the words
contrary to their genuine sense and meaning.

2 Others apply it to Christ, and say, He shall increase and multiply his
Elect both in number and glory at the last day. Qui ad Christum re^ert, filum
orationis non advertit. Mercer.
The very rehearsal of this is confutation sufficient.

3 The Vulgar Latin, leaving the Hebrew to follow the Septuagint, read it,
Ephraim dividet, Ephraim shall divide amongst his brethren, and make a schism
amongst them, therefore God will send the Assyrian against him. But the word is
Iaphri, crescet, not Iaphti, dividet.

4 Lyra hic delirat, when he takes, or rather mistakes the word for a division
and separation at the end of the world, when the evil shall be separated from
the good, and the Goats from the Sheep. Quite contrary to the scope of the
Text, which speaks of increasing, not of dividing; and of Brethren, which Sheep
and Goats were never yet accounted.

In the words we have Ephraims Dignity, and Ephraims Downfall; or Gods Mercy,
and Ephraims Misery.

1 Here is Ephraims Dignity, He was fruitful amongst his Brethren, he was
made the head of the Tribes, only the Tribe of Judah excelled him in Dignity,
Hos. 11. ult. else for number of men, for power and riches ^ee excelled them
all. The Prophet alludes, 1 To Ephraims name, which signified fruitful and
flourishing; Ephraim a Parah fructificavit crevit, auctus fuit. Genesis 41. 52.
such as his name was, such was he; Ephraim was his name, and fruitfulness was
with him; both the fruitfulness of the earth, and the fruitfulness of the womb;
He was like a bough by a Well side, fruitful, and flourishing, whose branch
run over the wall. He had the upper and the nether springs, the blessings of
heaven above, and of the earth beneath, Genesis 49. 22, 25. 2 He alludes to the
blessing, which Jacob his Grandfather gave him on his deathbed, Genesis 48. 16,
19, 20. Ephraim shall increase more than Manasseh, and he shall become a
multitude of Nations.

2 Here is Ephraims Downfall for abusing those blessings, they should have made
him more fruitful and obedient, but he like an unwise son became more
insolent, Idolatrous, and disobedient, Hos. 13. 5, 6. Therefore God will now
sweep all away, and make him know the price of his mercies, by the wanting of
them. An East Wind shall dry up all his springs. Where we have,

1 The Judgment threatened, An East Wind shall come. This wind usually is most
violent and boisterous, when God is said to break ships, Kadim ruach, v^ntus
orientalis omnia siccat and exu^^t, sicut Z^p^yrus saecu^^at.
it is with an East Wind, Psalm. 48. 7. when he divided the Sea, it was with a
strong East Wind, Exodus 14. 22. It is dry, sharp, searching, destructive,
burning, blasting, hurtful wind, to the herbs and fruits of the earth,
especially in those Countries, Genesis 41. 6. Job 15. 2. Ezekiel. 17. 10. and 19. 12.
^sa. 27 8. Jonah 4. 8. Hence great afflictions are compared to East-winds, Job
27. 22. Ier. 18. 17. This East Wind is not to be taken properly, but
metahorically, by it is meant the King of Assyria with his forces, Oriens inter
omnes ventos aspe^imus, huic reges qui te^ram afflixerunt comparant^r, Mercer.
who should come from the East, and like an East Wind should dry up and destroy
all before him. In this sense the violent Caldeans are compared to an
East Wind, Hab. 1. 9. And the Assyrian is also compared to an Eagle which comes
swiftly, with great force and violence.

2 From whom does this wind come? it comes not by chance or fortune, but it
comes from God, and therefore it is called the wind of the Lord, i. e. A
mighty, strong, irresistible wind, When God is added to a thing, it notes its
excellency, V^ Schools Guard. Rule ^3.
carrying down all before it; such an one as God himself shall raise for the
punishment of Ephraim, viz. That most cruel and most merciless Assyrian* sent
by the Lord to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant.

3 From whence shall it come? it shall come up from the wilderness, where the
winds blow most fiercely and vehement, because they meet with no resistance. It
was a great wind from the Wilderness that brought the house upon Jobs children,
Job 1. 19. This notes the fierceness of the Assyrian against Israel, he shall
rage unmercifully against him.

4 Here is the hurt which this violent wind shall do, It shall dry up all his
springs; what is that? why exegetically it is added, P^rip^rasis est extremae
desolationis. Rivet. Fontem, i. abundantiam, opes, felicitatem, nihil jam
refrigerii, n^hil solatii, omnia hostis auferet, Merc.
He shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant Vessels. When the fountain is
dried, the streams must needs fail. He alludes to the land of Ephraim which
abounded with fruits, and springs, and withal sets forth the great abundance of
all things that Israel enjoyed; they had not drops, or ponds, or torrents, but
constant springs of mercy, whilst others had only some streams of mercy; they
sat at the fountain head, they had the root when others had but branches, Hos.
9. 16.

q. d. Since Ephraim, and the rest of the Tribes have rebelled against me,
they shall be brought to utter desolation; all the springs of my blessings
shall be taken from them, and all manner of happiness shall fail them; I will
send the Assyrian amongst them, and he shall spoil all their Treasures, and
carry away all their Ornaments, even their most precious and desirable things,
Otsar, Thesaurus p^oprie dicitur pecunia in t^rra abscondita, and latiori forma
dicitur quicquid pretiosum est, sive illud in pecuniis, sive in bonis quocunque
modo numeretur, Ezekiel. 38 13. Nahum 2. 9. Sanctius in locum.
though never so closely hid, this searching wind will find them out, be it
gold, silver, Jewels, costly Ointments, costly Perfumes, costly Apparel, or any
of the precious fruits of the earth: What ever desirable thing is hid and
highly esteemed, either by the covetous, the voluptuous, or the lascivious,
shall all become a prey* to the merciless Assyrian. Cheli Chemdah, vasa
desiderii. Cheli significat vas, vestem, o^namentum, supellectilem, arma and
quicquid in usum hominum paratur, V. Rav^nel. in V. Thesaur. V. plura apud
Ravanel in V. d^siderium. V. Schools Guard. Rule 12. p. 85.
That which we translate pleasant Vessel, the Original renders Vessels of
desire, it is an Hebraism, i. e* very precious things. Hence Daniel is called
Ish Chamudoth, a man of desires, i. e. a precious man, and greatly beloved,
Dan. 9. 23. and 10. 11. Thus a good Land is called a Land of desires, i. e. a
most desirable Land, Ier. 3. 19. and 25. 34. Mal. 3. 12. Thus goodly Garments
are called Garments of desire, Genesis 27. 15. and pleasant bread is called bread
of desires, Dan. 10. 3. So all pleasant things, whether Gold, Jewels, Garments,
are called things of desires, i. e. precious things, 2 Chronicles. 20. 25. Dan. 1^.
8. 38. 43. It is usual with the Hebrews to express the superlative degree by
putting the substantive in the genitive Case.

The sum of all is this, Though Ephraim be high, and mightily exalted above
his brethren, yet since he has not exalted my Name who have exal^ed him, nor
made my benefits binders, and my mercies motives to duty and obedience, but
has fought against me with my own favors, and abused my blessings to my
dishonor, therefore I will bring the Assyrian upon him, who like an East Wind
shall blast him, utterly dash all his hopes, spoil his Tresures, and carry him
into Captivity: So that he who was sometimes the head of the Nations, shall
now become the Tail; He that was above, and was the terror of the Nations,
making them tremble when he spoke, shall now become the scorn of the Nations,
and the contempt of the people.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Gods goodness is wholly free.

He chooses not for seniority of birth, or excellency of parts, or worthiness
of the person, but he loves whom he loves, and shows mercy to whom he will
show mercy, Romans 9. 15. Ephraim here the younger brother, is preferred before
Manasseh the elder, and is advanced in number and dignity above him. This
displeased Joseph, and often displeases us; but what pleases God should please
us, we should quiet our selves in such dispensations as our Savior did,
Matthew. 11. 25, 26. Even so O Father, because it pleases thee. q. d. since it
is thy good pleasure to hide the mysteries of salvation from the wise men of
the world, and to reveal them to simple men and women, it pleases me well,
because it is thy good pleasure so to have it. We are apt to confine Gods
grace to the order of nature, and external accomplishments. Amongst all the
sons of Iesse, even Samuel the Seer would not have chosen David the youngest,
and the least regarded, and therefore set to keep Sheep, to be King of Israel,
yet God makes choice of him, and leaves his brother Elia^, Shammah and
Abinadab, the proper persons, great Soldiers, and prime Courtiers. Gods
blessing goes not by carnal seniority, but by spiritual grace and choice. He
is wiser than the wisest, and often chooses where man leaves, and leaves where
man chooses, as we see in Abel, Sem, Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Judah, Joseph,
being younger brethren, who yet were preferred in favor before Cain, See more
in Mr. Ienkin on Jude 11. p. 72. ^ol.
Iaphet, Haran, Ishmael, Esau, Reuben, Simeon, Levi. This God does, not only
to magnify his Sovereignty and free grace, but also to cheek our vain
thoughts, who are apt to limit the holy One of Israel, to our ways and
inventions.

2 Gods Minister must use plain and familiar expressions for the better
convincing of their people, both of their sin and misery. The Prophet here
uses similitudes from a traveling woman, from the East Wind, and the Lord by
way of aggravation of their sins tells them, That he had spoken to them by his
Prophets, and had multiplied Visions, and given them much preaching, yea and
the better to convince them, he had used similitudes by the Ministry of his
Prophets, Hos. 12. 10. This is an excellent way of preaching, and prevailing,
it does notably illustrate the truth, and creep into men's affections. Galeacius
Caracciolus, an Italian Marquess and Nephew to a Pope, Memorabilia sunt illa
quae sunt benephantisabilia. Juvil.
was converted by an apt similitude which he heard from Peter Martyr.
Similitudes are more memorable, and suit best with the capacities of all; For 1
Thereby things are brought to our sense. 2 Then to our understanding. 3 To our
memory. 4 To affection and practice. This made the Prophets so frequently use
them, H^nce it is that a great part of the Scripture is historical, that the
hearts of people might be the taken, with it, and delight in it.
Isa. 5. 1, 2. and Ezekiel 16. 3. and Hos. 14. 5. to 9. Nathan caught David with a
Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, etc. and out of his own mouth condemns him. Christ
who spoke as never man spoke, whose words were full of power and authority, yet
the better to work upon his hearers, did frequently use Parables, from the
Sower, from Leven, from Mustard Seed, Flowers, Feasts, from a Treasure, etc.
Matthew. 13. and 24. 32. Mark 4, 33. Luk 13. See Mr. Sam. Smith on Psalm. 23. 1.
p. 61. and Mr. Robinson on Ephesians. 6. Lect. 8. p. 106.
6. Ioh. 20. 5, 6, etc.

And the Apostle fetches similitudes from Runners and wrastlers, etc. 1 Cor.
9. 24. 2 Timothy 4. 6.

We are naturally very incapable of the best things* 1 Cor. 2. 14. like a dull
Ass Colt, untractable, Job 11. 12. We are slow to believe, and hard to
perceive the truths of God; Christ blamed his own Disciples for it, Luke 24.
25. Plain preaching is the best teaching, it is the best way to convince and
convert men; and if plain familiar preaching will not work, certainly, dark,
mysterious preaching will never do it. Hence Christ tells Nicodemus, that if
when he had spoken of earthly things they believed not, how will they believe
when he shall speak to them of heavenly things? Ioh. 3. 12. This made Paul,
that he had rather speak five words in a known tongue to edify others, than
ten thousand in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14. 19. That is the best preaching
which sets forth things to the life, and makes them as plain, as if they were
written with a Sunbeam.

We should therefore admire the riches of Gods mercy to us in co^descending to
teach us so plainly and familiarly, using all means to convert us, and bring us
home to himself; so that if any perish for want of knowledge, they may thank
themselves, for God has left no means unassayed to do us good. He has used
comparison from things, 1 Natural, 2 Artificial, 3 Ceremonial, 4 Moral.


1 In Scripture the Lord draws comparisons from things Natural; thus to show
his tender love and care over his people, There is (...) aranea, Retiformis,
uvea corn^a and adnata.
he alludes to a mothers love to her child, and to a Hen, that with much
tenderness gathers her chickens under her wings, and compares his people to the
apple of his eye, Psalm. 17. 8. Zach. 2. 8. which is guarded with five Tunicles,
the better to preserve it from danger.

2 From Artifical things, from plowi^ng sowin, Silversmiths trying their
metals in the fire, Psalm. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.

3 From Ceremonial things, Psalm. 51. 8. Purge me with hysop, alluding to the
cleansing of the Lepers under the Law.

4 From Moral things, Isa. 66. 12.

Many complain they are not book-learned, 1 whose fault is that? thou can not
plead ignorance for want of means. 2 If thou could read never a letter, yet
the book of the creature is written in such large characters, that he who runs
may read them; See Mr Hieron Bargain of Sal. p. 493. etc.
had we but spiritual hearts, we might learn many spiritual lesson from them.

3 Obs. The higher in mercy, the deeper in judgments if men abuse them.

Fruitful Ephraim that was the head of the Tribes, and advanced above his
brethren, The word is Chi, licet, not quia or quoniam, as the Vulgar, though
the particle will bear both, yet our Translation is most genuine.
is now for his sins made the most contemptible amongst them. Hence Zanchy
reads the words thus, Quoniam Ephraim fructificavit. etc. Seeing Ephraim is
fruitful amongst his brethren, i. e. since he abounds in riches, power, and
many privileges above the rest of the Tribes, these shall be so far from
saving him, that God will be more fierce against him for abusing them.
Capernaum that was exalted to heaven in the abundance of the means of grace,
for it was the City of Christ's residence, where he frequently cured the sick,
preached, and wrought many miracles; yet for their ingratitude, Ingentia
^eneficia, ing^ntia vitia, ingentia supplicia.
unfruitfulness, and abuse of those means, they were thrust down to hell. i. e.
They lost their privileges, they were brought to a very low and miserable
condition; so as at this day they are a desolation, and not three houses
standing where those three famous Cities, Corazin, Bethsaida, and Caperna^m
stood; and at last they shall be damned in hell too for contemning so great
salvation, See Mr. Carpenters Ser. on Mat. 11. 21. and Mr. Strong in his 31.
Ser. p. 309
when offered to them, Matthew 11. 23. As Ahashuerus said of Haman that had
abused his favor, Hang him on a Gallows fifty Cubits high; so will Christ say
of such, Plunge them into hell so much deeper than others, because they reject
Christ when he is tendered them. None sink so deep in hell, as the lewd,
licentious Christian. Favor abused increases sin, and men's offenses are
aggravated by their obligations. If Turks and Tartars shall be damned,
debauched Christians shall be double damned, because they bring a reproach
upon Christ and his ways, Hi sunt Christiani ad contumeliam Christi. Salvian.
and open the mouths of the wicked to cry, Behold these are the people of the
Lord, see how loosely and unrighteously they live, Ezekiel. 36. 20. where the Lord
has been a Valley of Vision, and bestowed much preaching, if people answer not
the Lords cost, Vall is visioni^ i. e. Prophetiae, quia Jerusalem fuit parens
and nutrix omnium fere Prophetarum. a Lap.
they mu^t expect a burden of judgment to sight upon them, Isa. 22. 1. No
place was punished like Jerusalem, because no place had better preaching, and
more privileges, Lam. 4. 6. Dan. 9. 12. They that have preaching, shall one
day know what it is to have Prophets amongst them, Ezekiel 2. 5. and shall pay
full dearly for their contempt of them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. Prove. 1. 24, 25.
and 28. 9. Isa. 5. 24, 25. and 30. 9, 12, 13. Ier 6. 19. and 9. 12, 13. Zach.
7. 11, 12. Mat. 10. 14, 15. This is the reason why Judgments usually begin at
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9. 6. and at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. Romans 2. 9.
though it does not end there, but goes on to the wicked, Ier. 25. 17, 18, 28,
29. the cup begins at Jerusalem, and then goes round to Egypt, Vz, Askelon,
Ekron, Edom, Moab, etc. The highest in preferment, are first in punishment; and
if this be done to Zion, Professio religionis non a^fert debitum, sed auget.
Salvia^.
woe to Babylon, Jer. 49. 12. The sins of Gods people are committed against
greater light and love, and bring more dishonor to God, and disgrace to his
truth, than the sins of others, and therefore of all men he will not spare
them for their iniquities, as we see in Moses, Eli, David, Hezekiah, Zachery,
1 Samuel 2. 27, 28, 30. and 2 Samuel 12. 14. Luke 1. 20. They are a people nearer to
him than others, and therefore he will not bear with them, as he does with
those that know him not, Numb. 16. 9. Lev. 10. 2, 3. Amos 3. 2. A father will
sooner correct his children if they offend, than strangers that he knows not,
Heb. 12. 5 6. We can endure dung in our fields, which we cannot abide in our
Parlours. We suffer those briars to grow in the wilderness, which we cannot
away with in our gardens. Pro^ul a Jove, p^o^ui a fu^mine
If they be open enemies, God can better bear it; but it highly provokes him
to be wounded in the house of his friends; when he shall nourish and bring up
children, and they shall rebel against him, he cannot, he will not brook it.
Isa. 1. 2, 7. To show his impartial Justice to the world. 2 For the terror of
others. 3 To take off the scandal that comes hereby to Religion, See ten
Reasons why God is so seve^e against the sins of his own people, Mr. Ant.
Burges of S^l^-j^dging, p. 88. etc. Hild^^sham on Psalm 51* 6. Lect. 114 p. 571,
572.
he will punish sin where ever he finds it, Numb. 20. 12. He has his fire
in Zion, and his Furnace in Jerusalem, and is terrible in the Assembly of his
Saints, Psalm. 68. ult.

4 Obs. No Privileges nor Prerogatives can preserve a disobedient people from
ruin.

Ephriam here had many Privileges, as you may see Genesis 48. 16, 19, 20. Deuteronomy.
^3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where under the name of Joseph, Moses blesses Ephraim
with the precious things of Sun and Moon, and the precious things of the earth,
as Corn, Wine, Gold, Silver, etc. and prophesies that the good will of him that
dwelt in the bush should dwell amongst them, i. e. God would show his special
love to them as his peculiar people, and not only give them outward, but inward
blessings also, and would so strengthen them, that no enemy should be able to
stand before them; yet Ephraim sinning against the God of those mercies, lost
all. No privileges can shelter us if God be against us. He that raised us,
can as easily ruin us; he that exalted us, can as easily abase us; he that
made us famous for mercies, can quickly make us infamous for judgments, and
consume us after he has done us good. Josh. 24. 20. It is not silver, nor
gold, Prove. 11. 4. Ezekiel. 7. 19. Zeph. 2. ult. Not men, nor might that can save
us, if God be against us, Psalm. ^0. 7, 8. Isa. 22. 6. to 15. Nahum 3. 12. Many
trust in their swords, and think by their valor and skill in war to defend
themselves, and possess the Land as their inheritance for ever; but God tells
them, since they trust in the sword, that they shall fall by the sword, and be
cast out of all, Ezekiel. 33. 26, 27, 28. if he be against us, all is against
us, and if he but stamp or hiss for an enemy, they presently come against us,
Isa. 5. 26. Jerusalem was strongly fortified, and no man thought that ever the
enemy could have entered it, Lam 4. 12. And if Privileges could ever have
preserved a sinful people from ruin, Jerusalem had never been destroyed, for
they had more Privileges than all the people in the world besides. It was
called the Perfection of beau^y, and the Joy of the whole earth, and Gods own
City, by way of eminency, Psalm. 46. 4. Matthew. 5. 35. so famous was it for
preaching, that it is called the Valley of Vision, Isa. 22. 1. and they were
called a people near to God, the holy people, that knew his Name, and were
blessed by him above all people. They had godly Magisirates, as David* Hezekiah,
Josiah, etc. and zealous Prophets, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc. and
after, Christ and his Apostles. To them pertained the Adoption, and the Glory,
and the Covenants, and the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises,
theirs were the Fathers, and of them Christ came. These eight Privileges the
Apostle sets down together, Romans 9. 4, 5. None better seated, none more
strangely delivered, none had such signal Providence, and glorious Ordinances;
all the world besides ^ay in darkness, they only were a Goshen, a Land of
light, Gods glory, his pecu^iar, his pleasant portion, and delight, etc. So
that if any people under heaven might have been secure in respect of
Privileges, it was Jerusalem; yet they falling to Atheism, Idolatry,
persecution of Gods Messengers, etc. they are become a desolation. Sodom was a
beautiful place, like the Paradise of God, Genesis 13. 10. Babylon was the glory
of Kingdoms, Isa. 13. 19. yet both the one, and the other were destroyed for
their lewdness and pride.

England is apt to boast of its Privileges, and to tell what great things God
has done for us. With thankfulness it must be acknowledged that God has done
great things for us indeed. He has made us as he did Ephraim here, the head
of the Nations, when for our sins, we might have been the Tail. He has set
us above, when for our horrid Apostasies, and hideous Blasphemies, he might
justly have have laid us beneath. He has made us the terror of the Nations,
and given us Victory upon Victory, success upon success, and has p^ospered us
by Sea and Land, blessed us with the best Laws, and the best Land (all things
considered) in the world; and as if all this had not been sufficient for us,
he has given us the word and the sword, Moses, and Aaron, Magistracy and
Ministry, the best (I think) in the world. Besdes the singular helps in Print,
those excellent Tracts, both Polemical, and Practical; compare but our large
Annotations with the Dutch Annotations, and you will see what cause we have to
be thankful in this kind.

All these things make us deeply indebted to our God; but had we ten thousand
times more Privileges than we have, yet if we walk not up unto them, and
answer them with obedience, we are an undone people. The greater our
Privileges, the nearer to Judgment, if we abuse them. Shiloh was for a time
privileged with the Tabernacle, and the Ark, those visible pledges of Gods
special presence and residence amongst them, but they abusing these mercies,
were given up to Judgments, Ier. 7. 12. And if England go on in sinning, as it
has done of late, and proceed in its Hypocrise, Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresy,
Witchcraft, Formality, Profaneness, and abuse of Gods favors, etc. we must
certainly expect some sweeping judgment. It is not Privileges, it is not
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, it is not those outward Prerogatives, that
make us acceptable to God, but a new creature, Gal. 6. 15. either new men, or
no men in Gods esteem. Let us then become an holy people, and we shall be an
happy people. Let us answer our Privileges with self-denying hearts and lives,
that as God has done more for us, than for others, so we may do more for him
than others; that as he has given us distinguishing mercies, so we may
answer them with distinguishing manners, not living like the men of the world,
Exodus 19. 4, 5. that the Lord may rejoice over us to do us good, and may show
us yet greater things than these.

5 Obs. Abuse of mercies, loses mercies.

God had done much for Ephraim, he had not been to him a barren wilderness, or
a land that was not sown, but he brought him out of the wilderness,
miraculously delivered him out of Egyt, freely adopted him for his own, planted
him in a fat pasture, even a land flowing with milk and honey, gave him his
Law, and sent to them many extraordinary Prophets; but they instead of exalting
God, who had exalted them, grew proud and insolent, forgetting the God of all
their mercies, and confiding in Kings and Princes, kissing the Calves, and
sacrificing to Baal, who could not save them, Reliqua numina sunt tantum
nomina, nihil sunt, nihil possunt, nihil prosunt. Tarnov.
and then they dyed, Hos. 13. 1. to 12. Mortuus est civilit^r quia amisit
authoritatem, and in varias calamita^es incidit, adeo ut pro mortuo habitus
sit, nullius pretii, nullarum virium, Paulatim consumebatur, ac tand^m penitus
deleba^ur, Tarnovius in locum.
when he began to fight against God with his own mercies, and to abuse the
health, wealth, and blessings which God had given him, to the dishonor of the
donor, then he lost his riches, strength, glory, Kingdom, and all. Then comes
the Assyrian like an East Wind, and sweeps away all; before, his name was
fruitfulness, but now God threatens them with emptiness, barrenness, dryness of
roots, fruits, branches, springs, even the loss of all. As all the world had
been witnesses of Gods special favor to them; so now they should be witnesses
of their just confusion; when men honor not the Lord with their riches, but
kiss their own hands, and sacrifice to their own Nets, when like beasts they
bite the hand that feeds them, and crop the tree that shelters them, it is just
with God to take all from them, Hos. 2. 8, 9. Neh. 9. 7. to 25. We have a
large Catalogue of Gods singular mercies. Verse. ^6. we read how they abused
those mercies, verse. 27, 28. we read of Gods judgments on them for abusing
those blessings. So Psalm. 106. 9, 10, 11. we see Gods mercies, verse 13. to 39.
we have the abuse of them, and verse. 40. 41, 42. Judgments follow. It is
usually seen, that where the Lord bestows the greatest mercies, there he often
receives the greatest indignities; where he gives most honor, there he
receives most dishonor. When Iesurum is fat and full, then he kicks, Deuteronomy.
32. 15. Ephraim here was a son, and had all the privileges of a son, the
greater was his sin to rebel against that God who had been so tender to him.

1 He had Dilection; when Israel was a child God loved him, Hos. 11. 1. 4.

2 Direction; he taught him how to go, and sent Jonah, Amos, Hosea, and other
Prophets to instruct him, Hos. 11. 3.

3 Correction; as a father corrects his children for their good, so did God by
Ephraim, Hos. 5. ult. and 6. 1, 2.

4 Provision; Fathers provide for their children, so did God for Ephraim; He
made him fruitful amongst his brethren, and sed him in a large pasture, Hos.
13. 6.

5 Protection; he was their King who saved them from their enemies, Hos. 13.
10.

God has done as great things for England (all things considered) as ever he
did for Ephraim; he has been a tender Father to us, he has blessed us
abundantly both in Church and State; He has broken the power and policy of
many subtle Achitophels and great Zanzummims, Giants, and sons of Anak. He
has made Mountains a plain before us; and though fierce men have rid over our
heads, yet has he brought us through fire and water into a wealthy place. For
Englands sake he has sent to Babylon, and brought down all their Nobles: He
has bound even Kings and Princes in chains, and their followers in links of
iron. He has made the wicked to bow before the good, and the evil at the
gates of the righteous. No Nation so blessed of our God as we, and no Nation
that has worse requited the Lords blessings than we have done. As he has
loaded us with mercies, so we have loaded him with Blasphemies, Heresies,
Apostasies; no favors can win us, no benefits bind us; if God had been our
deadly enemy, we could not have acted more ignobly and disingenuously against
him than we have done. It is a Miracle of mercy that he yet continues his
mercies to us, and that he has not long ago stripped us naked, as in the day
when we were born, Hos. 2. 3. We have rendered evil to the Lord for all his
goodness to us; and therefore we may justly fear that evil should pursue us,
Prove. 17. 13. if he shall be punished that renders evil for evil to man, what
shall be done to him that renders evil for good, and that to his God who never
did him hurt? The good Lord humble us for all our ungrateful and dis-ingenuous
walking before him, who has been so good and gracious to us; and grant, that
at last we may know and acknowledge the God of our mercies, lest an East Wind
come and bereave us of all; for though at present we have peace and plenty*
and fresh springs of mercy round about us, yet God can suddenly dry up all our
springs, and bring a plundring Assyrian from the East or West upon us (for
those Metathorical winds, as well as the Natural are all his servants) that
shall quickly rob us of all our pleasant things. Let us not therefore flatter
our selves, and think that because at present we have peace, See how mercies
abused increase wrath, Babington on Genesis 49. 3, 4. Caryl on ^ob 11. 11. p. 81.
I^nkin on Jude 2. p. 48. fol^o. Man^on on Jude 5. p. 257.
therefore no evil shall come upon us; for if England go on to sin after the
rate as it has done of late years, adding drunkenness to thirst, sin to sin,
and Heresy to Heresy, etc, The wrath of the Lord will certainly break forth
against us, and then we that would not serve him gladly and sincerely in the
abundance of all things, shall be made to serve in want and misery, that we
may know the difference between his service, and the service of men, Deuteronomy. 28.
47, 48.

6 Obs. The Judgments of God are irresistible.

Let Ephraim be deeply rooted like a Tree, or well founded like a Tower, yet
if ever this East Wind of Gods displeasure do arise, it will pull him up by the
roots, blow him down, and carry him into Captivity, carry him into scarcity,
carry him into infamy, yea carry him to death, and then to hell. If the Lord
gives but the word of Command, he has winds in store to carry us into any of
those sad coasts. Though great men are roo^ed in the earth like great Mountains
(in their own conceit, and in the opinion of others) (...) they are but like
Tennis-balls in the hands of God, which he hurles at pleasure which way he
pleases, as is excellently set forth, Isa. 22. 18. with a wo^d of his mouth
he can speak his enemies into confusion, he can with more ease destroy them,
than we can crush a moth in our windows, or tread a worm to death under our
feet. How easily and irresistibly does a bar of iron break an earthen pot to
pieces? Psalm. 2. 9. There is not the le^st creature but is too strong for us,
if God set it on. He did not vex Egypt with Lions and Leopards, but with
Grasshoppers, Frogs, Flies, and Lice, to show his Almig^ty, irresistible power,
who can punish us by the most contemp^ible creatures. Thus he slew Popeleius
and Hatto by Rats and Mice, Hermonactes was stung to death with Bees, Pope
Adrian was choked with a Fly, Cassander was eaten with Lice, Anti^chus and
Herod with Worms. See more Caryl on Job 4. 9. Obs. 1. p. 57, 58
Thus we ^ee Gods Omnipotency, and man's impotency, and must learn to fear him
who is able to arm the least and weakest of his creatures and make it strong
enough to encounter and conquer sinful man.

7 Obs. Cruel enemies are Gods rod.

They come not by chance, or of their own accord, but the Assyrian here is sent
by God as the rod of his indignation against rebellious Ephraim; hence he is
called, The wind of the Lord, as being more immediately sent by him. So Isa.
10. 5, 6, 7, 15. The Assyrian is called Gods Rod, Staff, Axe, Saw, with which
God chastises an hypocritical people; they can do nothing without a hand to
move them. There is no evil in this kind, but it comes from God, Isa. 42. 24,
25. and 45. 7. and 54. 16. Amos 3. 5. Ier. 51. 20. Lam. 3. 1, 37. Hab. 1. 6.
Hence Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon is called Gods Servant, Jer. 25. 9.
whom he employed in his service for the correction of his people, and the
wicked are called his Sword, Psalm. 17. 13. As the winds natural, so the winds
metaphorical, are all at Gods command, sent by him as Executioners of his wrath
upon a sinful people, Lev. ^6. 25. Ezekiel. 14. 17. 22.

Quest. But how can it stand with the Justice of God to use such wicked,
blashemous Instruments?

Answ. He that brings light out of darkness, and good out of evil, can make
good use even of the sins of men: As a wise Physician can so order poison, that
it shall become a medicine, and can expel poison by poison; so the most wise
God can extract good out of the actings of those evil ones, and what they
intend for evil, he by his overruling Providence disposes unto good.

For the clearing of this, we must take notice of a fourfold act of God in the
actions of wicked men.

1 There is an act of Inspection, whereby he sees all tha^ is done, Job 34.
21, 22. Psalm. 94. 7, 8.

2 Of Permission, whereby he does actively suffer that to be done, which he
has power to hinder, Psalm 89. 40, 41, 42.

3 Of Limitation or restraint, whereby he keeps in the wicked so, as they
cannot do any thing more or less than he will have done, Genesis 20. 6. Job 1. 12.

4 Of Direction, and Order, whereby the evil actions of wicked men (which are
in themselves evil) are by his most wise disposing, and overruling providence,
turned unto good, Genesis 45. 5, 7, 8. and 50. 20. Act. 2. 23, 24. The Devil,
Judas, Pilate, and the Jews had ends of their own in crucifying Christ, but God
had an end above their end, and a plot above their plo^s, to which all their
plots (though against their intents) were subservient. They did fulfill Gods
Decrees against their wills.

Quest. But if they do only that which God fore-seeth, permits, limiteth,
and disposes, how can they be said to sin, and why does God punish them since
they do his will?

Answ. Because they do it not in obedience to God, but out of malice,
covetousness, and self ends, etc. what ever they pretend, yet they intend
nothing less than the doing of Gods work, and the fulfilling of his will; but
their end is to satisfy their lusts, and to enlarge their borders by the
conquest of Countries, and the spoils of the people, Isa. 20. 7.

1 This may fear us, since in war we have not to do with men only, but it is
God who is mighty in power, and terrible in judgment, that comes against us:
If we had only to do with Potsherds of the earth, we might make some
resistance, but when the Creator shall come against the creature, Omnipotency
against impotency, who can stand? Isa. 45. 9. He is the Lord of Hosts, and if
he be against us, the Hosts of heaven, and the Hosts of earth are against us
also.

2 This may comfort us in the midst of all our sufferings by the hands of cruel
men, that yet they are but Gods Rods to chastise us for our good. Vel robur
hostium apud Deum.
Even they are his servants, and can do nothing without a Commission from our
Father, Ioh. 19. 11. They cannot curse where God does not curse, Numb. 23. 8.
The very Devil their Master is chained and limited, and cannot devour whom he
will, but only whom he may, i. e. Whom God permits him to devour. We are
apt, like Curs to bite the stone, and not look at the hand that threw it,
whereas we should always look at the hand of God in all our distresses (what
ever the Instruments be) then we shall be dumb and silent, when we see that
it is God that has done it, Job 1. 21. Psalm. 39. 9. Genesis 50. 20. 1 Cor. 10.
13. The wicked are but Gods Scullions to cleanse us, his Files to furbish us,
and fetch off our rust, his Milners to grind us, and make us fit Manchet for
our Lords use. The Caldeans were cruel persecuters, yet the Lord sends his
people into the land of Caldea for their good, he makes them to learn that
many times in Babylon, which they would never have done in Sion, Jer. 24. 5.
God can make a Treacle of these Vipers, and can dispose the worst things to his
peoples good, Romans 8. 28. their very persecutions shall spread the Gospel, Act.
8. 1. Philip. 1. 12, 19.

So that in some sense we are beholding to our enemies, for they make us
better.

3 It may comfort us, that when those Rods have done their work, themselves
shall be burnt, Isa. 10. 24, 25, 26. after Pharaoh had done Gods work on
Israel, God drowns him. After the Assyrian had done Gods work upon his people,
the Babylonians come and destroy him, and his flourishing Empire, Nahum 1. 2,
3. God suffers them for a time to vent their sin and malice, that his Justice
may be the more apparent in their downfall.

8 Obs. Sin bereaves us of our most pleasant, precious, and desirable things.

Jer. 15. 13. and 20. 5. Isa. 39. 6. and 64. 11. where the Church complains
that all her pleasant things lay waste. 1 See the generality of their loss, not
some, but All; All their Treasures, all their Princes, all their Palaces, all
their Riches, all their Cities, sin had ruined, All, All, All. 2 Here is their
propriety in them, Our pleasant things. To see another suffer, it may affect
us, but not so deeply as when we our selves suffer. 3 See the excellency of
the things they lost, they were pleasant and desirable things. To lose base
contemptible things does not so much trouble us, but to lose our choysest
things goes near us. 4 Which aggravates all, Here is 1 Con^lagration, our holy
and beautiful house is burnt with fire. 2 Devastation and desolation, All is
laid waste.

So long as Ephraim was Ephraim, i. e. faithful and fruitful, he flourished,
but now that he had forsaken God, God forsook him, and lets in an East Wind
that destroys all. He that before was famous, and the head of the Tribes, is
now, ^ince he has found out falsehood, and new lights, and new Gods, become
infamous, and the footstool of the Tribes. Hos. 13. 1. When Ephraim spoke
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel, but when he offended in Baal, he
dyed; q. d. when Ephraim spoke trembling, or with trembling (as it is in the
fountain) that is, Teret, terror and tremor erat, i. e. populus eum
reverebatur, quia ad summam dignitatem evectus ^^at. Riv^t.
was afraid of sin. Or 2 When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling, i. e. he was
once very awful to the rest of the Tribes, so as when he spoke, the rest of
the Tribes were ready to tremble. But when once he fell to Idolatry, and
worshipped Baal, he lost his Reputation, and no reckoning was made of him. He
that before was formidable, is now become contemptible both with God and man,
at home and abroad. Now every paltry adversary tramples upon him without
control, as the fearful Hare on a dead Lion. Wicked Ahab, that had sold
himself to wickedness, see how Be^hadad the King of Syria insults over him, 1
King 20. 3, 4. Thy silver, and thy gold is mine, thy wives also, and thy
children, even the goodliest are mine; and the King of Israel answered, and
said, My Lord, O King, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I
have. Look how the worried Cur falls upon his back, and turns up all four, as
craving quarter, so did this sordid Idolater crouch to his enemy when God was
departed from him, he was even as a dead carcass. Whilst Israel kept close to
God, and walked in his way, neither Balak, nor Balaam, neither the Devil, nor
his Agents, could by their Enchantments hurt them; But when by the wicked
counsel of Balaam they were enticed to sin against God by committing Whoredom
with the daughters of Moab, then Gods wrath brake forth against them, and they
dye for it, Number. 25. 1. and 31. 16. Hence a Heathen could say, Nostris peccatis
barbari fortes sunt, nostris peccatis Romanus superatur exercitus. Omnia bona
sunt in summo bono.
It is our sins that weaken our Armies, and make them fly before their
enemies. Omnia mala sunt in summo malo.
As all good is in God the chiefest good, who is therefore called a Sun for
consolation, and a Shield for protection; and the God of all comfort both
inclusively and exclusively, Ps. 84. 11. 2 Cor. 1. 3. So all the evil in the
world may be seen in sin, which is the chiefest evil, as poverty, sickness,
war, death, hell: It is sin that dryes up all our springs, stops our fountains,
spoils our Treasures, and robs us of all our pleasant things; our pleasant
land, our pleasant food, our pleasant raiment, our pleasant houses, pleasant
children, Sin, Sin, Sin, bereaves us of them all. God turns a fruitful Land
into a wilderness for the wickedness of such as dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 34.
and therefore when any thing goes amiss with us, we should search for the sin
that has done us the mischief, find out the Achan that has caused the
trouble, find out the Jonah that has raised the storm, do justice on the one,
and drown the other, and we shall have peace. We should slay that, which
otherwise will slay us, and ruin iniquity, which ruins our houses, lands,
wives, children, all. It is this enemy that robs us of our health, wealth,
peace, plenty, Ordinances, Magistrates, Ministers, and all our comforts.

Object. We will hide our Treasures that none shall find them.

Answ. There is no hiding of your selves, or substance, when God pursues, Ier.
11. 11. The wind of the Lord will pierce into the most secret places, and find
out you, and all your hid treasures, Psalm. 21. 8. and 139. 7, 8, and Isa. 13.
16, 17. Amos 9. 2, 3, 4. God has those that watch for your riches, Ier. 4. 16,
17. and greedy Soldiers that shall search for your hid treasures, Isa. 10. 13,
14. and 45. 3. Obad. 6.

Let us then wean our hearts from those flying, See the Vanity of the creature
in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 2. p. 38.
fading, transitory things. What the Prophet said of riches, If they increase,
set not your hearts upon them; may be fitly applied to all creature comforts,
if friends increase, set not your hearts upon them; if children increase, or
honors, or armies, or pleasant habitations, etc. yet set not your hearts upon
them, but look upon them as things that have wings to fly from us in our
greatest need. Lie loose therefore in your affections to all earthly
enjoyments, that so when ever the Lord shall call for them by fire, sword, or
any other way, it may not trouble you to part with them; make not Idols of them
in over-loving them, lest you lose them. It is great folly greedily to lay up
treasures for we know not who, Psalm. 39. 9. Ier. 17. 11. it may be for an
enemy, as Ephraim here; little did he think that the merciless Assyrian should
be enriched with his labor, and that the men whom their souls hated should
be masters of all their desirable and pleasant things.

2 Since earthly things are so uncertain and fading, Lay not up for your selves
treasures on earth, where moths corrupt, and thieves break through and steal,
but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, Matthew. 6. 20, 21. Lay out your
estates for God, See more fully in Trapp on Mat. 6. 19, 10.
his truth, his cause, his people, and the spiritual good of you, and yours.
This is to lay up treasures in heaven. Get grace, that is durable riches which
will never leave you, and that better part which shall never be taken from you.

VERSE 16.
Samaria shall become desolate, ^or she has rebelled against her God, they
shall fall by the sword, their Infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their
women with child shall be ripped up.
THis Verse contains the end of the Sermon, and ends the Chapter, and therefore
those Interpreters do ill, who make it to begin the next Chapter, when this
Verse fitly coheres with the precedent Verse; there the Prophet showed how they
should be plundered, and lose their goods, here he tells them how they should
be butchered and lose their lives. So that the Prophet does not here begin any
new Sermon, but only confirms what he had spoken before of the destruction of
Samaria, and the overthrow of the whole Kingdom. So that the words are a clear
exposition of the former similies, and a conclusion of the Sermon. Wherein we
have,

1 The dismal downfall of Samaria, Teosham desolabitur, from asham desolari,
devastare, perire, peccare, quia peccatum est desolationis causa. a Lap. V.
L^ights Crit. S. in V. Asham.
Samaria shall be made desolate. The Prophet labors to awaken them by
foretelling the greatness of their punishment.

2 Here is the meritorious cause of this sad destruction, viz. her* rebellion,
For she has rebelled against her God. So that she has no cause to complain
of God, as if he dealt hardly with her, for her own rebellion is the true
cause of her destruction, and her great provocation has brought this upon her,
as the Church in the like case complains, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is righteous (in
sending sword, plague, and famine upon us) for we have rebelled against him.

3 Here is the Accent or Aggravation of this their Rebellion, Beae lo hea, in
(...) p^onomen; quia obliteraverant sua ingratitudine adoptionis divinae
benefici^m* (...).
it was not against man, but it was against God, yea against her God in
Covenant, who had been so good and gracious to her both in Temporals and
Spirituals, yet ^ee most ignominiously casts off him, and prefers the Calves
before him, Hos. 13. 2.

4 Here is set forth the kind of their destruction, or what manner of death
they shall dye, and that is by the Sword, They shall fall by the Sword. They
shall not only lose their Treasure, and their Land, but their Lives also. He
says not* All shall fall, but indefinitly, Ye shall fall, i. e. many of the
Inhabitants of Samaria, and of the Kingdom of Israel, shall be slain by the
Assyrian.

5 The better yet to awaken them out of their security, he sets forth the rage
of the Assyrian, with its Aggravations, and tells them yet further, That their
children should be dashed in pieces against the walls and stones, and their
women with child should be ripped up. They should not only dye themselves,
but their little ones also should perish with them.

Samaria shall become desolate] Samaria was a first a City of Syria, built by
O^ri King of Israel, who bought the hill thereof from Shemer, and so from him
it was called Samaria, 1 King. 16. 24. It was the Royal City, even the chief
City of the Kings of Israel, where they kept their Court, and had their special
residence, there they reigned, and there they were buried. This was the
Metropolis, and Mother-City. All the other Cities of the Kingdom of Israel
were called the Daughters of Samaria, Ezekiel. 16. 46, 55 In Augustus Caesar's time
it was called Seb^ste, and not long after it was totally ruined. And here let
it be noted once for all, that when the Prophets speak of the ten Tribes
only, sometimes they call them Samaria, sometimes Ephraim, and sometimes
Israel, Joseph, Iezreel, Bethely, Beth-aven; but when they speak of the two
Tribes, they usually do it under the name of Judah, Jerusalem, Benjamin, and
the house of David.

2 Samaria was a populous, Urbs amplissim^ ut quam viginti stadioru^ ambitum
comprebendisse ^xistimant; c^m art t^m natura loci munita.
strong, well fenced, fortified, furnished City, there were Horses, Charrets,
Arms, and Ammunition, all things for defense, 2 King. 10. 1, 2. It was every
way well prepared to hold out against an enemy, as appears by the three years
^iege of that potent enemy which lay against it; yet notwithstanding all her
fortifications, Samaria shall be made desolate, Meton, subjecti, locus pro
incolis.
because of her sin; Samaria is here put for the Inhabitants of Samaria,
Samaria, i. e. ^otum regnum Israelis ab Assyria evertetur. Luther.
viz. the Israelites, and synecdochically it is put for the whole Kingdom of
Israel as distinct from the Kingdom of Judah. The Prophet names only Samaria,
because it was the prime City, and all the rest were taken before; there was
none left but Samaria, and sin brings down that also. This City was twice
besieged, first by the Syrians in Ahabs time, 1 King. 20. 1. and 2. 6. 24. and
now by the Assyrians. Phul and Tiglath-pileser had before molested Israel, 2
King. 15. 19, 29. and now comes Salma neser a third King of Assyria (the Church
shall never want enemies, especially when she rebels against God) he besieges
Samaria in the days of Hosh^a the last King of Israel, he takes it, and
carries the inhabitants into Captivity, from which they never returned, but
were totally rooted up, having continued from Jeroboam their first King, about
two hundred and sixty years, about the year of the World 3230, and before
Christ, about seven hundred years.

Because she has rebelled against her God.] The Lord had used all means to
reclaim them* his Spirit had long striven with them in the Ministry of those
Prophets which he had in compassion sent amongst them, as Iehu, Semaiah*
Azariah* with Elijah, Elisha, Joel, sonah, Amos, Micah, and specially this our
Prophet Hosea, Martha and Mora^ significant rebellare, apostatare, exacerbare,
and ad amaritudinem concitare. Ruth 1. 20. Lam. 1. 18.
how plainly does he tell them (throughout his Prophecy) of their Idolatry,
Apostasy, Ingratitude, and of those judgments which were coming on them for
those sins? yet nothing will work upon them, but they persist obstinately in
their sins, and therefore the Lord resolves to pour out his fury on them. Since
they had imbittered his soul with their sins, Hos. 12. 14. and given him gall,
who had given them honey, and gave him wormwood for his milk, therefore he now
resolves to send on them bitter punishments.

They shall fall by the Sword] i. e. Cadit and Ripheus justissimus unus, Qui
fuit in Teucr^s. Virg.
They shall dye by the Sword, so the phrase is frequently taken in Scripture,
as Lev. 26. 7, 8. Numb. 14. 3, 43. 2 Samuel 1. 12. Psalm. 78. 64. Ezekiel. 5. 12.
Hos. 7. 16.

Their Infants shall be dashed in peeces] This sets forth the great rage and
fury of the barbarous Assyr^ans, G^olah, puer, parvulus, recens ablactatus
and withal implies the greatness of Samariaes sin, which provoked God to so
great wrarh. They should spare neither old nor young, no mercy should be
showed to women or children, no sex, no age should escape unpunished. Their
little infants and sucklings (which usually are spared for their innocence and
ignoscency) yet now shall be dashed in pieces. Soldiers use to show mercy to
women and children, unless they be sorely provoked; the Assyrians had besieged
Samaria three years, and therefore they dealt the more severely with them.
Fenced Cities use to hold out long, but when they are conquered, they use to
pay for it. Of such kind of ferity and brutish inhumanity we read, 2 King. 15.
16. where the Tyrant Men^hem ripped the Infants of Tiphsal out of their mothers
bellies, because their fathers opened not the gates unto him; yet this does not
excuse the malicious cruelty of wicked men who despitefully slay the godly with
their seed, such cursed Edomites shall surely and suitably pay for it, Ps. 1.
37. 7. Amos 1. 13. the Assyrians that had dashed in pieces Ephraims children,
had at last by way of retaliation his own so served, Nahum 3. 10.

The sum of all is this, q. d. O people of Israel, I have often told you what
you will not believe, viz. that your destruction is ^ear; and therefore now
know, that whether you believe it or not, yet God will certainly and suddenly
execute what he has decreed, and fulfill what he has spoken by me; neither
have you any cause to complain of cruelty in God, since it is your own
rebellion which has brought this judgment on your own heads. There has been
no means wanting on Gods part to do you good, he has sent his Prophets rising
early, and coming late unto you. He would have cured you, but ye would not
be cured, and therefore now ye shall never be purged; but your chief City,
with the Regions round about it, shall be made a desolation, your men shall
fall by the sword, yea your women, and little children shall dye without mercy.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 God usually warns before he smites.

He sends Hosea to tell them before, Samaria shall be made a desolation. He
speaks before he strikes, and denounces judgments before he executes them.
Seldom does he send any great judgment against his own people, but he tells
them of it first. He lightens before he Thunders, shoots off his
Warning-peeces, before his Murdering pieces, and hangs out the white flag of
mercy, before the black flag of destruction. He deals not with us as one di^
with Diogenes, who first brake his head, and then bid him ^^ke heed. No^ like
the Canon, that first kills, and then makes the report. But he first
admonishes us to repent (as he did the seven Churches of Asia before their
destruction) else he tells them he will come against them, Rev. 2. 5. He
first cuts men down with the sword of his mouth, Hos. 6. 5. before he cut them
down with the sword of his hand. He first blows the Trumpet (and commands men
so to do, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11, 12.) before he sends the sword, Hos. 5. 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15. Ier. 7. 25. and 26. 18. Amos 4. 12. Joel 2. 1. Zeph. 2. 1,
2, 3.

1 Sometimes God warns by extraordinary and immediate revelation. Thus he
warned the wise men that came to Christ, not to go to Herod, but to return to
their own Country another way, Mat. 3. 12.

2 By prodigious Signs and Comets. These are the usual forerunners of some
judgment approaching. They have a Voice as well as the Word, Exodus 4. 8. if
they will not hearken to the Vo^ce of the first sign, yet they will believe the
Voice of the second. Christ tells us, that before the destruction of Jerusalem,
there should be many fearful sights and signs, Luke 21. 11, 25. And Iose^hus
affirms, that before its destruction, for a whole years space there appeared a
Comet like a Sword. Before our German wars, there appeared that blazing Comet,
1618.

3 By his Ministers, Ezekiel. 33. 3, 7, 8. Thus he warned the old world, an
hundred and twenty years, by the preaching of Noah, before he drowned it, Genesis
6. 13. Before the destruction of Jerusalem, he sent Christ himself and his
Apostles to call them to Repentance.

4 By his lesser Judgments. First, He comes as a moth, which eats one thread
now, and another anon, and without any noise devours all. 2 As a Worm, or
rottenness, which eats out the heart of the strongest Oak. 3 If that will not
do, there lies a Lion that tears all in pieces without resistance Hos. 5. 12,
14.

5 By his Rods on others, as on the Palatinate and Savoy, etc. so he sent the
Jews to Shiloh, See eight Voices by which God warns England, in that elaborate
Sermon of Mr Calamy on Jer. 18. 8. preached 1641. Mr. Gatakers Sermon on Heb.
11. 7. Mr. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 9. 1. p. 205. and my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 1. p. 6,
7.
Jer. 7. 12. also by taking away eminent Magistrates and zealous Ministers,
Isa. 3. 1. to 6.

6 By the Motions of his Spirit, he knocks at the door of our hearts, and
warns us to return, Rev. 3. 19.

And this he does 1 In mercy to his people, Paenas minatur ne paenas inferat
that they might prepare to meet him, and so prevent his Judgments, as those
that believed the threatening of the Hail, housed themselves and their Cattle,
Calamitas dicitur ventura ut agente populo paenitentiam non veniat Hietom.
and so were saved, Exodus 9. 18, 19, 20, 21. He deals not with us like an
enemy, who surprizeth his adversary unawares; but like a faithful friend he
tells us of the storm approaching, that we might hide our selves from it, 2
Chro^* 12. 6, 7. Job 22. 29. Hab. 3. 16.

2 For the manifestation of his Justice upon the wicked, who shall be made
inexcusable in that they had such fair warning given them, but they would not
take it. Nineveh at the preaching of one Jonah repented and escapes; the Lord
be merciful to England, how many hundred of Ionahs have we had to call us to
Repentance, and yet we turn not, but fall away more and more? It is a sad
aggravation of men's sins, and puts a sore sting into men's troubles, when
conscience shall fly in their faces, and say, Thou wast foretold of such
Judgments, and forewarned of such and such miseries, but thou contemnedst the
voice of thy Teachers, and did set at naught all their counsels; and
therefore now thou must expect no more pity or patience from God, but may
justly expect that he should fulfill the word which he spoke by his servants
against thee.

Let then his warnings win thee, and his patience, and longsuffering lead thee
to repentance. Let not his admonitions be always lost upon thee. Be not
still secure and senseless like Lots sons in Law, who when he warned them of
danger approaching, he seemed as one that mocked and ^eas^ed with them, Genesis
19. 14. but how soon did they find that he was in earnest? So Isa. 5. 19.
they mocked at the Prophet that told them of Captivity and Judgment, and bid
him let them see the things he spoke of, and so they did to their sorrow; and
is it not so in our days? when we tell people of judgment approaching, See
Gr^^n^il Ezekiel. 17. p. 427.
and ready to ceise upon them, they look upon it as some vain dream, or
melancholy fancy, till they be made to feel the contrary. See how dreadfully
God threatens such secure unbeleeving sinners, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, 21.

Without faith all warnings are ineffectual. It is only Noah that by faith
feared and built an Ark that was saved both he and his household, Heb. 11. 7.

2 Obs. The Ministers of God must apply the word to their people.

The Prophet preaches at Samaria against the sins of Samaria, and tells them
to their faces, that for their rebellion they shall be made a desolation. Thus
did all the Prophets, they made Jerusalem to know her abominations, Isa. 58. 1.
Ezekiel. 16. 2. So did Christ himself apply the word particularly to his hearers,
Matthew. 11. 21, 23, and 23. 37, 38. Ioh. 4. 17, 18. So did the Apostles, Act. 2.
36, 37.

This is the only way to convince and convert men; what is spoken generally to
all, few will apply unto themselves, Quod dicitur omni, dicitur nulli.

Be not then offended at the plain and powerful preaching of the word. A
plaster that is not applied, will never heal. A Minister shall never profit
his people, till he apply the word to their particular cases. See more at
large in my Com. on 2 Timothy 4. Obs. 2. p. 421
Those whom the Lord intends for conversion, by his Spirit he sets the word so
home upon their hearts, that they think the Minister knows all their secret
thoughts, etc.

3 Obs. Judgments seldom go alone.

Ephraim was plundered before, but now he must be butchered; before he lost
his goods, now his life must go, which is more precious than all pleasant
things, Job 2. 4. How often do we read of Sword, Plague, Famine, those three
Arrows of God shot together against a rebellious people? Ezekiel. 14. 22. As sins
seldom go alone, so neither do judgments. See what a concatenation and chain
of Judgments is set down t^^^ther, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16. etc. God wants not
variety of judgments to inflict upon a sinful people, that they may know what
a sad and bitter thing it is that they have provoked him. Pharaoh had ten
Plagues one after another. The Trumpets, and the Vials in the Revelations came
not single, but by sevens, bringing in mischief upon misc^ief, and plague upon
plague, till he had consumed them. See Deuteronomy. 31. 17. Ier. 51. 31, 32.

4 Obs. When lesser Judgments do not mend a people, God usually comes with
greater.

If plundring will not mend Ephraim, desolation shall end him, Hos. 5. 12, 14.
When Chederlaomer had plundered Sodom, and that did not better them, Genesis 14.
11. at last comes fire from heaven and consumes them, Genesis 19. When gentle
Physic will not work out the peccant humor, the Physician applies stronger;
if gentle correction will not mend our children, we double our strokes. If one
bea^ing will not mend a people, Godwill plague them yet seven times more
according to their sins, Lev. 26. 21, 23. Isa. 1. 5. Ier. 5. 3, 6. When no
judgments will work upon Ph^raoh, then he is drowned. When temporal
judgments do not mend a people, he sends them to eternal. It is an ill sign
when men be incorrigible under judgments, and are the worse for beating, Isa.
9. 13. Ahaz had a brand set upon him, to warn all others to take heed of t^is
sinning sin, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22, 23. In the time of his distress he sinned yet
more against the Lord; This is that King Ahaz. That King, it is emphatical, i.
e. that wicked, infamous, irresigious King, who sacrificed to the gods of
Damascus that smote him. What madness is this to serve such as beat them for
their pains, and ruin their servants; for so it follows, They were the ruin
of him, and of all Israel.

Desperate sores must have desperate cures. See more in B. Babington on Exodus
11. 1. p. 221, 222, 223 fol.
Hard knots must have hard wedges; Fitches are beaten out with a staff, but the
Cummin must have a rod, Isa. 28. 27. When the Lord had used all means to bring
Israel to repentance, he had sent blasting, plague, famine, and sword upon
them, and yet they were impenitent, Amos 46 to 11. he comes in the 12. verse
to tell them that now he would deal more sharply and severely with them.
Therefore now, Thus will I do unto thee, Quid sit sacturus tacet, ut dum ad
sing^la paenarum genera pendent incerti, paenitentiam agan^, ne inferat quae
minatur. Hieron.
i. e. Thus terribly, thus dreadfully, in a more fierce and furious manner than
ever; therefore now prepare to (...) him who is coming toward thee, before he
come to thee. There is no meeting him in a way of opposition or rising up
against him (for who ever hardened himself against God and prospered? Mi^tamus
preces and lach^ymas cordis legatos. Cyprian
) but meet him in a way of humiliation and repentance with prayers and tears,
dispatch those messengers to meet him on the way whilst he is afar off, that
you may prevent the execution of Gods wrath. A Lion will not seize on a
yielding prey; the bending reed is preserved, when the stubborn Oak is pulled
up by the roots, Isa. 2. 11, 12. etc. By ^his means we shall either remove the
judgment, or get it sanctified, so as all shall be for good unto us, or else
God will take us away, as he did Josiah, before the evil comes. We shall
escape those trials we cannot bear, and be enabled for to undergo those
trials which we cannot escape.

5 Obs. Eminent places oft-times are eminent in sin.

In great Cities usually there are great sinners. Jerusalem was a great City,
and what great abominations were in it? there was murder, oppression, bribery,
profanation of Sabbaths and holy things, her Princes were roaring Lions, her
Judges ravening Wolves, and the Priests did violence to the Law, Ezekiel. 22. per
totum. Babylon a famous, wealthy, populous City, yet full of cruelty and pride,
full of Witchcraft and Fornication, both corporal and spiritual, Ier. 50. 31,
32, 33, 36, 38. The Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha were full of crying sins, as
pride, idleness, gluttony, inhumanity, and notorious uncleanness; and here in
the Text Samaria was full of Idolatry and rebellion against God, I King. 13.
32. Isa. 10. 10, 11. Hos. 8. 5. the lesser Cities were called the Daughters of
Samaria, Ezekiel. 16. 46. and those were like their Mother. Great Cities have
great influence upon their neighbor Towns; if they be Idolatrous,
superstitious, riotous, proud, profane, so will the places round about them
be, if great Babylon be an Harlot, she will quickly be the Mother of more
Harlots and abominations, Rev. 17. 3. We should not therefore desire to live
in such populous places (unless we be called by God to them, for then he
will keep us, as he did Lot in Sodom) but to go live in them without a call,
only for pleasure, or to see fashions, etc. is a sore temptation. We see
Travelers that go to such great places to see fashions, return oft-times
infected both in body and soul. So true is that of One, Nunquam inter homines
fui, quin minor homo redii.

6 Obs. Such places as have been eminent for sin; usually are eminent for
punishment.

As we see in the old world, Sodom, Jerusalem; and Samaria, here for her sin,
is made a desolation, Mic. 1. 6. When sin grows general and National, it brings
National judgments, Isa. 8. 18. Ier. 11. 9, 11. Hos. 4. 1, 2, 3. When all
Israel transgressed the Law, no wonder if the curse come upon them; Dan. 9. 11.
Many think to escape the better because they have so many companions, when the
more general the sin, the nearer to judgment. If all Nations sin, all Nations
must have the cup of Gods wrath given them, Ior. 25. 15. Mal. 3. 8, 9. It is as
easy with God to destroy a world of men, as one man, they are al, but as a
drop, and a little dust to him, Isa 40. 15, 17. Multitudes of sinners increase
wrath. When the Jews assembled themselves by troops into the Harlots houses,
then God would pardon them no longer, Ier. 5. 7, 8. The more wicked the times
and places are that we live in, the greater our praise will be if we be
godly. To be good in good times and places, an hypocrite and formalist may
be; Asiam nunquam vidisse nulla laus est, v^rum summa laud dignum si quis pie
and pudice in Asia vix^rit. Vixit Noah non aetate unt, sed multis; non cum
bonis, sed cum hominibus corrup^issimis. Junius.
but with Lot to be good in Sodom, and Job in the Land of Vz, and with Noah,
Genesis 6. 9. and Elijah to be righteous and zealous in the midst of an
unrighteous and perverse generation, that is praiseworthy indeed, and argues
much sincerity. It was the commendation of the Church of Pergamus, that she
professed Christ's Name where Satan had his throne, and did not deny him in the
days when Antipas his faithful Martyr was slain, Rev. 2. 12, 13. Fly sin then
which brings destruction, not only on the sinner, but also on the very Towns,
Cities, Castles, and places where they dwell. As God has promised that peace
and prosperity shall be in the dwellings of the righteous, Job 5. 24. and 8.
6. Prove. 3. 33. and that he will make a hedge about them, and all that they
have, to preserve them from robbery, fire, molestation by evil spirits, and
other calamities, Job 1. 10. So on the contrary, sin makes a man naked, and
exposes him, and all that he has, to the curse of God. He will destroy the
very dwellings of Idolaters, Swearers, Cursers, Bribers, etc. Job 12. 6. and
15. 34. Zach. 5. 4. The wickedness that has been practiced in the great houses
and Castles of this Land, has said so many of them in the dust, and we may
look to be brought yet lower; we have brought God low in our judgments, low
in our affections, low in our actions, low in his Ordinances, low in his
Vicegerents and Ambassadors; and therefore it is just with God to lay us low,
and to debase us, who have so many ways debased him.

7 Obs. No Fortifications can preserve a sinful people from ruin.

Let them make walls as high as heaven, and ditches as deep as hell, yet if sin
reign within, it will bring all down. It is not a Fleet by Sea, nor Forces by
Land, it is not a Magazine of Treasures, nor an Arsenal of Armor, that can
preserve a wicked Kingdom from ruin. As Samaria was a well fortified, so it
was a rebellious, Idolatrous, sinful place, and this brought it down, Ezekiel. 16.
46. and 23. 4, 5. Hos. 7. 1. Amos 3. 9, 10. Mic. 1. 5, 7. though it were
strongly fortified both by Art and Nature, and very large, about three miles in
compass, yet Samaria's sin was Samaria's ruin. Niniveh was a populous,
ancient, great, strong, wealthy City, yet her great sins laid her in the dust,
and made all her strong holds drop like ripe figs with little ado into the
mouth of the Caldeans. Babylon a most ancient, ample, wealthy, well fortified,
potent, populous, V. Ravanel in V. Babylon.
pompous City, yet abounding with sin, all her power, and policy could not keep
her from ruin Jerusalem that strong City, encompassed with Mountains, Towers,
and Bulworks, fortified both by Art and Nature, and so powerfully protected by
the Lord himself for many years together to the admiration of all the world,
that it was judged invincible, Lam. 4. 12. The Kings of the earth, and all the
Inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem, yet Ierusalems sin was Ierusalems ruin;
and therefore for her sake, let none confide in Cities, or any Privileges
whatsoever. We are apt in our distresses to run to well-fortified places, but
in vain is salvation looked for from those creature-confidences, if the Lord
help not, how should these help? This is to forsake God the fountain of living
waters, Almighty, and All-sufficient, a present help in trouble, and to go to
Cisterns, broken Cisterns of creature comforts, that will fail and forsake them
in a time of trouble.

8 Obs. Sin is a bitter thing.

Samaria has rebelled or imbittered (as the word is in the fountain) God, and
provoked him to anger most bitterly by her sin, Hos 12. 14. Ephraims sins were
bitter to God, Irritavit Ephraim Deus (Tameru^im) amaritudi^^bus, vel in
amaritudines, i. e. ad iram amarulentam provocavit eum Idolis suis, quae and
Deo, and cultoribus suis amaritudinem afferunt. Rivet.
yea they were bitternesses in the abstract, and in the plural number also.
This may discover to us the cursed nature of sin, and the iniquity of our
iniquities, which turns Gods sweetness into bitterness, his patience into
wrath, and his bowels into wormwood. If any thing can sadden God. and imbitter
his soul, it is sin. To see every base lust preferred before him, to see Satan
in the Throne, the heart, and the Spirit of God kept out, must needs imbitter
his Spirit against us. The Lord that made heaven and earth, and sustains the
Pillars of it, yet never complains of that burden, but sin is such a burden,
that he often complains of that as tyring him out* Isa. 1. 14 24 and 43, 24.
Amos 2. 13. and the bitterness thereof is as gall, which he cannot endure,
Deuteronomy. 32. 32. God is all love and sweetness, and would not deal thus bitterly
with us, did not our bitter sins provoke him to it.

Sin is bitter
1 To God, 2 To Christ, 3 To the Spirit of God, 4 To Angels, both good and bad,
5 To Men, both good and bad, 6 To Kingdoms and States, 7 To Creatures, 8 In
its effects, Privative, Positive.

1 Sin is bitter to God, as we have seen before.

2 To Christ, it made him cry in the bitterness of his soul, My God, my God why
have thou forsaken me? And made his soul heavy unto death. V. Schools Guard,
Rul^ 12. p. 85, 86.
So bitter were our sins to him that they made him a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.
4. and made him sweat, non gu^tas sed grumos, clods of blood, Luke 22. 44. When
Christ hung upon the Cross, they gave him gall and vinegar to drink: every sin
is as gall to him. Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled
against him; or as it is in the fountain, because I have imbittered him; he is
righteous in all his judgments on me, for I have imbittered him against me
by my bitter sins.

3 It is bitter to the holy Spirit of God. Nothing grieves it, and drives it
out of the soul, but sin, Genesis 6. 3. Ephesians. 4. 29.

To the Angels. 1 To the good Angels, it is bitter and displeasing to them to
see their Lord and Master daily provoked by a company of sinful, rebellious
creatures; and should the Lord give them but a word of Command, they would
suddenly smite all the wicked dead, and revenge the dishonours done to him, as
we see in Sena^heribs blasphemous Camp, where one Angel in one night killed an
hundred fourscore and five thousand men.

2 It is bitter to the evil Angels; it has thrown them from heaven to hell,
and of Angels it has turned them into Devils, and keeps them in chains of
darkness to the Judgment of the great day, Jude 6.

5 To Man. 1 To good Men, there is nothing so bitter to them as sin, nothing
grieves them like this, that they have grieved the good Spirit of God. All
losses, crosses, reproaches, are light with them in comparison of sin. The
Church of Ephesus could bear any affliction; but not sin, Rev. 2. 2. Good David
often complains of the burden of his sins, seldom of his sufferings, Psalm. 38.
4. So bitter a thing is sin to them, that it oft-times makes them weary of
their lives, and long to be dissolved that they may sin no more, Romans 7. 24. 2
Cor. 5. 4. it makes them a burden to themselves, Job 7. 20. and causes them to
weep bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75. Hence Job 13. See Mr. Caryl on that Text.
26. calls sins bitter things, Thou writest bitter things against me; what is
that? Why thou make me to possess the sins of my youth.

2 It is bitter to wicked men. Though whilst conscience sleeps they may think
it a light matter, yet to an enlightened and an awakened conscience nothing is
more bitter. This made Adam to hide himself, and Cain to complain that his sin
was a burden too heavy for him to bear. Judas could not endure the bitterness
of it, but went forth and hanged himself. Nothing so bitter as sin when it is
once charged by God upon the conscience; of all heavy things this is the most
heavy: A wounded spirit who can bear? Those that will not now believe it, yet
shall one day find it, that it is an evil and bitter thing that they have
sinned against God, Ier. 2. 19. and 4. 18. Lam. 3. 15. Amos 8. 10. Prove. 9. 17,
18. and 14. 13. and 23. 32. Gal. 5. 19, 21. Act. 8. 23. Solomon, who had found
sweetness in the ways of the flesh, yet at last felt and acknowledged the
bitterness of such courses, Prove. 5. 3, 4. Eccles. 7. 26. Though sin may for a
time seem sweet to the sinner, and it be a pastime to them to do wickedly, yet
it will be bitterness in the end, the poison of Aspes is in it, Job 20. 12,
13, 14.

Quest. If sin be so bitter, how com^s it pass that wicked men are no more
sensible of it?

Answ. V. Bolton Comfort afflict. Consc. part. 2 Chap. 2 p. 90, 91, etc.
I Their consciences are ^eared with the custom of sinning, Elementum in suo
loco non est ponderosum. Ari^t.
which has taken away the sense of sin, so that now it is become connatural
and pleasant to them, and so is not grievous. Poison in a Toad is not
troublesome, he is never sick of it, nor sensible of it, because it is natural
to him; but poison in a Man, a Sheep, a Dove, is deadly, because it is not in
its proper place.

2 It is a spiritual bitterness, now wicked men have no spiritual life in them,
they are dead in sin and so are insensible of it.

3 The Devil that Prince of darkness, keeps wicked men in darkness and
ignorance, so that they know not the terrors of the Lord, nor what a fearful
thing it is to fall into the hands of an angry God, and this makes men so
fearless of sin. As we cannot desire what we know not (nihil volitum nisi
prius cognitum) so we cannot fear it. A child that knows not what a terrible
thing a Lion or a Bear is, will venture to provoke them; but a man of
understanding will run from them. It is fools who make a mock of sin, who never
knew the danger of it: but the godly who know its bitterness, will rather choose
any misery, than the least iniquity, any affliction, rather than sin.

6 Sin is bitter to States and Kingdoms, and provokes the Lord to send bitter
enemies against them, Hab. 1. 6. the very land where wicked men dwell is sick
of them, and cannot have ease till it has spewed them out. As a man that has
poison in his stomach is not well till he be rid of it; and as the Sea would
not be quiet till Jonah was thrown overboard; so Nations can have no rest till
they have vomited up such wicked men, which like corrupt humors oppress and
burden them, Lev. 18. 25, 28. and 20. 22. This is that bitter water which
causes the curse to seize on persons and Nations, Number. 5. 18. and brings upon
them bitter destruction, De^t. 32. 24. Thus the ten Tribes here were spewed out
for their Idolatry, when they were carried captive by Salmaneser into the Land
of the Medes from whence they never returned, 2 King. 17, 18. And the Jews were
vomited up when they were carried captive into Babylon for the space of seventy
years, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21.

7 It is bitter to the Creatures. See Mr. Fenner his Sermon on Romans 8. 22. p.
295. fol.
They all groan under the burden, and as a woman in travel longs to be
disburdened and eased of her birth; so the whole Creation travels in pain, and
longs to be delivered by reason of that bondage, vanity, and corruption that
it is subject to by reason of the sin of man, Ipsae creatur^ irrationales suo
creatori semper obedientes, detestantur detestatione and appetitu naturali, quo
i^ (...) totiusque universi ac Dei voluntatem impl^ndam feruntur atque
a^versantur c^ que sunt his co^traria; idem^ factur^ appetitu^ rationali, sieum
haberent, a Lapide.
Romans 8. 20, 21, 22.

8 It is bitter in the effects of it, which are twofold, I Privative, 2
Positive.

The Privative effects of ^in are sevenfold.

1 It deprives us of the favor of God which is the very life of our souls,
Psalm. 30. 5. In his favor is life.

2 It deprives us of Gods fatherly care and protection over us, Genesis 4. 14.
Exodus 32. 25.

3 It deprives us of the guard of the Angels. Every godly man has not one
Angel, but a guard of Angels about him, to keep him whilst he keeps Gods
ways, Psalm. 34. 7. and 9^. 11, 12. Heb. 1. 13.

4 It deprives us of Peace of conscience. A Jewel of more worth than all the
world; Adam when he had sinned, he was afraid, and hid* himself. David after
his sin* complained of broken bones, his sight and sense of sin was as bitter
to him as if he had broken all his bones, Psalm. 51. 8.

5 It deprives us of our Excellency. Purity is our excellency; it is sin, and
only sin that robs us of our glory, and makes us like other men. As Jacob said
of Reuben when he had defiled his Fathers bed, Thou shall not excel, Genesis 49.
4.

6 It deprives us of all true right to the creature. V. Dave^^nt Determine. Q.
30.
A wicked man is an usurper, though he may have a civil right in foro soli,
yet in foro poli, he has a sanctified right to nothing. When men are in
Christ, then, and not till then, All is theirs, I Cor. 3. 22.

7 It deprives us of heaven and eternal happiness, Rev. 21 ult.

2 The Positive effects of sin are more especially th^ee. It exposes us to all
miseries, External, Internal, Eternal.


1 Sin exposes us to miseries External, in body, goods, good name; we may
thank sin for all our sicknesses, sorrows, sores, losses, plagues, poverty,
etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 16. to the end of the Chapter, Lam. 3. 39.

2 Internal. It brings hardness of heart, the ^oreft of plagues, all the
plagues of Pharaoh, all the sores of Job, and all the sorrows of Joseph are
nothing, compared with it. This brings spiritual blindness, a reprobate sense,
a spirit of slumber, and strong delusions, Isa. 6. 9, 10. Romans 9. 17. and 11. 8.

3 Eternal miseries both in soul and body; See the mischief that sin does us,
in about twenty particulars, in Dr. Prestons Paul's Conversion on A^. 9. 6. p.
172. to 29^. V. my Comment on 2 Timothy 4. 1. p. 308.
it brings sorrows endless, easeless, and remediless. So that there is no evil
like the evil of sin, no plague like this plague. As piety has the promise,
and carries its reward with it, and though no man should recompense it, yet the
good we do* is recompense it self, not only for, but in the very keeping of
Gods Commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. The act of keeping them
is a reward as well as the issue. As every good work brings its reward with it,
so every evil work brings its sorrow with it; and though no man punish it, yet
it is a punishment to it self, it is finis operis, though not finis operantis;
Jer. 4. 18. Thy way, and thy doings, have procured thee these things. Sin is
that which procures us all our sorrow, we should therefore hate it with a pure
and perfect hat^ed, and get this cause of all our sorrows removed, and then the
effect will cease.

Now is sin so bitter? I Then take heed of pleading for sin, or extenuating of
it. Put not sweet names upon so bitter a thing. There is a woe denounced
against such as do so, Isa. 5. 20. Woe to them that call evil good, that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Such look upon sin through the Devils
spectacles, and then no wonder if they call Drunkenness, Good-fellowship,
Covetousness Frugality, Pride Decency, etc. Those put a fair glove upon a foul
hand, and false glosses upon filthy vices, the better to deceive. But let no
man deceive you with vain words, for even for these things comes the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience. Call not therefore sin so as the corrupt
world calls it, but esteem and call it as the Word of God calls it; How is
that? Why it calls it an abomination, poison, sorrow, sickness, bitterness,
filth, vomit, folly, madness, darkness, dung, death, etc.

When the judgment is thus truly convinced of the vileness of sin, it is an
excellent preservation against sin.

2 If sin be so bitter, then sad is the condition of such as are insensible of
its bitterness, who make that their Recreation here, which will be their
damnation hereafter, who plead not only for infirmities (which yet no good man
dares do) but also for enormities. They declare their sin like Sodom,
impudently and impenitently; they thank God they never knew what the burden or
bitterness of sin meant, the more is behind; for if sin be not bitter here,
it will be in another world.

And therefore this may comfort those that groan and grieve under the burden
and bitterness of sin, such as make their sin their greatest sorrow, Christ
will be unto them their greatest joy. Christ calls such as it were by name to
come to him, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Matthew. 11. 28. This qualifies a man, and fits him
for Christ; when Christ sees of the travel of his soul in our souls, it
delights him, Isa. 53. 10, 11. This sense of sin argues some spiritual life in
the soul. Nature will not complain of Nature, nor will corruption complain of
corruption; it is only grace that makes us truly sensible of the bitterness of
sin.

3 Pity those that groan under the burden and bitterness of sin. No sorrow
like their sorrow, no burden like the burden of a wounded conscience. Add not
affliction to the afflictions of those whom God has wounded, but power the oil
of mercy into their sin-sick souls. Be not like Jobs friends, miserable
comforters, and Physicians of no value; if we must ease our enemies Ox or Ass
when he lies under his burden, shall we not much more ease our brothers
soul? Scr^p^losi non (...) (...)
Exodus 23. 5. Be not harsh or hasty, be not sour and censorious to such, but
be meek and merciful, and so bear each others burdens, Gal. 6. 1, 2.

9. Obs. It is a sad Aggravation of peoples sins when they sin against their
God.

The God of all their mercies, the fountain of all their enjoyments. Their God
in Covenant with them, Deus illorum esse dic^tur, ut qui foederis nexu
conju^ctus sit ^ll is, quem jure societatis colere debebant, a quo non poterant
citra perfidiae crim^n de^icere. Wolphius in 2 Reg. 17.
whom they have avouched for their God, and vowed openly that he shall be
their God, and they would be his people, to love, serve, fear, and obey him;
yet contrary to all Vows, Baptistical, Eucharistical, personal, National, to
fly from God, and to rebel against him, this is the height of s^n, and makes
it ^xceeding sinful, and provokes the Lord to say, Lo-ammi, ye are no people
of mine, as he said to Ephram here, H^s. 1. 9.

And is not this Englands sin? God has taken us into Covenant with himself, he
has owned us above all the people in the world, he has made us the head and
terr^ur of the Nations, he has done wonders for us at home and abroad, he
has made us his darling Nation, whilst others swim in blood, we swim in
blessings of peace, whilst others are weeping, and wayling by the waters of
Babylon, we dwell in an Eden, joy, and gladness is found in us, thanksgiving,
and the voice of melody. He has made us his Ephraim, he has laid his right
hand upon us, he has planted us in a fruitful soil, hedged us about with his
gracious protection and good Laws; he has removed from amongst us all the
apparent impediments of our growth and fruitfulness; he has furnished us with
cho^ce persons, and those persons with excellent gifts and graces. He has a
special care over us for good; and now he looks (as well he may) for the
pleasant grapes of obedience, but behold the sour and wild grapes of
confusion, disorder, error, and disobedience abound amongst us. We have
broken all our Covenants, we are not only Sermonproof, but we are also
Covenant- See my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 3. P. 77, 78. etc.
proof; no bonds so sacred, so strong, but we can as easily break them as
Sampson did the cords of the Phi^istims. So that what can we expect but that
the Lord should take away his hedge of Government both Temporal and Spiritual,
breaking down the wall which defended us from our enemies, and letting in all
the wild beasts that might destroy us. Justly might he withdraw his good hand
of providence and protection from us, and expo^e us to all manner of rapine and
ruin for our Apostasies and Rebellions.

10 Obs. Sin, especially the sin of Rebellion, brings the sword upon a people.

They shall fall by the Sword. This is Gods last and great Rod, and he never
brings it forth till he be ^ greatly provoked by his peoples sins, Job 36.
12. Isa. 1. 20. When no other means will better a people, then comes the Sword
and cuts them off. See the Evils of War in ten particulars, D. Gouge his
Arro^s, on Exodus 17, 16. sect. 85. p. 342, etc. Mr. Clerks Mirror, cha. 134. p.
688
God has three evil Arrows, which he shoots at a Rebellious people, viz. the
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, Ezekiel. 5. 16. these are called Arrows, because
they are sharp and deadly; and evil, because of the misery and mischief which
they bring; Of all the three, the Sword is the ^orest, as appears by David's
choice, 2 Samuel 24. 14. besides the Plague and Famine are the usual attendants
of War, where the Sword goes before, there Famine and Pestilence usually attend.

Their Infants shall be dashed in pieces. 11 Obs. Little Infants are great
sinners.

1 That great Sin and Rebellion of Adam is imp^ted to them for sin; what he
did, they did, we were all in the loins of that one man, Romans 5. 12.

2 They have not only original sin imputed, but imparted also, they have
inherent original sin, which is radically, seminally, fundamentally all sin.
The youngest child carries an old man of sin within him. We are no sooner
born into the world, but we have a world of sin about us.

3 The sad diseases, pangs, and dismal deaths which seize on Infants, are
strong proofs of this point; their very dying speaks them sinners. The wages of
sin, be it original or actual, is death, Romans 6. 23. Original sin, which is
the greatest sin in the world, cleaves to their natures, and makes them odious
and abominable in Gods sight, so that they are by nature children of wrath, and
obnoxious to all his judgments. We are all daninati antequam nati, and so
might justly have been sent from the Womb to the Tomb, etc.

12 Obs. Wicked parents bring judgments on their posterity.

Their poor little ones fare the worse for them, Hos. 9. 12, 13. Though they
bring up children, yet I will bereave them of them, and they shall bring forth
children to the murderer, who is Gods executioner, and so become Paricides,
rather than Parents. Thus the old world was drowned, and their children with
them. And the Sodomites were burnt, and their children with them. Achan was not
only stoned himself, but his sons and daughters, yea and his cattle perished
with him. The accusers of Daniel were slain by the Lions, both they and their
children, Dan. 6. 24. The Jews that rejected and crucified Christ, brought a
curse, not only upon themselves, but also upon their children, Matthew. 27. 25.
His blood be on ^s, and on our children, which has lain on them above sixteen
hundred years.

It is just with God to cut off the wicked and their seed, as we kill the
Wolf with her VVhelps, and the Fox with her Cubs; though the young Toad has
not actually poisoned any, yet because it has a posonous nature in it we
destroy it. So does God by the children of the wicked, Genesis 19. 25. Numb. 16.
32, 33. I Sam. 15. 3. Isa. 13. 16. Ier. 44. 7. Hos. 10. 14. When men rebel
against God, and reject his ways, he will send against them a barbarous and
cruel Nation, that shall not regard the persons of the old, nor have compassion
on the young, Deuteronomy. 28. 50. and 32. 25. Ez^k. 9 6.

Q. Are not Infants called Innocents? Psalm. 106. 38. Ier. 19. 4. how then can
it stand with the justice of God thus severely to punish them?

Answ. They are not called so because they have no sin, but I In respect of
those cruel men, who without any cause shed the blood of those little ones who
had deserved no such thing at their hands. So the Assyrians here were guilty of
great inhumanity, in killing those Infants, and God in his due time did
retaliate it to them, Nahum 3. 10.

2 Though they may be called Innocent in respect of any actual sin, See Mr.
Hildersham on Psalm. 51. 5. Tract. 55. p. 277. etc.
yet they are not so in respect of original sin, which seminally and radically
is every sin. The guilt of that sin cleaves to their natures, and makes them
obnoxious to all tortures here, and eternal torments hereafter.

3 The sins of the Parents may be also a moving cause, and may provoke the
Lord to smite the Parents with their children. Exodus 20. 5. The Lord threatens
to visit the sins of Idolatrous Parents upon their children, because either
they already walk in their fathers sins, or else in time they would do so, or
it may be worse, which God only knows.

3 God has a sovereign right and power over all his creatures; he is the
Potter, God may, jure Dominii, as absolure Lord inflict temporal evils on the
s^n for the fathers sin without injustice, for it is only an affliction to the
son, which God can turn to his good, but a punishment to his father, who is
punished in his son. B. Andrews in 2. Command.
and we are his clay, he may do with his own what he pleases, he may make
us, or mar us, raise us, or ruin us; and none may say unto him, What do
thou? He that gives life may take it away, how, and when he pleases; his
will is the rule of Justice, yea Justice it self; we must therefore adore Gods
Judgments when we cannot comprehend them, and know, that though they may be
secret, yet they are always just.

4 Children are parts of their Parents, part of their Family, and part of their
substance, and God may justly punish the sinful parent in his child, as well as
in his cattle and estate, because they do not only belong to him, but also are
a part of him.

5 Sin committed by a particular man that is a member of a Politic body, See
the large Annot. on Josh. 7. 15.
does after a sort belong to the whole body. Thus Achans sin, Est sy^^ecdoche
fr^quens in Scriptur is, per quam factum unius in ceatu aliquo vel societate,
toti caetui vel societati ascribitur, quia tanta est inter eos ^onjunctio ut
sint veluti unum corpus. Lavater in Josh.
though not known to the people, yet made them all guilty, till he was put to
death, Josh. 7. 11.

6 Yet these temporal Judgments may be mingled with spiritual mercies; as we
see in Ierob^ams child, who was taken away in mercy, because there was some
goodness found in him, Infantes sunt pars Ecclesiae, op^rtet eos cum Ecclesia
affligi, ut reddantur conformes filio Dei. Luther.
I King. 14. 12, 13. especially the Infants of Gods people that are in Covenant
with their Parents, there is great grounds of hope that they have changed their
temporal life for an eternal; and are freed from many sins, sorrows, and
tentations, which men that live to riper years are exposed to; yea if they
should be cast away for their original sin, yet their damnation will be
lighter than if they had lived longer. It had been good for reprobates if they
had not been born, or that they had dyed as soon as they had been born; for
then they would not have had so many sins to answer for.

Quest. But has not God said, The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father? Deuteronomy. 24. ^6. and 2 King. 14. 16. Ezekiel. 18. 20. it seems then to be
cruelty to kill the children for the Parents sins, especially such as are
unborn, and have not deserved such evils.

Answ. 1 It is true in respect of the Assyrians, it was cruelty and horrid
barbarousness in them to kill poor harmless little ones, and God threatens to
visit such sins upon the heads of such sinners.

2 It is not cruelty in God, for children are children of wrath as well as
their Parents; as all have sinned, so he may punish all without injustice.
Besides, he permits and orders the cruelty of wicked adversaries to his own
glory and his peoples good. As for that Deuteronomy. 24. 16. It speaks of Gods
restraining of Magistrates, who may not punish the children for the fathers
offenses. True it is, God finds cause enough in children themselves to punish
them, but when they imitate their wicked parents, this hastens and heightens
wrath, by adding sin to sin.

3 The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, if he depart from the
fathers iniquity, and do not walk in his steps. Ezekiel. 18. 14, 17. If a man
beget a son that sees all his fathers sin, and fears, and does not the like,
he shall not dye for his fathers iniquity. But if the son tread in his fathers
steps, he shall bear his own iniquity, and becomes accessory to his fathers
sin, by imitation, and approbation of it, Matthew. 23. 32. Luke 11. 48, 50. the
blood of former generations had not been required of that generation, if they
had not been as bloody as the former. But where old sins are continued and
approved of by new acting of them, there the old sins as well as the new are
justly punished. So that the threatening is not to be understood absolutely, V.
Pemble on Neh. 1. 1. p. 365 fol.
but conditionally, viz. If the children do persist in their fathers sins, and
walk in their wicked ways.

4 The son shall not bear the personal iniquities of the father in reference to
eternal punishment; See this Point more fully cleared in eight particulars, and
all cavils answered, by Mr. Love I Sermon on Lam. 5. 7, 8. p. 2. to 12. and Mr.
Cudworth on Gal. 6. 4. p. 373. and S^holastically by Laurentius on Rev. 2. 22.
Homil. 39. p. 300.
God will not damn a son simply for the sin of his father, it is a man's own sin
which is his everlasting ruin; yet he may lay many temporal chaf^isements
upon a good son for the sin of his father. The Lord in Ezekiel. 18. 20, 23, 32.
seems to speak of eternal, and not of temporal punishment.

1 This should make Parents fearful of displeasing God, lest they bring
miseries, not only on themselves, but also on their children; their Idolatry
may bring a curse upon their childrens children to many generations. No
children in Scripture are threatened like the children of Idolaters. In none of
the Commandments does God threaten to visit the sin of the fathers upon the
children but only in the second, Mr. Love in his I. Ser, on Lam. 5. 7, 8. p.
11, 12.
Exodus 20. 5. It is well observed by a pious and precious Divine, that there
are eight sins which do more especially bring Judgments on a man's Posterity,
whereof the first is Idolatry.

2 Adultery, 2 Samuel 12. 14.

3 Covenant Breaking, 2 Samuel 21. 13.

4 Persecution of the godly, Matthew. 23. 31. to 36. Psalm. 137. 7.

5 Murder, 1 King. 21. 21. Jer. 15. 4.

6 Oppression, Job 20. 19, 26. Hab. 2. 9.

7 Contempt of Magistracy and Ministry, Number. 16. 32. 41. 49. 1 King. 13. 33, 34.

8 When men pretend Reformation, and intend themselves, as Iehu did, Hos. 1. 4.

God is very pitiful and tender over Infants, as appears in that he would not
destroy Nineveh for the Infants sakes that were in ti, Jonah 4, 11. and in the
sacking of Cities, he commands them to spare Infants, Deuteronomy. 20. 14. but it is
the sin of Parents which many times hardens Gods heart against them, and makes
him to delight in the destruction both of them and theirs; yea and it hardens
men's hearts against them, so that they cannot but act such cruelty against
them, as they never intended, as we see in Hazael, 2 King. 8. 11, 12, 13. when
the Prophet Elisha wept, and told him what mischief he should do to Israel,
viz. that he should kill the young men, and dash the Infants against the
stones, and rend in pieces the women with child; Am I a dog (says Hazael)
that I should do such things as these? He then thought it a base and barbarous
thing, when he was King Benhadads servant, to act such inhumane villainy upon
the mothers with their infants; the Prophet only tell* him that he shall be
a King, verse. 13. and then when he had changed his condition, he would also
change his manners, and commit all the abominations which he mentioned. Let
Parents then labor for grace, that they may leave a blessing, and not a curse
to their posterity, Genesis 17. 7. Exodus 20. 6. Psalm. 112. 2. If you will not
pity your selves, yet pity your little ones, let not them fare the worse for
you. V. Carylon Job 21. 19. p. 730, 731.
It is ill-being a wicked man's child, yea their very beasts fa^e the worse for
them, Josh. 7. 24, 25. Achan was stoned, and his cattle with him. Wicked
Egyptians bring a Murrain upon their cattle, Exodus 9. 3. As a good man is a
public good, the Family, City, Kingdom, fare the better for him, yea his
cattle are spared for his sake, Exodus 9. 4. The Lord shall sever between the
cattle of Egypt, and the cattle of Israel, there shall nothing dye of all that
is the children of Isreal's. God blesses the very cattle of his people, and if
the creature could speak, it would desire to serve those that serve God. Most
Parents provide Inheritances for their children, but oft-times they leave their
sins with them too. It was a sad Legacy that Ioab left to his children, that
one should be a Leper, another a weakling, a third beg his bread, 2 Samuel 3.
29. So many a man, to one child he leaves his Murder, to another his
Adultery, to a third his Usury, to a fourth his Swearing. Gehazi left a Talent
of silver behind him to his posterity, but he left the Leprosy with it.
Better want such men's lands and inheritances, than thus to inherit their sins
too.

2 Let children be humbled then for their forefathers sins, that they be not
imputed to them, L^v. 26. 41. So did Nehemia, chapter 1. 6. and David, Psalm. 79. 8.
Remember not against us (iniquitates praecedentium, says the Original) the
sins of our forefathers. He that sees the sins of his Predecessors, and is not
humbled for them, approves of them, and so becomes accessory to them. Hence the
Lord blames Belshazzar for not humbling himself for his fathers sin and
punishment which he knew of, Dan. 5. 22. Let us therefore acknowledge our
selves to be the children of sinful parents, and say with him, Deuteronomy. 26. 5. A
Syrian was my father, ready to perish; and with David, We have sinned with our
fathers, Psalm. 106. 6. and with Daniel, chapter 9. 8. Deprecate the punishment
which is due to u^ for their sins. So Ier. 14. 20.

3 Admire the patience of the Lord, that has born so long with us who have
been sinners from the womb. If little ones who never sinned against the
patience of God as we have done, endure such pangs, sorrows, sickness, and
death; what may men of years look for, who have added to original corruption a
numberless number of actual transgressions? If this be done to the green tree,
what shall be done to the dry? If Infants (who are Innocents, and righteous
comparatively) shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and rebellious
sinner appear? If he spare not little ones that lie in their mothers bowels,
but suffer wicked men to drag them thence; where, oh where shall those wicked
parents appear, that have been the primary cause of all this mischief and
sorrow to them, and have been the authors and actors of that wickedness which
has brought this misery on them? It should therefore be matter of great
humiliation to us all, when we see the sharp and sore judgments that often
light upon little ones for their original sin.

As Gods people were wont in extraordinary cases to bring their infants and
sucklings with them to keep Fasts, Joel 2. 16. the better to affect their
hearts, and break them with sorrow for sin, which threatened destruction to them
and their little ones. Even this use should we make of the miseries of
infants, when we see Gods hand upon them, we should humble our selves to
think what judgments are due to us who have so many actual sins to answer for,
which these little ones are free from. We should therefore mourn over them, as
David did for the people, Me, me ad sum qui fcci, in me convertite f^rrum. Vir
g.
As for these sheep, what have they done? it is I that have ^inned. So let us
say, As for these little ones, what have they done? it is we, even we that
have sinned, and provoked the Lord to anger with our transgressions.

12 Obs. Rebellion brings destruction.

Samaria shall be made desolate, for she has rebelled. When Gods heritage is
as a Lion that roars and rages against him, then he gives it into the hands
of its enemies, Ier. 12. 7, 8, 9, 11. and 4. 17. and 44. 16, 17, 22. Lam. 1.
18. 20. Micah 6. 13. Matthew. 23. 38. Israel had sinned, and now the Assyrian
destroys their Cities, eats up their fruits, passes through their land,
carries the people into Captivity, and makes slaves and exiles of them in a
strange Country.

Rebellion is a capital sin, it is not every sin (though every sin more or less
has something of rebellion in it, being committed against that allegiance we
owe unto God by the Law of Creation) but it is an habitual obstinacy and
stubbornness in sin; hence such are said to have necks of iron, and brows of
brass, hard and uncircumcised hearts; they are called a froward generation,
lying children which refuse to obey the Law, Isa. 30. 9. rebelling against the
light, Job 24. 13.

It is reckoned amongst the greatest sins, and is compared to Witchcraft, I
Sam. 15. 23. which is the highest and most hideous Idolatry in the world; it is
a renouncing of God, to follow the counsel of the Devil. It is a sin that God
will certainly visit for, his Justice will not suffer it ^o go unpunished,
Exodus 34. 7. Isa. 1. 2, 7.

For sins of mere infirmity there is a pardon in course; but sins of
presumption, committed with a high hand against ^ight and warning, are very
dangerous, and therefore David prays of all sins to be kept from such, Psalm.
19. 13.

Those great sins call for great humiliation, before there can be any pardon
expected, Exodus 34. 7. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. Psalm. 68. 18.

2 Do not envy the prosperous condition of rebellious sinners; though they may
flourish for a time, and waters of a full cup be wrung out unto them, yet
their feet shall slide in due time, and every threatening shall light upon them.
They are rather to be pitied, than envied.

3 As ever we desire to be free from desolation, Quorum exitus perhorr^scis*
little opera pertimescas.
let us fly those sins that cause it. Look what sins brought desolation upon
Eph^aim, those sins will bring desolation on England, if they reign amongst us;
for God is the same to the same sinners.

Quest. But what were Ephraims sins which brought desolation upon him?

Answ. Upon search I find them to be many, but about twenty signal ones there
are which brought destruction on him. Whether they be not England sins, as
well as Ephraims, the Application will show.

A Catalogue of Ephraims sins.
1 Idolatry. 2 A ready complying with men's inventions. 3 Contempt of the true
Prophets. 4 Delight in false Prophets. 5 Pride. 6 Hypocrisy. 7 Self-seeking. 8
Witchcraft. 9 Barrenness under the means of grace. 10 Ingratitude. 11
Covenant Breaking. 12 Security. 13 Anarchy. 14 Lukewarmness and Neutrality. 15
Division. 16 Carnal-confidence. 17 Incorrigibleness. 18 Oppression. 19 Atheism.
20 A fullness of sin. Lastly, Corrupt Rulers.
1 Their first grand, bosom, beloved sin was Idolatry. They forsook the Lord,
and set up Calves, when they should have cried, Kiss the Son and worship him,
they cry, Kiss the Calves, which Ierobo^m has set up, and worship them, Hos.
13. 1, 2. and this Idolatry was universal, it was not in one, but in all their
Cities, 2 King. 17. 9, 10, 11. Ezekiel. 23. 4, 5.

This is a God-provoking, Qantum hoc sce^us? mavult ^sse p^llex Satanae, quam
sponsa Christi. Wolphius. Gillu^m, Dii st^rcorei, per cont^mptum, quia faetore
suo Deum offendunt. The word is used for dung and dirt. Ezekiel. 4 12. and 14. 10.
V. Weems on 2. Command. chap. 6. vol. 2. p. 82.
and a Land-destroying sin, it is the choosing (as it were) another husband, it
breaks the Covenant, and the Marriage-knot between God and a people. It is a
preferring of the Devil before Christ, and dirty dunghill gods (as the word
signifies) before the living God, 2 King. 17. 12.

What ever sinners may escape, yet Idolaters are sure to pay for it. When men
begin to choose new Gods, the next news is, War is in the gates, Judge. 5. 8.
Psalm. 78. 58. Ier 22. 7, 8, 9. Micah 1. 5, 6, 7. Many sorrows attend this sin,
Psalm. 16. 7. This, even this was that fatal sin which laid Samaria in the dust,
Amos 8. ult. and therefore Hosea does more inveigh against their Idolatry, than
against any other sin.

And is not this Englands sin? Have not we chosen of late many new Gods, and
with Ephraim set up Idols according to our own understanding? Hos. 13. 2. and
have made a light within us, and not Gods word, the rule of our actions? We
have forsaken his faithful Ministers to follow Calves, Socinian, Arrian,
Arminian, Anabaptistick, Quaking Calves. Moses bare with many provocations from
the people of Israel, but when in his absence they set up a Calf, he was all
of a flame, and could bear no longer. Where can we go, but we meet with
Ieroboams Calves? What Town, City, County is not pestred with them? These
prophecy falsely, and too many love to have it so, but what will they do in the
end thereof, when God shall call them to account for all their Heresies and
Blasphemies? Ier. 5. ult.

Besides the gross Idolatry that still abounds in the land, many falling openly
to Popery, and many in their affections hankering after the bewitching
allurements of that Babylonish Harlot. A sad omen of an approaching judgment,
as we see in France and Germany.

And add to this the great worldly-mindedness and inordinate love of the world
that abounds amongst us, which is Idolatry in Gods esteem, Col. 3. 5.

2 A second sin of Ephraim was a ready compliance with the Traditions of men,
Hos. 5. 11. and 11. 6. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he
willingly walked after the Commandments and Traditions of men, preferring them
before Gods Commandments. Jeroboam could no sooner command Idolatry, but the
people readily obey, I King. 12. 32, 33. Omri another of their Kings makes
Statutes for grosser Idolatry, and even in those Statutes did they walk, Micah
6. 16. And for this the Lord threatens to destroy them, Hosea 5. 12, 14.

And is not this Englands sin? Are not many, too many amongst us, more ready to
hearken to a Seducer, than to a faithful Teacher, and more ready to follow
Vanity than Verity? preferring the chafe of men's inventions, before the wheat
of Gods word. Let the ablest Minister in the land preach in some Towns, yet how
many are there that prefer a railing, seducing Sectary that preaches the
fancies and dotages of his own brain, before the faithful servants of God that
dispense his word sincerely?

This also is a sad presage of some approaching Judgment.

3 Contempt of the true Prophets. It was a rare age of Prophets, they had the
best preaching a little before their ruin. So great was the Lords care over
them, and so loath was he that they should perish, that he sent extraordinary
Prophets to them, more in number than he did to the Kingdom of Judah, and by
them he supplied the defect of the ordinary Ministry of Priests and Levites.
They had Elijah, Elisha, Jonah, Amos, Micah, Joel, and Hosea, who prophesied
about seven and forty years unto them, besides these Prophets, Ahijah, Semaja,
Iehu, Iddo, Amani, Azariah, etc. yet such was their obstinacy and perverseness,
that no wooings, nor warnings could work upon them: instead of harkening to
those Messengers which the Lord in great compassion sent unto them to reclaim
them from their Idols, 1 Subsannabant nuncios Dei. 2 Cont^mnebant verba ejus. 3
Illudebant Prophetis, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. His tribus verb is summus Prophetiae
contemptus videtur significari. Lavater.
they mocked, jeered, mis-used and persecuted them, and looked upon them as a
pack of Cheats and deceivers that frighted people without a cause, till the
wrath of the Lord broke forth against them, and there was no remedy; his anger
was so fierce it could not be extinguished. When David sent messengers to
comfort Hanun, and he abused them, David's anger was kindled against him, Verbi
divini contemptus tanquam via ad extremam impietatem cavendus est. Wolphius. V.
Buroughs Hos. 5. 2. p. 363 364 Perkins 3 Vol. p. 421. etc.
and it cost him dear, 2 Samuel 10. 4. Contempt of the word, is an infallible
forerunner of judgment. When Elies sons hearkened not to the counsel of their
father, God cut them off. When Amaziah contemned the counsel of the Pr^phet, it
was a sign the Lord had a purpose to destroy him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16.

And if this be an infallible sign of a Nations ruin, the Lord be merciful
to England; never was the land so full of pious, painful, learned Ministers,
and never were any so coorsely and ingratefully dealt withal by many, as these
are. What loads of reproaches, and floods of bitter raylings are cast out
against us, not for any evil that we have done, but solely for discharging our
duty, and stopping men in their sinful, heretical, destructive ways? We are
their enemies, only because we tell them the truth. Those that formerly were
ready to pull out their own eyes to do us good, now they are ready to pull out
our eyes. Thus have we been wounded in the house of our friends. To be
derided by Egyptians, is threatened as a misery, Hos. 7. ul^. but to be
reproached by friends and professors, is very grievous. The good Lord lay not
this ingratitude and contempt to their charge. Though we bear, yet God will
not always bear. When Moses is silent, then God arises; when he is dumb,
then God speaks; when he is deaf, then God hears and stirs, Numb. 12. 1, 4.
God will smite through the loins of those that rise against his Messengers, and
of those that hate them, that they rise not up again, Deuteronomy. 33. 11.

It is not so much the Minister as the Ministry that is cried down, that which
they should principally love us for, viz. for our work sake, that is the ground
of these men's hatred. As it was not the Baron, but the Barony that was the
Traitor; so for the most part, it is not so much the man that they smite at, as
the Maintenance, the Tithes, the Glebe, and the Ordinances of God, wherewith
they are entrusted.

4 As the true Prophets were contemned, so they delighted in false ones. Elijah
is persecuted, when eight hundred and fifty false Prophets are entertained and
fed, I King. 18. 4, 19. Though they were fools and madmen, Hos. 9. 7. The
days of Visitation are come, how does that appear? why, the Prophet, the false
Prophet is a fool, and flatters the people with vain hopes; yea, the spiritual
man is mad.

i. e. He who braggs so much of the Spirit, and falsely boasts that he is
inspired by the holy Spirit, and that he speaks all by the Spirit, this man is
mad, he is smitten with a spiritual frenzy, doting upon his own dreams, and
lunatic illuminations, and venting his brainsick notions instead of Gods
Word. These Priests, Jeroboam (in his carnal policy) chose out of the meanest
of the people (fit servants for such gods, Calves suit well with Calves) which
were not of the Sons of Levi, who were set apart by Gods special command for
the service of his house, but whosoever would, might thrust himself into the
office, how unworthy soever, I King. 13. 33. But see what follows in the next,
verse. 34. This thing became a sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off
from the face of the Earth. This, even this, was that indeleble sin which
ruined both him and his Family.

And is not this the sin of England? are not false Prophets by many thousands
preferred before the true? Witness the Quakers Petition five and twenty yards
long, with twenty thousand hands at it against the Ministry.
will not many go ten miles to hear a deceiver, that will not go two to hear a
faithful Minister of Christ? when men go by troops to such harlotrymeetings,
the Lord will visit for this, as well as for corporal harlo^^y. Ier. 5. 7, 9.
The quaking Seducers are certainly lead by this spirit of the Devil, as will
easily appear, if we consider the Men, the Matter, or the Manner of their
speaking.

1 The Men, both Speakers and Hearers, are generally a profane Generation,
they are mordaces and mendaces, notorious Railers and Liars, as like their
Father the Devil, as ever they can look.

2 What is the Matter of their Speaking? why, it is against Ministers, and
their Maintenance, or against the Coercive power of the Magistrate, against
Scripture, Ordinances, etc.

3 The Manner of their Meeting is profane and tumultuous. A rout meet
together, on a Mountain, a Common, or under some Hedge, and there without any
praying before, some speak, others jeer, some dispute, some quarrel and fight,
others take Tobacco (amidst such an unsavory company they had need of some
better Antidote) so that one would think they were at some Bear-baiting, and
not at the Service of God. That men should be tolerated, yea and commanded to
serve God, is commendable, but that men should be tolerated to blaspheme and
worship the Devil, is abominable.

2 What folly and madness has seized on the false Prophets of our times, the
swarms of blasphemous Pamphlets do sufficiently testify to the world; and the
thousands and ten thousands that have been infected by them, do plainly
foretell that some judgment is at hand.

3 How many of Ieroboams Priests have thrust themselves into the work of the
Ministry? who vent heresies and blasphemies instead of truth, and what
tolleration and countenance has been given to such, is known now to all the
world, and foreign Churches complain against us for it; and what cause we
have to fear that wrath is coming upon us for this sin, Let the wise Reader
judge. If ever that Caution of our Savior were in season, it is now, Mat. 10.
17. Beware of men. Christ does not say, beware of Serpents, or Devils, (he
promised them power over these, Mark. 16. 17, 18. But, Beware of men.

1 Beware of wicked men, woolfish persecutors, and bloodsuckers, who hate us
without a cause, Psalm. 69. 4. how much more when by our unwise walking we
shall expose our selves to their fury and malice?

2 Beware of Hypocrites, and seeming good men. The Devil can transform himself
into an Angel of Light, and often ^^^ears in Samuels Mantle, the better to
deceive; he is never more to be feared, than when such; it is this Sanctus
Satanas, this white Devil, that does us most hurt. The swearing, cursing, black
Devil, every one cries shame of; but it is the preaching, praying, professing
Devil, who pretends to extraordinary sanctity and mortification that deceives
even many a good soul by its overmuch credulity. These are more dangerous (in
some sense) to us, than the very Devil himself; for if the Devil should appear
to us in his own likeness, and ugly shape, we should run from him for fear, no
man would hearken to him; if the Devil should come in person, and call men to
the Alehouse, or call them from their callings, who would obey? but when he
comes to us in a friend, a wife, a bosom-companion, etc. he is not so easily
perceived, and so we are sooner ensnared; and therefore our Savior does not
say, Beware of Satan, but, Beware of those men who are the Instruments of
Satan; if they should come like Angels, we should suspect them, if like
Beasts, we should shun them, if like fiends, we should fear them; but coming
to us like men of the same profession with us, and professing great kindness to
us, how soon are poor plain souls deceived by such? and therefore Beware of
men; for as God loves to work upon men by the Ministry of man, and sends them
to such: So the Devil, who is Gods Ape, loves to draw men from God, by men,
viz. by seducers and deceivers, who are inspired, fitted and filled by him for
that purpose; if Ahab will not hear Micaiah the true Prophet of the Lord, the
Devil has four hundred false Prophets at hand to deceive him. When he would
seduce Adam from his obedience, he does not appear himself, but he sets Eve
his wife upon him, and so prevails. When he would have innocent Abel slain,
he does not do it himself, but he has a malicious Cain that will do it. When
the Devil would have Christ crucified, he has a Judas, a Devil incarnate,
ready at hand to betray him, John 13. 2.

3 Beware of real good men. The Devil can shroud himself under a Peter, and
tempt our Savior by him, Matthew. 16. 23. by his example he can compel the
Gentiles to live after the Jewish manner, in observing the Ceremonial Law, Gal.
2. 14. The best of men, are but men at best; they know but in part, they have
their infirmities, and must have their grains of allowance; we may not
therefore glory in men, nor pin our Faith on their sleeves, because we know
not whither they may carry it. The great sin of this age, is, building on man;
Such a holy man is for a tolleration, and such a one holds such opinions; what
tell you me of men? We must live by Rule, not by Example, neither may we
follow any good man further than he follows Christ in his Word, I Cor. 11. 1.
Be it Paul, you must try his Doctrine by the touchstone of the Word, before
you trust it, Acts 17. 11. Remember, every man is a liar, Romans 3. 4. either
actively, or passively; either by Imposture, and of purpose, or else by
Impotency, and in event.

4 Beware of great men. We are apt to be lead by their examples; if Prince
such a one, or Sir Thomas such a one rise, etc. how apt are people to follow,
without any consideration? Great men many times are great sinners, they have
their native corruption heightened by their pomp and prosperity, Job 21. 7, to
15. Ier. 4. 5. When great men are wicked men, and have great parts, and great
wits, they do great mischief, as Achitophel, Catiline, etc. Beware then of
following such great ones.

5 Beware of subtle seducers, that pretend New-light, Genesis 3. 5. Revelations,
glorious Mysteries, etc. Romans 16. 17. but inwardly they are ravening wolves,
Mat. 7. 15. Poison in it self is dangerous, but never more dangerous than when
it is mixed with honey. These have men's persons in admiration, but it is for
their own ends and advantage, Jude 16. and if ever this Caution were in season,
it is now, when there are so many Juglers and chearers gone forth into the
world. Their number is greater than formerly, and they act more subtly and
mystically, they act against Christ, under the Name of Christ, Mat. 24. 5. and
that so cunningly and craftily, that if it were possible they would deceive the
very Elect, Mat. 24. 24. they have Jacob's voice, but Esau's hands; they talk
so divinely, as if they had no bodies, and live so lewdly, as if they had no
souls; hence it is that we are so often admonished to take heed of them, Romans
16. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 2 John 10.

Object. They cite Scripture.

Answ. So did the Devil, Matthew. 4. 6.

Object. There is some truth in what they say.

Answ. So there is in the Mass, and in Stage-plaies. It is the Devils usual
practice, to mix some sugar with his poison, to make it go down the better; and
to mingle some truths with his errors; as the Fowler mingles corn with his
chaff, that he may catch the sooner. You will shun those that poison your
bodies, Oh take heed of those that would poison your souls. No murder like
soul-murder. Shun a seducer, as you would shun the Devil himself, whose factor
he is; and when he speaks fairest, and pretends most love, then fear him
most; when Herod intended Christ's destruction, he then pretended devotion,
Matthew. 2. 8. When Absalom sought his Fathers Kingdom, he pretends a Vow at
Hebron; when Saul would mischief David, he makes him his Son-in-Law, I Sam.
18. 17. Beware then of men, who put fair Gloves upon foul hands; who pretend
pity, but act cruelty, who promise liberty, when they intend thraldom.

Object. But they are great Professors.

Answ. So were those that followed Christ, yet he would not trust them, for
he knew the deceit that was in them, Ioh. 2. 24, 25. All is not gold that
glisters, nor are all Israel, that are of Israel; and therefore take heed whom
you trust.

6 Beware of thy foes. We are beset round with them, and that both corporal
and spiritual, we had need therefore to be sober, and watch, and to pray with
David, Help me, O Lord, and that because of mine enemies, Psalm. 27. 11. Many
there be that watch for our halting, we also should watch and countermine
them. There is a cursed enmity in the wicked against the righteous, Genesis 3. 15.
Psalm. 37. 4. So that they could even slay them all, as Cain did Abel, I John 3.
12. because by their light and life they reprove them; and this enmity,

1 It is Natural, and so is constant and delightful.

2 It is Intensive. As a good man loves good men appretiative and intensive,
affectu and effectu, with a high degree of affection, and shew^ it in actions:
So the wicked hate the godly with an inveterate, intensive hatred, they could
even wish that they had more lives than one, that they might exercise their
malice on them; Antipathy is against the whole kind, they desire that even the
name of Israel might be no more in remembrance.

3 It is Irreconcilable. Enemies may be reconciled, but enmities never, till
nature be changed; when Saul is converted, and become a Paul, then, and not
till then he prizeth whom before he persecuted.

7 Beware of thy Frien ds and Relations. By these the Devil oft-times does us
more hurt, than by our open enemies; and therefore when one was praying, Lord
deliver me from my foes; Nay, said one that heard him, rather pray, Lord
deliver me from my friends. We usually shun our foes, and take heed of their
counsel; but it is the Devil in a friend that undoes us. The Italian Proverb
is, God keep me from the hurt of my friends, and I will see to my foes.

Object. It is my wife that persuades me, and shall I not hearken to her?

Answ. If thy wife give thee good counsel according to the word, then in all
that Sarah shall say unto thee, hearken to her voice, else you must stop your
ears against those Sirens. How many wives have deluded their husbands and drawn
their hearts from God? Adam by harkening to Eve undid himself, and all his
posterity. Solomon was besotted by his Idolatrous wives. Sampson betrayed by
Dalilah, and Job had undone himself, had he hearkened to his wives wicked
counsel, Job 2. 9.

Object. It is my son, my brother, my kinsman that counsels me.

Answ. Even these may deceive you, if you take not heed, A man's enemes are
those of his own house. What the Scripture speaks in case of persecution, is
most true in case of temptation; brother shall betray brother, the father the
child, and children shall rise against the father, Matthew. 10. 21. 36. Even
Christ's brethren rose against him, Ioh. 7. 5. and the Jews that were his
kinsmen according to the flesh, were so fiercely set against him, that they
preferred Barrabbas a Robber before him, and sought to stone him, Matthew. 26.
20. Ioh. 11. 8. Thus Cain slew his brother, Ishmael persecutes Isaac, Esau
Jacob, and Joseph's brethren sell him. So that if ever that counsel also were in
season it is now, Micah 7. 5. Trust not in a friend, put no confidence in a
guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom; why so?
for the son dishonours the father, the daughter rises against the mother (we
may add, the servant against his Master, the subject against his superior,
etc.)

8 Beware of Strangers. Try men before you trust them. Time discovers men's
tempers; the heart of man is so deeply deceitful, that it requires some time to
know it; and if it be not safe to trust Relations, much less strangers.
Hypocrisy is spun with a fine thread, and none are so soon deceived, as the
over-credulous; and therefore Solomon so often blames men for trusting strangers,
Prove. 5. 20. and 6. 1, 2. Christ's sheep will not f^llow strangers, Ioh. 10. 5.

9 Above all, take heed of that evil man thy self. It is a secret, subtle,
daily, deadly, bosom enemy, which does us most mischief, we our selves are
the sorest enemies to our selves ( Inimicorum pessimus, quia proximus) all the
Devils in hell, and all the men in the world could not hurt us, if we were but
true to ourselves. It was a good prayer of St. Austin, Lord deliver me from
that evil man my self. The way to conquer Satan, is first to conquer our
selves. This is the highest and hardest Martyrdom, to deny our selves
universally. Let us then walk wisely in this day of Englands trial, remembering,
that the Scripture calls wicked men Wolves for ravening, Dogs for greediness,
Lions for cruelty, and Foxes for subtilty. Any of these creatures, when
enraged, are terrible, and we will take heed of them; but when the cruelty and
subtilty of all these creatures shall concenter and meet in man, how great is
the danger, and how had we need to beware of men, especially when they come
with fair pretenses, and with fine words parget over foul matters, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
calling Pride, Decency; Error, New-lights; Hypocrisy, extraordinary sanctity;
Heretics, the servants of God, etc? The Devil knows that if sin should appear
in its own proper colors, men would hate it, so ugly and loathsome it is. If
Jeroboam had told Israel plainly, they must worship Devils, when they
worshipped the Calves, who would have followed him?

5 They were full of Pride, Hos. 5. 5. and 7. 10. The pride of Israel does
testify to his face. They were proud of their riches, and proud of their
buildings, and therefore the Lord threatens to smite the Winter-house with the
Summer House, which they had built for Pride and Pleasure, Amos 3. ult.

And is not this Englands sin? Was there ever more pride in heart, In my
Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 2. p. 49.
in habit, in hair, in vestures, gestures, words, and works? And does not pride
ever go before destruction, and a high mind before a fall? But of this
elsewhere at large.

6 Hypocrisy abounded amongst them, they were like a deceitful bow that breaks
and deceives the Archer; they compassed the Lord about with their Iyes, crying,
My father, my father, howling before him in their misery, when alas their
righteousness was but, as the morning dew which suddenly vanishes away, Hos.
5. 6. and 6. 4. and 8. 2. and 7. 14, 16. and 11. 12. 2 King. 17. 9. This made
the Lord to reject and abhor both them and their services, Amos 5. 21, 22.

And how does this sin reign in England from Dan to Beersheba, from East to
West, from one corner of the Land to another? Never was the Land so full of
praying and preaching, Lectures, Repetitions, Private-meetings, etc. and never
such unmortified, unholy, unrighteous, unanswerable walking to those duties.
This abuse and profanation of holy things makes the Land to tremble under us,
Ezekiel. 22. 8. The Land is full of Science, but where, oh where is the
conscience? The Voice is Jacobs Voice, Odi improbum qui proba loquitur verba.
Menander.
but the hands are the hands of Esau. Many talk like Angels, but live like
Devils; they talk as if they had cloven Tongues, but walk as if they had cloven
feet. Most amongst us live directly contrary to their prayers. They pray
against pride, and yet their pride is visible. They pray against
worldly-mindedness, and yet they are notoriously worldly. They pray for
self-denial, and yet are great self-seekers, etc. Oh this cursed Hypocrisy,
Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy ruins all. It is that leven that sowers all our
services, that Coloquintida that makes our duties deadly. If any sin destroy
England, In oculis Dei nullum ma^us scelus est hypocrisi, Scultet.
it is this. God may bear with other sins, but this provokes him to his face,
and is such a horrid mocking of him, that his soul abhors.

[Against Hypocrisy, see Mr. Torshel his Trea^ise against it, and Mr. Crook,
and Mr. Sheffeild, Mr. William Shepherd, Mr. Ant. Burges Spi. Refin. 2. P. Mr.
Rob. Bolton on Psalm. 1. p. 24. Mr. Fenner on Isa. 58. 4. p. 407.]

7 The Israelites were great self-seekers. They brought forth fruit, but it was
to themselves. They were all for present profit, and present pay, like the
Heifer that loves to tread out the corn (where she may eat as she goes) but
she loves not plowing, that is hard and hungry work, Hos. 10. 1, 11. They were
all for liberty and ease, they could not abide Gods yoke, and therefore the
Lord tells them, that since they loved liberty so well, they should have enough
of it, but to their ruin. Israel was a wanton Heifer, the whole pasture could
not contain, nor content her, and therefore the Lord threatens to give her the
liberty of the Lamb in the wilderness, where it should be exposed to a
thousand dangers and miseries, Hos. 4. 16.

And is not this the great sin of England? Was there everless self-denial, and
more self-seeking in the Land? where shall we find a plain, simple,
single-hearted Jacob, that prefers Gods glory before his own interest, and can
be content to perish, so that Gods Name may flourish? Show me, Oh show me
that man, that I may give thanks unto God for him.

Most men in our days are squint-eyed, See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 2.
p. 16, 17, etc.
they pray, hear, repent, fast, give Alms, but still they have an eye to
themselves in all they do. Zach. 7. 5. Matthew. 6. 2.

And as Ephraim, so England is all for Liberty; Liberty in Church, and Liberty
in State; Liberty in Spirituals, and Liberty in Temporals. We have those, that
like Sons of Belial, can bear no yoke, none must reign over them. They must
have Liberty, Liberty, Liberty; and I will proclaim a Liberty to you (says the
Lord) A Liberty to the Sword, a Liberty to the Famine, and a Liberty to the
Pestilence; This is the portion of such Libertines, Ier. 34. 17.

8 Witchcraft and Enchantments; This also was a sin that helped to ruin
Ephraim. They had familiarity with the Devil, and by his aid they could divine
and inchant, 2 King. 17. 17.

And was there ever more Witchcraft in England, than at this day? Oh this
sinning sin grows rife amongst us. Those seducing, deluding, quaking sots and
sectaries that go up and down the Land with their enchanting Ribbons, and other
Diabolical practices, plainly show that too many of them are in league with the
Devil. They talk much of the spirits moving, and the spirits leading them;
their bastards, their railing and blasphemy, shows that it is an evil spirit
that leads them.

This sin helped to ruin the Jews, See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 13. p.
225, 226.
Because they had forsaken the Lord, and were south-sayers, like the
Philistims, Isa. 2. 6. And if England be guilty of the like sin, it must also
look for the like punishment.

9 Barrenness under the means of Grace. God was not wanting in any means of
Grace to Ephraim, but Ephraim was an empty Vine, and wanting to himself, Hos.
10. 7.

This also is the great sin of England, we are dead under lively Oracles, and
fruitless under fruitful Ordinances, and lean under soul-enriching means. Like
Pharaohs lean kine, that devoured the fat ones, yet themselves were still lean,
Genesis 41. 20, 21. We dishonor the Lords Pastures, and discredit his Ordinances
by our unfruitfulness, and open the mouths of the wicked, to cry, Ecce quales
sunt qui Christum colunt! Behold how dead and dull, how base and barren, how
unholy and unrighteous these Christians are! such barren ground is nigh to
cursing, Heb. 6. 8. Which of us will plow the Rocks, or sow the Sands, or
bestow cost upon ground which will bring forth nothing but briars and thorns?
The barren fig tree was cut down, because it cumbred the Earth, and made the
ground about it the worse, Luke 13. 6, to 10. The fig tree that had nothing
but bare leaves of profession, was cursed for want of fruit, Mark 11. 13, 14.
God will lay his Axe to the root of those trees that bring not forth good
fruit, Matthew. 3. 10. and lay waste his Vineyard, and command the clouds to Rain
no more upon it, when after all his cost and care it brings forth nothing but
wild grapes, Isa. 5. 2, to 8. when the Lord comes to walk in the beautiful
Vineyard of his Church, and finds a tree that grows not in so fruitful a soil,
he will cut it down, it shall no longer cumber the ground.

Our great unfruitfulness under the rich means that we enjoy, should deeply
affect us. If Han^ah wept for the barrenness of her body, how should we lament
the barrenness of our souls? and cry as Rachel, Give me children, or I dye:
So, give me Grace, or I am undone, make me fruitful, or I perish for ever.
Complain to God against it, the best and most fruitful Christians have made the
saddest complaints against themselves. Holy Bradford, how often did he lament
that deadness, unfruitfulness, unthankfulness that cleaved to his nature?
David, how often does he beg for quickening Grace? Do by your barren hearts, as
men do by their barren grounds, they will digg, dung, drain them, and use all
means to make them fruitful: So do you, pray, re^d, meditate, hear, confer, and
use all means to get your dead hearts bettered, and your graces quickened.

Yet le^t any should deceive themselves, thinking that they grow in grace, when
they do but deceive themselves; you must therefore know that there may be a
growing in gifts, ^hen there is no growing in grace. Many a man knows more, and
can pray longer than formerly, and yet no growth in grace. True growth is
principally internal, in the Root, in Humiliation, Sanctification, Faith,
Obedience. It is a growing up, not only in some things, but in all things, (
Ephesians. 4. 15.) True growth is universal, it is not only a growing in the head
(as some that have the Rickets do) but in heart, See Dyke on the Sacrament,
chap. 15. p. 367
head, and every part. True growth (says Aristotle) is a diffusing of
nourishment to all the parts, uniformiter and difformiter; The Understanding,
Will, Memory, Affections, Body, Soul, all is bettered.

2 It may be you do grow, but do you grow answerable to all the means and
mercies which God has bestowed upon you? They that have much, of them shall
be much required. Where the Husbandman bestows extraordinary cost, there he
expects an extraordinary crop; and herein the best of us all have great cause
to be humbled in the dust. Who can say he has answered the Lords cost and
care, and grown answerably to all those Sermon^, Sabbaths, Sacraments, good
books, corrections, and all other rich means which God has afforded us in
these latter days. Oh what Giants might we have been in ways of grace and
goodness, if every Ordinance had been effectual upon our hearts! he that is
weak amongst us, might have been as strong as David, and he that is strong as
David, might have been as an Angel of the Lord, for wisdom, and purity, Zach.
12. 8. Like Saul, we might have been taller by the head and shoulders (in the
ways of Grace) than other men. Against barrenness; See Gross his Sermon. on Col.
2. 10. p. 207. Strong 31. Sermon. p. 1. Robins^n, Christ All in all, 2 p. p. 259.
Our leanness, and our lewdness, our barrenness, and unfruitfulness, our
unanswerable walking to the rich means of Grace that we enjoy, does certainly
foretell a storm approaching.

10 Ingratitude, and abuse of Gods mercies to the promoting of Idolatry. The
more God did for them, the less they did for him; their fullness bred
forgetfulness, and the more they were increased, the more they sinned. Hence
the Lord so often complains of this sin, as provoking him more than all the rest,
Hos. 2. 8. and 4. 7. and 10. 1. and 11. 3, 4. and 13. 5, 6.) It was this sin
especially that brought the sword upon them, Hos. 2. 9. and 13. 7. The Prophet
Amos also, who was contemporary with Hosea, does notably set forth the great
Ingratitude of this people in abusing Gods mercies, Amos 2. 9, 10, 11.

And is not this that crying sin of England? Do we not^fight against God with
his own blessings, abusing our health, wealth, wit, peace, plenty, corn, wine,
gold, silver, Scriptures, Ordinances, yea all our comforts, and creatures, to
the dishonor of the giver of them? His mercies make us proud, his riches
covetous, his peace secure, his food intemperate, and all his benefits serve us
but as weapons to rebel against him.

And do we thus require the Lord, O foolish and unwise? is this the thanks we
give him for all his patience, See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 2. p. 69, 70.
preservations, success and deliverances? Will not the Lord visit for these
things? and shall not his soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Had
England no more sins to answer for but this, even this were sufficient to make
it a desolation, as it did Samaria.

11 Covenant Breaking. God had betrothed them to himself, and chosen them from
the rest of the world, to become his people, But they like men transgressed the
Covenant, there did they deal treacherously against him, Hos. 6. 7. and 10. 4.
Like Sons of Adam, they walked in his steps; though they were abundantly blessed
by God, yet they revolted from him, and transgrest the Covenant, there, even
th^re (it is put emphatically) where they should have been most faithful, viz.
in the Covenant, there they dealt most falsely and perfidiously with him.

And is not this one of the crying sins of England? Never was there a wiser and
better composed Covenant in the Nation, and never any worse performed; we have
lifted up our hands to the most High, that we will (in our places and
callings) extirpate heresies, and yet many walk as if they had taken a Covenant
to propagate them; many amongst us make no more of their Covenants, than an Ape
does of his collar, which he can put off or on at his own pleasure.

Let any man but read all the branches of the Covenant, and then compare our
contrary walking to it; and he cannot but admire the infinite patience of the
Lord, See more before Obs. ninth, and Buroughs on Hosea 4. 1. p. 26, 27. and
5. 7. p. 420.
that he has not long since sent a sword to avenge the quarrel of his
Covenant upon us, Levit. 26. 25. we must not think to do such things, and
escape, or to break our Covenants with God, and then be delivered, Ezekiel. 17.
15, to 20. If the Lord so sadly avenged the breach of Covenant with a man, yea
with a Heathen, and Idolater, what shall be done to him who breaks his
Covenant made with the great God of Heaven and Earth? and if a good man will
perform the Covenant which he made, though it be to his disadvantage; how
great is their sin then, who perform not the conditions of such Covenants as
tend to their everlasting welfare? Psalm. 15. 4. The Jews have a saying, That
there is no punishment that befalls them, but there is a dram of the golden
Calf in it: so there is no misery that befalls England, but there it a dram of
Covenant Breaking in it.

12 Security. Though strangers had devoured his strength, yet he knew it not;
the Syrian and Assyrian had consumed him, and made a prey of him, yet such was
his stupidity, that he knew it not, viz. with a practical saving knowledge, so
as to repent, and make a right use of it: Yea gray hairs were sprinkled here
and there upon him (which were a sign of weakness, and old age, and death
approaching) yet they laid it not to heart, Hos. 7. 9. but they were at ease in
Sion, and trusted in the Mountain of Samaria, putting the evil day far from
them, and therefore a woe is denounced against them, Amos 6. 1, 3. and 9. 10.

And was there ever more security, and senseless stupidity in England, than at
this day? Do not the Ministers of Christ generally complain that they see not
that life, zeal, activity, tenderness, compunction, etc. in their people, as
formerly? Many applaud and flatter themselves with their gifts and external
profession of sanctity, but the power of it is very much wanting amongst us. A
great calm often times is a forerunner of a storm; and great security is a great
forerunner of some great judgment. When the old world was eating, drinking,
buying, building, marrying, and thought not of a flood, then it came and swept
them all away; when men cry peace, peace, then comes sudden and swift
destruction, 1 These. 5. 3.

13 Anarchy. They devoured all their Judges, all their Kings were fallen, Hos.
7. 7. They discovered their rage in their seditious and frequent conspiracies,
to the devouring and destroying of their Judges and Magistrates, as appears in
the frequent murders of their Kings.

What Anarchy and confusion is amongst us, The danger of Anarchy you may see in
my Comment on Psalm. 82. 1.
he is a great stranger in our English Israel that knows not.

14 Lukewarmness. This is another sin that helped to ruin Ephraim, Hos. 7. 8.
Ephraim is a cake not turned, and so but half-baked, or dough-baked; neque
crudus, neque coctus, neither hot nor cold, neither fish, nor flesh, but of a
middle mongrel Religion, halting between two, partly for God, and partly for
the Devil, partly for Christ, and partly for Baal; but God hates such halting,
(...) doings; and therefore spues them out of his mouth, and sends them packing
into captivity.

And is not this the sin of England? Are we not a lukewarm generation, neither
hot nor cold, that halt, not between two, but two hundred opinions? We have a
knee for God, and a knee for Baal; a tongue for Christ, and a tongue for
Antichrist; a tongue for Truth, and a tongue for Falsehood; Like the harlot, we
are all for dividing: But God will be served truly and totally, without
halting or halving; he has made our whole hearts, and he will have all, or
none at all. Oh, this sin of formality and lukewarmness cries for some
judgment against us. Where is our zeal for Gods glory? our mourning for the
great dishonours that are done to his Name? our crying out, and witnessing
against the blasphemies, heresies, witchcraft, juggling, and Satanical
delusions that abound amongst us? Nay, do not many plead for a general
Tolleration of all sorts and sects? and if under a color they make a Law
against such, yet it is either made so wide, that offenders creep through, or
the Rulers are so overawed, that they dare only admonish, when they should
punish, and barely shave the head, which of right should be cut off.

Now, See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 4. 2. ^. 334.
will not the Lord visit for these things? and shall not his soul be avenged
on such a cold and careless Nation as this is?

15 Divisions. Ephraim was against Manassse, and Manasses against Ephraim;
there was division upon division amongst them their sins had divided them from
their God, and now God in his just judgment sets a spirit of division amongst
themselves to their destruction, (...) desolabuntur. Vulg. and Montan. V.
Buroughs Ire^^cum, p. 1, 2, etc.
Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty; or as
some render the word, they shall be ruined. For desolations in a State often
follow divisions in the Church, as we see in Poland, Germany, etc.

And was England ever more sadly divided and sub-divided than at this day? What
separations, and sub-separations are found amongst us? One is of Paul, another
of Apollo; divisions in principles, divisions in practice, divisions in
judgment, and divisions in affection; divisions in Church, and divisions in
State: For the divisions of England there be sad thoughts of heart. Ierusalems
divisions were Ierusalems ruin; The Lord grant that Englands divisions prove
not Englands ruin. These give the enemy great advantage against us, and
encourage them to set upon us. When Isra^l and Judah were at variance, then
comes Shishak the Egyptian and troubles Jerusalem, 2 Ch^on. 12. 2.

It is observed, Dum pugnant singuli, vincuntur universi. Tacitus.
that England was never conquered, but when it was divided within it self.

Oh that God who has made our hearts would mend them, and unite them, that we
may never lose our Religion, Laws, Estates, Persons, Posterity, and all that is
dear to us, and lay our selves open to the malice of a bloody enemy, who has
no way to overthrow us sooner than by our sinful dissen^ions.

16 Carnal-confidence. For this sin they are frequently reproved; one while
they trusted in their Kings, anon they go down to Egypt for help, and then seek
to the Assyrian; they forsook the Lord, and trusted in an arm of flesh, which
yet could not help them in their troubles, Hos. 5. 13. and 7. 11. and 12. 1.
and 13. 10.

And does not this sin abound in England? Have not we trusted in Kings,
Princes, Protectors, Parliaments, Armies, Navies, etc? We have leaned so long
upon our staves, till we have broken them all, and ruined our carnal
confidences by idolizing them.

17 Incorrigibleness under lesser judgments. God had been as a moth to
Ephraim, which consumed him by little and little, but since that did not better
him, the Lord came as a Lion against him, and tore him all to pieces, Hos. 5.
^2, 14. Like a good Physician he used all means to heal them, Hos. 7. 1. by
his word, by his mercies, by his judgments, but since nothing would mend them,
the Lord swears by himself, to root up them, and their posterity, for their
stubbornness, Amos. 4. per totum.

And is not this our sin? Has not the Lord used all gentle means, and spent
all his lesser rods in vain upon us? Who can say he has been the better for
all the Agues, Fevers, Taxes, Plectim^r sed non flectimur, corrip^m^r sed non
corrigimur. Salvian.
Poverty, Sickness, etc. or any of those lesser rods which God has laid upon
us? May not the Lord complain of England as he did sometime of Israel for
their incorrigibleness? Amos 4. 6. to 12. Thus and thus have I done to you, yet
have ye not returned to me, says the Lord; and therefore now I will bring
some greater judgment on you, unless by repentance you prepare to meet your
God, and so prevent his wrath.

18 Oppression and cruelty. They acted their oppressions upon the poor in a
violent, virulent manner, which brought destruction upon them, Amos 3. 9, 10,
11, 12. and 4. 2. They used false weights, and loved to oppress, they were all
for getting, though it were by force and forgery, Hos. 12. 7.

And does not this sin reign amongst us? Was there ever more wracking of
Tenants, grinding the faces of the poor, squeezing them, and eating them
peece-meal? Was there ever more couzening, cheating, overreaching,
over-reckoning, and unrighteous dealing in the Land, and that by some who
pretend to an extraordinary measure of Religion? I believe the like has not
been known in the memory of man. Our forefathers had less light and knowledge,
but there was far more pla^nness and single-hearredness in those days, than is
in ours.

I have but little dealing in the world (had I less I should be well
contented) yet I must profess, that I can scarce tell where to find a plain,
simple, single-hearted Nathanael; let such know that God abom^nates them, Deuteronomy.
25. 13, 14. and will be avenged on them, See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3.
3. p. 81, ^2.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. The whole land fares the worse for such. This was one of those
sins amongst the rest, that brought judgments on Jerusalem, and will certainly
bring judgments on London, and the rest of our Cities where such enormities
abound, Ezekiel. 22. 12, 29, 31.

19. Atheism. They forgot God days without number, he was not in all their
thoughts. Hence the Lord so often complains that they knew him not, nor
considered that he remembered all their doings, Hos. 2. 5. 8. 13. and 5. 4. and
7. 2.

Atheism at this day is the crying sin of England, we are not in so much
danger of Papism, now, as of Atheism; how has this God-provoking, Land-ruining
sin overspread, the whole Island! we have all sorts of Atheism amongst us,
Mental, Vocal, Vital.


We have close Atheists, and gross Atheists; we have Atheists contemplative,
and Atheists practical; some are closer Atheists, they do not directly and
plainly cast God out of the world; yet these fools (who are the worlds wise
men) say in their hearts, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. This kind of Atheism
is not so easily discovered, nor reproved, and so it wants that help which
gross Atheism meets withal.

2 Many that confess God in their words, yet deny him in their works, and by
consequence deny his All-seeing eye and Being, as if God took no notice of
things below; these are practical Atheists, Titus 1. 16. Eliphaz sets the brand
of wickedness upon the forehead of this sin, Job 22. 5, 13, 14. and God
threatens to search, as with Candles, for such Atheistical ones, i. e. He will
search narrowly, and sift them thoroughly, as the woman that lighted a candle to
search for her lost groat, Zeph. 1. 12. yet Atheism is frequently acted in the
world in one degree or other, Psalm. 10. 4. The wicked in the pride of his heart
will not seek after God, i. e. he thinks he has no need of him, but has
enough in himself, and therefore he will not go to God: God is not in all his
thoughts, i. e. he is in none of his thoughts, no not in one of his thoughts
or ways. It is an Hebraism. The Devil would fain make men not believe that
which himself cannot but believe, viz. that there is a God. This is one of the
highest degrees of wickedness in the world. To deny God is so high a sin, that
it takes away all at once, the Devil needs not come a second time. This is to
sin against the greatest light, it is not only a sin against the light of
Christianity, but against the light of nature, against the witness of the
creature, and the whole Creation. Such sin against the Providence of God* and
against the common consent of all Nations. Tully could say, There was never any
Nation so barbarous, as to deny that there was a God. I have seen ^ City
without walls. but never any City but acknowledged a God. I have heard of some
that have denied that there was a God, yet never knew the man, but when he was
sick, he would seek unto God for help; Therefore (says Seneca) They do but
lie, that say, there is no God; they sin against the light of their own
consciences; they who most studiously go about to deny God, yet cannot do it,
but some check of conscience will fly in their faces; hence Heathens have
condemned some to death, that denied there was a God. This is a Mother-sin, and
the root of all abominations, yea, In every sin there is a virtual, tacit,
interpretative Atheism; they say, as it were, in their hearts, that God does
not see, Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. and 73. 11, 12. and 94. 5. to 9. This sin ruined
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 9. and if it spread in England, as it has done of late
years, it will certainly ruin us also.

We all carry the root of this Prolifical sin about us, and in every sin there
is a grain a least of Atheism; when we are charged with it, we are apt to
say, as Hazael, Am I a Dog? he would not believe that there was so much
wickedness in him: Thou shall be a King (says the Prophet) and then thy
corruptions will soon appear, when thou have power and opportunity to act them:
So say I, thou art a Son of Adam, lapsed and fallen in him, thou have the seed
of this sin within thee, and when a temptation comes, it will quickly discover
it self to the world.

2 Take heed of Polytheism, which is the ready way to Atheism; the having of
many gods, is the ready way to have no God. An Omni-Religion, is the ready way
to no Religion. The world abounds with false gods.

1 Whatsoever we have more than God, that is our God, Amor tuus, Deus tuus.

2 Whatsoever we confide in more than God, that is our God, Job 31. 24.

3 Whatever we glory and rejoice in more than God, Ier 9. 23. Phil. 3. 19.

4 Whatever we ascribe efficiency to, Hab. 1. 16. God will have all power
ascribed to himself, Deuteronomy 8. 12, 13, 17, 18.

5 Whatever we obey against the mind of God, be it friend or foe, men or
Devils, that we make our God.

[Against Atheism, See Capel on Tentat. p. 2. chapter 2. p. 153. Edit. ult. Mr.
Henry Smith, his Arrow against Atheists, amongst his Ser. 2. p. p. 1, to 96.
Mr. Trapp, at the end of his Comment. on the Epistles, p. 1103. Robinsons
Essaies, Obs. 11. D. Cl^rks Ser. on Psalm. 14. 1. p. 319. Weemse 4th. Vol. p. 1.
Church his Miscel. p. 154. Taffin on Amendment. p. 4, to 25. B. Andrews
Catechism, p. 25.

Fullers Holy State, p. 378. Mr. Clerks Mirror, chap. 9. Edit. 3.]

20 Their sin was full, and they ripe for ruin. God had born with their
provocations about two hundred and sixty years, even till they had filled up
the measure of their sins, and then he brought destruction on them.

Now Ephraims sin was full
1 In respect of Multitude. 2 Magnitude. 3 Strength. 4 Growth. 5 Impudency. 6
Obstinacy.
1 There was a fullness of Number and Multitude. 1 All sorts of sin abounded,
both in Doctrine and Manners; there was Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, Witchcraft,
Lying, S^ealing, Oppression, 2 King. 17. 9, 10, 11. Hos. 4. 1, 2, and 7. 7.
Amos 2. 6. 2 All sorts of Sinners abounded, high and low, Princes, Priests, and
People, all were Idolaters, and delighted in false worship, Hos. 5. 1. Micah 7.
3, 4, 5, 6.

This universality of sinning is ever a forerunner of judgment; when All the
old world had corrupted themselves, then came the flood; when All Sodom was
wicked, and All Jerusalem rebelled, when the mean man bowed to Idols, and the
great man humbled himself, then God will not forgive, Isa. 1. 5, 6. and 2. 9.
Ier. 5. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 7. 18, 19.

2 There is a fullness of Magnitude, which is a forerunner of destruction; When
the sins in themselves are great, as Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hypocrisy,
Apostasy, etc. and these sins are heightened by circumstances, being committed
against great Light, Love, Patience, etc. and this was Ephraims, I wish it were
not also Englands case.

3 A fullness of S^rength, when men do wickedly with both hands, i. e. Earnestly
and actively, Micah 7. 3. When men draw iniquity with the cords of Vanity, and
study how they may do mischief with all their might, Isa. 5. 18. Ezekiel. 22. 6.

4 A fullness of Growth, when men sin more and more, as Ep^m did, Hos. 13. 2.
and grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. persevering in their sin, without end
or measure, this also prognosticates ruin to a Nation. The Lord did not
presently destroy the Amorites, but suffered their sin to come to its fullness,
that he might pour upon them the fullness of his fury, Genesis 15. 16. The sins of
the Amorites is not yet full. Though they were notoriously wicked, yet he
bears with them till their sins were ripe for ruin. A woman must go her forty
weeks, till the child be come to perfection, and then comes her travel
suddenly and surely: So sin has its conception, rise, reign, and ruin, Psalm.
7. 14. James 1. 15.

5 A fullness of Impudency, A Quaker came lately to Aldermanbury on the Sabbath
day, and in Sermontime gets in the Pulpit, and pulls out a pocket, and falls to
working in the Church. Others in London work openly upon the Lords day. See
Solomon. (per Antiphrasin) Eccles. a Quaker his blasphemous Narrative of this
business.
when men declare their sins, like Sodom, and openly profess their wickedness
with Whores foreheads that cannot blush, Isa. 3. 9. Ier. 3. 3. and 6. 15.
Zeph. 3. 5.

6 A fullness of Obstinacy, when nothing can reclaim a People, but they are
resolvedly wicked, as Ephraim here, who was married to Idols, and would not
return, being deeply rooted in iniquity, Hos. 4. 17. and 5. 14. and 9. 9. They
sold themselves to do wickedly, 2 King. 17. 17. they would not be warned by
the falls of others, whom God had punished before them for the same sins, 2
King. 17. 8, 13, 14, 15. but rejected the counsel of his Prophets* till the
wrath of the Lord broke forth, and there was no remedy, as you may see, 2 King.
17, 7, to 24* where you have Ephraims sins, and Ephraims punishment fully set
forth.

Now what could the Lord do less, than root up such a people, so obstinate
under reproofs, so unthankful for mercies, so incorrigible under judgments, so
incapable of repentance, so impatient of remedies, so impenitent under all the
means of grace which God had afforded them?

Let us now reflect upon our selves, and see whether Ephraims sins, be not
Englands sins; if so, parity of sins will bring parity of judgments; if our
sins run parallel with those of Ephraim we may justly expect Ephraims downfall.

It is said of Lot, that his righteoussoul was vexed with the sins of Sodom, 2
Pet. 2. 7, 8. the word is in the original, his soul was wracked and tormented,
when he saw the abominations of the Sodomites. (...), torqucor, equul^o imponi.
These twenty sins which abound in England, and abode some judgment
approaching, should even wrack and torment our souls with grief, that so we
may be marked for mercy when judgment comes, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Hab. 3. 16.

The counsel which the Lord gave to Ephraim, shall I give to England, Hos. 14.
1, 2, 3. Return, O backsliding England, from thy Atheism, Apostasy, Heresy,
Bl^sphemy, Hypocrisy, Formality, Ingratitude, Witchcraft, Security, Anarchy,
etc. and take with you words of sincere confession, and turn unfeignedly to the
Lord, so will he receive you graciously, and accept both of your persons and
performances.

[If any would see more Land-destroying sins, let him peruse D. Corn. Burges on
Ier 4. 14. p. 38, 39. preached 1642. Perkins 3. Vol. p. 420. D. Gouge his
Arrows, on Numb. 16. 46. Sect. 46. p. 79. and 139. Mr. Case his Sermon on Exodus
5. 22. p. 11, 12. preached 1646. D. Peter Smiths Fast Sermon on Psalm. 107* 6.
p. 30, 31. preached 1644.]

Lastly, their Rulers were corrupt, their Kings, Princes, Judges were
Idolaters, Revolters, Violaters of the Law, Bribers, etc. Hos. 4. 18, 19. and
5. 10. and 9. 15. and the people were corrupted by them, for where the head is
rotten, the members cannot be sound. Of all the twenty Kings of Israel (after
the division of the State) there was not one good from first to last, they were
all Idolaters, which serves to clear and vindicate the Justice of God in the
utter overthrow of those Kings, and their Kingdom, who had for the space of
two hundred thirty seven, or two hundred and sixty years (say some) abused the
goodness and patience of the Lord, and since there is none that I know of, that
has distinctly described these twenty Kings of Israel in any set Treatise, I
shall briefly describe the men, and their manners, and give some useful and
seasonable Observations from them.

A brief History of the twenty Kings of ISRAEL.
AFter the death of Solomon, the twelve Tribes were divided into two Kingdoms,
under Rehoboam and Jeroboam. Rehoboam Solomon's son reigned over two Tribes,
viz. Judah and Benjamin, and this was called the Kingdom of Judah, because the
Tribe of Judah was the principal part of it. ( A part praestantiori fit
denominatio.) This Kingdom continued in Rehoboam, and his successors, the
posterity of David, three hundred seventy two years, even till the time of the
Babylonish Captivity, which was about six hundred years before Christ. In which
space nineteen Kings of the same stock succeeded each other. Mr. Woodwards
Chronicle of the Kings of Judah, in two Tracts.
All their Acts and ways are succinctly, but fully published by a very good
hand. I shall therefore give you only their names, and the Texts, with Stars
on the good Kings, and Daggers on the Hypocrites, the rest were wicked. Samuel
was the last Judge of Israel, and Saul the first King. Note that Saul, David,
Solomon reigned before the Kingdom was divided between Judah and Israel.

1 Saul he reigned ten years, 1 Samuel 13. 1. etc. and slew himself, 1 Samuel 31.
4.

2 * David reigned forty years, 2 Samuel 2. 4. etc.

3 * Solomon reigned forty years, I King. 11. 42.

4 * Rehoboam reigned seventeen years, I King. 14. 21.

5 * Abijah reigned two years 1 King. 15.

6 * Asa reigned one and forty years, 1 King. 15. 9, 10.

7 * Ie^osaphat reigned five and twenty years, 1 King. 22. 42.

8 Iehoram reigned eight years, 2 King. 8. 17.

Q. Ath^li^h, Ahabs daughter, and Iehorams widow, usurped the Kingdom for six
years, 2 King. 11. 1, 3.

9 Ioash reigned forty years, and was slain, 2 King. 11. 4, etc.

10 Amaziah reigns nine and twenty years, and is slain 2 King. 14. 2.

11 Uzziah, alias Az^riah was slain, 2 King. 15. 1, 2, 13. 2 Chronicles. 26. 3. he
reigned two and fifty years.

12 * Iotham reigned sixteen years, 2 King. 15. 33. 2 Chronicles. 27.

13 Ahaz reigned sixteen years, 2 King. 16. 2.

14 * Hezekiah reigned nine and twenty years, 2 King. 18. 2.

15 * Manasseh reigned five and fifty years, 2 King. 21. 1.

16 Amon reigns two years, and is slain, 2 King. 21. 19.

17 * Josiah reigns two and thirty years, and in slain, 2 Kings 22. 1.

18 Iehoahaz reigned three months, 2 King. 23. 31.

19 Iehojakim reigned eleven years, 2 King. 24. 1.

20 Iehojachin three months, 2 King. 24. 8.

21 Zedekiah reigned eleven years, 2 King. 25. 1.

The other ten Tribes over which Jeroboam reigned, was called The Kingdom of
Israel, which continued about two hundred thirty and seven years, till they
were carried into captivity by the Assyrian, about the sixth year of Hezekiah,
when Hoshea the last King of Israel was carried away captive. So that the
Kingdom of Israel ended one hundred thirty and three years before that of
Judah.

In this time there were twenty Kings of Israel, of ten several stocks, whereof
one destroyed another. Ieroboams stock was cut off by Baasha, and Baasha's by
Zimri, and Tibni's by Omri, and Omri's by Iehu, and Iehu's by Shallum, and
Shallum's by Menahem, and Menahem's by Pekah, and Pekah's by Hoshea, and Hoshea
with his were captives to Salmaneser King of Assyria. The most of these Kings
were cruel Tyrants and Persecutors, which bred sad commotions, and transported
the Kingdom from one family to another. Whereas in Judah, where purity of
worship was preserved, and the godly Kings joined with the Prophets, there were
nineteen Kings of the same stock orderly succeeding each other: So good it is
walk in Gods ways, and to take in his Ministers with us.

A CATALOGUE of the KINGS of ISRAEL.
1 Jeroboam reigned two and twenty years.

2 Nadab his Son succeeds him, he reigned two years, and is slain.

3 Baasha of another stock succeeds him, and reigns four and twenty years.

4 Elah his Son succeeds him, and he reigns two years, and is slain by Zimri.

5 Zimri of another stock reigns seven days, and burnt himself.

6 Tibni of another stock reigns about four years, and dies (as it is
conceived) a violent death.

7 Omri of another stock reigns twelve years.

8 Ahab his Son succeeds him, who reigned two and twenty years, and is slain by
the Syrians.

9 Ahaziah his Son succeeds him, and reigned two years.

10 Iehoram, Ahaziahs Brother, and a second Son of Ahab, succeeds him, he
reigned twelve years, and is slain by Iehn.

11 Iehu of another stock reigned eight and twenty years.

12 Iehoahaz his Son succeeds him, and reigns seventeen years.

13 Iehoash, or Ioash his Son succeeds him, and reigns sixteen years.

14 Jeroboam (the second) his Son succeeds him, and reigns one and forty years.

15 Zachariah his Son (the last of Iehu's race) succeeds him, he reigns six
months, and is slain by Shallum.

16 Shallum of another stock reigns one month.

17 Menahem of another stock having slain Shallum, reigns ten years.

18 Pekahiah his Son succeeds him, he reigns two years, and is killed by Pekah.

19 Pekah of another stock regins twenty years, and is slain by Hoshea.

20 Hoshea the last King of Isruel reigns nine years, and is carried into
captivity with his people by Salmaneser King of Assyria.

1 Jeroboam their first King came in by Rebellion. Israel rebelled against the
house of David, and chose Jeroboam for their King, 1 King. 12. 19. hence the
Lord complains, that they set up Kings, viz. Jeroboam, and his successors, but
not by him, Hos. 8. 4 they did it without asking his advice, or staying for his
command; for though he had decreed to rent the ten Tribes from Solomon's race,
yet because they did it not in an orderly way, but tumultuously, therefore he
calls it rebellion, and says, that he knew it not, viz. so as to approve of
it; and though God had foretold that Jeroboam should be King, yet because he
came to the Crown with a proud, aspiring, rebellions disposition, he is called
a Rebel, 2 Chronicles. 13. 6, 7. This Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat (so called, to
distinguish him from Jeroboam the second, the Son of Ioash, 2 King. 14. 23.)
was Solomon's servant, a valiant, active, subtle man, and so more fit to be the
head of a faction. Solomon hearing that the greatest part of his Kingdom was
given to Jeroboam, he was offended with him, and sought to kill him. Kings
cannot endure corrivals. Upon this Jeroboam fled into Egypt, where (probably)
he learnt the Idolatry of the Calves, for the Egyptians were great Idolaters,
1 King. 11. 28, 40. No sooner is he in the Throne, but he sets up a new
Religion in his new Kingdom; He begins ill, the very first step he takes is
out of the way; he sets up two golden Calves, and draws all Israel to worship
them. This crafty Achitophel foresaw, that if the people should go up to
Jerusalem, to worship there, the glory of the Temple might allure them, and the
true Priests of the Lord would be drawing them to adhere to their lawful
Prince of the house of David, 1 King. 12. 27. he therefore uses all means to
keep them from having any thoughts of Jerusalem (though this fear was vain and
needless, for he had Gods promise, that if he would cleave to him, and
worship him only, that then he would preserve the Kingdom to him and his
posterity, 1 King. 12. 38.) To this end he invents a more easy and plausible
kind of worship, pretending that it was too much cost and pains for them to go
thrice a year up to Jerusalem; they should have gods of their own at home, Two
golden Calves, to represent God to their eyes. These he sets up, one in Dan, E
Longinquo posuit, solent homines qui pii videri volunt, dissita pi^cul fana,
aut religionis gratia, aut novitatis studio frequente* invisere. Sanctius.
a City in the North, and the other in Bethel, a City in the South. He sets
not up Horses, or Rams, but Calves, as the Israelites in Egypt had done before
him (though to their cost, Exodus 32. 4, etc.) The Idol Apis is worshipped by
the Egyptians in the shape of an Ox, or Calf, and it should seem Jeroboam here
imitates them, and the rather peradventure (out of a politic device) to
ingratiate himself with Shisac the King of Egypt, that he might the sooner
help him against Rehoboam; and as if this were not sufficient, instead of Gods
Temple at Jerusalem, he set up houses of pretended devotion, wherein he
appointed God to be worshipped in his own Idolatrous fashion. He also
ordained new Priests, men that were of base condition, Nature could say,
Homines viles non constituantur Sacerdotes propter honorem qui religioni and
majestati divine dcbetur. Arist. Polit. l. 7. c. 9.
and not of the Tribe of Levi (for the Levites had left him and his Calves, and
went to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14.) men of his own party, and such as
joined with him in carrying on his state-design. Like Lettice, like lips;
Decebat vilissimos homines, ut vilissimos haberent Sacerdotes. A Lapide.
fit Chaplains for such Calves, or rather Devils, as they are called, 2 Chronicles.
11. 15.

Quest. But what says the Lord to all this?

Answ. Why this became a sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to destroy it from
the Earth, 1 King. 13. ult. It was a sin, a sin with a witness, a notorious,
heinous, complicated sin, that had many other sins in the belly of it; it was a
sin committed against great Light (for he had the Prophets, Ahijah, Semaja and
Iddo to instruct him) and against great Love, for the Lord had raised him from
a servant to be King, and that over his own people Israel, and had instructed
him what he should do, and how he should walk, that he might prosper, yet
he most ungratefully forsakes the God of his mercies, to follow Calves, and
Devils, contrary to the express command of God, that they should nor make any
graven Image, to worship it. It was also against the Judgment of God on their
Progenitors, whom they knew God had cut off for making such an Idol as the
golden Calf. Besides, he changed the time, the place, the manner of Gods
worship, 1 King. 12. 32, 33. and to encourage the people the more in these
exorbitant ways, he himself usurps the Priests Office, and offers upon the
Altar, which none but such as God had set apart for that work might do. Yet
more, this sin was a scandal and ruin to all Israel, it drew them from God,
and made the Lord to divorce them, Hos. 2. 2. Yea some of Judah also were
infected with this Idolatry, 2 King. 17. 19. and therefore Jeroboam is so often
famed with that infamous Title, and branded to posterity, with a This is that
Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin. See more in B. Halls
Contemplations. l. 18. p. 1175, etc. folio.
This is he, that by his Example, Precepts, and Power, drew the people from
God. He was the first Author of this Idolatry, others were but Accessaries.
This was that indelible sin which could never be removed from him, nor his
house, nor from Israel, till it brought them all into captivity.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Idolatry rents a Kingdom in pieces.

Solomon fell to Idolatry, and now ten Tribes fall from his immediate Successor
Rehoboam, his Son, to Jeroboam his Servant.

2 God is most true in his Threatenings.

He threatened to rend ten Tribes from Solomon, for his Idolatry, and here he
performs it, 1 King. 11. 31, 33, ^5.

3 A mutinous body cannot long want a head.

If Israel cast off their true Sovereign, they will choose a false one rather
than fail. If they forsake Reh^boam the true heir, See my Comment on Psalm. 82.
1.
they will have a Jeroboam, though he ruin them. Tyranny is better than
Anarchy, and a bad Ruler better than none at all.

4 Carnal men are very industrious to get and keep the Kingdoms of this world.

How does Jeroboam bestir himself here? He builds himself a Palace in Sechem,
and plants a garrison in Penuel; he invents a flesh-pleasing worship, false
Priests, false Paths, and all to establish himself (as he thought) the faster
in the Throne.

Now, shall carnal men be so industrious for earthly Kingdoms, and shall we
take no pains for a heavenly one? shall they labor thus for things that
perish, and thus eagerly pursue what they cannot keep? and shall not we labor
for heavenly and enduring riches? shall the Kingdoms of the Earth suffer
violence, and do the violent take them by force? and shall not the Kingdom of
Heaven suffer violence, and we be more zealous for it?

5 The Visible Church in this world is subject to many changes.

One while it flourishes, and anon it is clouded; one while it is famous, and
anon it is infamous; now it is united under a Solomon, anon it is divided under
a Rehoboam. The seven Churches of Asia, whose fame sounded through the world,
are at this day a desolation. The Invisible Church, the Elect of God, shall
never perish, they shall never fall totally and finally, because their seed
abides in them: But a Visible Church may fall away utterly, and come to
nothing. She that was visibly the Spouse of Christ, may become a harlot, as
Rome has done.

6 Great men, if they be not good men, do abundance of hurt.

If Jeroboam the King be an Idolater, he will infect all his Successors, his
Idolatry, like an incurable Leprosy, cleaved to all the nineteen Kings of
Israel, and they drew all the people with them. Magnates sunt magnetes, Great
men's actions are all examples, and their examples Laws; what men see, sinks
deeper into them, than what they hear. Segnius irritant animos, etc.

One sinner (especially if in authority) destroies much good. It is the Rulers
of a people that ofttimes make them to err, Quales in Rep. Principes, tales
reliquos solere ^sse Cives, dixit Cicero.
Isa. 3. 12. The more potent the sinner, the more mischief he does; they have
greater power, V. My Comment on Psalm. 82. 1.
and more able instruments at hand to promote their sinful designs. Hence
Jeroboam is never mentioned, but with a train after him. If a Ruler hearken to
lies, all his servants will be wicked, they will do as the Master does, and
think they do well, Prove. 29. 1^.

7 The Vulgar are very unstable.

No sooner are Ieroboams Calves up, but Israel is down upon their knees; Their
worship follows immediately upon their erection. How suddenly do men follow the
Religion of their Rulers, be it what it will! Like beasts they follow their
Leader, not considering which way they ought to go, but looking which way their
Rulers go.

8 Ringleaders in sin are abominable to God.

The Seduced, that follow in simplicity, are to be pitied; but the Seducers,
that wilfully mis-lead others, should be severely punished. How often is Jeroboam
branded with this ignominious Title to posterity, for drawing Israel into sin,
with a This is that Jeroboam, V. my Comment on ^ Tim. 4. 10. Obs. 6. p. 426.
the Son of Nebat, who made Israel sin. The memorial of such wicked ones shall
rot, and be as loathsome as dung upon the earth, 1 King. 14. 10.

9 Evil company is very infectious.

Israel sojourned in Egypt, and made one Calf; Jeroboam sojourned in Egypt, and
he sets up two. Ahaz going to Damascus, to the King of Assyria, the better to
ingratiate himself with him, he brings from thence a new-fashioned Altar, 2
King. 16. 10, 11, 12. See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 5. p. 140.
When people are mingled amongst the Heathen, then they learn their works,
Psalm. 106. 36.

10 Superstition is a sottish thing, Jer. 10. 8, 14.

It puts out the eye of Reason; before it makes men Idolaters, it unmans men.
As the Syrians were first blinded, and then carried into the midst of Samaria:
So are Idolaters first bereft of their wits and common sense, and then they
fall to worship Calves, O Sanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hort is
Numina, Juven. Sat. 15. V. Mr. Clerks Mirror, chap. 128. Edit ult.
Stocks, Stones, Bones, Relics, Cats, Dogs, Crocodiles, Hawks, Sun, Moon,
Onions, Leeks. What more brutish than a Calf? none but he who ascribes reason,
No wonder if such be brutish, who have made a Calf their God.
help and divinity to such unreasonable things. Many think they worship God
under such forms, but he expressly tells them, they worship Devils, 2 Chronicles.
11. 15. So Deuteronomy. 32. 17. Psalm. 106. 37. 1 Cor. 10. 20.

11 Superstition is lavish.

Jeroboam sets not up Iron, or Brazen, but Golden Calves; not does he only
gild them over, but they must be made of massy, molten Gold, cast into the
fashion of Calves. The basest metal is too good for such gods, but the best of
metals must make them, Exodus 32. 3. Ier. 10. 4, 9. Dan. 3. 1. Hosea 8. 4. Hab.
2. 19. Idolaters spare no cost about their Idols, They lavish gold out of the
bag, and wastfully spend their treasure upon these worthless vanities, Isa. 46.
6. Exodus 32. 3. Ezekiel. 16. 33. Hos. 8. 4. They neglect, yea carve and cut their
bodies to serve their Idols, Col. 2. 23. 1 King. 18. 28. and spend whole days
in their service, verse. 29. and which is more, they will offer their very
children in sacrifice to them, Psalm. 106. 37. Ezekiel. 16. 27.

12 Will Worship is no worship in Gods esteem.

Jeroboam here sets up a Temple, an Altar, Ceremonies, and Priests of his own
devising, but God rejects them all, and tells them, that for all their Temple,
they had forgotten him, and provoked him to wrath with their abominations, Mr.
Crostons Sermon. on Joshua 22. 19. and Mr. Strongs 32. Sermon. p. 471, 472.
Hos. 8. 14. God cannot endure that men should set their Altars by his Altars,
and their thresholds by his thresholds, Ezekiel. 43. 8. Idolaters think they do
God good service, when all their service incenseth him, Ezekiel. 6. 9. Isa. 7. 11,
to 16.

13 No mercies can work on wicked men.

Let favor be showed to them, yet they will not learn righteousness. Isa. 26.
20. God raises Jeroboam from a servant to be King of Israel, sends the Prophet
Abijah to tell him how he should walk and prosper, 1 King. 14. 7. but he
ungratefully forsakes the God of his mercies, and falls down to golden Calves,
and worships them: One would think the more men had, the better they should
be, and the more wages they had, the more work they should do, but such is the
corruption of our natures, that usually the more we have, the worse we be;
the higher in honor, the further from God. When Gods people are once become
Lords, then they refuse to come near him, solus imperantiun^tatus in melius
Vespatianus. Tacitus.
Ier. 2. 31. Like Esops Hen the better she was fed, the worse she laid.
Fullness breeds forgetfulness; when Ephraim was fed in a fat pasture, he grows
proud, and forgets God, Hos. 13. 6.

14 Wicked men are obstinate and incorrigible.

No judgment works on Jeroboam; let his hand wither, the Altar rend, his
Armies be routed, his plots defeated, the loss of his Kingdom, and utter
destruction of him and his be foretold, yet he is Jeroboam still, and persists
in his wickedness after all this, 1 King. 13. 3, 4, 5, 33. Besides, he could
not be ignorant how severely God punished the Israelites for the very same sin
of worshipping the golden Calf. But wilful sinners are judgment proof, no
plagues upon themselves, or others, can work upon them. It is this that
aggravated Jeroboams sin, and made it out of measure sinful, that he did not
through infirmity, but wilfully he sets up Idolatry, and therefore he is said
to devise a worship of his own head, the better to destroy the worship of God,
and draw men from his Temple at Jerusalem, 1 King. 12. 28, 33. Now the more
contrivement there is in sin, the worse it is, as we see in David, David in
ali is peccatis non ex mali animi instituto, sed sortuito and quodam casu
vulous acceperat; negligentiae peccata erant, non mlignitatis. Theodoret.
the kilsing of Vriah lies as a blot upon him more than all his other sins,
because there was more deliberation and contrivement in that, than in any of
his other sins, 1 King. 15. 5.

15 The tolerating of such contemptible men, as are neither called, nor
qualified for the work of the Ministry, to usurp the Ministry, is a
God-provoking sin.

Jeroboam makes Priests of the lowest of the people, and this provokes the Lord
to root up both him and his posterity, 1 King. 13. 33, 34.

16 Wicked men bring a curse on their posterity.

The poor children many times fare the worse for the fathers wickedness; not
only is Jeroboam cut off, but all his posterity perish with him, 1 King. 15.
29, 30. [Of this see more before on verse. 16. Obs. 12.]

17 Carnal policy, is mere folly.

One grain of sincerity, and real honesty, will outweigh many mountains of
shisting subtilty. It is he only that walks uprightly, that walks surely. It
is ill when Rulers are more careful of the State than of the Church, of civil
policy, than the matters of God. When they dare not promote Religion for fear
of troubling the State. God often punishes such selfishness with the loss of
all. Jeroboam for politic respects, and self ends, sets up Calves, as suiting
better with his carnal projects, than the pure worship of God; hereby he
thought to get the hearts of the people, and settle the Crown faster on his
head, and thereby he lost all. His Calves deceived him, and cast him off, Hos.
8. 5 14. he need not to have used such indirect courses, for he had Gods hand
for it, that he should be King, 1 King. 11. 31, 35, 37. But he, like a
Machiavellian, trusted more to his own policy, than to Gods promise, and he
prospered accordingly, for he had war all his days, 1 King. 14. 30. And many
of the Priests and people forsook him, and went to Jerusalem, and joined with
Judah, where they might worship God in purity 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 16. When men
make Religion ftoop to their politic ends, and use it no further than it may
either obtain, retain, or augment a Kingdom, such self-seekers, are
self-destroyers, their end is miserable, Consilia callida prima specie laeta,
tractatu dicra, eventu tristia. Live.
1 King. 14. 9, 10, 11. Carnal plots and projects may be kindled with hope,
kept up with miserable shifts, but their end is doleful.

18 Idolatry brings war.

When men choose New Gods, then war is in their gates, Judge. 5. 8. If Jeroboam
forsake God, and set up Idols, he shall have war continually, 1 King. 14. 30.
So had B^asha his Idolatrous Successor, 1 King. 15. 32.

19 It will not excuse wicked men in the day of wrath, to say, their Rulers
lead them in wicked paths.

Such Ieroboams shall be punished, and Israel shall suffer with them, 1 King.
14. 15, 16. We may not follow great men, nor any men further than they follow
Christ, unless we mean to perish with them. [See more in my Comment on 2 Timothy
3. 9. Obs. 1. p. 190, 191.]

20 When the enemies of the Church are most high, then God cuts them off.

When Jeroboam is lifted up, trusting in his Idols, and in the multitude of his
armies, he sets upon Judah both by force and fraud, Deus p^ape est, cum procul
abesse videtur.
intending to destroy him; but in the Mount the Lord appears, he affrights the
Israelites, and makes them fly, so that Judah slew five hundred thousand of
them, and the Lord struck Jeroboam that he died, not an ordinary death, but
he died by a special hand of God, 2 Chronicles. 13. per totum. Wicked men shall not
always escape, their sin at last will find them out.

2 Jeroboam being dead, Concerning. Chronological Doubts, I shall refer the
Reader to Mr. Roberts his Key of the Bible on the first and second Book of
Kings; my work is for Practicals.
Nadab his Son succeeds him, both in the Throne, and in his sin; and therefore
in the second year of his reign he was slain, 1 King. 14. 20. and 15. 25, to
29.

Obs. 1 That wicked Parents many times have wicked children.

Usually, like Father, like Son, malus corvus, malum ovum. As they inherit
their Fathers Lands, so many times their vices too. God often visits the sins
of the Fathers upon their Children, because they are apt to imitate their sin,
and to plead the example of their Ancestors, and Forefathers, especially in
Idolatry, Ier. 11. 9, 10.

As a good man may have a wicked child, but the promise is for him, that God
will be his God, and the God of his seed: So a wicked man may have a good son
(as Jeroboam here has a good Abijah, 1 King. 14. 13.) but the curse is due to
him and his seed, he has no promise of such a blessing.

2 Wicked Rulers reign not long.

They have many temptations to wickedness, Dum patris exemplar potius quam
divinam legem intuetur Nadab, and ipse sceleratus fuit, and quod scelerati
solent reges, populum ad peccandum induxit, and aluit audaciam; quare non diu
vixit. Sanctius.
and have more opportunities to vent it, than inferior persons have, and so
are sooner ripe for ruin, as we shall see in the following Kings.

3 Baasha having slain Nadab, gets into the Throne himself, and to make sure
work, he first cuts off all the house of Jeroboam (as the Lord had threatened)
yet because he had no command from God to do it, as Iehu had, nor was inwardly
incited by his Spirit to do it, as Ehud was, but traitorously for base
self ends to get the Kingdom to himself, he slew him, and therefore God
charge him with murder, and says, he killed him, Exaltare de pulvere
extremam significat conditionem illius qui ex pulvere excitari dicitur: In
pulvere enim sedere dicuntur miseri, abjecti, sordidi, quique extrema naturae
patiuntur incommoda. Sanctius.
1 King. 15. 7. yet God is said to raise Baasha from the dust, for though the
treachery and murder was Baasha's, yet the power and disposing of the Kingdom
was from God. In his days lived the Prophet Iehu, Hanani, and Azariah; yet he
has the common But and Blot put upon him, That he also did evil in the sight
of the Lord, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and made Israel sin, 1 King. 15.
29, 30, 33, 34. He overthrew the house of Jeroboam, and God over-threw his
house, according to the Prophecy of Iehu, 1 King. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. He reigned
four and twenty years.

Obs. 1. God wants not instruments to punish wicked men.

If Ieroboams posterity must be rooted up, he has a Baasha at hand ready to
do it. Though this wicked man had ambitious ends of his own, yet he does Gods
work, 1 King. 22. 20, 21. and fulfils his will; wicked men often break the will
of Gods Commandment, These permissive Acts of Providence are no warrant nor
security for such Acts of Injustice.
and yet fulfill the will of Gods Decree. They serve his purpose and providence
Materially, when Formally and Intentionally they seek themselves. As Joseph's
Brethren did in selling Joseph; and the Babylonians, when they carried the Jews
into captivity; and the Jews in crucifying Christ, Act. 4. 27, 28. Per
accidens, they did Gods will, but perse, their own.

2 God often warns even wicked men before he simte them.

God sends the Prophet Iehu here to tell Baasha of the evil that shall befall
him before it comes.

3 Wicked men are ungrateful men.

Baasha here sins against God, who had exalted him from the dust, and raised
him from a contemptible condition, to be a Prince over Israel; But he,
instead of worshipping and acknowledging the God of his mercies, worships
Calves. This sinning against mercy is often noted as a sad aggravation of sin.
See my Comment on 2 Timothy, 3. 2. p. 19
As in Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 17. In David, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. and Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7,
8.

4 God is most true in his Threatenings.

Not one of them shall fall to the ground unfulfilled. God threatened to root up
the house of Jeroboam, and now it is done; He threatened to root up Baasha's
posterity, and it is done, 1 King. 16. 3, 11. As all the Promises of God are
most true, and shall in due time be fulfilled: so all his Threatenings are most
true, and shall in their time be fulfilled.

5 Idolatry brings judgment upon a man's posterity.

No sin sooner than this, as appears by the second Commandment. Jeroboam
thought to have settled the Kingdom on his posterity, but his Idolatry roots up
his family and the Kingdom is transferred to another stock. So true is that,
Isa. 14. 20. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned. Bildad speaking
of the calamities of the wicked, says, They shall neither have Son nor Nephew
amongst the people, Job 18. 19. Their fruit shall be destroyed from the Earth,
and their seed from amongst the children of men, Psalm. 21. 10. and 37. 28. and
109. 13.

6 Parity in sin brings parity in punishment.

Baasha walks in Ieroboams steps, and meets with Ieroboams plagues; his house
is ruined, as the house of Jeroboam was. Baasha cut off Ieroboams seed, and
Zimri cuts off his, 1 King. 16. 3, 4, 9.

4 Baasha being dead, Elah the wicked Son of a wicked Father succeeds him. He
reigns two years current, and is slain by his servant Zimri in the very act of
drunkenness, 1 King. 16. 9. A Conque. rour that will securely enjoy what he
has wonn, must root up the former stock (say Politicians.) Hence Herod killed
the Infants, to make all sure.
and that there might none be left to avenge his death, Zimri slaies all his
house, friends and kindred, v. 11, 12. and this he did presently, that he
might not be prevented, as indeed he had been, for within few days himself
was burnt, v. 13.

Quest. But why was Elah thus punished?

Answ. For the sins of his Father, and for his own sins wherewith he made
Israel to sin, v 13.

Obs. 1 God sometimes smites wicked men dead in the very act of their sin.

So he did Elah here in his drunkenness; so he did Am^^^, 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29.
V. Mr. Clerks Mirror. chapter 42.
And Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 2, 30. When wicked men are most secure, then judgment
is nearest; when men least dream of death, then it comes and arrests them, Luke
12. 20.

It is infinite patience that the Lord bears with any of us. The Angels sinned
but once, and they were cast out of Heaven. ^dam sinned but once, and was cast
out of Paradise; we have multiplied transgressions, and yet behold we live.
Admire the riches of Gods patience, and let it lead us to repentance, else that
God which slew Elah in the act of his sin, may also slay thee; he that slew
Zimri and Cozbi in the act of uncleaanness, if thou act such wickedness, may
slay thee; he that made the Earth to devour Corah, and his followers, for
their opposing Moses and Aaron, will not always bear with our revilers of
Magistracy and Ministry.

Obs. 2 When we rebel against God, then men rebel against us.

If Elah rise against his Lord and Master in Heaven, Zimri his servant shall
rise against Elah his Lord and Master on Earth. So Ioash and Ammon two wicked
Kings of Judah, were slain by their own servants. All creatures are Gods
servants; if their Lord be against us, they are against us, if he be for us,
they are for us. This is the reason why subjects are more seditious and
rebellious in Popish and Heathenish Countries, it is because their Rulers rebel
against God; and therefore God in his just judgment stirs up some to rebel
against them.

3 Idols are vanities.

Elah provoked God to anger with his vanities, (verse. 13.) i. e. With his
Idols. Idol-gods in Scripture are often called Vain things, Tohu inanitas, and
Elilim nihilitates. Isa. 2. 8. [ Ezekiel. 30. 13.
1 Samuel 12. 21. and Vanity, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Jer. 8. 19. Isa. 41. 28. Nothing, 1
Cor. 8. 4. An Idol is something, Materially, It is not, Nihil negativum, but,
Nihil privativum, there is no relation between God and it; or it is, Nihil
essectivum, it can do nothing. Weems.
it is wood, stone, brass, or gold, but Formally, it is nothing. They have
nothing of a God in them, their Deity wholly consists in the Idolaters vain
opinion, 2 They can neither do good nor evil, they can neither hurt nor help,
and so are nothing, Psalm. 115. 5. and Isa. 41. 23. and therefore the confidence
that is placed in them is a vain confidence, and they that serve them, are
bereft of true understanding, in which respect they are said to be vain, 2
King. 17. 15.

5 Zimri having slain his Master, Perpetuam ignominiam brevissima fruitione
bonorum cadu^orum emit.
gate into his Throne. He had been but seven days in it, when to save the
Executioner a labor, he burns himself with the Royal Palace, that neither he
nor it might fall into his enemies hands. This may be counted in our days
Roman, but it is no Christian, nor commendable valor. When dangers beset us,
we should humble our selves before God, and beseech him, either to mitigate
the affliction, or to give us strength to bear it, and then be it what it
will, we may bid it welcome.

Obs. 1 Tyrants and Traitors usually reign not long.

Zimri's date is but seven days. The Roman Emperors were cruel and
tyrannical; of sixty three, Ad generum Cereis sine caede and vulnere pauci
Descendunt Reges, ac sicca morte Tyranni. Juven. Saty. 10.
only six of them died a natural death. As if they had been exalted to those
seats for no other end (says one) Nisi ut ^itius interficerentur, Regna vi and
scelere parta non sunt diuturna.
that their days might be shortened. No violent thing is permanent; we
seldom see an old Tyrant; though for a time by fraud and force they may shift,
yet in the end divine Justice finds them out.

2 Wicked men are Gods Rod.

And when it has done Gods work, the Rod is burnt. So it was with Zimri here,
God raised him up to cut off Baasha's stock, and when that is done, himself is
cast into the fire.

3 No fortifications can preserve wicked men from destruction. Nulla impiis
tuta latebra, cum malis ubique male sit. Em. Thesaurus.


Zimri gets into Tirzah, a fortified City, and then into the Kings Palace
there, and there he burns. Had we all the power and policy of all the Princes
and Politicians of the world for us, yet if God be against us, these cannot
help us, Prove. 31. 30. There is no wisdom nor counsel against the Lord.

4 Such as have been cruel to others, are oft-times cruel to themselves.

Zimri had slain his Master, and now he slaies himself. Saul a bloody
Persecutor, at last becomes his own Executioner, Sardanapalus effaeminatus
victus in Regiam se recepit, ubi extructa pyra se and divitias s^^as in
incendium mittit, hoc solo imitatus vicum. Justin. l. 1.
1 Samuel 31. 4. So did Nero, Dioclesian, Sardanapalus, and others. Murderers,
especially of their Relations, and Masters, seldom escape in this life,
without some signal hand of divine Justice against them; Even Iesabel could say
to Iehu, Zimri Tyrannus ambiens a^lam, invenit urnam, (...) ascondens in Regiam
resil^it in Pyram. A Lapide.
Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? 2 King. 9. 31. i. e. he had no peace,
nor did he enjoy the benefit of his conspiracy, for he was soon cut off.

The Question then will be, Whether it be unlawful for a man to kill him self
by fire, water, sword, or halter, etc?

Answ. It is utterly unlawful, and that for these Reasons.

1 It is against the Law of God, which expressly forbids killing of others, much
more of our selves.

2 It is against the Law of Nature, which teaches every creature to love and
preserve its own life.

3 It is against the Law of Nations, which sets a brand of infamy upon such as
rob the Commonwealth of its subjects in this kind. Achitophel and Judas, with
others, are branded to posterity for it.

4 We are not Lords of our lives, Sicut in h^^c vitam non spont^ nostra (...)
ita rursus ex domicilio corporis quod tuendum nobis est assignatum, ejusdem
jussu recedendum est qui nos in hoc cerpus induxit, tamdiu habitaturos donce
jubeat emitti. Lactant.
to dispose of them as we please, but we are all set in this world, as in an
army, where every one must keep his station, till the great Lord general of us
all shall call us thence.

[See more in Syms against Self-murder, Downams Warfare, l. 2. c. 2. p. 70, to
82. B. Halls CC. Dec. 2. c. 10. p. 150. Brochmand CC. Tom. 2. p. 130. Sayrus
CC. p. 425. Basenbanum CC. in sextum Praecept. p. 213.]

5 Wicked men are dis-ingenuous men. See my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 2. p. 69.


They deal unworthily oft-times with those that advance them to honor. Elah
had made Zimri Captain of half his Chariots, 1 King. 6. 9. and he to requite
the favor, kills his Lord and Master, and that cowardly, when he was full of
drink, and so unable to help himself; and cruelly, for dying in his drunkenness
he was a means to kill both body and soul. Si jus and sides violanda est,
Regn^ causa v^olanda ^st.
Men hardly care what they do, so they may get Kingdoms. swear and forswear,
poison Fathers, slay Brothers, kill Masters, do any thing for a Crown. The
Popes of ^ome, what witchcraft and wicked practices did they not use to get the
Popedom?

6 Wicked men may plot and project, but God disposes.

Zimri cuts off all the house of Elah, even his kindred and all, that so he
might enjoy the Kingdom quietly without molestation; and when he has done
all, he misseth it, God gives it to another. Zimri beat the bush, but Omri
caught the bird.

6 Tibni is chosen King by the people that sat at home, who disdained that the
soldiers in the field should without the consent of the rest of the people,
set up a King; they therefore would not submit to Omri, whom the soldiers made
King, and the soldiers would not depart from their choice, thereupon they were
divided, which division and contest lasted about four years, till Tibni died
(as it is conceived) an untimely death, and then the soldiers being armed, and
too strong for the people, set up Omri, 1 King. 16. 21, 22, 23.

Obs. It is no new thing to see States and Kingdoms divided.

The people are for Tibni, and the soldiers for Omri; one is for a King,
another for a Council; one for a Protector, another for a Free State; one for a
Dictator, another for an Emperor, etc. So it was often amongst the Romans, and so
it is now amongst us. Romano imperio accidit ut milites non sequerentur
suffragia Senatus in designando Imperatore, sed suo arbitrio plerumque
utebantur.
Mobile Vulgus, the Vulgar are always like themselves, unstable as water.

7 Tibni being dead, Omri reigns quietly; he buys the Hill of Samaria, and
builds a City thereon, which came to be the Mettopolis of the Land, and the
place of the Kings Court and residence; for Zimri having burnt the Royal Palace
in Tirzah, Omri resides in Samaria, which was stronger than Tirzah, as appears
by the three years siege which it endured. This wicked man being exalted to the
Throne, walks in the steps of his wicked predecessors, and exceeds them in
wickedness; for the Text tells us, That he did worse than all that were before
him, 1 King. 16. 25.

1 Because he persisted in his Idolatry, notwithstanding all the judgments of
God which he had seen upon his predecessors.

2 Because he did with more violence force and press the people to Idolatry;
hence we read of the Statutes of Omri, viz. concerning their Idolatrous
worship of the golden Calves, Micah 6. 16.

Obs. 1 There is no stability in earthly things.

They are vain, uncertain, mutable. One while the Royal Court is in the City of
Sechem, anon it is removed to Tirzah, and then to Iezreel, and at last Samaria
is the Metropolis, 2 King. 8. 29.

2 The successors of wicked men many times exceed their predecessors in
wickedness.

Omri here is worse than all that were before him. So the Scholars of Arminius
and Socinus, have out-erred their Masters. The Anabaptists and Separatists of
our times, are far more erroneous than they were in Episcopal times. Errbrs in
the first concoction, are not amended in the second. As good men do improve the
choice notions of their predecessors to Gods honor: so wicked men do improve
the corrupt principles and practices of their wicked predecessors to God
dishonor.

3 Wicked men are obstinate in sin.

Nothing works upon them. Let Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri be plagued,
both they and their posterity for their Idolatty, yet Omri stirs not, unless it
be to evil, but he is Omri still, as Idolatrous, as vile, yea worse than ever.

8 Omri after twelve years reign, dies, and Ahab the wicked Son of a wicked
Father succeeds him. Pessimi Patris, pessimus Filius.
He reigns two and twenty years, and is a Non-such for wickedness. How he
exceeded all his predecessors in wickedness, in twelve particulars, see our
large Annot, on 1 King. 16. 33.
All the Kings of Israel before him, and after him, were bad, but none so
abominable as Ahab, who sold himself to do evil, 1 King. 16. 30, 31, 32, 33. A
good man may be Passively sold under sin against his will, as Paul complains
he was, Romans 7. 14. But Ahab here Actively sold himself wittingly and
wilfully, as a slave to the service of Satan, the lusts of the flesh, and the
cursed plots of his wife. So that I cannot but wonder at a learned Commentator
of our times, who makes Paul to be like Ahab, that sold himself to wickedness,
Romans 7. 14.

No man had better Prophets in his days to instruct him, (as Elijah, Elisha,
Micah, and a hundred which Obadiah hid, by fifty in a cave, from his wives
fury) nor more Miracles to convince him, nor more signal Victories and
deliverances to endear him; yet this Ahab, thus blessed, sets up Idolatry, stones
Naboth, gets his Vineyard, persecutes the Prophets and people of God,
counrenanceth eight hundred and fifty false Prophets; to Ieroboams Idolatry,
he adds the worship of Baal in the Mountain of Samaria, which was far worse
than the Idolatry of Jeroboam, for though they had Idols, yet they pretended to
worship the true God, but in this they worshipped Baal himself, as appears by
that speech of Elijah, of Baal be God, implying that they esteemed him so.

2 Jeroboam erected the golden Calves, to preserve the Kingdom to himself, but
Ahab peaceably possessed the Kingdom, yet desiberately he sets up more Idols.

3 He knew the Zidonians were great worshippers of Baal, yet he fears not to
match with a Iesabel there, that stirred him up to a greater height of
wickedness, 1 King. 21. 25. she was a proud, cruel, cursed Idolatress, a
fierce persecutor of Gods people, and a great promoter of the worship of Baal;
hence St. John calls that false Prophetess that seduced so many to uncleanness
and Idolatry, Iesabel, Rev. 2. 20. And Iehu charge her with whoredom and
witchcraft. This Ahab was slain in battle by the Syrians, the dogs lick his
blood, and he is buried in Samaria his chief City, and his posterity is cursed
after him, 1 King. 21. 22, 23, 24.

Obs. 1 Wicked Parents many times have wicked children.

An Idolatrous Omri has an Idolatrous Ahab. As I have showed before.

2 Succeeding Idolaters oft-times exceed their predecessors in wickedness.

Jeroboam was naught, Omri worse, but Ahab worst of all, he is a Non-such for
wickedness; No King of Israel before him, nor after him, like him for
wickedness.

3 Great sins seldom go alone.

Ahab here is first an Idolater, then an Oppressor, a Murderer, a Persecutor,
etc. and what not? As there is a concatenation of virtues, V. Comment on 2 Timothy*
3. 20 p. 21.
2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. So usually of vices. Great sins, like great men, have many
followers, as I have proved at large elsewhere.

4 The best Preachers cannot work upon hardened sinners.

Ahab had Elijah a man of fire, fit for those cold times, one that had wrought
many great Miracles, and boldly reproves him to his face for his wickedness;
besides Elisha, and others, and yet he is Ahab still. When once men are given
up to hardness of heart, not all that Mount Sinah, Ne pergas quaerere quid sit
co^ durum, sinon expavisti, tuum est. Bernard.
or Mount Sion can afford, not all the curses of the one, nor all the promises
of the other, can do any good. Of all the plagues, therefore, take heed of the
plague of a hard heart. On this side Hell there is not a sorer judgment, and
therefore when the Church prays for a direful curse upon her incurable
enemies, it is this, Lam. 3. 65. Give them sorrow of heart, or as the margin
reads it, Obstinacy and hardness of heart, thy curse upon them.

[See the danger of a hard heart, Mr. Marshals Sermon. on Zach. 7. 12. Dyke on
Scandals, p. 88. Bain Epist. 7. A Lapide on Exodus 7. 3. Sibbs Cordials, p. 14.
Hierom 1. part. p. 457, and 462. Downams Guide, in fine, p. 8. and 72. H^okers
Guide of Saints, p. 98.]

5 Wicked men sell themselves to do wickedly.

They are not Passively sold under sin against their wills, and the bent of
their souls, as the regenerate are, Romans 7. 14. But they Actively give up
themselves unto it. As a servant is not, sui juris, at his own dispose, but is
a living instrument to work for his Master: so a wicked man that has given up
himself a servant to sin, is not now himself, but he must plod, contrive, and
act for sin with all his might, though he ruin himself by it, Romans 6. 16.
Thus it was with Ahab here, he had not hired himself out to sin for a week, a
month, a year, but he had wholly sold himself as a slave for ever to the
service of sin and Satan; so that he could neither think, speak, or act any
thing, but what had a tendency to sin. He was a King, and by his place he
should have ruled others, Tu servus servorum es, iis enim ^upiditatibus quibus
tu inservis, ego impero.
but alas, he was so enthralled to sin, that he could not rule himself.
Diogenes could upbraid Alexander for his lusts. I am the King (says Diogenes)
and thou art the slave, for I rule over those lusts that rule over thee.

6 Misery attends Idolatry.

Ahab sets up Baal, and God pulls down him. How can they expect Peace on Earth,
that fight with Heaven? The Kingdom is now troubled, Samaria besieged, a
famine in the Land, no dew nor rain for three years and a half; Ahab and
Iesabel are slain, and Ahabs seventy Sons cut off. These, these are the fruits
of Idolatry, and forsaking God. It is worth observing, what Tumults, Treasons,
Treachery, King-killing, Wars, and changing of the Royal Lines there was
throughout the reign of these Idolatrous Kings of Israel. Solomon, that first
set up Idolatry, had three enemies upon him. 1 Hadad the Edomite. 2 Rezin King
of Damascus. 3 Jeroboam his servant. So, when Ioram King of Judah walked in the
ways of Idolatrous Ahab, then Edom and Libnah revolt from him, 2 King. 8. 18,
20. But on the contrary, see what success and renown Judah had, who was more
faithful to God. They had nineteen Kings of Israel, all of the same stock,
succeeding each other; whereas among the twenty Kings of Israel, there were ten
several Kings, and they of several stocks, and they frequently destroyed each
other to get into the Throne, and lived not long, whereas Asa, one of the good
Kings of Judah, outlived Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Tibni, Omri,
and some part of Ahabs time.

7 It is a fore judgment to have an evil Wife.

Ahab was wicked, but his Iesabel made him worse, 1 King. 21. 25. He was so
awed by her, and such a slave to her, that what ever she would have done (be
it never so vile) he durst not but do it. Indignum facinus quod Ahab metu
aliquo detentus non audebat, astu and ausu plusquam femineo concip^t and
consicit Iesabel. Paroeus.
Ahab wanted neither wit nor wickedness, and yet he is in both a very novice
to this Zidonian Dame. There needs no other Devil than Iesable, whether to
project evil, or to act it; Sylla and Charybdis S^cula contorquens freta m^nus
est timenda, nulla est serocior fera. Seneca in Heicule O^teo.
she chides the pusillanimity of her dejected Husband, and persuades him that
his rule cannot be free, unless it be licentious, and that there should be
not bounds for sovereignty, V. B. Halls Contemplations, p. 1215. folio.
but will. As our English Seneca excellently. As a good wife is a choice mercy,
Prove. 19. 14. So an ill wife is a sore judgment. As a good wife will incite a
man to goodness; so an evil one will be provoking to wickedness. Solomon the
wisest of men, how was he besotted by his Idolatrous wives? into what sin and
mifery did they draw him? 1 King. 11. 3, 7, 8, 9. And this helped to ruin
Iehoram, in that he had the Daughter of Ahab to his Wife, Mulier est viscus
toxicatum quo Diabolus aucupatur. August.
2 King. 8. 18. As you love your souls, take heed of matching with an
Idolatress; it is an abomination for Gods people so to do. Ezra 9. 14. Neh. 13.
6. Mal. 2. 11. Israel has committed an abomination, why? what has he done?
why, he has married the Daughter of a strange God. When Pompey would have
ensnared Cato, by bestowing one of his Daughters on him, he wisely answered,
Contra Mulie res malas consulite sultis. A Lapide, in 1 Reg. 11. 4. and in
Apocal. 2. 20. And Mr. Osburns Advice to a Son, chapter 2. p. 34, and 70.
Se per mulieres capi non posse, He would not be ensnared by women.

8 The God whom we serve, is a bountious God.

There is no man shall serve him for naught, (what ever wicked men say to the
contrary, Mal. 3. 14.) If Ahab, one of the wickedest men that ever lived, an
Idolater, an Oppressor, a Murderer, a Persecutot, yet if this wicked man do but
humble himself, though it be but hypocritically, and only for fear of
punishment, he shall have a reward answerable to his service; the evils
threatened shall be deferred, and he shall have a temporary deliverance
answerable to his temposary humiliation. We should have thought, if so vile a
wretch should have rent his flesh, torn off his hair, and wept rivers of tears,
yet God should rather have killed him, V. D. Sandersons Sermon. ad populum, on 1
King. 22. 29.
than spared him. But Gods thoughts are not like our thoughts; if the shadow
can do so much, what will not the substance do? if God so far reward an
unsound, what will he not do for sincere service? Again, we see here that
grief is not always a sign of grace; Ahab rends his clothes, but not his
heart; he puts on sackcloath, but not amendment; he walks softly, but not
sincerely; worldly sorrow causes death. Ambulabat demisso capite, he went
softly. i. e. He did not go so proudly up and down as formerly, but he went
softly and sadly, poorly and meanly.
Happy is that grief which makes the soul holier.

9 Our God is a patient God.

He bears long with the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; See more
concerning A^ab, in B. Halls Contemplations, l. 19. Contempl: 1, 2, 3. mihi. p.
1209, etc.
what man could have born two and twenty days with Ahabs provocations? yet the
Lord lets him reign two and twenty years.

The ninth King of Israel is Ahaziah, Ahabs Son, who reigned ill two years,
walking in the ways of Jeroboam, Ahab, and Iesabel, and those ways were as
bad as bad could be, 1 King. 22. 52, 53. He rebels against God, and Moab
rebels against him, in his sickness he sleights the true God, and goes to
Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, See more in B. Halls Contemplations. l. 19. p.
1221.
for help, he persecutes Elijah, and dies, 2 King. 1. 1, 2, 3, 9, 15, 17.

10 Iehoram, alias Ioram, a second Son of Ahab succeeds his Brother Ahaziah,
who had no children. Evil he was, yet not so evil as his Father and Mother,
for he pulls down the Image of Baal, 2 King. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yet there is a But
and Blot upon him, verse. 3. But he persisted in the ways of Jeroboam. He is
wounded by the Syrians, and slain by Iehu, after he had reigned twelve years,
2 King. 9. 24.

Obs. 1 Where there is but some goodness, and some reformation, God takes
notice of it, and commends it.

He takes notice, nor only of men's vices, but also of their virtues; if
Abijah the Son of Jeroboam have but some good in him, it shall be recorded and
rewarded, 1 King. 14. 13. Many, like flies, pass over the sound flesh, and
light upon that which is galled; or like Beetles, they fly over all the
flowers in a field, and if there be any dung in it, that they creep into: So
it is with most, they pry into men's infirmities, but pass by their Graces. But
Christ did commend the Churches for what was good in them, as well as reprove
them for their failings, Rev. 2. 3. Christ takes notice, not only of the grown
fruit, but of the green buds, and tender Grapes, even of the beginnings of
Grace in young converts, Cant. 2. 13. Hypocrisy is sullen, sour, and
censorious, especially to young beginners; but true Grace is meek, merciful and
tender. It is our duty to acknowledge Grace, where ever we find it, be it in
Jew or Gentile, in rich or poor, old or young. Where ever we find but aliquid
Christi, some seeds of piety, and the fear of the Lord, we should love and
cherish it. Hence Christ commends Natharael (that had but some seeds of Grace)
for his sincerity, John 1. 47. The Centurion, though a Gentile, yet Christ
commends him for his Faith, Matthew. 8. 10. Christ took notice of such as did
improve their Talents, and calls them good and faithful, Matthew. 25. 21, 23. And
Christ testifies of Mary, that she loved much, Luke 7. 47. Sad then is the
condition of those that are so blinded with malice, that they cannot see the
graces of God in others, without indignation; like Cain, that hated his
Brother, because he was better than himself, 1 John 3. 12. Or like Joshua,
that was envious at Eldad, and Madad, for prophesying in the Camp, Numb. 11.
29. We may not bear false witness against our neighbor, but must acknowledge
the Grace of God in them to his praise. Our eye must not be evil, because Gods
eye is good. It is the Devils work to be the slanderer and accuser of the
Brethren; let him do his work himself, Job 1. 9, 10. Rev. 12. 10. But let us
imitate our Savior, who has a tender care, not only of his strong rooted
Oaks, and bright burning Tapers, but also of his weak, bruised Reeds, and
smoking Flax, though as yet it flame not, Mat. 12. 20. Yea, where there is but
civility and common good, Christ takes notice of it, and commends it; when the
young man came to Christ, (though he had no true grace) yet it is said, Christ
loved him, Mark. 10. 21. He also took notice of that discreet answer of that
Scribe, Mark. 14. 34. and said to him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of
God. This should encourage us to be active for Christ, who covers our
infirmities, takes notice of our services, and will reward them openly.

2 Hypocrites reform to halves.

Iehoram suppresseth the worship of Baal, but continues the Idolatry of the
golden Calves. Herod will reform many things, but his Herodias he will not
part withal. It is said of Naaman the Syrian that he was a valiant man, But
he was a Leper. So, many go far, have good gifts, make great shows, But they
are covetous, But they are disobedient, and will not do Gods will, Ezekiel. 33.
31. These Buts spoil all. They must have their Reservations, V. Dyke on the
Heart. p. 134, etc.
their Dispensations, their Dalilahs, their beloved lusts, though they perish
with them.

11 Iehu the Son of Nimshi (for now the line of succession is again changed)
having slain Ioram the Son of Ahab, gets up into his Throne. He is anointed
King by a young Prophet, at Elisha's command, 1 King. 19. 16. and 2 King. 9. 6.
2 Chronicles. 22. 7. The reason why he only of all the Kings of Israel (since the
division) was anointed with Oil, was this, because his work was hard and
extraordinary, and therefore the Lord, to make him the more courageous, and
confident, assures him, by this visible sign, that he had called him, and he
would keep him in his office. He being an active, valiant, politic man,
Commander in Chief over the Army in the City of Ramoth Gilead, and so, highly
esteemed amongst the Captains and soldiers, was raised by God to execute his
vengeance on the house of Ahab. Having slain Ahaziah King of Judah, 2 King 9.
27. He then cuts off Iesabel, 2 King. 9. 30, 33. Causes the seventy Sons of
Ahab to be beheaded, 2 King. 10. 6. Slaies two and forty of Ahaziah the King
of Iudahs Brethren, 2 King. 10. 13, 14. And destroies all the Idols, Priests,
and Worshippers of Baal; down go all his Monuments, he burns his Images,
destroies the house of Baal, and makes it a draught-house, 2 King. 10. 25, 26,
27, 28. This was good service, and such as God had commanded and approved of,
and therefore the Lord promises him a reward for his service, viz. that his
posterity to the fourth Generation, should sit upon his Throne, 2 King. 10. 30.
Yet this But lies on him as a blot, that he countenanced and practiced that
part of Idolatry which consisted in the faise worship of the true God, brought
in by Jeroboam, who set up the Golden Calves, 2 King. 10. 29. And for this God
punishes him. 1 In his own days, God smote him in all the coasts of Israel, 2
King. 10. 32, 33. And because his heart was not sound in what he did, but he
sought himself, Homines facientes ea quae Deus praecepit and vult, tamen
peccant, nisi and mado legitimo and fine faciant, i. e. Ex side and studio
obediendi Deo causae enim impulsiva and finales faciunt actionum diseimina.
Paraeus.
and the settling of the Kingdom upon himself and his posterity, and did
tolerate Idolatry, therefore God threatens to punish him in his posterity
after his death, and to avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu,
Hos. 1. 4.

He reigns eight and twenty years, and then leaves the Kingdom to his Son.

Obs. 1 God transfers Kingdoms from one family to another, as pleases him.

He takes it from Ioram, and gives it to Iehu his servant, 2 King. (...). We
may not therefore free and murmr at Gods dispensations, but must be dumb and
silent, since it is he who is King of Kings that does it. He pulls down one,
and sets up another in the Throne, and none may say unto him, what do thou?
Dan. 2. 21. and 4. 35.

2 The hearts of men are in the hand of God, and he turns them as pleases him.

If he set up Iehu, he will give him in, the hearts of the people. It is
wonderful to see that a Captain should so suddenly, and so unanimously become
King of Israel. 1 The soldiers, they proclaim him at the City of Ramoth.
Gilead, 2 King. 9. 13. 2 He goes to Iezr^el, and it yields. 3 He bids throw
down Iesabel, and the Eunuchs presently do it, 2 King. 9. 32, 33. 4 He summons
Samaria, and it submits. 5 He calls for the heads of Ahabs seventy Sons, and
they are given him; he can but ask, and have; as it is said of Caesar, Veni,
vidi, vic^^- he no sooner came, but he overcame. Thus shall it be done to
those whom God will honor.

3 What ever God threatens or promises, shall certainly come to pass.

They are all Yea, and Amen, true and infallible; Heaven and E(...) shall fail,
before one jot or tittle of Gods word shall fail, (...) all be fulfilled,
Matthew. 5. 18. God threatened vengeance on the house of Ahab, and see how it is
fulfilled in every particular. 1 The Lord threatens, that where the dogs lickt
Naloths blood, there they should lick the blood of Ahab; see this fulfilled, 1
King. 22. 38. 2 That the dogs should eat Iesabel in the field of Iezreel; see
it fulfilled, 2 King. 9. 35, 36. 3 That God would cut off Ahabs posterity, for
his Idolatry, and we see Ioram, and the seventy sons of Ahab all cut off;
whereupon Iehu calls on the people to consider the truth of Gods threatenings, 2
King. 10. 7, 10. God has threatened many judgments against disobedient ones,
Deuteronomy. 28. 16, etc. And there is not one of them, but first or last, will light
upon the heads of those that go on still in their sins.

2 The Lord promised Iehu, that his children should sit upon his Throne to the
fourth Generation, and we see it punctually performed, for after him reigned
his four Sons, Jehoash, Joash, Jeroboam, and Zechariah. The Kingdom continued
in his family about an hundred years.

4 Though God for a time may defer the fulfilling of his threatenings and
promises, yet in his due time (when men think he has forgot, and imagine that
God is like to them, and approves of all their doings) he will arise and
fulfill what ever he has said.

Though he seldom come at our time, yet he never fails his own, Hab. 2. 3.
Heb. 10. 37. He lets Ahab reign two and twenty years, suffers Jesabel to stone
Naboth, to slay his Prophets, to persecute his people; I, but see what havoc
Jehu makes amongst them, and how God recompenseth his patience with the
fierceness of his fury, and suffers not one word to fail that he spoke against
them by the Prophet Elijah.

Let us therefore firmly believe the Word of God, and let us not faint in a
time of trouble, for then our strength is but small, Prove. 24. 10. And let us
not envy the prosperity of wicked men, nor fret when they seem to carry all
before them, for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the
green herb, Psalm. 37. 1, 2.

5 When God has great works to do in the world, and great changes to make, he
raises up Instruments fitted for the work, and gives them a spirit of
activity, wisdom and counsel to effect it.

If God will have Ahab, Jesabel, and Baal down, he has a Jehu at hand ready
to perform it; God can no sooner command, but Jehu executes, He shoots Joram,
slaies Ahaziah, kills Jesabel, cuts off the house of Ahab, and conquers all
before him. No doubt but many cursed and mis-called him for this great
slaughter and change; but he came to do Gods work, and will, and he does it
strenuously and successfully, in despite of all opposition that lay in his way.
So good it is to act for God in our places and callings.

6 Idolatry is attended with war and misery.

Jehu walks in Jeroboms Idolatry, and see what follows, 2 King 10. 31, 32, 33.
In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short, and Hazael smote them in all
the coasts of Israel, he burnt their Cities, killed their young men, slaies
their children, (...) ripped up the women with child, and then the Moabites
distress them on the other side, 2 King. 1. 1. and 3. 5. and 13. 20.

7 Obs. Sin besots men that they cannot see the misery which is coming on them.

Iehu knew how Gods hand was upon Jeroboam and his posterity, and Baasha and
his posterity, and Ahab and his posterity for their Idolatry; yea; and Jehu
himself was an executioner of Gods wrath upon the house of Ahab for this sin,
and yet he lived and dyed an Idolater himself, and brought a curse on his
posterity, as his predecessors had done on theirs. It is strange that men
should punish others for illegal, exorbitant courses, and breach of
privileges, and yet themselves be notoriously guilty of the same crimes.

The Devil, and the ambitious desire of a Kingdom, had so blinded them, that
they walked in the very steps of those wicked Kings which they had but newly
slain. Hence God in his just judgment made them executioners of his wrath one
upon another. Baasha slayes Ieroboams posterity, and Zimri slayes his, etc.
Thus it was amongst the Romans, Julius Caesar roots up Pompey, Brutus and
Cassius, Julius; and Aug^^tus roots up them. The Senate pursued Nero, Otho,
Galba; Vitellius, Otho; Vespatian Vitellus; Domitian, Titus; Nerva and Trajan,
Domitian. Tyrants seldom dye in peace.

8 Obs. Rulers must destroy all the Monuments of Idolatry.

It is not sufficient that they destroy Baal, but they must down with his
Temples Images, Groves, Priests, and all his appurtenances; so does Iohu here,
and so did God command, Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. Perde^di perdetis, Destroying ye shall
destroy, i. e. ye shall utterly destroy. It is an Hebraism.
Ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations served their
gods, etc. Every word has its weight, Ye shall destroy, utterly destroy, the
places, all the places, where menserved Idols; you shall overhrow their Altars,
break their Pillars, burn their Groves, hew down their Images, and abolish the
very names of their gods. What can be more fully spoken? So Number. 33. 52. They
must destroy, not one, but, all their Pictures, and pull down all their high
places. When one demanded why in King Henry the eighths days they pilled down
the Monasteries? Si nolis cicoias, 'ollenidos
It was answered, That the very nests of such rooks must be pulled down, that
they may build there no more.

We are to bless God for this, here in England, that in our days he has not
only rooted up Idolatry, but he has cast out all the rags and remnants of
it; there is not a hoof, not a cross, not a crucifix, not an Image left
behind. The greater is their sin then, that in these days of Reformation,
have not only leaped out of the Surpless, but out of the Ministry, and out of
the Church too. They have not only cast out the Font, but the Infant also. The
Ceremonies are gone, and some are casting the substance after them. Set forms
are gone, and now they would have no prayers at all. Oh the folly and madness
of this licentious age! Do we thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise! Is
this the thanks we give him for all his Ordinances, Mercies, and great
deliverances, to separate from the Assemblies of his people, to contemn his
Ordinances, the pledges of his love unto us, to vilify his Ministers, and hate
the paths of purity and peace? The Lord has born long with this Athestical
brood, but he will not always bear. The Lord will wound the head of these his
enemies, and the hairy pates of such as walk on in such paths of libertinism
and profaneness.

9 The service that men do for God shall be rewarded.

If Jehu cut off Ahabs posterity, destroy Baal and his worshipers, and execute
Gods commands, though it be but hypocritically, yet it shall be rewarded with a
temporal reward, answerable to his service, his sons shall sit upon his Throne
to the fourth Generation, 2 King. 10. 30. Ahabs hypocritical humiliation
obtained a reprival. The King of Babylon, though a Heathen, yet is rewarded by
God for the service he does him, Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19. 20. yea and those wicked
ones, Mal 1. 10. but especially such as serve him sincerely, shall be rewarded
fully, Numb. 14. 24. Rev. 14. 13. He never says to the seed of Jacob, seek my
face, in vain, Isa. 45. 19. We cannot lose, though we should lose all by
serving him. Not only For, but In the very keeping of his Commandments there
is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11 All the good we have done in secret, shall at
last be acknowledged and openly rewarded, even to a cup of cold water, Matthew.
6. 6. and 10. 41, 42. Pharaohs Butler may forget the kindness of Joseph, and
the Saints themselves may forget the good which they have done, but their God
does not, Mal. 3. 16. Matthew. 25. 34. etc.

10 God may reward men for the matter of their service, yet punish them for the
manner of doing it.

Iehu was commanded to destroy the house of Ahab, and God commends him for it,
and rewards his service, To make Action morally good, there Circumstances must
concur. 1 The man must be Bonus. 2 He must do Bona. 3 He must do them Been.
for the act in it self was good; yet because Iehu did it hypocritically, and
by halves, and though he destroyed Ahabs house, yet he followed him in his
Idolatry, and did cut off the posterity of Ahab for self ends, viz. to settle
the Kingdom on himself and his posterity the surer, and did not primarily look
at Gods glory therein, therefore God calls it Murder, and threatens to avenge
the blood of Ahab on the house of Iehu, Hosea 1. 4. Because he did not Gods
work for God, but for himself, to settle the Crown faster on his own head, and
so did Gods work for base self ends; his great care was to settle the State and
Kingdom, and that he did thoroughly; but when he came to reform the Church,
that he did haltingly, and halvingly. He destories the Priests and Idols of
Baal, but not the Priests and Idols of Dan and Bethel; he was not sincere in
what he did, he picked and chose his way, so as might best stand with his own
politic interest; he suppressed one false way, and did tolerate another; and
therefore the Lord puts a But upon him, 2 King. 10. 31. But Iehu took no heed
to walk in the way of the Lord with all his heart, for he departed not from
the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin: V. Mr. Strong 31. Sermon. on 2
King. 10. 31. Dike on Heart, chapter 37. p. 344. Mr. Will. Shepherd, of Sincerity,
chapter 5.
This But spoiled all. A man may do much, go far, and show much zeal for God,
as Iehu did here, and yet be nothing. How fat an hypocrite may go, is
abundantly showed by others. The Papists boast much of their zeal, in
converting the Indians, when they pervert them rather, and turn them from one
kind of Idolatty, to another, and under the Name of Christ, draw them to
Antichrist, flaying and massacring those poor souls in a most inhumane, See
Whites Way to the Church. Digres. 50. p. 358.
barbarous manner, seeking their gold, rather than their good, as appears by
History.

11 The better men are, the longer many times they live.

Iehu was one of the best Kings that ever Israel had since the Tribes were
divided, and he reigned longer than any King of Israel before him did, and but
one after him that reigned longer, and that was Jeroboam the second, Iehu's
grand child, who reigned one and forty years, when Jehu reigned but eight and
twenty. Piety has the promise of long life, Prove. 22. 4. And if such as honor
their natural Fathers, shall have their days prolonged, how much more such as
honor their heavenly Father?

12. Death spares none.

Jehu, valiant, See more in my Comment on psalm. 82. 7.
powerful, politic, active, successful Jehu dies. No privilege nor
prerogative can preserve men from the grave; Death is that great Leveller,
which lays all in the dust; it is the way of all flesh, and therefore we
should prepare to meet it.

12 Jehoahaz, the Son of Jehu, succeeds his Father, both in his sin, and in the
Throne; he reigns seventeen years over Israel, and has the usual brand set on
him, which his predecessors had, viz. that he did that which was evil in the
sight of the Lord, in following the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin. This
kindles Gods wrath against him, and makes it burn like fire, insomuch that the
Lord delivered Israel into the hand of the Syrians, who oppressed them very
sorely, both in their persons and estates, and made them like the dust by
threshing, i. e. very weak and contemptible (like corn which is too much
thresht, which is broken and scattered about) leaving them but fifty horsemen,
ten Charriots, and ten thousand footmen, a poor Guard for a Kingdom, 2 King.
13. 3. 7. 22.

Quest. But what does Jehoahaz do in this his deep distress?

Answ. He goes to his prayers, as wicked men use to do, nevertill necessity
and deep distress does drive them. They make not prayer a duty, but a refuge;
yet such is the goodness of the Lord, that seeing the deep distress his people
were in, and the sad oppression they lay under, he answers the prayers of this
wicked man, and gave Israel a Savior, and Deliverer, so that they dwelt
quietly and securely as before.

Quest. But what was the ground of all this mercy?

Answ. Nothing but Gods free Grace; though they were most unworthy, yet the
Lord was gracious to them, and had compassion on them because of his covenant,
2 King. 13. 23.

Obs. 1 Those that will not serve God, shall be slaves to men.

Israel forsakes God, and God forsakes them, and delivers them into the hand of
Hazael, and into the hand of Benhadad his Son, who oppressed and vexed Israel
all their days, 2 King. 13. 2, 3.

2 Even wicked men, when they are in deep distress, will pray.

Idolatrous Jehoahaz is brought very low, and now he prays. The Heathenish
Mariners can pray in a tempest, Qui ^escit orare, discat navigare, yet how many
that go to Sea, instead of praying, curse and swear?
and call on Jonah so to do, Jonah 1, 5, 6. A wicked Pharaoh in time of trouble
may beg the prayer of a Moses, and Saul of a Samuel. How many profane persons
amongst us, when they are sick, and dying, yet will send again and again for
those Ministers to pray for them, whom they hated in their health? When the
Devil was sick, etc. We read of four sorts in one Psalm that cried to the Lord
in their trouble, viz. Travelers, sick-men, Seamen, Captives, Psalm. 107. So
did Israel, Judge. 10. 10. Psalm. 78. 34.

3 God hears the prayers of wicked men, and sometimes answers them, so as to
deliver them from temporal distresses.

Many a time did Israel cry hypocritically to the Lord, only in their trouble,
and he delivered them out of their distress, Psalm. 78. 34, to 39. So he dealt
with Ahab, 1 King. 21. 29. And Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7.

Wicked men may pray to God, as to a Creator, and he may hear them, though
they cannot pray to him as to a Father. He is a God of pity and compassion,
and the very distress and misery of the Creature Virtually, though not Vocally,
cries unto him for mercy. He that hears the cry of the Ravens, cannot but hear
the cry of his rational and more noble Creatures. This Reason is given in the
Text, Verse. 4. He saw the oppression of Israel to be great, and therefore he
heard and delivered them.

4 God usually suffers things to come to extremity, before he deliver.

Israel is brought as low as the dust; great, doubtless, was the slaughter,
when but fifty horsemen were left, and ten Charriots, and ten thousand foot,
what are these to save a Kingdom? God could have prevented this, but for the
greater manifestation of his wisdom, See my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 9. p. 182.
power and glory, he often deals thus with his people.

5 Magistrates are the Saviors of a people.

God gave Israel a Savior, Verse. 5. i. e. He raised up Joash, the Son of
Jehoahaz, who regained the Cities which his Father had lost, 2 King. 13. 25.
and prevailed mightily against the Syrians, as did Jeroboam his Son, 2 King.
14. 27. Hence Magistrates in Scripture are often called the Saviors and
Deliverers of a people, Judge. 2. 16. See more in my Conment on Psalm. 82. 1.
and 3. 9. 2 King. 14. 27. Neh. 9. 27. Prove. 11. 14. Obad. 21. There is but one
common Savior of us all, and these are subordinate Saviors under him, as
Moses, Gideon, Jeptha, Deborah, Barac, Joshua, David, etc. We should therefore
love, honor, respect them, pray for them, pay to them, and defend them whom
God has raised for our defense. In their peace, lies our peace, we should
therefore be tender over them.

6 Nothing works on hardened sinners.

No judgments, nor mercies; Israel here is brought as low as the dust, God
hears their prayers, gives them a Savior, raises them out of the dust, and
yet Israel is Israel still, as Idolatrous and forgetful of God as ever; and
that foul But still lies as a blot upon them, 2 King. 13. 6. But they departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin. Phryges Plagis, Prove.
Phrygians (they say) are amended by blows, but no beating will mend these: So
true is that of Solomon, let a sinful fool be brayed never so long in the
mortar of affliction, yet his folly will not depart from him, Prove. 27. 22. You
may beat him to death, before you can beat his folly out of him, Jer. 8. 28, 29.

Neither do mercies win them, Isa. 26. 10. Unless God set in with his Spirit,
nothing works kindly upon our souls, but men will be made more obstinate by
judgments, and more loose by mercies. Besides, Elisha living in those times
(no doubt) but he had forewarned them of the evils approaching, and yet
nothing works upon them.

7 The ground of all Gods goodness to his people is no merit of ours, See more
in my Comment on 2 Timothy 4. 8. p. 408, 409.
but only his own free grace and love, 2 King. 13. 23.

8 No might nor manhood can save a sinful people from ruin.

King Jehoahaz here is said to be a man of Might, and one that with abundance
of courage and valor fought with the Syrians, yet still they prevailed against
him: so that it was not want of courage, but want of conscience in him and his
people that undid them. Their Idolatry was their worst enemy, and strengthened
their enemies against them.

13 Jehoash or Joash succeeds Jehoahaz his father, both in his dignity and
iniquity. He reigned sixteen years, and has the common But and brand put upon
him that his Predecessors had, 2 King. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13. He obtained three
great Victories against the Syrians, of which Elisha foretold him. 2 King. 13.
17, 18, 19. and rescued many of the Cities of Israel from them, and thereupon
is called their Savior and Deliverer, 2 King. 13. 5, 25. He also prevailed
against Amaziah King of Judah, and pillaged the Temple of Jerusalem, with the
Kings house, 2 King. 14. 13. and which makes most for his praise, though he
were a King, yet he goes to visit the sick Prophet Elisha, He sends not a
servant with a How do you? but he waits upon the poor Prophet in person, etc.
V. Mr. Sam. Ainsworth his Sermon at Mr. Pernes Funeral, p. 1, 2, 3.
weeps over him, and calls him, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof. Such tender affection and reverence did this wicked
King bear to this man of God, whom he acknowledged to be the Walls and
Bulworks, the Ammunition and defense both of Church and State, who by his
praying and preaching, did more for the defense and safety of Israel, than all
their Armies could do.

1 Obs. It is dangerous following our forefathers in sin.

Iehoash does so, and is punished for his pains. People are so besotted with
the example of their Parents and Ancestors, especially if Idolaters, that they
will after them what ever come of them, 2 King. 17. ult. which made the Lord to
add that commination to the end of the second Commandment, (which he does to
no other Commandment) against those children which should walk in the steps of
their Idolatrous forefathers, A me and a vobis recedant qui dicunt, nolumus
esse meliores quam patres nostri, Bern. Ep. 93.
and often forbids that sin, as foreseeing our proneness to it, Ezekiel. 20. 18,
19, 20. Psalm. 78. 8. Zach. 7. 4. and bids us to the Law, and not to Examples,
Isa. 8. 20. If Ioash would have followed his Predecessors, he should have set
before him the example of Abraham, Optimum est majorum ve^tigia sequi, si recie
praecesserunt. Cato.
Isaac, and Jacob, and not of Jeroboam an Idolater that had misled so many
into sin and misery. We may follow our forefathers so far as they followed
Christ, and no further. But such is the bewitching power of Superstition, that
when once it has got possession and rooting in men's hearts, it is seldom ever
rooted up again, but runs from generation to generation, till all be cut off.
Idolatry has so many flesh-pleasing, pompous Rites and Ceremonies, such
seeming sanctity and devotions, such splendour of Temples, Images, Organs, and
other allurements as are very taking with carnal men; besides the fat
Bishoprics, Denaries, Cardinal-ships and Kingdoms with which they entice many
from Christ. This was that which made all these Kings of Israel keep up the
worship of the Calves, that they might keep the people from going from them to
Jerusalem.

2 Obs. Men may conquer others, and yet not conquer themselves.

Ioash here beats the Syrians three times, recovers many Cities from them,
takes the King of Judah prisoner, and yet himself is a prisoner to sin; he
pillageth Jerusalem, and the Devil pillageth him. He is called the Savior of
Israel, and yet himself was not saved from his iniquity; for he lived and dyed
an Idolater. So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 16. 32. He that can rule his
own spirit, Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vinc^t Maenia. Lucan.
is better than he that takes a City. Alexander that could conquer others,
yet Wine and Women conquered him.

3 There is none so wicked, but there is some good in them.

Joash here a wicked King, yet visits the Prophet in his sickness, sympathizeth
with him, and weeps over him in his affliction, considering the great loss that
the Church and State would receive by his death; he gives him honorable
Titles, savouring of much respect to him. How would some Atheistical Sectaries
amongst us have railed at this King for calling the good Prophet Father, and
stiling him, The Chariot of Israel, See Mr. Obad. Sedgwicks Ser. on 2 King. 2.
12. preached 1654.
i. e. The Shield and Buckler, the best defense that Israel had. Those Sots and
Satan's, whom the Devil has blinded, and strongly deluded, are not worthy of an
Answer [yet if any would see them answered, let them peruse my Comment on 2 Timothy 3. 17. p. 296.] Wisdom is justified of her own children; Cum istius
farinal hominibus non est operose disputandum, nam neque id merentur illorum
dogmata quae difficult atem ^ullam continent, neque ill is reddes magis
convictos, sed polius arrogantiores, etc. Hornbeck summa Controvers. lib. 6 p.
386: Virtutem incolumem odimus, sublatam ex oculis colimus invidi. Horat.
and though this ungrateful world vilify Gods Ministers whilst living, yet
when they are dead, they are ready to adore them.

4 There is no loss in showing kindness to the Prophets of God.

The King comes to visit the Prophet in his sickness, and the Prophet by way of
gratitude assures the King of a threefold victory, which he should have
against the Syrians, 2 King. 13. 25 etc. The Lord takes the kindness which we
show to his Prophets, as done to himself. He that honors them, honors him
whose Ambassadors they are. Ebedmelech, that showed kindness to Jeremy, has
his life given him for a prey, Ier. 39. 17, 18. He that receives a Prophet, in
the name of a Prophet, and shows kindness to him upon that account, because he
is a Minister of Christ, shall have a Prophets reward, Mat. 10. 41. i. e. He
shall have an eminent reward, fit for such a one as has promoted Gods service
in a high degree. Gaius lost nothing by such guests as John, nor the Shunamite
or Sareptan Widow by entertaining Prophets; of such Christ seems to say, as
Paul did of Onesimus, if he owe thee ought, put it on mine account, I will
repay it.

5 He died,

The most potent, puissant, successful Conquerors of the world, are conquered
by death. As I have showed before.

14 Jeroboam the second succeeds his Father Joash, and reigns one and forty
years; not one of his rank reigned so long; he was one of the most prosperous,
successful, and victorious of all the Kings of Israel, since the division of
the ten Tribes. He recovered the ancient borders of Israel from the Syrians,
and made them tributary to himself. The ground of all this goodness is given, 2
King. 14. 23, 25, 26, 27, 28. The Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it
was very bitter, for there was none shut up or left, nor any helper left,
therefore the Lord out of his wonted mercy raised up Jeroboam to be a Savior
to them; Yet he is stigmatized with the old brand that his predecessor had
before him, v^z. That this New Jeroboam was a chip of the old block, for he
did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and departed not from all the
sins of old Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, 2 King. 14. 24.

And that which aggravates his sin is this, 1 That he sinned against great
Light, for in his days preached Jonah, Amos, Hosea, three very famous
Prophets. 2 Against great Love, for the Lord sent Jonah to prophecy of
victory, and good success unto him, 2 King. 14. 25. But since he profited not
by this Prophets Ministry, the Lord sends him to Niniveh the chief City of the
great Empire of the Assyrians.

Obs. 1 When a Nation is in its most prosperous and flourishing condition, it
may be nearest ruin.

Israel never flourisht (since the division of the ten Tribes) under any King,
as it did under this: Joash and Jehoahaz had done valiantly before, but
Jeroboam excells them all. Under him the Kingdom flourisht* in riches,
honors, victories, and great success. But after this its honor and power
still decayed, till it was totally ruined. It was in this Kings reign, that
Hosea foretold the destruction of Samaria, Hos. 1. 1. And Amos foretold the
ruin of Jeroboam and his house, Amos 1. 2. and 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. Idolatrous
Kingdoms cannot stand long; Babylon may think to sit as a Queen, but sorrows
shall at last surprise her, and no worldly pomp or power shall be able to keep
off Gods judgments from her, Rev. 18. 7, 8. All Kingdoms have their rise and
ruin, and when they be at the height, then they decrease and moulder away, as
we see in the Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian Monarchies; what vast
Dominions had they? yet all are vanished and come to nothing.

This should keep us humble in the midst of all creaturecomforts. Pigeons, when
they fare best, are most fearful. In the highest prosperity remember that a
change will come. Hence it is, that when ever the Lord gave Israel a mercy, he
presently adds a caution, Magni pectoris est inter secund^ moderatio. Sen.
Magnae felicitatis est a felicitate non ^ixci. Clemangiis.
that they forget not him the giver of it, Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2, 6, 9. and 8. 11, 13,
13, 14. He has made a good progress in the School of Christ, who has learnt
to use prosperity as well as adversity aright. Paul had learnt both these
lessons, he could be abased, and he could abound, Phil. 4. 12.

Object. We have arms and ammunition, and therefore we need not fear.

Answ. The Lord takes off that, Hos. 1. 4, 5. Yet a little while, and I will
cause the Kingdom of Israel to cease. i. e. I will put an end to that
Kingdom, and utterly destroy it. But how does that appear? Why, I will break
the bow of Israel. The bow is here put for all warlike Instruments, q. d. I
will destroy their ammunition, and bring all the strength of their warlike
power to naught.

2 That God can make use of wicked Instruments for the saving of his people.

Jeroboam here a wicked man, yet becomes a Savior to Israel; though he
intended self, yet God makes him a deliverer of his people. If God will help
his Church, he cannot want Instruments; The very Earth shall help the Woman,
Rev. 12. 16. i. e. Wicked men, who are as vile as the Earth, shall yet be
assistant to the Church of God.

3 When a people have the best Preaching, they may be nearest ruin.

Israel now had three extraordinary Prophets sent unto them, viz. Jonah, Amos,
Hosea, three eminently holy, bold men, that spared not to tell them of their
sins, as appears by their Prophecies; yet Prince and people contemning their
warnings, and persisting in their sins, about thirty years after they were
rooted up, and lead into captivity by the proud Assyrian; So it was with
Jerusalem, it had the best Preachers not long before its ruin. There was
Christ and his Apostles, but they contemning the Gospel, See Josephus his
History. 1. 7. c. 18.
crucifying the Lord of glory, stoning his Prophets, and abusing his
messengers; about forty years after it was sacked by Titus and Vespatian, and
laid in the dust.

London was never so richly stored with pious, painful, learned Ministers of
the Gospel, nor the Nation so richly furnished with able and industrions
Preachers, as at this day. But if City and Country go on to slight and vilify
the faithful Ministers of Christ, as they have done of late; and instead of the
power of Religion, rest content with a formal, hypocritical profession of it; a
man that is no Prophet, nor Prophets Son, may easily foresee judgment
approaching. When the Sun shines hot test, harvest is at hand. The glorious
sunshine of the Gospel, ripens men apace, either for Heaven, or Hell. God will
not bear so long with sinners now, as he did in times of Ignorance, Act. 17.
30.

4 When Gods Messengers are not prized, he removes them.

If Israel regard not Ionah's Ministry, God will send him from them to
Niniveh, that populous City. When people are dead under lively Oracles, and
barren under fruitful means, God will either remove that people from the
Ministry, or the Ministry from them. He will not always plow the Rocks, and
sow the Sands, nor take pains with a people that shall bring forth nothing but
briars and thorns; when a people be rebellious, God either takes away his
Prophets, or makes them dumb, Ezekiel. 3. 26.

Many blame Ministers in our days for removing from place to place, and if
they do it without just cause, so do I. But people must know, that there are
many just causes of a Ministers removal from one place to another; some of
which I shall set down, As,
1 In case of Persecution. 2 In case of Corporal Weakness and Sickness. 3 Upon
Improvement of Gifts. 4 When the Maintenance is Incompetent.


1 In case of Persecution, especially if it be personal, and the Minister be
specially aimed at; then our Savior tells us, that being persecuted in one
City, they may fly to another, and reserve themselves for better times. This is
granted by all sober men, V. Aug. Ep. 180. Aquinas 2. 2ae. Q. 185. art. 5. Pet.
Martyr. D. Geo. Abbot, in Thesib. cap. 5. de fuga in persecutione and peste. p.
169. Et prae aliis ^owles Past^r Evangelic. lib. 3. cap. 8. p. 204.
and therefore I shall refer the Reader to the Margin for fuller satisfaction.
Thus, when a Minister desires to spend himself for the good of a people, but
they cannot endure sound Doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. 3. But lay snares for their
Minister, and make a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29. 21. And think him too
hot, too plain, too precise, and shall unanimously (for the opposition of one
or two malicious wretches, should settle us rather) desire us to depart out of
their coasts, then the case is clear, and we may shake off the dust of our
feet against such wilful contemners of the Gospel, Mat. 10. 14. Though a
peoples present barrenness under his Ministry be no just cause of his
removal, yet when a people shall set themselves maliciously against a man's
Ministry, it varies the case. God removed Lot from the Sodomites, when from
day to day they vexed his righteous soul with their malicious wickedness.

2 In case of Sickness. Non mutat sedem, qui non mutat mentem, i. e. qui non
avaritiae causa, aut dominationis, aut propria^ voluntatis, vel delectationis
su^ migrat de civitate ad civitatem; sed causa necessitatis and utilitatis
mutatu; Pelag. Epist.
Some constitutions will not away with some Climats; a Minister may love a
people, and they him, and yet for want of health and strength to go through with
the work of his Ministry, he may lawfully change places with one of a
stronger constitution. The like may be said for those who preach to a great
Congregation, but by reason of weakness, their voice is so low, that half the
people cannot hear them; in this case they may remove to a lesser Congregation,
where they may be better heard.

3 Upon Improvement of Abilities. A young man begins to exercise his gifts in
some obscure Chapel, or little place; but by study and exercise his parts are
improved, and he fitted for some more eminent and public place. In this case
also a man may lawfully, and without offense remove. The Apostle would have him
that used the office of a Deacon we^l, promoted to the Ministry, 1 Timothy 3. 13.
A diligent man stays not long in a low place. We see it is thus in all
callings, upon Improvement of Abilities. The Barrester is made a Reader, the
Reader a Sergeant, the Sergeant a Judge, the Judge a chief Justice, etc. And
why will not men allow of that in the Ministry which is approved of in all
other professions?

It is a very safe way to have young men's gifts and lives tried and exercised
in lesser. Congregations at first, and being found faithful in a little, then
to make them Rulers over greater Congregations. It is a temptation to put a
green head into a great place, when he has neither grace, gifts, nor gravity
fit for the place. It either puffs them up, or makes them idle (if the means
be great) or else they are discouraged, and sink under the burden, being
unable to grapple with the oppositions and contradictions of sinners, which are
incident to such great places. They had need to be solid, seasoned,
substantial pieces, that have the weight of the building lying on them.

4 When the Maintenance is Incompetent. If a man have a great family to
maintain, but the means is so small, that he cannot maintain his family, nor
go through the works of his Ministry, with that comfort and credit as becomes a
Minister of the Gospel; in such a case also it is lawful to remove. We see it
is fo in all callings; if a man cannot live in one Town, he may lawfully
remove to another. God would have the Ministers of the Gospel not to beg, V.
S^l Terrae. cap. 9.
but to live comfortably in their Ministry; and to be maintained not like
Swine-heards, but like the Ambassadors of Christ, with a competent, fixed,
honorable maintenance. The Levites that had their Tithes taken from them, left
their stations without blame, Neh. 13. 10.

5 Whereas many think that a Minister can remove at his pleasure from place to
place, and get what place soever pleases him, they are much deceived; for God
has decreed and fore-appointed Ministers to their places before they are born.
He has decreed how long such a Minister shall abide in such a place, and how
long in such a place, Act. 17. 26. and though we are loath to remove, yet when
providence calls, be the means more or less, it matters not, we must obey,
Genesis 12. 1. 4. Act. 7. 3. 5. And if a Sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor a
hair from our heads, without a providence, much less can a Minister remove from
one Congregation to another without a providence; so that the quarrelling
Quakers, with the rest of that rout, who rail at us when we justly remove from
place to place, do not so much revile us, as the Lord, who is the disposer of
us; he is the Potter, and we are the clay, he may raise us, or ruin us, plant
us, or transplant us, as he sees good, and none may say unto him, What do
thou? It is not we, but the Holy Ghost that sets us over our flocks, Act. 20.
28.

Quest. But why does the Lord remove men from place to place, as he did the
Apostles sometimes, why does he not fix them to one place?

Answ. The Lord is a free agent, and is not bound to give us a reason of his
doings, it may satisfy us that it is his good pleasure to have it so, Psalm.
39. 9. Matthew. 11. 25, 26.

2 If nothing will satisfy you without a Reason, reasons enough may be given.

1 Sometimes people hate and persecute their Ministers, and look upon them as a
burden, not a blessing; it is fit such should be eased, and made to know the
worth of the mercy, by the wanting of it.

2 Sometimes people are barren under the means of grace, and do not value the
Gospel according to its worth, it is just with God to remove it to those who
will prize it better. When the Jews contemned the Gospel, the Apostle left them
and went to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from
such, and be given to those* that will bring forth the fruit of it.

3 As for the Apostles, there was great reason why they were not fixed to one
place:

1 Because the Church was then in planting, but not planted.

2 They were to spread the Gospel over the world, and therefore were not
confined to any fixed charge.

Caution. Yet to prevent scandal, these Cautions would be remembered.

1 Because many are apt to cavil and cry, Ministers are covetous, and remove
without a cause; let none remove rashly, ambitiously, self-seekingly, but
judiciously, and piously, for the profit and edification of the Church; and the
better to stop the mouths of adversaries, it were well if in such cases men
would not be their own judges, but refer the hearing of the case, with all its
circumstances, to the Presbytery, or for want of that, to some neighbor
Ministers, who are able to judge and determine the case.

2 They must do what in them lies to provide an able successor for the place
they leave, See my Comment on 3* Tim. 4 12.
that the Church be not unprovided of a faithful Pastor.

3 If after all this, any shall be found to make it their trade to remove from
place to place, solely to get more means, and shall refuse to refer their cause
to the hearing and determination of sober, pious, judicious Ministers, let them
bear their shame for me, I shall never plead for such.

By all that has been said, we may see,

1 That some offend in the Defect, whilst they hold it unlawful for a man upon
any occasion to remove, whereas Christ who is the Lord of the harvest, has not
only power to call Ministers, but also to transfer them from one Church to
another; See more Calvin Epi^t. 209. Chemnit. loc. com. P. 322 Heming de
Pastore, p. 211. and prae aliis Bowls Past^r. Evange^ic. lib. 3 cap. 7.
and therefore it is not in the power of any man absolutely to indent with any
people to stay so long, or so long with them.

2 Others offend in the Excess, when upon every light occasion, without any
urgent necessity, or benefit to the Church, they forsake their proper charge,
and chaffer for Parishes as Horse-coursers do for horses; or as Seneca says of
sick men, Mutationibus ^^^^tur pro remediis, they think to cure their sick
souls with changing of their seats, as the dropsy man thinks to cure his
dropsy with change of drinks.

15 Zachariah son to Jeroboam, succeeds him, both in the Throne, and in his
sin, and has therefore the common brandset upon him, viz. That he did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his Forefathers had done. He was
so far from repenting of the wickedness of his forefathers, Iehu, Iehoahaz,
Ioash, and Jeroboam, that he justified them in their abominations, by walking
in their sinful paths. This his obstinacy so incensed the Lord against him,
that when he had reigned but six months, he cut him off by Shallum, who
killed him openly; so wicked was he, and so ill-beloved, that the people let
him be slain before them, they did not oppose, but rather approve of what was
done, 2 King. 15. 8, 9, 10. This was the time of the Kingdom of Isreal's wane,
things grew worse and worse with them, one judgment following in the neck of
another, till they were quite destroyed; and one wicked King rising up as Gods
executioner to do justice upon another, till all was over-thrown.

Obs. 1 God faithfully performs what ever he promises.

God promises Iehu, that his seed should sit upon his Throne, to the fourth
Generation, and see it here punctually performed; and if he thus faithfully
keep promise with his enemies, who daily provoke him by their ingratitude and
Idolatry, what will he not do for his people, who serve him sincerely? He
that thus keeps touch with his enemies, will never fail his friends. Though for
a time he may hide himself, to try and exercise their graces, yet not one
tittle of all that he has promised* shall fail.

2 God is faithful in fulfilling his Threatenings, though it be long first.

The Lord threatened to avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, Hos.
1. 4. and now about one hundred years after, Zachariah the last of Iehu's race,
is slain. Though God defer long, yet he comes at last; though his mill grind
slow, yet it is always sure.

3 Still see how wicked Parents bring a curse upon their children.

Iehu's sin helps to cut off his Son Zachariah suddenly, for he reigned but six
months.

16 Shallum, Male par^a, male pereunt Regna.
a man of a new stock, having slain Zachariah, reigns in his stead one month;
so quickly does the hand of justice find out bloody Usurpers, and retaliate
their sins; for as he slew Zachariah, so Menahem slaies him. As men mete to
others, so usually God metes to them again, Mat. 7. 2.

17 Menahem slaies Shallum, and reigns ten years in his stead. 1 He was an
obstinate Idolater, for he walked in the Idolatrous steps of his predecessors,
whom God had punished before him, and his own hands had been the executioner of
Gods wrath upon one of them, 2 King. 15. 18.

2 He was cruel to all that submitted not to him. He came to Tiphsah, a City
situate in the way to Tirzah, demands admit^ance, which being denied to him, an
Usurper, in his wrath he puts all to the sword, without distinction of old or
young, male or female, and which adds to his cruelty, he ripped up the women
with child, 2 King. 15. 16. Now if Menahem do thus to those that withstand and
oppose him, a Tyrant, wha^ shall be done ^o Me^ahem, who opposed God, and
seduced his people from him to Idols?

Quest, But why did the people oppose Menahem?

Answ. They knew him to be a Tyrant, and bloody Usurper, and came to the
Kingdom by murder, and therefore the people are not to be blamed for shutting
their gates against him, till they had better satisfaction about his ti^le to
the Crown; and if Mena^em had been an ingenuous, valiant spirit indeed, he
would have loved them the better for their fidelity and constancy, supposing
they would have been as faithful to him when he had been settled amongst them;
but men that are void of prudence, piety, and true valor, are satisfied with
nothing but blood. None so cruel as the cowardly Tyrant, when he conquers.

3 He was Tyrannical; He exacted by force no less than a thousand talents of
silver, which was, three hundred seventy and five thousand pounds, to give to
Pull, the King of Assyria, that so he might settle the Kingdom faster on
himself. He came to the Crown by Treason, Murder, and Usurpation, and having a
guilty conscience, he feared lest some might rise up against him, as he had
done against others, and therefore he ^abours by might and main to secure the
Kingdom to himself. Usurpers fear shadows many times, Judge. 9. 36. They fear,
where there is no cause of fear.

This Menahem (says Josephus) was a Captain, and great Commander in King
Zachariah's army, he hearing that Shallum had slain his Master, came with the
army, and destroi^s Shallum; as Omri destroyed Zimri, and succeeded him in the
Throne.

Obs. 1* Tyrants and Traitors seldom live to be old.

In the space of one year there are four Kings of Israel succeeding one
another, viz. Jeroboam, Zachariah, Shallum and Menahem* Abimelech, an usurping
Tyrant, reigns but three years, V. Mendoza, in 1 R^g. 4. 22. Sect. 16. p. 262.
and then is killed by a woman. Judge. 9. 22, 53. The Popes of Rome, how quickly
were many of them cut off? B^^^i^ ^^^t n^^^^^e est, cum n^c D^^ ni^antur, nec
j^^e gera^tur, nec b^^^volentia t^neantur. Wolphius.
Some reigned not a year, others not a quarter, othe^s a month, others a week,
and some but a few days. How many Popes did Queen Elizabeth outlive, though
they cursed her with Bell, Book, and Candle? So true is that of Solomon, Prove.
28. 2. For the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. 1 There
are many striving at the same time one against another for the Crown. Or, 2
There are many in a short time succeeding one another; such sudden changes are
hurtful both to Prince and people, and are apt to raise tumults and
insurrections, because a people are unacquainted with the men, and their
manners. When people do wickedly, both they and their Kings do perish, 1 Samuel
12. 25.

2 Tyrants have more care of themselves, than of the people.

Good Rulers are men of public spirits, they serve not themselves, but their
Generation, Act. 13. 36.

But tyrannical Menahems tax and pole, fleece and slay, not for their peoples
good, but to settle the Kingdom on themselves.

3 God wants not Rods to punish a perverse people.

When the Syrians have done with Israel, now he raises up the Assyrians, who
distressed them more than the former, till they were totally ruined, 2 King.
17. 6. When lesser Rods do not mend a people, then come greater; yea rather
than fail, one wicked man shall be executioner to another, as we see in these
wicked Kings.

4 See here how misery still attends Idolatry at the heels.

Menahem walked in the Idolatrous ways of Ierob^am, and the King of Assyria
presently falls on him. So 1 Chronicles. 5. 25, 26.

5 Idolaters are barbarous, bloody men.

Who ever saw an Idolater that was not cruel? Idolatrous Menahem, what cruelty
does he exercise on all sorts and sexes? He kills his King, and now murders
the people. Tyrants are like dropsie-men, the more blood they drink, the more
thirsty they are. The cruelty of Papists in notoriously known to the world. Ask
England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Savoy, Poland, and all Protestant
Nations, and they will ^ell you of many thousands that have been most inhumanly
slain by that man of sin. No less than thirty thousand Protestants were slain
at the Parisian Massac^e, See Mr. Whites Way to the Church. Digres. 50. p. 358.
and Mr. Cl^rks Martyrology.
1572. in a months space. Go to the Indians, and they will tell you sad stories
of the butchery and barbarous murders committed by the Papists there.

6 Idolaters usually are great oppressors.

They impose heavy burdens upon their people; so did Menahem here, and so did
Solomon before him, when he fell to Idolatry, and Rehoboam his Son adds to
their burdens, 1 King. 12. 4, 11. It is just with God, when men will not serve
him with gladness of heart, in the abundance of all things, and submit to his
easy yoke, then to put an Iron yoke of oppression upon them, that they may
know the difference between his service, and the service of Idols, Deuteronomy. 28.
47, 48. 2 Chronicles. 12. 8. Hos. 5. 11. Such as can so easily part with spirituals,
shall lose their temporals. Those that will not have grace, shall not have
riches long.

18 Pekahiah succeeds his Father, and therein is more happy than his Father,
who gained the Kingdom by murder. He reigned two years, and did evil in the
sight of the Lord, as his predecessors had done before him; and therefore he
has the common brand set upon him, 2 King. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25. Pekah the son
of Remaliah, a Captain of his own, conspires against him, and slaies him in his
Royal Palace at Samaria. Argob and Arieh, with fifty of the Gileadites, are
thought to be Pekah's partners, who aided him in the murder of their
sovereign. Others conceive they were on the Kings side, and slain with him. But
the first opinion is conceived to be most genuine.

Obs. 1 God many times visits the sins of the Fathers upon the children,
especially when they walk in their steps.

Menahem killed his King, and now God raises up one to kill his Son. Thus
wicked men that get riches and Kingdom for their children by indirect means,
get a cu^se for them and bring them into many straights and miseries, which
otherwise they might have avoided.

2 If God be against us, no place can secure us.

Let Pekahiah get into Samaria, the City Royal, and be guarded in his Palace
there, yet God has a Pekah that shall find him out, and slay him in his own
Palace, for his sin, and the sins of his bloody Father.

3 If we take the fifty Gileadites for the Kings friends and assistants, then
observe, That such as side with great men in their sins, must look to suffer
with them.

No doubt but these Gileadites gloried, that they were admitted to be
Courtiers, and Assistant to the King, but as it proved, they had better have
been Carters, for then they had not perished, as they did. It is dangerous
living in Prince^ Courts; Procul a Iov^, procul a fulmin^.
they live safely, who live privately; especially it is dangerous to have
communion and fellowship with the wicked. Good Iehosaphat joining with wicked
Ahab against the Syrians, had like to have lost his life into the bargain. The
Geese in the Fable that joined with the Cranes in preying upon the fields, were
killed for company.

19 Pekah having killed Pekahiah, reigns twenty years in his stead; He also
did evil in the sig^t of the Lord, and has the common brand, 2 King. 15. 27,
28. He was born of obscure Parents, his Father Remaliah was a private person,
and therefore by way of contempt he is called Remaliah's Son, and the tail of
a fire-^rand, Isa. 7. 4. and 8. 6. He is punished for his obstinacy and
Idolatry.

I With the loss of ^ great part of his Kingdom; All the people of the Land of
Napthali were lead into captivi^y by Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, 2 King.
15. 29. Two Tribes and a half beyond Jordan, with Napthali and Zebulun on this
sid^ Jordan, were now carried all away, and this was the beginning of Isreal's
sorrow.

2 With the loss of his life. Hoshea conspired against him, and slew him, Verse.
30. Tyrants often come to violent ends, and those that slay their Sovereigns,
shall have some that will slay them. If Pekah kill Pekahiah, Hoshea shall kill
him. As he came to the Kingdom by murder, so by murder he loses it.

Obs. 1 Idolatry from first to last is still attended with misery.

Pek^h pe^sists in the Idolatrous steps of his predecessors, and now see how
many Cities and Regions are lost, 2 King. 15. 29. Ijon and Abel-beth-maachah,
and Ianoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, and all the Land of
Napthali; so that upon the point, five Tribes of Israel were lost. This was the
first captivity of Israel.

2 The troubiers of Gods people many times are men of sordid and obscure
Origin^ls.

Pekah here Rema^iahs Son, and the tail end of a brand, which retains not fire
long, but after a little smoking vanishes, it is he that molests Judah the
people of God, Isa. 7* 4, 5, 6. It was Alexander, a Smith, not a Goldsmiths, or
a Silver-Smith, but a Copper-Smith, that molested Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 14. David
complains that the abjects and dreggs of men gathered themselves against him,
Psalm. 35. 15, 16. and Job complains of such, Job 19. 18. and 30. 1.

20 Hoshea the last King of Israel, having slain Pekah, reigns nine years in
his stead; and though he were the last of all the Kings of Israel, yet he
also is branded for one that did evil in the sight of the Lord, though he was
not altogether so bad as the other Kings of Israel that were before him, 2
King. 17. 1, 2. Where there is any goodness, God takes notice of it, and
commends it, as I have showed before. This will appear, 1 In that he did not
worship Baal, nor serve the Host of Heaven, as some of his predecessors had
done before him. He abandoned the grosser Idolatry of many of his
Predecessors, and secondly, He suffered such of his subjects as would, to go
up to worship in the Temple of Jerusalem, which the former Kings of Israel
would not permit, but laid snares for them, Hos. 5. 1. But when Hezekiah
proclaimed a Passover, many of the ten* Tribes went up to keep it in
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30. 11.

Yet see how judgment still attends upon Idolatry, Murder and Treachery.

1 Gods hand lies heavy upon King Hoshea himself, he is subdued and made
tributary to Salmaneser King of Assyria, 2 King. 17. 3. See the unconstancy of
worldly honors, Hoshea to day a King, to morrow a prisoner; hence he is
called a bubble, or foam, that soon vanishes, Hos. 10. 7.

2 He breaks Covenant with the King of Assyria, conspires against him, and
seeks to So, the King of Egypt for aid, refusing to pay the annual Tribute
which he had covenanted to pay. Upon this Salmaneser shuts him up, and binds
him in prison, Rex ipse captus su^t, and vinculis addictus, nam licet Paulo
ante, V. 4. in vincula dicatur esse conjectus, id tamen dictum est per
Prolepsim, quae saepe ante suum tempus na^rationem anticipat. Sanctius.
Verse. 4. This was done (says Sanctius) after the City was taken, though by a
Prolepsis it is mentioned before. This is the fruit of Treachery and
Impatience; when men seek by indirect means to get out of troubles, they do but
double them, and multiply sorrows to themselves.

3 This is not all, for judgment does not only light on the King, but on his
Kingdom also. Samaria the Metropolis, and chief City, is taken by Salmaneser
King of Assyria, after three years siege, and the whole Kingdom overthrown.
The Israelites are carried captive out of their own Land into Assyria, and a
mixed people of foreign Nations are planted in their Land, He that would see
more of these twenty Kings of I^rael, let him peruse Josephus his History.
Alsteeds Encyclopaed. Histor. l. 32. c. 17. p. 2039.
who made up a Mongrel Religion, consisting of Paganism, and Judaism, fearing
the Lord, and serving their Idols too, 2 King. 17. 33. ult.

Seeing all these twenty Kings of Israel were so wicked, we may

Observe 1 That few great men are good men.

From the division of the ten Tribes, to the captivity of Israel, there was not
one good King of Israel, that Kingdom remained Idolatrous, from first to last.
There was a continued Series of Idolatry that did run through the whole race of
their Rulers. They should have seen to their people that they had lived in
godliness and honesty, and they were a means to lead them in paths of
ungodliness and Idolatry; They sinned directly against their office, for God
sets up Magistrates to rule for him, but these lead their people from him. All
other creatures observe the word of Gods command, and fulfill the end of their
Creation, and are therefore called Gods servants, Psalm. 119. 9^. All are thy
servants. The Sun, Moon, Stars, Plants, Brutes, all act in their Orbs, and
Spheres, for their Creators praise; only man rebels against him.

2 All these Kings followed the example of a wicked Jeroboam, against the Rule.

3 They perished not alone, but drew their subjects with them into perdition;
yea Judah was in part infected by them, 2 King. 17. 19.

4 They acted all this against the warnings of Gods Prophers, against signal
mercies and judgments; all which serves to clear the justice of God in their
total extirpation and ruin; we may stand amazed at the stupendous patience
of the Lord, who bare above two hundred years with such a succession of
Idolaters, and evil doers; when if his patience had not been infinite, and
every way like himself, he would not have born two hundred days with them.

Great places corrupt many, ^carce ever better any. It is folly therefore, for
any ambitiously to seek Kingship, and highplaces, Nescitis am^ci quid sit
imperare, nam and gladii, and tela cervici^us nostr^s a nostris impendent,
imm^nent hastae, undique spic^la, ipsi^^^stodes time^tur, ip^i comites
^ormidantu^, non cibus provoluptate, non iter pro authoritate. Add quod omnis
^tas in impe^io repre^^nditur; senex est quispiam? inhabilis videtur. Si
juvenis, inest furor. Dixit Saturn^nus apud Flavium Vopiscum.
from whence so many have broke their necks. We should rather pity and pray
for great men, than any way envy them, since they are exposed to so many
dangers, and great tentations.

2 The end of wicked men is miserable.

What ever the good man's beginning may be, be it never so blustrous and
rugged, yet his end is peace, Psalm. 37. 37. On the contrary, let the wicked
man's beginning be never so pleasant and plausible, yet his end is sorrowful. A
good man begins like a Tragedy, but ends like a Comedy; but a wicked man begins
like a Comedy, and ends like a Tragedy. Of those twenty Kings of Israel, eight
of them at least, if not nine, died violent and untimely deaths; the other
twelve, though they died in outward peace, yet had they no true inward peace;
how could they, when their Idolatries and spiritual whoredoms were so many?
The higher men are, the more hurt they do, and so are nearer to judgment.

The Kings of Judah, as they were generally better men, so they lived longer
than the Kings of Israel did, and came not to such untimely ends, but few of
them, viz. four, Ioash, Ioram, Ammon, and Josiah. Besides, in the time of the
twenty Kings of Israel, there were but eleven over Judah; and of those, Asa by
name reigned in the time of eight several Kings of Israel, and those of five
several stocks; and Uzziah reigned in the time of six other Kings of Israel, of
which, four were of other stocks. It will be our wisdom to take heed of those
rocks against which so many have ruined themselves, Sit aliorum perditio, tua
cautio; Let us live by Rule, not by Example, and then peace will be our
portion, Gal. 6. 16. The godly Kings of Judah, that kept purity of worship, and
went hand in hand with the Prophets, See Mr. Strongs 31. S^rm. (...) Josh. 1.
8. p. 617.
they flourisht, and were victorious. So good it is, to walk in Gods way, and
keep to the Rule, Josh. 1. 8. But the Kings of Israel had loss upon loss, and
vexation upon vexation, by enemies within and without, till they lost Life,
Land, and all. So ill it is, to walk in carnal bypath against the Rule.

3 That Succession, Antiquity, Universality, are all but vain without Verity.

The Idolatrous Israelites here might have pleaded all these for their
Idolatry, it does not therefore follow that it was just and good. Ge^ebrard in
C^r^nol. ad a^num 901. Cacolici non Catholici, Papae, Popae; Cardinales,
carnales; Dominicani, Daemoniaci; Iesuitae, Iesuvitae, Riv^^.
Genebrard confesses, that of fifty Popes in order succeeding one another,
there was not one good. They were all Apostatical, not Apostolical.

4 Such as partake with wicked men in their sins, shall also be partaker with
them in their plagues.

Israel here follows their twenty Kings in Idolatry, and now they must follow
them into captivity and ruin; if you would not partake of others plagues, be
sure not to partake with them in their sins, Rev. 18. 4.

HAving showed before that Impudency in sinning is a forerunner of some
judgment approaching; I shall now give you an instance of the Impudency,
Anarchy, and Blasphemy of our times. The bare reciting of this sinful,
sens^less Pamphlet, is confutation sufficient.

Here you may see what is the fruit of that New-light so much cried up by some;
it teaches men to disturb Congregations in Gods worship, to bring Pockets to
Church, and openly to sow them on the Lords day, to rail on Gods Messengers,
and call them liars, to lay their Bastards at Gods Door, and father all their
abominations on Gods Spirit. The Spirit moved, and the Lord (says this
deluded, hardened wretch) ^tirred him up, and commanded him, etc. And shall not
the Lord visit for these things? if Rulers will not, he certainly will. These
talk much of the Spirits leading them, but certainly it is an ill spirit that
leads them; for God is the God of order, and not of confusion; his Spirit is
the Spirit of Peace and Purity, and teaches men to act according to the word,
and not according to their own brainsick delu^ions. As for his vain
scrupulosity, in not daring to use the ordinary names of our months and days,
you may see this excellently confu^ed by the learned Dr. Reynold, in his
Commentary on Haggai, Ser. 1. p. 8, 9, 10.

In the year 59, in the fourth month, the last day of the month, being the
fifth day of the week, THe presence of the Lord was felt within me, and in his
light he let me see what his pleasure was with me; it was clearly showed me
that I should go to the Steeple-house in Alderman^u^y, the first day of the
week then following, and take with me something to work, and do it in the
Pulpit at their singing time.

At which sight I found much unwillingness in my self, yet sitting still with
^rembling, there came upon me a very great weight, pressing me to obedience;
yea a heavy burden was felt, till I had consented to obey; I felt the weight
to increase; oh how hard my unwilling will was to yield, but the Lord
strengthened me, and having consented, I found a little ease, yea I did
resolve in the power of the Lord to go on: I purposed to carry with me a
Pocket to sow.

So the first day morning being the third day of the fifth month after the
eighth hour one of the Doors being open, I passed in, thinking to get into the
Pulpit to hide my self there till their singing time, and then get up and work;
The Sexton spying me, took me by the arm, said, friend, we do not open yet,
for it was their Communion day, as they call it: but the time I was in, I found
that the Galleries were higher than the Pulpit, and I should have been
discovered before their song began; I see the Clerk giving Tickets: so about
the ninth hour their Doors were opened, I passed in as one of their own crowd,
the throng came in very fast, I gat into one of the Galleries to spy if
possible to get in the Pulpit some way, but I found none at that time, so they
began to read, and I came down, and finding no way to get into the Pulpit, I
came to the Table that is prepared so* that troop, I thought to get upon the
Table to work, but the Table was set round with young men, and when they began
their song, they laid on their hats upon the Table, so I standing still waiting
on the Lord, having a great mind to do the Lords work, their song being up, my
hat offended them, they took it off, and cast it away, and one of the young men
gave it me again, I put it on, and it offended again, in so much that
Piercefall did perceive me, who came violently, and took my hat off to fling
it away, but I held it, then he took me by the hair of the head, and dragged
me out, and as one of their own company testified to his face that he struck
me, but I cannot say that, but a lu^ty red hair'd man did strike me, I
supposed him to be an officer in that hateful place, but Piercefall after he
had dragged me out by the hair, said, Sirrah, Do you not know William Duike, I
said nay, for I did not know him; Sirrah, said he, I put him in prison, and
fined him ^en pound, and you must be served so too, and so charged the
Con^table with me, and went himself in again, and received the Sacrament for
all this.

The Constable told me that I might go away if I would, but in again I must
not. So I stood a while, and finding in my self no constraint, I passed away
toward More-fields, finding a little ease from the weight of the burden, being
faithful to what might be done at that time: but the sixth day of the week,
being the eighth day of the month, sitting at work in my Shop but not on the
Shop-board, the burden of the Lord came upon me, and the light making manifest
the same thing that was not yet done, must be done, and the Lord would not
discharge me, but laid a necessity upon me. I beholding this with trembling
and fear, I did resolve in the power of the Lord not to eat nor drink, till I
had performed the Lords requiring. So having purposed in heart, I greatly
desired the Lords assistance; and it was showed me how to do it, and the Lord
made way for me.

So the first day of the week, being the tenth day of the fifth month, I waited
opportunity till the singing time began, which when I heard, I passed in, but
being fearful to be taken with the hat again, and so lose my main business,
for the Lord: I stepped out again, but stayed not, I came in again, I looked
toward the Pulpit, and spied the Pue door open, that the Priest might pass up
the Pulpit. So I waited, thinking that Edmund Calamy would go up the Pulpit, I
intended to get in before him; for thought I, that boy that sits upon the
stairs, will open the Pulpit door for the Priest, and I will get in before, but
no Priest came, whereupon in the power of the Lord, I fixed my eye upon the
Pulpit, and I spied an Iron hook, and I passed through the Pue up the stairs,
and unhookt the door, and pulled twice, and gat it open, and I sat my self
down upon the Cushin, and my feet upon the seat where the Priest when he has
told out his lies does sit down, and having my work ready, I pulled one or two
stitches. The people lost their song, and some cried, pull him down, some,
break his neck down, and a lusty fellow came up, and did intend to do me a
mischief, and rang my neck, as if he would have wrung it in two. So I let go
my hold, and he flang me down stairs, but the Lord preserved me, and I felt
no hurt; for having done that which the Lord required me to do, I was full of
peace; and it had been little to me if they had there taken away, or killed
the body. For I was full of joy, and they were full of wrath and madness; so
they tore my Coat off, and my hat, and dragged me out, and one took me by the
hair, and flung me upon the ground, and some that was without said, why do ye
use the man so? but I gate up again, then they dragged me quite out into the
street, and there held me, and while they held me, one came, and gave me a
violent kick on the shins, and said, he could find in his heart to knock me
down, he made my shin bleed, and another kicked me on the other shin, but did
not much hurt, another said that I had been some notorious sinner heretofore,
and now came to do something that might merit; Presently the Churchwarden, as
they call him, came out, and he and the Bell-toller carried me away to the
Counter, till their Sermon was ended, as they call it, then they carried me
away to Paul's Yard, to stay for the Mayor, but the Sergeant said, he would
carry me away to the Mayors house, and there stay me till he came in, so he
did: And all the way through Paternoster-Row as I went, the boys kicked my
heels, so then the Mayor came in, and they told him that I was at work in the
Pulpit; then said he to me, Wherefore did you work there? I said, in
obedience to the Lords commandment; he said, It was a false spirit, and said
he, Where are your sureties? I said, The Lord was my surety; he said, The
Lord would not bear me out in this thing; said he to them, Carry him again to
the Counter; so they carried me back again, and there I was till the third day.

Now let all sober people judge whether I did this thing out of envy against
either Priest or People.

Yea further, I say, the Lord God lay it not to their charge, who have said
that I did it in malice, devilishness, and envy; it is the desire of my soul
that they might be saved,

And so do write my name, being a Prisoner for the Testimony of the Lord in the
Common Gaol in Newgate, London, Committed the 1 5th. of the 5th. Month, 59.
Solomon Eccles.
FINIS.
A Table of the Principal things contained in the Commentary on HOSEA.
A.
ANarchy dangerous, p. 103. 104 Application of the word necessary. p. 67
Assurance attainable. p. 41 Atheism how dangerous. p. 106. 107
B.
Barrenness under the means of grace, a great sin. p. 99. 100 Bew^re of men,
amplified in many particulars. p. 92 to 97
C.
Carnal policy ruins men. p. 121 Christ is the Lord. p. 33 Cities that are
great, usually have great sins. p. 69, 70 And great punishments. ibid.
Conviction, it is necessary to Conversion. p. 17. 18 What it is. p. 19 What
^^easure requisite to conversion. ibid. Impediments to Conviction. p. 20
Motives to get it. p. 21 Covenant, ^ins against it grievous. p. 78. 102
D.
Death is terrible in it self. p. 35* 36 It is a conquered enemy. p. 36. 37 Not
to be feared by Believers. p. 37. 38. 39 Consolation against it. p. 40
Divisions dangerous. p. 104 105
E.
Englands abuse of patience. p. 7. 8
F.
Father, God is so to his children p. 53 Fools, what men are so. p. 21 22
Forefathers not to be followed in sin. p. 146 Fortifications cannot shelter a
sinful people. p. 71
G
Gods decrees unchangeable. p 40 God is patient* p. 4, 5 Godly may lie in deep
distress p. 33 Yet God will deliver them. p. 34 Gods goodness is free. p. 46
134 Good men are good in bad times. p. 70 Goodness, if but a little, God owns
it. p. 135. 147
H.
Hardness of heart a great sin. p. 133 Hypocrites may go far, p. 16 17
Hypocrisy a great sin. p. 97 98
I.
Idols are vanity. p. 126 Idolatry brings Judgment. p. 87. 88. 133. 139. 158.
160 Ingratitude brings Judgment. p. 101. 102 Innocents, how children be such.
p. 80. 81 How they are punished for their fathers sins. p. 82. 83 Gods hand on
them should humble us. p. 85 Infants are sinners. p. 79, 80 Jeroboam how
wicked. p^115 Judgments of God irresistible p. 55.
K.
Kings of Israel very wicked. p. 112 etc.
L.
Lesser Judgments for^runners of greater. p. 60 Luke-warmness a sin. p. 104
M.
Man's extremity, Gods opportunity. p. 34, 35 Mercies abused hasten judgment.
p. 52. 53. 54. 55 Ministe^s, contempt of them a forerunner of Judgment. p. 8.
9 when they may remove from o^e place to another, this case is handled at
large. p. 152 etc.
O.
Old Testament Gods word. p. 32
P.
Pangs on women in travail sharp. p. 12 Parents, if wicked, bring curses on
their children. p. 80 Patient, God is so. p. 4. 5 Yet he will not always
bear. p. 6. 7 How to improve his Patience. p. 10 Motives to be patient. p. 11
Plain Preaching best. p. 46 Prayers of wicked men when heard. p. 144
Privileges abused, aggravate sin. p. 48. 49 They cannot save a ^inful Nation
from ruin. p. 50. 51. 52 Prosperity a forerunner of ruin. p. 149. 150
Q.
Quakers how vile. p. 164
R.
Rebellion brings destruction. p. 79. 86 Rewards when given to wicked men. p.
141 Rep^obates how far they may go. p. 16 Righteous, God is good to them p. 31
Rod, the wicked are Gods Rod p. 56 Rulers, when corrupt, hasten Iudg^ment. p.
111 They must d^stroy Idolatry. p. 140
S.
Samaria what it was. p. 62 Sat^ns depths discovered. p. 8 Scripture modest. p.
13 It consist* in the sense. p. 31 It is harmonious. p. 33 Security dangerous.
p. 9. 22. 23 Sels-denial must be Universal. p. 17 Sel^-murder unlawful. p. 128
Sparation unlawful. p. 22 Similitudes to be used by Minist^rs. p. 47, 48 Sin
brings sorrow. p. 14. 59 70. 71 Sin when full. p. 109 Sins of the Godly do most
incense God. p. 49. 50 It bereaves us of our comforts. p. 58. 59 It Is a bitter
thing, in eight respects. p. 72 Twenty sins which are forerun ers of Judgment.
p. 87 Superstition vile. p. 119 Sword a sad judgment. p. 79
T.
Tyrants cut off. p. 157
W.
Wicked wife a sad judgment p. 133 God warns before he smites. p. 64. 65
Wicked men Gods Rod. p. 56 They shall at last be burnt. p. 58 They bring a
curse on all about them. p. 84 Their sorrows are many. p. 12 162. 163
Will Worship dangerous. p. 120 Witchcraft abounds. p. 99 World, w^e must wean
our selves from it. p. 60
A Table of the Texts which are explained.
Genesis 6. 6. p. 40 Exodus 20. 5. p. 81, 83 Deuteronomy. 13. 13. p. 50 2 Kings 8. 11, 12.
p. 84 2 Chronicles. 28. 22, 23. p. 68 36. 15, 16. p. 89 Job 13. 26. p. 73 18. 14. p.
35, 36 Psalm. 50. 16. p. 6 Eccles. 7. 1. p. 32 8. 11. p. 6 Ier. 4. 18. p. 76, 77
24. 5. p. 58 L^^. 1. 18. p. 73 Ez^k. 18. 14. p. 82 37. 3. p. 33 Daniel 9. 23.
p. 45 Hosea 4. 14. p. 9 5. 17. p. 65 9. 7. p. 91 9. 12, 13. p. 80 12. 14. p. 72
13. 1. p. 53, 58, 59 Am^. 4. 12. p. 68, 69 Matthew. 10. 17. p. 92 11. 23. p. 48
11. 25. p. 46 Mark 10. 21. p. 17 John 11. 39. p. 34 16. 8. p. 17 Acts 26. 28.
p. 16. Romans 11. 29. p. 41 1 Corinthians. 3 22. p. 32 6. 9. p. 8 8. 4. p. 126 15.
55. p. 27, 28 Philip. 1. 21. p. 38 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. p. 89 Heb. 2. 14. p. 36
FINIS

