SUSURRIUM CUM DEO SOLILOQVIES: OR, Holy Self-Conferences of the DEVOUT SOUL,
upon sundry choice Occasions, With Humble Addresses to the Throne of Grace.

Together with The Souls Farewell to Earth, AND Approaches to Heaven.

The second Edition. By JOS. HALL, B. Norwich.

LONDON, Printed by Will: Hunt, and are to be sold by George Lathum junior, at
the Sign of the Bishops Head in St Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

THE AUTHORS SVPPLICATORY DEDICATION.
TO thee only, O my God, who have put these holy Thoughts into my soul, do I
most humbly desire to Dedicate both my self and them; Earnestly beseeching
thee graciously to accept of both: And that thou would be pleased to
accompany and follow these my weak practical Devotions, with a sensible
blessing in every Reader. Let these good Meditations not rest in the eye, but
descend into the Bosom of the Perusers: and effectually work in their Hearts,
that warmth of pious Affections, which I have here presumed to exemplify in
mine; To the glory of thy great Name, and our mutual comfort, in the day of
the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

THE Heads of the several Soliloquies.
1. The best Prospect. 2. The happy Parting, 3. Heavenly conversation. 4. Love
unchangeable. 5. The Happiest Object. 6. Unchangeable duration. 7. Trust upon
Trial. 8. Angelical Familiarity. 9. The unanswerable Christian. 10. Hellish
Hostility. 11. False Joy. 12. True Light. 13. Bosome-Discourse. 14. The
insensible fetters. 15. Satan's Prevalence. 16. Leasurely growth. 17. Allowable
variety. 18. Misconstructions of holiness. 19. Two Heavens in one. 20. The
stock employed. 21. Love of Life. 22. Equal Distribution. 23. The Bodies
subjection. 24. The ground of unproficiency. 25. The sure Refuge. 26. The light
Burden. 27. Joy intermitted. 28. Universal Interest. 29. The spiritual
Bedleem. 30. The difference of actions 31. The necessity of labor. 32.
Acquaintance with heaven. 33. The All-sufficient knowledge. 34. Poor Greatness.
35. Acceptance of desires. 36. Heavenly joys. 37. Mixed Contentments. 38.
True Wealth. 39. False Light. 40. The haste of Desire. 41. Deaths
remembrancers. 42. Faiths victory. 43. The unfailing friend. 44. Quiet
Humility. 45. Sure Mercies. 46. Dangerous Prosperity. 47. Cheerful Obedience.
48. Heavenly accordance. 49. Divine Bounty. 50. Sweet use of Power. 51. The
power of conscience. 52. Proud Poverty. 53. The happiest Society. 54. Honey
from the Rock. 55. Sure Earnest. 56. Heavenly Manna. 57. The Hearts treasure.
58. The narrow way. 59. Gods various proceedings. 60. The waking Guardian. 61.
The sting of guiltines. 62. Beneficial want. 63. Interchange of conditions.
64. The rule of devotion. 65. Hels triumph. 66. Dumb homage. 67. Indifferency
of events. 68. The transcendent love. 69. Choice of seasons. 70. The happy
return home. 71. The confinements of Age. 72. Sin without sense. 73. The
extremes of devotion. 74. The sick man's vows. 75. The suggestions of a false
heart. 76. Sacred Melody. 77. Blemishes of the holy Function. 78. The blessed
reward. 79. Presages of judgment. 80. Unwearied motion, and rest eternal.
June the 26th, 1650.
I Have perused these divine and holy Soliloquies between God and the faithful
Soul, and do find them to be so pious and profitable, so sweet and
comfortable, and full of pious and spiritual devotion, that I judge them well
worthy to be Printed and Published.

JOHN DOWNAME.

Selfe-Conferences.
Soliloq. I. The best Prospect.
O My God, I shall not be worthy of my eyes, if I think I can employ them
better, than in looking up to thy heaven: and shall I not be worthy to look up
to heaven, if I suffer my eyes to rest there, and not look through heaven at
thee, the Almighty Maker and Ruler of it; who dwell'st there in all glory and
Majesty; and if seeing thee I do not always adore thee, and find my soul
taken up with awful and admiring thoughts concerning thee: I see many eyes
have looked curiously upon that glorious frame else they could not have made so
punctual observation of the fire, and motion of those goodly Globes of light,
which thou have placed there, as to fortell all their Conjunctions, and
Oppositions, for many hundred years before; but, whiles they look at the
Motions, let me look at the Mover; wondering, not without ravishment of spirit,
at that infinite Power and Wisddome, which keeps up those numberless and
immense bodies in so perfect a regularity, that they all keep their just
stations, and times, without the least varying from the course which thou
settedst them in their first Creation; so whiles their observation makes them
the wiser, mine shall make me the holier. Much variety of Objects have thou
given us, here below, which do commonly take up our eyes; but it shall be my
fault, if all those do not rather lead my thoughts to thee, than withdraw them
from thee; since thy power and Majesty is clearly conspicuous in them all. O
God, whiles I have eyes, let me never but see thee in all things, let me never
but enjoy thee; Let me see thee here as thou may be seen, by the eye of
faith, till I may see, as I am seen, hereafter, in glory: 1 Cor. 13.12.
Let me see thee as through a glass darkly here on earth, till I may come to
see thee face to face in Heaven.

Soliloq. II. The happy parting.
Euthym in Praefat. Psalmorum.
I Have lived diverse years longer than holy David did; yet I can truly say with
him; if that Psalm were his which has the Title of Moses; We have brought our
years to an end, as it were a tale that is told: Me thinks, Psalm. 90.9.
O my soul, it is but yesterday since we met; and now we are upon parting;
neither shall we, I hope, be unwilling to take leave; for what advantage can it
be to us to hold out longer together? One piece of me cannot but grow more
infirm with use and time; and thereupon must follow a decay of all faculties,
and operations: Where the Tools are grown bad and dull, what work can be
exquisite? Thou see it then necessary, and inevitable that we must yield to
age, and grow worse with continuance.

And what privilege can mere time give us in our duration? We see the basest of
stones last longer than the durablest plants; and we see trees hold out longer
then any sensitive Creatures; and diverse of those sensitive Creatures out-last
man, the Lord of them all: neither are any of these held more excellent because
they wear out more hours: Genesis 5.2.24.27.
We know Henoch was more happy that was fetched away at three hundred sixty
five years, than Methuselah at nine hundred sixty and nine: Difference of age
does nothing but pull down a side where there are not supplies of increasing
abilities. Should we continue our partnership many years longer, could we
hope for more health and strength of body, more vigor of understanding and
judgment, more heat of good affections? And can we doubt that it will be
elsewhere better with us? Do we not know what abides for us above? Are we
not assured that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, 2 Cor. 5.1.
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Why therefore, oh, why,
should ye be loath to part upon fair terms? Thou, O my soul, to the
possession of that happy Mansion, which thy dear Savior has from eternity
prepared for thee in his Fathers house: and thou, O my body, to that quiet
repository of thy Grave, till ye both shall happily meet in the blessed
Resurrection of the just, never, never to be severed?

Soliloq. III. Heavenly Conversation.
IT matters not a little with whom we hold our familiar Conversation; for
commonly we are transformed into the Dispositions and manners of those whose
company we frequent: We daily see those who by haunting the society of
Drunkards, and debauched persons, have from civil and orderly men grown into
extremity of lewdness; and on the contrary, those who have consorted
themselves with the holy and virtuous, have attained to a gracious
participation of their sanctity: Why should thou not then, O my soul, by a
continual conversation with God, and his Angels, improve to an heavenly
disposition? Thou can not, whiles thou art here, but have somewhat to do
with the world; that will necessarily intrude into thy presence, and force upon
thee businesses unavoidable; and thy secular friends may well look to have
some share in thy sociable entertainements: But these are but goers and
comers, easily and willingly dismissed, after some kind interlocutions: The
Company that must stick by thee is spiritual, which shall never leave thee, if
thou have the grace to apply thy self to them upon all occasions.

Thou may hold fair correspondence with all other not offensive companions;
but thy entirenesse must be only with these.

Let those other be never so faithful, yet they are uncertain; be their will
never so good, yet their power is limited; these are never but at hand, never
but able, and willing to make and keep thee happy. O my God, thou see how
subject I am to distractions; Oh hold me close to thee: Let me enter into the
same company here in my Pilgrimage, which I shall for ever enjoy hereafter in
my home.

Solilo. IV. Love unchangeable.
OUr younger years are wont to be delightted with variety, and to be much
affected to a change, although to the worse: The child is better pleased with
his new Coat, though the old be far handsomer: Whereas age and experience
fixes our desires and teaches us to set the greatest vallue upon those good
things wherewith we have been longest acquainted.

Yea, it is the general disposition of nature to be cloyed with continued
blessings, and upon long fruition to complain of that good which we first
commended for pleasing, and beneficial: Exo. 16.13. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Exo. 16.31.
What could relish better with the Israelites the first morning than the Angels
food which fell down from heaven every day about their Camp? the taste
whereof was like to wafers made with honey: If we stay but a while, we shall,
ere many years, hear them calling for the Onions and Garlike of Egypt; and
crying out: Number. 11.6.
Now our soul is dried away; there is nothing but this Manna before our eyes.
Our wanton appetite is apt to be weary of the best blessings, both of earth and
heaven, and to nauseate with store: Neither is any thing more tedious to us,
than the enjoined repetition of a daily-tasked Devotion. But contrarily, Grace
endeares all blessings to us by their continuance, and heightens our
affections, where they are rightly placed, by the length of the time of their
enjoying. O God, it is thy mercy that thou have vouchsafed to allow me an
early interest in thee, even from my tender years,: the more and longer I have
known thee, the more cause have I still found to love thee, and adore thee;
Thou art ever one and unchangeable; Oh make thou my heart so; Devote thou me
wholly unto thee; and by how much cooler my old age is in all other affections,
inflame it so much the more in my love to thee.

Solil. V. The happiest Object.
IF we could attain to settle in our thoughts a right apprehension of the
Majesty of God, it would put us unto the comfortable exercise of all the
affections that belong to the Soul: For surely, if we could conceive aright
of his Omnipotent power, and transcending glory, and incomprehensible
infiniteness, we could not but tremble before him, and be always taken up
with an adoring fear of him: And, if we could apprehend his infinite goodness
both in himself and to mankind, we could not but be ravished with a fervent
love to him, and should think our selves happy, that we might be allowed to
love such a God; and if we could conceive of that absolute beauty of his
holiness, and blissful presence, we could not but be enflamed with a longing
desire to enjoy such a God; and if we could apprehend all these; we could not
be but both transported with an unspeakeable joy, that we have a sure interest
in a God so holy, so good, so almighty, so glorious, and stricken with an
unexpressible grief, that we should either offend him, or suffer our selves to
want but for a moment the feeling presence of that allsufficient, and
all-comprehending Majesty: On the contrary, those men begin at the wrong end,
who go about to draw their affections to God first, and then after seek to
have their minds enlightened with right conceits of his Essence and Attributes:
who meeting with those occurrent Temptations, which mainly cross them in their
desires and affections, are strait set off from prosecuting their good motions,
and are as new to seek of a God, as if they had never bent their thoughts
toward heaven. O God, let it be the maine care of my life, to know thee, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ thy Son my Savior. I cannot through thy mercy
fail of an heavenly disposition of soul whiles I am here, and of a life of
eternal glory with thee hereafter.

Solilo. VI. Unchangeable duration.
IN the first minute wherein we live, we enter upon an eternity of being; and,
though at the first, through the want of the exercise of reason, we cannot know
it; and afterward, through our inconsideration, and the bewitching businesses
of time, we do not seriously lay it to heart, we are in a state of
everlastingnesse; there must upon the necessity of our mortality be a change of
our condition, but with a perpetuity of our being; the body must undergo a
temporary dissolution, and the soul a remove, either to bliss or torment; but
both of them, upon their meeting, shall continue in an unchangeable duration,
for ever and ever: And if we are wont to slight transitory and vanishing
commodities, by reason of their momentany continuance, and to make most account
of things durable; What care and great thoughts ought I to bestow upon my
self, who shall outlast the present world; and how ought I to frame my life
so, as it may fall upon an eternity infinitely happy and glorious?

O God, do thou set off my heart from all these earthly vanities, and fix it
above with thee. As there shall be no end of my being, so let there be no
change of my affections; Let them beforehand take possession of that heaven of
thine, whereto I am aspiring: Let nothing but this clay of mine be left
remaining upon this earth whereinto it is mouldring; Let my spiritual part be
ever with thee whence it came, and enter upon that bliss which knows neither
change nor end.

Soliloq. VII. Trust upon Trial.
WHat a Providence there is over all the creatures in the world, which both
produces them to their being, and overrules, and carries them on, to and in
their dissolution without their knowledge, or intended cooperation; but for
those whom God has endued with the faculty of ratiocination, how easy is it
to observe the course of the divine proceedings with them, how that all-wise
God contrives their affairs and events quite beyond, and above the power of
their weak projections; how he prevents their Desires, how he fetches about
inexpected and improbable occurrences to their hinderance, or advantage;
sometimes blessing them with success, beyond all their hopes, sometimes
blasting their projects, when their blossoms are at the fairest? Surely, if I
look only in a dull stupidity upon the outsides of all accidents, that befall
me, and not improve my reason and faith to discern, and acknowledge that
invisible power, that orders them to his own, and their ends, I shall be
little better than brutish; and if upon the observation of all that good hand
of God, sensibly leading me on, in all the ways of my younger, and riper age,
in so many feeling and apparent experiments of his gracious provisions and
protections, I shall not have learned to trust him with the small remainder of
my days, and the happy close of that life which he has so long, and
mercifully preserved, the favors of a bountiful God shall have been cast away
upon a barren, and unthankful heart. O God, I am such as thou have made me,
make up thy good work in me, and keep me that I do not mar my self with my
wretched unbelief, I have tried thee to the full; Oh that I could cast my
self wholly upon thee; and trust thee both with my body and soul, for my safe
passage to that blessed home; and for the perfect accomplishment of my glory,
in thine.

Soliloq. VIII. Angelical Familiarity.
THere is no reason to induce a man to think that the good Angels are not as
assiduously present with us, for our good, as the evil Angels are for our
hurt; since we know that the evil spirits cannot be more full of malice to
work our harm, than the blessed Angels are full of charity, and wel-wishing to
mankind; and the evil are only let loose to tempt us by a permission of the
Almighty, whereas the good are by a gracious delegation from God encharged with
our custody; Now, Heb. 1. ult.
that the evil spirits are ever at hand, ready upon all occasions to present
their services to us for our furtherance to mischief, appears too plainly in
their continual temptations which they inject into our thoughts; in their
real and speedy operations with the spells and charms of their wicked Clients,
which are no less effectually answered by them, immediately, upon their
practice, than natural causes are by their ordinary and regular productions.
It must needs follow therefore, that the good Angels are as close to us, and as
inseparable from us: and though we see neither, yet he that has spiritual
eyes perceives them both, and is accordingly affected to their presence. If
then wicked men stick not to go so far as to endanger, and draw on their own
damnation, by familiarly conversing with malignant Spirits; Why should not I
for the unspeakable advantage of any soul affect an awfully-familiar
Conversation with those blessed Angels which I know to be with me? The language
of spirits are thoughts: Why do not I entertain them in my secret
cogitations, and hold an holy discourse with them in mental allocutions; and
so carry my self as that I may ever hold fair correspondence with those
invisible companions, and may expect from them all gracious offices, of holy
motions, careful protection, and at last an happy conveyance to my glory? O my
soul, thou art a Spirit, as they are; do thou ever see them, as they see
thee; and so speak to them, as they speak to thee; and bless thy God for
their presence, and tuition; and take heed of doing ought that may cause those
heavenly guardians to turn away their faces from thee as ashamed of their
charge.

Soliloq. IX. The unanswerable Christian.
IT is no small grief to any good heart that loves the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, to see how utterly unanswerable the greater sort of men that bear
the name of Christ are to the example and precepts of that Christ whose name
they bear: He was humble and meek, they proud and insolent; he bade us love
our enemies, they hardly can love their friends; he prayed for his persecutors,
they curse; he that had the command of all, cared not to possess any thing,
they not having right to much, would possess all; he bade us give our Coat
also to him that takes our Cloak, they take both Coat and Cloak from him that
has it; he bade us turn our cheek for the other blow, they will be sure to
give two blows for one; he paid obedience to a Foster Father, and tribute to
Caesar, they despise Government; his trade was only doing good, spending the
night in praying, the day in preaching and healing; they debauch their time,
revelling away the night, and sleeping away, or mispending the day; he forbad
Oaths, they not only swear and forswear, but blaspheme too; he bade us make
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousnes, they make Mammon their God; he bade
us take up his Cross, they impose their own; he bad us lay up our treasure in
heaven, they place their heaven in earth; he bids us give to them that ask,
they take violently from the owners; he bade us return good for evil, they for
good return evil; he charged his Disciples to love one another, they nourish
malice and rancor against their brethren; he left peace for a Legacy to his
followers, they are apt to set the world on fire: His business was to save,
theirs to destroy. O God, Psalm. 119.136.
let rivers of waters run down mine eyes because they do no better keep the
law of thy Gospel. Give grace to all that are called by thy name, to walk
worthy of that high profession whereto they are called: And keep me thy
unworthy servant that I may never deviate from that blessed pattern which thou
have set before me: Oh let me never shame that great name that is put upon me:
Let me in all things approve my self a Christian in earnest; and so conform my
self to thee, in all thy example and commands, that it may be no dishonor to
thee to own me for thine.

Soliloq. X. Hellish Hostility.
I Cannot but observe how universal it is in all kinds for one creature to
prey upon another, the greater fishes devour the less, the birds of Rapine
feed upon the smaller Fowls, the ravenous wild beasts sustain themselves with
the flesh of the weaker and tamer cattle; the Dog pursues the Hare, the Cat the
Mouse; Yea the very Moale under the earth hunts for the worm, and the Spider in
our Window for the fly: Whether it pleased God to ordain this antipathy in
nature, or whether man's sin brought this enmity upon the creature I enquire
not, this I am sure of; that both God has given unto man (the Lord of this
inferior world) leave and power, to prey upon all these his fellow creatures;
and to make his use of them, both for his necessity, and lawful pleasure; and
that the God of this world is only he that has stirred up men to prey upon
one another; some to eat their flesh, as the savage Indians; others to destroy
their lives, estates, good names: this proceeds only from him that is a
murderer from the beginning. O my soul, do thou mourn in secret to see the
great enemy of mankind so woefully prevalent as to make the earth so bloody a
shambles to the sons of men; and to see Christians so outragiously cruel to
their own flesh: And O thou that art the Lord of Hosts, and the God of peace,
restrain thou the violent fury of those which are called by thy name, and
compose these unhappy quarrels amongst them that should be brethren. Let me (if
it may stand with thy blessed will) once again see peace smile ore the earth,
before I come to see thy face in glory.

Soliloq. XI. False Joy.
AMongst these public blusters of the World, I find many men that secretly
applaud themselves in the conceit of an happy peace which they find in their
bosom: Where all is calm and quiet; no distemper of passions, no fear of
evil, no sting of remorse, no disturbance of doubts; but all smoothness of
brow, and all tranquillity of mind; whose course of life, yet, without any
great enquiry has appeared to be not over-strict and regular. I hear them
boast of their Condition, without any envy of their happiness, as one that had
rather hear them complain of their inward unquietness, than brag of their
peace. Give me a man that after many secret bickerings, and hard conflicts in
his breast, upon a serious penitence, and sense of reconciliation with his God
has attained to a quiet heart, walking conscionably and close with that
Majesty with whom he is attoned; I shall bless and emulate him as a meet
subject of true joy: For spiritually there is never a perfect calm but after a
tempest; the wind and earthquake and fire make way for the soft voice. 1 Kin.
19.
But I pity the flatteries, and selfe-applauses of a careless and impenitent
heart: This jollity has in it much danger, and without some change, death. Oh
Savior, I know thou came to send fire on the earth; Luke 12.49.
yea fire into these earthen bosoms, whereof the very best has combustible
matter enough for thee to work upon; and what will I (thou say) if it be
already kindled; O blessed Jesu, my will agrees with thine; I desire nothing in
the world more than that this fire of thine may flame up in my soul, and burn
up those secret corruptions which have lain smothering within me: Set me at
full variance with my self, that I may be at peace with thee.

Soliloq. XII. True Light.
Mat. 6.23.
THou have taught us, O Savior, that even the light of man may be darkness,
and that the light endarkned causes the greatest darkness: neither can it be
otherwise; since the very obscuring of the light makes some kind of darkness,
the utter extinction of it must needs make the darkness absolute. Now what is
darkness but a mere privation of light: There is but a double spiritual
light, the absence whereof causes darkness: Thine Evangelist has justly said
of thee, John 1.9.
Thou art the true light, that enlightnest every man that comes into the
world; Psa. 119.105.
Thy Psalmist has said of thy Divine Oracles, Thy Word is a Lantern unto my
feet, and a light unto my steps; whosoever wants both, or either of these,
cannot but be in darkness, yea his pretended light cannot but be darkness it
self.

I see, O Lord, there is much of this dark light in the World; In one I observe
a kind of Glow-wormelight, which in a Summers evening shines somewhat bright,
but he that should offer to light his Candle at it would be much deceived; this
is justly a dark light, since it shines not at all by day, neither is at all
communicable to another, no not to the bearer it self: In another, I see the
light of a dark Lantern; which casts out some Gleams of light, but only to him
that bears it; even this man's light is darkness also, to all the world besides
himself: In a third I see a resemblance of that meteoricall light, which
appears in Moorish places, that seems fire, but is nothing but a slimy
glittering exhalation, causing both the wonder and error of the Travailer;
leading him, through the impulsive motion of the air, into a Ditch; and of this
kind I find too much variety; all of them agreeing in this, that they pretend
Visions and Revelations of the Spirit even for contrary projections. O Savior,
what light soever is not derived from thee, is no better than darkness: Thou
have sufficiently revealed thy self and thy will to us in thy Word; as for any
new lights (except it be a clearer manifestation of the old) O Lord give me the
grace not to follow them: I find a double light to proceed from thee, one
which is a general light, that enlightens every man that comes into the world;
the other a special light of thy spirit illuminating the soul of every
believer with a right apprehension of thee and heavenly things: O do thou shine
into my soul with this heavenly light of thine; and if this be not enough to
make me happy, (without the acce^sion, and with the rejection of other new
lights) let me sit in perpetual darkness.

Soliloq. XIII. Bosome-Discourse.
O Lord, if I had the skill, and grace to be ever communing with my own heart,
and with thee, I should never want either work, or company, never have cause
to complain of solitariness, or tedious hours: For there is no time wherein
there is not some maine business to be done betweeen thee and my soul; one
while finding my heart dull and stupid, I should have cause to rowse it up by
some quickening meditation; another while finding it dejected with some
inexpected Cross, I should be chearing it up with some comfortable
Applications: One while finding it distracted with some scrupulous doubts, I
should be laboring to settle it in just resolutions; another while perceiving
it to incline toward idle thoughts, I should be cheeking it with a seasonable
reprehension: One while, finding it faint and flacke in holy duties, I should
chide it into a more sensitive vigor; another while, finding it more cheerful
in the performances of Devotion, I should encourage it with the assurance of a
gracious acceptance: One while I should find cause to fortify it against
temptations; another while to erect it after a foil: one while to Conflict;
another to Triumph: One while to examine my condition; another while either to
deplore, or congratulate it: One while I should find time to sue to thee my
God for the supply of some want; another while to bless thee for favors
received: One while to bemoane my wretchedness, another while to adore thy
infinite greatness: One while to renew my vows; another while to beg pardon
for my omissions: One while to seek thee with tears and due Humiliation;
another while to rejoice in thy great salvation: The varieties of my
ever-changing condition, whiles I am in this vale of misery, cannot want the
perpetual employment of a busy soul. O God, let me be dumb to all the
world, so as I may ever have a tongue for thee, and my own heart.

Soliloq. XIV. The insensible Fetters.
WHat a subtle Devil we have to deal with? He will be sure to give the
sinner line enough, so he may be sure to hold him: he shall have his full scope
and freedom to all honest, and religious practices; so as by some one secret
sin that evil spirit may have power over his soul, both to ensnare, and
retain it: He cares not how godly we seem, how conscionable we are in all
other actions, so as he may still in one dear sin keep us fast entangled:
Whereupon it often comes to pass, that not only the eyes of the World, but even
our own are too often deceived in the judgment of our spiritual estate: We
profess strict holiness; and give good proofs, upon occasion, of a tender, and
well-guided Conscience, so as this glorious show wins us the reputation of rare
virtue and exemplary piety: yet still that wicked Devil has a tie upon our
heel: there is some peccadillio of smothered lust, or concealed pride, or
zealous cruelty, and uncharitableness, that gives him the command of our souls
at pleasure: and this shall no less fetch us within his power and mercy, than
if we were locked up under a thousand chains. O God, thou who art infinite both
in wisdom and power, do thou enable me not only to resist the power, but to
avoid the wiles of that cunning Spirit: let me give him no advantage by the
close entertainment of any bosom sin: Let my holiness and obedience be as
universal, as either thy commands, or his mischievous intentions.

Soliloq. XV. Satan's prevalence.
HOw busy and prevalent Satan is, in this present age, above all former times,
appears too plainly in those universal broiles, and combustions which he has
raised all the world over; whereof no nation of the whole known habitable
earth is at this day free; in the strange number and variety of Sects,
Schisms, Heresies, set on foot by him, every where; the like whereof were
never heard of, in the preceding times of the Church; in the rifenesse of bold
and professed Atheism; and most clearly, in the marveilous multitude of
Witches abounding in all parts. Heretofore one of those Clients of Hell in a
whole Country was hooted at as a strange Monster; now, hundreds are discovered
in one shire; and (if Fame deceive us not) in a village of fourteen houses in
the North parts are found so many of this damned breed: heretofore, only some
barbarous, and wild Deserts; or some rude uninhabited Coasts, as of Lapland,
and Finland, etc. were thought to be haunted with such mis-creant guests; now
the civillest, and most religious parts are frequently pestered with them:
heretofore some silly poor and ignorant old women were thus deluded by that
Infernal impostor; now we have known those of both sexes which have professed
much knowledge, holiness, devotion, drawn into this damnable practice: What
shall we say to all these over-pregnant proofs of the unusually prevailing
power of hell? Certainly, either Satan is now let loose (according to the
prediction of the holy Evangelist in Pathmos) toward the end of the world: Or
because he finds his time but short, he rages thus extremely; as if what he
must lack in time, he would make up in fury: But, oh blessed God, thine
infinite wisdom and omnipotence, knows how to make a just advantage of that
increased power, and success, which thou have permitted to this great enemy of
mankind; Thy Justice is hereby magnified in thy just judgments, upon the
wicked; and thy mercy in the gain that hence accrues to thy chosen; for
certainly, thy true Saints would not be so eminently holy, if Satan were not so
malicious: Thou who in natural causes are wont to work by contraries, (so as
inward heat is ordinarily augmented by the extremity of an ambient cold) can,
and wilt do so much more in spiritual; What thy visible Church loses in the
number of formal professors, is abundantly made up in the vigorous graces of
thy real Saints. Still and ever do thou so order and overrule these busy
workings of the powers of darkness, that thou may repay thine unreclaimeable
enemies with judgments, and heighten the piety, vigilance and zeal of thy
faithful ones.

Soliloq. XVI. Leasurely growth.
WE are all commonly impatient of leisure; and apt to over-hasten the fruition
of those good things we affect: one would have wealth, but he would not be too
long in getting it; he would have golden showers rain down into his lap, on
the sudden: Another would be wise and learned; yet he cannot abide to stay
for gray hairs, or to spend too much oil in his tedious lucubrations: One
would be free, but he would not wear out an Apprentiship: Another would be
honorable, but he would neither serve long, nor hazard much: One would be
holy, but he would not wait too long at the doorposts of Gods house, nor lose
too many hours in the exercise of his stinted Devotions: Another, would be
happy, but he would leap into heaven suddenly, not abiding to think of a
leasurely towering up thither by a thousand degrees of ascent, in the slow
proficiency of grace. Whereas the great God of Heaven, that can do all things
in an instant, has thought good to produce all the effects of natural agency
not without a due succession of time. When I look into my Garden, there I see
first a small spire look out of the earth, which in some months time grows
into a stalk; then after many days expectation, branches forth into some
leaves; at last appears the hope of a flower, which ripened with many Suns
and Showers, arises to its perfection, and at last puts forth its seed for a
succeeding multiplication.

If I look into my Orchard, I see the well-grafted Siens yield first a tender
Bud; it self after many years is bodied to a solid stock, and under the
patience of many hard Winters, spreads forth large Arms; at last being grown
to a meet age of vegetation, it begins to grace the Spring with some fair
blossoms, which falling off kindly, give way to a weak Embryon of fruit; Every
day now adds something to the growth, till it attain in Autumn to a full
maturity: Why should I make account of any other course in my spiritual
proceedings? O God, I shall be always ready to censure my slow pace in grace,
and holy obedience, and shall be ever ambitious of aspiring higher in thy
gracious favor; but when I shall have endeavored my utmost, I shall wait with
humble patience upon thy bountiful hand; as one that desires thankefully to
acknowledge the little that I have received, and meekely to attend thy good
pleasure for what I may receive. So thou bring me to Heaven, take what time,
and keep what pace thou please.

Soliloq. XVII. Allowable Variety.
IT is a great and insolent wrong in those men, who shall think to reduce all
dispositions, and forms of Devotion and usages to their own; since in all
these there may be much variety; and all those different fashions may receive
a gracious acceptance in heaven: One thinks it best to hold himself to a set
form of Invocation; another deems it far better to be left free to his
arbitrary and unpremeditated expressions: one pleases himself with this notion
of that Omnipotent Deity whom he implores; another thinks that may be more
proper, and affective: one thinks this posture of body may be the meetest for
his humble address to the throne of Grace, or to the Table of the Heavenly
Manna; another likes that better: one is for a long prayer; another for short
ejaculations: one desires to raise up his spirits (with the Prophet) by the aid
of an harmonious melody; another holds them better fixed in a sad silence: one
holds it best to set forth Gods service in a solemn state and magnificence;
another approves better of a simple and inceremonious Devotion: One requires a
sacred place, and a peculiar habit, as best becoming Gods public worship;
another makes no difference of either room, or dress: One makes scruple of
coming otherwise than fasting to the Lords Table: another conceives it more
seasonable after a Love-Feast: One thinks his Christian Liberty allows him
the moderate scope to all not-unlawfull Recreations: another austerity
interdicts all pastimes: One judges this hair, and that attire not lawful
only, but comely: another thinks he espies sin in both: O God, as thou have
ever showed thy self justly severe in the avenging of sin, so I know thee
graciously indulgent in allowing thy servants much latitude in the free use of
all that thou have not prohibited, In imitation whereof, give me an heart
holily zealous to abhor every thing that is truly evil, and charitably
affected to the favorable censure of all usages that are merely indifferent.
Let my maine care be to look to the sincerity of my Soul, and to the sure
grounds of warrant for my actions; For other circumstantiall appurtenances,
where thou art pleased to be liberal, let me not be strait-handed.

Soliloq. XVIII. Misconstructions of holiness.
IT is no marvel if there be nothing that undergoes more variety of
constructions from the lookers on, than holiness; for that being an inward
gracious disposition of the soul, conformed to God, in all the renewed
faculties thereof, lies so close in the bosom, that it can only be guessed at
by such uncertain emanations of words, and actions, as flow from it to the
ears, and eyes of others: The particular graces and affections of Love, Fear,
Hope, Joy, godly Sorrow, Zeal, and the rest break forth apparently in such
symptoms, and effects as may win a certainty of belief from the beholders,
neither indeed are easily concealed from the view of others: all these may be
read in the face: but, if the heart it self could be seen, and that curiously
dissected, yet even thus could not holiness be discovered. Beside the
closeness, every man is apt to measure his judgment of holiness, by a false
rule of his own, whereby it comes to pass that it is so commonly mis-taken.
One thinks him holy that forsakes the World, and retires into some wild
Desert, or mures up himself in an Anchorites Cell: Another judges him holy
that macerates his body with Fasting, that disciplines his hide with whips and
hair clothes, that lies hard, and fares hard: that abstaines from all that
relates to flesh in his Lent, and Embers: that passionately hugges his
Crucifix, and tosses his Beads, and duly observes his Shrifts, and Canonical
hours: Now this man that in their way is in danger of Canonization for a
Saint, is by the professor of an opposite holiness decryed to hell for
superstition and Idolatry: One styles him holy, who segregates himself from
the contagious Communion of formal Christians, professing to serve his God in
a purer way of worship; rejecting all stinted forms of Prayer and Psalmony;
spitting at the mention of an Hierarchy, allowing no head sacred, but by the
imposition of what we miscall, Laick hands; abandoning all Ceremonies of humane
Institution; abiding no Circumstances of Divine Worship but Apostolical:
Another allows him only holy, who is already a Citizen of the new Jerusalem,
advanced to such an entirenesse with God as that he is no less than
glorified; he has left the Scriptures below him as a weak and dead Letter,
and is far above all whatsoever Ordinance; Yea (which I tremble to report)
above the blood of Christ himself. A third reputes him only holy, who having
left the Society of all Churches as too impure, stands now alone, waiting for
some Miracles from Heaven to settle his Resolution. Now, Lord, after all these
and many more weak and idle misprisions, upon the sure and unfailing grounds
of Truth (thy Word is Truth) I know that man to be truly holy, whose
understanding is enlightened with right apprehensions of thee and Heavenly
things; whose Will and Affections are rightly disposed to thee, so as his heart
is wholly taken up with thee; whose Conversation is so altogether with thee,
that he thinks all time lost, wherein he does not enjoy thee, and a sweet and
heavenly Communion with thee; walking perpetually with thee; and laboring in
all things to be approved of thee. O God, do thou work me up to this temper,
and keep me still in it; and then, however I may differ in a construction of
holiness from others, that think themselves more perfect, howsoever, I may
be censured as defective in my judgment or affections, yet I do, not without
sound and sensible comfort, know, that my Judge is in Heaven, and my Witness
in my bosom.

Soliloq. XIX. Two Heavens in one.
I Was wont to say, It is in vain for a man to hope for, and impossible for
him to enjoy a double heaven; one below, and another above: since our
sufferings here one earth must make way for our future glory: but, now I find
it in a better sense, very faisible for a true Christian to attain both: for,
as we say, where the Prince resides, there is the Court: so surely, where the
supreme and infinite Majesty pleases to manifest his presence, there is heaven:
whereas therefore God exhibits himself present two ways, in grace, and in
glory; it must follow, that the gracious presence of God makes an heaven here
below, as his glorious presence makes an heaven above. Now it cannot but fall
out, that as the lower material heaven comes far short of the purity of the
superior Regions, being frequently over-cast with Clouds, and troubled with
other both watery and fiery Meteors: so this spiritual heaven below, being
many times darkened with sad desertions, and blustred with temptations, cannot
yield that perfection of inward peace, and happiness, which remains for us
above this sphere of mutability: yet affords us so much fruition of God as may
give us a true Title, and entrance into blessedness. I well see, O God, it is
no Paradox to say that thy Saints reign with thee here on earth; though not
for a thousand years, yet during the time of their sojourning here below; not
in any secular splendour and magnificence, not in bodily pleasures, and sensual
contentments: Yet in true spiritual delectation, in the joys of the holy Ghost
unspeakeable, and full of glory. O my God, do thou thus set my foot over the
threshold of thy heaven: put thou my soul into this happy condition of an
inchoate blessedness: so shall I cheerfully spend the remainder of my days in
a joyful expectation of the full consummation of my glory.

Soliloq. XX. The Stock employed.
WHat are all excellencies without respect of their use? How much good ground
is there in the World, that is neither cultured nor owned? What a world of
precious metals lies hid in the bowels of the earth, which shall never be
coined? What store of rich Pearls and Diamonds are hoarded up in the earth and
sea, which shall never see the light? What delicacies of Fouls and Fishes do
both Elements afford, which shall never come to the Dish? How many great wits
are there in the world, which lie willingly concealed? whether out of modesty,
or idleness, or lack of a wished opportunity. Improvement gives a true value
to all blessings: A penny in the purse is worth many pounds, yea talents in an
unknown mine: That is our good which does us good. O God, give thou me grace to
put out my little stock to the public bank; and faithfully to employ those
poor faculties thou have given me, to the advantage of thy Name, and the
benefit of thy Church; so besides the gain of others, my pounds shall be
rewarded with Cities.

Soliloq. XXI. Love of Life.
WE are all naturally desirous to live; and though we prize life above all
earthly things, yet we are ashamed to profess that we desire it for its own
sake, but pretend some other subordinate reason to affect it. One would live to
finish his building, or to clear his purchase; Another to breed up his
children, and to see them well-matched: One would feign outlive his trial at
law; Another wishes to outweare an emulous corrivall: One would feign out-last
a lease, that holds him off from his long-expected possessions; Another would
live to see the times amend, and a re-establishment of a public peace: Thus
we that would be glad to give skin for skin, and all things for life, would
seem to wish life for any thing, but it self: After all this hypocrisy,
nature above all things would live; and makes life the maine end of living; But
grace has higher thoughts, and therefore though it holds life sweet and
desirable, yet entertaines the love of it upon more excellent, that is,
spiritual terms. O God, I have no reason to be weary of this life, which,
through thy mercy, long acquaintance has endearead to me (though sauced with
some bitter disgusts of age;) but how unworthy shall I approve my self of so
great a blessing, if now, I do not more desire to continue it for thy sake,
than my own?

Soliloq. XXII. Equal Distribution
IT was a most idle question which the Philosophers are said to have proposed
to Barnabas the Colleague of Saint Paul: Why a small Gnat should have six
legs, Clement. de gestis Petri.
and wings beside; whereas the Elephant, the greatest of beasts, has but four
legs, and no wings? What pity it is that those wise Masters were not of the
Counsel of the Almighty, when he was pleased to give a being to his Creature;
they would surely have devised to make a winged Elephant, and a corpulent Gnat:
A fethered man, and a speaking Beast. Vain fools, they had not learned to
know and adore that infinite wisdom wherein all things were made: It is not for
that incomprehensible Majesty and power to be accountable to wretched man for
the reasons of his all-wise, and mighty Creation; yet so has he contrived it,
that there is no part of his great workmanship, whereof even man cannot be
able to give an irrefragable reason, why thus framed, not otherwise. What were
more easy than to say, that six legs to that unweildy body had been
cumbersome, and impeditive of motion, that the wings for so massy a bulk had
been useless.

I admire thee, O God, in all the works of thy hands; and justly magnify not
only thine omnipotence both in the matter and form of their Creation; but thy
mercy and wisdom in the equal distribution of all their powers and faculties,
which thou have so ordered, that every Creature has some requisite helps, no
Creature has all: The Fowls of the air, which are ordained for flight, have
thou furnished with Feathers to bear them up in that light Element; The Fishes,
with smooth scales and finnes for their more easy gliding through those watery
Regions: the Beasts of the Field, with such Limbs and strong Hides as might
fit them for service: As for man, the Lord of all the rest, him thou have
endued with Reason, to make his use of all these: whom yet thou have so framed,
as that in many qualities thou have allowed the brute Creatures to exceed their
Master: Some of them are stronger than he; some of them swifter than he, and
more nimble than he: he were no better than a mad man that should ask, why man
should not fly as well as the bird, and swim as well as the Fish, and run as
fast as the Heart? Since that one faculty of Reason wherewith he is furnished is
more worth than all the brutish excellencies of the world put together. O my
God, thou that have enricht me with a reasonable soul, whom thou might have
made the brutest of thy Creatures, give me the grace so to improve thy gift, as
may be most to the glory and advantage of thy own name; Let me in the name and
behalf of all my brute Fellow Creatures bless thee for them; and both for them
and my self in a ravishment of Spirit cry out with the Psalmist; O Lord my
God, how wonderful and excellent are thy works, in wisdom have thou made
them all.

Soliloq. XXIII. The Bodies subjection.
1 Timothy 4.8.
BOdily exercise, says the Apostle, profits little: Little sure in respect of
any worth that it has in it self; or any thank that it can expect from the
Almighty: For what is it to that good and great God, whether I be full or
fasting, whether I wake or sleep, whether my skin be smooth or rough, ruddy
or pale, white or discolored; whether my hand be hard with labor, or soft
with ease; whether my bed be hard, or yielding; whether my diet be course, or
delicate: But though in it self it avail little; yet so it may be, and has
been, and ought to be improved, as that it may be found exceedingly beneficial
to the soul: Else the same Apostle would not have said, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means,
when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. In all the
records of History, whom do we find more noted for holiness, than those who
have been most austere in the restraints of bodily pleasures and contentments?
In the Mount of Tabor who should meet with our Savior in his Transfiguration,
but those two eminent Saints, which had fasted an equal number of days with
himself? And our experience tells us, that what is detracted from the body is
added to the soul. For the flesh and spirit are not more partners, than
enemies; one gains by the others loss: The pampering of the flesh, is the
starving of the soul: I find an unavoidable emulation between these two parts
of my self. O God, teach me to hold an equal hand betwixt them both; Let me
so use them, as holding the one my favorite, the other my drudge; not so
humouring the worse part, as to discontent the better; nor so wholly regarding
the better, as altogether to discourage the worse: Both are thine, both by
gift, and purchase; enable thou me to give each of them their Dues, so as the
one may be fitted with all humble obsequiousness to serve; the other to rule
and command with all just authority, and moderation.

Soliloq. XXIV. The ground of Vnproficiency.
WHere there is defect in the Principles, there can be no possibility of
prevailing in any kind: Should a man be so foolish as to persuade his horse
that it is not safe for him to drink in the extremity of his heat; or to
advise a child that it is good for him to be whipped, or in a case of mortal
danger, to have a fontinell made in his flesh, how fondly should he mispend
his breath? bebecause the one wants the faculty, the other the use of reason.
So if a man shall sadly tell a wild sensualist, that it is good for him to bear
the yoke in his youth; that it is meet for him to curb and cross his unruly
appetite; that the bitterest cup of afflictions ought to be freely taken off,
as the most sovereign medicine of the soul; that we ought to bleed and die
for the name of Christ; Romans 8.18.
that all the suffering of the present times are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed in us; his labor is no less lost, than if
he had made an eloquent Oration to a deaf man; because this carnal hearer
lacks that principle of grace and regeneration which only can enable him to
apprehend and relish these divine Counsels: I see, O God, I see too well, how
it comes to pass that thy Word sounds so loud, and prevails so little; even
because it is not joined with faith in the hearers: The right principle is
missing, which should make the soul capable of thy divine mysteries: Faith is
no less essential to the true Christian, than reason is to man, or sense to
beast: O do thou furnish my soul with this heavenly grace of thine; and then
all thy sacred Oracles shall be as clear to my understanding, as any visible
object is to my sense.

Soliloq. XXV. The sure Refuge.
SUfficient unto the day is the evil thereof, says our Savior: Lo, Every day
has its evil, and that evil is load enough for the present, without the
further charge of our anticipated cares. Surely the life of man is conflicted
with such a world of crosses succeeding each other, that if he have not a sure
refuge to flee unto, he cannot choose but be quite over-laid with miseries: One
while his estate suffers, whether through casualty, or oppression; another
while his Children miscarry, whether by sickness, or death, or disorder: One
while his good name is impeached; another while his body languishes: One while
his mind is perplexed with irksome suits; another while his soul is wounded
with the sting of some secret sin: One while he is fretted with Domestical
discontents; another while distempered with the public broiles: One while the
sense of evils torments him; another while the expectation. Miserable is the
case of that man, when he is pursued with whole Troops of Mischiefs, has not
a Fort wherein to succor himself: and safe and happy is that soul, that has
a sure and impregnable hold whereto he may resort. O the noble example of holy
David; Never man could be more perplexed than he was at his Ziklag; His City
burnt, his whole stock plundered, his Wives carried away, his people cursing,
his Soldiers mutining, pursued by Saul, cast off by the Philistims; helpless,
1 Samuel 30.6
hopeless: But David fortified himself in the Lord his God: There, there, O
Lord, is a sure help in the time of trouble, a safe protection in the time of
danger, a most certain remedy of all complaints: Let my Dove get once into the
holes of that Rock, in vain shall all the birds of prey hover over me for my
destruction.

Soliloq. XXVI. The light burden.
WHy do we complain of the difficulty of a Christian profession, when we
hear our Savior say, My yoke is easy, and my burden is light? Certainly he
that impoposed it, has exactly poised it, and knows the weight of it to the
full: It is our fault if we make or account that heavy, which he knows to be
light: If this yoke and burden be heavy to our sullen nature, yet to grace
they are light: If they be heavy to fear, yet they are light to love: what is
more sweet and easy than to love? and love is all the burden we need to take
up: For love is the fulfilling of the Law; and the Evangelicall law is all the
burden of my Savior. O blessed Jesu, how willingly do I stoop under thy
commands: It is no other than my happiness that thou requirest; I shall be
therefore my own enemy, if I be not thy servant: Had thou not bidden me to
love thee, to obey thee, thine infinite goodness, and perfection of divine
beauty would have attracted my heart to be spiritually inamoured of thee; now
thou bidst me to do that which I should have wished to be commanded; how
gladly do I yield up my soul to thee? Lay on what load thou please; since
the more I bear, the more thou enablest me to bear, and the more I shall desire
to bear: the world has so clogged me this while, with his worthless and base
lumber, that I have been ready to sink under the weight, and what have I got
by it, but a lame shoulder, and a galled back? O do thou free me from this
unprofitable, and painful luggage; and ease my soul with the happy change of
thy gracious impositions; so shall thy yoke not be easy only but pleasing,
so shall thy fulfilled will be so far from a burden to me, that it shall be my
greatest delight upon earth, and my surest and comfortablest evidence for
heaven.

Soliloq. XXVII. Joy intermitted.
WHat a lightsomenesse of heart do I now feel in my self, for the present,
out of a comfortable sense of thy presence, O my God, and the apprehension of
my interest in thee? Why should it not be thus always with me? Surely thine
Apostle bids me rejoice continually, and, who would not wish to do so? for
there is little difference betwixt joy and happiness; neither was it ghessed
ill by him that defined that man only to be happy that is always delighted;
and certainly, there is just cause, why I should be thus always affected:
Thou, O my God, art still and always the same: yea the same to me, in all thy
gracious relations, of a merciful Father, a loving Savior, a sweet Comforter:
Yea thou art my head, and I am a limb of thy mystical Body. Such I am, and
shall ever be; Thou can no more change, than not be: and for me, my crosses
and my sins are so far from separating me from thee, that they make me
hold of thee the faster. But, alas, though the just grounds of my joy be
steady; yet my weak disposition is subject to variableness; Whiles I carry
this flesh about me, my soul cannot but be much swayed with the temper of my
body; which sometimes inclines me to a dull listlesnesse, and a dumpish
heaviness of heart, and sadness of spirit; so as I am utterly unapt to all
cheerful thoughts, and find work enough to pull my affections out of this
stiff clay of the earth, and to raise them up to heaven. Besides, this joy of
the holy Ghost is a gift of thy divine bounty, which thou dispensest, when, and
how thou please; not always alike to thy best Favorites on earth: Thou that
give thy Sun and Rain, do not command thy Clouds always to be dropping,
nor those beams to shine continually upon any face: there would be no
difference betwixt the proceedings of nature and grace, if both produced their
effects in a set and constant regularity: and what difference should I find
betwixt my pilgrimage, and my home, if I should here be taken up with a
perpetuity of heavenly joy? should I always thus feelingly enjoy thee, my life
of faith should be changed into a life of sense: It is enough for me, O God,
that above in those Regions of bliss, my joy in thee shall be full and
permanent: if in the mean while it may please thee, that but some flashes of
that Celestial light of joy may frequently glance into my soul: It shall
suffice if thou give me but a taste of those heavenly pleasures, whereon I
shall once liberally feast with thee to all eternity.

Soliloq. XXVIII. Universal Interest.
IT was a noble praise that was given to that wise Heathen, Cato.
that he so carried himself as if he thought himself born for all the
world: Surely the more universal a man's beneficence is, so much is it more
commendable; and comes so much nearer to the bounty of that great God, who
opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousness: There are
too many selfish men, whose spirits as in a close retort, are cooped up within
the compass of their own concernments; whose narrow hearts think they are
born for none but themselves: Others that would seem good natured men, are
willing enough to enlarge themselves to their kindred; whom they are careful
to advance with neglect of all others, however deserving; some yet, more
liberal minded, can be content to be kind and open-handed to their
neighbors; and some perhaps reach so far, as to profess a readiness to do
all good offices to their Contrymen; but here their largess finds its
utmost bounds: All these dispositions are but enclosures; Give me the open
Champaine of a general and illimited benefacture: Is he rich? he scatters his
seed abroad by whole handfulls over the whole ridge, and does not drop it down
between his fingers into the several furrows; His bread is cast upon the
waters also: Is he knowing and learned? He smothers not his skill in his bosom:
but freely lays it out upon the common stock; not so much regarding his
private contentment, as the public proficiency: Is he deeply wise? He is
ready to improve all his cares and counsels to the advancement and preservation
of peace, justice, and good order amongst men. Now although it is not in the
power of any but persons placed in the highest Orb of Authority, actually to
oblige the world to them; Yet nothing hinders but that men of meaner rank may
have the will to be thus universally beneficent, and may in preparation of
mind be zealously affected to lay themselves forth upon the common good: O
Lord; if thou have given me but a private and short hand, yet give me a large
and public heart.

Soliloq. XXIX. The spiritual Bedleem.
HE that with wise Solomon affects to know not wisdom only, but Madness and
Folly, let him after a serious observation of the sober part of the world,
obtain of himself to visit Bedleem, and to look into the several Cells of
distracted persons; where, it is a world to see what strange varieties of
humors, and passions shall present themselves to him: Here he shall see one
weeping, and wringing his hands for a meerely-imaginary disaster; there
another, holding his sides in a loud laughter, as if he were made all of
mirth: here one mopishly stupid, and so fixed to his posture, as if he were a
breathing statue; there another apishly active and restless: here one ragingly
fierce, and wreaking his causeless anger on his chain; there another
gloriously boasting of a mighty style of Honor, whereto his rags are justly
entitled; and when he has wondered a while at this woeful spectacle, let him
know and consider that this is but a slight image of those spiritual
phrensies, wherewith the world is miserably possessed; The persons affected
believe it not; surely should I go about to persuade any of these guests of
Bedleem, that in deed, he is mad, and should therefore quietly submit himself
to the means of cure, I should be more mad than he: Only dark rooms, and
cords, and Ellebore are meet receipts for these mental distempers; In the mean
while, the sober and sad beholders too well see these men's wits out of the
socket, and are ready out of Christian charity, to force upon them due
remedies, who cannot be sensible of their own miseries.

Now having learned of the great Doctor of the Gentiles to distinguish man into
spirit, 1 These. 5.23.
soul, and body, (whereof the body is as the earthly part, the soul as the
ethereall, the spirit as the heavenly: the soul animal, the spirit rational,
the body merely organicall,) it is easy for him to observe that as each of
these parts exceeds other in dignity, so the distemperatures thereof is so much
greater, and more dangerous, as the part is more excellent; When therefore he
shall hear the Prophet Hosea say, Hos. 9* 7.
The spiritual man is mad, he cannot think that charge less than of the
worst of phrensies: And such indeed they are which have been epidemicall to all
times: Could they pass for any other than sottishly mad, that would worship
Cats, and Dogs, and Serpents? so did the old Egyptians, who thought themselves
the most deeply learned of all nations. Could they be less mad than they, that
of the same Tree, would make a block for their fire, and a God for their
Adoration? Esa. 44.16.
so did Isaiah's Idolaters. Could they be any bettter, who when they had molten
their Earings, and with their own hands had shaped a golden Calf, could fall
down and worship it, and say, these be thy Gods, O Israel, Exodus 32.4
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt? so did they which should have
known themselves Gods peculiar people. Could they be any other than mad men,
2 Kin. 20.23.
that thought there was one God of the hills, another of the valleys? so did the
Syrian Courtiers. Could they be any other than stark mad that would lance, 1
Kin. 18.28.
and gash their own flesh, because their Block did not answer them by fire? so
did the Baalites. Lastly, could they be other than the maddest of men, who
would pass their own Children through the fire, 2 Kin. 23.11.
and burn them to ashes in a pretense of Devotion? so did the Clients of
Moloch. Yea, what speak I of the times of ignorance? even since the true light
came into the world, and since the beams of his glorious Gospel shined on all
faces, there has been no less need of dark rooms and manicles than before:
Can we think them other than notoriously mad, that having good clothes to
their backs, would needs strip them off, and go stark naked? so did the
Adamites of old, about the year of our Lord, 194. So did certain Anabaptists
of Holland at Amsterdam in the year 1535. so did the Cynicall Saint Francis in
the streets of Assissium. Could they be other than mad which would worship
Cain, Judas, the Sodomites? So did those good Devotionists which were called
Caiani, about the year 159. Nay, were they not worse than mad, who if we may
believe Hosius, and Lindanus, and Prateolus, worshipped the Devil ten times
every day? so did those Heretics which were in the last age called Demoniaci.
Could they be better than mad which held that beasts have Reason as well as man,
that the Elements have life, that Plants have sense, and suffer pain in their
cutting up? so did the Manichees. Could they be other than blasphemously mad,
that held there are two Gods, one good the other evil, and that all creatures
were made by the latter? so did the Gnostics. Were there ever mad men in the
World, if they were not such who would beseech, yea force passengers to do
them the favor to cut their throats, in a vain affectation of the praise of
Martyrdom? so did the Circumcellions, a Faction of Donatists in the year 349.
But above all other, did not those surpass in madness, who allowed of all
Heresies, and professed to hold all opinions true? so did Rhetorus and his
followers: St. Augustines Charity sticks at the belief of so impossible a
Tenet; I must crave leave to wonder at his reason: For (says he) many
opinions being contradictory to cach other, no man that is compos mentis can
think both parts can be verifiable: as if it could be supposed that a
Rhetorius, thus opening, could be any other than beside all his wits: Surely
had he been himself, so impossible an absurdity could not have fallen from him:
neither could any of these forecited practices or opinions have been incident
into any but brains highly distempered. But what do we raking in the ashes of
these old forgotten Lunaticks; would to God we had not work more than enough
to look for the prodigious phrensies of the present age, than which there were
never since the world began either more or worse,

Can there be under the cope of heaven a madder man, than he that can deny
there is a God? such a monster was rare and hooted at in the times of
Paganism: Cicer. de Nature. Deorum, initio.
The Heathen Orator tells us of but two in those dark ages before him, that
were so far forsaken of their wits; and we know that the old Athenians, when a
bold Pen durst but question a Deity, sentenced the book to the fire, and the
Author to exile. But now, alas, I am ashamed to say that this modern age under
so clear beams of the Gospel has bred many professed Atheists, who have
dared, not in their heart only, as in David's time, but with their blasphemous
lips to deny the God that made them.

And are the phrensies of those insolent souls any whit less wild and
outrageous, Heart bleedings for Professors abominations; Set forth under the
hands of 16 Churches of Christ baptized into the name of Christ. p. 5.6, 7. etc.
that dare boast themselves to be God; and stick not to style themselves
absolutely deified? avowing that the soul in their body is the only Christ,
or God in the flesh; That all the acts of their beastly and abominable lusts
are the works of righteousness; that it is their perfection, and the highest
pitch of their glory to give themselves up to all manner of abominations,
without any reluctation; that there is no hell, but a dislike of, and remorse
for, their greatest villainies: Now show me amongst the savagest of Pagans any
one that has been thus desperately brainsick, and let me be branded for a
slanderer.

What should I need to instance in any more, or to contract a large Volume of
Hereseology? In short, there is no true Heretic in the world, that is not in
some degree a madman; And this spiritual madness is so much worse than the
natural, as in other regards, so especially in this; that whereas that
distemper of the brain contains it self in its own bounds, without any danger
of Diffusion to others, the spiritual, is extreemly contagious, spreading its
infection to the peril of all that come within the air of it.

In this sad case what is to be done? Surely we may, as we do, mourn for the
miserable distractions of the world; but it is thou only, O Lord, that can
heal them. O thou, that art the great and sovereign Physician of souls; that
after seven years brutality, restoredst the frantic Babylonian to his shape
and senses, look down mercifully upon our Bedleem, and restore the distracted
World to their right temper once again: as for those that are yet sound, keep
them O God, in their right wits unto the end, preserve them safe from all the
pestilent taintures of Schism and Heresy: And for me, the more insight thou
give me into, and the more sense of, these woeful distempers, so much the
more thankful do thou make me to thine infinite goodness, that thou have
been graciously pleased to keep me within compass. And O, do thou still and
ever keep me within the compass of thy revealed will, and all just moderation;
and suffer me not to be miscarried into any of those exorbitances of judgment
which may prove a trouble to thy Church, and a scand all to thy Name.

Soliloq. XXX. The difference of actions.
THere is great difference in sins, and actions whether truly or seemingly
offensive; there are Gnats, and there are Camels; neither is there less
difference in Consciences: There are consciences so wide and Vast, that they
can swallow a Camel; and there are consciences so strait, as that they strain
at a Gnat; Yea, which is strange to observe, those very consciences which one
while are so dilated that they strain not at a Camel, another while are so
drawn together by an anxious scrupulousness that they are ready to be
choked with a Gnat.

How palpably was this seen in the chief Priest and Pharisees and Elders of the
Jews: Joh. 18.28.
the small Gnat of entering into the judgment Hall of the Roman Governor, would
by no means down with them; that heinous act would defile them, so as they
should not eat the Passover; but in the mean time the huge Camel of the
murder of the Lord passed down glib, and easily through their throats: They
are ready to choke with one poor ear of corn pulled on a Sabbath by an hungry
passenger; Yet whole houses of widows, the whiles, pass down their gorges
with ease: An unwashen had or cup was piacular; Mat. 23.25
whiles within their hearts are full of extortion and excess. I wish the
present age did not abound with instances: It is the fashion of Hypocrites to
be seemingly scruplous in small things, whiles they make no conscience at all
of the greatest: and to be so much less conscionable of greater matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy and faith; as they are more scrupulously punctual in
their Mint, Anise, and Cummin. O God, I would not make more sins than thou have
made; I desire to have an heart wisely tender, not fondly scrupulous; Let my
soul endure no fetters but thine; If indifferent things may be my Gnats, let
no known sin be other than a Camel to me; and let me rather choke in the
passage, than let down such a morsel.

Soliloq. XXXI. The necessity of Labor.
THe great and wise God that has been pleased to give to all creatures their
life and being, without their endeavor or knowledge, has yet ordained not to
continue their being, without their own labor, and cooperation; so as he
has imposed upon them all a necessity of paines-taking for their own
preservation: The wild beasts of the desert must walk abroad, and forage far
for their prey; The beasts of the field must earne their Pasture with their
work, and labor in very feeding to fill a large maw with picking up those
several mouthfulls, whereby they are sustained; The Fowls of several kinds
must fly abroad to seek their various Diet, some in the hedges, some in the
fields, some in the waters; The Be must with unwearied industry gather her
stock of wax and honey out of a thousand flowers; Neither know I any that can
be idle and live: But man, as he is appointed to be the Lord of all the rest,
so he is in a special manner borne to labor; as he upon whom the charge lies
to provide both for himself, and all the creatures under his command; being
not more impotent than they in his first entrance into the world, than he is
afterward by the power of his reason more able to govern them, and to order
all things that may concern both their use, and conservation. How willingly, O
Lord, should I stoop to this just condition of my Creation? Labor is my
destiny, and labor shall be my trade: Something I must always do; both out
of thy command, and my own inclination; as one whose not un-active spirit
abhorres nothing more than the torment of doing nothing: O God, do thou direct
me to, and employ me in, those services that may be most for thy glory, for
the good of others, and my own discharge and comfort.

Soliloq. XXXII. Acquaintance with Heaven.
WHat an high favor is it in the Great God of heaven, that he is pleased to
stoop so low as to allow wretched man here upon earth to be acquainted with so
infinite a Majesty? yet in the multitudes of his mercies, this has he
condescended unto: so far has he yielded to us, as that he is pleased we
should know him; and to that end he has clearly revealed himself to mankind,
and more then so, he is willing and content that we should enjoy him, and
should continually make a comfortable use of his presence with us; that we
should walk with him, and impart all our secret thoughts and counsels to him;
that we should call for his gracious aid upon all our occasions; that we
should impart all our wants and fears and doubts to him, with expectation of a
merciful and sure answer, and supply from heaven; Yea, that he should invite
us, silly wretches, to his presence, and calls us up to the throne of grace,
and encourage us poor souls, dejected with the conscience of our unworthiness,
to put up our suits boldly to his merciful hands; Yea, that he should give
this honor to dust and ashes as to style us his friends: how shamefully,
unthankful, and how justly miserable shall I be, if I make not an answerable
use of so infinite a mercy? O God, how utterly unworthy shall I be of this
grace, if notwithstanding these merciful proffers and solicitations, I shall
continue a willing stranger from thee, and shall make no more improvement of
these favors than if they had never been rendered? O let me know thee, let me
acknowledge thee, let me adore thee, let me love thee, let me walk with thee,
let me enjoy thee; let me, in an holy and awful familiarity be better and
more entirely acquainted with thee than with the World, than with my self; so I
shall be sure to be happy here, and hereafter glorious.

Soliloq. XXXIII. The All-sufficient knowledge.
I Find much inquiry of curious wits, whether we shall know one another in
heaven; There is no want of arguments on both parts, and the greatest
probabilities have seemed to be for the affirmative: But, O Lord, whether or
no we shall know one another, I am sure we shall all thy glorified Saints know
thee; and in knowing thee we shall be infinitely happy; and what would we
more? Surely, as we find here, that the Sun puts out the fire, and the greater
light ever extinguisheth the less: so why may we not think it to be above?
When thou art all in all to us, what can the knowledge of any creature add to
our blessedness? And if when we casually meet with a Brother, or a Son before
some great Prince, we forbear the ceremonies of our mutual respects, as being
wholly taken up with the awful regard of a greater presence; how much more may
we justly think, that when we meet before the glorious Throne of the God of
heaven, all the respects of our former earthly relations must utterly cease,
and be swallowed up of that beatificall presence, divine love, and infinitely
blessed fruition of the Almighty.

O God, it is my great comfort here below to think and know that I have
parents, or children, or brothers and sisters, or friends already in possession
of glory with thee, and to believe assuredly that in my time I shall be
received to the association of their blessedness: but if upon the dissolution
of this earthly Tabernacle, I may be admitted to the sight of thy all-glorious
essence, and may set eye upon the face of my blessed Savior, now sitting at
the right hand of thine incomprehensible Majesty, attended with those millions
of his heavenly Angels, I shall neither have need, nor use of enquiring after
my kindred, according to the flesh. What can fall into my thoughts or desires,
beside, or beyond that which is infinite?

Soliloq. XXXIV. Poor Greatness.
I Cannot but look with much pity mixed with smiles upon the vain worldling,
that sets up his rest in these outward things, and so pleases himself in this
condition, as if he thought no man happy but himself: how high he looks, how
big he speaks, how proudly he struts? with what scorn and insultation does
he look upon my dejectedness? the very language of his eye is no other than
contempt, seeming to say, Base Indigent, thou art stripped of all thy wealth, and
honor; thou have neither flocks, nor herds, nor lands, nor manors, nor
bags, nor barne-fulls, nor titles, nor dignities, all which I have in
abundance; no man regards thy meandness; I am observed with an awful
veneration. Be it so, great Sir, think I; enjoy you your height of honor, and
heaps of treasure, and ceremonies of state, whiles I go shrugging in a
thredbare coat, and am glad to feed on single dishes, and to sleep under a
thatched roof; But let me tell you, set your all against my nothing, if you
have set your heart upon these gay things, were you the heir of all the earth,
I would be loath to change conditions with your eminence; and will take leave
to tell you, that at your best, you shall fall within my commiseration: It is
not in the power of all your earthly privileges to render you other than a
miserable vassal: If you have store of gold, alas, it is but made up into
feetters and manicles; and what is all your outward bravery but mere matter of
opinion? I shall show you an Indian slave, that shall no less pride himself
in a Bracelet of Glass beads, that you can in your richest Jewels of Rubies
and Diamonds: All earthly things are as they are valued: The wise and Almighty
Maker of these earthen Mines, esteems the best Metals, but as thick Clay; and
why should we set any other price of them than their Creator? And if we be wont
to measure the worth of al things by their virtues and uses, and operations,
what is it that your wealth can do? Can it free you from cares? can it lengthen
your sleeps? can it keep you from headaches, from Gouts, Dropsies, Fevers
and other bodily distempers? can it ransom you from death? can it make your
account easier in the great day of reckoning? Are you ever the wiser, ever the
holier, ever the quieter for that which you have purchased with tears, and
blood? And were it so precious as you imagine, what hold have you of it? what
assurance to enjoy it, or your self but one hour? As for despised me, I have
wealth that you know not of; My riches are invisible, invaluable, interminable:
God all-sufficient is mine; and with him all things: My treasure is not locked
up in earth, or in heaven, but fills both: My substance is sure; not obnoxious
to plunder or loss, or diminution: No man has bled, no widow or orphan has
wept for my enriching; The only difference is this; You are miserable, and
think your self happy; I am happy whom you think miserable: How ever our
thoughts may bear us out in both for a while, yet at the last, except truth it
self can deceive us, the issue must fall on my side. O God, be thou my
portion, and the lot of mine inheritance, let the scum of the world spit in my
face as the most despicable of all creatures, I am above the despite of men
and devils, and am secretly happy, and shall be eternally glorious.

Soliloq. XXXV. Acceptance of Desires.
WHat a comfort it is to us weak wretches that we have to deal with a
merciful God, that measures us not by our performances, but by the truth of
our desires: David had a goodmind to build God an House, his hands were too
bloody to lay the foundation of so holy a fabric; Yet God takes it as kindly
from him, as if he had finished the work; and rewards the intention of
building an house to his Name; with the actual building of an house to David
for ever. Good Ezekiah knew how easy and welcome a suit he made, when after
all endeavors of sanctifying the people, for the celebration of that great
Passover, he prayed, The Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to
seek God, 2 Chro* 30.18, 19*
the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. Alas, we cannot be but lame in all our
obediences: What can fall from defective causes, but imperfect effects? If we
pray, we are apt to entertain unmeet notions of the infinite Spirit to whom
we address our supplications, and sudden glances of wandering thoughts; If we
read or hear, we are subject to vain distractions; if we approach Gods
table, our souls fail of that exact preparation and purity wherewith they
should be decked, when they come to that celestial banquet; If we do the
works of Justice, or Mercy, it is not without some light touch of
self-respect; and well may we say with the blessed Apostle, Romans 7.19*
The good that I would, I do not: we should therefore find just cause of
discouragement in our selves, if our best actions were to be weighed by their
own worth; and not by our better intentions: But that gracious God, who puts
good desires into us, is so ready to accept of them, that he looks not so much
at what we have done, as at what we wished to have done; and without respect to
our defect, crowns our good affections. All that I can say for my self, O my
God, is, that the desire of my heart is to please thee in all things: my
comfort then is, though my abilities fail in the performance, yet thy mercies
cannot fail in my acceptance.

Soliloq. XXXVI. Heavenly Joys.
DOubtless, O God, thou that have given to men, even thine enemies, here upon
Earth, so excellent means to please their outward senses; such beautiful
faces, and admirable flowers to delight the eye; such delicate sents from their
garden, to please the smell; such curious confections, and delicate sauces, to
please the taste; such sweet Music from the birds, and artificial devises of
ravishing melody from the art of man, to delight the ear; have much more
ordained transcendent pleasures, and infinite contentments for thy glorified
Saints above. My soul, whiles it is thus clogged and confined, is too straight
to conceive of those incomprehensible ways of spiritual delectation, which
thou have provided for thy dear chosen ones, triumphing with thee in thy
heaven: O teach me to wonder at that which I cannot here attain to know, and
to long for that happiness which I there hope to enjoy with thee for ever.

Soliloq. XXXVII. Mixed Contentments.
WHat a fool were I, if I should think to find that, which Solomon could not;
contentment upon earth? his greatness, wealth and wisdom gave him opportunity
to search, where my impotency is shut out: Were there any thing under heaven
free from vanity and vexation, his curious inquisition could not have missed it.

No, alas, all our earthly contentments are like a Jewish Passover, which we
must eat with sour herbs: Have I wealth? I cannot be void of cares: Have I
honor? I cannot be rid of envy: Have I knowledge? He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, says the Kingly Preacher: Have I children? it
were strange, if without crosses: Have I pleasures? not without a sting: Have I
health? not without the threats of disease: Have I full diet? not without the
inconveniences of satiety: Have I beauty? not without a snare to my soul. Thus
it is in all our sublunary comforts; I cannot have the Rose, but I must be
content with the prickles: Pure and absolute pleasure dwells elsewhere, far
above the reach of this vale of misery. O God, give me to seek it there only:
not without a contemptuous neglect of all those deceitful vanities which would
withdraw my soul from thee; and there let me find it, whiles I am here by
faith, when I remove hence by personal fruition: In the mean time, let me take
what thou give me with patience, and thankfulness: thankfulness for the
meat, and patience with the sauce.

Soliloq. XXXVIII. True Wealth.
ALL a man's wealth or poverty is within himself: It is not the outward
abundance or want that can make the difference. Let a man be never so rich in
estate, yet if his heart be not satisfied, but he is still whining, and
scraping and pining for more, that man is miserably poor; all his bags
cannot make him other than a stark beggar. On the other side, give me a man
of small means whose mind is thoroughly content with his little, and enjoyes
his pittance with a quiet and thankful heart, that man is exceeding rich; all
the World cannot rob him of his wealth. It is not having, by which we can
measure riches, but enjoying: The Earth has all Treasures in it, yet no man
styles it rich: Of these which the world call goods of Fortune, only opinion
sets the value: Gold and Silver would be metals whether we think them so, or
not; they would not be riches, if men's conceit and institution did not make
them such. O my soul, be not thou carried away with the common Error to covet
and admire those things which have no true worth in themselves: If both the
Indies were thine, thou should be no whit the wealthier; Labor for those
riches whereby thy stock may be advanced: The great Lord of all, who knows
best where his Wealth lies, and where thou should hoord up thine, has told
thee where to seek it, where to lay it: Mat. 6.19.
Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; But lay up for your selves
Treasures in Heaven: There thou shall be sure to find it entire, free from
plunder, and all danger of diminution. O God, give me to covet that my mind
may be rich in knowledge, that my soul may be rich in grace, that my heart
may be rich in true contentation; as for this pelf of the World, let it make
them miserable that admire it.

Soliloq. XXXIX. False Light.
LOoking forth one starry evening, my eye met with a glorious light, that
seemed fairer than its fellows: Whiles I was studying what Planet it might be,
it suddenly glided down, and vanished. O God, how can we hope to avoid
delusions upon earth, when even the face of heaven may thus deceive us? It is
no otherwise in the firmament of the Church: How many have there been, that
have seemed eternally fixed in that high sphere, which have proved no other
than base Meteors, gilded with fair beams; they appeared stars, their
substance was but slime. Woe were to the earth, if a true star should fall;
Yea, I doubt whether the Fabric of heaven would stand, if one of those
glorious Lights should drop down: If therefore the star Wormwood shall fall,
and imbitter the waters, he shall show himself to be but a false star, and a
true Impostor; else, heaven should fall as soon as he. O my God, give me
grace to know the truth of my substance and the firmness of my station: Let me
hate all counterfeit exhalations; Let me know my self the least and most
insensible star in thy Galaxie; so shall I be happy in thee, and thou shall be
by me glorified.

Soliloq. XL. The haste of Desire.
HOw slowly the hours seem to pace when we are big with the desire and
expectation of any earthly contentment? we are ready to chide the time for
standing still, when we would over-hasten the fruition of our approaching
comfort: So the Schoolboy longs for his play-day, the Apprentice for his
freedom, the Ward for his livery, the Bride for her nuptials, the Heir for
his inheritance: so approvedly true is that of wise Solomon, Pro. 13.12.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick. Were it not, O my soul, for that wretched
infidelity, which cleaves so close unto thee, thou could not but be thus
affected to thy heaven; and should be yet so much more, as the joys there
are infinitely more exquisite than which this earth can afford: Surely thou
do but flatter me with the overweening conceit of the firm apprehension of
my faith; whiles I find thee so cool in the longing desires of thy
glorification: What? have thou no stomach to thy happiness? Has the world
benumbed thee with such a dull stupidity that thou art grown regardlesse and
insensible of eternal blessedness? Oh shake off this Lethargick heaviness of
spirit, which has possessed thee, and rouse up thy self to those ardent
desires of glory which have sometimes enflamed thee: Yea, Lord, do thou stir up
that heavenly fire that now lies raked up in the Embers of my soul, and ravish
my heart with a longing desire of thy salvation.

Soliloq. XLI. Deaths Remembrancers.
EVery thing that I see furnishes me with fair monitions of my dissolution: If
I look into my garden, there I see some flowers fading, some withered; If I
look to the earth, I see that mother, in whose womb I must lie; If I go to
Church, the graves that I must step over in my way, show me what I must trust
to; If I look to my Table, death is in every Dish, since what I feed on did
once live. If I look into my glass, I cannot but see death in my face; If I
go to my bed, there I meet with sleep the Image of death; and the sheets,
which put me in mind of my winding up. If I look into my study; what are all
those books, but the monuments of other dead authors? O my soul, how can thou
be unmindfull of our parting, when thou art plied with so many monitors? Cast
thine eyes abroad into the world, what can thou see but killing and dying?
Cast thine eyes up into heaven, how can thou but think of the place of thy
approaching rest? How justly then may I say with the Apostle, By our rejoicing
which I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily: And, Lord, 1 Cor. 15.31.
as I daily die in the decay of this frail nature; so let me die daily in my
affection to life, in my preparation for death. O do thou fit me for that last,
and happy change. Teach me so to number my days that I apply my heart to
wisdom, and address it to ensuing glory.

Soliloq. XLII. Faiths Victory.
WE are here in a perpetual warfare, and fight we must; Surely, either
fight, or dye; some there are that do both; That is according as the quarrel
is, and is managed: There are those that fight against God; these meddling with
so unequal a match, cannot look to prevail. Again, The flesh warreth against
the spirit; this intestine rebellion cannot hope to prosper; but if with the
chosen vessel, I can say, I have fought a good fight, I can neither lose life,
2 Timothy 4.7.
nor miss of victory: And what is that good fight? Even the same Apostle tells
me, the fight of faith; 1 Timothy 6.2.
this is the good fight indeed, both in the cause and managing, and the issue:
Lo this faith it is, that wins God to my side, that makes the Almighty mine;
that not only ingages him in my cause, but unites me to him; so as his strength
is mine: In the power of his might therefore I cannot but be victorious over
all my spiritual enemies by the only means of this faith: For Satan; Ephesians.
6.16.
This Shield of faith is it that shall quench all the fiery darts of that
wicked one. For the world; this is the victory that overcomes the world; 1 Ioh.
5.4.
even our faith.

Be sure to find thy self furnished with this grace; and then say, O my soul,
thou have marched valiantly: the powers of Hell shall not be able to stand
before thee; they are mighty and have all advantages of a spiritual nature, of
long duration, and experience; of place, of subtilty: Yet this conquering grace
of faith is able to give them the foil, and to trample over all the powers of
darkness. O my Lord God, do thou arm and fortify my soul with a lively and
steadfast faith in thee, I shall not fear what man or Devil can do unto me:
settle my heart in a firm reliance upon thee, and turn me loose to what
enemy thou please.

Soliloq. XLIII. The unfailing Friend.
NExt to the joy of a good conscience, there is no greater comfort upon earth,
than the enjoyment of dear friends; neither is there any thing more sad than
their parting; and by how nearer their relations are, so much greater is our
sorrow in forgoing them: What moan* did good David make, both for Absalon as a
Son, (though ungracious) and for Jonathan as a friend: Surely, when our dear
ones are pulled away from us, we seem to have limbs torn away from our
bodies; yet this is a thing must be looked for; we are given to each other,
(or lent rather) upon condition of parting, either they must leave us, or we
them; a parting there must be, as sure as there was a meeting: It is our fault
if we set our hearts too much upon that, which may, yea, which must be lost. Be
wise, O my soul, and make sure of such friends as thou can not be bereaved
of: Thou have a God, that has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee: It
was an easy suit, and already granted which the holy Psalmist made: Cast me
not off in the time of old age, Psalm. 71.9.
forsake me not when my strength fails: And again, Psalm. 27.10.
When my Father and my Mother forsake me (in their farewell to a better world)
yet then the Lord will take me up. It is an happy thing to have immortal
friends: stick close unto them, O my soul, and rejoice in them evermore, as
those that shall sweetly converse with thee here, and shall at last, receive
thee into everlasting habitations.

Soliloq. XLIV. Quiet Humility.
HE is a rare man that is not wise in his own conceit; and that says not
within himself, I see more than my neighbors: For we are all borne proud,
and selfe-opinionate; and when we are come to our imaginary maturity, are apt
to say with Zedechiah, to those of better judgment than our own, 1 Kin. 22.24.
which way went the Spirit of God from me to speak unto thee? Hence have arisen
those strange varieties of wild paradoxes, both in Philosophy and Religion,
wherewith the world abounds every where. When our fancy has entertained some
uncouth thought, our self-love is apt to hatch it up, our confidence to broach
it, and our obstinacy to maintain it; and (if it be not too monstrous) there
will not want some credulous fools to abet it: so as the only way both to
peace and truth, is true Humility; which will teach us to think meanly of our
own abilities, to be diffident of our own apprehensions and judgments, to
ascribe much to the reverend antiquity, greater sanctity, deeper insight of our
blessed Predecessors. This only will keep us in the beaten road, without all
extravagant deviations to untrodden bypath: Teach me, O Lord, evermore to
think my self no whit wiser than I am; so shall I neither be vainly irregular,
nor the Church troublesomely unquiet.

Soliloq. XLV. Sure Mercies.
THere is nothing more troublesome in humane society than the disappoint of
trust, and failing of friends: For besides the disorder that it works in our
own affairs, it commonly is attended with a necessary deficiency of our
performances to others: The leaning upon a broken Reed gives us both a fall and
a wound: Such is a false friend, who after professions of love, and real
offices, either slinkes from us, or betrays us: This is that which the great
pattern of patience so bitterly complains of, as none of his least
afflictions, My Kinsfolk have failed me, Job 19.14.
and my familiar friends have forgotten me. It went to the heart of David,
Psalm. 41.9.
that his own familiar friend, in whom he trusted, which did eat of his
bread, should lift up his heel against him: And surely, those that are stanch,
and faithful in themselves, cannot but be so much the more deeply affected
with the perfidious dealing of others; and yet also so much the more, as their
confidence and entirenesse was greater; this was that which heightened the
vexation of that man who is so famous for the integrity of his heart. Psalm.
55.13, 14.
It was thou, O man, mine equal, my guide, my acquaintance; we took sweet
counsel together, and walked to the house of God in company. And still our
daily experience gives us miserable instances in this kind: He has had
little to do in the world that has not spent many a sigh upon others
faithlesness.

And now, O my soul, the more sad proof thou have had of the untrusty
disposition and carriage of men, the more it concerns thee to betake thy
self, in all zealous and absolute affiance, unto the sure protection and
never-fayling providence of thy God? the God who being Truth it self, never
did, never can forfeit his Trust to any soul that relied upon his most
certain promises, upon his promised mercies, upon his merciful and just
performances.

My soul wait thou only upon God; Psalm. 61.7.
for my expectation is from him; He only is my Rock, and my salvation; In God
is my salvation and my glory, the Rock of my strength, and my refuge is in
God. It shall not trouble thee to send men false, whiles thou have such a true
God to have recourse unto.

Soliloq. XLVI. Dangerous Prosperity.
IT was a just and needful precaution, O God, which thou gave of old to
thine Israel. Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12.
When thou shall have eaten, and art full, then beware lest thou forget the
Lord: There was not so great fear of forgetting thee, whiles they were in an
hungry and dry Wilderness, although even there they did too often forget
themselves, in an ungracious murmuring against thee and their Leaders; the
greatest danger of their forgetting Thee would be, (thou knew) when they
should come to be pampered in the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey: Deuteronomy.
32.15.
There it was that accordingly Jesurum waxed fat and kicked; there being grown
thick and covered with fatness, he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his salvation. Nothing is more difficult than to keep our
selves from growing wanton by excess; whereas nature kept low is capable of
just obedience: Like as in the body also, a full feed breeds superfluous and
vicious humors, whereas a spare diet keeps it both clean and healthful. Do not
I see, O Lord, even the man that was after thine own heart whiles thou kepst
him in breath, with the prosecution of an unjust Master, how tenderly
conscientious he was; remorsed in himself for but cutting off a lap of the
robe of his causeless pursuer: 1 Samuel 24.5
who yet when he came to the full scope of his ease, and Courtly jollity, made
no scruple of the adulterous bed of fair Bathsheba, or the bloody murder of a
faithful Vriah. Who was I, O Lord, that I should promise my self an immunity
from the peril of a prosperous condition under which thy holier servants have
miscarried. It was thy goodness and wisdom who fore-seest not what shall be
only, but what might be also, in prevention of the danger of my surfeit, to
take away the dish, whereon I might have over-fed. O God, I do humbly submit to
thy good pleasure; and contentedly rest upon thy Providence, which have thought
fit rather to secure me in the safe use of my little, than to exercise me with
the temptations of a bewitching plenty.

Soliloq. XLVII. Cheerful Obedience.
IT is not so much the work that God stands upon as the mind of the worker.
The same act may be done with the thank and advantage of one agent, and with
frowns and disrespect to another. If we do our business grudgingly, and
because we must, out of the necessity of our subsistence, we shall have as much
thank to sit still: It is our own need that sets our hands on work, not our
obedience: So as herein we are our own slaves, not Gods servants; Whereas, if
we go about the works of our calling cheerfully, offering them up to God, as
our willing sacrifice in an humble compliance with his commands, and an awful
and comfortable expectation of his gracious acceptance, we are blessed in our
holy endeavors, and cannot fail of an Euge from our Master in Heaven. Alas,
Lord, it is but little that I can do, and, without thy enabling, nothing.

Thou that vouchsafest to give me an abilitation to the work, put into me also
good affections to thee in performing of it: Let me do thy will here, as thy
Angels do in heaven, with all gracious readiness, and alacrity; and be no
less glad that I shall do it, than that it is done: so whiles carnal hearts
shall languish under their forced taskes, my labor shall be my pleasure; and I
shall find unspeakable comfort both in the conscience of my act, and the crown
of my obedience.

Soliloq. XLVIII Heavenly Accordance.
AS our condition here upon earth is different; so must our affection needs be
also: that which is one man's joy is another grief; one man's fear is another
man's hope: neither can it be otherwise, while our occasions draw us to so
manifest contradictions of disposition: These diversities and contrarieties of
inclination and desire, are the necessary symptoms of our wretched mortality;
and the nearer we grow to the perfection of our blessedness, the more shall we
concentrate in the united scope of all our actions, and affections, which is
the sole glory of our Creator: Know then, O my soul, that the closer thou can
gather up thy self in all the exercise of thy faculties, and proposals of thy
desires, to the only respect of the honor of that great and good God which
gave thee thy being, thou aspirest so much nearer to thy heaven, where all the
blessed Saints and Angels agree together in one perpetual employment of
praising their Maker; and sweetly accord in that one most perfect ditty and
note of an eternal Allelujah to him that sits upon the Throne of that
Celestial glory.

O God, do thou draw in my heart more and more from this variety of earthly
distractions, and fix it upon this one heavenly work: put me upon that
blessed Task here below, which shall never know any end, but endure for ever
in heaven.

Soliloq. XLIX. Divine Bounty.
HAd not the Apostle said so, yet our own sense and experience would have told
us, that every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights: For sure, Iam. 1.17.
from below it cannot come. How should any perfect gift arise from the region
of all imperfection? How should evil afford any good? What is below but earth
and hell? whereof the one yields nothing but torment, the other nothing but
misery, and sin: If therefore it be pefect, or good, (since nothing can give
what it has not) it must needs come from above: And from whom above? Not from
those lightsome bodies of the Stars, whose influences cannot reach unto the
soul, whose substance is not capable of any spiritual power, whether to have,
or give perfect gifts: Not from the blessed Spirits, which are Angels of Light:
They may help, through Gods gracious appointment, to convey blessings to us,
they neither will or can challenge an original and primary interest in the
blessings which they convey. Only therefore from the Father of Lights; who as
he is light, so is the Author of all whatsoever light, both inward and outward,
spiritual and sensible: and as light was the first good and perfect gift which
he bestowed on the world, so it well may employ all the spiritual blessings
conferred on the Creature: So as he that said, Let there be light; said also,
Let this man be wise; Let that be learned; Let that other be gracious and
holy: whence then, O whence can I look for any good thing, Iam. 1.5.
but from thy hands, O my God, who give to all men liberally and upbraidest
not: whose infinite treasure is not capable of any diminution; since the more
thou give, thy store is not the less, thy glory more. Thou do not sell thy
favors, as we men are apt to do, looking through our small bounty, at an
expected retribution; but thou give most freely, most absolutely: neither
do thou lend thy best blessing, as looking to receive them back again, but so
conveyest them to us, as to make them our own for ever: since therefore thy
gifts are so free, that all thy heavenly riches may be had for asking; how
worthy shall I be to want them if I do not sue for them to the Throne of thy
grace; Yet even this (since it is a good thing) I cannot do without thee. O
then give thou me the grace that I may be ever begging faithfully of thee;
and give me the graces that I beg for.

Soliloq. L. Sweet use of Power.
I See that great, wise, and holy God, who might most justly make use of his
absolute power, yet proceeds sweetly with his creature in all his ways: He
might force some to salvation in spite of their wills; He might damn others
merely for his pleasure, without respect to their sin: But he does not, he
will not do either of these; but goes along graciously and gently with us,
inviting us to Repentance, and earnestly tendering to us the means of salvation
on the one side with effectual persuasions, and strong motives, and kindly
inclinations to an answerable obedience; on the other side, laying before us
the fearful menaces of his judgments denounced against sinners, urging all
powerful disswasions, and using all probable means to divert us from all the
ways of wickedness; and when those prevail not, justly punishing us for our
wilful disobedience, impenitence, and infidelity.

O God, how should we learn of thee to proceed with all our Fellow Creatures,
(but much more with our Christian Brethren) not according to the rigor of any
pretended prerogative of power, but in all merciful tenderness, in all gentle
and fair means of their reclamation on the one side, and on the other, in an
unwilling and constrained severity of necessary justice.

And how much does it concern thee, O my soul, not to stay till thy God shall
drag thee to Repentance and salvation, but gladly to embrace all those happy
opportunities, and cheerfully to yield to all those merciful solicitations,
which thy God offers thee for thy full Conversion; And carefully to avoid those
ways of sin and death which he has under so dreadful denunciations
graciously warned thee to shun: Else thy God is cleared both in his justice and
mercy, and thy perdition is of thy self.

Soliloq. LI. The power of Conscience.
IT is a true word of the Apostle, God is greater than our Conscience; and
surely, none but he: under that great God, the supreme power on earth is the
conscience. Every man is a little world within himself; and in this little
world there is a Court of Judicature erected, wherein next under God the
Conscience sits as the supreme Judge, from whom there is no appeal; that
passes sentence upon us, upon all our actions, upon all our intentions; for
our persons, absolving one, condemning another; for our actions, allowing one,
forbidding another: If that condemn us, in vain shall all the World besides
acquit us; and if that clear us, the doom which the World passes upon us, is
frivolous* and ineffectuall. I grant this Judge is sometimes corrupted with the
Bribes of Hope, with the weak fears of loss, with an undue respect of
persons, with powerful importunities, with false witnesses, with forged
evidences, to pass a wrong sentence upon the person, or cause; for which he
shall be answerable to him that is higher than the highest; but yet this doom,
(though reversible by the Tribunal of Heaven) is still obligatory on earth: So
as it is my fault that my conscience is misled; but it is not my fault to
follow my Conscience. How much need have I therefore, O my God, to pray that
thou would guide my Conscience aright; and keep this great Judge in my
bosom from Corruption and error? and what need has this intestine arbiter of
mine to take special care that he may avoid all misinformations that may
mislead his judgment, and all the base suggestions of outward advantage, or
loss that may deprave his affections? And, O thou, that only art greater than
my Conscience, keep me from doing ought against my Conscience: I cannot
disobey that but I must offend thee; since that is but thine Officer under
thee, and only commands for thee.

Soliloq. LII. Proud Poverty.
THat which wise Solomon observed in the temporal estates of men, holds no
less true in the spiritual: Prove. 13.7.
There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing; There is that makes
himself poor, yet has great riches: On the one side, we meet with a proud but
beggarly Laodicean, Rev. 3.17.
that says, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing;
which will not know that he is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked; This man when the means of further grace are tendered him, can say,
as Esau did of the proffered herds, I have enough my Brother; and with the
bragging Pharisee can boast of what he is not, and of what he is; of what he
has, of what he does; admiring his own nothing, and not caring to seek for
more, because he thinks he has all; this fond Justiciary can overdoe his duty,
and supererogate; contemning the poverty of souls better furnished than his
(...); and laying his merits in the dish of the Almighty.

On the other side, there is an humble soul, that is secretly rich in all
spiritual endowments; full of knowledge, abounding in grace, which out of the
true poverty of spirit under-values himself, and makes no show of ought but a
bemoaned disability: as we have seen those grounds wherein the richest Mines
are treasured, bewray nothing but barrenness in their outside.

O my soul, what estimation soever others may set upon thee, thou art conscious
enough of thy own wants; be thankful for the little thou have, and abased for
the much thou lackest; and if thou will needs be advancing thy self above
others, let it be in the contestation of thy greater humbleness, and lower
dejection. Thy grace shall be no less because thou think it so: but shall
rather multiply by a modest diminution.

And, O Blessed Lord, thou who resistest the proud, and give grace to the
humble, give me more humility, that I may receive more grace from thee; and
thou whose gracious rain shelves down from the steep mountains, and sweetly
drenches the humble valleys; depresse thou my heart more and more with true
lowliness of Spirit, that the showers of thy heavenly grace may soke into it,
and make it more fruitful in all good affections, and all holy obedience.

Soliloq. LIII. The happiest Society.
I Find, O Lord, some holy men that have gone aside from the world, into some
solitary wilderness, that they might have their full scope of enjoying thee
freely, without any secular avocations; who no doubt improved their perfect
leisure to a great entirenesse of conversation with thee. Surely I could easily
admire the report of their holiness, and emulate their mortified retiredness,
if I did not hear them say, The Woolfe dwells in the Wood, and that they could
as soon leave themselves, as the World behind them. There is no Desert so
wild, no Mountains or Rocks so craggy, wherein I would not gladly seek thee,
O my God, and which I would not willingly climb up to find thee, if I could
hope that solitude would yield a spiritual advantage of more enjoying thee.
But, alas, I find our weak powers are subject to an unavoidable lassitude; and
we can no more contemplate always those divine Objects, than our bodily eyes
are able to fix themselves on the body of the Sun in his brightest splendour: so
as, if our minds should not be sometime taken off with a safe variety of
Cogitations, we should be overwhelmed with thy Glory, and with too much light
blinded: by this means it comes to pass that these small interspirations set
an edge upon our reassumed speculations, and renewed Devotions: Although also
in the mean time, I should hate all secular diversions, if they should take
thee for a moment quite out of my sight; If I did not find that I may still
refer them to thee, and enjoy thee in them. O God, do thou so fix my soul upon
thee, that what ever occasion shall take me up, I may never be out of thy
blessed society, and make me so insensible of the noise of the world, that even
in the midst of the Market I may be still alone with thee.

Soliloq. LIVE. Honey from the Rock.
O God, thou did miraculously refresh thy murmuring Israel of old with water
out of the Rock, in that dry wilderness; and now I hear thee say, If they had
hearkened to thy voice, and walked in thy ways, Psalm. 81.16.
with honey out of the Rock thou would have satisfied them. Lo, that which
thou would have done to thine ancient people, if they had obeyed thee, thou
have abundantly performed to thine Evangelicall Israel. With Honey out of the
Rock have thou satisfied them; The Rock that followed them was Christ my
Savior: 1 Cor. 10.
Lo, out of this Rock has flowed that honey whereby our souls are satisfied;
Out of his side (says the Evangelist) came water and blood, This Rock of our
salvation affords both what Israel had, and might have had. Surely, O my God,
there can be no honey so sweet, as the effect of the precious blood of my
Savior to the soul of the Believer; Heb. 9.12. Ephesians. 1.7.
By that blood we have eternal redemption from death, and Remission of all our
sins; Romans 5.9.
By that blood are we justified in the sight of our God, and saved from the
wrath to come; By that blood we have our Peace made in Heaven, Col. 1.20.
and are fully reconciled to our God; Heb. 9.22.
By that blood we are cleansed and purged from all our iniquity; Heb. 13.12,
14. 1 Pet. 1.2.
By that blood we are sanctified from our Corruptions; Heb. 9.15.
By that blood we receive the Promise and possession of an eternal
inheritance. O the spiritual Honey so sweet, that the material Honey is but
bitterness to it! 1 Samuel 14.29.
Jonathan of old did but dip his Spear in the honey of the wood, and but with
one lick of that sweet moisture had his eyes cleared, and his spirits revived;
O God, let me but taste, and see how sweet the Lord Jesus is, in all his
gracious Promises, in all his merciful and real Performances, I shall need no
more to make me happy. Thy Solomon bids me to eat honey: Lo, Pro. 14.23.
this is the honey that I desire to eat of; Give me of this honey and I shall
receive both clearness to my eyes, and vigor of my spirits to the foiling of
all my spiritual enemies. This is nothe honey whereof I am bidden not to eat
too much: Pro. 25.16.
No, Lord, I can never eat enough of this Celestial honey; Here I cannot
surfeit; Or, if I could, this surfeit would be my health. O God, give me still
enough of this honey out of the Rock, so shall my soul live, and bless thee,
and be blessed of thee.

Soliloq. LV. Sure Earnest.
O My God, what a comfortable assurance is this which thou have given to my
soul? Thou have, in thy great mercy, promised and agreed to give me heaven;
and now because thou do not put me into a present possession, thou have given
me earnest of my future inheritance; Ephesians. 1.14.
and this earnest is that good Spirit of thine, which thou have graciously put
into my soul. Even we men, whose style is deceitful upon the balance, think
our selves sure when in civil transactions we have received an earnest of the
bargain; and much more when we have taken that small piece of coin, as part
of the bargained payment; How then can I fear to fail thee, my God, whose Title
is faithful and True; whose Word is Yea, and Amen. It is ordinary with the
World to cheat my soul with fair promises, and faithless engagements of
yielding me those contentments, which it neither can, nor meant to perform.
Mat. 24.35
But for thee, O Lord, heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot of
thy Word shall pass unfulfilled: Had thou then, but given me that Word of
thine, I durst have set my soul upon it, with all firm confidence; but now
that thou have seconded thy Word with thy Earnest, what place can be left for
my doubt? What then, what is it that thou can stick at, O my soul? Can
thou make question of the truth of the Earnest? Thou know that thou can
not; the stamp is too well known to be misdoubted; the impressions are full and
inimitable; this seal cannot be counterfeit; the graces of the Spirit which
thou have received, thou feel to be true and real; thou find in thy
self a faith, though weak, yet sincere; an unfeigned repentance joined with an
hearty detestation of all thy sins; a fervent love of that infinite goodness
that has remitted them, a conscionable care to avoid them, a zealous desire to
be approved to God in all thy ways: Flesh and blood cannot have wrought these
graces in thee; It is only that good Spirit of thy God, which has thus sealed
thee to the day of Redemption.

Walk on therefore, O my soul, confidently and cheerfully in the strength of
this assurance, and joyfully expect the full accomplishment of this happy
contract from the sure hands of thy God: Let no temptation stagger thee in the
comfortable resolutions of thy future glory; But say boldly with that holy
Patriarch, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation.

Soliloq. LVI. Heavenly Manna.
VIctory it self is the great reward of our fight; but what is it, O God that
thou promisest to give us as the reward of our Victory? even the hidden Manna:
Surely were not this gift exceeding precious, thou would not reserve it for
the remuneration of so glorious a Conquest. Behold that material and visible
Manna, which thou sentest down from heaven, to stop the mouths of murmuring
Israel, perished in their use; and if it were reserved but to the next day,
putrified, and instead of nourishing, annoyed them; But the hidden Manna, that
was laid up in the Arc, was incorruptible, as a lasting monument of thy power,
and mercy to thy people; But now, alas, what is become both of that Manna, and
of that Arc? Both are vanished (having passed through the devouring jaws of
time) into mere forgetfulness. It is the true spiritual Manna that came down
from the highest heaven, and ascending thither again is hidden therein the
glorious Arc of Eternity, that thou will give to thy Conqueror: That is it,
which being participated of here below, nourishes us to eternal life; and
being communicated to us above, is the full consummation of that blessed life,
and glory. O give me so to fight that I may overcome, that so overcomming, I
may be feasted with this Manna. Thou that art, and have given me thy self,
the spiritual Manna, which I have fed on by faith; and the symbolicall Manna,
whereof I have eaten sacramentally; give me of that heavenly Manna, whereof I
shall partake in glory: It is yet an hidden Manna, hid from the eyes of the
world, yea in a sort from our own; hid in light inaccessible: Colos. 3.
For our life is hid with Christ in God; but shall then be fully revealed: for
it shall then not only cover the face of the earth round about the tents of
Israel. but spread it self over the face of the whole heaven, yea fill both
heaven and earth. I well thought, O my God, that if heaven could afford any
thing more precious than other, thou would lay it up for thy Victor: for it
is an hard service that thy poor Infantry here upon earth are put unto; to
conflict with so mighty, so malicious, so indefatigable enemies; and therefore
the reward must be so much the greater, as the warefare is more difficult. O
do thou who art the great Lord of Hosts, give me courage to fight,
perseverance in fighting, and power to overcome all my spiritual enemies, that
I may receive from thee this hidden Manna, that my soul may live for ever, and
may for ever bless thee.

Soliloq. LVII. The Hearts Treasure.
IT is a sure Word of thine, O Savior, that where our Treasure is, there our
hearts will be also; neither can we easily know, where to find our hearts, if
our Treasure did not discover them: Now, Lord, where is my Treasure? Surely I
am not worthy to be owned of thee, if my Treasure be any where but in heaven:
my lumber and luggage may be here on earth, but my Treasure is above; there
thou have laid up for me the richest of thy mercies, even my eternal
salvation: Yea Lord, what is my richest Treasure but thy self? in whom all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, yea of infinite Glory are laid up for all
thine: All things that this world can afford me, are but mere pelf in
comparison of this Treasure; or, if the earth could yield ought that is
precious, yet I cannot call that Treasure. Treasure implies both price, and
store of the dearest Commodities: never so great abundance of base things
cannot make a Treasure; neither can some few pieces of the richest metals be
so accounted; but where there is a large congestion of precious Jewels, and
Metalls, there only is Treasure: If any at all, surely very little, and mean
is the wealth which I can promise my self here; perhaps some brass Farthing,
or light and counterfeit Coin, mere earthy dross, which may load but cannot
enrich my soul; my only true riches are above with thee; and where then should
my heart be but there? My hand and my brain too must necessarily be
sometimes here below, but my heart shall be still with my Treasure in heaven.
It is wont to be said, that however the memory of old age is short, yet that no
old man ever forgot where he laid up his Treasure. O God, let not that
Celestial Treasure which thou have laid up for me, be at any time out of my
thoughts; let my eye be ever upon it; let my heart long for the full possession
of it; and so joy in the assured expectation of it; that it may disrelish all
the contentments, and contemn all the crosses which this World can afford me.

Soliloq. LVIII. The narrow Way.
O Savior, I hear thee say, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and yet
again, thou (who art Truth it self) tell me, that the way is narrow, and
the gate straight that leads unto life: Surely, thou who art the living Way,
art exceeding large; so wide that all the World of Believers enter into life by
thee only: but the way of our walk toward thee is straight and narrow; Not,
but that thy Commandment in it self is exceeding broad; Psalm. 119.
for Lord, how fully comprehensive it is of all moral and holy duties? and
what gracious latitude have thou given us in it of our Obedience? and how
favorable indulgence and remission in case of our faylings? But narrow in
respect of the weakness and insufficiency of our obedience? It is our wretched
infirmity that straitens our way to the. Lo, heaven, which is thy All-glorious
Mansion, when we are once entered into it, how infinitely large and spacious it
is; even this lower contignation of it, at how marvailous distance it archeth
in this Globe of air, and earth, and waters? and how is that again surrounded
with several heights of those lightsome Regions, unmeasurable for their
glorious dimensions? But the heaven of heavens, the seat of the blessed, is yet
so much larger, as it is higher in place, and more eminent in glory; yet thou
would have the way to it narrow, and the gate of it straight: And even thus
it pleases thee to ordain in the dispensation of all thine inferior
blessings; Learning dwells fair within, but the entrance is straight through
study, watching, bending of brains, wearing of spirits: the house of honor is
sumptuous and goodly within, but the gate is straight that leads into it; which
is through danger, attendance, plots of emulation: Wealth has large
Elbow-roome of lodging, but the gate is straight; hard labor, careful thrift,
racking of thoughts, painful adventures. How much more would thou have it
thus in the best of all blessings, the eternell fruition of heaven? And why is
this way narrow, but because it is untracked, and untrodden? If I may not
rather say the way is untracked and found by few, because it is narrow, and not
easy to tread in. Surely grace is the way to glory, and that path is not for
every foot: the straighter and narrower it is, O my God, the more let me strive
and shoulder to enter into it. What vain quarrels do we daily hear of for
the way; but Lord enable me to strive for this way even to blood: And if thou
have been pleased to set me a deep way, or a rough way through many
tribulations, to that happy and eternal life, let me pass it with all
cheerful resolution. How often have I not grudged to go a foul way to a friends
house, where I knew my entertainment kind and cordial? O let me not think
much to come to those thy everlasting Mansions of bliss, through tears and
blood. The end shall make an abundant amends for the way; If I suffer with
thee, I shall reign with thee.

Soliloq. LIX. Gods various Proceedings.
WHat strange varieties do I find in the workings of God with men: One-where
I find him gently, and plausibly inviting men to their Conversion;
another-where, I find him frighting some others to heaven: some he trains up
in a goodly education, and without any eminent change, calls them forth to an
exemplary profession of his Name; some others he chooses out of a life
notoriously lewd, to be the great patterns of a sudden Reformation; One that
was only formal in his Devotion without any true life of grace, is, upon a
grievous sickness, brought to a lively sense of godliness; another comes to
Gods house with a purpose to sleep or scoff, and through the secret operation
of Gods Spirit working with his Word, returns full of true compunction of
heart, with tears in his eyes, and resolutions of present amendment of life:
One that was proud of his own righteousness is suffered to fall into some
foul sin, which shames him before men, and is thus brought down to an humble
acknowledgement of his own frailty; another, that was cast down with a sad
despair of Gods mercy, is raised up by the fall of an unbroken glass, or by
some comfortable dream, or by the seasonable word of a cheerful friend: One
is called at the sixth hour, another not till the eleventh; one by fair and
probable means, another by contraries; so as even the work of Satan himself
has been made the occasion of the conversion of his soul. O God, thy ways
are infinite, and past finding out: It is not for us to prescribe thee what to
do, but humbly to adore thee in what thou do. Far be it from me, so to cast
my self upon thy All-working providence, as to neglect the ordinary means of my
salvation: Enable me cheerfully to endeavor what thou requirest, and then take
what way thou please; so that thou bringst me to the end of my hope, the
salvation of my soul.

Soliloq. LX. The waking Guardian.
IT is a true word which the Psalmist said of thee, O God; Thou that keep
Israel, neither slumbrest, nor sleep: Psalm. 12.14.
Fond Tyrants think that thou winkest at their cruel persecutions of thy
Church, because thou do not speedily execute vengeance upon them, whereas, if
the fault were not in their eyes, they should see thine wide open, and bent
upon them for their just destruction; only thou think fit to hold thy hand
for a time from the infliction of judgment, till the measure of their iniquity
be full, and then they shall feel to their cost, that thou saw all their
secret Plots and Conspiracies against thine Israel. Mat. 8.24, 25, etc. Mat.
4.37. Luke 8.13.
The time was, O Savior, when in the days of thine humane infirmity thou
slept'st in the stern of the Ship, on a pillow, when the Tempest raged and the
Waves swelled; yet even then when thy Disciples awoke thee and said, Lord save
us we perish, thou rebukedst them sharply, with, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? Their danger was apparently great, but yet thou telst them their
fear was causeless, and their faith weak, that they could not assure
themselves that thy presence (though sleeping) was a sufficient preservative
against the fury of winds and waters: How much more now, that being in the
height of thine heavenly glory, and ever intentively vigilant for the safeguard
of thy chosen ones, may we rest secure of thy blessed protection, and our sure
indemnity? O God, do thou keep my eyes ever open, that I may still wait upon
thee, for thy gracious tuition, and the merciful accomplishment of thy
salvation: Thou see I have to do with those enemies that are never but
waking, never but seeking all advantages against my soul; What can they do
when thine eye is ever over me for good? O then let mine eyes be ever unto
thee, Psa. 141.8.
O God my Lord; in thee let me still put my trust: so shall thou keep me from
the snares that they have laid for me, and the grins of the workers of iniquity.

Soliloq. LXI. The sting of guiltiness.
Guiltiness can never think it self sure; if there were no Fiends to torment
it, like a bosome-Devill, it would ever torture it self: no Guard can be so
sure, no Fort so strong as to secure it from terrors. The first Murderer after
his bloody fratricide, when there is no mention of any man (beside his Father)
upon earth, yet can say, It shall come to pass that every one that finds me
shall slay me; Genesis 4 14.
and I marvel that he added not; if none else will do it, I shall do that
deadly office to my self: He was sure he could meet with none but Brethren
or Nephews; and even the face of those was now dreadful to him: he that had
been so cruel to him that had lain in the same womb with himself, fears
that no neereness of blood can shield him from the violence of the next man.

Conscience when once exasperated, needs not stay for an accuser, a witness, a
solicitor to enforce the evidence, a Judge; but it self alone acts all these
parts, and oft-times also the executioners to boot. It was a just question of
the wisest of men, A wounded spirit who can bear? But there are diverse and
different degrees of the wounds of spirit: All are painful, some mortal; as
in the body, there may be some wounds in the outward and fleshly part, which
have more pain than peril, but those of the principal, and vital parts are
not more dolorous than dangerous, and often deadly: so it is in the soul, there
are wounds of the inferior and affective faculties, as grief for crosses,
vexation for disappointment of hopes, pangs of anger for wrongs received, which
may be cured with seasonable remedies; but the wounds of conscience inflicted
by the sting of some heinous sin, which lies belking within us, carries in it
horror, despair, death. O God, keep me from bloudguiltinesse, and from all
crying and presumptuous sins; but if ever my frailty should be so foully
tainted, do thou so work upon my soul, as that my repentance may walk in
equal paces with my sin, ere it can aggravate it self by continuance. Apply
thy sovereign plaster to my soul whiles the wound is green, and suffer it
not to fester inwardly through any impenitent delay.

Soliloq. LXII. Beneficial Want.
IT is just with thee, O God, when thou see us grow wanton, and unthankfully
neglective of thy blessings, to withdraw them from us, that by the want of them
we may feel both our unregarded obligations, and the defects of our duty: So we
have seen the Nurse, when the child begins to play with the dugge, to put up
the breast out of sight. I should not acknowledge how precious a favor health
is, if thou did not sometimes interchange it with sickness; nor how much I
am bound to thee for my Limbs, if I had not sometimes a touch of lamenesse:
Thirst gives better relish to the drink, and hunger is the best sauce to our
meat. Nature must needs affect a continuance of her welfare; neither is any
thing more grievous to her, than these cross interceptions of her
contentments: but thou, who art wisdom it self, know how fit it is for us,
both to smart for our neglect of thy familiar mercies, and to have thy
blessings more endeared to us by a seasonable discontinuance. Neither do thou
want to deal otherwise in the mannaging of thy spiritual mercies. If thy
Spouse, the faithful soul, shall (being pampered with prosperity) begin to
grow secure and negligent, so as at the first knock of her beloved, she rise
not up to open to Him, but suffers his head to be filled with Dew, and his
locks with the drops of the night; Cant. 5.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.
she soon finds her beloved withdrawn and gone: she may then seek him, and
not find him; she may call, and receive noe answer; she may seek him about the
streets, and in stead of finding him lose her veil, and meet with blows and
wounds from the watchmen. O God, keep thou me from being resty with ease; hold
me in a continual tenderness of heart: continue me in a thankful, and
awful use of all thy favors: but, if at any time thou see me decline to a
careless obduration, and to a disrespective forgetfulness of thy mercies, do
thou so chastise me with the fatherly hand of thy afflictions, and so work me
to a gracious use of thy desertions, that my soul may seek thee with more
vigor of affections, and may recover thee with more sensible comfort.

Soliloq. LXIII. Interchange of Conditions.
IT is not for nothing, O my God, that thou have protracted my time so long,
and have given me so large experience of thy most wise and holy dealing with my
self and others. Doubtless it is, that I might see, and feel, and observe,
and teach the gracious changes of thy carriage toward thy poor sinful
Creatures upon earth. Thou do not hold us always under the rod, (though we
well deserve a perpetual correction) as considering our miserable impotence,
and aptness to an heartlesse dejection; Thou do not always keep our hearts
raised up to the jollity of a prosperous condition, as knowing our readiness
to presume, and to be carried away with a false confidence of our
unmoveablenesse; but graciously interchangest thy favors with our sufferings:
When thou see us ready to faint, and to be discouraged with our adversity,
thou take off thy hand, and give us a comfortable respiration from our
miseries; When thou see us puffed up with the vain conceit of our own worth,
or success, thou take us down with some heavy cross. When thou find us
overlaid with an unequal match, and ready to be foiled in the fight, thou
give us breath, and put new strength into our arms, and new courage into
our hearts; When thou find us insolent with our Victory, thou sham'st us by
an unexpected discomfiture.

And as for the outward estate of the Nations and Kingdoms of the earth, thou
whirlest them about in a perpetual, yet constant vicissitude; Peace breeds
plenty, Plenty wantonness and pride, Pride Animosity, from thence follows
war, War produces Vastation and want, Poverty causes Industry, and (when
nothing is left to strive for) Peace, an industrious peace brings plenty
again, and in this gyre thou have ordained the world still to turn about.

Be not too much moved then, O my soul, when thou find thy self hard
pressed with afflictions, and conflicted with strong temptations, but bear up
constantly in the strength of thy faith, as being assured, that having rid out
this storm, thou shall be blessed with an happy calm; Neither be thou
lifted up too much when thou find thy self carried on with a fair gale of
prosperity, since thou know not what tempests may suddenly arise; and many
hopeful vessel has been sunk in sight of the Port: And when thou see the
world every where full of woeful combustions, be not overmuch dismayed with
the sight and sense of these public Calamities, but wait patiently upon that
Divine Providence; which, after those revolutions of change, shall happily
reduce all things to their determinate posture: To which purpose, O God, do
thou fix my heart firmly upon thee; do thou keep me from the evil of
prosperity, from dejectedness in affliction, from the prevalence of
temptation, from misprision of thy Providence: Work me to that due temper
which thy Solomon has prescribed me; Eccle. 7.14.
In the day of prosperity be joyful; but in the day of adversity consider: God
also has set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find
nothing after him.

Soliloq. LXIV. The rule of Devotion.
THy will, O God, as it is always holy, so in what thou have decreed to do
with us, is secret, and in what thou would have us do to thee, is revealed:
It is thy revealed will that must regulate both our Actions, and our Prayers.
It may be that I may lawfully sue to thee for what thou have decreed not to
grant: As Samuel ceased not to pray for thy favor to that Saul, whom thou
had rejected; and many an Israelite prayed for rain in that three years and
an half, wherein thou had commanded the Clouds to make good the prophecy of
thine Elias; yea, thine holy Apostle prayed thrice to have the Messenger 1 Cor.
12.
of Satan taken off from him; and heard no answer, but, My grace is sufficient
for thee: So, Lord, we pray for the removal of thy judgments from this
sinful and deplored Nation, which for ought we know, and have cause to
fear, thou have decreed to ruin and de^^station; and many a good soul prays
for a comfortable sense of thy favor, whom thou think fit to keep down
for the time in a sad desertion; and I thy unworthy servant may pray to be
freed from those temptations, wherewith thou see it fit that my faith should
be still exercised. O God, give me the grace to follow thy revealed will, and
to submit my self to thy secret. What thou have commanded, I know I may do;
what thou have promised, I know I may trust to; what thou have in a generality
promised to do, may in some particular cases by the just decree of thy secret
Counsel be otherwise determined: If I ask what thou have decreed to do, I
know I cannot but obtain; If I ask what thou have warranted (notwithstanding
the particular exception of thy secret will) though I receive it not, yet I
receive not pardon only, but acceptance. O God, give me grace to steer my
self, and my prayers by thy revealed Will; and humbly to stoop to what the
event shows to have been thy secret will.

Soliloq. LXV. Hels Triumph.
THou have told us, O Savior, Luke 15.10.
that there is joy in the presence of thine Angels, for a sinners repentance;
those blessed Spirits are so far from envying our happiness, that as they
endeavor it here, so they congratulate it in heaven: and we well know, that
these good Spirits do not more rejoice in the conversion of a sinner, than the
evil Spirits do in the mis-carriage of a convert. The course of the holy
obedience of thy servants here is doubtless a pleasing object to thine Angels,
neither are those malignant spirits less pleased with the wicked practices of
their Vassals; but the joy arises to both from the contrary condition of those
parties, over which they have prevailed: The alleagance of a good subject
(though wel-accepted) yet is no news to a gracious Sovereign; but the coming
in of some great Rebel is happy tidings at the Court: On the contrary, where
there is a rivality of soveraigntie, for a professed enemy to do hostile
actions, is no other than could be expected; but for a subject or a domestic
servant to be drawn into the conspiracy, is not more advantage than joy to
the intruder. O God, thou have mercifully called me out of the world to a
profession of thy Name; I know what eyes those envious Spirits have ever upon
me: Psalm. 5.8.
O do thou lead me in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; If thine
Angels have found cause to joy in my conversion, O do thou keep me from
making music in hell by my miscarriage.

Soliloq. LXVI. Dumb Homage.
HOw officious, O God, do I see thy poor dumb Creatures to us? how do they
fawn, or crouch, as they see us affected? how do they run and fetch, and
carry, and draw at our command? how do they bear our stripes with a trembling
unresistance? how readily do they spend their strength, and their lives in our
service? how patiently do they yield us their milk and their fleeces for our
advantage? and lie equally still to be shorn, or slain at our pleasure?
expecting nothing from us in the mean time but a bare sustenance, which, if it
be denied them, they do not fall furiously upon their cruel Masters, but
meekly bemoane themselves in their brutish language, and languish, and die; If
granted them, they are fatned for our use. I am ashamed, O God, I am ashamed to
see these thy creatures so obsequiously pliant unto me, whiles I consider my
disposition and deportment toward thee my Creator: Alas, Lord, what made the
difference betwixt me and them, but thy mere good pleasure? thou might have
made them rational, and have exchanged my reason for their brutality; They are
my fellows by Creation, and owe both their being and preservation to the same
hand with my self: Thou art the absolute Lord of both, to whom I must be
accountable for them; they are mine only by a limited substitution from thee;
why then should they be more obedient to my will, than I am to thine; since
they have only Sense to lead them in their Way, I have both Reason and Faith
to teach me my duty. Had I made them, I could but require of them their
absolute submission: Why should I then exact of them, more than I am ready to
perform unto thee? O God, thou that have put them under my hand, and me under
thy own, as thou have made me their Master for command, so let me make them my
Masters to teach me obedience.

Soliloq. LXVII. Indifferency of Events.
THou give us daily proofs, O God, of the truth of that observation of wise
Solomon, That all things come alike to all, Eccl. 9.1, 2.
and that no man knows love or hatred by all that is before them: In these
outward things thy dearest friends have not fared better then thine enemies;
Thy greatest enemies have not suffered more than thy beloved Children. When
therefore I look abroad, and see with what heavy afflictions thou art pleased
to exercise thy best Favorites upon earth, I cannot but stand amazed to see
what horrible Torments of all kinds have been undergone by thy most precious
Martyrs, whose patience has overcome the violence of their executioners: and
to see those extreme tortures which some of thy faithful servants have endured
in the beds of their sickness; one torn, and drawn together with fearful
convulsions, another shrieking under the painful girds of an unremoveable
stone; one wrung in his Bowels with pangs of cholicke, and turning of guts,
another possessed with a raging gout in all his Limbs; one whose bladder after
a painful incision is ransacked, another whose Leg or Arm is cut off to
prevent a mortal Gangrene: I cannot but acknowledge how just it might be in
thee, O God, to mix the same bitter cup for me; and how merciful it is, that
knowing my weakness thou have forborne hitherto to load me with so sad a
burden. What thou have in thine eternal Council determined to lay upon me,
thou only know. If thou be pleased to continue thy gracious indulgence to
me still, make me truly thankful to thee for health and ease, as the greatest
of thy outward favors; but let me not build upon them, as the certain
evidences of thy better mercies: and if thou think fit to interchange them
with a vicissitude of sickness and pain, let me not misconstrue thy severe
chastisements as arguments of thy displeasure: But still teach me to fear
thee in my greatest prosperity, and to love thee in my greatest sufferings; and
to adore thine infinite Wisdom, Justice, and mercy in both.

Soliloq. LXVIII. The transcendent Love.
HOw justly do I marvel, O God, to see what strength of natural affection
thou have wrought in poor brute Creatures toward their Masters, and toward
their own Mates, toward their dammes and their young: We have plentiful
instances of those whom Death could not separate from their beloved Guardians,
some that have died for their Masters, some with them; some that have fearlesly
hazarded their own lives for the preservation of their young ones, some that
have fed their aged dammes with that food which they have spared from their own
Mawes Amongst the rest how remarkable is that comparison of thine, O Savior,
wherein thou were pleased to set forth thy tender care of thine Israel by the
resemblance of an Hen gathering her Chickings under her wings? Mat. 23.37.
how have I seen that poor Fowl, after the patience of a painful hatching,
clocking her little brood together? and when she has perceived the Puttock
hovering over her head, in a varied note calling them hastily under the wing of
her protection, and there covertly hiding them not from the Talons only, but
from the eye of that dangerous enemy, till the peril has been fully over;
after which she calls them forth to their liberty and repast, and with many a
careful scrape discovers to them such grains of food as may be fit for them,
contenting her self to carve for them with neglect of her own sustenance. O
God, thou who have wrought in thy silly creatures such an high measure of
indulgence and dearnes of respect toward their tender brood, how infinitely is
thy love and compassion toward the children of men, the great Masterpiece of
thy Creation? How past the admiration of men and Angels, is that transcendent
proof of thy divine love, in the more than marvelous work of our Redemption?
How justly glorifiable is thy name in the gracious, and sometimes miraculous,
preservation of thy Children? In the experience whereof, if I forbear to
magnify thee, or dare not to trust thee, how can I be but unworthy to be
owned of thee, or blessed by thee?

Soliloq. LXIX. Choice of Seasons.
HOw regularly, O God, have thou determined a set season for all thy Creatures,
both for their actions and their use? The Storke in the heaven, says thy
Prophet Jeremy, knows her appointed times, Ier. 8.7.
and the Turtle and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their
coming: Who has seen the Oecolampad. in locu^ Ierem.
Stork before the Calends of August, or a Swallow in the Winter? Who has heard
the Nightingale in the heat of harvest? or the Bittern bearing her base in the
coldest Months? Yea the Fishes in the Sea know and observe their due seasons,
and present us with their Shoales only when they are wholesome and useful; The
Herring does not furnish our Market in the Spring, nor the Salmon, or Mackerell
in Winter: Yea the very flies both have and keep their days appointed; the
Silke-worme never looks forth of that little Cell of her Conception, till the
Mulbery puts forth the leaves for their nourishment; and who has ever seen a
Butter-flie, or an Harnet in Winter? yea there are Flies we know appropriate
to their own months, from which they vary not: Lastly, how plain is this in
all the several varieties of Trees, Flowers, Herbs? The Almond tree looks out
first, the Mulberry last of all other; The Tulip, and the Rose, and all other
the sweet Ornaments of the earth are punctual in their growth and fall: But as
for Man, O God, thou have in thy infinite VVisdome endued him with that power
of reason, whereby he may make choice of the fittest seasons of all his
actions. Eccl. 3.1.
Thou that have appointed a time for every purpose under heaven, have given him
wit to find and observe it. Even lawful acts unseasonably done, may turn
evil; and acts indifferent, seasonably performed, may prove good, and
laudable. The best improvement of morality, or civility, may shame us, if due
time be not as well regarded, as substance: Only Grace, Piety, true Virtue
can never be unseasonable. There are no seasons in Eternity; There shall be
one uniforme and constant act of glorifying thee: Thy Angels and Saints praise
thee above, without change or intermission; The more we can do so on earth, the
nearer shall we approach to those blessed Spirits. O God, let my heart be
wholly taken up evermore with an adoration of thine infinite Majesty, and let
my mouth be ever sounding forth of thy praise; and let the Hosannahs, and
Hallelujahs which I begin here, know no measure but Eternity.

Soliloq. LXX. The happy return home.
EVery Creature naturally affects a return to the original whence it first
came. The Pilgrim, though faring well abroad, yet has a longing homeward;
Fountains and Rivers run back with what speed they may to the Sea whence they
were derived; all compound bodies return to their first Elements; The vapors
rising up from the earth, and waters, and condenss'd into clouds, fall down
again to the same earth, whence they were exhaled; This body that we bear
about us, returns at last to that dust whereof it was framed: And why then, O
my soul, do not thou earnestly desire to return home to the God that made
thee? Thou know thy Original is heavenly, why are not thy affections so?
What can thou find here below worthy to either withdraw, or detain thee from
those heavenly Mansions? Thou art here in a Region of sin, of misery and death;
Glory waits for thee above: Fly then, O my soul, fly hence to that blessed
immortality; If not as yet in thy dissolution: (for which thou must wait on
the pleasure of thy dear Maker and redeemer) yet in thy thoughts, in thy
desires and affections; soar thou up thither, and converse there with that
blessed God and Father of Spirits, with those glorious Orders of Angels, and
with the souls of just men made perfect; And if the necessity of these bodily
affairs must needs draw thee off for a time, let it be not without reluctation
and hearty unwillingnesse, and with an eager appetite of quick return to that
Celestial society. It will not be long ere thou shall be blessed with a free,
and uninterrupted fruition of that glorious Eternity: In the mean time do
thou prepossesse it in thy heavenly dispositions; and contemning this earth,
wherewith thou art clogged, aspire to thy heaven, and be happy.

Soliloq. LXXI. The confinements of Age.
Do thou not observe, O my soul, how time and age confines, and contracts,
as our bodies, so our desires and motions here upon earth, still into narrower
compasses? When we are young the world is but little enough for us; after we
have seen our own Island, we affect to cross the Seas, and to climb over
Alps, and Pyrennes, and never think we have roved far enough; When we grow
ancient, we begin to be well-pleased with rest; now long and unnecessary
journeyes are laid aside. If business call us forth, we go, because we must;
As for the visits of friendship, one Sun is enough to measure them, with our
returns; And still, the older we grow, the more we are devoted to our home;
there we are content to sit still, and enjoy the thoughts of our youth, and
former experience, not looking farther than a kind neighborhood: But, when
Age has stiffened our joints, and disabled our Motions, now, our
home-pastures, and our Gardens become our utmost boundaries; from thence a few
years more confine us to our own floor; Soon after that, we are limited to
our chamber, and at last to our chair, then to our bed, and, in fine, to our
Coffin. These natural restrictions, O my soul, are the appendences of thy
weary Partner, this earthly body: but for thee, the nearer thou drawest to thy
home, the more it concerns thee to be sensible of a blessed enlargement of
thy estate and affections* Hitherto thou art immured in a straight pile o^
clay; now, heaven it self shall be but wide enough for thee: The world has
hitherto taken thee up^ which (though large is yet but finite;) now, thou art
upon the enjoying of that God who alone is infinite, in all that he is: O how
inconsiderable is the restraint of the worse part, in comparison of the
absolute enlargement of the better? O my God, whose mercy knows no other
limits than thy essence, work me in this shutting up of my days to all
heavenly dispositions, that whiles my outward man is so much more lessened, as
it draws nearer to the Center of its corruption, my spiritual part may be so
much more dilated, in, and toward thee, as it approaches nearer toward the
circumference of thy celestial glory.

Soliloq. LXXII. Sin without sense.
ALas, Lord, how tenderly sensible I am of the least bodily complaint that can
befall me? If but a tooth begin to ache, or a thorn have rankled in my flesh,
or but an angry Corn vex my Toe, how am I incessantly troubled with the pain?
how feelingly do I bemoane my self? how carefully do I seek for a speedy
remedy? which till I feel, how little relish do I find in my wonted
contentment? But for the better part, which is so much more tender, as it is
more precious, with what patience (shall I call it,) or stupidity, do I endure
it wounded (were it not for thy great mercy) no less than mortality? Every new
sin (how little soever) that I commit, fetches blood of the soul; every
willing sin stabs it; the continuance wherein festers inwardly; and, without
repentance, kills. O God, I desire to be ashamed, and humbled under thy hand
for this so unjust partiality; which gives me just cause to fear that sense
has yet more predominance in me than Faith. I do not so much sue to thee to
make me less sensible of bodily evils, (whereof yet too deep a sense differs
little from impatience) as to make me more sensible of spiritual: Let me feel
my sin more painful than the worst disease; and rather than wilfully sin, let
me die.

Soliloq. LXXIII. The extremes of Devotion.
I Acknowledge it to be none of thy least mercies, O God, that thou have
vouchsafed to keep me within the due lines of devotion; not suffering me to
wander into those two extremes, which I see and pity in others. Too many there
are, that do so content themselves in mere formalities, that they little
regard how their heart is affected with the matter of their prayers: so have I
grieved to see poor misdevout souls under the Papacy, measuring their
Orisons, not by weight, but by number; not caring which way their eye strayed,
so their lips went; resting well apaid that God understood them, though they
understood not themselves: too near approaching whereunto, are a world of
wel-meaning ignorant souls at home, that care only to pray by rote, not
without some general intentions of piety, but so, as their hearts are little
guilty of the motion of their Tongues; Who, whiles they would cloak their
carelessness, with a pretense of disability of expressing their wants to God,
might learn that true sense of need never wanted words to crave relief: Every
beggar can with sufficient eloquence importune the Passenger for his Alms. Did
they not rather lack an heart than a tongue, they could not be defective in
bemoaning themselves to heaven for what they lack; Especially, whiles we have
to do with such a God, as more esteems broken clauses made up with hearty
sighs, than all the complements of the most curious Eloquence in the world.

On the other side there are certain zealous Devotionists, which abhor all
set forms, and fixed hours of Invocation, teaching (and so practicing) that
they may not pray, but when they feel a strong impulsion of Gods Spirit to
that holy work; whereupon it has come to pass, that whole days, yea, weeks,
have gone over their heads, unblessed by their prayers; who might have taken
notice, that, under the Law, God had his regular course of constant hours for
his morning and evening Sacrifices; that the ancient Saints under the old
Testament, held close to David's rule, Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and Morning, and at Noon to pray and cry aloud; so as the very Lions
could not fright Daniel from his task: And even after the veil of the Temple
was rent, Act. 2.1.
Peter and John went up together to Gods house, at the ninth hour, to Evening
Prayer. Yea, what stand we upon this? when the Apostle of the Gentiles charges
us, 1 These. 5.17.
To pray continually: Not that we should in the midst of a sensible
indisposednesse of heart fall suddenly into a fashionable Devotion; but that
by holy Ejaculations, and previous Meditation, we should make way for a
feeling Invocation of our God, whose ears are never but open to our faithful
Prayers. If we first (though silently) pray that we may pray, the fervor of
our Devotion shall grow upon us in praying: these holy Waters of the Sanctuary,
that at first did but wet the soles of our feet, shall, in their happy
process, rise up to our chinnes. I thank thee, O God, that thou have given me
a desire to walk even between these extremities: As I would be ever in a
praying disposition to thee, so I would not willingly break hours with thee; I
would neither sleep nor wake without praying; but I would never pray without
feeling. If my heart go not along with forms of words, I do not pray, but
babble; and if that be bent upon the matter of my suit, it is all one to thee,
whether the words be my own, or borrowed. Let thy good Spirit ever teach me to
pray, and help me in praying: Let that ever make intercessions for me with
groanings which cannot be expressed; Romans 8.26.
and then, if thou can, send me away empty.

Soliloq. LXXIV. The sick man's Vows.
THe answer was not amiss, Aeneas Sylv. de Reb. gest* Alph.
which Theodoricus Bishop of Coleine is said to have given to Sigismond the
Emperor, who demanding how he might be directed the right way to heaven,
received answer; If thou walk so, as thou promisedst in thy painful fit of the
Stone, or Gout. Our extremities commonly render us holy: and our pain is
prodigal of those Vows, which our case is as niggardly in performing. The
distressed Mariner, in the peril of a Tempest, vows to his Saint a Taper as
big as the Mast of his ship; which upon his coming to shore, is shrunk into a
rush-candle. There was never a more stiff-necked people than that, which
should have been Gods peculiar, yet, upon every new plague, how do they crouch
and creep to the power, which their murmurs provoked? And we daily see
Desperation makes those Votaries, whom health dispenses with, as the loosest
of Libertines. Were it essential to prosperity, thus to pervert and debauch
us, it were enough to make a good heart out of love with welfare, since the
pleasure and profit of the best estate is far too short of recompensing the
mischief of a depraved jollity: but now, the fault is in our own wretched
indisposition; the blessing is Gods, the abuse is ours. Is the Sun to be blamed
that the Travelers cloak swelts him with heat? Is the fruit of the Grape
guilty of that Drunkenness which follows upon a sinful excess? Can we not
feed on good meat without a surfeit? And whose fault is it but ours, if we
forget the engagements of our sick beds? Rather than health should make us
godless, how much better were it for us to be always sick? O my God, I do
acknowledge, and bewail this wretched frailty of our corrupt nature; We are
not the same men sick and whole; we are apt to promise thee fair, and to pay
thee with disappointment; and are ready to put off our holy thoughts with our
biggens: It is thou only that can remedy this sickness of our health, by
working us to a constant mortification. O do thou ever bless thy servant,
either with sanctified crosses, or a temperate prosperity.

Soliloq. LXXV. The suggestions of a false heart.
SUrely, if thousands of souls perish by the flattery of others, more perish by
their own; whiles their natural self-love soothes them with plausible, but
untrue suggestions, concerning their estate: Is the question concerning grace?
the false heart tells a man he is stored to superfluity, and excess; when he
is indeed more bare and beggarly than the proud Pastor of Laodicea. Is the
question of sin? It proclaims him, not innocent only but a Saint; it tells
him his hands are pure, when he is up to the elbows in blood; that his tongue
is holy, when it is foul with perjury and blasphemy; that his eye is honest
and chaste, when it is full of adultery; that his soul is clean, when it is
defiled with abominable lusts, or with cruel rancour, and malice. Is the
question concerning Virtue? It tells a man he is just, when he is all made up
of rapine, and violent oppression; that he is eminently wise, when he has
not wit enough to know himself a fool; that he is free handed and munificent,
when he sticks not to rob beggars; that he is piously religious, whiles he pulls
down Churches: Thus is the man still hid from himself, and is made to see
another in his own skin: He cannot repent, because he thinks himself
faultles; he cannot amend, because he is ever at the best: his only ease and
advantage is, that he is carried hoodwinkt into hell. If the question be
concerning some scrupulous act to be done or omitted, now self-respect plays
its prizes at all weapons; what shifting and traversing there is to avoid the
dint of a present danger? what fine colors, and witty Equivocations does the
soul find out, to cozen it self into a safe offense. If the question be of a
sinful act already committed, what a shuffling there is to face it out by a
stout justification? maugre conscience, it was not lawful only, but (such as
the circumstances were) expedient also; And if it be so foul, that an apology
is too odious, yet an extenuation cannot but be admitted: be it amiss, yet,
not heinous, not unmeet for pardon. One would think Hell should have little
need of the fawning assentation of others, when men carry so dangerous
Parasites in their own Bosoms: But sure both together must needs help to
people that Region of darkness. Take heed, O my soul, how thou give way to
these flattering thoughts, whether arising from thy own breast, or injected by
others; and know, thou art never in more danger, than when thou art most
applauded: Look upon thine Estate, and Actions with unpartiall and severe
eyes; Behold thine own face, not in the false glass of opinion, and mercenary
Adulation, but in the true and perfect glass of the Royal Law of thy Creator;
that shall duly represent unto thee, whether the beauty of thy graces, or the
blemishes of thy manifold imperfections; that alone shall tell thee how much
thou art advanced in a gracious proficiency, and how shamefully defective thou
art in what thou oughtedst to have attained: Judge of thy self by that
unfailing rule, and be indifferent what thou art judged of by others.

Soliloq. LXXVI. Sacred Melody.
WHat a marvailously cheerful service was that, O God, which thou requiredst,
and had performed, under the Law: Here was not a dumb and silent act in thy
Sacrifices, a Beast bleeding before thy Altar, and a Smoke, and Flame arising
out of it; Here was not a cloudy perfume quietly ascending from the golden
Altar of thine Incense: but, here was the merry noise of most melodious music,
singing of Psalms, and sounding of all harmonious instruments. 2 Chro. 29.25,
28. 2 Chro. 5.12, 13.
The Congregation were upon their knees, the Levites upon their Stage sweetly
singing, the Priests sounding the Trumpets, together with Cymbals, Harps,
Psalteries, making up one sound in praising and thanking the Lord. Me thinks I
hear, and am ravished to hear in some of thy solemn days, an hundred and
twenty of thy Priests sounding with Trumpets; Thy Levites in greater number,
singing aloud with the Mixture of their musical instruments; So as not the
Temple only, but the Heaven rings again; and even in thy daily Sacrifices,
each morning and evening, I find an heavenly Mirth; Music, if not so loud,
yet no less sweet, and delicate; no fewer than twelve Levites might be
standing upon the stage every day singing a divine Ditty over thy sacrifice;
Mamonides in Cle. hamikdash. c. 3
Psalteries not fewer than two, nor more than six; Pipes, not fewer than two,
nor more than twelve; Trumpets two at the least, and but one Cymball; so
proportioned by the Masters of thy Chore, as those that meant to take the heart
through the ear: I find where thy holy servants, David, Solomon, Hezekiah,
(doubtless by thy gracious direction, yea, by thy direct command Chro* 29.25,
28.
) both appointed, and made use of these melodious Services; I do not find
where thou have forbidden them: this I am sure of, since thou art still and
ever the same, under both Law and Gospel, that thou both requirest, and
delightest in the cheerful devotions of thy servants; If we have not the same
sounds with thy legal worshippers, yet we should still have the same
affections. As they might not wait upon thee, sorrowful; so it is not for us
to praise thee with drooping and dejected spirits. O God, do thou quicken my
spiritual dullness in thy holy service; and when I come to Celebrate thy great
Name, whiles the Song is in my mouth, let my heart be the stage, wherein
Trumpets and Psalteries, and Harps shall sound forth thy praise.

Soliloq. LXXVII. Blemishes of the holy function.
I Cannot but bless my self at the sight of that strange kind of curiosity,
which is reported to have been used in the choice of those, who were of old
admitted to serve at the Altar; If Levi must be singled out from all Israel,
yet thousands must be refused of the Tribe of Levi: We are told, that,
notwithstanding that privilege of blood, no less than an hundred and forty
blemishes might exclude a man from this sacred Ministration; Maymon. in giath
hamikdash.
whereof nineteen in the eyes, nine in the ears, twenty in the feet; such an
holy niceness there was in the Election of the legal Priesthood, that, if
there were not found an exact symmetrie of all parts of the body, and not
comelines only, but a perfection of outward form in those Levitical
Candidates, they might by no means be allowed to serve in the Sanctuary; they
might have place in some out-roomes, and cleave Wood for the Altar; and might
claim a portion in the holy things; but they might not meddle with the sacred
Utensils, nor set foot upon the floor of the holy place. It was thy charge, O
God, that those Sons of Aaron, which drew near to thee, should be void of
blemish; thou, which would have the beasts of thy Sacrifice free from bodily
imperfection, would much more have thy Sacrificers so: The generality of the
Command was thine; the particularities of the numbers are Traditionall: And
well might the care of these outward observations agree with the pedagogie of
that law, which consisted in external rites; but we well know, it was the
inward purity of the heart, and integrity of an unspotted life, that thou
meant'st to aim at, under the figure of these bodily perfections, which, if it
were wanting, it was not a skin-deep beauty, and exquisiteness of shape, that
could give a son of Aaron an allowed access to thine Altar: Hophni and
Phinehas, the ill sons of good Eli, were outwardly blemishlesse, else they
had not been capable of so holy a^ attendance; but their insolences and
beastliness made them more loathsome to thee, than if they had been Lepers, or
Monsters of outward deformity: And can we think that thou have less regard
to the purity of the Evangelicall Ministry, than thou formerly had of the
Legal? Can we think the spiritual blemishes of thine immediate servants under
the Gospel, can be a less eyesore to thee, than the external blemishes of
thy Priesthood under the Law? Oh that my head were waters, Ier. 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep night and day for the
enormities of those, who profess to wait on thy Evangelicall Sanctuary? My
sorrow and piety cannot but bewail them to thee, though my charity forbids me
to blazon them to the world. Mal. 3.2.
Oh thou, that art as the Refiners fire, and the Fullers soap, do thou purify
all the sons of thy spiritual Levi: Mal. 3.4.
Do thou purge them as Gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering of righteousness; Then shall the Offerings of our Judah and Jerusalem
be pleasant to the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

Soliloq. LXXVIII. The blessed Reward.
WHen Paulinus came first into this Island, Beda Eccles. Hister. l. 2. cap. 13.
to preach the Gospel, to our then-Pagan Ancestors, King Edwin thought good to
consult with his Priests, and Nobles, whether it were best to give any
entertainment to the Christian Religion, which was by that stranger Preached,
and recommended to his people.

Up starts one Coifi, the Archpriest of those Heathen Idols, and freely says;
There is no virtue or goodness, O King, in this Religion, which we have
hitherto embraced; There is none of all thy Subjects, that has more studiously
addicted himself to the Service and worship of our gods, than my self; Yet I
am sure there are many that have prospered better, and have received more
favors from thee, than I have done; And if our gods could do any thing, they
would rather have been beneficent to me, that have most carefully served them:
It remains then, that if these new doctrines, which are preached to us, be
found upon examination, to be better, and more availeable, that without all
delay we do readily receive, and welcome them. Thus spoke a true Idols Priest,
that knew no Ell whereby to measure Religion, but Profit; no proof of a just
Cause, but success; no Conviction of Injustice, but mis-carriage. Yea, even
thine Altars, O righteous God, were never quit of some such mercenary
attendants, who seek for only gain in godliness: Ier. 44.17, 18.
If the Queen of Heaven afford them better penny worths and more plenty than
the King of Heaven, she shall have their Cakes, and their Incense, and their
hearts to boot. I know thee, O Lord, to be a munificent Rewarder of all that
serve thee; yet if thou should give me no wages, I will serve thee; If thou
should pay me with hunger and stripes, and prisons, and death, I will serve
thee. Away base thoughts of earthly remuneration, I will honor and serve thee,
O God, for thine own sake, for thy services sake; yet I have no reason not to
regard thine infinite bounty; It is no less than a Crown that thou have
promised me; and that I shall humbly aspire unto, and expect from thee, not as
in the way of my merit, but of thy mere mercy; My service is free in a zealous
and absolute Consecration to thee, thy hand is more free in my so gracious
Retribution: If thou be pleased to give thy servant such a weight of glory, the
glory of that Gift is thine: My service is out of my just duty, thy Reward is
of thy Grace, and divine Beneficence. Do thou give me to do what thou bidst
me, and then deal with me as thou will. As the glory of thy Name is the drift
of all my actions, so the glory that thou give me cannot but redound to the
glory of thine infinite mercy. Blessed be thy Name in what thou give, whiles
thou make me blessed in what I receive from thee.

Soliloq. LXXIX. Presages of Judgment.
Seldom ever do we read of any great mutation in Church or State, which is
not ushered in, with some strange Prodigies; either raining of Blood, or
apparitions of Comets, or airy Armies fighting in the Clouds, or Sea Monsters
appearing, or monstrous Births of men, or Beasts, or bloody Springs breaking
out, or direful noises heard; or some such like uncouth premonitors; which the
great and holy God sends purposely to awaken our Security, and to prepare us
either for expectation, or prevention of Judgments; wherein, the mercy of God
marvellously magnifies it self toward sinful Mankind, that he wills not
to surprise us with unwarned evils, but would have his punishments anticipated
by a seasonable repentance: But of all the fore-tokens of thy fearefullest
plagues prepared for any Nation, O God, there is none so certain, as the
prodigious sins of the people committed with an high hand against Heaven,
against so clear a light, so powerful Convictions. The monstrous and
unmatchable Heresies, the hellish Blasphemies, the brutish Incests, the savage
Murders, the horrible Sacrileges, Perjuries, Sorceries of any People, can be
no other than the professed Harbingers of Vengeance; these are our shoures of
blood; these are our ill-boding Comet; these are our misshapen Births; which an
easy Augurie might well construe to portend our threatened destruction.

1 King, 18.44.
The Prophet did not more certainly foretell, when he heard of an hand-broad
Cloud arising from the Sea, that a vehement Rain was coming, than Gods Seers
might foreknow, when they saw this dark Cloud of our sins mounting up toward
Heaven, that a Tempest of Judgment must necessarily follow.

But, Esa. 63.15.
Oh thou God of infinite mercy and compassion, look down from Heaven upon us,
and behold us from the Habitation of thy Holiness: Where is thy Zeal, and thy
Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy mercies toward us? Are they
restrained? If so, it is but just; For surely we are a sinful Nation, a
People laden with iniquity: Esa. 1.4.
We have seen our Tokens, and have felt thy Hand; yet we have not turned to
thee from our evil ways: to us therefore justly belongs confusion of Faces,
Dan. 9.8.
because we have sinned against thee: But to thee, O Lord our God, 9.
belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against thee; Oh
spare, spare the remnant of thy people: Dan. 9.16.
Let thine Anger and thy fury be turned away from thy chosen inheritance. 17.
O my God, hear the Prayer of thy servant, and his Supplications, and cause thy
face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate: Dan. 9.19.
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken, and defer not for thine own
sake, O my God.

Soliloq. LXXX. Unwearied Motion, and Rest Eternal.
I See thy Heavens, O God, move about continually, and are never weary of their
revolution; whereas all sublunary Creatures are soon tired with their motions,
and seek for ease, in their intermissions: Even so, O my soul, the nearer thou
growest to celestial, the more constant shall thy courses be, and the freer
from that lassitude that hangs upon thine earthly part. As it is now with me,
thou see, I soon find an unavoidable defatigation in all things.

I am weary of labor, and, when that is done, I am no less weary of doing
nothing; weary of the day, and more weary of the night; weary of all postures;
weary of all places; weary of any one (if never so pleasing) employment; weary,
even of varieties; weary of those, which some men call, recreations; weary of
those (wherein I find most delight) my Studies. But, O my soul, if thou be
once soundly heaveniz'd in thy thoughts, and affections, it shall be otherwise
with thee; then thou shall be ever (like this Firmament) most happily
restless; thou shall then find ever work enough to contemplate that infinite
Deity, who dwells in the Light inaccessible; to see (with ravishment of spirit)
thy dear Savior in his glorified humanity, adored by all the powers of
heaven; to view the blessed Orders of that Celestial Hierarchy, attending upon
the throne of Majesty; to behold, and admire the unspeakable, and
incomprehensible glory of the Saints: These are Objects, with the sight whereof
thine eye shall never be satisfied, much less cloyed: Besides that the hopes
and desires of enjoying so great felicity, and the care of so composing thy
self, as that thou may be ever readily addressed for the fruition of it,
shall wholly take thee up, with such contentment, that all earthly pleasures
shall be no better than torments in comparison thereof. O, then my soul,
since (as a spark of that heavenly fire) thou can never be but in motion, fix
here above, where thy movings can be no other than pleasing, and beatificall.

And as thou, O my God, have a double Heaven, a lower heaven for motion, and an
Empyreall heaven for rest; One, patent to the eye, the other visible to our
faith: so let my soul take part with them both; Let it ever be moving toward
thee, and in thee, (like this visible heaven) and (since the end of all motion
is rest) let it ever rest with thee, in that invisible Region of glory. So let
it move ever to thee whiles I am here, that it may ever rest with thee in thine
eternal glory hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.
THE SOVLES FAREWELL TO EARTH, AND APPROACHES TO HEAVEN.

BY J.H. B.N.

THE SOULS Farewell to Earth, AND Approaches to Heaven.
SECT. I.
BE thou ever, O my soul, holily ambitious; always aspiring toward thine
heaven; not entertaining any thought that makes not toward blessedness: For
this cause therefore put thy self upon thy wings, and leave the earth below
thee; and when thou art advanced above this inferior world, look down upon
this Globe of wretched mortality, and despise what thou wast, and had; and
think with thy self: There was I not a sojourner, so much, as a prisoner, for
some tedious years; there have I been thus long tugging with my miseries, with
my sins; there have my treacherous senses betrayed me to infinite evils both
done and suffered: How have I been there tormented with the sense of others
wickedness, but more of my own? What insolence did I see in men of power? What
rage in men of blood? What gross superstition in the ignorant? What abominable
sacrilege in those that would be zealous? What drunken revellings, what
Sodomitical filthiness, what hellish profanations in Atheous ruffians? What
perfidiousnesse in friendship, what cozenage in contracts, what cruelty in
revenges; Shortly, what an Hell upon Earth? Farewell then sinful world, whose
favors have been no other than snares, and whose frowns no less than
torments: farewell for ever; for, if my flesh cannot yet clear it self of thee,
yet my spirit shall ever know thee at a distance; and behold thee no otherwise
than the escaped Mariner looks back upon the rock whereon he was lately
splitted. Let thy bewitched Clients adore thee for a Deity, all the homage thou
shall receive from me shall be no other than Defiance, and if thy glorious
shows have deluded the eyes of credulous Spectators, I know thee for an
Impostor: Deceive henceforth those that trust thee, for me, I am out of the
reach of thy fraud, out of the power of thy malice.

Thus do thou, O my soul, when thou art raised up to this height of thy fixed
contemplation, cast down thine eyes contemptuously upon the region o^ thy
former miseries, and be sure ever to keep up in a constant ascent toward
blessedness; not suffering thy self to stoop any more upon these earthly
vanities: For, tell me seriously, when the World was disposed to Court thee
most of all, what did it yield thee but unsound joys sauced with a deep
anguish of spirit; false hopes shutting up in an heartbreaking disappointment;
windy proffers mocking thee with sudden retractions; bitter pills in sugar;
poison in a golden cup. It showed thee perhaps stately Palaces, but stuffed with
cares; fair and populous Cities, but full of toil and tumult; flourishing
Churches, but annoyed with Schism, and Sacrilege; rich Treasures, but kept by
ill spirits; pleasing beauties, but baited with temptation; glorious titles,
but surcharged with Pride; goodly semblances with rotten in-sides; in short,
Death disguised with pleasures and profits.

If therefore heretofore thy unexperience have suffered thy feathers to be
belimed with these earthly intanglements, yet now, that thou have happily cast
those plumes, and quit thy self of these miserable incombrances; thou may
soar aloft above the sphere of Mortality; and be still towering up toward thine
heaven; And as those that have ascended to the top of some Athos or Tenariffe
see all things below them in the Valleys small, and scarce, in their
diminution, discernable; so shall all earthly objects in thy spiritual
exaltation seem unto thee; either thou shall not see them at all, or at least
so lessened, as that they have to thee quite lost all the proportion of their
former Dimensions.

SECT. II.
IT will not be long, O my soul, ere thou shall absolutely leave the world in
the place of thine habitation, being carried up by the blessed Angels to thy
thy rest and glory; but in the mean time, thou must resolve to leave it in thy
thoughts, and affections: thou may have power over these even before the hour
of thy separation; and these rightly disposed have power to exempt thee
beforehand from the interests of this inferior World, and to advance thine
approaches to that World of the blessed. Whiles thou art confined to this Clay,
there is naturally a luggage of Carnality that hangs heavy upon thee, and
swayes thee down to the earth, not suffering thee to mount upward to that
bliss whereto thou aspirest; this must be shaken off, if thou would attain
to any capacity of happiness; Even in this sense, Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God: It behooves thee to be, so far as this composition
will admit, spirituallized, ere thou can hope to attain to any degree of
blessedness.

Thy conjunction with the body does necessarily clog thee with an irrational
part, which will unavoidably force upon thee some operations of its own; and
thy senses will be interposing themselves in all thy intellectual employments,
profering thee the service of their guidance in all thy proceedings: but if
thou love eternity of blessedness, shake them off as importunate suitors;
gather up thy self into thine own regenerated powers, and do thy work
without, and above them. It is enough that thou have at first taken some hint
from them of what concerns thee; as for the rest, cast them off as
unnecessary, and impertinent; the prosecution whereof is too high, and too
internal for them to intermeddle with: thou have now divine and heavenly
things in chase, whereof there cannot be the least sent in any of these earthly
faculties. Divest thy self therefore (what thou possibly may) of all
materiality both of objects, and apprehensions; and let thy pure, renewed, and
illuminated intellect work only upon matter spiritual, and celestial; And
above all, propose unto thy self, and dwell upon that purest, perfectest,
simplest, blessedest Object, the glorious and incomprehensible Deity: there
thou shall find more than enough to take up thy thoughts to all eternity. Be
thou, O my soul, ever swallowed up in the consideration of that infinite
self-being Essence, whom all created spirits are not capable sufficiently to
admire: Behold and never cease wondering at the Majesty of his Glory. Thy
bodily eyes dazzle at the sight of the Sun, but if there were as many Suns
as there are stars in the Firmament of Heaven, their united splendor were but
darkness to their All-glorious Creator: Thou can not yet hope to see him as
he is: but lo thou beholdest where he dwells in light inaccessible; the sight
of whose very outward verge is enough to put thee into a perpetual ecstasy. It
is not for thee as yet to strive to enter within the veil; Thine eyes may not
be free where the Angels hide their faces; What thou wantst in sight, O my
soul, supply in wonder. Never any mortal man, O God, durst sue to see thy
face, save that one entire servant of thine, whose face thy Conference had made
shining and radiant; but even he (though inured to thy presence) was not
capable to behold such glory, and live: Far be it from me, O Lord, to presume
so high; Only let me see thee as thou have bidden me; and but so, as not to
behold thee (after thy gracious revelation) were my sin: Let me see, even in
this distance, some glimmering of thy divine Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy,
Truth, Providence, and let me bless and adore thee in what I see.

SECT. III.
OH the infiniteness of thine Almighty power, which thou not have, but art,
beyond the possibility of all limitations of objects or thoughts: In us, poor
finite Creatures, our power comes short of our will; many things we fain would
do, but cannot; and great pity it were that there should not be such a
restraint upon our unruly appetites; which would otherwise work out the
destruction both of others, and our selves. But, O God, thy Power is beyond thy
Will; Thou can do more than thou will: Thou could have made more worlds
when thou madst this one; And even this one, which thou have made, Lord, how
glorious a one it is: Lo, there needs no other demonstration of thine
omnipotence. Oh what an heaven is this which thou have canopied over our heads?
how immensely capacious? how admirably beautiful? how bestudded with goodly
Globes of Light? Some one whereof has in it such unspeakable glory, as that
there have not wanted nations, (and those not of the savagest) which have
mis-worship'd it for their God: And if thou had made but one of these in thy
firmament, thy workmanship had been above our wonder; for even this had
surpassed the whole frame of this lower world; but now as their quality strives
with their greatness, so their magnitude strives with their number, which of
them shall more magnify the praise of their Almighty Creator; and these three
are no less than matched by the constant regularity of the perpetual motion of
those mighty bodies; Which having walked their daily rounds about the World
above this five thousand six hundred and sixty years, yet are so ordered by
thy inviolable Decree, that they have not varied one inch from their appointed
Line, but keep their due course and just distance each from other: although
not fixed in any solid Orb, but moving singly in a thin and yielding sky, to
the very same point whence they set forth. And if the bodily and visible part
of thine heavenly Host, O God, be thus unconceivably glorious, where shall we
find room to wonder at those spiritual and living powers which inhabit those
celestial Mansions, and attend upon the Throne of thy Majesty: the thousand
thousands of thy blessed Angels, Archangels, Cherubim, Seraphin, Thrones,
Principalities, Dominions, which in thy presence enjoy a bliss next to
infinite? any one of which if we could see him, were enough to kill us with
his glory: Not one of those millions of mighty spirits, but were able to
destroy a World: Oh then how infinitely transcendent is that power of thine,
which have both created all this heavenly Hierarchy, and so movest in them,
that only in and by thee they are thus potent.

Yea, Lord, let me but cast mine eyes down to this earth I tread upon, and
view thy wonders in the deep, how manifestly do these proclaim thy divine
Omnipotence? When I see this vaste Globe of earth, and waters, dreadfully
hanging in the midst of a liquid Air, upheld by nothing but by the powerful
word; When I see the rage of the swelling waves (naturally higher than the
shores they beat upon) restrained to their bounds by thine overruling command:
When I see the earth beautifully garnished with marvailous variety of trees,
herbs, flowers; richly stuffed with precious metals, stones, minerals: When I
see (besides a world of men) the numberless choice and differences of the
substance, forms, colors, dispositions, of Beasts, fowls, fishes, wherewith
these lower Elements are peopled, how can I be but dissolved into wonder of
thine Almighty power?

SECT. IV.
NEither is thy power, O God, either more, or more thy self than thy Wisdom,
which is no less essential to thee, than infinite. What have we to do, silly
and shallow wretches, with that incomprehensible wisdom which is intrinsecall
to thy divine Nature; the body of that Sun is not for our weak eyes to
behold: it is enough for me if I can but see some rays of that heavenly light
which shines forth so gloriously upon thy creature: in the framing and
governing whereof, whether thy Power or Wisdom did and do more exhibit it
self, thou only can judge. O the divine Architecture of this goodly Fabric
of Heaven, and Earth, raised out of nothing to this admirable perfection! What
stupendous artifice of composition is here! What exquisite symmetrie of parts,
what exact Order of Degrees, what marvailous analogy betwixt beasts, fishes,
plants, the natives of both Elements! Oh what a comprehensive reach is this of
thine Omniscience, which at once in one act beholdest all the actions and
events of all the creatures that were, are, or shall be in this large Universe?
What a contrivance of thine eternal Counsel, which have most wisely and
holily ordered how to dispose of every Creature thou have made, according to
the pleasure of thy most just will? What a sway of Providence is this that
governes the world? overruling the highest, and stooping to the meanest piece
of thy Creation? concurring with, and actuating the motions and operations of
all second causes of whatsoever is done in heaven, or in earth? Yea, Lord, how
wonderful are those irradiations of knowledge and wisdom, which thou have
beamed forth upon thine intelligent creatures, both Angels and men? As for
those Celestial spirits which see thy face continually, it is no marvel if
they be illuminated in a degree far above humane apprehension; but that the
rational soul of man, even in this woeful pilgrimage below, notwithstanding
the opacity of that earth wherewith it is encompassed, should be so far
enlightened, as that it is able to know all the motions of the Heavens, the
magnitudes and distances of Stars, the natures, properties, influences of the
Planets, the instant of the Eclipses, Conjunctions and several Aspects of
those Celestial bodies; that it can discover the secret Treasures of Earth and
Sea; and knows to unlock all the close Cabinets both of art and nature; O God,
what is this but some little gleame of that pure and glorious light, which
breaks forth from thine infiniteness upon thy creature: Yet were the knowledge
of all men on earth, and all the Angels in heaven, multiplied a thousand fold,
how unable were it being united together, to reach unto the height of thy
divine Counsels, to fadome the bottom of thy most wise and holy Decrees? so as
they must be forced to cry out with that Saint of thine, who was rapt into the
third heaven, Romans 11.33
O the depth of the riches both of the VVisdome and Knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

SECT. V.
BUt with what a trembling adoration, O my soul, must thou needs look upon the
infinite Justice of thy God; whose inviolable rule is to render to every man
according to his works. Alas, the little good thou were able to do, has been
allayed with so many, and great imperfections, that it can expect no
retribution but displeasure; and for the many evils whereof thou art guilty,
what can thou look for but the wages of sin, Death? not that temporary, and
natural only, which is but a separation of thee, a while, from thy load of
earth; but the spiritual and eternal separation from the presence of thy God,
whose very want is the height of torments. Lo, whatever become of thee, God
must be himself: In vain should thou hope that for thy self he will abate
ought of his blessed Essence, of his sacred Attributes: That righteous doom
must stand, The soul that sins shall die: Hell claims his due; Justice must
be satisfied; where art thou now, O my soul? what can thou now make account
of but to despair and die? surely, in thy self, thou art lost: there is no way
with thee but utter perdition. But look up, O soul, look up above the Hills
whence comes thy salvation; see the heavens opening upon thee; see what
reviving, and comfortable rays of grace and mercy shine forth unto thee from
that excellent glory; and out of that heavenly light hear the voice of thy
blessed Savior, saying to thee, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Ose.
13.9.
but in me is thy help. Even so, O Jesu, in thee, only in thee is my help:
wretched man that I am; in my self I stand utterly forfeited to death and
hell: it is thou that have redeemed me with no less ransom than thy precious
blood. Death was owing by me, by thee it was paid for me, so as now my debt is
fully discharged, and my soul clearly acquitted: Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? 34.
It is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died,
yea rather that is risen again. Lo now the rigor of thine inviolable justice is
taken off by thine infinite mercy; the sum that I could never pay, is by the
power of that faith which thou have wrought in me, set off to my all-sufficient
surety, and by thy divine goodness graciously accepted as mine; I have paid it
in him, he has paid it for me; Thy justice is satisfied, thy debtor freed, and
thy mercy magnified.

SECT VI.
THere are no bounds to be set unto thy thoughts, O my soul, since whatsoever
thy God either is, or has done comes within thy prospect: There, besides the
great work of his Creation, thou may dwell upon the no less almighty work
of his Administration of this universal world, whereof the preservation and
government is no less wonderful than the frame; there thou shall see the
marvelous subordination of creatures, some made to rule, others to obey; the
powerful influences of the Celestial bodies upon the Inferior; the
continual transmutation of elements, forsaking their own places and natures to
serve the whole; forms dying, matter perpetual; all things maintained by a
friendly discord of humors, out of which they are raised; the circular
revolution of fashions, occurrences, events; the different and opposite
dispositions of men overruled to such a temper; that yet government is
continued in the hands of few, society and commerce with all: shortly, all
Creatures whiles they do either naturally, or voluntarily act their own part,
doing unawares the will of their Creator.

But that which may justly challenge thy longer stay, and greater wonder, is
the more-than-transcendent work of man's Redemption; 1 Pet. 1.12.
the mysteries whereof the holy Angels have desired to look into, but could
never yet sufficiently conceive or admire: That the Son of God, the Lord of
Glory, Coeternall, Coequall to his Father, God blessed for ever, should take
upon him an estate lower than their own; should cloth his Deity with the
rags of our flesh; should stoop to weak and miserable manhood, and in that
low and despicable condition, should submit himself to hunger, thirst,
weariness, temptation of Devils, despite of men, to the cruelty of
tormentors, to agonies of soul, to the pangs of a bitter, ignominious, cursed
death, to the sense of his Fathers wrath for us wretched sinners, that had made
our selves the worst of Creatures, enemies to God, slaves to Satan, is above
the reach of all finite apprehension. O never-to-bee-enough-magnified mercy!
Bernard. Sermon. de passione Domini.
Thou did not, O Savior, when thou saw mankind utterly lost, and forlorn,
content thy self to send down one of thy Cherubim, or Seraphin, or some other
of thy heavenly Angels to undertake the great work of our deliverance (as well
knowing that task too high for any created power) but would, out of thine
infinite love and compassion, vouchsafe, so to abase thy blessed self, as to
descend from the Throne of thy Celestial glory to this Dungeon of earth; and
not leaving what thou had, and what thou wast, to assume what thou had not,
man; and to disparage thy self by being one of us, that we might become like
unto thee, coheirs of thy glory and blessedness. Thou that art the eternal
Son of God, would condescend so low, as to be man; that we who are worms
and no men might be advanced to be the Sons of God; thou would be a
servant, that we might reign; thou would expose thy self to the shame and
disgrace of thy vile Creatures here, that thou might raise us up to the
height of heavenly honor with thee our God, and thy holy Angels; thou would
dye for a while, that we might live eternally.

Pause here a while, O my soul, and do not wish to change thy thoughts;
neither earth nor heaven can yield thee any of higher concernment, of greater
comfort: Only withal, behold the glorious person, of that thy blessed
Mediator, after his victories over death and hell, sitting triumphant in all
the Majesty of heaven, adored by all those millions of Celestial Spirits, in
his glorified humanity; and (what thou may) enjoy the vision of him by faith,
till thou shall be everlastingly blessed with a clear, and present intuition.
Long after that day; and be ever careful in the mean time to make thy self
ready for so infinite an happiness.

SECT. VII.
ANd now, O my soul, having left below thee all the trivial vanities of Earth;
and fixed thy self (so far as thy weak eyes will allow thee) upon thy God,
and Savior, in his Almighty works, and most glorious Attributes, it will be
time for thee (and will not a little conduce to thy further address toward
blessedness) to fasten thy self upon the sight of the happy estate of the
Saints above, who are gone before thee to their bliss, and have (through Gods
mercy) comfortably obtained that which thou aspirest unto: thou that were
guided by their example, be likewise heartned by their success: thou art yet
a Traveller, they comprehensors; thou art panting toward that rest which they
most happily enjoy; thou art sweating under the cross, whiles they sit crowned
in an heavenly magnificence. See the place wherein they are, the heaven of
heavens, the paradise of God: infinitely resplendent, infinitely delectable;
such as no eye can behold, and not be blessed: should thou set thy Tabernacle
in the midst of the Sun, thou could not but be encompassed with marvailous
light; yet even there it would be but as midnight with thee in comparison of
those irradiations of glory which shine forth above in that Empyreall Region;
For thy God is the Sun there: Rev. 21.23
by how much therefore those divine rays of his exceed the brightest beams of
his Creature; so much does the beauty of that heaven of the blessed surpass
the created light of this inferior and starry firmament. Even the very place
contributes not a little to our joy, or misery; It is hard to be merry in a
Goal; Nehe. 2.2.
and the great Persian Monarch thought it very improper for a Courtier to be
of a sad countenance within the verge of so great a Royalty. The very devils
conceive horror at the apprehension of the place of their torment, Luke 8.31.
and can beseech the overruling power of thy Savior not to command them to go
out into the deep. No man can be so insensate to think there can be more
dreadfulnesse in the place of those infernal tortures, than there is pleasure
and joy in the height of that sphere of blessedness; since we know we have to
do with a God that delights more in the prosperity of his Saints, than in the
cruciation, and howling of his enemies. How can thou then, O my soul, be
but wholly taken up with the sight of that celestial Jerusalem, the beauteous
City of thy God, the blessed Mansions of glorified Spirits? Surely, if earth
could have yielded any thing more fair, and estimable than gold, pearls,
precious stones, it should have been borrowed to resemble these supernall
habitations: but, alas, the luster of these base materials does but darken the
resplendence of those divine excellencies. With what contempt now, do thou
look down upon those muddy foundations of earth, which the low spirits of
worldlings are wont to admire? and how feelingly do thou bless and emulate
the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23
who are honored with so blisfull an habitation.

But what were the place, O my soul, how goodly and glorious soever in it
self, if it were not for the presence of him whose being there makes it heaven?
Lo there the Throne of that heavenly Majesty, which filling and comprehending
the large circumference of this whole, both lower and superior world, yet there
keeps and manifests his state, with the infinite magnificence of the King of
eternal glory: there he in an ineffable manner communicates himself to
blessed Spirits, both Angels and men: and that very Vision is no less to them
than beatificall: Surely, were the place a thousand degrees lower in beauty and
perfection than it is, yet that presence would render it celestial; the
residence of the King was wont to turn the meanest Village or Castle, into a
Court: The sweet singer of Israel saw this of old, and could say, in thy
presence is the fullness of joy; and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. It is not so in these earthly and finite Excellencies: A man may see
mountains of treasure, and be never a whit the richer; and may be the
witness and agent too in another honor (as Haman was of Mardochees) and be so
much more miserable; or may view the pomp and splendor of mighty Princes, and
be yet still a beggar: but the infinite graces of that heavenly King are so
communicative, that no man can see him but must be transformed into the
likeness of his glory.

SECT. VIII.
EVen thy weak and imperfect Vision of such heavenly Objects, O my soul, are
enough to lay a foundation of thy blessedness; and how can there choose but be
raised thence as a further degree toward it, a sweet complacency of heart in
an appropriation of what thou see; without which nothing can make thee happy?
Let the Sun shine never so bright, what is this to thee if thou be blind? Be
the God of heaven never so glorious, yet if he be not thy God: be the
Savior of the World never so merciful, yet if he be not merciful to thee:
be the heaven never so full of beauty and Majesty, yet if thou have not thy
portion in that inheritance of the Saints in light; so far will it be from
yielding thee comfort, that it will make a further addition to thy torment.
What an aggravation of misery shall it be to those that were children of the
kingdom, Mat. 8.11.
that from that outer darkness whereinto they are cast, they shall see aliens
come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of heaven? Cease not then, O my soul, till by a sure and
undefaisible application, thou have brought all these home to thy self; and
can look upon the great God of Heaven, the gracious Redeemer of the world,
the glory of that celestial Paradise as thine own. Let it be thy bold
ambition, and holy curiosity to find thy name enrolled in that eternal
Register of Heaven: And if there be any one room in the many Mansions of that
celestial Jerusalem, lower and less resplendent than other, thither do thou
find thy self (through the great mercy of thy God) happily designed. It must
be the work of thy faith that must do it: that divine grace is it, the power
whereof can either fetch down heaven to thee, or carry thee beforehand up to
thy heaven; and not affix thee only to thy God, and Savior, but unite thee to
him, and (which is yet more) ascertaine thee of so blessed an union.

Neither can it be but that from this sense of appropriation there must
necessarily follow a mavelous contentment, and complacency in the assurance,
of so happy an interest. Lord, how do I see poor worldlings please themselves
in the conceit of their miserable proprieties? Dan, 4.30.
One thinks, Is not this my great Babylon which I have built? Another, Are not
these my rich Mines? Another, Is not this my royal and adored Magnificence?
And how are those unstable minds transported with the opinion of these great
(but indeed worthless) peculiarities; which after some little time moulder
with them into dust? How can thou then, be, but pleasingly affected, O my
soul, with the comfortable sense of having a God, a Savior, an heaven of thine
own? For in these spiritual and heavenly felicities, our right is not partial
and divided, as it uses to be in secular inheritances; so as that every one
has his share distinguished from the rest, and parcelled out of the whole; but
here each one has all; and this blessed patrimony is so communicated to all
Saints, as that the whole is the propriety of every one

Upon the assurance therefore of thy Gods gracious promises made to eevery true
believer, find thou thy self happily seized of both the King, and Kingdom of
heaven, so far as thy faith can as yet feoffe thee in both; and delight thy
self above all things in these unfailing pledges of thine instant blessedness,
and say with the holy Mother of thy redeemer, My soul does magnify the Lord;
Luke 1.46.47.
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

SECT. IX.
FRom this feeling complacency in the owning of thy right to glory and
happiness, there cannot but arise a longing desire of the full possession
thereof: for thou can not so little love thy self, as what thou know thou
have a just title unto, and withal apprehendest to be infinitely pleasing and
beneficial, not to wish that thou may freely enjoy it. If thou have tasted
how sweet the Lord is, thou can not but long for more of him, yea, for all:
It is no otherwise even in carnal delights, the degustation whereof is wont to
draw on the heart to a more eager appetition; much more in spiritual; the
pleasures whereof as they are more pure, so they are of the heavenly-minded
with far greater ardency of spirit affected. The covetous man's heart is in his
bags; what he has does but augment his lust of more; and the having of more
does not satiate but enlarge his desires; He that loves silver, Eccl. 5.10.
shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance with
increase: but these celestial riches are so much more allective, as they are
more excellent, than those which are delved out of the bowels of the earth. O
my soul, thou have through the favor of thy God sipp'd some little of the cup
of immortality, and tasted of that heavenly Manna the food of Angels; and can
thou take up with these slight touches of blessedness? Thou have (though most
unworthy) the honor to be contracted to thy Savior here below; thou know
the voice of his Spouse, Draw me and we shall run after thee; Cant. 1.4.
stay me with flagons, 2.5.
comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love; 8.14.
make have my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
mountains of Spices: Where is thy love if thou have not fervent desires of a
perpetual enjoyment? if thou do not earnestly wish for a full consummation of
that heavenly match? O my Lord and Savior, as I am not worthy to love thee; so
I were not able to love thee (how amiable soever) but by thee. O thou that have
begun to kindle this fire of heavenly love in me, raise thou it up to a perfect
flame; make me not only sick of thy love, but ready and desirous to die for
thee, that I may enjoy thee: Oh let me not endure that any worldly heart should
be more enamoured of these earthly beauties, which are but varnished rottennes,
than I am of thee who art of absolute and infinite perfections; and bestowest
them in being loved.

Oh when shall the day be, wherein thou will make up these blessed Nuptials;
and endow me with a full participation of that glory wherewith thou art
invested, from, and to all eternity? whereto have all thy sweet favors, and
gracious love tokens tended, but to this issue of blessedness? Oh do thou
Crown all thy mercies in me, and me with immortality.

SECT. X.
Upon this desire of fruition, (if thou would be truly happy) there must
follow a constant prosecution of that desire: for if thy wishes be never so
fervent, yet if they be only volatile and transient, they shall be able to
avail thee little; slight and flickering motions of good, if they be not
followed with due endeavors, sort to no effect. Content not thy self
therefore, O my soul, that thou have entertained into thy self some affective
thoughts of thy beatitude; but settle thy self in firm resolutions to pursue,
and perpetuate them: Let them not call in as strangers, but dwell in thee as
in-mates, never to be, by any secular occasions, dislodged. These morning dewes
of holy dispositions, which are ready to be exhaled with every gleam of worldly
prosperity, as they find little acceptance from God, so they are able to
afford small comfort to thee; as whose condition is such, that they leave thee
more disconsolate in their vanishing, than they yielded thee pleasure in their
momentany continuance. Be thou able to say with holy David, my heart is fixed,
Psalm. 57.7.
O God, my heart is fixed; and then thou may well add, I will sing and give
praise; otherwise thy distracted thoughts will admit no cause of sound joy. In
this case it falls out with thee, O my soul, as with some fond child, who
eagerly following a Be in hope of her bag, sees a gay Butterfly cross his
way; and thereupon leaves his first chase, and runs after those painted wings;
but in that pursuit seeing a Bird fly close by him, he leaves the fly in
hope of a better purchase; but in the mean time is disappointed of all, and
catches nothing. It mainely behooves thee therefore to keep up thy Cogitations
and Affections close to these heavenly objects; and to check them whenever
thou perceivest an inclination to their wandering: like as the careful
Huntsman, when he finds his Hound offering to follow after a new game, rates
him off; and holds him to his first sent. Whither are ye straying, O my
thoughts? what means this sinful and lossefull inconstancy? Can ye be
happier in a change? Is there any thing in this miserable world that can be
worthy to carry you away from the hopes and affectations of blessedness? Have
ye not full often complained of the worthlesnesse, and satiety of these poor
vanities here below? Have ye not found their promises false, their
performances unsatisfactory, their disappointment irksome? Away then ye
frivolous temptations, and solicit those minds that are low, and empty like
your selves: For me, I disdain your motions; and being taken up with higher
employments, scorn to descend to your base suggestions, which tend to nothing
but mere earthliness.

But (as there is no fire which will not go out if it be not fed) it cannot be
enough that thou have entertained these gracious resolutions, unless thou do
also supply and nourish them with holy meditations, devout prayers, continual
ejaculations, and the due frequentation of all the holy ordinances of thy God;
without which, if they shall languish through thy neglect, thou shall find
double more work, and difficulty, in reviving them, than there could have been
in maintaining, and upholding them in their former vigor. Be not therefore
wanting to thy self in the perpetual exercise and improvement of all those
holy means, that may further and perfect these heavenly longings after
salvation; thy God shall not be wanting to thee in blessing thee with an
answerable success.

SECT. XI.
IT is the just praise of the marvailous bounty of thy God, O my soul, Psalm.
145.19
that he will fulfill the desires of them that fear him. If therefore thou
can hunger and thirst, after righteousness, if thy heart can yearn after
heaven, he shall be sure to satisfy thee with goodness; and not only shall
bring thee home at the last to that land of promised blessedness, but in the
mean time also put thee into an inchoate fruition of happiness; which is the
next degree of thine ascent to heaven.

That which is complete may be the surest rule of knowing and judging of that
which is imperfect: Wherein does the perfection of heavenly bliss consist, but
in a perpetual enjoying the presence of God, in a clear vision of the divine
Essence, in a perfect union with God, and an eternal participation of his life
and glory? Now as grace is glory begun, and glory is grace consummate, so do
thou, O my soul (being wrought to it by the power of the Spirit of thy God)
even in this life (how weakly soever) enter upon all these acts and privileges
of Beatitude: Even here below thou art never out of the presence of thy God;
and that presence can never be other than glorious; and that it is not
beatificall here, is not out of any deficiency in it, but in thine own
miserable incapacity; who, whiles thou abidest, in this vale of tears, and art
clogged with this flesh, art no fit subject of so happy a condition. Yea that
blessed presence is ever comfortably acknowledged by thee, and enjoyed with
such contentment and pleasure that thou would not part with it for a world,
and that thou justly accountest all earthly delights but mere vexations to that
alone; Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.24.
and what do I desire on earth in comparison of thee? Number. 24.17.
A Balaam could say (how truly soever) I shall see him, but not now; I shall
behold him, but not nigh: But, Lord, I see thee even now; I behold thee so nigh
me, that I live in thee, and would rather die than live without thee; I see
thee, though weakly and dimly, yet truly and reallie; I see thee as my God
all-sufficient, as my powerful Creator, my merciful Redeemer, my gracious
comforter; I see thee the living God, the Father of Lights, the God of Spirits,
dwelling in light inaccessible, animating, filling, comprehending this glorious
world; and do awfully adore thine infiniteness. Neither do I look at thee
with a trembling astonishment, as some dreadful stranger, or terrible avenger;
but I behold thy majesty so graciously complying with my wretchedness, that
thou admittest me to a blessed union with thee: I take thee at thy Word, O
dear Savior, even that sweet word of impetration, which thou were pleased to
utter unto thy coeternal Father, immediately before thy meritorious passion,
Ioh. 17.20.
I pray not for these alone; but for them also which shall believe on me
through their Word; 21.
That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they
may be One in us: 22.
And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one
even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, 23.
that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou
have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. I know thou could
not but be heard in all that thou prayed'st; and therefore I take what thou
suedst for, as done. Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17.
I do believe in thee, unite thou me to thee: make me one spirit with thee: It
is no presumption to sue and hope for what thou have prayed for, and promised
to perform: Oh make me according to the capability of my weak humanity, 2
Pet. 1.4.
partaker of thy divine nature; Vouchsafe to allow me, even me poor wretched
soul, to say of thee, I am my beloveds, Can. 6.3.
and my beloved is mine: And by virtue of this indissoluble union, why should
thou not, O my soul, find thy self endowed with a blessed participation of
that heavenly life and glory, which is in, and with him? In that thou art
united to thy body, thou impartest to it vegetation, sense, motion; and give
it a share in the exercise of all thy noble faculties: how much more entire and
beneficial is the spiritual union of thy God, and thee? Alas, that bond of
natural conjunction is easily dissolved by ten thousand ways of death: this
heavenly knot is so fast tied, that all the powers of hell cannot unloose it;
And the blessings communicated to thee by this divine match are so much more
excellent, as the infinite giver of them is above thy meandness: Lo, now thou
art actually interessed in all that thy God is, or has; his kingdom is thine,
his glory is thine to all eternity.

SECT. XII.
ANd what now can follow, O my soul, upon the apprehension of thus enjoying
the presence of thy God, and the vision of so blessed an object; and thine
union with him, and participation of him, but a sensible ravishment of Spirit
with a joy unspeakable, and full of glory? Heretofore, if some great friend
should have brought me to the Court, and having showed me the splendour and
magnificence of that seat of Majesty, should have brought me in to the sight
of his Royal person; and should have procured me not only a familiar
conference with him, but the entire affection of a favorite; and from thence
there should have been heaped upon me, Titles of honor, and large revenues,
and (yet higher) a consociation of Princely dignity: How should I have been
transported with the sense of so eminent an advancement? how great and happy
should I have seemed, not more in others eyes, than in my own? what big
thoughts had hereupon swollen up my heart in the days of my vanity? But, alas,
what poor things are these in comparison of those heavenly promotions? I might
have been brought into the stateliest Court of this World; and have been
honored not only with the presence, but the highest favors, of the best and
greatest of Kings, and yet have been most miserable: Yea, which of those
Monarchs, that have the command, and dispensation of all greatness, can secure
himself from the saddest infelicities? But these spiritual prerogatives are
above the reach of all possible misery; and can, and do put thee (in some
degree) into an unfailing possession both real and personal of eternal
blessedness. I cannot wonder that Peter when with the other two Disciples upon
Mount Tabor, he saw the glorious transfiguration of my Savior, was out of
himself for the time, Mar. 9.6. Luke 9.33.
and knew not what he said; yet, as not thinking himself and his partners, any
otherways concerned, than in the sight of so heavenly a vision, he mentions
only three Tabernacles, for Christ, Moses, Elias, none for themselves; it was
enough for him, if without doors he might be still blessed with such a
prospect: But how had he been wrapped from himself, if he had found himself
taken into the society of this wondrous transformation, and interessed in the
communion of this glory?

Thy renovation, and the power of thy faith, O my soul, puts thee into that
happy condition; thou art spiritually transfigured into the similitude of thy
blessed Savior, Romans 12.2 Ephesians. 4.24.
shining with his righteousness and holiness; so as he is glorified in thee,
and thou in him; Glorified, Ioh. 17.10. 2 These. 1.12.
not in the fullness of that perfection which will be, but in the pledge and
earnest of what shall, and must be hereafter. O then, with what unspeakable
joy, and jubilation, do thou entertain thy happiness? How can thou
contain thy self any longer within these bounds of my flesh, when thou
feel thy self thus initiated into glory? Art thou in heaven and know it
not? Know thou not that he who is within the entry, or behind the screen,
is as truly within the house, as he that walks in the Hall, or sits in the
parlour? And can thou pretend to be within the verge of heaven, and not
rejoice? What is that makes heaven, but joy and felicity? thy very thought
cannot separate these two, no more than it can sever the Sun and light: For
both these are equally the originals and fountains of light and joy; from
whence they both flow, and in which both are complete; there is no light which
is not derived from the Sun; no true joy but from heaven: as therefore the
nearer to the body of the Sun, the more light and heat, so the nearer to
heaven, the more excess of joy. And certainly, O my soul, there is nothing but
infidelity, can keep thee from an exuberance of joy, and delight in the
apprehension of heaven.

Can the weary Traveller after he has measured many tedious miles, and passed
many dangers both by sea and land, and felt the harsh entertainements of a
stranger, choose but rejoice to draw near in his return to a rich, and pleasant
home? Can the Ward, after an hard pupillage choose but rejoice that the day is
coming wherein he shall freely enjoy all his Lordly revenues and roialties?
Can a Joseph choose but find himself inwardly joyed, when out of the dungeon he
shall be called up, not to liberty only, but to honor; and shall be arraied
with a vesture of fine Linen; and graced with Pharaoh's ring, and chain; and
set in his second Chariot, and in the next chair to the throne of Egypt? And
can thou apprehend thy self now approaching to the glory of the heaven of
heavens, a place and state of so infinite contentment and happiness, and not
be extasied with joy? There, there shall thou, O my soul, enjoy a perfect rest
from all thy toiles, cares, fears; there shall thou find a true vital life,
free from all the incombrances of thy miserable pilgrimage; free from the
dangers of either sins, or temptations; free from all anxiety and distraction;
free from all sorrow, pain, perturbation; free from all the possibility of
change, or death: A life wherein there is nothing but pure and perfect
pleasure; nothing but perpetual melody of Angels and Saints, singing sweet
Allelujahs to their God; A life which the most glorious Deity both gives, and
is: A life wherein thou have the full fruition of the ever-blessed Godhead,
the continual society of the celestial spirits, the blissful presence of the
glorified humanity of thy dear Savior: A life wherein thou have ever consort
with the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the
Patriarks, and Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, the
Celestial synod of all the holy fathers, and illuminated Doctors of the
Church; Shortly, the blessed Assembly of all the faithful Professors of the
Name of the Lord Jesus, that having finished their course, sit now shining in
their promised glory: See there that yet-unapproachable light, that divine
magnificence of the heavenly King; See that resplendent Crown of
righteousness, which decks the heads of every of those Saints, and is ready
to be set on thine, when thou have happily overcome those spiritual powers,
wherewith thou art still conflicting; See the joyful triumphs of these
exsulting victors; See the measures of their glory different, yet all full, and
the least unmeasurable; Lastly, see all this happiness not limited to
thousands, nor yet millions of years, but commeasured by no less than eternity.
And now, my soul, if thou have received the infallible engagement of thy God,
[in that having believed, Ephesians. 1.13.
thou art sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
thine inheritance, 14.
until the full Redemption of thy purchased possession] if, through his
infinite mercy, thou be now upon the entering into that blessed place and state
of immortality, 1 These. 1.6.
forbear (if thou can) to be raised above thy self with the joy of the holy
Ghost, to be enlarged toward thy God with a joy unspeakable and glorious: See
if thou can now breath forth any thing but praises to thy God, and songs of
rejoicing; bearing evermore a part in that heavenly ditty of the Angels;
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and thanksgiving, Rev. 7.12.
and Honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever, and ever.

SECT XIII.
ANd now what remains, O my soul, but that thou do humbly and faithfully wait
at the gate of heaven for an happy entrance (at the good pleasure of thy God)
into those everlasting Mansions. I confess, should thy merits be weighed in
the balance of a rigorous Justice, another place (which I cannot mention
without horror) were more fit for thee, more due to thee: for, alas, thou have
been above measure sinful, and thou know the wages of sin, death. Psalm.
59.10.
But the God of my mercy has prevented thee with infinite compassion: Psalm.
86.13.
and in the multitudes of his tender mercies has not only delivered thee from
the nethermost hell, but has also vouchsafed to translate thee to the Kingdom
of his dear Son; In him thou have boldness of access to the Throne of Grace;
Col. 1.13.
thou, who in thy self art worthy to be a child of wrath, art in him adopted
to be a co-heire of Glory; and have the livery and seizin given thee beforehand
of a blessed possession; the full estating wherein I do in all humble
awfulnesse attend. All the few days therefore of my appointed time will I wait
at the threshold of grace until my changing come; with a trembling joy, with a
longing patience, with a comfortable hope. Only, Lord, I know there is
something to be done, ere I can enter; I must die, ere I can be capable to
enjoy that blessed life with thee: one stroke of thine Angel must be endured
in my passage into thy Paradise; And lo, here I am before thee ready to embrace
the condition; Even, when thou please, let me bleed once to be ever happy.
Thou have, after a weary walk through this roaring wilderness, vouchsafed to
call up thy servant to Mount Nebo, and from thence aloof off, to show me the
land of Promise, a land that flows with milk and honey; Do thou but say, Die
thou on this Hill, with this prospect in mine eye, and do thou mercifully take
my soul from me, who gave it to me; and dispose of it where thou will in
that Region of Immortality. Amen, Amen. Come Lord Jesu, Come quickly.

BEhold, Lord, I have by thy Providence dwelt in this house of Clay more than
double the time wherein thou were pleased to sojourn upon earth; Yet I may well
say with thine holy Patriark, Genesis 47.9.
Few and evil have been the days of the years of my pilgrimage: Few in
number, evil in condition: Few in themselves, but none at all to thee, with
whom a thousand years are but as one day. But had they been double to the age
of Methusaleh, could they have been so much as a minute to eternity? Yea, what
were they to me (now that they are past) but as a tale that is told and
forgotten.

Neither yet have they been so few, as evil. Lord what troubles and sorrows
have thou let me see, both my own and others? What vicissitudes of sickness
and health? What ebbes and flows of condition? How many successions and
changes of Princes both at home, and abroad? What turnings of times? What
alterations of Governments? What shiftings and downfalls of Favorites? What
ruins and desolations of Kingdoms? What sacking of Cities? What havocks of
war? What frenzies of rebellions? What underminings of treachery? What
cruelties and barbarismes in revenges? What anguish in the oppressed and
tormented? What agonies in temptations? what pangs in dying? These I have seen,
and in these I have suffered: And now, Lord, how willing I am to change time
for eternity, the evils of earth, for the joys of heaven, misery for
happiness, a dying life for immortality?

Even so, Lord Jesu,

Take what thou have bought; Receive my soul to thy mercy, and crown it with
thy glory. Amen. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the several Books written by the Author in and since his
Retiring, Namely,
1. THe Devout Soul, and Free Prisoner. 2. The Remedy of Coffeehouse, Or, A
Treatise of Contentation in whatsoever condition. 3. The Peacemaker, laying
forth the right way of Peace in matter of Religion. 4. The Balm of Gilead, Or,
Comforts for the distressed; both Moral and Divine. 5. Christ Mystical, Or,
The blessed union of Christ and his Members.

To which is added,

An holy Rapture, Or, A Patheticall Meditation of the Love of Christ. Also, The
Christian laid forth in his whole disposition and carriage.

6. A modest offer, tendered to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. 7.
Select thoughts in two Decades, with the breathing of the Devout Soul. 8. Pax
Terris. 9. Imposition of Hands. 10. The Revelation unrevealed -- Concerning,
The thousand years reign of the Saints with Christ on earth. 11. Satan's
Fiery Darts quenched, Or, Temptations repelled; In 3 Decades. 12. Resolutions
and Decisions of diverse practical cases of Conscience; In 4 Decades.

Select Thoughts, one Centurie, with the breathing of the Devout Soul.

13. Susurrium cum Deo, etc. This present Tract, newly Reprinted.

